Src-family
kinases (SFKs) make
up a family of nine non-receptor tyrosine kinases (Src, Hck, Fyn,
Lyn, Lck, Yes, Fgr, Blk, and Frk) that play a variety of important
biological functions through both catalysis and intermolecular protein–protein
interactions (Figure A)., Largely
because of the potential roles that they play in human disease, SFKs
have become popular subjects of study, with most biochemical and structural
research focusing on Src and Hck.− All SFKs consist of an
N-terminal unique domain, regulatory SH3 and SH2 domains, a catalytic
domain (CD), and a C-terminal tail (Figure B). Catalytic activity in SFKs is regulated by a combination of post-translational
modification (phosphorylation) and intramolecular protein–protein
interactions., In the autoinhibited form, SFKs
adopt a closed global conformation stabilized by intramolecular interactions
between the SH3 domain and the SH2-CD linker [polyproline type II
(PPII) helix] and between the SH2 domain and the C-terminal tail,
which is enhanced by phosphorylation of Tyr527 on the C-terminal tail.
In the active, open conformation, these intramolecular interactions
are weakened and the regulatory domains are freed to interact with
other binding partners in the cell. The active form is further stabilized
by phosphorylation of the activation loop at Tyr416.−

Allosteric
relationships in the Src-family kinases (SFKs). (A)
Dendrogram showing the evolutionary relationship of the Src-family
kinases (SFKs). (B) Conserved domain architecture of SFKs. SH3 and
SH2 regulatory domains are connected to the catalytic domain (CD)
by the SH2-CD linker and C-terminal tail. The SH3 domain-binding epitopes
in the linkers of Src, Fyn1, Fyn2, Hck, and Lyn are boxed, and key
residues thought to allosterically connect the αC helix (ATP-binding
site) and the SH3 domain are boxed and labeled (Src numbering). Note
that Fyn1 has a linker longer than those of Fyn2 and Src. (C) Cartoon
representation of the three-dimensional structure of an autoinhibited
SFK. The crystal structure (PDB entry 2SRC) shows a portion of the CD (yellow),
αC helix (red), SH2-CD linker (green), and SH3 domain (blue),
known to be important for mediating allosteric connection of the ATP-binding
site and regulatory domains. Key residues highlighted in panel B are
shown as sticks. Of particular interest are the proximity of helix
αC to Trp260 and the hydrophobic contacts made by Leu255. (D)
Schematic illustrating the goal of this study, to probe the degree
of bidirectional allosteric coupling between the ATP-binding site
(helix αC) and the regulatory domains among SFK family members
via the SH3–linker interaction.

Mutational studies and crystal structure analyses have shown
that
the SH2-CD linker region plays an important role in allosteric coupling
between the ATP-binding site and the regulatory domains.− Crystal structures of autoinhibited Src and Hck constructs show
that a conserved Trp260 contacts the CD, near the αC helix,
and forms a π-stacking/hydrophobic network with other aromatic
residues contacting the SH3 domain, most notably Leu255 in Src (Trp255
in Hck) (Figure B,C).,,, Mutating Leu255
to valine activates Src without disrupting binding between the SH2-CD
linker and the SH3 domain, indicating that these interactions are
mediating allosteric coupling between the ATP-binding site and regulatory
domains. The conformation of helix αC
is known to play a critical role in facilitating transitions between
autoinhibited and active states. The
proximity of the αC helix to Trp260 and its interaction with
Leu255 indicate that it plays a role in transmitting changes in ATP-binding
site conformation to the regulatory domains and vice versa. The allosteric
relationship described above is bidirectional, in that ATP-binding site conformation also influences regulatory domain
engagement., In fact, our lab has shown that
ATP-competitive ligands that stabilize Src and Hck in an inactive
αC helix-out conformation strengthen intramolecular SH3/SH2
domain engagement upon binding., In contrast, inhibitors
that stabilize helix αC in an active conformation weaken interactions
between the SH2/SH3 domains and their respective intramolecular ligands.
While the basic allosteric regulatory network between the catalytic
and regulatory domains of SFKs is well-characterized, less is known
about how SH2-CD linker heterogeneity affects the magnitude of this
bidirectional relationship. For example, we have observed differences
in the relative magnitude of allosteric coupling between Src and Hck., Because of their overall structural homology, allosteric regulation
in Src and Hck has been assumed to be the same in many studies. Differences
in SH2 and SH3 domain availability for intermolecular associations
could have unexplored biological consequences and help explain nonredundant
functions of individual SFKs. Thus, a more thorough exploration of
the SFK family is needed to understand how SH2-CD linker variability
affects regulatory domain accessibility and ATP-binding site conformation.

The binding preferences of the SH2 and SH3 domains of SFKs are
very similar, and their catalytic domains have almost identical substrate
specificities in vitro; however, their sequences
diverge at the SH2-CD linker.− Hck and Src are evolutionarily disparate, occupying
different branches of the tyrosine kinase portion of the kinome dendrogram
(Figure A). SFKs
have been characterized as “Src-like” or “Hck-like”
with respect to their linker sequences (Src’s linker is one
residue longer than Hck’s), and it has been proposed that variation
in linker length or sequence may be a source of functional differences
between these homologous family members (e.g., recruitment of different
binding partners). In fact, global conformational differences, presumably
caused by SH2-CD linker heterogeneity, between the two SFK subfamilies
have been exploited with bivalent peptide inhibitors that target the
CD and the SH2 domain. A bivalent ligand
that is more than 1000-fold selective for Src-like SFKs (Src, Fyn,
Yes, and Fgr) over Hck-like SFKs (Hck, Lyn, Lck, and Blk) has been
generated, indicating a detectable difference in the relative proximity
and accessibility between the SH2 domains and CDs in the two subgroups
of SFKs. Furthermore, studies have shown that a chimeric SFK, made
by swapping the SH3 domain of Src with that of Lck (Hck-like), displays
impaired autoinhibition, while swapping the SH3 domains of Src and
Fyn (both Src-like) results in a fully autoinhibited kinase., These data suggest that the SH3–SH2-CD linker interaction
is tuned within each SFK subgroup and highlights the ability of the
SH2-CD linker to determine the degree of allosteric coupling between
the SH3 domains and the ATP-binding sites of SFKs.

Given the
SH2-CD linker’s prominent role in SFK ATP-binding
site–regulatory domain coupling and its relatively low level
of sequence homology, we hypothesize that SH2-CD variability between
SFKs produces differences in the magnitude of coupling between individual
family members, even those belonging to the same subgroup. Such variation
could have important cellular consequences and contribute to experimentally
observed nonredundancy. To better understand how SH2-CD linker diversity
leads to variability in SFK regulatory interactions, we explored the
bidirectional relationship between the regulatory domains and CDs
of the SFKs Fyn (Src-like) and Lyn (Hck-like). We also performed the
same analysis on two splice variants of Fyn (Fyn1 and Fyn2), which
contain divergent linkers within the context of nearly identical SH3,
SH2, and CDs. Using a panel of conformation-selective,
ATP-competitive inhibitors in combination with a panel of Fyn1, Fyn2,
and Lyn regulatory state mutants, our study explores the degree of
allosteric coupling between each regulatory domain and the ATP-binding
site for each SFK (Figure D). Systematically
profiling the effects of αC helix conformation on regulatory
domain accessibility across the SFK family is necessary to explain
how these highly homologous family members are able to perform nonredundant
cellular functions and to provide insight into how allosteric regulation
governs and adds complexity to the behavior of homologous multidomain
protein kinases. Our study consists of two components: (1) exploration
of how SH2 and SH3 domain engagement affects ATP-binding site conformation
via the SH2-CD linker and (2) characterization of how αC helix
conformation influences regulatory domain accessibility via the SH2-CD
linker for Fyn1, Fyn2, and Lyn.

Materials and Methods
SFK Regulatory
State Mutant Design and Protein Expression
QuikChange mutagenesis
was used to introduce all point mutations.
SFKY527F constructs: Lyn Y508F, Fyn1 Y531F, and Fyn2 Y528F.
SFKSH2eng constructs: Lyn Q509E/Q510E/Q511I, Fyn1 Q532E/P533E/G534I,
and Fyn2 Q529E/P530I/G531I. SFKSH3eng constructs: Lyn K233P/K236P,
Fyn1 M251P/L254P/T255P, and Fyn2 T251P/T254P/S255P. Fyn active site
cysteine constructs: Fyn1 S350C and Fyn2 S347C. The Src-family kinases
Fyn1 (residues 82–537), Fyn2 (residues 82–534), and
Lyn (residues 64–512) were expressed with YopH and GroEL and
purified as previously described for Src and Hck., All constructs possess an N-terminal His tag to facilitate purification
and a TEV protease cleavage site. All constructs were obtained in
≥95% purity. The CskDR plasmid was transformed into
BL21(DE3) competent cells and purified by GST resin.

Preparation
of Activation Loop-Phosphorylated SFK (pY416 SFK),
SFK was autophosphorylated at Tyr416 by incubating SFK
(250 nM) with ATP (1 mM) and BSA (1 mg/mL) in activation buffer [50
mM HEPES (pH 7.5), 10 mM MgCl2, 2.5 mM EGTA, and 100 mM
NaCl]. The reaction mixture was incubated at 25 °C for 1.5 h.
Quantitative phosphorylation was monitored with antibodies that specifically
recognize activation loop-phosphorylated Src [1:2000 P-Src Family
(Tyr416 DM9G4) Cell Signaling] and non-pTyr416 [1:2000 non-pY416 (7G9)
Cell Signaling] (Figure S1 of the ).

Substrate Km Determination
Peptide Substrate Km Determination
Activities of SFK regulatory
state mutants in the presence of varying
concentrations of the Src-peptide substrate (Ac-EIYGEFKKK-OH)
were determined (3-fold dilutions starting at an initial concentration
of 900 μM, seven data points) in assay buffer containing 75
mM HEPES (pH 7.5), 15 mM MgCl2, 3.75 mM EGTA, 1 mM Na3VO4, 150 mM NaCl, 0.2 mg/mL BSA, and [γ-32P]ATP (0.2 μCi/well) at room temperature and ambient
pressure. The concentrations of SFK constructs were as follows: 0.7
nM LynAct, 0.3 nM Fyn1Act, 2.5 nM Fyn2Act, 10 nM LynSH2eng, 10 nM Fyn1SH2eng, and 3
nM Fyn2SH2eng. The final volume of each assay well was
30 μL. The enzymatic reaction was conducted at room temperature
for 2 h and then terminated by spotting 4.6 μL of the reaction
mixture onto a phosphocellulose membrane. Membranes were washed with
0.5% phosphoric acid (three times, 10 min each wash) and dried, and
the radioactivity was determined by phosphorimaging with a GE Typhoon
FLA 9000 phosphor scanner. The scanned membranes were quantified with
ImageQuant. Data were analyzed using GraphPad Prism, and Km values were determined using Michaelis–Menten
analysis.

ATP Km Determination
Activities
of SFK regulatory state mutants in the presence of varying concentrations
of ATP were determined (3-fold dilutions starting at 500 μM,
seven data points). Assay conditions are the same as those described
above with 100 μM SPS added to the assay buffer solution. The
concentration of [γ-32P]ATP was increased to 0.8
μCi/well, while the overall ATP concentration was varied using
nonradioactive ATP. The concentrations of SFK constructs were as follows:
0.7 nM LynAct, 0.3 nM Fyn1Act, 2.5 nM Fyn2Act, 10 nM LynSH2eng, 10 nM Fyn1SH2eng, 3 nM Fyn2SH2eng, 5 nM LynSH3eng, 1.2 nM Fyn1SH3eng, and 2.2 nM Fyn2SH3eng. The scanned membranes
were quantified with ImageQuant. Data were analyzed using GraphPad
Prism, and Km values were determined using
Michaelis–Menten analysis.

Enzymatic Activity Determination
Titrations of SFK
regulatory state mutants (2-fold serial dilutions starting at 20 nM,
seven data points) were assayed in buffer containing 75 mM HEPES (pH
7.5), 15 mM MgCl2, 3.75 mM EGTA, 1 mM Na3VO4, 150 mM NaCl, 0.2 mg/mL BSA, [γ-32P]ATP
(0.2 μCi/well), and 100 μM SPS. The final volume of each
assay well was 30 μL. The enzymatic reaction was conducted at
room temperature for 2 h and then terminated by spotting 4.6 μL
of the reaction mixture onto a phosphocellulose membrane. Membranes
were washed with 0.5% phosphoric acid (three times, 10 min each wash)
and dried, and the radioactivity was determined by phosphorimaging
with a GE Typhoon FLA 9000 phosphor scanner. The scanned membranes
were quantified with ImageQuant and converted to percent activity.
Data were analyzed using GraphPad Prism (mean ± SEM; n = 3).

Activity Assays for Inhibitor Ki Determination,
Inhibitors
(initial
concentration of 10 μM, 3-fold serial dilutions, 10 data points)
were assayed in triplicate against all SFK constructs. Assay conditions
were the same as those described for enzymatic activity assays. Concentrations
of SFK constructs are as described above for SPS Km determination. Assays of CskDR (25 nM) were
performed using 100 μM CSKtide (KKKEEIYFFFG-NH2). Blot radioactivity was determined by phosphorimaging with
a GE Typhoon FLA 9000 phosphor scanner. The scanned membranes were
quantified with ImageQuant and converted to percent inhibition. Data
were analyzed using GraphPad Prism, and Ki values were determined using nonlinear regression analysis.

Pull-Down
Assay for Determining SH3 Domain Accessibility,
Formation of the Kinase–Inhibitor Complex
The
kinase of interest (100 nM) and mammalian lysate (0.2 mg/mL) were
diluted in immobilization buffer [50 mM Tris, 100 mM NaCl, and 1 mM
DTT (pH 7.5)]. A saturating amount of the inhibitor of interest (5
or 10 μM) was added to this kinase dilution. The mixture was
allowed to incubate for 30 min before being loaded on the resin.

SH3 Pull-Down
Forty microliters of a 50% slurry of
SNAP-Capture Pull-Down Resin (NEB) was placed in a microcentrifuge
tube. The resin was washed (twice, 10 bed volumes) with immobilization
buffer. A SNAP tag–polyproline peptide fusion (VSLARRPLPPLP)
(10 μM) was loaded onto the resin at a final volume of 100 μL
in buffer. The resin was rotated at room temperature for 90 min. After
polyproline peptide immobilization, the resin was washed (twice, 10
bed volumes), and 100 μL of the kinase–inhibitor complex
was loaded. The resin was allowed to shake at room temperature for
1 h. After incubation with the kinase–inhibitor complex, the
flow-through was collected, and the resin was washed (three times,
10 bed volumes). To elute the retained kinase, 100 μL of 1×
SDS loading buffer was added, and the beads were boiled at 90 °C
for 10 min. All samples were separated via sodium dodecyl sulfate–polyacrylamide
gel electrophoresis (SDS–PAGE) and visualized by Western blotting
using a His6-specific antibody [at a 1:5000 dilution (abm, HIS.H8)].
The scanned blots were quantified with LI-COR Odyssey software to
determine the percentage of kinase retained on the resin on the basis
of the loaded and eluted fractions (mean ± SEM; n = 3).

SH2 Pull-Down
Pull-downs were performed as described
previously using resin displaying an SH2-binding peptide (EPQpYEEIPIYL).

Phosphorylation of the Tyr527 Assay
Titrations of Fyn1S350C and Fyn2S347C starting
at 35 nM (2-fold serial
dilutions, four data points) were incubated with 50 μM pharmacophore 1 with 0.25 mg/mL BSA, 1 mM Na3VO4,
and 0.5 mM DTT in activation buffer (pH 7.5). Following a 4 h incubation
at room temperature, 25 nM CskDR was added and phosphorylation
was initiated by the addition of [γ-32P]ATP (0.2
μCi/well). The final volume of each assay well was 30 μL.
The enzymatic reaction was run at room temperature for 1 h and then
terminated by spotting 4.6 μL of the reaction mixture onto a
nitrocellulose membrane. Membranes were washed with 0.5% phosphoric
acid (three times, 10 min each wash) and air-dried, and the radioactivity
was determined by phosphorimaging with a GE Typhoon FLA 9000 phosphor
scanner. The scanned membranes were quantified with ImageQuant, and
data were analyzed using GraphPad Prism (mean ± SEM; n = 3).

Results
Intramolecular Regulatory
Domain Interactions Differentially
Modulate the Catalytic Activities of Fyn1, Fyn2, and Lyn
Autoinhibited and activated Src and Hck constructs have previously
been generated by introducing mutations that enhance or weaken intramolecular
SH2 and SH3 regulatory domain interactions. To explore the effects
of SH2 and SH3 domain engagement on catalytic activity within the
context of Lyn, Fyn1, and Fyn2, analogous regulatory state mutants
of each SFK were generated (Figure A). All
SFKs discussed in this work are three-domain (3D) constructs, meaning
that they are full length except the unique domain has been excluded.
Activated Lyn and Fyn (SFKAct) constructs were generated
by activation loop autophosphorylation of Y527F mutants, which cannot
undergo C-terminal tail autoinhibitory phosphorylation.− Quantitative activation loop phosphorylation was confirmed via immunoblotting
with antibodies that selectively recognize either phosphorylated or
nonphosphorylated SFK activation loops (Figure S1 of the ). Mutations that strengthen
intramolecular SH2 and SH3 regulatory domain interactions were used
to create autoinhibited Lyn and Fyn constructs. Constructs with an
increased level of engagement between the C-terminal regulatory tail
and the SH2 domain (SFKSH2eng) were generated by changing
the three residues following Tyr527 to a high-affinity SH2 domain-binding
epitope (Glu-Glu-Ile)., Constructs with an increased
level of engagement between the SH2-CD linker and the SH3 domain [SFKSH3eng (Figure S2 of the )] were generated by introducing two high-affinity PXXP motifs (PPXPP)
into the SH2-CD linker (Figure S2 of the ). This epitope has
been shown to possess a similarly high affinity for the SH3 domains
of SFKs.,− Adding PXXP sequences to the linkers of Fyn1, Fyn2,
and Lyn enhances intramolecular SH3 domain engagement within the context
of the native SFK linker, which has been shown in chimera studies
to be tuned specifically for each SFK.,

Intramolecular
regulatory domain interactions affect the catalytic
activities of Lyn, Fyn1, and Fyn2. (A) Cartoon representations of
the SFK regulatory state mutants used in this study (SFKAct, SFKSH2eng, and SFKSH3eng). Disruptive mutations
are illustrated as red X’s, while mutations that lead to greater
intramolecular engagement are illustrated as red dots. (B) Activity
of Lyn, Fyn1, and Fyn2 activated (left) and autoinhibited [SH2eng
(middle) and SH3eng (right)] regulatory state mutants obtained via
a radioactive phosphate transfer assay and plotted as signal vs enzyme
concentration (mean ± SEM; n = 3). (C) Fold
difference in activity between SFKAct and SFKSH2eng (left), SFKAct and SFKSH3eng (middle), and
SFKSH2eng and SFKSH3eng (right) (mean ±
SEM; n = 3).

The catalytic properties of all nine Lyn and Fyn constructs
were
tested in enzymatic assays. Interestingly, all nine constructs possess
similar Km values for ATP (Table ). In addition, the overall activation state of
each SFK had only a small effect on the Km for the peptide substrate. Next, the relative catalytic activity
of each construct was tested at an ATP concentration well below its Km. As expected, the SFKAct constructs
are the most active, with Lyn, Fyn1, and Fyn2 demonstrating very similar
catalytic activities (Figure B). This shows
that, in the absence of intramolecular regulatory domain engagement,
SFKs are functionally equivalent.

Km Values
for ATP and Src Peptide Substrate (SPS) Determined for Each SFK Regulatory
State Mutant
SFK	Km(ATP) (μM)	Km(SPS) (μM)	
LynAct	42 ± 7	11 ± 2	
LynSH2eng	54 ± 5	60 ± 10	
LynSH3eng	100 ± 10	46 ± 8	
Fyn1Act	70 ± 10	4.7 ± 0.8	
Fyn1SH2eng	31 ± 9	8.5 ± 1.0	
Fyn1SH3eng	45 ± 6	160 ± 30	
Fyn2Act	50 ± 8	31 ± 7	
Fyn2SH2eng	90 ± 30	40 ± 10	
Fyn2SH3eng	40 ± 3	70 ± 20	
Consistent with the introduced regulatory mutations strengthening
autoinhibitory interactions, SFKSH3eng and SFKSH2eng constructs are less active than their SFKAct counterparts
(Figure B). However, in contrast to SFKAct constructs, there is greater diversity in catalytic activity
among autoinhibited constructs. For example, Fyn1SH3eng is notably more active than Fyn2SH3eng or LynSH3eng (Figure B, right panel). This Fyn1 mutant
exhibits an activity more than 10-fold greater than that of Fyn1SH2eng [being only ∼3-fold less active than Fyn1Act (Figure C, right panel)]. However,
Fyn2SH2eng is much more active than either Fyn1SH2eng or LynSH2eng (Figure B, middle
panel). To confirm that Fyn1SH3eng’s relatively
high catalytic activity compared to that of Fyn2SH3eng is
not a result of differences in occupancy between the introduced high-affinity
SH2-CD linker and the Fyn SH3 domain, a series of pull-down experiments
to determine SH3 domain accessibility were performed (Figure A). Fyn constructs of interest were incubated with
resin displaying an SH3-binding peptide. After being washed, the bound
kinase was eluted and quantified. The amount of SFK retained on the
beads is a reflection of the relative accessibility of their SH3 domains
to engage in intermolecular binding interactions. Comparing the relative
amounts of retained Fyn1SH3eng and Fyn2SH3eng provides a measure of how tightly each construct’s high-affinity
linker engages the Fyn SH3 domain. Both Fyn1SH3eng and
Fyn2SH3eng possess relatively inaccessible SH3 domains,
presumably because of linker-SH3 domain engagement, relative to Fyn1Y527F (Figure B). Pull-downs using
resin loaded with 5- and 10-fold more SH3 ligand than in the previous
experiment were performed to test if intramolecular engagement could
be outcompeted by higher concentrations of the immobilized SH3 domain
ligand. The amount of Fyn1SH3eng and Fyn2SH3eng captured (and unbound) by each resin loading is almost identical,
demonstrating that both Fyn1 and Fyn2 SH3eng constructs have similarly
engaged SH3 domains (Figure C,D). Thus, the
ability of regulatory interactions to transmit autoinhibition to the
ATP-binding site varies dramatically among Fyn1, Fyn2, and Lyn. The
fact that Fyn1 and Fyn2 have identical SH3 and SH2 domains provides
evidence that SH2-CD linker variability strongly contributes to the
relative ability of an SH2 or SH3 domain to autoinhibit the kinase
domain. The functional consequences of SH2-CD linker variability,
modulating the degree of allosteric coupling between intramolecular
regulatory domain engagement and the ATP-binding site, may point to
a source of nonredundancy between SFK family members in cells.

The Fyn1 and
Fyn2 SH3eng constructs have similarly inaccessible
SH3 domains. (A) Schematic of the SH3 pull-down assay. SFK constructs
are exposed to beads displaying an SH3-binding peptide. After being
washed, the retained kinase is eluted, subjected to SDS–PAGE,
and quantified by Western blotting or Coomassie staining. (B) Pull-down
comparing the percent SFK retained on SH3-binding resin. Fyn1Y527F possesses an SH3 domain that is relatively accessible
compared to those of Fyn1SH3eng and Fyn2SH3eng, which are similarly inaccessible (mean ± SEM; n = 3). (C) SDS–PAGE quantification of unbound Fyn1SH3eng and Fyn2SH3eng after incubation with 1.5 mM (1×),
7.5 mM (5×), and 15 mM (10×) SH3-binding peptide resin (mean
± SEM; n = 3). (D) SDS–PAGE quantification
of Fyn1SH3eng and Fyn2SH3eng eluted from resin
after incubation with 1×, 5×, and 10× loading resin
(mean ± standard deviation; n = 2).

Conformation-Selective, ATP-Competitive Inhibitors
Allow for
Dissection of the Role of the αC Helix in Allosteric Coupling
The data in Figure  do not provide information
about the overall conformation of the ATP-binding site for each SFK
regulatory state mutant. To thoroughly explore how domain engagement
influences SFK ATP-binding sites, a method for sensing ATP-binding
site conformation is required. To provide more information about this
parameter, the sensitivities of activated and autoinhibited Lyn, Fyn1,
and Fyn2 constructs to conformation-selective, ATP-competitive inhibitors
were determined. A representative panel of ATP-competitive ligands
that are known or predicted to stabilize distinct SFK ATP-binding
site conformations was employed (Figure A).
By determining affinities of these ligands for various regulatory
state SFK mutants, one can determine the influence of intramolecular
interactions on ATP-binding site conformation. All inhibitors tested
are pyrazolopyrimidine-based compounds with variable substituents
at the C3 position. 1 (PP2) contains a 4-chlorophenyl
group at the C3 position and has previously been found to have a minimal
activation state preference for Src and Hck, making it a useful control
for these studies.2–4 display small aryl moieties containing hydrogen bond donors and/or
acceptors from their C3 positions and have been found to be selective
for activated Src and Hck constructs over their autoinhibited forms., These inhibitors are predicted to stabilize an active ATP-binding
site conformation by forming electrostatic interactions with catalytic
residues that are aligned for catalysis. In contrast, 5–7 contain extended hydrophobic substituents at the C3 position, which
have been shown to stabilize the ATP-binding sites of SFKs in an inactive
conformation that involves rotation of the αC helix out of a
catalytically competent alignment, the αC helix-out inactive
conformation. Inhibitors of this class have been found to have a higher
affinity for autoinhibited Src and Hck constructs than their activated
counterparts. Unlike 2–4, 5–7 are not compatible with the αC helix being in an active conformation
(see Figure B). Profiling active compatible
(αC helix-in) and active incompatible (αC helix-out) ligands
against Lyn and Fyn regulatory state mutants provides insight into
how the allosteric relationship between αC helix conformation
and regulatory domains for Fyn and Lyn compares to that for Src and
Hck.

Binding preferences of conformation-selective inhibitors reveal
differences in allosteric coupling among Lyn, Fyn1, and Fyn2. (A)
Conformation-selective inhibitor panel. 2–4 favor
the ATP-binding site of active (αC helix-in) SFKs, while 5–7 stabilize the αC helix-out, inactive ATP-binding
site conformation. These ligands allow systematic analysis of the
ATP-binding site conformation in response to domain engagement. (B)
Ligands that stabilize active and αC helix-out conformations
make different contacts with the ATP-binding sites of SFKs. The left
panel shows Src bound to 2 with the ATP-binding site
in an active conformation (PDB entry 3EN4). An electrostatic interaction between
the inhibitor and E310 in the αC helix is shown. The right panel
shows Src bound to 6 with the ATP-binding site in the
αC helix-out inactive conformation (PDB entry 4DGG). Helix αC
is rotated out of the active site, disrupting the interaction between
K295 and E310. (C) Quantitative comparison of the fold differences
in Ki values between activated SFKs (SFKAct) and their respective autoinhibited constructs (SFKSH2eng) for 1–4. Previously reported data
for Src and Hck are plotted for reference. (D) Quantitative comparison of the fold differences in Ki values between activated SFKs (SFKAct) and
their respective autoinhibited constructs (SFKSH2eng) for 6 and 7. Previously reported data for Src and
Hck are plotted for reference. The left-most column, marked with a
dagger symbol, shows that the absolute fold difference in Ki value could not be determined because inhibitor
affinity is lower than the enzyme concentration used in the assay.
Ligand 5, which is marked with an asterisk in panel A,
is too potent for Ki determination. All
values are the average of assays performed in triplicate; the SEM
for each value is less than 20% of the average Ki value. Ki values are listed in
Figure S3 of the .

Comparing affinities of active
and αC helix-out stabilizing
ligands for autoinhibited (SFKSH2eng) and activated (SFKAct) constructs allows investigation of how intramolecular
regulatory domain engagement influences ATP-binding site conformation
for a particular SFK. More specifically, the fold difference in Ki values for a given ligand between SFKAct and SFKSH2eng constructs provides information
about the equilibrium between active (αC helix-in) and inactive
(αC helix-out) conformations of an SFK’s ATP-binding
site. SFKAct and SFKSH2eng constructs were selected
because they represent the extremes of regulatory domain allosteric
control over catalytic activity for both Fyn and Lyn, fully active
and fully autoinhibited. Ki values for
the entire panel of active stabilizing and αC helix-out preferring
ligands were obtained for LynAct, Fyn1Act, Fyn2Act, LynSH2eng, Fyn1SH2eng, and Fyn2SH2eng using standard activity assays. The results of the assays
performed are summarized in panels C and D of Figure , which plots the ratio of inhibitor affinity for the SFKAct construct over the inhibitor affinity for the SFKSH2eng construct, or vice versa. Ki values
for these ligands against Src and Hck were also included as a reference. As expected, compound 1 displays
a minimal activation state binding preference for Lyn, Fyn1, and Fyn2
(Figure C). Consistent with previous observations
for Src and Hck, αC helix-out ligands 6 and 7 bind with a higher affinity to SFKSH2eng constructs
than to activated SFKs (Figure D). Active
ATP-binding site-stabilizing ligands 2–4 show
the opposite preference (Figure C). Despite
the overall similar trend in conformation-selective inhibitor selectivity
for Hck, Src, Lyn, Fyn1, and Fyn2 regulatory state mutants, there
are some significant differences in the magnitudes of these preferences
among the SFKs. Most notably, Fyn1 possesses the most distinct conformation-selective
inhibitor profile. Fyn1SH2eng shows the lowest selectivity
for ligands 6 and 7 relative to its activated
construct (Fyn1Act). Furthermore, 2–4 demonstrate a much larger fold difference in affinity for Fyn1Act versus Fyn1SH2eng, relative to the other SFKs.
As both ligand classes (2–4 and 6 and 7) most likely make favorable contacts with different
conformations of the αC helix, this structural element appears
to be unique in Fyn1. The difference in fold preference is especially
striking compared to that of Fyn2, which possesses the exact same
SH3 and SH2 domains as Fyn1 and 97% identical CDs (only eight residues
are different in the N-terminal lobe). The fact that Fyn2 behaves
more like Hck, Src, and Lyn than Fyn1 in the presence of conformation-selective
inhibitors suggests that the SH2-CD linker, which is unique for Fyn1,
plays a major role in the conformation of the αC helix.

Regulatory
Domain Engagement, but Not Activation Loop Phosphorylation,
Is the Major Determinant of SFK Sensitivity to Ligands 2–4
SFK catalytic activity is predominantly governed by two
factors: activation loop phosphorylation (activating) and regulatory
domain engagement (autoinhibiting). We were interested in seeing if
we could use our panel of inhibitors and regulatory state mutants
to determine which factor, activation loop phosphorylation or regulatory
domain engagement, governs the changes in ATP-binding site conformation
driving the extreme difference in affinity observed between Fyn1Act and Fyn1SH2eng for ligands 2–4. To do this, Ki values for ligands 2–4 were determined for each SFKY527F construct
and compared to those for SFKAct, to probe activation loop
phosphorylation, or SFKSH2eng, to probe SH2 domain engagement
(Figure  and Figure S4 of the ). The Y527F construct
was chosen as a basis for comparison because it is neither activation
loop-phosphorylated nor engineered to favor regulatory domain engagement.
This analysis shows that SH2 domain engagement determines the affinity
of ligands 2–4 for the ATP-binding sites of all
SFKs tested, because a larger difference in affinity is observed between
SFKSH2eng and SFKY527F than between SFKY527F and SFKAct. This is particularly true for
Fyn1, providing evidence that the ATP-binding site conformation equilibrium
for Fyn1Y527F favors the active, αC helix-in conformation
to a greater extent than all other SFKY527F constructs
tested, even in the absence of activation loop phosphorylation.

Effects of
activation loop phosphorylation and regulatory domain
engagement on the ATP-binding sites of SFKs. (A) Schematic of the
analysis that was performed. Ki values
for SFKSH2eng and SFKAct are compared to those
for SFKY527F to determine whether activation loop phosphorylation
or SH2 domain engagement influences the affinity of 2–4. (B) Quantitative comparison of the differences in Ki values between SFKSH2eng and SFKY527F for ligands 2–4. All values are the average
of assays performed in triplicate; the SEM for each value is less
than 20% of the average Ki value. (C)
Quantitative comparison of the fold difference in Ki values for SFKY527F vs SFKAct.
All values are the average of assays performed in triplicate; the
SEM for each value is less than 20% of the average Ki value. Ki values are listed
in Figure S4 of the .

ATP-Binding Site Profiling
of SFKSH3eng and SFKSH2eng Regulatory State
Mutants Confirms Decoupling of SH3
Domain Engagement from αC Helix Conformation in Fyn1
Because of the disparate activities of the autoinhibited SH2eng and
SH3eng Fyn1 constructs (Figure B), we investigated
whether this difference in activity is manifested in the observed
affinities of inhibitors 2–4 for Fyn1SH3eng versus Fyn1SH2eng using a similar strategy as described
in Figure  (Figure A). SH3 domain binding is predicted to align a network of residues
in the SH2-CD linker that stabilizes the αC helix in an inactive
conformation (Figure C). Therefore, it is
odd that enhancing the affinity of Fyn1’s SH2-CD linker for
its SH3 domain would not autoinhibit the enzyme to an extent similar
to that observed for Lyn and Fyn2 (Figures  and ). On the basis of the relatively large
differences in catalytic activities between the Fyn1SH3eng and Fyn1SH2eng constructs, we predicted that Fyn1SH3eng would possess a more active ATP-binding site conformation.
To test this, the Ki values of ligands
that prefer an active conformation (2–4) were
determined for Fyn1SH3eng and Fyn1SH2eng (Figure
S5 of the ). As predicted,
ligands that prefer an active ATP-binding site conformation possess
a higher affinity for Fyn1SH3eng than for Fyn1SH2eng (Figure B). In contrast, the SH3eng and
SH2eng constructs of Lyn and Fyn2 possess similar affinities (∼1–10
SH3eng/SH2eng ratios) for these ligands. The fact that ligands 2–4 do not show an equally strong preference for Fyn2SH3eng over Fyn2SH2eng is strong evidence that the
decoupling of Fyn1’s SH3 domain from the αC helix is
dependent on the SH2-CD linker. Unlike most SFKs, in which SH3 domain
engagement directly results in autoinhibition, Fyn1’s SH2-CD
linker requires SH2 domain engagement to allosterically couple SH3
domain binding to the αC helix.

Intramolecular engagement of Fyn1’s
SH3 domain minimally
influences the conformation of its αC helix. (A) Schematic of
the analysis that was performed. Ki values
for SFKSH2eng and SFKSH3eng were measured and
compared for each SFK. Differences in affinity between SFKSH2eng and SFKSH3eng indicate differential effects of SH3 and
SH2 binding on the ATP-binding site. (B) Quantitative comparison of
the fold difference in Ki values for SFKSH2eng and SFKSH3eng, illustrating the effects of
SH2 domain or SH3 domain binding on ATP-binding site conformation.
Compounds 2–4 greatly prefer Fyn1SH3eng over Fyn1SH2eng, showing that despite enhanced SH3 domain
engagement Fyn1 maintains an active, αC helix-in binding site. Ki values are listed in Figure S5 of the .

αC Helix Conformation Is Less Coupled to SH3 Domain Intramolecular
Engagement in Fyn1 Than in Fyn2, Lyn, Src, and Hck
Given
the surprising differences that were observed in how regulatory domain
engagement affects ATP-binding site conformation in Fyn1 and Fyn2,
we next investigated how αC helix conformation affects intramolecular
regulatory domain engagement using our panel of conformation-selective
ligands. SH3 domain accessibility was measured using the pull-down
assay described in the legend of Figure .
Each SFK of interest was incubated with a saturating amount of a conformation-selective
inhibitor before being exposed to SH3-binding peptide resin. Comparing
the relative amounts of retained Lyn, Fyn1, and Fyn2 when they are
bound to active or αC helix-out stabilizing ligands provides
a measure of how αC helix conformation influences SH3 domain
accessibility within the context of each SFK. Ligand 8, which stabilizes an inactive activation loop conformation (DFG-out)
but an active αC helix conformation (αC helix-in), was
also tested to investigate the contribution of the activation loop
to regulatory domain accessibility. Ligands that stabilize the DFG-out
inactive conformation form a hydrogen bond with Glu310 in the αC
helix—similar to αC helix-in, active ligands 2–4—and are thus predicted to prefer the ATP-binding sites of
activated over autoinhibited SFK constructs (Figure A). Consistent with this hypothesis, stabilizing the DFG-out
conformation of Src and Hck results in increased SH3 domain accessibility. SH3 pull-downs were performed with LynY527F, Fyn1Y527F, and Fyn2Y527F in the presence
of a saturating concentration of 1, 2, 5, 6, or 8 (Figure B). For each of these experiments, ligand 1,
which has a minimal preference for the SFK activation state, was used
as a reference compound. Representative blots for the data in Figure B are shown in Figure S6 of the .

Conformation-selective inhibitors differentially
modulate the SH3
domain accessibilities of Lyn, Fyn1, and Fyn2. (A) Molecular structure
of ligand 8 and a crystal structure of 8 bound to the ATP-binding site of Abl (PDB entry 3OXZ). 8 stabilizes the DFG-out inactive conformation and is predicted to
stabilize helix αC in an active conformation by forming an electrostatic
interaction with Glu310. (B) Quantification of the SH3 pull-down experiment
performed with LynY527F in the presence of saturating 1, 2, 4, 5, or 8 (mean ± SEM; n = 3). All data are
normalized to the SFKY527F·1 complex
(1 does not show a strong preference for SFKAct over SFKSH2eng). (C) Quantification of the SH3 pull-down
experiment performed with Fyn1Y527F and Fyn2Y527F in the presence of saturating 1, 2, 4, 5, or 8 (mean ± SEM; n = 3). All data are normalized to the SFKY527F·1 complex. Representative blots are shown in Figure
S6 of the .

Consistent with their predicted
effects and previous results observed
for Hck, more LynY527F kinase was retained by the SH3 peptide
ligand resin in the presence of 2 than in the presence
of 1 (∼5-fold increase), while much less bound
the resin in the presence of 5 and 6 [∼10-fold
decrease (Figure B)]. Strikingly, an ∼20-fold
increase in the amount of kinase retained was observed in the presence
of compound 8. This agrees with recently reported results
for Src and Hck and is consistent with the observation that DFG-out
ligands stabilize the αC helix in an active conformation. The
same pull-down experiment was used to probe Fyn1 SH3 domain accessibility.
Interestingly, while the trends in SH3 domain accessibility are the
same for each Fyn1Y527F inhibitor complex, the relative
differences in SH3 domain accessibility are much smaller than those
of the Fyn1Y527F·1 complex (Figure C). Compound 5 reduced SH3 domain accessibility
several-fold; however, the reduction is not as dramatic as that observed
for LynY527F, and compound 6 failed to change
SH3 domain accessibility to any detectable extent. Similarly, 2 and 8 do not significantly increase Fyn1’s
SH3 domain accessibility. Next, pull-down assays were repeated using
Fyn2Y527F to probe whether Fyn1’s anomalous SH2-CD
linker is responsible for decoupling the αC helix from SH3 domain
accessibility. The fact that Fyn2 displays a greater reduction in
SH3 domain accessibility when bound to either 5 or 6 (comparable to the reduced levels observed with Src) suggests
that this is indeed the case. However, unlike Lyn and Hck, Fyn2Y527F does not show a dramatic increase in SH3 domain accessibility
in the presence of inhibitors 2 and 8. Thus,
while the SH3 domain of Fyn2 shows allosteric coupling to its ATP-binding
site stronger than that of Fyn1, this SFK behaves more like Src than
Hck or Lyn. This similarity in behavior correlates with differences
in the SH2-CD linker (Figure B).

Inhibitor
binding-mediated changes in SH3 domain accessibility
were also explored using the SFKSH2eng construct (Figure A). Both LynSH2eng·1 and Fyn1SH2eng·1 complexes display
a relatively inaccessible SH3 domain compared with that of the SFKY527F·1 complex, consistent with enhanced
SH2–C-terminal tail intramolecular engagement promoting SH3
domain–SH2-CD linker interaction in both kinases. When they
are bound to ligand 2, the SH3 domain accessibility of
Fyn1SH2eng and LynSH2eng returns to a level
on par with those of the Fyn1Y527F·1 and
LynY527F·1 complexes, respectively (Figure B). These data show that adopting an active ATP-binding
site conformation can overcome engineered regulatory domain engagement.
It also indicates that although Fyn1 displays a reduced level of coupling
between the SH3 domain and the ATP-binding site, enhancing the interaction
between the SH2 domain and C-terminal tail is able to engage the SH3
domain and stabilize an αC helix-out inactive ATP-binding site.
These effects can be reversed by stabilizing an αC helix-in,
active ATP-binding site with a ligand.

Stabilizing an active
ATP-binding site conformation overcomes regulatory
interactions in Lyn and Fyn1. (A) SH3 pull-downs were performed using
SFKSH2eng constructs. SFKSH2eng constructs were
incubated with control ligand 1 or active-preferring
ligand 2 and the amounts of kinase retained on the resin
compared. (B) Quantification of the SFKSH2eng SH3 pull-down
experiment (mean ± SEM; n = 3). All data are
normalized to the SFKY527F·1 complex.

The ability of ATP-binding site
conformation to allosterically
influence SH2 domain accessibility was also probed for Fyn1, Fyn2,
and Lyn 3D constructs in pull-downs utilizing resin displaying an
SH2-binding peptide (Figure S7 of the ). The observed trends match the results from the
SH3 pull-down experiments, but overall differences in SH2 regulatory
domain accessibility are smaller. However, these results suggest that
ATP-binding site conformation allosterically modulates SH2 domain
accessibility to differing degrees between SFK family members.

Comparison
of Fyn1 and Fyn2 SH2 Domain Accessibility Demonstrates
Biologically Relevant Consequences of SH2-CD Linker-Mediated Coupling
among SFKs
Fyn1 and Fyn2’s SH2-CD linker variability
results in surprising differences in the degree of allosteric coupling
between the SH2 and SH3 domains and the ATP-binding site, but what
are the biological consequences of more versus less coupling for a
particular SFK? Csk is the primary kinase responsible for autoinhibition
of SFKs in most cells., It phosphorylates Tyr527 on the
C-terminal tail of all SFK family members, resulting in enhanced intramolecular
engagement of the SH2 domain and autoinhibition. The biochemical studies
described so far suggest that Fyn1’s reduced ATP-binding site–regulatory
domain coupling results in greater overall regulatory domain accessibility
regardless of ATP-binding site conformation compared to Fyn2. Thus,
one would predict that Fyn1’s C-terminal tail would be more
vulnerable to phosphorylation by Csk than Fyn2’s tail. Csk
has been shown crystallographically to interact only with the C-terminus
of Src. Fyn1 and Fyn2 possess identical
C-termini; thus, comparing the rate of phosphorylation is directly
probing how SH2-CD linker variation between the two isoforms affects
post-translational modification (Figure A).

SH2-CD
linker affects availability of the C-terminal tail to post-translational
modification by Csk. (A) Crystal structure of regulatory domain-disengaged
Src (blue, PDB entry 1Y57) superimposed on a cocrystal structure of the SrcCD–Csk complex
(green, PDB entry 3D7T). The interface between Csk and Src is boxed, while the variable
region between Fyn1 and Fyn2 is colored red. Regions colored blue
are identical between Fyn1 and Fyn2. (B) Scheme for measuring pTyr527
phosphorylation of inhibitor-bound Fyn1 and Fyn2 complexes by Csk.
(C) Structure of a Michael acceptor analogue of ligand 1. (D) Graph displaying the results of the pTyr527 experiment. The
radioactive phosphate signal is plotted vs Fyn concentration (mean
± SEM; n = 3).

To prevent the complication of competing C-terminal tail
autophosphorylation
obscuring the activity of Csk, inhibitor-bound complexes of Fyn1 and
Fyn2 were used. Because of the high degree of sequence homology, the
ATP-competitive ligands used in this study inhibit Csk in addition
to SFKs, making it necessary to devise a scheme in which Fyn is completely
inhibitor-bound but pTyr527 by Csk is uninhibited. To this end, Ser350
and Ser347 in the active sites of Fyn1 and Fyn2, respectively, were
mutated to Cys, and a Michael acceptor analogue of 1 was
used to covalently modify the Fyn active sites (Figure C). The pharmacophore of ligand 1 was selected
because of its lack of activation state preference. As expected, the
electrophile-modified version of 1 is a much more potent
inhibitor of Fyn1 and Fyn2 active site Cys constructs than their wild-type
counterparts (Figure S8 of the ). Furthermore, it is possible to inhibit &gt;98% of Fyn1S350C and Fyn2S347C without inhibiting a drug resistant Csk
construct (CskDR) (Figure S8 of the ). A Csk substrate peptide previously
reported was used to verify the catalytic activity of CskDR.

Varying concentrations of inhibitor-bound
Fyn1S350C and
Fyn2S347C were incubated with CskDR and [γ-32P]ATP, and the amount of pTyr527 was monitored over time
(Figure B). Plotting the radioactive signal
versus Fyn concentration reveals that Fyn1S350C is a better
substrate for Csk than Fyn2S347C (Figure D). Activity assays in Figure  revealed
that Fyn1 is more autoinhibited than Fyn2 when intramolecular engagement
of the SH2 domain is enhanced. Therefore, these results predict that
Fyn1 is more autoinhibited in vivo despite possessing
an ATP-binding site that favors an active conformation. This conclusion
is supported by cellular experiments: in HEK293 cells, Fyn1 displays
more pTyr527 and less pTyr416 than Fyn2. As a result, the SH3 domain
of Fyn1 is less available for intermolecular interactions than the
SH3 domain of Fyn2.

Discussion
In this study, we have investigated allosteric regulatory networks
in SFKs. Beyond providing potential insight into SFK function, our
results highlight how multidomain enzymes are able to fine-tune the
transmission of binding events over large distances. All SFKs possess
very similar regulatory domains, but via variation of a flexible structural
element that couples regulatory domain interactions to their catalytic
domains, diverse regulatory behavior can be achieved. Specifically,
SH2-CD linker heterogeneity among SFKs influences the bidirectional
coupling between their αC helices and regulatory domains. Using
a panel of ATP-competitive inhibitors that stabilize the αC
helix in two distinct conformations, we have probed (a) the conformation
of the αC helix when intramolecular engagement of the SH2 and
SH3 domains is enhanced or weakened and (b) how αC helix conformation
affects SH2 and SH3 domain availability for intermolecular interactions
for Fyn and Lyn. Given the high degree of sequence homology of SFK
SH2, SH3, and CDs, we like many others in the field focused on the
relatively nonhomologous SH2-CD linker as a source of nonredundant
biological functions between SFKs. On the basis of previous work with
Src and Hck, we further hypothesized that the SFK SH2-CD linkers uniquely
govern the magnitude of allosteric coupling between the regulatory
domains and the ATP-binding site, thus influencing the availability
of the regulatory domains for intermolecular interactions. This comprehensive
biochemical study is an important first step toward understanding
how homologous protein kinases play nonredundant cellular roles.

Analysis of Fyn1 and Fyn2 serves as a direct probe into the influence
of the SH2-CD linker on coupling between the SH3 and SH2 domains and
the ATP-binding site. Fyn1’s longer dissimilar linker, characterized
by a three-residue insertion, is primarily responsible for the reduced
level of allosteric coupling between the αC helix and the SH3
domain compared to that observed for Fyn2 and all other SFKs investigated.
Intriguingly, engagement of Fyn1’s SH2 domain autoinhibits
the kinase to an extent greater than that observed for Fyn2 as demonstrated
by decreased catalytic activity and diminished affinity for inhibitors
that stabilize an active ATP-binding site. Rigorous analysis of the
ATP-binding sites of Fyn1, Fyn2, Lyn, Src, and Hck with conformation-selective
inhibitors suggests that, in the absence of post-translational modification
and SH2 domain engagement, the ATP-binding site of Fyn1 favors an
active conformation. In contrast, Fyn2 and other SFKs exhibit an ATP-binding
site conformation somewhere between active and autoinhibited.

It has been proposed that allosteric regulation in SFKs follows
a “snap-lock” mechanism, which postulates that SH3 and
SH2 domains are coupled by the short linker segment connecting the
two domains. The SH3–SH2 domain linker has been shown to be
important for CD regulation by mutagenesis and molecular dynamics
simulations. Tightly coupled SH3 and
SH2 domains produce a kinase in which engagement of either the SH2
or SH3 domain recruits the other domain, while less coupled SH3 and
SH2 domains result in a decreased level of synchronization between
domains. NMR studies have shown that the SH3-SH2 domains of Fyn, identical
between isoforms 1 and 2, are tightly coupled compared to the SFK
Lck, which has a flexible SH3–SH2 linker. However, despite having identical SH3–SH2 linkers,
Fyn1 shows an anomalous mechanism of autoinhibition in which SH3 domain
engagement does not induce SH2 domain engagement or complete autoinhibition
of the CD, as is generally the case for Fyn2, as well as Src, Lyn,
and Hck. However, Fyn1 SH2 domain engagement is extremely effective
at autoinhibiting the CD through a mechanism that is not entirely
clear. It is possible that SH2 domain engagement stabilizes the SH2-CD
linker in a conformation that allows for allosteric control over the
CD through SH3 binding. SH2-CD linker variability can thus influence
coupling of SH3 and SH2 domain engagement beyond the contribution
of the SH3-SH2 linker. This result illustrates the importance of studying
multidomain SFKs as opposed to individual domains.

SH2-CD linker
heterogeneity has important consequences for SFK
regulation and function in cells. This is illustrated by investigation
of Fyn1 and Fyn2 C-terminal tail availability for phosphorylation
by Csk. All in vitro evidence suggests that Fyn1
would be more active in cells; it is characterized by more SH3 domain
accessibility regardless of αC helix conformation and favors
an active ATP-binding site conformation compared to Fyn2 and other
SFKs. However, experiments in HEK293 cells report that Fyn1 is less
activation loop phosphorylated and possesses an SH3 domain that is
less available for intermolecular interactions compared to that of
Fyn2. We have shown that, because of
its more accessible SH2 domain, Fyn1 is a better substrate for Csk
phosphorylation and thus is more autoinhibited in cells when Csk is
active. This implies that, because of Fyn1’s strong autoinhibition
by SH2 domain engagement caused by its unique SH2-CD linker, Fyn1’s
cellular function is determined by the competing activities of Csk
and phosphatases to a greater extent than that of Fyn2 and other SFKs.
This finding draws attention to the surprising consequences of SH2-CD
linker differences in the complex environment of the cell.

Beyond
providing insight into allosteric regulation within the
SFKs, these studies suggest how individual SFKs are able to play nonredundant
roles in cellular processes despite high degrees of sequence homology.
For example, in Mast cell and B cell signaling, Fyn and Lyn have been
demonstrated to play opposing and/or nonredundant functions.− The structural source of this nonredundancy is currently unknown,
but our results indicate that it may be due to SH2-CD linker heterogeneity
between the two kinases.

Supporting Information Available
Phospho-specific blots demonstrating
quantitative activation loop phosphorylation of SFKAct constructs
(Figure S1), sequence context and design of SFKSH3eng high-affinity
linkers (Figure S2), Ki values for histograms
in Figures – (Figure S3–S5, respectively), representative Western blots
for pull-down bar graphs in Figure  (Figure
S6), SH2 pull-down results for SFK3D constructs (Figure
S7), and percent inhibition of CskDR and Fyn active site
Cys constructs described in Figure  (Figure
S8). This material is available free of charge via the Internet at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bi5008194_si_001.pdf

This work was
supported by the National Institutes of Health via Ruth L. Kirschstein
National Research Service Award T32GM008268 from the National Institute
of General Medical Sciences (A.C.R.) and Grants R01GM086858 (D.J.M.)
and F32CA174346 (S.E.L.) and the Alfred P. Sloan and Camille and Henry
Dreyfus Foundations (D.J.M.).

The authors declare no
competing financial interest.

Abbreviations
SFKSrc-family kinase

CDcatalytic domain

DRdrug-resistant

SH3Src homology 3

SH2Src homology 2

GSTglutathione S-transferase

PPIIpolyproline type
II

BSAbovine serum
albumin

SPSSrc
peptide substrate

3Dthree-domain

SEMstandard error of the mean

PDBProtein Data Bank.

