

   
BiochemistryBiochemistrybibichawBiochemistry0006-29601520-4995American
Chemical Society 10.1021/bi501159wArticleFolded Monomers and Hexamers of the Ectodomain of
the HIV gp41 Membrane Fusion Protein: Potential Roles in Fusion and
Synergy Between the Fusion Peptide, Hairpin, and Membrane-Proximal
External Region Banerjee Koyeli Weliky David P. *Department of Chemistry, Michigan State University, East Lansing, Michigan 48824, United States* Phone: 517-355-9715. Fax: 517-353-1793. E-mail: weliky@chemistry.msu.edu.05 11 2015 05 11 2014 25 11 2014 53 46 7184 7198 12 09 2014 04 11 2014 Copyright © 2014 American Chemical Society2014American Chemical SocietyThis is an open access article published under an ACS AuthorChoice License, which permits copying and redistribution of the article or any adaptations for non-commercial purposes.

HIV
is an enveloped virus and fusion between the HIV and host cell
membranes is catalyzed by the ectodomain of the HIV gp41 membrane
protein. Both the N-terminal fusion peptide (FP)
and C-terminal membrane-proximal external region
(MPER) are critical for fusion and are postulated to bind to the host
cell and HIV membranes, respectively. Prior to fusion, the gp41 on
the virion is a trimer in noncovalent complex with larger gp120 subunits.
The gp120 bind host cell receptors and move away or dissociate from
gp41 which subsequently catalyzes fusion. In the present work, large
gp41 ectodomain constructs were produced and biophysically and structurally
characterized. One significant finding is observation of synergy between
the FP, hairpin, and MPER in vesicle fusion. The ectodomain-induced
fusion can be very efficient with only ∼15 gp41 per vesicle,
which is comparable to the number of gp41 on a virion. Conditions
are found with predominant monomer or hexamer but not trimer and these
may be oligomeric states during fusion. Monomer gp41 ectodomain is
hyperthermostable and has helical hairpin structure. A new HIV fusion
model is presented where (1) hemifusion is catalyzed by folding of
gp41 ectodomain monomers into hairpins and (2) subsequent fusion steps
are catalyzed by assembly into a hexamer with FPs in an antiparallel
β sheet. There is also significant interest in the gp41 MPER
because it is the epitope of several broadly neutralizing antibodies.
Two of these antibodies bind our gp41 ectodomain constructs and support
investigation of the gp41 ectodomain as an immunogen in HIV vaccine
development.

National Institutes of Health, United Statesdocument-id-old-9bi501159wdocument-id-new-14bi-2014-01159wccc-price

   
Human immunodeficiency
virus
(HIV) is enveloped by a membrane obtained during viral budding from
an infected host cell. An early step in infection of another cell
is fusion of the viral and cell membranes with accompanying release
of the viral nucleocapsid into the cytoplasm.1 The HIV membrane includes a gp160 glycoprotein complex comprised
of two noncovalently associated subunits, gp120 and gp41.2 Gp41 is a ∼350-residue monotopic integral
membrane protein with a ∼180-residue ectodomain (Figure 1). Gp120 is bound to the gp41 ectodomain. HIV targets
lymphocytes via binding of gp120 to cell receptors and gp120 moves
away from or dissociates from gp41. Gp41 then undergoes large conformational
changes with accompanying catalysis of membrane fusion. Direct fusion
with the plasma membrane has been observed as well as fusion with
endosomes following virion endocytosis.1,3 Fusion appears
to occur near physiologic pH via either route. To our knowledge, the
gp120/cell receptor complex is only for target cell identification
and gp41 is the only fusion protein. Much of our biophysical understanding
of fusion has therefore come from studies of gp41 with an emphasis
on its ectodomain which can contact the outer leaflets of both the
viral and cell membranes. Mutagenesis has demonstrated that there
are two ∼20-residue regions of the gp41 ectodomain that play
key roles in fusion likely through membrane interaction.4−6 The N-terminal fusion peptide (FP) and C-terminal membrane-proximal
external region (MPER) are postulated to bind to the host cell and
viral membranes, respectively. The fusion significances of the FP
and MPER have been supported by observation of vesicle fusion induced
by FP or MPER peptides. There is an intervening N-heptad repeat (NHR), loop, and C-heptad repeat
(CHR) between the FP and MPER domains (Figure 1).

Figure 1 (A) Schematic diagram of HIV gp41 where FP = fusion peptide, NHR
= N-heptad repeat; CHR = C-heptad repeat, MPER = membrane-proximal
external region, TM = transmembrane domain, and endo = endodomain.
(B) Amino acid sequences of HP, HM, and FP-HM. The epitopes of the
2F5 and 4E10 bNAbs are marked.

Electron micrographs of virions show clusters of three gp160,
that
is, three gp120 and three gp41 molecules. These clusters are likely
the initial protein state before any changes in membrane topology
because of membrane fusion.7 The extraviral
region of gp160 is termed gp140 and is comprised of gp120 and the
gp41 ectodomain without the gp41 TM and gp41 endodomain. WT gp140
is typically monomeric but gp140 trimers can be stabilized via mutations
and a gp120/gp41 ectodomain cross-link.8,9 There are ∼5
Å resolution structures of such gp140 trimers that likely represent
the protein state prior to membrane fusion.10−12 The structure
includes a loose bundle of three parallel NHR helices and three CHR
helices forming a tripod. The monomer structure is NHR-helix/70°-turn/CHR-helix.
The FP and MPER are not in the structure. There are also atomic-resolution
structures of segments of the gp41 ectodomain typically without the
FP and MPER and without gp120.13−16 These show NHR-helix/180°-turn/CHR-helix hairpin
structure as well as assembly of three molecules into a six-helix
bundle (SHB) with the three NHRs forming parallel coiled-coil structure
on the bundle interior and the three CHRs packing antiparallel to
the NHRs on the bundle exterior. Melting temperatures of ∼70
°C are observed for shorter ectodomain constructs with hairpin
structure whereas temperatures up to 110 °C are observed for
longer constructs.17,18 This thermostability has supported
the SHB as the final gp41 structure during fusion.

In addition
to the initial NHR/70°-turn/CHR bent structure
and the final NHR/180°-turn/CHR SHB structure, a “pre-hairpin
intermediate” (PHI) structure has been proposed to form after
removal of the gp120s. Each PHI gp41 has a fully extended (no turn)
structure, that is, NHR-helix/0°-turn/CHR-helix and there are
separate NHR and CHR trimer helical bundles. To our knowledge, the
existence of the gp41 PHI is only supported by functional studies,
in particular inhibition of membrane fusion and HIV infection with
NHR or CHR+MPER peptides.19,20 These peptides are
proposed to bind to the CHR and NHR bundles of the PHI, respectively,
and to inhibit the PHI → SHB structural transition. CHR+MPER
peptides are a clinically prescribed HIV treatment.21

There are also distinct membrane structures during
fusion.22 The separate viral and host cell
membranes first
merge into a hemifusion intermediate characterized by intermembrane
lipid mixing and no contents mixing. This is followed by breaking
the hemifusion barrier and formation of a small pore through which
small species (e.g., atomic ions) can pass. The fusion pore then expands
to create a single membrane enclosing the cell and the viral capsid.

There are little data about the relative timing of gp41 and membrane
structural changes. One common model I has been: (1)
gp120 receptor binding followed by gp120 removal; (2) formation of
extended PHI gp41 trimer followed by FP insertion into the host cell
membrane; (3) PHI → SHB trimer folding that brings the two
membranes close together; (4) hemifusion; (5) initial pore formation;
and (6) fusion pore expansion.23 The appealing
intuitive aspect of this model is that some of the free energy released
during PHI → SHB folding is used to form membrane intermediates.
However, the relative timings of this model are not supported by the
observation that CHR+MPER peptides inhibit fusion up to the final
fusion pore expansion step.20 Because the
peptides are presumed to bind to the PHI trimer but not the SHB trimer,
these data suggest an alternative model II: (1) gp120
receptor binding followed by gp120 removal; (2) formation of extended
PHI gp41 trimer followed by FP insertion into the host cell membrane;
(3) hemifusion; (4) initial pore formation; (5) PHI → SHB trimer
folding; and (6) fusion pore expansion.24

In the present work, we show that the gp41 ectodomain can
form
stable hairpin monomers as well as stable hexamers that are likely
composed of two SHB trimers. CHR+MPER inhibitor peptides likely bind
to the monomer but not the trimer or hexamer. These findings are the
basis of a new model III (Figure 12): (1) gp120 receptor binding followed by gp120 removal; (2) dissociation
of gp41 ectodomain into monomers and formation of extended PHI gp41
ectodomain monomer followed by FP insertion into the host cell membrane;
(3) PHI → hairpin monomer folding that brings the two membranes
close together; (4) hemifusion; (5) initial pore formation; (6) hairpin
monomer → SHB trimer → hexamer ectodomain assembly;
and (7) fusion pore expansion. Like model I and unlike model II, the new model III retains the appealing
coupling of the PHI → SHB transition to initial steps of membrane
fusion. There are more reasonable coordinated changes of the ectodomain
and membrane topologies for PHI → SHB monomer folding of model III than for PHI → SHB trimer folding of models I and II. Finally, the discovery of stable
hexamers correlates with other data supporting a requirement of multiple
gp160 trimers for membrane fusion and HIV infection.25,26

Much of our understanding of the FP and MPER regions of the
gp41
ectodomain has been based on studies of vesicle fusion induced by
peptides.27−29 Rapid (∼5 s) fusion typically requires 500–1000
peptides per ∼100 nm diameter vesicle which is much higher
than the ∼30 gp160 per virion and suggests that there are aspects
of viral fusion unaccounted for in the peptide studies.30 A reasonable hypothesis with some supporting
data is that the rest of the ectodomain plays an important role in
fusion. In the present work, we demonstrate efficient vesicle fusion
with only ∼15 gp41 per vesicle provided that the FP, hairpin,
and MPER are included in the large gp41 ectodomain construct. To our
knowledge, this is the first demonstration of fusion synergy between
the FP, hairpin, MPER in a large gp41 ectodomain construct. Such synergy
correlates with postulated binding of FP and MPER regions to host
cell and viral membranes, respectively, and also with postulated FP/MPER
interaction in a folded hairpin structure.

The MPER is the epitope
of several broadly neutralizing antibodies
(bNAbs) that prevent infection by diverse isolates of HIV.5,31 There has consequently been continued effort to develop a HIV vaccine
with a MPER immunogen. The ectodomain with MPER and hairpin structure
is a candidate immunogen in part because of the stability of this
structure. However, there is disagreement in the literature about
the antigenicity of the hairpin, that is, whether bNAbs bind well
to the MPER in this structure.32−34 The present study shows such
binding for the hairpin ectodomain which is initially in a monomer
or hexamer state.

Materials and Methods
HP and HM Inserts
Amino acid (Figure 1B) sequences are for the
HXB2 laboratory strain of HIV and
are described using gp160 numbering (see Supporting
Information for DNA sequence). HP and HM include the NHR residues
535(M535C)-581 and a non-native loop (SGGRGG). HP includes CHR residues
628–666 and a non-native H6 tag. HM includes CHR+MPER
residues 628–683, a non-native G4 spacer, and a
non-native H4 tag. The HP insert in the pGEM-t vector without
the H6 tag has been previously described and the H6 tag was then added via PCR.35 The
HM insert was generated from the HP insert via multiple rounds of
PCR.

HP and HM Expression, Solubilization, and Purification
The expression host was Escherichia coli, BL21(DE3)
strain. The typical protocol began with addition of 1 mL of bacterial
glycerol stock to 50 mL of LB medium. After overnight growth at 37
°C, the 50 mL culture was added to 1 L of fresh LB medium. Growth
was continued for 2 h with a final OD600 of ∼0.8.
Protein expression was induced with addition of 2 mM IPTG and continued
for 6 h at 37 °C. “Pellet I” (∼9 g) was
harvested by centrifugation at 9000g. The next steps
were done at 4 °C using 30 mL PBS at pH 7.4 with protease inhibitor
cocktail. Three g of pellet I was suspended in PBS and lysed by tip
sonication in an ice bath. The lysate was centrifuged at 48000g and the resultant “pellet II” was sonicated
in PBS with subsequent centrifugation. SDS-PAGE showed that the resultant
“pellet III” had a high mass fraction of recombinant
protein (RP). Pellet III was effectively solubilized by sonication
in PBS + 6 M GuHCl and the RP in this solution was purified at ambient
temperature by affinity chromatography with Co2+ resin.
The resin suspension solutions were PBS (pH 7.4) + 6 M GuHCl + imidazole
and resin was isolated using gravity filtration. After initial protein
binding with 1 mM imidazole, weakly bound proteins were removed using
sequential washes with 5 mM imidazole (2×), 10 mM imidazole (2×),
and 20 mM imidazole (2×). The RP was eluted using 250 mM imidazole
(4 × ) and the purified yields of HP and HM were ∼50 and
∼15 mg/L culture, respectively, as determined by A280. Elutions were (1) diluted to ∼0.1 mg RP/mL
in PBS + 6 M GuHCl + 2 mM DTT; (2) dialyzed at 4 °C against 50
mM sodium formate buffer (pH 3.2) + 150 mM NaCl + 0.2 mM TCEP reducing
agent; and (3) concentrated to ∼1 mg/mL. HP and HM were aggregated
in the pH 5–9 range in the absence of GuHCl. Aggregation of
either protein was evidenced by a visibly significant quantity of
protein precipitate.

Synthesis and Purification of FP-HM
FP23 (residues
512–534 (S534A)-(thioester linker)) was synthesized manually
by t-boc chemistry, purified by RP-HPLC, and quantitated with the
BCA assay. Purity was &gt;95% by MALDI MS. Native chemical ligation
between
FP23 and HM was done with 1.2 mM FP23, 1.2 mM HM, 0.1 M sodium phosphate
buffer at pH 7.2, 8 M GuHCl, 60 mM MPAA, 2 mM TCEP, 1 day time, and
ambient temperature. The ligation products were purified by RP-HPLC.

Size-Exclusion Chromatography (SEC)
A DuoFlow Pathfinder
20 instrument (Bio-Rad) was used with a flow rate of 0.3 mL/min, A280 detection, and Tricorn semipreparative columns
(GE Technologies).

CD Spectroscopy
A Chirascan spectrometer
(Applied Photophysics)
was used with a quartz cuvette with 1 mm path length. There were 0.5
nm steps with 1.5 s per step. For each sample, three scans were averaged.
The final spectrum was the (RP + buffer) – buffer difference
spectrum.

Western Blots
Purified RP in SDS buffer (∼0.5
mg/mL) was boiled followed by SDS-PAGE (∼5 μg RP per
lane) and transfer to a nitrocellulose membrane and incubation in
a 10 mL solution containing antibody (5 μg), TBST at pH 7.4,
and 5% w/v nonfat dry milk. Subsequent incubation with Goat Anti-Hamster
IgG (H+L) HRP conjugate secondary antibody (1 μg) was followed
by development with SuperSignal West Pico chemiluminescent substrate.

Immunoprecipitation
Five microgram quantities of RP
and antibodies were used from 1 mg/mL stocks. Solutions other than
RP stock contained PBS at pH 7.4. bNAb was incubated with Protein
G magnetic beads followed by 3× wash removal of free bNAb. Because
RP binds to unpassivated beads but not IgG, the beads were incubated
with IgG and then washed. The beads were then incubated with RP in
700 μL solution for 1 h and washed. Bound RP and antibodies
were removed by boiling in SDS sample buffer and analyzed by SDS-PAGE.

Protein-Induced Vesicle Fusion
Lipid:Chol (1.0:0.5
μmole) was dissolved in chloroform followed by chloroform removal
with nitrogen gas and vacuum pumping. The film was homogenized by
freeze–thaw cycles in ∼1 mL buffer and extruded through
100 nm diameter pores to form unilamellar vesicles. Fluorescently
labeled vesicles were similarly prepared except that the mixture also
contained 2 mol % of the fluorescent lipid N-NBD-PE
and 2 mol % of the quenching lipid N-Rh-PE. Labeled
and unlabeled vesicles were mixed in 1:9 ratio with total [lipid+Chol]
≈ 230 μM. Fluorescence of the stirring vesicle solution
was measured at 37 °C with 467 nm excitation, 530 nm detection,
and 1 s time increment. After measurement of the baseline fluorescence F0, a protein aliquot was added and marked time t = 0. Vesicle fusion was reflected in the increased fluorescence
ΔF(t) = F(t) – F0 because
of longer distances between fluorescent and quenching lipids in a
fused (labeled+unlabeled) vesicle relative to the initial labeled
vesicle. The dead-time in the assay was ∼5 s and asymptotic
fluorescence (ΔFf) was usually reached by ∼600 s. The maximum fluorescence
change (ΔFmax) was detected after
addition of 12 μL 10% Triton X-100 which solubilized the vesicles.
Percent fusion was M(t) = {ΔF(t)/ΔFmax} × 100. Comparison among assay replicates showed δ(Mf)/Mf ≈ 0.02.

We wanted to compare vesicle
fusion induced by HP, HM, and FP-HM where all proteins were in the
same stock buffer conditions. FP-HM was not soluble without 6 M GuHCl,
so the chosen stock conditions were 10 mM sodium formate at pH 3.2,
6 M GuHCl, and 0.2 mM TCEP. The effects of the stock pH and GuHCl
were minimized by always adding 7.5 μL of stock into a final
total volume of 1200 μL with final [GuHCl] = 40 mM. Vesicle
fusion was done for final pHs of 3.2 and 7.4 with respective stock
[protein] = 20 μM and 160 μM, chosen so that (1) for all
proteins, Mf &lt; 100%
with no light scattering; and (2) for at least one protein, Mf was appreciably greater than
0%.

Results
High-Yield Protein Production
Cells
that had expressed
HP were lysed in PBS but SDS-PAGE of the soluble lysate did not show
a clear HP band. It was therefore concluded that most of the HP was
in inclusion bodies (IBs). After an additional lysis in PBS, different
solubilization conditions were tested for “pellet III”
as defined in the Experimental section. Similar intensity HP bands
were observed in SDS-PAGE of the lysates from glacial acetic acid,
1% w/v SDS, 8 M urea, or 6 M GuHCl. Purification of the 6 M GuHCl
lysate yielded HP with high purity (Figure 2B). The most intense band was the HP monomer and there were also
reproducible weaker dimer bands confirmed to be HP by Western blotting
with anti-His tag antibody. The purified yield was ∼50 mg HP/L
culture.

Figure 2 (A) 13C SSNMR spectra of a cell pellet harvested from
centrifugation of a cell lysis in PBS. The E. coli cells contained a plasmid with the HM insert and expression was
induced for 2 h in minimal medium containing 13CO-Leu.
Any expressed HM will therefore be 13CO-Leu labeled. The
SSNMR acquisition parameters included a 9.4 T magnetic field, 4 mm
diameter rotor, 8 kHz magic angle spinning frequency, and ∼1
day of signal averaging. The ratio of integrated isotropic 13CO intensity (peaked at ∼175 ppm) to integrated aliphatic
intensity (0–90 ppm region) translates to expression of ∼300
mg HM/L culture. (B) SDS-PAGE of purified HM (MW = 13.7 kDa) and HP
(MW = 11.6 kDa). (C) MALDI MS of FP-HM ligation product twice-purified
by RP-HPLC. The experimental ratio [m/z(FP-HM)/m/z(HM)] is 1.1522 and
matches the ratio of expected MWs, [MW(FP-HM)/MW(HM)] = 1.1522.

The first HM construct had a H6 C-terminal tag without
glycines and the initial efforts to solubilize and purify the protein
were unsuccessful as judged by no clear band in SDS-PAGE. It was unclear
whether the main problem was low expression, low solubilization, or
purification losses. HM expression prior to solubilization was then
quantitated with a recently developed solid-state NMR (SSNMR) method.36 Addition of 13CO-Leu during the expression
period resulted in 13CO-labeling of HM. Cells were lysed
in PBS followed by centrifugation of the lysate and the harvested
pellet was enriched in any HM IBs. The 13C NMR spectrum
of this pellet showed a prominent 13CO feature consistent
with ∼300 mg HM/L in IBs (Figure 2A).
The main bottlenecks to purified HM were therefore low solubilization
of HM IBs or purification losses.

A systematic search was carried
out to find conditions for solubilization
of HM IBs. Two sequential lyses were done in PBS to solubilize other
proteins. Assessment of solubilization of HM IBs in pellet III was
done by (1) visual reduction in pellet size; and (2) SDS-PAGE of the
solution. Many conditions that solubilized HP IBs did not solubilize
HM IBs. Appreciable HM solubilization was only achieved with 1% SDS
or 6 M GuHCl and the latter additive was chosen for solublization
and purification. HM with H6 tag did not bind the Co2+ resin whereas HM with a G4H6 tag bound
so tightly that there was no elution with 250 mM imidazole. HM with
a G4H4 tag both bound tightly to the resin with
20 mM imidazole and also eluted from the resin with 250 mM imidazole.
The purified yield was ∼15 mg HM/L culture and SDS-PAGE showed
dominant monomer and weaker dimer bands (Figure 2B).

FP-HM was produced by native chemical ligation between
FP and HM
and purified by RP-HPLC. For one round of purification, MS intensities
showed FP-HM:HM ≈ 1.2 which correlated with SDS-PAGE (Supporting Information). For two rounds of RP-HPLC,
the FP-HM:HM ≈ 10 (Figure 2C). However,
there was too little FP-HM, so the FP-HM+HM mixture after only one
round was used for subsequent experiments.

Solubility Only at pH 3
or with 6 M GuHCl
Solubility
in a particular buffer was examined by (1) dialyzing the protein (∼0.2
mg/mL) against the buffer for 1 day; (2) centrifugation at 16000g for 5 min; and (3) measuring protein concentration in
the supernatant. A protein was typically either soluble by the criterion
[final concentration]/[initial concentration] &gt; 0.8 or poorly soluble
with obvious precipitation.

None of the proteins were soluble
in (1) 10 mM sodium formate at pH 5.0; (2) 5 mM HEPES/10 mM MES at
pH 7.4; (3) PBS at pH 7.4 with or without 0.1% (w/v) nonionic detergent
(Triton X-100, N-lauroylsarcosine, n-decyl-β-d-maltopyranoside, and n-dodecylphosphocholine were tested); or (4) 10 mM Tris at pH 9.0.
Both HP and HM were soluble in 10 or 50 mM sodium formate buffer at
pH 3.2. However, FP-HM was not soluble under these conditions. All
proteins were soluble with 6 M GuHCl at either pH 3.2 (50 mM sodium
formate) or pH 7.4 (10 mM sodium phosphate). There was solubility
either with or without 150 mM NaCl. At pH 7.4, there was no appreciable
solubility with [GuHCl] &lt; 6 M.

Monomer or Hexamer and
Not Trimer
Oligomerization was
probed by SEC for conditions that satisfied the above solubility criteria.
The typical protein loading was 1 mg/mL, and there was ∼10-fold
dilution in the column. For a particular buffer, the dominant oligomeric
state was either monomer or hexamer and never trimer. For example,
for HP at pH 3.2 without GuHCl, the SEC profile is consistent with
a monomer (Figure 3A). This is significant
as CD, calorimetric, and vesicle fusion studies of gp41 ectodomain
constructs have often been done with protein at pH 3.18,35,37 It has typically been assumed
that there are SHB trimers; however, the SEC only shows monomers.
For 10 mg HP/mL loading concentration, the SEC profile also shows
a major fraction monomer with much smaller fractions of trimers, hexamers,
and larger aggregates (Figure 3B). SEC was
attempted for HM at pH 3.2 without GuHCl but the protein bound to
the Superdex column material. For buffer with 6 M GuHCl at either
pH 3.2 or pH 7.4, both HP and HM show major fraction hexamer with
much smaller fractions assigned to dodecamers, 24-mers, and aggregates
with MW &gt; 2 MDa (Figure 4). Although cell
physiology
does not include 6 M GuHCl, it is the only condition we found that
resulted in a defined small oligomer state. The hexamer is also the
dominant species when non-native protein tags are added to the ectodomain
construct.38 We therefore used 6 M GuHCl
as one initial solubilization condition in subsequent experiments.
The major hexamer population and minor populations of larger oligomers
likely represent a thermodynamic equilibrium state. This was evidenced
by collecting the hexamer fraction, concentrating to 1 mg/mL, and
then reloading this fraction for a second round of SEC. The resultant
SEC profiles for HP and HM are similar to those initially observed
(Supporting Information).

Figure 3 SEC A280 profiles for HP with (A) 1
mg/mL loading, Superdex 200 column and (B) 10 mg/mL loading, Superdex
75 column. The loading and running buffer was 50 mM sodium formate
pH 3.2, 150 mM NaCl, and 0.2 mM TCEP. The blue numbers are the MW
standards in kDa and their respective elution volumes are the downward
blue arrows. There are accompanying SEC profiles of the MW standards,
as well as plots of Kav vs log10(MW) (Supporting Information).

Figure 4 SEC A280 profiles from a semipreparative
Superdex 200 column for HP and HM in buffers containing 6 M GuHCl
and 150 mM NaCl. The pH 3.2 buffer was 50 mM sodium formate with 0.2
mM TCEP and the pH 7.4 buffer was 10 mM phosphate with 2 mM DTT. For
each run, the loading and running buffers were the same and the loading
stock solution had a 1 mg/mL protein concentration. The blue numbers
are the MW standards in kDa and their respective elution volumes are
the downward blue arrows. The most prominent peaks in the profiles
correspond to hexamer masses and vertical dashed lines show the elution
volume offset between the HP and HM hexamers. Smaller peaks most consistent
with dodecamer and 24-mer masses are identified by shaded regions.
For HM, there is also a small peak associated with the Vo void volume, that is, aggregates with MW ≥ 2
MDa.

Hyperthermostable Hairpin
Structure of the Monomer
CD spectra of HP and HM at pH 3.2
without GuHCl have the 208/222
nm minima characteristic of α helical structure and the θ222 values are consistent with dominant helical structure (Figure 5A). HP is predominantly a monomer in this buffer
so the data support a highly helical monomer. There is a small fraction
of trimer for high SEC loading and the CD spectrum of this fraction
is also consistent with dominant helical structure. The ∼15%
reduction in |θ222| of trimer relative to monomer
is not understood. For HM, there was a small linear decrease in |θ222| between 20 and 95 °C (Figure 5B) that is similar to the previously observed temperature-dependence
for HP and other large ectodomain constructs at pH 3. This correlates
with calorimetrically determined Tm values
of ∼110 °C.18

Figure 5 (A) CD spectra of HP
and HM in pH 3.2 buffer. All spectra show
θ222 indicative of a significant fraction of α
helical structure. (B) θ222 vs temperature for HM
at pH 3.2. No unfolding transition is observed. (C) CD spectra of
WT and mutant HP at pH 3.2. For a SHB trimer, the D632A mutation could
disrupt the intermonomer salt bridge with K574 and the W628A mutation
could disrupt the intramonomer hydrophobic interaction with W571.
More positive CD signal for the double but not the single mutant is
consistent with monomer rather than SHB trimer HP at pH 3.2. (D) CD
spectra of HP and HM in buffer with 6 M GuHCl. The spectra show θ222 indicative of a significant fraction of α helical
structure. The [protein] ≈ 15 μM (∼0.2 mg/mL),
the pH 3.2 buffers contained 50 mM formate with 0.2 mM TCEP, and the
pH 7.4 buffers contained 10 mM phosphate and 2 mM DTT.

CD spectra for the D632A and D632A/W628A mutants
of HP provide
additional support for the helical monomer model (Figure 5C). In the atomic-resolution SHB trimer structure,
D632 and W574 form an intermonomer CHR/NHR salt bridge and W628 and
W571 form an intramonomer hydrophobic interaction.39 There is negligible difference between the WT and D632A
CD spectra whereas there is about two-times less magnitude molar ellipticity
in the D632A/W628A spectrum that is consistent with a significant
loss in helicity. These data support hairpin monomer structure of
HP which is similar to a monomer unit of the SHB trimer structure
(Figure 11A). The Tm of ∼110 °C corresponds to unfolding of hairpin monomer
rather SHB trimer.

For HP and HM in 6 M GuHCl at either pH 3.2
or pH 7.4, there is
a 222 nm minimum consistent with helical structure (Figure 5D). Significant absorption/interference from the
GuHCl precludes quantitation of the helical fraction. The hexamer
is the dominant oligomeric state under these conditions and may be
a dimer of two SHB trimers. For HP in 6 M GuHCl at pH 7 between 20
and 90 °C, there is a linear decrease in |θ222| comparable to Figure 5B change without GuHCl.
This supports thermostability of the hairpin monomer structure within
the hexamer.

The ligations are done in 8 M GuHCl at pH 7 and
ambient temperature
so it is interesting to consider the structural properties in this
condition. For HP in 8 M GuHCl at 20 °C, the |θ222| is about 60% of the value in 6 M GuHCl. In addition, the |θ222| in 8 M GuHCl exhibits a small linear decrease between
20 and 70 °C. These data are consistent with a dimer of SHB trimers
in 8 M GuHCl.

Hairpin Monomer with MPER is Highly Fusogenic
Earlier
work has shown that peptides corresponding to the FP and the MPER
regions induce vesicle fusion.27,29 For the present study,
we investigated the effects of these regions as part of the gp41 ectodomain
including the hairpin region. The typical vesicle composition was
POPC:POPG:Chol (8:2:5) and reflected the major fraction PC, minor
fraction negatively charged lipid, and mole fraction Chol in the membranes
of HIV and its host cells.40 Fusion was
studied at final pHs of 3.2 and 7.4 which was motivated by previous
studies with HP showing much greater fusion of negatively charged
vesicles at pH 3.2 relative to pH 7.4.41 A second vesicle composition was POPC:DOTAP:Chol (8:2:5) and contained
positively charged DOTAP rather than negatively charged POPG. Comparison
of results for the two compositions and two pH values provides insight
into the role of protein/vesicle electrostatics because the POPG and
DOTAP are respectively negatively and positively charged at both pH
values, whereas the protein is positively charged at pH 3.2 and negatively
charged at pH 7.4.

HP and HM were solubilized as monomers at
pH 3.2 and induced rapid fusion of negatively charged POPG vesicles
at this pH with low 1:700 protein:total lipid mole ratio (Figure 6A). This is likely monomer-induced fusion because
of insufficient time for oligomerization at the membrane surface prior
to fusion. At pH 7.4, comparable fusion required an order-of-magnitude
higher 1:75 ratio (Figure 6B). For 1:150 ratio,
there was negligible fusion which is consistent with earlier work.
For positively charged DOTAP vesicles, there was little fusion at
pH 3.2, measurable fusion at pH 7.4, and higher fusion at pH 9.0 (Figure 6C and D). The different pH dependences for POPG
and DOTAP vesicles likely reflect differences in protein/vesicle electrostatic
energy, that is, (1) attractive energy between the positively charged
protein and negatively charged POPG vesicles at low pH and between
the negatively charged protein and positively charged DOTAP vesicles
at neutral and high pH and (2) repulsive energy between the negatively
charged protein and negatively charged POPG vesicles at neutral pH
and between the positively charged protein and positively charged
DOTAP vesicles at low pH. Attractive energy results in a higher fraction
bound protein and repulsive energy results in a lower fraction. In
the spatially restricted environment of HIV/host cell fusion, there
is likely high protein/membrane binding that is similar to near-quantitative
binding during the pH 3.2 vesicle fusion of POPG vesicles. Higher
fusion extent for POPG vesicles at low pH relative to DOTAP vesicles
at neutral and high pH may be a consequence of the different magnitudes
of attractive electrostatic energy. This hypothesis is evidenced by
calculated hairpin charges of about +10 at pH 3.2, −2 at pH
7.4, and −4 at pH 9.0. For many data, fusion was rapid and
occurred during the ∼5 s dead-time of the assay which is consistent
with earlier studies. Other studies have also shown that as the fraction
of charged lipid in the vesicle is decreased, the fusion rate decreases
but the fusion extent increases where the latter effect is probably
due to reduced intervesicle electrostatic repulsion.42

Figure 6 Vesicle fusion at 37 °C. Protein was added just prior to the
increase in fusion with ∼5 s assay dead time. For panels A
and B, the vesicles were negatively charged and for panels C and D,
the vesicles were positively charged. The calculated protein charge
is +16, −2, and −4 at respective pH values 3.2, 7.4,
and 9.0. The protein:lipid mole ratios were: (A) 1:700, (B) 1:75,
and (C, D) 1:300, with Chol not included in the lipid quantity. The
data overall support the importance of attractive protein/vesicle
attractive energy for fusion at low protein:lipid ratios. The protein
stock contained 20 μM protein (∼0.25 mg/L) in 10 mM formate
at pH 3.2 with 0.2 mM TCEP which are condition for predominant monomeric
protein. For panels A and B, [POPC] = 120 μM, [POPG] = 30 μM,
and [Chol] = 75 μM, and for panels C and D, the vesicles contained
[POPC] = 120 μM, [DOTAP] = 30 μM, and [Chol] = 75 μM.
Vesicle buffers were 10 mM formate at pH 3.2, 5 mM HEPES/10 mM MES
at pH 7.4, and 10 mM Tris-HCl at pH 9.0.

Fusion is enhanced with inclusion of the MPER in the construct
as evidenced by the following differences for HM relative to HP with
POPG vesicles: (1) at pH 3.2, higher initial fusion rate and (2) at
pH 7.4, higher final fusion extent (Mf). For pH 3.2, the final [protein] = 0.2 μM (∼0.003
mg/mL) and the hairpin monomer likely makes initial contact with the
vesicle. HM-induced fusion occurs within a few seconds, so the monomer
is likely a fusion-active species. The enhanced fusion with inclusion
of the MPER is consistent with earlier observations of vesicle fusion
induced by MPER peptides.

Synergy of FP, Hairpin, and MPER with the
gp41 Copy Number of
a Virion
The individual and collective contributions of the
FP, hairpin, and MPER to ectodomain-induced fusion were studied with
HP, HM, and FP-HM solubilized as hexamers in 6 M GuHCl. The final
[GuHCl] = 40 mM and in the absence of protein, only modest fusion
was observed at pH 3.2 (Mf ≈ 4%)
and no fusion was observed at pH 7.4 (Supporting
Information). Much greater fusion was observed with protein
(Figure 7). Relative to HP which lacked most
of the MPER, inclusion of the full MPER in HM resulted in higher Mf. Even greater Mf was induced for FP-HM which contains both the FP and MPER. Similar
quantitative binding was observed in the absence and presence of the
FP.41,42 Dose response was observed for HM and FP-HM
(Figure 8). A substantial Mf of ∼15% was observed for FP-HM even at ultralow
protein/lipid = 1:4800 that corresponds to ∼15 proteins per
∼100 nm diameter vesicle, estimated using the area-per-lipid.
This number is significant because it is comparable to the ∼30
gp41 molecules per virion. To our knowledge, this is the first observation
of rapid (∼5 s) ectodomain-mediated vesicle fusion at the protein
copy number of a virion. In some contrast, rapid FP or MPER peptide-induced
vesicle fusion has typically been observed at 500–1000 peptides
per vesicle. Our result highlights the importance of the whole ectodomain
in fusion, including contributions from FP, hairpin, and MPER regions.43,44 The fusogenicity of FP-HM is even higher than shown in Figure 8 because our FP-HM stock contained ∼40% HM
impurity.

Figure 7 Vesicle fusion at 37 °C. A 7.5 μL aliquot of protein
was added just prior to the increase in fusion and the final total
volume was 1200 μL. The POPC/POPG/Chol vesicle composition and
buffers were the same as Figure 6. The protein
stock buffer was 10 mM formate at pH 3.2 with 6 M GuHCl and 0.2 mM
TCEP and following addition of protein stock, the assay buffer contained
40 mM GuHCl. For the pH 3.2 assays, the stock [protein] = 20 μM
(∼0.25 mg/mL), and for the pH 7.4 assays, the stock [protein]
= 160 μM (∼2 mg/mL). The [protein]/[POPC + POPG] = 1:1200
for the pH 3.2 assays and 1:150 for the pH 7.4 assays.

Figure 8 Dose response of vesicle fusion induced by HM and FP-HM
at pH 3.2.
The assay conditions were the same as Figure 7A except that the protein stock concentrations were 20, 10, and 5
μM for [protein]/[total lipid] = 1:1200, 1:2400, and 1:4800,
respectively.

Although the stock protein
is predominantly hexameric (Figure 4), the
fusion-active oligomeric state is not clear
because of the ∼200-fold dilution of protein and GuHCl prior
to fusion. HP is a monomer at equilibrium under these diluted conditions
(Figure 3) and HM and FP-HM are probably monomers
as well. Protein stock with 6 M GuHCl was used because this was the
only condition for which FP-HM was soluble at ∼1 mg/mL.

Folded
Hairpin Ectodomain with MPER Binds bNAbs
The
MPER region of gp41 includes the linear epitopes of several bNAbs
and there is consequently continued effort to develop a MPER-based
immunogen as a HIV vaccine. HM or similar folded hairpin molecules
are appealing because of their high stability but there are conflicting
data about the extent to which they bind bNAbs. However, our Western
blots show reproducible binding of HM to the 4E10 bNAb (Figure 9A). HP lacks the 4E10 epitope and serves as a negative
control. Western blots also show that HM binds to the 2F5 bNAb more
strongly than HP which includes only part of the 2F5 epitope (Figures 9B and 1B). In the Western
blot approach, the protein is in 15% SDS prior to antibody binding.
Although we do not know HM structure in this condition, HM hairpin
structure is hyperthermostable and a shorter ectodomain construct
without the MPER forms crystals in SDS with helical SHB structure.45 A gel shift is not observed between HP and HM
(Figures 2B and 9B)
and could be the result of folded rather than random coil structure.
HM is predominantly monomeric in 15% SDS and may therefore bind bNAb
as a hairpin monomer. The blots also show minor dimer populations
binding to 2F5.

Figure 9 Western blots showing binding of HM to the 4E10 and 2F5
bNAbs and
weaker binding of HP to 2F5. The left-side arrows are MWs in kDa.

Binding to bNAbs was probed under
physiological conditions using
direct immunoprecipitation. The protein stock solution contained either
monomeric or hexameric protein and the binding was done at pH 7.4
with [GuHCl] &lt; 10 mM. For either initial oligomeric state, HM bound
to 4E10 and 2F5 (Figure 10) whereas there was
no binding to IgG (Supporting Information). This is the antigenicity needed for a vaccine immunogen. HP binds
2F5 weaker than HM which is consistent with an incomplete epitope
in HP.

Figure 10 SDS-PAGE of the immunoprecipitation of HP and
HM with the 4E10
and 2F5 bNAbs. There is stronger binding of HM to 4E10 and 2F5 and
weaker binding of HP to 2F5. The protein stock buffer contained 50
mM sodium formate at pH 3.2 with 150 mM NaCl. For the right three
lanes of the panel A gel, the buffer also contained 6 M GuHCl whereas
for the left three lanes of panel A, the GuHCl was absent. Binding
was done in PBS at pH 7.4 and for the right lanes, the diluted [GuHCl]
= 10 mM. The center lane is the MW ladder in kDa.

Figure 11 Working structural models of the gp41 ectodomain with Figure 1 color coding. Monomeric HP is modeled as the hairpin
structure of a monomer in the SHB. HM and FP-HM hexamers are modeled
as two SHB trimers that contact at their N-/C-terminal interfaces.
This model correlates with the observed intermolecular antiparallel
β sheet structure of FPs.

Discussion
Significant Findings
The ectodomain
of the HIV gp41
protein plays a major role in catalyzing fusion between HIV and host
cell membranes. The likely respective binding of the FP and MPER to
the host cell and viral membranes are probably part of the underlying
physical basis for catalysis. Although there has been significant
functional and structural study of FP and MPER peptides, there have
been just a few investigations of these regions as part of the larger
ectodomain. The present work shows the significance of the FP, hairpin,
and MPER regions for ectodomain-induced vesicle fusion including fusion
with ∼15 proteins per vesicle which is comparable to the gp41
copy number of the virion. For FP or MPER peptides, there has typically
only been appreciable rapid vesicle fusion at 500–1000 peptides
per vesicle and to our knowledge, ours is this first observation of
rapid vesicle fusion at the virion gp41 copy number. Detection of
either predominant monomer or hexamer gp41 ectodomain rather than
trimer gp41 ectodomain was incorporated into the new HIV/host cell
membrane fusion model III (Figure 12). One significant feature
is inclusion of monomer ectodomain rather than trimer ectodomain PHI
→ hairpin folding at step 3. The free energy of gp41 ectodomain
folding is coupled to free energy of formation of membrane intermediates.
Our work may also aid HIV vaccine development via an immunogen with
a folded gp41 ectodomain including MPER. This immunogen has the advantage
of very high stability but there is literature disagreement about
ectodomain binding to bNAbs. We show bNAb binding to gp41 ectodomain
protein initially prepared as a monomer or hexamer.

Figure 12 Model for membrane fusion
that includes the gp41 ectodomain monomer
and hexamer. The different regions of gp41 are color coded according
to Figure 1 and the TM and endodomains are
not shown. One of the monomers is not displayed in steps 3–5.
The initial gp41 structure of step 1 is based on the ∼5 Å
resolution gp140 structures and the final SHB structure of step 7
is based on high-resolution structures.

SSNMR is a Novel and Important Tool in RP Production
One
key result that moved the work forward was SSNMR detection of
HM in IBs at ∼300 mg/L culture. The bottleneck to purified
protein was therefore IB solubilization rather than expression and
subsequent effort was focused on increasing solubilization. This result
exemplifies how SSNMR is a general method to quantitate RP yield without
solubilization or purification. High expression was obtained with
common and inexpensive plasmids, E. coli strain,
and growth and expression conditions. IB solubilization rather than
expression may therefore be a general determinant of purified protein
yield. Our yields were 15–50 mg/L and obtained with single-step
affinity purification which should be advantageous in immunogen production.
Our approach contrasts with earlier efforts that used protein fusion
tags that had to be cleaved.46

Monomer and
Hexamer Rather than Trimer gp41 Ectodomain
For gp41 ectodomain
constructs lacking solubility tags, only constructs
with short NHR and CHR segments and no FP or MPER appear to form soluble
trimers near pH 7.47 For longer constructs
that contain some or all of the FP or the MPER, for example, HP and
HM, the present and earlier studies show most protein forming large
aggregates (MW &gt; 2 MDa) even in the presence of nonionic detergents.48 There is solubility near pH 3 and many biophysical
measurements have been done at this pH. High fractional helicity and Tm &gt; 100 °C were considered strong evidence
of SHB trimers.

One important contribution of the present study
is SEC showing predominant monomer rather than trimer gp41 ectodomain
at pH 3 (Figure 3). Our SEC monomer result
is consistent with the SEC of large ectodomain constructs done by
other groups (Figure 1A from ref (48) and Figure S1 from ref (51)) although this monomer
interpretation was typically not made by the authors of these papers.
For these latter studies, the construct was NHR + native loop + CHR,
FP + NHR + native loop + CHR + MPER + TM, or short NHR + short loop
+ short CHR.

The gp41 ectodomain monomer is highly helical and
hyperthermostable.
The most plausible monomer structure is N-helix/180°
turn/C-helix model (Figure 11A) similar to
the monomer unit of the high-resolution SHB trimer structures. The
trimer is stabilized by several intermonomer NHR/NHR hydrophobic interactions
and small reorientations of helices could reposition residues for
favorable intramonomer NHR/CHR interactions. A looser helical monomer
hairpin structure has been observed for a short NHR + loop + CHR construct
in nonionic detergent but we favor the tight structure of Figure 11A.49 Large ectodomain
constructs like HP and HM have Tm &gt;
100
°C either in the absence or presence of detergent and this high
thermostability likely reflects substantial interhelical contact in
the folded monomer. The looser structure of much shorter ectodomain
constructs may be reflected in their typical Tm ≤ 70 °C.

Measurements of large ectodomain
constructs at low pH should be
interpreted in the context of monomer protein. For example, the hyperthermostability
detected by calorimetry and CD is likely a consequence of intramolecular
NHR/CHR interaction rather than intermolecular NHR/NHR interaction.
The stability of the ectodomain monomer would be consistent with an
important role for the monomer in fusion, discussed in a subsequent
section and presented in Figure 12. We also
note that rapid vesicle fusion using stock protein at low pH is likely
a consequence of membrane perturbation by hairpin monomer rather than
SHB trimer. This includes fusion of negatively charged vesicles at
pH 3.2 (Figure 6A) and positively charged vesicles
at pH 7.4 and 9.0 (Figure 6C and D).

For 10 mg HP/mL SEC loading, there is a major monomer peak as well
as minor trimer and oligomer/aggregate peaks (Figure 3B). The normalized values of monomer:trimer:larger oligomer
integrations are 0.72:0.18:0.10. These correspond to [monomer] ≈
60 μM and [trimer] ≈ 5 μM using the experimentally
determined 10-fold dilution in SEC. For the association equilibrium,
3 monomer ↔ trimer, the derived Ka ≈ 2 × 107M–2, and corresponds
to equal mass concentrations of monomer and trimer for total HP of
∼9 mg/mL (∼90 mg/mL loading in SEC). Earlier analytical
ultracentrifugation (AUC) data have been analyzed to yield Ka ≈ 5 × 1111 M–2.14,50,51 We do not
understand the discrepancy between the SEC and AUC analyses.

Protein hexamers were observed in 6 M GuHCl at either pH 3.2 or
7.4 (Figure 5). The data show the hexamer as
the fundamental unit of oligomerization rather than the trimer, for
example, dodecamers were observed but not nonamers. A reasonable model
for a hexamer is a dimer of SHB trimers with intertrimer contact between
the MPERs (Figure 11B). This model is consistent
with the observed helical structure in the hexamer and with Tm &gt; 100 °C. This model is also consistent
with some of the crystal packing of SHB trimers.39 In addition, SSNMR studies of FP structure in the membrane-associated
gp41 ectodomain show an oligomeric FP β sheet with antiparallel
but not parallel arrangement of the FP strands.24 The antiparallel arrangement would be consistent with end-on
arrangement of two SHB trimers (Figure 11C).

It is important to consider the impact that GuHCl may have on the
ectodomain structure as GuHCl often but not always denatures proteins.52 We think denaturation is unlikely for the ectodomain
because there is substantial helical structure and Tm &gt; 100 °C. In addition, to our knowledge, it
is
very unusual that denatured protein would have a well-defined oligomeric
state other than monomer. The hexamer is also the dominant oligomeric
state of a modified ectodomain construct in physiologic solution,
that is, pH 7.4 without any GuHCl.38 This
Soc-gp41ectoM-Fd construct includes a central gp41ectoM region, which
is very similar to FP-HM, as well as a ∼9 kDa non-native Soc
protein N-terminal of the FP and a ∼2 kDa Fd non-native protein
C-terminal of the MPER. The Soc and Fd proteins were chosen because
they form homotrimers in physiological solution. However, there was
only minor trimer population of Soc-gp41ectoM-Fd in physiologic solution.
Instead, the hexamer was dominant with additional smaller populations
of two larger oligomers. The overall oligomer distribution of Soc-gp41ectoM-Fd
in physiologic solution is very similar to that of HP and HM in 6
M GuHCl with dominant hexamer and two minor higher-order oligomers
that are reasonably assigned to dodecamer and 24-mer. It is likely
that there are similar hexamer structures of HP, HM, and Soc-gp41ectoM-Fd.

Biophysical Model of Oligomerization
At neutral pH,
large ectodomain constructs form &gt;2 MDa aggregates, whereas at
low
pH, monomers predominate for &lt;10 mg protein/mL and there is significant
trimer population with SHB structure for &gt;50 mg protein/mL. The
pH-dependence
of oligomeric state is observed with or without nonionic detergent
so our explanatory model is based on relative magnitudes of protein
electrostatic vs hydrophobic effects. Trimer stabilization is primarily
because of hydrophobic interaction between the three NHR helices on
the SHB interior. At low pH, there is a calculated charge of ∼+10
for the hairpin region of the ectodomain monomer. We posit that monomer
rather than oligomers are favored at low pH because intermolecular
electrostatic repulsion overwhelms the hydrophobic interaction. At
neutral pH, the calculated charge is −2 and hydrophobic interaction
is dominant. The resulting aggregates may be composed of SHB trimers.

For solutions containing GuHCl at both low and neutral pH, hexamers
predominate, that is, addition of GuHCl induces monomer → hexamer
oligomerization at low pH and induces aggregate → hexamer breakup
at neutral pH. To our knowledge, the specific interaction of positively
charged GuH+ with protein molecules is not understood.53 For the ectodomain protein, we posit that the
hexamer is formed from two SHB trimers (Figure 11B and C) and that GuH+ interacts with COO– groups on the SHB surfaces. The −COO– rather
than the −COOH state is favored at both pH’s because
of attractive interaction with GuH+. At low pH, this reduces
the positive charge of the protein so that the SHB trimer does not
dissociate due to electrostatic repulsion between monomers. Hexamers
form because of favorable hydrophobic interaction between the FP/MPER
end of one SHB trimer and the FP/MPER end of a second trimer. Aggregation
beyond hexamers is disfavored because this aggregation would reduce
exposed protein surface area and therefore the number of GuH+/COO– contacts. As noted above, SOC-gp41ectoM-Fd
forms a hexamer in the absence of GuHCl, and we posit this is also
two SHB trimers. Further aggregation is disfavored because of the
solubility of the SOC and FD proteins and perhaps because of their
steric bulk.

Correlation of Vesicle Fusion with HIV/Cell
Fusion
One significant result is observation of vesicle fusion
for ∼15
FP-HM per vesicle (Figure 8B), which is comparable
to the gp41 copy number of ∼30 in the virion. To our knowledge,
FP-HM thus provides the first example for which protein-induced vesicle
fusion might reasonably be directly compared to viral fusion. FP-HM
is more fusogenic than shorter ectodomain constructs like HP, which
lacks the FP and MPER, and also more fusogenic than isolated FP or
MPER peptides. This potent fusogenicity highlights the importance
of the full ectodomain in fusion, with inclusion of the N-terminal
FP, hairpin region, and C-terminal MPER. During HIV/cell fusion, the
FP and MPER likely bind to the cell and HIV membranes, respectively,
and higher fusion for FP-HM relative to HM supports synergy between
these two regions, likely via membrane perturbations. Vesicle fusion
is probably a better model of the earlier hemifusion (lipid mixing)
step of viral fusion than the final fusion pore expansion step. Pore
formation and expansion in vesicle fusion is less regulated than in
HIV/cell fusion and leakage of contents out of the vesicles occurs
much faster than mixing of contents between vesicles.

For conditions
with attractive protein/vesicle electrostatic energy, protein/vesicle
binding is quantitative and FP-independent. The observed FP-dependent
fusogenicity is therefore not reasonably ascribed to FP-dependent
binding. Protein binding is described by the equation fm = (Km × [L])/{1 + (Km × [L])} where fm = fraction bound-protein, Km =
equilibrium constant derived from Gm =
binding free-energy, and L = lipid. For our assays, [L] = 1.5 ×
10–4 M and protein/vesicle binding is quantitative
(fm = 1.0) when Km &gt; 105 M–1. The Gm = Gelec + Ghydro and corresponding Km = Kelec × Khydro describe
contributions from electrostatic and hydrophobic interactions. The
FP is hydrophobic but lacks ionizable residues so it affects Ghydro but not Gelec. For negatively charged vesicles at pH 3 and positively charged
vesicles at pH 9, the calculated Kelec &gt; 105 M–1 and corresponds to quantitative binding
of all proteins,
which has also been experimentally observed. For conditions with much
smaller Kelec, such as negatively charged
vesicles at neutral pH, binding may be FP-dependent and changes in
fusogenicity could be related to binding differences.

High fusion
by FP-HM requires a pH for which there is attractive
protein/vesicle electrostatic energy with resultant quantitative binding
to the vesicles (Figure 6). Attractive electrostatic
energy is not a requirement for fusion by the ectodomain of full-length
gp41 in the virion, likely because the ectodomain is restricted to
the space between the viral and host cell membranes. This spatial
confinement favors protein binding to the membranes even without electrostatic
attraction.

For the present study, a 0.2 fraction charged lipid
was used which
is larger than the typical fraction in the cell membrane. However,
a recent study showed efficient vesicle fusion with much smaller fractions
charged lipid.42 As the fraction charged
lipid is decreased, there is a corresponding increase in fusion extent
that is likely due to decreased intervesicle electrostatic repulsion.
Some charged lipid is needed for quantitative protein binding to the
vesicles and consequently fusion. As one example, HP at protein/lipid
= 1:700 (∼100 HP molecules/vesicle) induced ∼40% fusion
of vesicles containing only 0.02 fraction negatively charged phosphatidylserine
lipid. These results, along with the higher fusogenicity of FP-HM
relative to HP (Figure 7A), support correlation
between FP-HM induced vesicle fusion and hemifusion between the HIV
and cell membranes mediated by the viral ectodomain. Viral fusion
is probably also affected by membrane curvature and fluidity.

New Fusion
Model with gp41 Monomer and Hexamer Ectodomain
As noted in
the Introduction, models for gp160-induced membrane
fusion have typically considered changes in structure of a gp160 trimer
that are temporally and energetically coupled to changes in the topologies
of the HIV and host cell membranes. Models I and II of the Introduction share the feature of trimeric ectodomain
gp41 throughout fusion. For model I, concerted PHI →
SHB trimer folding is coupled to subsequent hemifusion. However, this
is inconsistent with fusion inhibition by CHR+MPER peptides up to
the final pore expansion step and the corollary assumption of peptide
binding to the PHI trimer but not the SHB trimer. Model II delays the PHI → SHB trimer folding until the pore expansion
step which suggests that the SHB is only associated with fused membrane
stabilization and fusion arrest. The new model III incorporates
asynchronous ectodomain monomer PHI → hairpin folding followed
by changes in membrane topology leading to hemifusion (Figure 12). There is subsequent ectodomain monomer hairpin
assembly into SHB trimers and final assembly of two trimers into a
hexamer with an antiparallel FP β sheet like Figure 11 C model. During viral fusion, the N-terminal FP
is likely attached to the cell membrane and the C-terminal TM is in the viral membrane. In our view, these membrane
topologies are more reasonably maintained with asynchronous folding
of individual monomer ectodomains than with concerted folding of the
three ectodomains of the trimer. Asynchronous ectodomain monomer folding
to a hairpin is also consistent with the hyperthermostability (Tm ≈ 110 °C) of the monomer hairpin. Model III is based on integration of findings of the present
study including ectodomain monomers and hexamers with previous biophysical
and viral fusion results.

There is evidence supporting the involvement
of monomer hairpin gp41 ectodomain at some stage of HIV/host cell
fusion. Such fusion has typically been assayed using the surrogate
system of fusion between cells expressing gp160 and cells expressing
CD4 and coreceptor proteins. Fusion is quantitated using the number
of syncytia (fused cell aggregates). There is typically dramatic reduction
in fusion with mutations impacting intramonomer CHR/NHR interactions,
for example, no syncytia are formed with the W571R mutation.54 Membrane fusion and HIV infection are inhibited
by the clinically prescribed CHR + MPER enfuvirtide therapeutic which
could act by binding to exposed NHR surfaces in the PHI or hairpin
ectodomain monomer but would not bind to the SHB trimer for which
the three NHR helices are on the bundle interior.55 The physiological relevance of the gp41 ectodomain monomer
is also supported by observation of monomer rather than trimer WT
gp140 protein.8 Gp140 is a noncovalent
complex between the HIV gp120 protein and the ectodomain of gp41 but
lacks the TM and intraviral regions of gp41.

A role for hexameric
gp41 in HIV/cell fusion is supported by the
trans-dominant effect of the V513E mutation in the FP region of gp41
on gp160-mediated membrane fusion and HIV infection.56 These data have been modeled using a requirement of multiple
gp160 trimers for fusion and infection.26 A membrane-associated gp41 hexamer is consistent with the antiparallel
β sheet FP structure in the membrane-associated gp41 ectodomain
observed by SSNMR.24 Such structure is
consistent with interleaved FP strands from two trimers (Figure 11C).

In the course of publishing this work,
another paper was published
showing that a shorter NHR + loop + CHR gp41 ectodomain construct
is monomeric at low pH in nonionic detergent.49 This result is consistent with our observations for the larger HP
and HM constructs. We also observed that pH rather than detergent
is the critical parameter for solubility. In the absence of GuHCl,
both the HP and HM constructs are soluble at low pH and insoluble
at neutral pH and these results are independent of the presence or
absence of detergent. The short construct in detergent at low pH has
a loose hairpin structure with noninteracting NHR and CHR helices
which lie on the micelle surface. The low pH micelle location is consistent
with our observations of protein-to-lipid headgroup contact for a
large, membrane-associated ectodomain construct. At low pH, NHR+CHR
backbone 13CO-to-lipid 31P distances of 8–9
Å were observed via SSNMR spectroscopy.42 At neutral pH, there was no detectable contact which corresponds
to 13CO–31P distances &gt;12 Å even
though the protein remained membrane-bound via the FP region. The
pH-dependence of the protein-to-lipid distances is consistent with
the attractive protein/membrane electrostatic energy at low pH and
repulsive energy at neutral pH.

Although not included in the
gp41 constructs of the present study,
the TM domain is important for anchoring gp41 in the viral membrane
and is likely also important in fusion pore formation.57 The TM sequence is conserved across clades of
HIV and this conservation may be needed for efficient trafficking
of gp160 to the infected cell membrane surface prior to viral budding.58 There are moderate effects on fusion and infection
with some mutations in the TM region.59,60 It would be
interesting in the future to study the oligomerization and fusion
activity of gp41 constructs that include the TM domain. SEC of a full
ectodomain + TM construct showed predominant monomers at pH 4 in detergent
which is consistent with the SEC for ectodomain without TM.51 There was little contact between the FP and
TM regions for the large construct in detergent but some contact has
been observed between synthesized FP peptide and TM peptide in membranes.61

Supporting Information Available
Material suppliers, DNA
sequence
of HM insert, and additional RP-HPLC, SEC, mass spectra, and immunoprecipitation
data. This material is available free of charge via the Internet at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bi501159w_si_001.pdf

 The research
was supported by the National Institutes of Health grant A147153.

The authors declare no
competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
The following reagent was obtained through the NIH
AIDS Research
and Reference Reagent Program, Division of AIDS, NIAID, NIH: HIV-1
gp41 Monoclonal Antibodies (4E10 and 2F5) from Dr. Hermann Katinger.
We acknowledge Matthew J. Nethercott for assistance with CD spectroscopy.

Abbreviations
AUCanalytical ultracentrifugation

BCAbicinchoninic assay

bNAbbroadly neutralizing
antibody

CDcircular
dichroism

Cholcholesterol

CHRC-terminal heptad
repeat

DOTAP1,2-dioleoyl-3-trimethylammonium-propane
(chloride salt)

FPfusion peptide

gp140gp120+gp41 ectodomain

gp160gp120+gp41

GuHClguanidine hydrochloride

IBinclusion body

HEPES4-(2-hydroxyethyl)-1-piperazineethanesulfonic acid

IPTGisopropyl β-D-1-thiogalactopyranoside

LBLuria–Bertani

MES2-(N-morpholino)ethanesulfonic acid

MPAAS-trityl-β-mercaptopropionic
acid

MPERmembrane-proximal
external region

SHBsix-helix bundle

NHRN-terminal heptad repeat

N-NBD-DPPEN-(7-nitro-2,1,3-benzoxadiazol-4-yl)
(ammonium salt) dipalmitoylphosphatidylethanolamine

N-Rh-DPPEN-(lissamine rhodamine B sulfonyl) (ammonium salt) dipalmitoylphosphatidylethanolamine

PHIprehairpin intermediate

POPC1-palmitoyl-2-oleoyl-sn-glycero-3-phosphocholine

POPG1-palmitoyl-2-oleoyl-sn-glycero-3-[phospho-rac-(1-glycerol)]
(sodium salt)

RPrecombinant protein

RP-HPLCreversed-phase HPLC

SECsize-exclusion chromatography

SSNMRsolid-state nuclear magnetic resonance

TCEPtris(2-carboxyethyl)
phosphine hydrochloride



   
References
Grewe C. ; Beck A. ; Gelderblom H. R.  (1990 ) HIV: Early virus-cell interactions . J. AIDS 
3 , 965 –974 .
White J. M. ; Delos S. E. ; Brecher M. ; Schornberg K.  (2008 ) Structures
and mechanisms of viral membrane fusion proteins: Multiple variations
on a common theme . Crit. Rev. Biochem. Mol.
Biol. 
43 , 189 –219 .18568847 
Melikyan G.
B.  (2014 ) HIV entry:
a game of hide-and-fuse? . Curr. Opin. Virol. 
4 , 1 –7 .24525288 
Durell S. R. ; Martin I. ; Ruysschaert J. M. ; Shai Y. ; Blumenthal R.  (1997 ) What studies
of fusion peptides tell us about viral envelope glycoprotein-mediated
membrane fusion . Mol. Membr. Biol. 
14 , 97 –112 .9394290 
Montero M. ; van Houten N. E. ; Wang X. ; Seott J. K.  (2008 ) The membrane-proximal
external region of the human immunodeficiency virus type 1 envelope:
Dominant site of antibody neutralization and target for vaccine design . Microbiol. Mol. Biol. Rev. 
72 , 54 –84 .18322034 
Apellaniz B. ; Huarte N. ; Largo E. ; Nieva J. L.  (2014 ) The three lives
of viral fusion peptides . Chem. Phys. Lipids 
181 , 40 –55 .24704587 
Liu J. ; Bartesaghi A. ; Borgnia M. J. ; Sapiro G. ; Subramaniam S.  (2008 ) Molecular
architecture of native HIV-1 gp120 trimers . Nature 
455 , 109 –113 .18668044 
Schulke N. ; Vesanen M. S. ; Sanders R. W. ; Zhu P. ; Lu M. ; Anselma D. J. ; Villa A. R. ; Parren P. ; Binley J. M. ; Roux K. H. ; Maddon P. J. ; Moore J. P. ; Olson W. C.  (2002 ) Oligomeric
and conformational properties of a proteolytically mature, disulfide-stabilized
human immunodeficiency virus type 1 gp140 envelope glycoprotein . J. Virol. 
76 , 7760 –7776 .12097589 
Sanders R. W. ; Vesanen M. ; Schuelke N. ; Master A. ; Schiffner L. ; Kalyanaraman R. ; Paluch M. ; Berkhout B. ; Maddon P. J. ; Olson W. C. ; Lu M. ; Moore J. P.  (2002 ) Stabilization of
the soluble, cleaved, trimeric form of the envelope glycoprotein complex
of human immunodeficiency virus type 1 . J. Virol. 
76 , 8875 –8889 .12163607 
Bartesaghi A. ; Merk A. ; Borgnia M. J. ; Milne J. L. S. ; Subramaniam S.  (2013 ) Prefusion
structure of trimeric HIV-1 envelope glycoprotein determined by cryo-electron
microscopy . Nat. Struct. Mol. Biol. 
20 , 1352 –1357 .24154805 
Julien J.-P. ; Cupo A. ; Sok D. ; Stanfield R. L. ; Lyumukis D. ; Deller M. C. ; Klasse P.-J. ; Burton D. R. ; Sanders R. W. ; Moore J. P. ; Ward A. B. ; Wilson I. A.  (2013 ) Crystal
structure of a soluble cleaved HIV-1 envelope trimer . Science 
342 , 1477 –1483 .24179159 
Lyumukis D. ; Julien J.-P. ; de Val N. ; Cupo A. ; Potter C. S. ; Klasse P.-J. ; Burton D. R. ; Sanders R. W. ; Moore J. P. ; Carragher B. ; Wilson I. A. ; Ward A. B.  (2013 ) Cryo-EM structure
of a fully glycosylated soluble cleaved HIV-1 envelope trimer . Science 
342 , 1484 –1490 .24179160 
Tan K. ; Liu J. ; Wang J. ; Shen S. ; Lu M.  (1997 ) Atomic structure of
a thermostable subdomain of HIV-1 gp41 . Proc.
Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 
94 , 12303 –12308 .9356444 
Caffrey M. ; Cai M. ; Kaufman J. ; Stahl S. J. ; Wingfield P. T. ; Covell D. G. ; Gronenborn A. M. ; Clore G. M.  (1998 ) Three-dimensional
solution structure of the 44 kDa ectodomain of SIV gp41 . EMBO J. 
17 , 4572 –4584 .9707417 
Yang Z. N. ; Mueser T. C. ; Kaufman J. ; Stahl S. J. ; Wingfield P. T. ; Hyde C. C.  (1999 ) The crystal structure of the SIV gp41 ectodomain at
1.47 A resolution . J. Struct. Biol. 
126 , 131 –144 .10388624 
Buzon V. ; Natrajan G. ; Schibli D. ; Campelo F. ; Kozlov M. M. ; Weissenhorn W.  (2010 ) Crystal structure
of HIV-1 gp41 including both fusion
peptide and membrane proximal external regions . PLoS Pathog. 
6 , e1000880.20463810 
Lu M. ; Ji H. ; Shen S.  (1999 ) Subdomain
folding and biological activity of the core
structure from human immunodeficiency virus type 1 gp41: implications
for viral membrane fusion . J. Virol. 
73 , 4433 –4438 .10196341 
Sackett K. ; Nethercott M. J. ; Epand R. F. ; Epand R. M. ; Kindra D. R. ; Shai Y. ; Weliky D. P.  (2010 ) Comparative analysis of membrane-associated
fusion peptide secondary structure and lipid mixing function of HIV
gp41 constructs that model the early pre-hairpin intermediate and
final hairpin conformations . J. Mol. Biol. 
397 , 301 –315 .20080102 
Wild C. T. ; Shugars D. C. ; Greenwell T. K. ; McDanal C. B. ; Matthews T. J.  (1994 ) Peptides
corresponding to a predictive alpha-helical domain of human immunodeficiency
virus type 1 gp41 are potent inhibitors of virus infection . Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 
91 , 9770 –9774 .7937889 
Markosyan R. M. ; Cohen F. S. ; Melikyan G. B.  (2003 ) HIV-1 envelope proteins complete
their folding into six-helix bundles immediately after fusion pore
formation . Mol. Biol. Cell 
14 , 926 –938 .12631714 
Matthews T. ; Salgo M. ; Greenberg M. ; Chung J. ; DeMasi R. ; Bolognesi D.  (2004 ) Enfuvirtide:
The first therapy to inhibit the entry
of HIV-1 into host CD4 lymphocytes . Nat. Rev.
Drug Discovery 
3 , 215 –225 .
Chernomordik L. V. ; Kozlov M. M.  (2008 ) Mechanics
of membrane fusion . Nat. Struct. Mol. Biol. 
15 , 675 –683 .18596814 
Weissenhorn W. ; Dessen A. ; Harrison S. C. ; Skehel J. J. ; Wiley D. C.  (1997 ) Atomic
structure of the ectodomain from HIV-1 gp41 . Nature 
387 , 426 –430 .9163431 
Sackett K. ; Nethercott M. J. ; Zheng Z. X. ; Weliky D. P.  (2014 ) Solid-state NMR
spectroscopy of the HIV gp41 membrane fusion protein supports intermolecular
antiparallel beta sheet fusion peptide structure in the final six-helix
bundle state . J. Mol. Biol. 
426 , 1077 –1094 .24246500 
Sougrat R. ; Bartesaghi A. ; Lifson J. D. ; Bennett A. E. ; Bess J. W. ; Zabransky D. J. ; Subramaniam S.  (2007 ) Electron tomography
of the contact
between T cells and SIV/HIV-1: Implications for viral entry . PLoS Pathogens 
3 , 570 –581 .
Magnus C. ; Rusert P. ; Bonhoeffer S. ; Trkola A. ; Regoes R. R.  (2009 ) Estimating
the stoichiometry of Human Immunodeficiency Virus entry . J. Virol. 
83 , 1523 –1531 .19019953 
Yang J. ; Prorok M. ; Castellino F. J. ; Weliky D. P.  (2004 ) Oligomeric b-structure
of the membrane-bound HIV-1 fusion peptide formed from soluble monomers . Biophys. J. 
87 , 1951 –1963 .15345571 
Shnaper S. ; Sackett K. ; Gallo S. A. ; Blumenthal R. ; Shai Y.  (2004 ) The C- and the N-terminal regions of glycoprotein 41 ectodomain fuse
membranes enriched and not enriched with cholesterol, respectively . J. Biol. Chem. 
279 , 18526 –18534 .14981088 
Apellaniz B. ; Garcia-Saez A. J. ; Nir S. ; Nieva J. L.  (2011 ) Destabilization
exerted by peptides derived from the membrane-proximal external region
of HIV-1 gp41 in lipid vesicles supporting fluid phase coexistence . Biochim. Biophys. Acta 
1808 , 1797 –1805 .21316335 
Zhu P. ; Chertova E. ; Bess J. ; Lifson J. D. ; Arthur L. O. ; Liu J. ; Taylor K. A. ; Roux K. H.  (2003 ) Electron tomography analysis of envelope
glycoprotein trimers on HIV and simian immunodeficiency virus virions . Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 
100 , 15812 –15817 .14668432 
Huang J. H. ; Ofek G. ; Laub L. ; Louder M. K. ; Doria-Rose N. A. ; Longo N. S. ; Imamichi H. ; Bailer R. T. ; Chakrabarti B. ; Sharma S. K. ; Alam S. M. ; Wang T. ; Yang Y. P. ; Zhang B. S. ; Migueles S. A. ; Wyatt R. ; Haynes B. F. ; Kwong P. D. ; Mascola J. R. ; Connors M.  (2012 ) Broad and potent neutralization
of HIV-1 by a gp41-specific human antibody . Nature 
491 , 406 –412 .23151583 
Frey G. ; Peng H. ; Rits-Volloch S. ; Morelli M. ; Cheng Y. ; Chen B.  (2008 ) A fusion-intermediate
state of HIV-1 gp41 targeted by broadly neutralizing
antibodies . Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 
105 , 3739 –3744 .18322015 
Wang J. ; Tong P. ; Lu L. ; Zhou L. L. ; Xu L. L. ; Jiang S. B. ; Chen Y. H.  (2011 ) HIV-1 gp41
core with exposed membrane-proximal
external region inducing broad HIV-1 neutralizing antibodies . PLoS One 
6 , e18233 .21483871 
Dawood R. ; Benjelloun F. ; Pin J. J. ; Kone A. ; Chanut B. ; Jospin F. ; Lucht F. ; Verrier B. ; Moog C. ; Genin C. ; Paul S.  (2013 ) Generation of HIV-1 potent and broad
neutralizing antibodies by immunization with postfusion HR1/HR2 complex . AIDS 
27 , 717 –730 .23719346 
Sackett K. ; Nethercott M. J. ; Shai Y. ; Weliky D. P.  (2009 ) Hairpin folding
of HIV gp41 abrogates lipid mixing function at physiologic pH and
inhibits lipid mixing by exposed gp41 constructs . Biochemistry 
48 , 2714 –2722 .19222185 
Vogel E. P. ; Weliky D. P.  (2013 ) Quantitation of
recombinant protein in whole cells
and cell extracts via solid-state NMR spectroscopy . Biochemistry 
52 , 4285 –4287 .23742073 
Lev N. ; Fridmann-Sirkis Y. ; Blank L. ; Bitler A. ; Epand R. F. ; Epand R. M. ; Shai Y.  (2009 ) Conformational stability and membrane
interaction of the full-length ectodomain of HIV-1 gp41: Implication
for mode of action . Biochemistry 
48 , 3166 –3175 .19206186 
Gao G. F. ; Wieczorek L. ; Peachman K. K. ; Polonis V. R. ; Alving C. R. ; Rao M. ; Rao V. B.  (2013 ) Designing a soluble near full-length HIV-1 gp41 trimer . J. Biol. Chem. 
288 , 234 –246 .23184960 
Shi W. X. ; Bohon J. ; Han D. P. ; Habte H. ; Qin Y. L. ; Cho M. W. ; Chance M. R.  (2010 ) Structural characterization of HIV
gp41 with the membrane-proximal external region . J. Biol. Chem. 
285 , 24290 –24298 .20525690 
Brugger B. ; Glass B. ; Haberkant P. ; Leibrecht I. ; Wieland F. T. ; Krasslich H. G.  (2006 ) The HIV lipidome: A raft with an
unusual composition . Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
U.S.A. 
103 , 2641 –2646 .16481622 
Sackett K. ; TerBush A. ; Weliky D. P.  (2011 ) HIV gp41
six-helix bundle constructs
induce rapid vesicle fusion at pH 3.5 and little fusion at pH 7.0:
understanding pH dependence of protein aggregation, membrane binding,
and electrostatics, and implications for HIV-host cell fusion . Eur. Biophys. J. 
40 , 489 –502 .21222118 
Ratnayake P. , Sackett K. , Nethercott M. J. , Weliky D. P.  pH-dependent
vesicle fusion induced by the ectodomain of the Human Immunodeficiency
Virus membrane fusion protein gp41: Two kinetically distinct processes
and fully-membrane-associated gp41 with predominant beta sheet fusion
peptide conformation , Biochim. Biophys. Acta , in press.
Suarez T. ; Gallaher W. R. ; Agirre A. ; Goni F. M. ; Nieva J. L.  (2000 ) Membrane
interface-interacting sequences within the ectodomain of the human
immunodeficiency virus type 1 envelope glycoprotein: Putative role
during viral fusion . J. Virol. 
74 , 8038 –8047 .10933713 
Kim C. S. ; Epand R. F. ; Leikina E. ; Epand R. M. ; Chernomordik L. V.  (2011 ) The final
conformation of the complete ectodomain of the HA2 subunit of Influenza
Hemagglutinin can by itself drive low pH-dependent fusion . J. Biol. Chem. 
286 , 13226 –13234 .21292763 
Shu W. ; Ji H. ; Lu M.  (2000 ) Interactions between HIV-1 gp41 core and detergents
and their implications for membrane fusion . J. Biol. Chem. 
275 , 1839 –1845 .10636883 
Lin C. H. ; Lin C. H. ; Chang C. C. ; Wei T. S. ; Cheng S. F. ; Chen S. S. L. ; Chang D. K.  (2011 ) An efficient production and characterization
of HIV-1 gp41 ectodomain with fusion peptide in Escherichia coli system . J. Biotechnol. 
153 , 48 –55 .21419812 
Shu W. ; Liu J. ; Ji H. ; Radigen L. ; Jiang S. B. ; Lu M.  (2000 ) Helical interactions
in the HIV-1 gp41 core reveal structural basis for the inhibitory
activity of gp41 peptides . Biochemistry 
39 , 1634 –1642 .10677212 
Caffrey M. ; Braddock D. T. ; Louis J. M. ; Abu-Asab M. A. ; Kingma D. ; Liotta L. ; Tsokos M. ; Tresser N. ; Pannell L. K. ; Watts N. ; Steven A. C. ; Simon M. N. ; Stahl S. J. ; Wingfield P. T. ; Clore G. M.  (2000 ) Biophysical characterization of gp41
aggregates suggests a model for the molecular mechanism of HIV-associated
neurological damage and dementia . J. Biol. Chem. 
275 , 19877 –19882 .10747981 
Roche J. ; Louis J. M. ; Grishaev A. ; Ying J. F. ; Bax A.  (2014 ) Dissociation
of the trimeric gp41 ectodomain at the lipid-water interface suggests
an active role in HIV-1 Env-mediated membrane fusion . Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 
111 , 3425 –3430 .24550514 
Caffrey M. ; Kaufman J. ; Stahl S. ; Wingfield P. ; Gronenborn A. M. ; Clore G. M.  (1999 ) Monomer-trimer equilibrium of the
ectodomain of SIV gp41: Insight into the mechanism of peptide inhibition
of HIV infection . Protein Sci. 
8 , 1904 –1907 .10493592 
Lakomek N. A. ; Kaufman J. D. ; Stahl S. J. ; Louis J. M. ; Grishaev A. ; Wingfield P. T. ; Bax A.  (2013 ) Internal dynamics of the homotrimeric
HIV-1 viral coat protein gp41 on multiple time scales . Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 
52 , 3911 –3915 .
Moon C. P. ; Kwon S. ; Fleming K. G.  (2011 ) Overcoming hysteresis to attain reversible
equilibrium folding for outer membrane phospholipase A in phospholipid
bilayers . J. Mol. Biol. 
413 , 484 –494 .21888919 
Lim W. K. ; Rosgen J. ; Englander S. W.  (2009 ) Urea, but
not guanidinium, destabilizes
proteins by forming hydrogen bonds to the peptide group . Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 
106 , 2595 –2600 .19196963 
Cao J. ; Bergeron L. ; Helseth E. ; Thali M. ; Repke H. ; Sodroski J.  (1993 ) Effects of amino-acid changes in the extracellular
comain of the Human Immunodeficiency Virus Type-1 gp41 envelope glycoprotein . J. Virol. 
67 , 2747 –2755 .8474172 
Peisajovich S. G. ; Shai Y.  (2001 ) SIV gp41 binds to membranes both in the monomeric and trimeric states:
Consequences for the neuropathology and inhibition of HIV infection . J. Mol. Biol. 
311 , 249 –254 .11478858 
Freed E. O. ; Delwart E. L. ; Buchschacher G. L. Jr.; Panganiban A. T.  (1992 ) A mutation
in the human immunodeficiency virus type 1 transmembrane glycoprotein
gp41 dominantly interferes with fusion and infectivity . Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 
89 , 70 –74 .1729720 
Kemble G. W. ; Danieli T. ; White J. M.  (1994 ) Lipid-anchored influenza hemagglutinin
promotes hemifusion, not complete fusion . Cell 
76 , 383 –391 .8293471 
Miyauchi K. ; Curran A. R. ; Long Y. F. ; Kondo N. ; Iwamoto A. ; Engelman D. M. ; Matsuda Z.  (2010 ) The membrane-spanning
domain of gp41
plays a critical role in intracellular trafficking of the HIV envelope
protein . Retrovirology 
7 , 95 .21073746 
Wilk T. ; Pfeiffer T. ; Bukovsky A. ; Moldenhauer G. ; Bosch V.  (1996 ) Glycoprotein incorporation and HIV-1 infectivity despite exchange
of the gp160 membrane-spanning domain . Virology 
218 , 269 –274 .8615034 
Miyauchi K. ; Curran R. ; Matthews E. ; Komano J. ; Hoshino T. ; Engelman D. M. ; Matsuda Z.  (2006 ) Mutations
of conserved glycine residues
within the membrane-spanning domain of Human Immunodeficiency Virus
type 1 gp41 can inhibit membrane fusion and incorporation of Env onto
virions . Jpn. J. Infect. Dis. 
59 , 77 –84 .16632906 
Reuven E. M. ; Dadon Y. ; Viard M. ; Manukovsky N. ; Blumenthal R. ; Shai Y.  (2012 ) HIV-1 gp41 transmembrane
domain interacts
with the fusion peptide: Implication in lipid mixing and inhibition
of virus-cell fusion . Biochemistry 
51 , 2867 –2878 .22413880 



