Protein degradation is a tightly
orchestrated process that is required to maintain cell homeostasis.
When homeostasis is not maintained, disease-prone events such as protein
misfolding and aggregation can frequently occur, the hallmarks of
several disorders, including Alzheimer’s, Parkinson’s,
and Huntington’s diseases. The ubiquitination proteolysis pathway
is the primary mechanism for directing proteins to the proteasomal
degradation machinery, eliminating unwanted proteins and preserving
protein levels in the cell. A cascade of three proteins, ubiquitin-activating
(E1), ubiquitin-conjugating (E2), and ubiquitin-ligase (E3) enzymes,
are utilized for covalently attaching the small protein ubiquitin
to a substrate and building a polyubiquitin chain required for recognition
by the proteasome. Of the three classes of proteins involved in ubiquitination,
the E3 ubiquitin ligase proteins have been especially attractive targets
for drug discovery because more than 1000 different homologues have
been identified, suggesting that the E3 protein is a major contributor
to the substrate specificity in the pathway.

Parkin is a RING-inBetweenRING-RING (RBR) E3 ligase composed
of
465 residues with multiple domains, including N-terminal Ubl (ubiquitin-like),
UPD (unique-parkin domain), RING0, RING1, IBR (inBetweenRING), and
RING2, domains. Specific mutations in the PARK2
gene, encoding parkin, have been linked to an autosomal recessive
inheritance of Parkinson’s disease (PD). This form of PD afflicts
approximately 5–10% of PD patients and is distinguished by
an early onset age, typically earlier than 40 years old, but otherwise has many of the characteristics
of the more common idiopathic form. One hypothesis for the function
of parkin is that it regulates appropriate levels of its protein substrates,
avoiding accumulations of aggregate-prone substrates such as α-synuclein,
Aβ peptide, and Huntingtin protein. Other substrates have also been proposed for parkin such as synphillin-1, Pael-R, and cyclin
E, although confirmation of these has
not been resolved. One mechanism for recruitment of substrates by
parkin is through its Ubl domain. Recent evidence shows that in addition
to possible substrate recognition, the Ubl domain modulates the activity
of parkin through interaction with the RBR region. Like ubiquitin, the Ubl domain has a β-grasp fold
with an exposed domain hydrophobic face comprised of five β-sheets.
The parkin Ubl domain has been previously shown to interact with proteins
containing a short recognition motif termed a ubiquitin-interacting
motif (UIM) found in proteasomal subunit S5a, the endocytosis protein
Eps15, and ataxin-3, a deubiquitinating enzyme.,, The UIM region is composed of ∼20
residues and contains a conserved acidic stretch located prior to
a five-residue (large–small–large–small–large
side chain size) core motif, followed by a conserved serine residue.,

The multistep enzymatic reaction for the attachment of ubiquitin
to a substrate protein can be reversed by ubiquitin specific proteases
or deubiquitinating enzymes. This removal of ubiquitin from a substrate
is thought to correct errors in the ubiquitin chain building process
by ensuring the correct substrate, linkage, and chain length. This
allows deubiquitinating enzymes to work with an E3 enzyme to edit
substrate ubiquitination and adapt to constantly changing cellular
environments., Ataxin-3 is a deubiquitinating
enzyme that has a preference for editing K63-linked ubiquitin chains− and plays a role in DNA repair and ERAD (endoplasmic reticulum-associated
degradation)., The deubiquitinating activity
of ataxin-3 is controlled through its N-terminal Josephin domain that
houses the catalytic site for activity. The C-terminus of ataxin-3
contains three UIM regions (UIM1–UIM3) thought to control the
interaction with potential substrate proteins such as parkin, VCP (valosin-containing protein), and E6-AP (ubiquitin ligase E3A). The second and third UIM regions in ataxin-3
are separated by a variable glutamine tract that contributes to one of nine identified polyglutamine diseases
causing Machado Joseph disease when the polyglutamine stretch exceeds
a threshold of 45 residues.

In
this work, we identified the mechanism of interaction between
the C-terminus of ataxin-3 and the Ubl domain of parkin. Our work
presents evidence that all three UIM regions of ataxin-3 have direct
weak interactions with the hydrophobic patch of the parkin Ubl domain
consistent with a multivalent ligand binding mechanism. These observations
provide a better understanding of the recognition of the UIM regions
of ataxin-3 by parkin that contributes to an understanding of its
role in deubiquitination activity.

Experimental Procedures
Molecular
Biology
The DNA encoding the human parkin
ubiquitin-like domain (residues 1–77) was inserted into the
NdeI and BamHI sites of a pET44a vector (Novagen) as previously described. Parkin Ubl domain constructs were verified by
DNA sequencing (Robarts Sequencing Facility). The cDNAs encoding full-length
human ataxin-3 proteins with a 14- or 82-residue polyglutamine tract
were provided by E. Fon (McGill University, Montreal, QC). A fragment
containing all three UIM sequences from ataxin-3 (residues 194–361,
UIM_123) was generated by inserting the corresponding sequence into
the BamHI and XhoI sites of the pET21a vector (Novagen) that included
an in-frame six-residue histidine tag. A similar approach was used
for site-directed mutagenesis to incorporate a TEV cleavage site to
allow for removal of the histidine tag from all ataxin-3 constructs.
A C-terminal deletion construct, consisting of UIM1 and UIM2 (residues
194–261, UIM_12Δ3), was generated by encoding a stop
site prior to the polyglutamine stretch. An N-terminal construct containing
UIM1 (UIM_1Δ23) was generated in a similar fashion by placing
a stop codon prior to the DNA sequence encoding UIM2.

Single
functional UIM constructs (UIM_1–UIM_3) and a full-length ataxin-3
C-terminal region containing 45 consecutive glutamine residues were
synthesized by DNA2.0 and cloned into the NdeI and XhoI sites of the
pJexpress414 vectors. Conserved serine residues and hydrophobic residues
within each UIM core region were substituted with alanine residues
to generate UIM_1 (L249A, R250A, R251A, I253A, S2566A, L340A, Q341A,
V344A, and S347A), UIM2 (L229A, Q230A, R231A, L233A, S236A, L340A,
Q341A, V344A, and S347A), and UIM_3 (L229A, Q230A, R231A, L233A, S236A,
L249A, R250A, R251A, I253A, and S256A). DNA sequencing was conducted
to ensure the correct sequences of all ataxin-3 constructs (Robarts
Research Institute).

Protein Expression and Purification
The human parkin
Ubl domain was overexpressed in a BL21(DE3) Codon PlusRIL Escherichia coli strain. Bacterial cultures were diluted
1:100 (v/v) in LB medium and grown at 37 °C until an A600 of 0.6–0.7 had been reached. For 15N-labeled proteins, cells were grown in M9 medium using 15NH4Cl (1 g/L) as the sole nitrogen source. Cultures
were grown with constant shaking overnight at 16 °C after the
addition of 1 mM isopropyl 1-thio-β-d-galactopyranoside.
Starter cultures and larger bacterial cultures contained the antibiotic
ampicillin (50 μg/mL). Cells were lysed with either an EmulsiFlex
C5 homogenizer (Avestin, Ottawa, ON) or a French press and centrifuged
at 106255g for 1 h. Cell homogenates were filtered
through a MILLEX HV 0.45 μm filter unit (Millipore, Billerica,
MA) before being loaded onto a HiTrap Q XL column, using an AKTA FPLC
system (GE Healthcare, Mississauga, ON). Binding buffers contained
25 mM Tris and 1 mM EDTA (pH 9.0), and elution buffers contained 25
mM Tris, 1 mM EDTA and 1 M NaCl (pH 9.0). The Ubl protein eluted in
the flow-through fractions and was further purified on a size exclusion
column (G75) at 4 °C in 50 mM Na2HPO4,
150 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, and 1 mM DTT (pH 8.0) with a flow rate of
6 mL/h.

All unlabeled and 15N-labeled human ataxin-3
UIM constructs were overexpressed in a manner similar to that used
for the parkin Ubl domain. Clarified cell homogenates were applied
to a Ni-NTA fast protein liquid chromatography affinity column (GE
Healthcare). Loading and elution buffers contained 50 mM Na2HPO4, 500 mM NaCl, and 10 mM imidazole (pH 8). Elution
buffers also contained 500 mM imidazole. Protein samples were dialyzed
overnight at 4 °C in loading buffer with an addition of TEV protease
(1.2 mg/L bacterial preparation) for cleavage and reloaded onto the
Ni-NTA column. Cleaved ataxin-3 proteins eluted in the flow-through
fractions. All ataxin-3 UIM constructs were purified using the same
protocol.

Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR) Spectroscopy
All NMR
experiments were performed on a 600 MHz Varian Inova spectrometer
(Biomolecular NMR Facility, University of Western Ontario) at 25 °C.
Protein samples were extensively dialyzed into 10 mM KH2PO4, 150 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, and 1 mM dithiothreitol (pH
7). Imidazole (100 μM) was added to serve as a pH indicator.
Chemical shift perturbation experiments that monitored the interaction
of parkin Ubl and ataxin-3 variants were globally fit using nonlinear
1:1 or 3:1 binding models. For the 1:1 model (eq ) representing the protein (P; Ubl or ataxin-3) and ligand (L; ataxin-3
or Ubl)the dissociation constants (KD) were
determined using eq where Pt is the total protein, Lt is the
total ligand, and PL is the amount of complex formed. For a 3:1 multivalent
ligand model, three possible binding sites were considered (eqs –)where PL1–PL3 represent binding of the
Ubl domain (P) to three different UIM sites
(L1–L3, respectively) on ataxin-3. For
the sake of simplicity, we considered that binding to each site occurs
with equal affinity (i.e., K1 = K2 = K3 = KD) and where weak binding does not result in
multiple protein species occupying multiple ligand sites (i.e., P2L and P3L). The resulting equation (eq ) (procedures of the ) was used to globally fit this binding model where n is the number of identical sites (three).

In both cases, chemical
shift changes occurred in the fast exchange regime such that the observed
chemical shift (δobs) was a weighted combination
of the chemical shifts and populations for the free (δP and fP, respectively) and saturated
protein (δPL and fPL,
respectively) states (eq  and procedures in
the ). This equation
can be recast such that the ratio of the change in chemical shift
(Δδ = δobs – δP) and total chemical shift change (δTOT = δPL – δP) are related to the ratio of
the complex (PL) and total protein (Pt) (eq ).Combining eqs  and , we plotted the chemical shift change (Δδ)
as a function of total added ligand (Lt), at a constant total protein concentration (Pt), and fitted for KD and δTOT. A similar approach was used for the multivalent ligand
model (procedures of the ). All data were fit using the equations given above incorporated
into Prism version 5.0b (GraphPad Software Inc., La Jolla, CA) or
the titration analysis software built into NMRViewJ (version 8.0.rc4).
Protein concentrations were determined by amino acid analysis (Hospital
for Sick Children, Toronto, ON).

Results and Discussion
The C-terminus of ataxin-3 contains three UIMs that span residues
224–243 (UIM1), 244–263 (UIM2), and 331–349 (UIM3)
(Figure ). The region between UIM2 and UIM3
contains a polyglutamine region that is expanded in Machado Joseph
disease. To identify the mechanisms used by ataxin-3 to recruit the
parkin Ubl domain, we constructed a series of proteins comprised of
different combinations of the UIM regions (Figure ), including proteins that contained all three UIM regions
(UIM_123), the first region only (UIM_1Δ23), and the first two
UIM regions (UIM_12Δ3). Three proteins that tested the importance
of an individual UIM within the context of the intact C-terminus were
also designed. In these sequences, two of the UIM regions were rendered
inactive by substituting key core UIM-defining residues and a conserved
serine with alanine residues (Figure ), shown
to eliminate binding with a Ubl domain or ubiquitin.,, For example, UIM_1 contains only
a functional first UIM sequence but retains the remainder of the C-terminus
having appropriate alanine substitutions in UIM2 and UIM3.

Schematic diagram
of the UIM regions in ataxin-3. The boundaries
of each UIM region are indicated above the full-length C-terminal
construct (UIM_123) for UIM1 (E224–E243), UIM2 (D244–N263),
and UIM3 (G331–L349). Other protein constructs that include
deletion of UIM3 (UIM_12Δ3), deletion of UIM2 and UIM3 (UIM_1Δ23),
or substitutions in the UIM regions (UIM_1–UIM_3) are shown
below. Light gray rectangles indicate that the native UIM sequence
is present, and dark gray rectangles represent UIM sequences with
alanine substitutions. Specific residues substituted with alanine
residues are represented in bold text.

The C-Terminus of Ataxin-3 Is Recruited by the Parkin N-Terminal
Ubl Domain
As an initial step to identify the interactions
between the C-terminus of ataxin-3 and the parkin Ubl domain, we monitored 1H–15N heteronuclear single-quantum coherence
(HSQC) spectra of the 15N-labeled Ubl domain in the absence
and presence of unlabeled UIM_123 from ataxin-3. In the absence of
ataxin-3, the spectrum of the parkin Ubl domain is well-dispersed
(Figure A), a pattern similar to that of the
data previously reported. Upon addition
of UIM_123, the 1H–15N HSQC spectrum
of the 15N-labeled Ubl domain shows many resonances that
shift compared to the original spectrum, indicative of an interaction
between the two proteins. For example, Figure  shows residues F13 and V15 (β1), V43, K48, and E49 (β4),
L61, Q64, I66, and V67 (β5), and V70 and R75 (C-terminus) in
the parkin Ubl domain exhibit obvious chemical shift changes upon
addition of the C-terminus of ataxin-3. The observed chemical shift
changes were measured and plotted as a function of residue position
(Figure S1 of the ) to identify the binding surface for ataxin-3 on the Ubl domain.
This analysis showed that most residues affected by ataxin-3 binding
are found on the solvent-exposed hydrophobic patch of the Ubl domain
(Figure B) that surrounds I44 and includes
A46, I66, V67, and V70. Nearly all the affected residues fall on the
β-grasp face of the Ubl domain (Figure B).

Ataxin-3 UIM regions interact with the parkin Ubl domain. (A) Region
of 1H–15N HSQC spectra of the 15N-labeled Ubl domain (105 μM) in the absence (black) and presence
(red) of excess ataxin-3 UIM_123 protein. Resonances that experienced
the largest chemical shift changes upon UIM_123 addition are labeled,
and the direction of the chemical shift change is denoted with an
arrow. (B) Surface representation of the parkin Ubl domain (Protein
Data Bank entry 1IYF) showing the binding surface for UIM_123. Residues that displayed
chemical shift changes &gt;0.5 standard deviation above the mean (0.078
ppm) are colored pink and labeled. The surface representation was
created in PyMOL (PyMOL Molecular Graphics System, version 1.5.0.4,
Schrödinger, LLC).

The binding surface for ataxin-3 exhibited some similarities
with
other UIM-containing proteins for interaction with the parkin Ubl
domain. For example, Eps15 and S5a, which each have two UIM motifs,
utilize K48, A46, and I66 residues, centered
around I44 in the Ubl domain, for binding (Figure S1 of the ). On the other hand, residues
V15, V56, V70, Q71, and R75 from the parkin Ubl domain display large
chemical shift changes when ataxin-3 is added, not obvious in similar
examinations of the interaction between the parkin Ubl domain and
either Eps15 or S5a. This shows that although each UIM-containing
protein uses the hydrophobic “I44 patch” as a main recruitment
site, other residues appear to be more specialized for different UIM
sequences. In particular, chemical shift
perturbation plots showing the interaction of the parkin Ubl domain
with all three UIM-containing proteins (Figure S1 of the ) show the C-terminus of
the Ubl domain appears to be more sensitive to ataxin-3 interactions
than Eps15 or S5a. The utilization of the C-terminus of the parkin
Ubl domain to recruit ataxin-3 is more similar to that of hPLIC2 and
HHR23A, and also bears some resemblance to that
of ubiquitin upon interaction with the UIM1–UIM2 region of
ataxin-3.

In Machado Joseph disease,
one of the contributing factors is an
extension of the polyglutamine stretch between UIM2 and UIM3 to more
than 45 continuous glutamine residues. In light of this, we attempted
to examine the interaction of two versions of the C-terminus of ataxin-3
carrying a 45- or 82-polyglutamine residue insertion to determine
how this might affect binding or the recognition surface on the parkin
Ubl domain. Repeated attempts to produce these proteins lead to either
inefficient expression or insoluble material not suitable for biophysical
characterization.

The Parkin Ubl Domain Is Recognized by All
Three UIMs from Ataxin-3
1H–15N HSQC titration experiments
were utilized to investigate the specificity of the UIMs from ataxin-3
with the parkin Ubl domain. The backbone 1H, 15N, and 13C assignment for most of the ataxin-3 UIM_123
construct was completed using standard triple-resonance methods, although
we were unable to assign resonances from the 15-residue polyglutamine
region (Q291–Q305) and much of the region preceding UIM1 because
of the redundancy of signals. The spectrum (Figure S2 of the ) showed a tight arrangement
of resonances having a 1H chemical shift range between
7.9 and 8.7 ppm. Because UIM regions frequently adopt α-helical
conformations,,− and UIM1 and
UIM2 have been shown to be α-helical, the NMR spectrum of UIM_123 is suggestive of α-helical content
with a large amount of disordered structure from the regions adjoining
the UIM regions. This is in agreement with chemical shift index analysis
of the NMR assignment data that showed α-helical stretches for
UIM1 and -2 but was inconclusive for UIM3 (Figure S3 of the ). Incremental additions
of the unlabeled parkin Ubl domain to 15N-labeled ataxin-3
UIM_123 revealed that resonances shifted in the fast exchange regime
for residues found in all three UIM sequences of ataxin-3. For example,
Figure  shows that A232 in UIM1, E246 and
D248 in UIM2, and S335, V344, and T345 in UIM3 all undergo obvious
chemical shift changes upon addition of the parkin Ubl domain. Using
these data, the chemical shift changes for clearly resolved signals
from UIM1 (A232, A234, and D241), UIM2 (D248), and UIM3 (S335, V344,
and T345) were used to determine the dissociation constants for each
UIM with the parkin Ubl domain. This approach showed that individually
all three UIMs exhibited very weak binding to parkin with individual
dissociation constants of &gt;1000 μM. One of the disadvantages
of this approach was the significant overlap of resonances from each
UIM in the 1H–15N HSQC spectra of ataxin-3
UIM_123 in the absence and presence of Ubl domain protein that did
not allow an extensive number of residues to be characterized. Further,
this type of analysis did not take into account the competitive nature
of binding of one UIM motif in the presence of others. Nevertheless,
the data showed that each UIM binds weakly with the parkin Ubl domain.

Three
UIM regions in ataxin-3 interact with the parkin Ubl domain.
Regions of the 1H–15N HSQC spectra of
UIM_123 (73 μM) in the absence (black) and presence (cyan) of
excess parkin Ubl domain. Resonances that experienced the largest
chemical shift changes in UIM_123 upon addition of the parkin Ubl
domain are labeled, and the direction of the chemical shift change
is denoted with an arrow.

Our results differ from those of some other studies that
show a
particular UIM within a multi-UIM protein tends to be more selective
for Ubl domain interaction. For example, the Ubl domains from parkin
and hPLIC-2 have been shown to preferentially interact with UIM1 from
the S5a subunit of the 19S proteasome,, while the
Ubl domain from hHR23a primarily interacts with UIM2. On the other hand, both UIMs from Eps15 appear to interact
equally with the parkin Ubl domain. In
all these cases, the Ubl domain binds to the individual UIM motifs
with dissociation constants ranging from 100 to 400 μM. Our
initial experiments suggest the interaction of an ataxin-3 UIM motif
is much weaker.

The Parkin Ubl Domain Recruits Individual
Ataxin-3 UIM Regions
To identify the mechanism and relative
importance of each UIM within
ataxin-3 for parkin Ubl recruitment, experiments that examined changes
in the NMR spectra of the 15N-labeled Ubl domain upon titration
with either ataxin-3 proteins carrying UIM variants known to compromise
Ubl binding or constructs lacking particular UIM regions were designed.
In principle, these experiments should also show whether a particular
UIM region in ataxin-3 interacts with a specific region of the parkin
Ubl domain.

In the first of these experiments, conserved serine
and hydrophobic core residues within each UIM region were substituted
for alanine residues (Figure ). This approach
has been shown to eliminate binding of UIM to Ubl domains and ubiquitin
in several other systems.,, The alanine substitutions favor α-helix formation in the UIM
regions observed in other UIM structures., Further, the conserved serine in each UIM (S236, S256, or S347)
is a hallmark of all UIM sequences and
is absolutely essential for the interaction with Ubl domains and ubiquitin., The resulting protein constructs, UIM_1–UIM_3, each have
only a single functioning UIM region allowing the interaction of each
UIM to be determined in the context of the entire C-terminus of ataxin-3.
In separate experiments, each UIM protein was titrated into the 15N-labeled parkin Ubl domain and the interaction monitored
by analysis of the 1H–15N HSQC spectra
(Figure ). As with our previous experiments
(Figure ), these data showed that addition
of each protein caused changes in the NMR spectrum of the parkin Ubl
domain, indicating that all three of the UIM regions are involved
in the interaction. Further, the data showed that each UIM region
affected similar residues within the parkin Ubl structure (Figure ) in a similar manner. For example, F13, K48, E49,
and V67 consistently displayed the largest chemical shift changes
upon titration with the ataxin-3 variants (Figure S4 of the ). In addition, for each
UIM construct, the affected resonances shifted in similar directions
indicative of similar changes in the environment. This result is expected
for the interaction of the common UIM motif found in each protein
construct. The common chemical shift perturbations from each experiment
were plotted as a function of UIM protein concentration (Figure ). The results showed that each UIM region bound
weakly to the parkin Ubl domain with statistically similar apparent
dissociation constants (KD,UIM_1 = 840
± 189 μM, KD,UIM_2 = 502 ±
41 μM, and KD,UIM_3 = 921 ±
165 μM). This indicates that each UIM within ataxin-3 appears
to contribute equally to the interaction with the parkin Ubl domain.

Individual
UIM regions in ataxin-3 bind similarly to the parkin
Ubl domain. Regions of 1H–15N HSQC spectra
of the 15N-labeled parkin Ubl domain (100 μM) showing
selected residues that exhibit changes in chemical shifts upon addition
of (A) UIM_1, (B) UIM_2, and (C) UIM_3. The change in chemical shift
as a function of increasing ataxin-3 protein concentration is shown
for residues F13, K48, V67, and Q64. The middle panels show the binding
curves for (A) UIM_1, (B) UIM_2, and (C) UIM_3 with the parkin Ubl
domain derived from NMR data. The data were globally fit for 1:1 binding
using eq  to determine the apparent dissociation
constants; KD,UIM_I = 840 ± 189 μM, KD,UIM_2 = 502 ± 41 μM, and KD,UIM_3 = 921 ± 165 μM. In each case,
fits were completed using residues K48 (▲), E49 (⬣),
H68 (○), Q64 (◆), L61 (□), and V43 (∗).
The right panel depicts the corresponding surface representations
of the parkin Ubl domain (Protein Data Bank entry 1IYF) showing residues
affected by binding of UIM_1 (purple), UIM_2 (cyan), and UIM_3 (orange).
The surface representations were created in PyMOL (PyMOL Molecular
Graphics System, version 1.5.0.4, Schrödinger, LLC).

The Parkin Ubl Domain Uses
a Multivalent Ligand Binding Mechanism
to Recruit Ataxin-3
At least two possible mechanisms are
possible for parkin Ubl domain recruitment of the UIM regions in ataxin-3.
One method employs simultaneous or cooperative binding such that different
portions of the Ubl domain recognize distinct UIM regions. This mechanism
has recently been suggested for the binding of the first two UIM regions
from ataxin-3 to ubiquitin where it is suggested that the UIMs adopt
a more compact structure upon binding. A second mechanism employs a multi- or polyvalent ligand binding
mode in which multiple UIM regions recognize a single binding surface
on the parkin Ubl but only a single UIM occupies this site at any
given time. Both mechanisms can give rise to a decrease in the apparent
dissociation constant as the number of ligand sites increases.− A recent example of this phenomenon is the recruitment of multiple
phosphorylation sites on Sic1 using a single Cdc4 binding site.

To identify whether different portions
of the Ubl domain recognize distinct UIM regions, we constructed two
additional proteins that lacked either the C-terminal UIM region (UIM_12Δ3)
or both the second and third UIM regions (UIM_1Δ23) and compared
these to the parent protein (UIM_123). Changes in the 1H–15N HSQC spectra of the 15N-labeled
Ubl domain were determined upon titration of each protein (Figure ). These experiments show that the addition of each
UIM construct resulted in a very similar response in the parkin Ubl
spectrum. For example, all UIM constructs elicited changes in the
signals for similar residues (i.e., F13, K48, and R75). Further, the
directions of the chemical shift changes were the same regardless
of whether UIM_123, UIM_12Δ3, or UIM_1Δ23 was added (Figure ). In fact, the residues affected were nearly identical
to those observed in earlier experiments that utilized only a single
intact UIM motif (Figure ). The data also
showed no evidence that additional residues in the Ubl domain underwent
chemical shift changes upon addition of UIM_123 compared to the proteins
with fewer UIM motifs (UIM_1Δ23 and UIM_12Δ3). Together,
these data indicate that the parkin Ubl domain binding surface area
for ataxin-3 does not increase as a function of the number of UIM
regions, as expected if simultaneous or cooperative binding of multiple
UIMs were occurring.

Multiple UIM regions in ataxin-3 affect the same binding
surface
in the parkin Ubl domain. Regions of the 1H–15N HSQC spectra for the 15N-labeled Ubl domain
titrated with (A) UIM_123, (B) UIM_12Δ3, and (C) UIM_1Δ23.
Identical residues that experienced chemical shift changes are labeled,
and arrows indicate the direction of the shift with increasing concentrations
of the different UIM constructs. The dotted arrow in spectrum C indicates
that R75 experiences a chemical shift visible at a lower contour level.
The concentrations of the 15N-labeled parkin Ubl domain
were 105, 100, and 40 μM for UIM_123, UIM_12Δ3, and UIM_1Δ23
experiments, respectively.

The observation that the three UIM sites in ataxin-3 bind
equally
to a single site of the parkin Ubl domain suggests a multi- or polyvalent
ligand binding mode. This binding mechanism is characterized by multiple
weak binding sites that have fast off rates, such that when the number
of binding moieties increases, the apparent binding affinity may also
increase. To provide further evidence
for this mechanism, we fit the data for binding of UIM_123 to the
parkin Ubl domain (Figure A) to a model for
three identical binding sites in ataxin-3. This treatment of data
resulted in a dissociation constant of 669 ± 62 μM for
each UIM in ataxin-3 with the parkin Ubl domain (Figure ). This value agrees well with results of experiments for
the binding of the individual UIM regions (UIM_1–UIM_3) with
the Ubl domain that provided an average dissociation constant of ∼750
μM (Figure ). Using the same data, the
apparent dissociation constant for binding between the two proteins
was significantly lower (235.7 ± 14.0 μM), an indication
that all three sites in ataxin-3 are individually recruited by the
parkin Ubl domain.

Multivalent ligand binding curves for the ataxin-3 UIM
region binding
to the parkin Ubl domain. Binding curves were generated by measuring
the change in the 15N chemical shift from the data collected
in Figure A. A KD of 669 ± 62 μM was determined using eq  and a global fit from changes in the chemical shift of K48
(▲), A46 (▽), E49 (⬣), V15 (◇), I44 (■),
L50 (gray stars), and V43 (∗).

Several studies have shown that some E3 ligases, including
parkin,
have a relationship with a deubiquitinating enzyme that prevents the
ligase from rapid turnover via the proteasome.− For example,
the E3 ligase parkin is able to autoubiquitinate itself, thereby modulating
its activity., However, in the presence of ataxin-3,
autoubiquitination is inhibited likely through interception of the
E3–ubiquitin conjugate in parkin by the deubiquitinating enzyme.
This could be mediated by the Josephin domain of ataxin-3 shown to
interact with the C-terminal RING1-IBR-RING2 (RBR) region of parkin
or with the E2 enzyme., It has recently been shown that
the Ubl domain acts as an autoinhibitory module by interacting with
the RBR region of parkin, a finding supported
by recent low-resolution X-ray data. For
ubiquitination to proceed, structural studies, have shown that a significant conformational change must occur,
in part to relieve the interaction of the Ubl domain with the RBR
region of parkin. The observed dissociation constant for the UIM regions
of ataxin-3 is significantly weaker than that determined for the interaction
of the Ubl domain with the RBR (3 μM), suggesting ataxin-3 would be an ineffective competitor of this interaction.
This indicates that the interaction of the parkin Ubl domain with
the ataxin UIM regions must occur following a conformational change
in parkin, likely upon interaction with the E2 enzyme, an idea supported
by models proposed by Durcan and co-workers., Alternatively, it has also been shown that PINK1 activation leads
to self-association of parkin. It is
intriguing to propose that the multiple UIM sites in ataxin-3 might
be specific for multiple Ubl sites in a parkin oligomer.

Supporting Information Available
Procedures describing equations
used for binding of three UIM regions to the parkin Ubl domain, chemical
shift perturbation plots for the parkin Ubl domain upon binding of
UIM_123 compared to binding of Eps15 and S5a, the assigned 1H–15N HSQC spectrum for ataxin UIM_123, and chemical
shift perturbation plots for the parkin Ubl domain upon binding of
UIM_123, UIM_1, UIM_2, and UIM_3 proteins. This material is available
free of charge via the Internet at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bi400780v_si_001.pdf

bi400780v_si_002.pdf

bi400780v_si_003.pdf

bi400780v_si_004.pdf

bi400780v_si_005.pdf

The authors declare no
competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
We thank Dr. Edward Fon (McGill University) for
the cDNAs
of the full-length ataxin-3 proteins and Anne Rintala-Dempsey and
Liliana Santamaria-Kisiel for maintenance of the Biomolecular NMR
Facility (University of Western Ontario).

