Many cell
signaling events are
triggered by the association of peripheral membrane proteins with
the membrane.− The cell membrane acts both as a scaffold for the localization of
peripheral proteins and as a two-dimensional platform that allows
diffusion on the membrane surface, resulting in the formation of protein–lipid
complexes. Association of peripheral proteins
with specific
lipids
in the membrane (e.g., phosphatidylinositol phosphates or PIPs) occurs
via lipid-binding modules.− Indeed, it has been shown that the majority of human kinases contain
at least one lipid-binding module, demonstrating
the importance of the peripheral protein–lipid
association in many cellular events. The main binding modules that
have been identified in mammals are the C1, C2, FERM, PX, and PH domains. This work will focus on two related proteins
that contain
a C2 domain and catalyze the dephosphorylation of PIPs: the intensively
studied PTEN (phosphatase and tensin homologue) tumor suppressor and
the less well characterized voltage sensitive phosphatase from Ciona intestinalis (Ci-VSP).

C2 domains possess an
antiparallel β-sheet architecture with
variable loops connecting the eight β-sheets., They can be grouped into two types: C2 domains that associate with
the membrane in a Ca2+-dependent manner and C2 domains
that bind to the membrane in a Ca2+-independent manner. Both types of C2 domains have been shown to
interact
with anionic lipids, such as phosphatidylserine (PS) and PIPs, in
the plasma membrane.,,, PTEN and related proteins (e.g., Ci-VSP
and auxilin) contain Ca2+-independent C2 domains,, the loops of which are thought to form direct interactions with
anionic
lipids. For example, recent simulation studies of the auxilin PTEN-like
domain have shown that the loops of its C2 domain determine its orientation
relative to the membrane and promote PIP clustering around the bound
protein.

PIPs serve as second messengers
in many
signaling events and are
involved in several pathological defects. PIPs have an inositol headgroup that can be phosphorylated at different
positions, creating different
PIP species. For example, PI(4,5)P2 and PI(3,4,5)P3 are the major PIPs in the plasma membrane. The exact percentage of different PIPs in the plasma
membrane is difficult to determine because of the reversible turnover
of PI(4,5)P2 to PI(3,4,5)P3 and other PIP species.
It is generally stated that PI(4,5)P2 comprises ∼5%
of all phospholipids in the cytoplasmic leaflet of the plasma membrane., For comparison, phosphatidylserine is the most abundant anionic
phospholipid
in eukaryotic cells and comprises approximately 20% of plasma membrane
lipids.

PTEN is a cytosolic enzyme
that when bound
to the inner leaflet
of the plasma membrane catalyzes dephosphorylation of PI(3,4,5)P3 to PI(4,5)P2. By
reducing the level of PI(3,4,5)P3 in the
inner membrane leaflet, PTEN negatively regulates the phosphatidylinositol
3-kinase (PI3K) signaling pathway, leading to a reduced level of cell
proliferation., For this reason, PTEN is a tumor
suppressor and is one of the most
commonly mutated protein in human
sporadic tumors. Mutations in PTEN may
also lead to Cowden disease, Lhermitte-Duclos
disease, and Bannayan-Zonana syndrome.

PTEN has four domains: an N-terminal PIP2-binding
module,
a phosphatase domain (PD), a C2 domain, and a C-terminal tail (Figure A). The N-terminal binding module specifically
binds PIP2 molecules, ensuring selective binding of PTEN
to the inner leaflet of the plasma membrane. The PD contains the PI(3,4,5)P3 catalytic binding site, including the P-loop consisting of
the signature HCXXGXXR motif, common
with many protein tyrosine phosphatases (PTPs). The proposed binding site for PI(3,4,5)P3 corresponds
to the site of a bound tartrate molecule in the crystal
structure and is supported by mutational data.,, The positively charged face of the C2 domain
of PTEN is believed
to bind to anionic lipids, e.g., phosphatidylserine and PIPs, in the
membrane. PTEN lacks the aspartate residues associated with Ca2+-dependent binding. The C-terminal
tail of PTEN is not needed for phosphatase
activity but has been shown to have regulatory features.,−

Domain
organization of PTEN (A) and Ci-VSP (B) showing the location
of the phosphatase domain (PD) and the C2 domains, and of the voltage
sensor (VS) domain in Ci-VSP. The crystal structures of the two proteins
used in the simulations are also shown: Protein Data Bank (PDB) entry 1D5R for PTEN and PDB
entry 3V0H for
Ci-VSP.

There are more than 2000 mutations
in PTEN associated with cancer
and other diseases (http://www.sanger.ac.uk/perl/genetics/CGP/cosmic). These mutations appear in all four domains of the protein. For
example, the R130G mutation (identified in endometrial, ovarian, lung,
and central nervous system cancer cells) is in the PD, while the R335L
mutation (associated with Cowden syndrome) is located
in the C2 domain. Mutations can affect PTEN by reducing or abolishing
phosphatase activity or by preventing binding to the bilayer. The productive orientation of PTEN on the membrane
has
been suggested to involve association of the C2 domain loops with
the lipids.,, Other proteins (e.g., SUMO1) may form complexes with PTEN and regulate
its association
with the membrane.,

The C. intestinalis voltage sensitive phosphatase
(Ci-VSP) catalyzes the dephosphorylation of PI(3,4,5)P3 and PI(4,5)P2 at the 5′-phosphate,, and PI(3,4)P2 at the 3′-phosphate. Ci-VSP is expressed in Ciona sperm
tail membranes and has been suggested
to function in digestive system cells and blood cells. Mammalian orthologs of Ci-VSP (namely, TPTE, TPIP, and PTEN2) are expressed
in the testis. The phosphatase activity
of Ci-VSP is regulated by the
plasma membrane potential. The membrane potential is sensed by the
voltage-sensing (VS) domain, a four-α-helix transmembrane domain
at the N-terminus of the protein (Figure B).
The VS domain is homologous to the VS
domain of potassium-selective voltage-gated channels and is joined to the cytosolic section by a linker domain.
The cytosolic catalytic region is comprised of a PD and a C2 domain
and is similar in structure to PTEN itself, with a 44% identical sequence
and a high degree of conservation of catalytically significant residues (Figure B).

It
has been suggested that membrane depolarization activates Ci-VSP
by moving the PD and C2 domain toward the membrane into the optimal
orientation for PIP dephosphorylation. However, more recently, it has also been proposed that
conformational changes in a “gating loop” (residues
398–413)
result in voltage-triggered activity due to the movement of E411,
which competes with the substrate for the active site. Indeed, a crystal structure of Ci-VSP with E411
in a
hydrophobic cavity and not in the active site [Protein Data Bank (PDB)
entry 3V0H]
contains a bound IP3 molecule at a site
on Ci-VSP equivalent to that for binding of tartrate on PTEN.

The C2 domain of Ci-VSP is similar in
structure to that of PTEN
and thus is thought to contribute to membrane binding in a Ca2+-independent manner. However, despite similar C2 domains,
there are notable differences between the PTEN CBR3 loop and the analogous
Ci-VSP loop (P519–P526). While the PTEN loop contains four
positively charged residues and
points toward the membrane, the Ci-VSP
CBR3 loop
contains only one positive arginine residue and points toward the
PD, forming hydrogen bonds with a loop in the PD. This indicates a possible regulatory role for the C2
domain. The Ci-VSP PD also shares similarities with the PTEN PD: both
contain a P-loop. Ci-VSP, however, has a tyrosine residue (Y522) that
fills a shallow pocket present in the PTEN active site and a glycine
at residue 365, rather than the equivalent alanine in PTEN.

Molecular dynamics simulations may be used to probe the interactions
of both integral and peripheral membrane proteins with lipid bilayers. Such simulations have yielded initial models
of the
likely mode of interaction of PTEN with anionic lipid bilayers that
are in good agreement with experimental biophysical data.,, Furthermore, the resultant models
of PTEN–model bilayer interactions
are in good agreement with, e.g., recent mutational studies of PTEN
that used exogenous expression in Dictyostelium to
probe membrane association and PTEN function in living cells. There have also been simulations of a homology
model
of the complete Ci-VSP (including the PTEN domain) bound to the surface
of a PIP-containing lipid bilayer. These have focused in particular
on the role of the linker region between the voltage sensor and PTEN
domains. However, a number of aspects
of the detailed
molecular
interactions of PTEN and of the PTEN domain of Ci-VSP with PIP3 molecules in lipid bilayers remain unclear. In this work,
we use multiscale molecular dynamics simulations to improve our understanding of the similarities and differences
in the mechanism(s) of recognition of the PIP-containing lipid bilayer
by PTEN and by the PTEN domain from Ci-VSP.

Methods
Structures
Used in the Simulations
The PTEN crystal
structure (PDB entry 1D5R, resolution of 2.10 Å) consisted of the PD and the C2 domain, as did the Ci-VSP crystal structure (PDB entry 3V0H, resolution
of 1.85 Å) (see Figure ). The Ci-VSP structure was crystallized
with inositol 1,4,5-triphosphate (IP3) bound.

Lipid Bilayers
All lipid bilayers were generated by
self-assembly coarse-grained MD simulations. In these simulations,
POPC lipids (without any protein) were randomly placed in a simulation
box and solvated with coarse-grained water molecules and ions to neutralize
the system. Subsequently, a production simulation was performed for
100 ns. After the first ∼15 ns of the simulation, the bilayer
was formed with an equal distribution of lipids in the two leaflets.
The bilayers for the pten_away, vsp_away, and pten_bound simulations contained 466, 476,
and 680 lipids, respectively (see Tables  and ). Prior to the simulations described
in this study, using a locally written code the POPC lipids were randomly
replaced with POPS or PIP lipids in both leaflets to reach the final
concentration of lipids required for each system (see Tables  and  for the final lipid
concentration). In the pten_bound simulations, PIP
lipids were placed in the desired position, as shown in Figure A, using the GROMACS genbox command.

Summary of Simulations with the PTEN
simulation	bilayer
composition	no. of PIP3s	duration	
coarse-grained	 	 	 	
pten_away-1	POPC/POPS (80:20)	one in each leaflet	6 × 3 μs	
pten_away-2	POPC/POPS (80:20)	two in each leaflet	6 × 4 μs	
pten_away-3	POPC/POPS (80:20)	four in each leaflet	6 × 3 μs	
pten_bound-1	POPC/POPS (80:20)	one in the PTEN-bound leaflet	6 × 1 μs	
pten_bound-2	POPC/POPS (80:20)	four in the PTEN-bound leaflet	6 × 1.5 μs	
pten_bound-3	POPC/POPS (80:20)	one in the
PTEN-bound leaflet	6 ×
1 μs	
atomistic	 	 	 	
pten_AT-1	POPC/POPS (80:20)	one
in the PTEN-bound leaflet	3 × 50 ns	
pten_AT-2	POPC/POPS (80:20)	four
in the PTEN-bound leaflet	3 × 50 ns	
In these simulations,
an in silico mutant PTEN (K164E, K269E, K327E, and
K330E) was
employed.

Summary
of Simulations with the Ci-VSP
simulation	bilayer composition	duration	
coarse-grained	 	 	
vsp_away-1	POPC/POPS (80:20)	6 × 1 μs	
vsp_away-2	POPC/POPS (60:40)	6 × 1 μs	
vsp_away-3	POPC/POPS/PIP2 (75:20:5)	6 × 1 μs	
vsp_away-4	POPC/POPS/PIP3 (75:20:5)	6 × 1 μs	
atomistic	 	 	
vsp_AT-1	POPC/POPS/PIP2 (75:20:5)	3 × 50 ns	
vsp_AT-2	POPC/POPS/PIP3 (75:20:5)	2 × 50 ns	
Coarse-Grained Molecular Dynamics Simulations (CG-MD)
Coarse-grained molecular dynamics (CG-MD) simulations were performed
using GROMACS version 4.5.4 with the
Martini 2.1 force field., In these coarse-grained
models, groups of approximately four atoms
are represented by a single particle. An elastic network model (ENM) was applied to the backbone particles of the
protein. Within the network, a harmonic potential was applied to all
pairs of backbone particles falling within a cutoff distance of 7
Å to model the secondary and tertiary structure of the protein.
All
CG-MD simulations were equilibrated for 5 ns and then run using a
time step of 20 fs. During the equilibration stage, the protein backbone
particles were restrained (force constant of 10 kJ mol–1 Å–2). A Berendsen thermostat and a Berendsen
barostat were used for temperature and pressure. The LINCS algorithm
was used to constrain bond lengths. Note
that the protein and the bilayer were fully solvated
in all simulations using the standard (nonpolarizable) Martini CG
water particles. For the simulations
with the PTEN and the Ci-VSP displaced
from the bilayer, the dimensions of the simulation box were 12.5 nm
× 12.5 nm × 28 nm, containing ∼30000 CG waters. In
the simulations with the PTEN bound to one leaflet of the bilayer
(Figure ), the dimensions of the simulation
box were
14.5 nm × 14.5 nm × 13 nm, containing ∼14500 CG waters.

Atomistic Molecular Dynamics (AT-MD) Simulations
AT-MD
simulations were conducted as described in Tables  and . The final snapshots of selected
CG-MD simulations were converted to AT representations using a CG-to-AT
fragment-based protocol. For the AT-MD
simulations, the PME (particle mesh Ewald)
method was used to model long-range electrostatics.
A V-rescale thermostat was used for temperature
coupling (temperature of 323 K), and the Parrinello–Rahman
barostat was used for semiisotropic pressure
coupling (pressure of 1 bar). The LINCS algorithm was used to constrain
bond lengths. Prior to the production
simulations, the system was
equilibrated for 2.5 ns. During the equilibration stage, the protein
backbone atoms were restrained (force constant of 10 kJ mol–1 Å–2). Note that
no restraints, other than the LINCS algorithm that constrains bond
lengths, were imposed during the production AT-MD simulations. Analysis
was conducted using GROMACS, PyMol (http://www.pymol.org), VMD, and locally written codes. For
these simulations, the SPC water model was used. Note that in all systems the protein–lipid complex
was fully solvated. For all AT-MD simulations (containing either the
PTEN or the Ci-VSP), a 15 nm × 15 nm × 14 nm simulation
box was used, including ∼63000 water molecules.

Results
Association
of PTEN with PIP-Containing Bilayers
Examination
of the electrostatic surface of PTEN (Figure S1 of the ) reveals an extended positively
charged surface
formed by the catalytic site of the PD and the Cα2 and CBR3
loops of the C2 domain (Figure S1A of the ). As
shown by recent heterologous expression studies, mutations removing
the positive charges of the CBR3 loop lead to a loss of membrane localization
of PTEN in living cells. This positively
charged surface was also implicated
in membrane binding in previous biophysical, modeling, and simulation
studies.,,, However, a dynamic model of the mechanism of PTEN–membrane
association has not been developed.

To study the association
of PTEN with PIP3-containing bilayers, a series of three
simulations [pten_away-1–3 (see Table )] was performed, in which the
PTEN molecule was placed ∼12 nm (i.e., 120 Å) from the
center of mass of a lipid bilayer containing increasing
numbers of PIP3 molecules. In these simulations, PTEN initially
diffused in the aqueous environment before interacting with the bilayer
(Figure A). Overall, increasing the concentration
of PIP3 lipids in the bilayer enhanced the formation of
the PTEN–bilayer complex. In particular, when only one PIP3 lipid was added to each bilayer leaflet (pten_away-1), just two of six repeat simulations resulted in binding of PTEN
to the bilayer (Figure S3A of the ), and of these two simulations that yielded a PTEN–lipid
complex, only one demonstrated movement of PTEN into a productive
orientation (Figure S3D of the ) (a
productive PTEN–bilayer complex is considered to be one that
agrees with the previous experimental and computational data,,).

(A) Snapshots of a selected
simulation (pten_away-2 in Table ) with the PTEN molecule displaced
from a bilayer that contained two PIP3 molecules (green)
in each leaflet. Simulation snapshots are shown at 0, 1.2, 1.7, and
3 μs. The blue arrows indicate the process of initial encounter
of the protein and bilayer followed by reorientation of the protein
at the bilayer surface. All the systems shown in this figure were
fully solvated with CG water particles. However, for the sake of clarity,
these are not shown. (B and C) Progress of selected CG-MD simulations
of PTEN and Ci-VSP with PIP3-containing bilayers [simulations pten_away-2 and vsp_away-4 (Tables  and )]. Panel B shows the
distance between the center of mass of the protein and the center
of mass of the bilayer as a function of time. Panel C shows the cosine
of the angle between the protein plane (as defined by the protein’s
principal z axis) and the bilayer plane. This angle
is equal to 0° (and hence the cosine is equal to 1) if the protein
is in the “correct” binding orientation (see the text
for more information).

In the systems where the number of PIP3 lipids
in each leaflet was increased to two (pten_away-2) and four (pten_away-3), a productive PTEN–bilayer
complex was reached in four of six simulations in each case (Figure
S3 of the ). Note
that in all cases PTEN did not initially bind to the bilayer in the
productive orientation but the initial encounter was followed by rotational
reorientation (see Figure ) to form more specific
interactions via
the residues implicated by mutational and computational studies.,, The resultant productive orientation
was retained for the remainder
of the simulation. To further determine the stability of the final
orientation, all six repeat simulations of the pten_away-2 system were extended from 3 to 4 μs, resulting in PTEN adopting
the productive orientation in five of six simulations. Analysis of
the radial distribution functions of lipids (Figure S4 of the ) indicated
preferential interactions of PTEN with PIP3 and, to a lesser
extent, POPS.

(A) Seven positions in which the PIP3 molecules
were
placed in the pten_bound simulations (see Table ). PTEN was placed in the center of the bilayer.
POPC and POPS headgroups are shown as gray spheres. (B) Routes from
two of the simulations (in one of which the PIP3 lipids
reached the PTEN catalytic side via the C2 domain and one via the
PD) are colored red and brown. (C) Snapshots from one of the simulations
(red in panel B) are shown at 0, 0.2, 0.4, and 1 μs. Note that
the systems shown in the figure were fully solvated with CG waters
(omitted for the sake of clarity).

When similar simulations were run with the PTEN displaced
from
a POPC/POPS/PIP2 (75:20:5) bilayer, the same mechanism
for the formation of the PTEN–bilayer complex was observed.
In particular, PTEN associates with the bilayer in a nonproductive
orientation, but the initial encounter was followed by rotational
reorientation to move PTEN in a productive orientation. Productive
association of PTEN with the bilayer resulted in clustering of PIP2 lipids around the protein in the adjacent bilayer leaflet.
See Figure S9 and the text of the  for more details.

Interactions of a PTEN–Bilayer Complex
with PIP3 Molecules
Following definition of the
association mechanism
to form a “productive” PTEN–bilayer complex,
we investigated how PIP3 might interact with a preformed
PTEN–bilayer complex. To this end, simulations [pten-bound-1–3 (Table )] were
initiated with PTEN bound to a POPC/POPS bilayer in a productive orientation
(as derived from the simulations described above), but with PIP3 molecules placed in the bilayer away (∼60 Å)
from the bound PTEN molecule (Figure A). In the first
case, a single PIP3 lipid was placed in seven different
positions in the bilayer. Four of six simulations in which the PIP3 was displaced from PTEN revealed PIP3 moving into
a cleft between the PD and the C2 domain (Figure  and Figure S5 of the ). The
cleft was comprised mainly of PTEN residues K128 (from the active
site P-loop), K164, V166, and T167 (from the T1 loop of the PD), and
K327 and K330 from the C2 domain Cα2 loop. Interestingly, immediately
after the initiation of the simulations, the PD partly dissociated
from the bilayer and rebound to the bilayer only after the formation
of the PTEN–PIP3 complex (Figure C).

Two different routes of the PIP3 to the
PD–C2 cleft were observed in the four simulations,
two via an initial interaction with the PD (Figure B) and two in which the initial interaction
occurs via the C2 domain (Figure B). Both
routes lead to PIP3 binding
to the PD–C2 cleft described above and were exploited an equal
number of times. Detailed analysis of the routes, however, shows that
on its way to the cleft, the PIP3 did not interact with
exactly the same residues on the PD or on the C2 domain. Simulations
of in silico mutations that reversed the charge of
the positive residues in the cleft and surrounding regions (i.e.,
K164E, K269E, K327E, and K330E; system pten_bound-3 in Table ) exhibited no binding of PIP3 to the cleft site (see the ).

Similar CG-MD simulations were then run
with four PIP3 molecules in the PTEN-bound leaflet (pten_bound-2). This resulted in four of six simulations
with a PIP3 bound in the aforementioned cleft, three of
which went via the C2
domain route and one via the PD route. The interactions with the cleft
were again predominantly those with residues K330 and K164. When no
PIPs interacted with the cleft or the PD, PTEN again showed transient
interaction of the PD with the bilayer. Once interacting with PTEN,
the PIP3 molecules tended to remain bound to the same region
of the protein for extended periods of time.

To determine whether
PTEN can differentiate between PIP2 and PIP3 molecules, similar simulations (compared to
those described above) were run with a bilayer containing both four
PIP2 molecules and four PIP3 molecules. Two
of six simulations showed binding of PIP3 and three of
six binding of PIP2 (the remaining simulation showed no
binding) to the cleft. Therefore, it seems that both PIP types can
bind to the PTEN cleft.

Atomistic Simulations
Atomistic
systems were derived
from the CG systems described above to study in more detail the interactions
of PIP3 with PTEN. AT-MD simulations were set up using
the final snapshot from one of the pten_bound-1 simulations
and one of the pten_bound-2 simulations. In both
simulations, the PIP3 lipid had bound in the aforementioned
cleft. Three repeats (with different initial velocities) for each
system were run for 50 ns (Table ). In both
systems, PIP3 moved up partially out of the bilayer to
interact with PTEN (Figure A,B) and then remained
there for the remainder
of the simulation. The contacts made between PTEN and PIP3 formed in the corresponding CG-MD simulations were maintained during
the (short) atomistic simulations (Figure S5 of the ). In
particular, PIP3 can be seen to form interactions with
the P loop (residues 124–129) and T1 loop (residues 164–171)
of the PD active site, although the PIP3 headgroup
is displaced slightly from the active site formed by the H123CXXGXXR130 motif of the P loop
(Figure A). Thus, the three major areas of
frequent
contact between PTEN and PIP3 were residues K164 and T167
of the T1 loop and residue K330 of the C2 domain. PTEN continued to
interact with the bilayer in the productive orientation described
for the CG-MD simulations with the C2 domain loops penetrating into
the bilayer (Figure A). Comparison of the
PTEN structure from
the atomistic simulations with the crystal structure suggests a degree
of conformational change corresponding to a rotation of ∼10°
of the PD relative to the C2 domain (Figure B), although more extended simulations may be needed to capture
the full extent of this transition.

Snapshots of the lipid-bound PTEN and
Ci-VSP domains, from the
end of all-atom simulations in the presence of PIP2 or
PIP3 lipids. (A and B) Snapshots from simulations pten_AT-1 and pten_AT-2, respectively.
The PTEN C2 domain is colored orange and the PD blue. (C and D) Snapshots
from simulations vsp_AT-1 and vsp_AT-2, respectively. The Ci-VSP C2 domain is colored green and the PD
purple. PIP lipids are shown in VDW format. Note that the water molecules
included in the simulation box are shown only for the pten_AT-1 simulation system. For the other systems, the waters were included
in the simulation (see ), but for the
sake of clarity, they are not shown in this figure.

(A) Comparison of the AT-MD simulation (pten_AT-1) and crystal structure in terms of the location of PIP3 and tartrate relative to the PTEN active site defined by catalytic
residues C124 and R130. (B) Comparison of the PTEN structure of the
AT-MD simulation in panel A (red; pten_AT-1) and
the crystal structure (blue) reveals a rotation of ∼10°
of the PD relative to the C2 domain (the two structures are superimposed
via their C2 domains).

Density profiles along the membrane normal for the C2 domain (orange
for PTEN to purple for Ci-VSP), the PD (blue for PTEN to green for
Ci-VSP), and the C2 CBR3 loop region (red; residues 261–266
for PTEN to residues 516–524 for Ci-VSP) relative to the positions
of the lipid (POPC and POPS) phosphate groups (black), from the (A) pten_AT-1, (B) vsp_AT-1, and (C) vsp_AT-2 simulations.

Interaction of Ci-VSP with Membranes
Ci-VSP is a rather
specialized example of a PTEN-like enzyme. Unlike PTEN, Ci-VSP is
permanently anchored to the bilayer via an N-terminal voltage-sensor
(VS) domain, more generally seen in voltage-gated potassium, sodium,
and related ion channels. The PTEN domain from Ci-VSP has an electrostatic
surface somewhat different from that of PTEN (Figure S1 of the ), with
a molecular dipole; its positive pole points directly to the presumed
location of the membrane surface (Figure S2 of the ). Furthermore,
despite the overall conservation of fold, the lipid-binding loops
of the C2 domain differ between the two structures. Therefore, we
performed a series of simulations of Ci-VSP PTEN (Table ) comparable to those described above for PTEN itself.

In the absence of PIP molecules, the Ci-VSP PTEN domain did not exhibit
any interactions with the bilayer (Figure S6 of the ). The
presence of PIP2 or PIP3 resulted in interactions
with the bilayer such that the Ci-VSP domain adopted an orientation
comparable to the productive mode of PTEN discussed above (Figure
S6 of the ). Interestingly,
in the simulations that resulted in a Ci-VSP–bilayer complex,
the final orientation of Ci-VSP relative to the bilayer was similar
to that of PTEN (Figure ). However, the Ci-VSP
PD made strong interactions
with the bilayer unlike the PTEN PD. This is consistent with the difference
in the electrostatic potential surface between the two proteins. Calculation
of the orientation of Ci-VSP relative to the bilayer (Figure B,C and Figure S6 of the ) revealed
binding without subsequent reorientation of the domain relative to
the bilayer surface. Of course, in vivo Ci-VSP PTEN
is more likely to be bound to the membrane as it is tethered by the
nearby N-terminal VS domain. Overall, these simulations provide support
for a model in which PTEN of Ci-VSP interacts all of the time with
the bilayer and is voltage-activated via a conformational change rather
than a voltage-driven on and off movement of the PTEN domain to and
from the membrane.

Atomistic simulations
were performed, using the end points from the vsp_away-3 and vsp_away-4 simulations as starting configurations
(Figure C,D). Calculation of the contacts
between
Ci-VSP and the lipids demonstrated that the three regions of Ci-VSP
PTEN forming the principal contacts were the same for both PIP2 and PIP3 (Figure S7 of the ). These
regions included contributions from both the PD and the C2 domain.
The most conserved site of protein–PIP interaction between
the PIP2 and PIP3 simulations was between residues
362 and 369 (particularly K364 and G365), i.e., corresponding to the
H362SxxGxxR369 catalytic
loop. As for PTEN (see above) in the atomistic simulations, the PIP2 or PIP3 molecule is close to the active site but
is not found directly between the two catalytic residues (S363 and
A369), unlike IP3 in the X-ray structure. It is interesting
to note that unlike PTEN, the corresponding domain from Ci-VSP does
not penetrate beyond the surface of the bilayer. In particular, whereas
for PTEN the CBR3 loop penetrates deep into the headgroup phosphates,
for Ci-VSP the CBR3 loop sits closer to the phosphate–aqueous
interface (Figure ). This is suggestive of
the possibility
of a further conformational change linked to tighter binding of the
PIP3 substrate, although more extended simulations might
be needed to test this.

Discussion
Our simulations have
allowed us to model the nature of the PTEN–membrane
association process. The predicted final orientation of PTEN relative
to the membrane is in good agreement with previous experimental data
and computational studies.,,,,, An increased concentration of PIP3 resulted in more frequent
association of PTEN with the model bilayer, and PTEN could achieve
its optimal orientation without SUMOylation. To reach the preferred orientation, PTEN was observed
to be able to reorient at the membrane surface following an initial
encounter with the
lipid bilayer. It should be noted that in our simulations only a low
concentration of PIP3 lipids in the bilayer was required
for the formation of a productive PTEN–membrane complex. Recent
lipidomics data suggest that the global PIP3 concentration
is expected to be lower than, for example, the PIP2 concentration
in the plasma membrane, although it should be noted that it is difficult
to be certain of the exact concentration of the PIP3 and
PIP2 molecules because of the reversible turnover of PIP2 to PIP3 and other PIP species. However, the local
concentration of PIP3 is not known, and it remains possible
that a high local concentration of PIP3 may drive the formation
of the PTEN–membrane complex. Simulation with bilayers containing
the more abundant PIP2 at physiological concentrations
also resulted in the same mechanism for the formation of the PTEN–membrane
complex. A similar encounter-plus-reorientation mechanism has been
observed for, for example, the auxilin PTEN-like domain. Interestingly, the interaction of the PTEN domain
from
Ci-VSP did not generally require a reorientation step. In simulations
starting with prebound PTEN at the bilayer surface, PIP3 molecules were able
to enter the PD–C2 cleft via lateral diffusion along with some
degree of “loosening” followed by “tightening”
of the PTEN–bilayer interaction.

In CG simulations linked
to subsequent atomistic simulations, the
PIP3 molecule interacted with residues close the PTEN active
site [identified via a tartrate bound in the crystal structure (Figure A and Figure S5 of the )]. However, the bound PIP3 in the simulations
was somewhat displaced from the optimal binding
mode at the active site suggested by the crystal structure (Figure
S8 of the ). Furthermore,
molecular dynamics simulations with a PIP3 molecule initially
docked using the tartrate coordinates as a guide did not result in
the PIP3 molecule remaining bound to this site. Interestingly, docking of PTEN inhibitors to
the tartrate
binding site has been demonstrated after the removal of the C2 domain. Because the C2 domain is more cationic than
the PD,
it is perhaps not surprising that the negatively charged PIP3 molecule binds initially to a site formed between the PD and the
C2 domain and contains multiple lysine residues. It is also possible
that a degree of conformational change is needed, and indeed, some
limited change in the relative orientation of the PD and the C2 domain
is seen during our (short) atomistic simulations. However, it is likely
that more extended atomistic simulation studies, using, for example,
metadynamics for better sampling, will
be required to explore this aspect in more detail.

In the case
of Ci-VSP, the structural similarity to PTEN would suggest a similar orientation of binding
to the membrane. The simulations described here are in agreement with
this (Figure ), indicating that the Ci-VSP
C2 domain binds
to the membrane via a Ca2+-independent mechanism as is
the case for PTEN and auxilin. Ci-VSP PTEN adopted a preferred orientation
in simulations
directly after initial membrane binding, without a need for subsequent
reorientation, reflecting a difference in the molecular dipole orientation
between PTEN and Ci-VSP (Figure S2 of the ). In
simulations with PIPs present, the residues that formed a substantive
number of contacts with PIP2 or PIP3 molecules
are in the proximity of the IP3 substrate in the crystal
structure (see Figure S8 of the ). However,
as for PTEN, PIP3 did not interact directly with the active
site, again suggesting the need for some degree of conformational
change and/or more exhaustive sampling of interactions in simulations.
In this context, it is of interest that crystal structures of Ci-VSP
PTEN have indicated conformational changes may be required for binding
of the substrate to the active site of the enzyme.

It is important to consider possible limitations
of the current
simulation studies. In particular, one must consider the approximations
implicit in the use of a CG-MD-based approach. This has been shown
to correctly predict interactions of PIPs with integral membrane proteins, and also the interactions of peripheral proteins with anionic lipid
bilayers. However, the use of an elastic
network model
within
the coarse-grained simulations means that possible conformational
changes of the protein are not accurately represented. The use of
a multiscale approach, with subsequent atomistic simulations, in part
addresses this limitation. However, as noted above, the AT-MD simulations
are relatively short and more extended simulations and/or sampling
is likely to be needed to more fully address possible conformational
changes linked to, for example, binding of PIP3 to the
PTEN active site.

A more “biological” limitation
is the focus on the
core PTEN domains (i.e., PD and C2 domain), thus excluding the N-
and C-terminal tails of
PTEN, and the VS and linker region of Ci-VSP. This is necessitated
by limited structural data, although there have been simulations of
a homology model of the complete Ci-VSP protein. There are not any structural data for the PTEN N-terminal
domain or for the PTEN C-terminal tail. In particular, the C-terminal
tail is thought to be a long, unstructured, and flexible region, which
makes modeling or simulation rather difficult. It seems that the C-terminal
tail
may adopt different dynamic conformations in the membrane-bound and
membrane-unbound states of PTEN., In particular,
recent data suggest that the C-terminal tail may interact
with those regions of PTEN that otherwise can interact with lipids
in the plasma membrane, thus providing an autoinhibitory mechanism. Consequently, in future studies, it will require
rather
detailed and careful simulations, possibly via an enhanced sampling
approach, to fully capture the conformational energy landscape of
the C-terminal tail. This will be a prerequisite for creating a predictive
dynamic model of full length PTEN and of its interaction with the
membrane. It will also be important to treat more fully some of the
lipid compositional complexities of mammalian cell membranes.

To summarize, our multiscale simulation
approach offers novel insights
into the molecular mechanism of association of PTEN proteins with
model membranes, providing details of the interactions of these proteins
with PIP3. As discussed by, for example, Nguyen et al., the majority of PTEN in a cell is not bound
to the membrane,
so an improved understanding of the mechanism of PTEN–bilayer
interaction offers a longer term prospect of developing activators
of PTEN function for therapeutic applications.

Supporting Information Available
Details of additional
simulations and analysis. This material is available free of charge
via the Internet at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bi5000299_si_001.pdf

The authors
declare no competing
financial interest.

