The enolase superfamily (ENS)
has been the subject of function discovery-based research since it
was demonstrated that its homologous members catalyze different chemical
reactions. Although all members of the
ENS catalyze a common partial reaction (general base-catalyzed abstraction
of a proton α to a carboxylate group to form a Mg2+-stabilized enediolate intermediate), their overall reactions and
chemistries can be quite diverse (e.g., β-elimination and 1,1-proton
transfer reactions)., Nevertheless, the members of the
ENS share significant structural homology: they share a (β/α)7(β)-barrel domain for acid/base catalysis and an (α+β)
capping domain for substrate specificity.−

When the d-mannonate dehydratase (ManD) subgroup
of the
ENS was discovered in 2007, all of its members were assumed to catalyze
the dehydration of d-mannonate to 2-keto-3-deoxy-d-gluconate. The Asp, Glu, and Glu ligands
for the essential Mg2+ are located at the ends of the third,
fourth, and fifth β-strands, respectively, of the barrel domain.
The general base catalyst is a Tyr-Arg dyad located at the start of
the “150–180s” loop (between the second and third
β-strands); the general acid catalyst is a His located at the
end of the third β-strand.

A large-scale in vitro survey of sequence–function
space in the ManD subgroup was supported by the Enzyme Function Initiative
(EFI; U54GM093342), a large-scale, collaborative, project focused
on devising tools and strategies for addressing and correcting the
widespread non- and misannotation present in today’s automatically
curated protein databases., For confident functional
and physiological assignment, the EFI seeks not only in vitro enzymatic activity (values of kcat and kcat/KM) but also in vivo metabolic function.

The ManD subgroup of the
ENS (in Pfam families PF02746 and PF13378)
initially was thought to be isofunctional, but the survey of the sequence
space revealed dehydration activity with d-mannonate and/or d-gluconate. The members of the
ManD subgroup have a range of catalytic activities and efficiencies:
high-efficiency (specific to d-mannonate with a kcat/KM of 103–104 M–1 s–1), low-efficiency
(d-mannonate and/or d-gluconate with a kcat/KM of 10–102 M–1 s–1), and no activity. However, the in vivo physiological
function had not been assigned to any member of the ManD subgroup.
The only metabolic pathway in which dehydration of d-mannonate
is known to occur is the catabolism of d-glucuronate (Figure ), in which the ManD reaction is performed by the
well-characterized UxuA (utilization of hexuronate A), that is included in Pfam family PF03786.

Degradation pathway of d-glucuronate in Escherichia
coli. The dehydration of d-mannonate to 2-keto-3-deoxy-d-gluconate is performed by UxuA.

One high-efficiency ManD (Uniprot entry B8GZZ7; Protein Data
Bank
entries 3VCN and 4GME)
was shown to be specific for d-mannonate with a catalytic
efficiency of 1.2 × 104 M–1 s–1. The UxuAs in d-glucuronate catabolism have catalytic efficiencies of ∼103 M–1 s–1. Interestingly,
low-efficiency and no activity ManDs are encoded by genomes that encode
a member of the UxuA family; however, genomes that encode a high-efficiency
ManD do not encode a UxuA. This suggested
that high-efficiency ManDs are analogues for UxuAs, with low-efficiency
and no activity ManDs likely having different physiological functions.

Of the high-efficiency ManDs that were characterized in
vitro, we selected B8GZZ7 for in vivo study
because its encoding organism, Caulobacter crescentus NA1000, is amenable to genetic manipulation.C. crescentus is an important organism
in the study of asymmetric cell division and prokaryotic development
because it can differentiate into mobile swarmer cells and immobile
stalk cells. Species of Caulobacter utilize aquatic vegetation as a carbon source in freshwater environments;d-glucuronate makes up a large part
of plant cell-wall biomass. Therefore,
we hypothesized that C. crescentus NA1000 could utilize d-glucuronate as a carbon source via B8GZZ7, a high-efficiency
ManD, despite the absence of UxuA.

Genome neighborhoods of B8GZZ7, a high-efficiency
ManD, (top) and
canonical d-glucuronate catabolism genes (bottom). The genes
directly involved in d-glucuronate metabolism are colored
green.

The gene encoding B8GZZ7 is located
in a genome neighborhood that
is not indicative of d-glucuronate metabolism. Nearby genes
encode catabolic enzymes for N-acetylglucosamine
6-phosphate, a mannosidase, and a GntR transcriptional regulator (Figure ). Nevertheless, the ability of d-glucuronate
to upregulate the gene encoding B8GZZ7 was investigated via quantitative
reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction (qRT-PCR). Expression
of the gene encoding B8GZZ7 was induced &gt;1000-fold when C.
crescentus NA1000 was grown on d-glucuronate as
a carbon source (relative to growth on d-xylose) (Figure ). Importantly, the gene encoding the mannosidase
immediately upstream of the gene encoding B8GZZ7 was not upregulated
(Figure ); therefore, the gene encoding B8GZZ7
is transcribed separately from its genome neighbors and is likely
not involved in N-acetylglucosamine catabolism. The
absence of cotranscription of the genome neighborhood was further
verified by the lack of a PCR product when cDNA was amplified using
primers inside of the genes encoding both B8GZZ7 and the mannosidase
(such that the potential product would span the gap between the two
genes). Thus, we conclude that genomic context can be misleading for
functional assignment in the absence of definitive information about
regulation and the identities of transcriptional units.

ThermoFluor ligand binding studies
were performed on the GntR transcriptional regulator in the genome
neighborhood of B8GZZ7 using a library of acid sugars, including d-glucuronate and d-mannonate, as well as other metabolites
(Table S2 of the ). This assay yielded no stabilizing ligands, providing further evidence
that the gene encoding B8GZZ7 is regulated separately.

Upregulation of the genes
encoding B8GZZ7 and the d-glucuronate
catabolism genes shown in Figure .

The genes encoding the remaining enzymes in the
canonical d-glucuronate pathway are located elsewhere in
the genome, closely
clustered with other sugar-metabolizing genes (Figure ). The genes encoding d-glucuronate isomerase (UxaC),
fructuronate reductase (UxaB), 2-keto-3-deoxy-d-gluconate
kinase (KdgK), and 2-keto-3-deoxy-d-gluconate-6-phosphate
aldolase (KdgA) were upregulated when they were grown on d-glucuronate (relative to growth on d-xylose) (Figure ). These qRT-PCR data provide compelling evidence
that B8GZZ7 is performing the ManD reaction in the canonical d-glucuronate catabolic pathway.

The knockout of the gene encoding
B8GZZ7 showed no growth on d-glucuronate (Figure S1 of the ). Complementation of the knockout with an isopropyl
β-d-1-thiogalactopyranoside-inducible gene encoding
B8GZZ7 (pSRK-Kan) restored growth on d-glucuronate. Although the growth rate of the complemented
knockout strain was slower than that of wild-type C. crescentus NA1000 on d-glucuronate, the wild-type strain transformed
with the same complementation vector showed a similar growth defect
(Figure S1 of the ), likely because of the toxicity of plasmid-based expression of
B8GZZ7. The requirement of B8GZZ7 for growth on d-glucuronate
and complementation of the growth defect by supplying B8GZZ7 in trans verifies that B8GZZ7 is the ManD for d-glucuronate metabolism in C. crescentus NA1000.

We visualize functional diversity in the ManD subgroup using sequence
similarity networks. Using an E-value threshold of 10–190, corresponding
to ∼75% identity, the clusters are isofunctional as judged
by a sequence alignment. B8GZZ7 is a
member of an isofunctional cluster that includes 55 additional proteins
(Figure S2 and Table S3 of the ). None of the organisms that encode these proteins encode the UxuA
in d-glucuronate catabolism, although the genes encoding
all of the other enzymes needed for catabolism of d-glucuronate
via the pathway shown in Figure  are present
in the genomes.

The genomes of a few of these organisms, including C. crescentus NA1000, encode two high-efficiency ManDs.
In C. crescentus NA1000, the second ManD (UniProt
entry B8H1R9) is not involved in d-glucuronate catabolism:
the knockout of the gene encoding
the B8H1R9 retains the ability to utilize d-glucuronate as
a carbon source (Figure S1 of the ); also, the gene encoding B8H1R9 is not upregulated by d-glucuronate. Apparently, the ManD activity of B8H1R9 is essential
for another metabolic function that is currently unknown.

We
are confident that we can transfer the now verified physiological
function of B8GZZ7, the ManD in the catabolic pathway for d-glucuronate, to the high-efficiency ManDs that are encoded by the
organisms with a single orthologue (Table S3 of the ); all of these organisms encode the
other enzymes in d-glucuronate catabolism. For those organisms
that encode two high-efficiency ManDs, genome context is sufficient
to assign function in some cases, e.g., Sphingomonas wittichii and Sphingomonas sp. MM-1; in other cases, such
as C. crescentus NA1000 described here, transcriptomic
and genetic experiments are needed to assign the physiological function.

Previously, no physiological function for a ManD in the ENS had
been determined. We now have used in vivo approaches
to establish that B8GZZ7, a high-efficiency ManD in C. crescentus NA1000, participates in d-glucuronate catabolism. Thus,
we conclude that the high-efficiency ManDs in the ENS are examples
of convergent evolution of function with the ManDs in the UxuA family.

This study demonstrates that (1) in vitro enzymatic
activity alone cannot be used to infer in vivo physiological
function for an “unknown” enzyme discovered in a genome
project and (2) genome context also is not sufficient to infer the in vivo physiological function. In due course, we will report
the in vivo physiological functions for members of
the ManD subgroup that have low catalytic efficiencies for dehydration
of d-mannonate and d-gluconate.

Supporting Information Available
Growth curves, ThermoFluor
library, Uniprot entries of orthologous ManDs, and all experimental
methods. This material is available free of charge via the Internet
at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bi500683x_si_001.pdf

Accession Codes
This manuscript
describes characterization of in vivo function of
Uniprot entry B8GZZ7.

This research
was supported by a program project grant (P01GM071790) and three cooperative
agreements with the National Institutes of Health (U54GM093342, U54GM074945,
and U54GM094662).

The authors
declare no competing financial interests.

