The human
KCNQ1 channel belongs
to the superfamily of voltage-gated potassium channels (KV) and plays critical roles in human physiology.− For example, KCNQ1 is essential
to both the cardiac action potential that mediates heartbeat and K+ homeostasis in the inner ear.− KCNQ1 dysfunction has been linked to multiple
diseases, including various cardiac arrhythmias, congenital deafness,
and type II diabetes mellitus., Loss-of-function mutations
in KCNQ1 can result in long QT and Romano-Ward syndromes, while gain-of-function
mutations can result in atrial fibrillation and sudden infant death
syndrome.− Human KCNQ1 is a 676-residue protein consisting of a 100-residue
N-terminal cytosolic domain, followed by an ∼260-residue channel
domain containing six transmembrane helices, and a 300-residue cytosolic
C-terminus. The first four transmembrane helices (S1–S4) form
the voltage-sensor domain (VSD) that is linked to the pore domain
(helices S5 and S6) by the S4–S5 linker. Roughly 40% of the &gt;200 reported disease-related mutations
in the KCNQ1 gene result in amino acid substitutions in the VSD (Figure A), making structural
and functional studies of this domain important in unraveling molecular
mechanisms in human pathophysiology.

(A) Topology of the 100–243 construct
of the KCNQ1 voltage-sensor
domain (Q1-VSD), which spans helices S0–S4, as inferred on
the basis of the results of this work. The sites for mutations linked
to long QT syndrome and related disorders are colored pink, while
sites for mutations linked to atrial fibrillation (AF) and related
disorders are colored yellow. (B) Sequence alignment (by ClusterW2)
of TM segments S2 and S4 of VSDs from various voltage-gated ion channels.
(C) Sodium dodecyl sulfate–polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis
gel stained with Coomassie blue, showing that purified Q1-VSD runs
as a monomer in SDS micelles, with an apparent molecular mass of 15
kDa.

KCNQ1 has been subjected to numerous
mutagenesis-based electrophysiology
studies. Moreover, several models for the channel domain have been
developed on the basis of homology to potassium channels of known
structure.− Direct structural biological studies of KCNQ1 have also been conducted
for water-soluble fragments of its large cytosolic C-terminal domain., However, neither the complete channel nor its substituent pore and
voltage-sensor domains have been purified or subjected to high-resolution
structural studies. This is despite tremendous progress over the past
decade in experimental structural biology− and experimentally restrained modeling− of other KV channels. Here we report the overexpression,
purification, and preliminary structural studies of the human KCNQ1
voltage-sensor domain.

Materials and Methods
Cloning and Overexpression
of Q1-VSD
Segments of the
human KCNQ1 cDNA starting at codon 100, 107, or 121 and stopping at
codon 243 or 261 were cloned into a pET16b or pET21b expression vector
(Novagen) with an added segment encoding either an N- or C-terminal
His tag, respectively (N-terminal, MGHHHHHHG-;
C-terminal, -LEHHHHHHHHHH). Escherichia coli expression vectors were also prepared using
pQE32 [for expression in XL1-Blue and XL10-Gold strains (Qiagen)].
Expression of the Q1-VSD constructs was tested in several E. coli strains: BL21(DE3), Rosetta(DE3), C43, Rosetta/C43(DE3)
(which contains the pRARE plasmid that encodes rare codon tRNAs for
Arg, Gly, Ile, Leu, and Pro), XL1-Blue, and XL10-Gold. Successful
transformants were cultured in M9 minimal medium with appropriate
antibiotics and supplemented with a MEM vitamin (Mediatech) and ZnCl2 (50 μM). The culture was incubated at 22 °C and
230 rpm, and expression was induced at an OD600 of 0.8
by adding IPTG (1 mM), followed by continued rotary shaking at 22
°C for 24 h.

Q1-VSD Purification
Cells expressing
Q1-VSD were harvested
by centrifugation at 22000g for 20 min at 4 °C.
The cell pellet was suspended in 20 mL of lysis buffer [70 mM Tris-HCl
and 300 mM NaCl (pH 8.0)] per gram of wet cells, with 2 mM TCEP, lysozyme
(0.2 mg/mL), DNase (0.02 mg/mL), RNase (0.02 mg/mL), PMSF (0.2 mg/mL),
and magnesium acetate (5 mM). This mixture was tumbled for 30 min
at room temperature (RT). The cell suspension was then sonicated (F550
sonic dismembrator, Misonix, Farmingdale, NY) at 4 °C for 5 min
at a power level of 60 with 5 s pulses separated by 5 s. The lysate
was centrifuged at 22000g for 20 min, yielding a
pellet that contained inclusion bodies. The supernatant was collected
and centrifuged at 100000g for 2 h to pellet the
membrane fraction. The pellets of either membranes or inclusion bodies
were homogenized using a glass homogenizer and diluted to a final
volume 10 times the original cell pellet weight. Q1-VSD inclusion
body fractions were solubilized with different detergents, including N,N-dimethyl-N-dodecylglycine
[3% (v/v) (Empigen)], dihexanoylphosphatidylcholine {DHPC [0.5% (w/v)]},
dodecylphosphocholine {DPC [0.5% (w/v)]}, or 8 M urea containing 0.2%
SDS (w/v; all handling of solutions containing SDS was conducted at
RT). To solubilize Q1-VSD in the membrane-separated fraction, DPC
was added to a final concentration of 0.5% (w/v). Extracts were tumbled
overnight at 4 °C (except for solutions containing SDS, which
were handled at RT). After detergent extraction, insoluble debris
was removed by centrifugation at 22000g for 20 min
at 4 °C. The supernatant was then incubated with Ni(II)-NTA Superflow
resin (Qiagen) (1 mL/g of original cell pellet) for at least 45 min
while the mixture was being tumbled at 4 °C.

To purify
Q1-VSD, the resin was packed into a gravity-flow column and washed
with 4–5 bed volumes of lysis buffer containing the extraction
detergent. Impurities were eluted using a wash buffer [50 mM HEPES,
300 mM NaCl, and 60 mM imidazole (pH 7.8)] containing the extraction
detergent until the A280 returned to baseline.
The extraction detergent was then exchanged using 12 bed volumes of
rinse buffer [50 mM Tris-HCl and 300 mM NaCl (pH 7.8)] containing
one of the following detergents: 0.5% DPC, 0.5% β-n-decyl maltoside (DM), 0.5% DHPC, 0.2% n-tetradecylphosphocholine
(TDPC), 0.2% n-hexadecylphosphocholine (HDPC), 0.2%
lyso-myristoylphosphatidylcholine (LMPC), 0.2% lyso-palmitoylphosphatidylcholine
(LPPC), 0.2% lyso-myristoylphosphatidylglycerol (LMPG), or 0.2% lyso-palmitoylphosphatidylglycerol
(LPPG). All detergents were purchased from Avanti or Anatrace, unless
otherwise stated. Q1-VSD was eluted with elution buffer [50 mM Tris-HCl,
300 mM NaCl, 500 mM imidazole, and 2 mM TCEP (pH 7.8)] containing
the chosen detergent. The final concentration was determined by the A280 (0.59 OD unit per milligram per milliliter
per centimeter). The protein was identified as Q1-VSD by trypsin digestion
followed by mass spectrometry.

Preparation of Q1-VSD for
Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR) Spectroscopy
The Q1-VSD
sample in detergent after purification and elution was
centrifugally concentrated to ∼0.5 mL at 5000g using a 10 kDa molecular weight cutoff (MWCO) concentrator (Amicon
Ultra-10, EMD Millipore) at 4 °C. The approximately 0.5 mL Q1-VSD
samples were diluted with 5 mL of pH 5.5 buffer (50 mM MES, 0.5 mM
EDTA, 2 mM TCEP, and 10% D2O) and then concentrated to
0.5 mL. This step was repeated three times to ensure complete buffer
exchange. When needed, the concentrations of lysophospholipid detergent
in [U-15N]Q1-VSD NMR samples were determined by 31P NMR. For this, 5 μL of the Q1-VSD NMR sample was mixed with
25 μL of 200 mM pyrophosphate and 170 μL of 50 mM MES
buffer (pH 5.5) in a 3 mm NMR tube. The one-dimensional 31P NMR spectrum was then recorded on a Bruker Avance 500 or 600 MHz
spectrometer, using a delay of 15 s between scans to ensure complete
relaxation. The detergent concentration was then calculated by comparing
the integrals of the lyso-phospholipid and pyrophosphate (standard)
peaks in the NMR spectrum. The final
protein and detergent concentrations in the NMR sample were adjusted
to 0.5 and 60 mM [3% (w/v)], respectively.

For amino acid-selective
isotopic labeling, a transaminase-deficient strain of E. coli, CT19, with genetic lesions of the aspC, avtA, ilvE, trpB, and tyrB
genes, was used to reduce 15N-labeled amino acid scrambling.
CT19 is well-suited for selective 15N labeling with Ala,
Asp, Ile, Leu, Phe, Trp, Tyr, and Val. Briefly, cells were grown in 4 L of LB culture supplemented with
10 mg/L ampicillin, 100 mg/L kanamycin, and 20 mg/L tetracycline at
22 °C and were shaken at 230 rpm. Once the culture reached an
OD600 of 0.6, cells were pelleted by centrifugation at
3000 rpm for 15 min and then resuspended in 1 L of M9 medium containing
the same antibiotics, 0.2 g of the 15N-labeled amino acid
of interest, and 0.5 g each of all the other amino acids with natural
isotopic abundance amino acids. Reverse isotopic labeling was applied
to identify Arg peaks by supplementing M9 medium with [15N]NH4Cl (1 g/L) and an excess of [14N]Arg (1.0
g/L M9). The subsequent 1H–15N TROSY
spectrum of the protein exhibits peaks for all amino acid types except
for Arg.

Q1-VSD Backbone NMR Resonance Assignments
NMR spectra
were recorded at 50 °C on a Bruker Avance spectrometer at 600
MHz (14.4 T), 800 MHz (18.7 T), or 900 MHz (21.1 T) each equipped
with a cryoprobe. Uniformly 2H-, 13C-, and 15N-labeled Q1-VSD was prepared in 60 mM LPPG micelles buffered
at pH 5.5 with 50 mM MES, 0.5 mM EDTA, 2 mM TCEP, and 10% D2O. Proton chemical shifts were referenced to internal DSS, and 13C and 15N chemical shifts were referenced indirectly
to DSS using absolute frequency ratios. The following series of three-dimensional (3D) experiments were
used for sequential resonance assignments: TROSY-HNCO, TROSY-HN(CA)CO,
TROSY-HNCA, TROSY-HN(CO)CA, TROSY-HNCACB, TROSY-HN(CA)CB, and NOESY-TROSY., Selective labeling of specific amino acids also aided the completion
of assignments.

NMR Relaxation Experiments
TROSY-based
pulse sequences
were used to determine R1, R2, and 15N–{1H} heteronuclear
NOEs (hetNOEs).,, Q1-VSD samples were uniformly 15N-labeled and concentrated
to 0.25 mM in 50 mM MES buffer (pH 5.5) containing 0.5 mM EDTA, 2
mM TCEP, and 10% D2O. Relaxation experiments were performed
at 800 MHz (18.7 T) and 50 °C. R1 values were determined from a series of inversion recovery spectra
with 100, 200, 400, 600, 800, 1000, 1200, 1600, 2000, 4000, and 8000
ms relaxation delays. R2 values were obtained
from Carr–Purcell–Meiboom–Gill data with 34,
51, 68, 85, 102, 119, 136, 153, 170, and 204 ms delays. Steady-state 1H–15N hetNOE values were determined from
peak ratios between spectra collected with and without a 3 s proton
presaturation pulse. All spectra were
processed using NMRPipe and analyzed with Sparky.

H–D
Exchange Experiments
Amide H–D exchange
experiments were performed at 50 °C with uniformly 15N-labeled Q1-VSD (0.5 mM) in 60 mM LPPG and 50 mM MES buffer (pH
5.5) containing 0.5 mM EDTA, 2 mM TCEP, and 10% D2O; 500
μL this Q1-VSD solution was mixed with 5 mL of 100% D2O in 50 mM MES (pH 5.5) and concentrated back to 500 μL using
a 10 MWCO concentrator to start the H–D exchange process. The
900 MHz 1H–15N TROSY spectra were recorded
4, 8, 12, 16, 20, and 24 h after the addition of D2O. Each
spectrum was collected within 4 h, with 2048 × 256 complex points.

Near-UV and Far-UV Circular Dichroism (CD)
CD spectra
(Figures S3 and S4 of the ) were acquired using a Jasco J-810 spectrometer with temperature
control. Near-UV and far-UV CD spectra were collected in quartz cuvettes
with path lengths of 1 and 0.1 cm, respectively. Samples were purified
as described above and desalted with an Econo-Pac 10DG column (Bio-Rad)
into 50 mM MES buffer (pH 5.5, containing 0.5 mM EDTA, 2 mM TCEP,
and 0.2% LPPG). Near-UV and Far-UV CD spectra were measured at 50
°C in the ranges of 320–260 and 260–190 nm at protein
concentrations of 1.0 and 0.1 mg/mL, respectively.

Results
Optimization
of Expression and Purification of Q1-VSD
N-Terminally His-tagged
Q1-VSD constructs starting at residue 100,
107, or 121 and ending at residue 243 or 261 were tested for expression
in several different strains of E. coli, including
the XL10-Gold strain recently used to express the VSD from a voltage-sensitive
phosphatase. The highest expression levels
were observed in strain Rosetta/C43(DE3), which was employed in all
subsequent work. Constructs lacking the complete S0-containing 100–121
segment was expressed poorly. The 100–243 fragment, which terminates
at the end of S4, was expressed better (∼4 mg of Q1-VSD/L of
M9 culture) than the 100–261 fragment, the latter of which
includes the S4–S5 linker. Higher expression levels were observed
for the N-terminally tagged protein than for the C-terminally tagged
construct. The 100–243 domain was selected for structural characterization
and is the protein hereafter in this paper termed Q1-VSD. Q1-VSD was
expressed primarily in inclusion bodies, with &lt;10% in E.
coli membranes.

Q1-VSD could be extracted from inclusion
bodies using Empigen, SDS–urea, DHPC, or DPC; however, only
DPC extraction produced high yields and led to NMR samples exhibiting
high-quality spectra following transfer of the samples into LPPG micelles
(see below). Extraction of Q1-VSD by other detergents and/or denaturants
resulted in either poor extraction efficiency or low-quality NMR spectra
(even following transfer into LPPG micelles). One possible explanation
is that harsh detergents like Empigen and SDS result in a denatured
state of Q1-VSD from which refolding into a nativelike structure upon
transfer back into a mild detergent is kinetically forbidden. This
phenomenon has been encountered for other membrane proteins such as
G protein-coupled receptors. On the other
hand, DPC, considered to be moderate on the scale of detergent mildness
and harshness, was efficient at solubilizing Q1-VSD from either plasma
membranes or inclusion bodies and, following the transfer of the protein
into LPPG micelles, led to samples yielding high-quality NMR spectra
(see the following sections). Purified Q1-VSD migrated on SDS–PAGE
as a monomer (&gt;95%) with an apparent molecular weight of ∼15
kDa (Figure C).

Optimization of NMR Conditions
for Q1-VSD
Q1-VSD was
extracted from inclusion bodies using DPC and then purified into DPC,
TDPC, HDPC, LLPC, LMPC, LPPC, or LPPG micelles. Most of these detergents
yielded low-quality Q1-VSD NMR spectra. For example, the 1H–15N TROSY spectrum of Q1-VSD purified from inclusion
bodies into DPC micelles exhibited only 60 of 151 expected peaks (Figure A), with only two of 12 Gly and three of four Trp
side chain peaks being observed. Results were equally disappointing
when NMR samples were prepared in DPC using Q1-VSD from isolated E. coli membranes (Figure B). Low-quality
spectra resulted when Q1-VSD was purified into TDPC, HDPC, LLPC, LMPC,
or LPPC micelles. On the other hand, the 1H–15N TROSY spectrum of Q1-VSD purified into LPPG micelles resulted
in 134 of 151 expected amide peaks, including all expected Gly and
Trp indole side chain peaks. The modest dispersion of resonances over
a relatively narrow 1H chemical shift range (7–9
ppm) is consistent with a folded helical protein (Figure C,D). CD spectra support the notion that Q1-VSD
in LPPG micelles is structured (Figure S1 of the ): the far-UV CD spectrum of Q1-VSD
is consistent with a highly α-helical content, while the nonbaseline
near-UV CD spectrum indicates the presence of tertiary structure.

600 MHz 1H–15N TROSY NMR spectra of
the Q1-VSD that was first extracted using DPC and then purified in
different detergent micelles at pH 6.5 and 45 °C. (A) Inclusion
body-derived Q1-VSD in DPC micelles. (B) Membrane fraction-derived
Q1-VSD in DPC micelles. (C) Inclusion body-derived Q1-VSD in LPPG
micelles. (D) Membrane fraction-derived Q1-VSD in LPPG micelles.

Similar NMR results were obtained
whether the Q1-VSD was purified
into LPPG from isolated membranes or inclusion bodies (Figure C,D). In light of this and because the inclusion
body fraction yielded more Q1-VSD than isolated membranes, all subsequent
work was conducted using inclusion body-derived protein. It is interesting
to note that the VSD of the hERG potassium channel has also been expressed
in E. coli and subjected to NMR sample optimization,
where lyso-myristoylphosphatidylglycerol (LMPG) micelles were found
to yield the optimal NMR spectra. However,
the quality of the best reported NMR spectrum of the hERG VSD (Figure
3C in ref ()) is
not nearly as high as for Q1-VSD (see especially Figure ) in LPPG micelles, a fact that limited the number of backbone
resonance assignments that could be made for the hERG VSD to 50%.

(A) Assigned
900 MHz 1H–15N TROSY
spectrum of the Q1-VSD in LPPG micelles. Main chain amide peaks have
been assigned for 140 sites (of 151 non-Pro residues). The four Trp
side chain peaks (Nε) have also been assigned. The
spectrum was recorded at 50 °C on a 900 MHz spectrometer in 50
mM MES buffer (pH 5.5) containing 10% LPPG, 10% D2O, 2
mM TCEP, and 0.5 mM EDTA. The Gly residues from the N-terminal His
tag are marked as G2 and G9; the His residues on the tag and the folded-in
Arg side chain peaks are also marked. (B) Expanded view of the congested
area within the dashed square of panel A.

Backbone NMR Resonance Assignments and Secondary Structure of
Q1-VSD
NMR resonances were assigned using standard TROSY-based
3D triple-resonance and NOESY-TROSY amide proton–amide proton
experiments, in combination with residue-specific
labeling and site-directed mutagenesis (see Figure ); 89% of backbone assignments were completed for Q1-VSD (Figure ). Examples of the NMR data used to complete these
assignments are shown in Figures S2–S4 of the . Backbone H(N), N, CO, Cα, and Cβ peak assignments have been deposited in
the BioMagResBank (http://www.bmrb.wisc.edu) as accession
number 19708.

Secondary structure was calculated by TALOS+ using
backbone amide HN, 15N, 13CO, 13Cα, and 13Cβ chemical shifts. Nearly identical results were obtained using
TALOS-N. The TALOS+-determined secondary
structure of Q1-VSD in LPPG micelles (Figure ) is dominated by α-helices (Figure A), consistent with its far-UV CD spectrum (Figure S1 of the ). Significantly, the dihedral
angles calculated with TALOS+ using the
NMR chemical shift data indicate that S4 of Q1-VSD in LPPG is α-helical
with no 310-helical content.,

Backbone amide
hydrogen–deuterium exchange data for Q1-VSD
in LPPG micelles. Int/Into is the ratio between an observed
backbone amide peak intensity in a spectrum that was acquired starting
2 h after mixing the Q1-VSD with excess D2O and the corresponding
peak intensity in a matched but nonexchanged reference sample. The
spectra on which these data are based are 900 MHz 1H–15N TROSY spectra that were recorded at 50 °C and pH 5.5.
Sites showing negative intensity ratios are those for which it was
not possible to make measurements because of peak absence or overlap.

Backbone Amide H–D
Exchange of Q1-VSD
D2O incubation of Q1-VSD in
LPPG micelles for 2 h followed by
acquisition of a 1H–15N TROSY spectrum
provided site-specific quantification of the degree of replacement
of backbone amide protons with deuterium. These measurements (Figure ) reveal that the transmembrane sections of helices
S1–S3 exchange slowly, on the time scale of a couple of hours.
On the other hand, S0, the water-exposed C-terminal end of S1, and
the water-exposed end of S2 were seen to be rapidly exchanged, indicative
of exposure to water. Interestingly, with the exception of one focal
point centered at L236, most of the critical S4 segment underwent
extensive H–D exchange. This is despite the high helicity (Figure ) and rigidity (Figure )
of this segment, except at its frayed C-terminus.

Secondary structure of
Q1-VSD and supporting NMR chemical shift
data. (A) Results of TALOS+ analysis of the backbone chemical shifts,
which identify the helical secondary structure elements within the
Q1-VSD. Negative bars in panel A indicate that reliable chemical shift
data are unavailable for that site, such that a TALOS+ determination
of helical probability cannot be calculated. The sequence of Q1-VSD
is shown above the TALOS+ output. The locations of the α-helical
segments as determined by the TALOS+ results are indicated by the
bars above the amino acid sequence. The TM segments are colored gray
and the other helical segments (some of which are extramembrane extensions
of TM helices) cyan. (B and C) Deviations of the observed chemical
shift values for backbone 13Cα and 13CO resonances from corresponding random coil chemical shift
values. Results of chemical shift index analysis of the data in panels B and C is generally consistent with
the results of TALOS+ analysis.

800 MHz 15N NMR relaxation measurements reveal the dynamic
properties of 0.5 mM VSD in 10% LPPG micelles at pH 5.5 and 50 °C. R1 is the longitudinal relaxation rate. R2 is the transverse relaxation rate. 15N–{1H} NOE is the steady-state heteronuclear nuclear
Overhauser effect (hetNOE). The displayed error bars illustrate the
uncertainties associated with the fits of the raw relaxation data
and an additional 20% of that uncertainty to account for other sources
of error. Sites for which no values are reported represent residues
for which assignments were not available or for which extensive resonance
overlap hindered the extraction of reliable parameters. The dashed
red line in the third panel indicates the position of a hetNOE of
0.7. The black line in the bottom panel indicates the position of
the average R1R2 value, while the dashed red line indicates the R1R2 = 25 s–2 point. Residues displaying R1R2 values of &gt;25 s–2 and
hetNOE
values of &lt;0.7 are likely subject to intermediate exchange processes
occurring on the microsecond to millisecond time scale.

Backbone Dynamics of the Isolated Q1-VSD in LPPG Micelles
NMR 15N relaxation and 15N–{1H} hetNOE measurements were collected to assess Q1-VSD flexibility
in the picosecond to nanosecond time scale range (Figure ). As expected, the transmembrane helices exhibit
generally high R2/R1 and hetNOE values. Reduced values of hetNOE and R2/R1 are seen at the N-terminus
and (especially) C-terminus, and for the segments connecting S0 to
S1, S1 to S2, S2 to S3, and S3 to S4.

After residues exhibiting
hetNOE values of &lt;0.7 had been excluded (dashed line in the third
panel of Figure ), the average R1R2 was calculated to be 16.5
s–2 (solid line in the bottom panel of Figure ).R1R2 analysis has the advantage
over R2/R1 of significantly attenuating the effect of motional anisotropy.
This approach identified four residues, T155, G168, V185, and V206,
with R1R2 values
significantly higher than the mean R1R2 value, potentially indicating intermediate
exchange broadening as a result of microsecond to millisecond local
backbone motions. Such intermediate time scale exchange may also explain
why residues close to T155, G168, and V206 have broadened or missing
peaks. This is particularly interesting for V206, which is located
in S3 at a site homologous to a Val site in KvAP associated with a
short break in S3 seen in several of the available structures of this
microbial VSD (see Figure ).

Sequence alignments and
secondary structures of Q1-VSD and of KV and NaV channels for which structures have been
experimentally determined. Note that the MlotiK1 channel is not actually
voltage-gated but does have a VSD-like domain. For Q1-VSD, the results
of this work are presented and also the secondary structure observed
in a composite homology/Rosetta model developed using previously published
methods using the KV1.2/2.1
chimera crystal structure as a template. Protein Data Bank entries
and references for the secondary structures presented in this figure
are as follows: KV1.2/2.1 chimera (2R9R); KVAP, VSD-only, X-ray (1ORS); KVAP, mixed micelles, X-ray (2A0L); KVAP, micelles, X-ray (1ORQ); KVAP DPC, LDAO micelles, NMR; KVAP, D7PC micelles, NMR (2KYH); NaVRh (4DXW); NaVAb (3RYV); and MlotiK1 (3BEH). The depicted sequence
alignment was generated manually, making heavy use of the available
3D structures as the basis for choosing between alternative alignment
modes. A global multiple-sequence alignment for VSDs was recently
generated using a sophisticated computational approach, as reported
elsewhere, and differs in many details
from that presented here.

Discussion
Comparison of Q1-VSD Secondary Structure
to Other Experimental
VSD Structures
Shown in Figure  is
the alignment of the Q1-VSD sequence with the S0–S4 sequences
of VSDs from potassium and sodium channels with experimentally determined
structures. Also included in this figure are the locations of the
α- and 310-helical segments observed in the various
experimental structures. We have also included the secondary structure
from a hybrid homology/Rosetta model for Q1-VSD that was developed
in this lab using the KV1.2/2.1 chimera structure as a template. All of these VSD were structurally
characterized in the absence of a transmembrane voltage potential
and, with the exception of the MlotiK1 channel, are believed to populate
a conformation that most closely resembles that of the activated conformational
state.− The MlotiK1 channel is not actually voltage-gated but has a VSD-like
domain with a conformation very different
from that observed for activated state VSDs.

It can be seen
that Q1-VSD, with four transmembrane helices, shares the same general
topology as the other VSDs (Figures A and ). Q1-VSD also shares a S0 helix that is observed
in the KV1.2/2.1 chimera, MlotiK1, the NaV channel,
and two of the five KVAP channel structures. The high degree
of variability seen in the length of S0 from channel to channel and
structure to structure most likely reflects the modest stability of
this helix. Its exact beginning and end, indeed, whether it is seen
at all, is dependent on exact experimental conditions. This points
to a more general observation that can be made for all of the VSD
structures represented in Figure . While each
of these structures has been enormously revealing, many of the details,
such as the exact beginnings and ends of helices and the locations
of short breaks in helices, should be taken with a grain of salt.
With this in mind, we can nevertheless point out what appear to be
meaningful differences between Q1-VSD and the other VSDs.

S1
appears to be significantly longer for Q1-VSD, beginning earlier
and ending later in the sequence, than for other VSDs (Figures A and ). Both ends of the
Q1-VSD helix likely protrude out farther into the aqueous phase, as
reflected by the higher rate of H–D exchange observed for those
segments relative to the central transmembrane portion of S1 (Figure ). The Q1-VSD S2 appears also be longer than in
the other VSDs, with its extra residues being located at its intracellular
C-terminal end, which extends into the aqueous phase (again, as reflected
by the H–D exchange pattern in Figure ). S3, on the other hand, resembles S3 of NaV in that
it is just slightly shorter than the corresponding segment in the
KV1.2/2.1 chimera and significantly shorter than that in
KVAP. Helix S3 in Q1-VSD does not have any obvious break,
unlike helix S3 in KVAP, which is punctuated differently
from structure to structure by short breaks in the helices of this
segment.

Segment S4 of Q1-VSD exhibits some fraying of its helix
near its
C-terminus. This is not seen for any of the other VSDs represented
in Figure  and is almost certainly due to
the fact that these other VSDs were not truncated at the end of S4
(as was the case for Q1-VSD) but continued at least partway into the
S4–S5 linker. Except for its frayed C-terminus, both the NMR
chemical shifts and the relaxation data for Q1-VSD indicate its S4
segment is a stable α-helix. It is interesting, therefore, that
this helix was found to undergo rather rapid H–D exchange along
its full length, except at Q235 and I236. A similar observation does
not seem to have been made for KVAP S4 in either of the
two fine NMR studies of this domain., We hypothesize
that a combination of several phenomena may explain the generally
rapid H–D exchange rate for the Q1-VSD S4 segment. First, some
degree of conformational heterogeneity may be critical to the voltage-transducer
function of S4. It is interesting to note that while S4 in the Q1-VSD
is α-helical, the corresponding segment in the KV1.2/2.1 chimera crystallized as a 310-helix. The MlotiK1
and NaV channels also have considerable 310-helical
content. It seems very possible that S4 segments may in some cases
be able to populate both 310- and α-helical conformations, depending on exact conditions and, most likely, depending on the
state of VSD activation (or transition between states). This suggests
that the energy barrier to backbone conformational switching of this
segment is low. A second, nonexclusive possibility is that the location
of S4 in LPPG micelles is closer to the micelle surface (or edge)
than for S1–S3, where it would be exposed to higher D2O concentrations. This is reasonable in light of the higher polarity
of S4 relative to the polarity of the other TM segments. Finally,
it is believed that the membrane is thinned in the vicinity of the
S4 transmembrane segment, such that water can permeate into what would
normally be the plane of the membrane to hydrate the multiply charged
residues of this segment,− an effect that may also apply to micellar conditions and that would
also be expected to contribute to enhanced H–D exchange rates.

As summarized above, there are significant differences in the secondary
structure observed for Q1-VSD in LPPG micelles and the other potassium
channel VSDs for which structures have been determined. For all other
VSDs (except for the pseudo-VSD in the MlotiK1 channel), it is thought
that the structures reflect the activated-state conformation. The
NMR studies of this work were conducted at 0 V. Because only a single
set of resonances were observed, Q1-VSD either populates only a single
conformational state in LPPG micelles or is in rapid exchange (on
the NMR time scale) between activated and resting states. For the
intact channel, the open-state probability at 0 V favors the open
channel by ∼4:1 relative to the resting state., This suggests the activated state of the VSD may be favored under
the 0 V conditions of our NMR experiments, as might also be predicted
on the basis of the fact that all available high-resolution VSD structures
(all determined at 0 V) are thought to represent activated conformations.
However, it should be noted that for the KCNQ1 tetramer there is an
active debate about whether the transition of all, some, or any of
the four VSDs to the activated state is needed for channel opening.− Thus, we cannot infer the exact inactive-state versus active-state
equilibrium constant for the VSD at 0 V (even assuming that excision
of the VSD from the rest of the channel does not alter this equilibrium).
In any case, it appears likely that the observed population-weighted
average spectrum reflects primarily the intrinsic spectrum of the
activated state, which would mean that the differences in secondary
structure seen for Q1-VSD in this work as compared to the other VSDs
further extend the previously documented conformational diversity
seen among activated-state VSDs. It is possible that the differences
in secondary structure observed for the KCNQ1 VSD are coupled to other
known differences between it and the VSD of other channels. The S4
segment of KCNQ1 bears a lower net positive charge than S4 for any
other eukaryotic voltage-gated ion channel., Moreover, KCNQ1 appears to always function under physiological conditions
in concert with modulation by members of the KCNE family of single-span
membrane proteins., It is now well-established that
KCNE family members alter the electophysiological properties of the
KCNQ1 channel in part through direct interaction with its VSD.,,,− The degree to which unique structural features of the Q1-VSD reflect
adaptations that allow optimal interactions with KCNE family members
will be an interesting topic for future study.

Conclusions
These studies of the structure of the human Q1-VSD represent a
still-rare application of NMR methods to a mammalian multispan helical
membrane protein. This work confirms the structural modularity of
the voltage-sensor domain of KV channels and establishes
an overall degree of similarity in structural topology between Q1-VSD
and the VSD from other channels. However, significant differences
are also observed in the sequential locations of the helices in Q1-VSD
relative to the other VSDs characterized to date. These differences
likely reflect both conformational diversity among members of the
VSD superfamily and to some degree the fact that VSDs are intrinsically
multiconformational. Structural plasticity in the face of the non-native
environment of detergent micelles also cannot be ruled out as having
an influence on some details of the observed secondary structure.
The results of this work and of previous structural studies (as summarized
in Figure ) tend to emphasize structural variation
among VSD domains from different channels. This is in juxtaposition
to an elegant recent computational study that highlights important
structural features that may be shared by all VSDs. Establishing which VSD traits are shared versus those that
reflect more channel-specific adaptations is likely to be a major
future area of study. In any case, as a first experimental probe of
the structure of the KCNQ1 channel, the results of this study should
prove useful both as an experimental platform for more advanced studies
and as a source of structural hypotheses to guide experiments probing
structure–function relationships of KCNQ1 in the future.

Supporting Information Available
Supporting Figures S1–S4.
This material is available free of charge via the Internet at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bi500102w_si_001.pdf

Author Contributions
J.-H.K. and
B.M.K. contributed equally to this work.

The authors
declare no competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
We thank Arina Hadziselimovic for help
with preparative molecular
biology, Prof. Markus Voehler for technical assistance with NMR experiments,
and Prof. Alfred George for useful discussion and encouragement.

