Substantial
progress has been made recently in assessing the role of miRNAs
in the mammalian visual system. Loss of DICER1 (and hence most mature
miRNAs) in the developing mouse neuroretina led to aberrant differentiation
of neuroretinal cell types or apoptosis of retinal progenitors., More recently, it was demonstrated that a loss of activity of the
photoreceptor-enriched miR-183 cluster led to enhanced sensitivity
to light damage- or age-induced retinal degeneration, suggesting a
role for this cluster in promoting photoreceptor cell survival during
cellular stress., Significant retinal degeneration
was also reported in mature rod
photoreceptor-specific Dicer1 conditional knockout
mice, indicating that additional miRNAs are also important for the
survival of rods. In addition, changes
in miRNA expression have been demonstrated
in models of experimental autoimmune uveoretinitis, diabetic retinopathy,
retinitis pigmentosa, and retinoblastoma, suggesting a link between
miRNAs and retinal degenerative diseases.,,

Identification of physiologically
relevant direct targets of miRNAs
is of paramount importance to understanding their functional significance.
Until recently, the use of target prediction algorithms followed by
validation of direct miRNA targeting of selected 3′-UTRs in
a cell culture transfection assay was the primary way to establish
miRNA target genes. However, this approach has significant limitations.
Target prediction algorithms exhibit a high rate of false positives
and ignore several types of physiologically relevant targets. Factors
other than seed region complementarity (i.e., expression
of other miRNAs, differential expression of miRNA-induced silencing
complex components, presence of other mRNA-binding factors, target
mRNAs, target site-containing noncoding RNAs, etc.) can also regulate
miRNA–target interactions. Therefore,
it is vital to biochemically identify miRNA
targets directly in a tissue of interest.

Combining the newly
developed technologies of next-generation DNA
sequencing (NGS) and cross-linking immunoprecipitation (CLIP) now
makes it possible to systematically
identify transcripts directly targeted by miRNAs. This technique,
known as Argonaute high-throughput sequencing of RNAs isolated by
crosslinking immunoprecipitation (HITS-CLIP), provides a “snapshot”
of miRNA–target interactions in living cells from a given tissue. Argonaute family proteins directly interact with
miRNAs
to form the core of the miRNA-induced silencing complex that effects
miRNA-mediated repression of gene expression. Argonaute family proteins
can be cross-linked both to bound miRNAs and to the target mRNAs with
which they interact in vivo, allowing high-stringency
co-immunoprecipitation
of target transcripts and their
identification by NGS technology. As RNAs associate with Argonaute
proteins postlysis,
cross-linking is critical for detecting only invivo-relevant interactions. This
approach constitutes a definitive biochemical method
for studying miRNA–target interactions directly in a tissue
of interest. However, no retinal miRNA–target interactions
have yet been biochemically validated.

Here, we employed Argonaute
HITS-CLIP to identify miRNA targets
in the bovine retina, an animal model used extensively in vision research.
Through an arrangement with a local slaughterhouse, we were able to
isolate retinas and perform UV-induced cross-linking within 1 h of
the death of an animal, minimizing the impact of post-mortem
changes in gene expression on the identified miRNA target genes. The
tissue was lysed, subjected to limited RNase digestion, and immunoprecipitated
with an antibody specific to Argonaute
family proteins. Cross-linked protein–RNA
complexes were then radiolabeled by ligation
of a 32P-labeled RNA linker oligonucleotide to the 3′
end of the RNA. These
protein RNA complexes were resolved by electrophoresis and subjected
to autoradiography (Figure a). Autoradiograms
revealed a single, Argonaute-specific antibody-dependent band slightly
larger than the size of bovine Argonaute family proteins (97–99
kDa), with a smear of higher-molecular weight (MW) complexes above
it. This region of the membrane was excised and digested with protease;
co-immunoprecipitated
RNAs were eluted, and another RNA linker oligonucleotide was ligated
to the 5′ end. cDNA was generated and amplified by polymerase
chain reaction (PCR), revealing a major band corresponding to the
length of the 3′
and 5′ linkers (41 nucleotides) plus the size of ∼22-nucleotide
miRNAs (Figure b,c). Sequencing of cDNAs derived
from this band revealed mainly miRNAs (not shown). In addition to
this band, a smear of higher-MW complexes appeared at later cycle
numbers, corresponding to fragments of co-immunoprecipitated mRNAs.
Libraries were prepared
for Illumina-based sequencing of these higher-MW cDNAs according to
Chi et al. In parallel, libraries were
prepared for NGS-based transcriptome
analysis from the same bovine retina tissue samples. Libraries for
transcriptome analysis and HITS-CLIP were prepared from three biological
replicates of bovine retinal tissue. Enrichment analysis was performed,
comparing the HITS-CLIP reads to the transcriptome reads using model-based
analysis of ChIPseq (MACS) software. Enrichment
analysis ensures that analysis of Argonaute-interacting
RNAs is not biased by nonspecific interactions of Argonaute family
proteins with the most abundant
cellular RNAs. Peaks with a P value for enrichment
of ≤1 × 10–20 present in all three biological
replicates were considered
high-confidence miRNA target sites. Panels d and e of Figure  show examples of how enrichment analysis along
with the requirement for reproducibility in binding sites across three
biological replicates selected high-confidence miRNA target sites.

Bovine
retina HITS-CLIP library production and analysis. (a) Autoradiograms
of labeled protein–RNA complexes generated by CLIP using either
normal IgG or the Argonaute-specific 2A8 mouse monoclonal antibody.
(b and c) PCR amplification of cDNA derived from Argonaute CLIP on
bovine retina. (d and e) Bovine retina Argonaute HITS-CLIP and transcriptome
sequencing results for the miRNA target genes Ppp2ca and Rgs9bp were mapped onto the UCSC genome browser.
High-stringency enrichment analysis requiring high-confidence peaks
in all three biological replicates identified a single high-confidence
miRNA target site in each transcript.

We identified 348 high-confidence miRNA target sites in the
bovine
retina that mapped to 261 genes (Table S1 of the ). With more than 9600 genes expressed
in the bovine retina at one read per kilobase of transcript per 1
million mapped reads (RPKM) or higher, this represents a precise high-confidence
list. It should be noted, however, that as miRNAs have been implicated
in responding to cellular stress, as well as conferring robustness
to gene networks by buffering gene expression against potentially
deleterious fluctuations, many miRNA–target mRNA interactions
are likely to be transient in nature., Therefore,
our list of retinal miRNA target genes is meant to represent a snapshot
of retinal miRNA gene regulation and not a complete list of retinal
miRNA-targeted genes.

Retinal miRNA targets
identified by Argonaute HITS-CLIP. (a) Pie
chart showing the localization of identified miRNA target sites within
retinal mRNAs. (b) A MEME-based, nonbiased search for 6–8mer
sequence motifs enriched in retinal miRNA target sites identified
seed region matches to abundant retinal miRNAs. (c) 293T cell culture-based
luciferase assays show the effect of overexpressed miR-183 cluster
miRNAs on expression of firefly luciferase reporter constructs containing
identified miRNA target sites exhibiting perfect seed region complementarity
to miR-183 cluster miRNAs. Constructs containing the same target gene
fragment with the miR-183 cluster seed region match(es) mutated were
also tested. Data represent means ± the standard deviation based
on three independent experiments.

The localization of miRNA targets is consistent with the
biology
of miRNA gene regulation with the bulk of the target sites (56%) located
within the mRNA 3′-UTR and a smaller fraction (20%) residing
within the coding sequence (Figure a). Several
additional high-confidence miRNA target sites were localized to long
noncoding
RNAs (lncRNAs), suggesting roles for miRNAs in the regulation of
lncRNAs or a function for lncRNAs as miRNA sponges within the retina. MEME-based nonbiased analysis of 6–8mer
sequence motifs enriched within the identified target sites identified
perfect seed region complementarity to miR-124 family miRNAs and miR-183
cluster miRNAs as the second and
third most statistically significantly
enriched motifs, respectively (Figure b).
Intriguingly, the most significantly enriched motif also matched the
abundant miR-183 cluster miRNAs if one allows for one or two G-U wobble
base pairs, suggesting that seed region G-U wobble base pairing could
be an important component of miRNA target recognition in the retina.

We used a 293T cell-based dual luciferase assay to validate repression
by miR-183 cluster miRNAs of identified target sites bearing seed
region matches. The ∼1 kb fragments surrounding the identified
target sites were cloned into the 3′-UTR of the firefly luciferase
gene in the pmiRGLO vector (Promega, Madison, WI). Eight of 10 constructs
tested showed some level of repression upon cotransfection of plasmids
driving overexpression of miR-183 cluster miRNAs, and
this repression was relieved by deletion of three nucleotides in the
center of the miRNA seed region complementary sequence (Figure C). Consistent with the notion that miRNAs “fine-tune”
gene expression, repression was generally modest. miRs-96, -182,
and -183 produced variable levels of repression upon being cotransfected
with reporter vectors. While some overlap in miRNA target genes
is expected given the seed region similarity among miR-183 cluster
miRNAs, this result suggests that these miRNAs repress different sets
of target genes. Taken together, these results provide validation
for the identified high-confidence mammalian retinal miRNA target
sites.

Mammalian retinal miRNA target genes conduct diverse
functions,
with genes involved in gene regulation, metabolism, signal transduction,
and transport being the most abundant (Table S1 of the ). Several recent reports
have implicated rod and cone photoreceptors as cell types within the
retina where miRNA gene regulation is particularly critical to survival
and function.−,, Consistent with this notion, 102 of 261 (39%) of the identified
miRNA
target genes were statistically significantly downregulated in rhodopsin
knockout mice, suggesting enrichment in rod and cone photoreceptors
(data are available in the GEO database). More compelling is the finding
that 28 of 261 (11%) of the high-confidence retinal miRNA target genes
were linked with retinal degenerative disorders in humans (Table S1
of the ), suggesting
a role for retinal miRNAs in the pathology of retinal degenerative
diseases.

A wealth of emerging evidence links miRNA gene regulation
to retinal
degeneration and blinding diseases, making miRNAs potentially powerful
new therapeutic targets for protecting or restoring vision. Both the
isolation and accessibility of the visual system compartment make
it ideally suited for gene therapy approaches. As such, miRNA-based
gene therapy approaches to preventing or ameliorating retinal degeneration
is an attractive option. Clearly, a much more detailed understanding
of the physiological impact and molecular mechanism of action of retinal
miRNAs is required to pursue therapeutic approaches. This systematic,
nonbiased
analysis of mammalian retinal miRNA target genes represents an initial
step in this process.

Supporting Information Available
Supporting Methods
and Table S1. This material is available free of charge via the Internet
at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bi500966b_si_001.pdf

bi500966b_si_002.xlsx

This
work was supported by funding from
the National Eye Institute, National Institutes of Health Grant R01EY022326,
and the Arnold and Mabel Beckman Foundation. K.P. is the John H. Hord
Professor of Pharmacology.

The authors
declare no competing financial interests.

Acknowledgments
We thank Zissimos Mourelatos
(University of Pennsylvania,
Philadelphia, PA) for antibodies and Leslie T. Webster, Jr. (Case
Western Reserve University), for critical comments about the manuscript.

