The free
energy stored in the
form of negative DNA supercoils is essential
for many genomic DNA transactions., Topological
strain and the associated DNA strand separation promote
the initiation of DNA replication− and RNA transcription− and facilitate homologous recombination. In addition, because the free energy trapped within
an entire DNA superhelical domain must be partitioned between twist
and writhe, local unwinding events caused by protein binding or DNA
strand breaks can be rapidly propagated over large distances within
the domain by the associated changes in writhe. Such local events
that bring about changes in the three-dimensional topology of DNA
can promote interactions between bound proteins that would otherwise
be separated by large distances in the linear DNA sequence, and they
could also be used as a signaling event for DNA damage., The essential processes described above occur in all eukaryotic
cells
and rely on the maintenance of a steady-state level of DNA supercoiling
regulated in part by type I DNA topoisomerase enzymes., These catalysts serve to remove the excess supercoils generated
during
the cellular processes of DNA replication and transcription and allow
the steady-state superhelical density to be optimally maintained.

Given the global importance of negative
supercoiling, it is of
interest to understand if eukaryotic type IB topoisomerases sense
features of DNA superhelical topology. Such a mechanism could target
these enzymes to highly supercoiled DNA domains and also preclude
these abundant catalysts from completely unwinding genomic DNA. Type
IB topoisomerases bind nonspecifically to DNA and form a C clamp structure
that allows them to interact with the phosphate backbone of both strands
of the DNA duplex, but these enzymes cause little overall distortion
of the linear duplex structure.,, Structural and mechanistic studies have not established whether
type
IB topoisomerases recognize superhelical nodes, bind more tightly to destabilized negatively supercoiled
duplex structures, or detect other subtle
features of supercoiled DNA in
preference to relaxed DNA.

Although biased affinity for DNA
of high superhelical density would
be an attractive mechanism for targeting topoisomerases to where they
are needed in the genome, it is not the only possible specificity
mechanism. An attractive alternative would be for the enzyme to take
advantage of the intrinsic structural or dynamic properties of supercoiled
DNA after it has formed a covalent phosphotyrosyl linkage. Because the lifetime of the covalent intermediate
and
the swivel rate of the mobile portion of the DNA determine the number
of supercoils that are removed each time the enzyme cleaves DNA, this kinetic intermediate is especially well-suited
to regulate supercoil unwinding. In this regard, both ensemble and
single-molecule measurements have established that type IB topoisomerases
remove multiple supercoils each time a DNA strand is cleaved., Moreover, the number of supercoils that are removed during the lifetime
of the covalent intermediate is influenced by interactions between
the enzyme and the DNA and the intrinsic superhelical torque.,

The specificity and efficiency for unwinding highly supercoiled
DNA could be obtained in several ways that are related to the unwinding
mechanism. First, the lifetime of the covalent intermediate could
increase with higher superhelical density, resulting in a larger time
window for DNA rotation for supercoils to be unwound. Second, the
efficiency of supercoil unwinding could be enhanced in highly supercoiled
DNA substrates because of faster duplex rotation resulting from the
high superhelical torque that is present. Finally, the enzyme–DNA
interactions that restrict rotation could be weaker in the context
of a highly mobile DNA segment.

The mechanistic questions mentioned
above have been difficult to
address using standard plasmid supercoiled substrates because most
type IB topoisomerases cleave DNA nonspecifically and each cleavage
site has a different lifetime for the covalent intermediate and an
unknown rate of supercoil unwinding. Here we describe the synthesis
and characterization of plasmid minicircles that contain only a single
cleavage site for the sequence specific topoisomerase from variola
virus (vTopo). In addition to allowing the study of sequence specificity
in the context of supercoiled DNA, these substrates can be supercoiled
to different densities, allowing mechanistic investigation of the
effect of supercoiling and torque on enzyme activity. These engineered
minicircles also have features that allow for the insertion of unnatural
nucleotides containing base or backbone substitutions, which will
foster further informative studies on topoisomerase action on supercoiled
DNA.

Materials and Methods
Cloning, Expression, and Purification of
vTopo
Wild-type
vTopo was purified as previously described using phosphocellulose
chromatography. The K271E mutant vTopo
was made in a similar
manner
and purified as described previously.

Minicircle Construction
A 1000 bp sequence containing
the 454 bp minicircle (MCsp) sequence and flanked by NcoI
and XhoI restriction sites was generated by gene synthesis (Integrated
DNA Technologies) in the pIDTSMART-Amp vector (). The 1000 bp sequence was cloned into
the 3000 bp pattD vector using its NcoI and XhoI sites to produce
pMC454 (). The size and sequence
of pMC454 were confirmed via agarose
gel electrophoresis and DNA sequencing (Figure ).

Minicircle (MC) preparation. MCs containing a single vTopo cleavage
site (CCCTT) were prepared by inserting an engineered DNA sequence
between the attP and attB λ integration sites in plasmid pattD
to give pMC454 (the attP and attB sites are in the direct orientation).
The engineered plasmid sequence was devoid of any other pentapyrimidine
sequences that might serve as good cleavage sites but also includes
engineered nicking sites (Nb. BbvC1) and a zinc finger binding motif
for future mechanistic explorations (see the ). For the propagation and recovery of the MC plasmids, pMC454 was
transformed into bacterial strain LZ54, which is lysogenic for λ
bacteriophage, and integrase expression was induced by heat shock.
The addition of norfloxacin results in decatenation of the circular
products of the disintegration reaction, and MCs are purified by preparative
agarose gel electrophoresis. The products of the integration reaction
and purified MCsp (454 bp) are shown. Gel electrophoresis
was performed using a 1% agarose gel with visualization by EtBr staining.

MCsp Expansion
in Bacteria, Disintegration, and Decatenation
pMC454 was
transformed into LZ54 cells via heat shock, conditioning,
and growth at 30 °C as previously described. A 10 mL overnight culture grown in LB/Amp at 30 °C
was used to inoculate 350 mL of modified TB (12 g of tryptone, 48
g of yeast extract, 30 mL of glycerol, 0.1 mL of antifoam 204, 2.32
g of KH2PO4, and 12.54 g of K2HPO4 per liter). Inoculated medium was incubated
at 30 °C while being shaken at 225 rpm to an OD600 of 2.0. The culture was then heat shocked to induce λ-integrase
activity via the addition of 350 mL of modified TB preheated to 60
°C, and cultures were shaken at 42 °C for 30 min before
norfloxacin was added to a final concentration of 30 μg/mL.
The temperature was returned to 30 °C, and cells were shaken
for an additional 1 h.

Cells were
harvested via centrifugation at 6000g for 15 min,
resuspended in Buffer P1 (Qiagen), and frozen at −20
°C. Plasmid DNA was purified using a HiSpeed Maxiprep
Kit (Qiagen) according to the manufacturer’s instructions and
eluted into 1 mL of buffer EB [10 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.5)]. To confirm
that the λ-integrase disintegration reaction and decatenation
were complete, 1 μL of eluent was run on a 1% agarose gel (Figure ).

MCsp Purification
Approximately
125 μg
of eluted DNA was run on a 0.7 or 1% agarose gel to purify the MCs
from all other DNA. The band containing the desired MC product was
excised following staining with EtBr and destaining with distilled
water. MCs were gel extracted in one of two ways. In the first method,
a Qiaquick Gel Extraction Kit (Qiagen) was used. In the second, the
agarose gel slice was incubated for at least 24 h in 3× (w/v)
gel extraction buffer (300 mM NaOAc and 1 mM EDTA)
while being shaken at 37 °C to allow the DNA to diffuse out of
the gel. Isolated MCsp was concentrated with a Millipore
concentrator (molecular weight
cutoff of 10 kDa), buffer exchanged using a polymerase chain reaction
(PCR) purification
kit (Qiagen), and eluted with distilled water. Concentrations were
determined using a Nanodrop spectrophotometer with calculated extinction
coefficients at 260 nm absorbance measurements. The purity was assessed
using agarose gel electrophoreses (1% agarose) (Figure ).

Construction of MCns
A MC where the specific
vTopo site was removed (MCns) was constructed from pMC454
using the following mutagenesis primers (altered nucleotides are shown
in bold) to form pMC454I in a QuikChange mutagenesis kit according
to the manufacturer’s instructions:Mutations
were confirmed by DNA sequencing. MCns was obtained by
bacterial expansion of pMC454I and disintegration
as described above for MCsp. The identity of MCns was confirmed using vTopo supercoil relaxation assays in addition
to agarose gel electrophoresis to determine purity.

Construction
of MCsp2
Plasmid pMC1752 was
designed to generate a larger 1752 bp MC with a single vTopo recognition
site (MCsp2). pMC1752 was constructed using a 661 bp sequence
of DNA constructed via gene synthesis (IDT) (). This sequence contains no specific
vTopo recognition sites and no other pentapyrimidine sequences. The
661 bp sequence was cloned out of the IDT vector and into phosphatase-treated
pMC454 using PstI sites
to create pMC1103. The identity of pMC1103 was confirmed by agarose
gel electrophoresis. pMC1103 contains a NheI site between the two
PstI sites, in the 661 bp sequence segment that was inserted, and
this
site conflicts with subsequent cloning strategies. Therefore, it was
removed by mutagenesis before the second round of cloning to form
pMC1752 from pMC1103 (). In the second round of
cloning, the 661 bp sequence was cut out of the IDT vector using NheI
sites (rather than the PstI sites used above) and ligated into NheI-digested
pMC1103 that had
been pretreated with phosphatase to create pMC1752. The identity of
pMC1752 was confirmed via 1% agarose gel electrophoresis. Following
confirmation, pMC1752 was expanded and MCsp2 was obtained
as stated above for MCsp. The identity of MCsp2 was confirmed using vTopo activity assays in addition to agarose
gel electrophoresis to determine its purity (data not shown).

Ethidium
Bromide Supercoiling of Minicircles
Intercalating
agents such as ethidium bromide (EtBr) can be used to introduce negative
supercoils into circular DNA. This is
accomplished by creating a transient nick in
the DNA backbone in the presence of EtBr, resealing the backbone,
and then removing the EtBr to restore the native twist of the DNA. Purified MCsp and MCns were supercoiled
by reacting each MC (10 nM) with 100 nM vTopo in the presence of 1.5
μg/mL EtBr for 1 h to make MCsp* and MCns*, respectively. Following
incubation, EtBr was removed via two rounds of phenol/chloroform extraction
and the MCs were purified using two PCR purification kits (Qiagen).
After the second column, each MC was eluted with distilled water and
the concentration was determined using a Nanodrop spectrophotometer.
The supercoiling and purity of each MC were ascertained using electrophoresis
through a 5% native polyacrylamide gel (19:1) in the presence of TBM
buffer (90 mM Tris, 90 mM boric acid, and 10 mM MgCl2)
at 4 W for 6 h or 1 W overnight (Figure ,
rightmost lane). Gels were stained with
SYBR Green (Life Technologies) for 30 min and imaged using a Typhoon
imaging system (GE Healthcare).

Minicircle supercoiling using ethidium
bromide intercalation. Following
purification from bacterial cells, MCsp has a superhelical
density of −0.062. The inset shows an atomic force microscopy
(AFM) image of MCsp. The images show the expected topological
features of a supercoiled minicircle with a superhelical density of
approximately −0.06. AFM was performed by deposition of MCs
onto APS-functionalized mica in air as described previously. Lane 2 shows that reaction of MCsp with vTopo collapses all supercoils into a single relaxed band with
lower mobility. Increasing numbers of negative supercoils were introduced
using in vitro reaction mixtures containing vTopo
and increasing concentrations EtBr as indicated. After extraction
of vTopo and the EtBr intercalater, the DNA was isolated and subjected
to polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis in the presence of MgCl2 (shown). The negative linking numbers are indicated.

Superhelical Density and
Linking Number Determinations
To determine the linking number
and superhelical density of MCsp, MCns, and
MCsp*, electrophoresis
was performed using a 6% native polyacrylamide gel (75:1) containing
chloroquine concentrations between 1 and 20 μg/mL. The running
buffer was 1× TBE (90 mM Tris base, 90 mM boric acid, and 2 mM
EDTA) containing the same concentration of chloroquine. Electrophoresis
was performed for 18 h at 3 V/cm (Figure S1 of the ). A similar
process was used to determine the number of
supercoils present in MCsp2 except that 2% agarose gels
containing chloroquine concentrations between 1 and 5 μg/mL
were used. Electrophoresis was performed for 18 h at 4 V/cm in the
cold room using TAE buffer (40 mM Tris base, 20
mM acetic acid, and 1 mM EDTA) containing the same concentration of
chloroquine (Figure S2 of the ). Gels
were stained with SYBR Green and imaged.

Following imaging,
the number of supercoils present in each MC was determined. First, the bands in each gel lane corresponding
to the
topoisomer distribution generated at a given chloroquine concentration
were fit to Gaussian peak shapes using QuantityOne. Bands with identical
intensities with different chloroquine concentrations were aligned
to allow reliable counting of linking number differences. All intensities
were then plotted against the number of negative supercoils they contained
and fit to a Gaussian distribution to determine the mean number of
negative supercoils and standard deviation (Table  and Figures S1 and S2 of the ). Once the average
number of supercoils was determined,
the superhelical density (σ) was calculated using eq .

Superhelical Densities,
Binding Constants,
and Single-Turnover Kinetic Constants for Relaxation of MCs by WT
vTopo
 	no. of supercoils	superhelical
density	klim′ (M–1 s–1)	KD (nM)	
MCsp	–2.7 ± 1.1	–0.062	1.7 × 106	ND	
MCsp*	–5.4 ± 1.7	–0.125	ND	ND	
i–1	–1	–0.023	ND	ND	
MCsp2	–11.2 ± 1.4	–0.066	ND	ND	
pool I1	–7 ± 1	–0.042	ND	ND	
pool I2	–4 ± 1	–0.024	ND	ND	
MCns	–2.7 ± 1.1	–0.062	5.9 × 104	0.38	
MCns*	–5.4 ± 1.7	–0.125	ND	0.54	
MCnsL	0	0	ND	0.70	
Determined by band counting using
chloroquine gel electrophoresis (Figures S1 and S2 of the ). Reported as the mean
± the standard deviation of a Gaussian fit.

Determined using eq .

Determined using eq . The units are nanomolar minicircle.

Not determined.

These values were calculated using
the most prevalent topoisomer in the intermediate pool, which was
then used to calculate the average superhelical density of the pool.

Competition Binding Experiments
A fluorescein (FAM)
fluorescence-based continuous steady-state DNA vTopo cleavage assay
was performed as described by Kwon et al., except that the Dabsyl quencher was replaced with Iowa
Black (IABK, IDT). Briefly, the 18U-FAM/18-IABK ribonucleotide substrate
was annealed in buffer A [20 mM Tris (pH 9) and 200 mM NaCl] overnight
using 110 μM 18U-IABK strand and 100 μM 18U-FAM strand.
The ribonucleotide substrate at 1 μM and various concentrations
of competitor DNAs were combined in 148 μL of buffer A. The
sample was placed into a Quartz microcuvette (0.3 cm, Starna Cells)
at 37 °C, and readings were taken every 15 s for 5–10
min
at an excitation wavelength of 492 nm and an emission wavelength
of 522 nm with an integration time of 2 s in a fluorometer (Fluoromax-3).
Excitation slits were set at 0.5 nm and emission slits at 7 nm. Following
the initial scan, 1.5 μL of 1 μM vTopo was added to the
cuvette to give a final concentration of 10 nM and the increase in
fluorescence intensity was monitored continuously after a 30 s equilibration
period. Readings were taken every 15 s for at least 135 s in triplicate.

Time courses were fit to a linear regression line in Prism (GraphPad).
Corrections were made for the background fluorescence at 522 nm. The
fluorescence change at each time (Ft – F0) was converted to
the percent reaction by normalization to the maximal fluorescence
change (Fmax – F0) corresponding to complete reaction for the substrate
according
to eq  (Figure S3 of the ):The Ki for each
competitor (in base pairs) was calculated using eq  using the known Km of 7920 nM
bp and an [S] of 18000 nM bp:

The competitor DNAs used in these experiments were MCns, linearized MCns (MCnsL), MCns*, a nonspecific 206mer, and a nonspecific 35mer. The construction
of MCns and MCns* is described above. MCnsL was obtained by digestion with PstI-HF, and the nonspecific
206mer was constructed by PCR using pMC454I
as the template (). The nonspecific 35mer was obtained by annealing
the mutagenesis primers that were used for construction of MCns (see above). All constructs were confirmed by gel electrophoresis.
To account for differences in DNA length, we express binding in base
pair molarity and not molar concentration of the DNA molecules.

Single-Turnover Kinetics
MCsp or MCns (10 nM each) was reacted with 20, 40, or 80 nM vTopo in
a single 80 μL reaction mixture in supercoil release buffer
[50 mM Tris (pH 7.5), 100 mM NaCl, 1 mM DTT, 20 μg/mL BSA, 0.01%
Brij-35, and 5 mM MgCl2] by adding 40 μL of 2×
vTopo to 40 μL of 20 nM MC with vigorous mixing. At desired
time points (Figures  and ), 10 μL
was removed from the reaction mixture and added to 10 μL of
2× quench buffer (1% SDS and 20% glycerol in 1× Tris-glycine).
Fifteen microliters of the quenched reaction mixture was loaded onto
a 2% agarose gel run in 1× TAE for 1 h at 100 V. Gels were stained
for 10 min with 0.5 μg/mL EtBr and destained with distilled
water before
being imaged. All experiments were performed in triplicate.

Gel bands were quantified using QuantityOne (Bio-Rad), and areas
were determined by nonlinear least-squares fitting to Gaussian peak
shapes. Because of unequal EtBr staining
between the relaxed and supercoiled bands on agarose gels, the raw
fluorescence of the relaxed product bands was multiplied by a normalization
factor of 1.4 obtained from a standard curve (Figure S4 of the ). Following
normalization, the concentration of product at each time ([P]t) was calculated according to eq , where Fp represents
the normalized fluorescence of the product and Fs the fluorescence of the substrate.The time courses for product formation were
fit to a first-order rate equation (GraphPad Prism). The assumption
of pseudo-first-order kinetics was confirmed using Dynafit 3 (Biokin).

Steady-State Kinetics
Steady-state kinetic experiments
were performed like those described above for single-turnover conditions,
including the quantification of gel images and normalization for the
product species fluorescence. In these experiments, 2.5, 5, or 10
nM MCsp or MCns was reacted with 1 nM
vTopo in a reaction volume of 80 μL. The slope of the initial
linear rates was used to determine vmax.

Supercoil Unwinding Mechanism of MCsp, MCsp*, and MCsp2
All reactions for investigating the
kinetics of supercoil unwinding were performed in supercoil release
buffer by adding 2× vTopo (WT or K271E) to 2× MC to achieve
final concentrations of 5 nM DNA and 5 nM enzyme. Reactions were conducted
for the desired times, and 10 μL samples were removed and quenched
by adding 10 μL of quench buffer. For MCsp and MCsp*, 30 μL of distilled water was added to each quenched
time point followed by two extractions with a phenol/chloroform mixture.
Samples were dried under vacuum and resuspended in 10 μL of
distilled water and 2 μL of 6× loading dye before 6 μL
was loaded onto a 6% native PAGE gel (75:1 acrylamide:bisacrylamide)
in 1× TBE. Gels were run for 18 h in the cold room at 4 V/cm.
For MCsp2, no further manipulation
was necessary. An 8 μL reaction sample was loaded onto a 3%
agarose gel and then run in 1× TAE buffer in the cold room for
24 h at 3 V/cm. All gels were stained for at least 1 h with SYBR Green
and imaged using a Typhoon imaging system.

Bands were quantified
using QuantityOne with the Gaussian peak shape
fitting routine. The measured Gaussian peak areas were used to determine
the molar amounts of each band at each time point in the supercoil
unwinding reaction. Standard curves were used to confirm that there
were no staining differences between different topological forms of
DNA (Figures S5 and S6 of the ). To account for possible inconsistencies in staining across the
gel and loading of the lanes, all bands were quantified as a fraction
of the total DNA loaded in a lane. The molar concentration of each
species was calculated by multiplying the fractional contribution
of an individual band by the total concentration of substrate. If
necessary, the amount of nicked DNA initially present in the substrate
was subtracted from overlapped product bands. All reactions were performed
in duplicate.

Kinetic Simulations of Supercoil Unwinding
The data
were fit by numerical integration methods using Dynafit 3 and employed
the simplest models that preserved the information content of the
data sets. The procedures and controls used for model selection and
the Dynafit input script files can be found in the .

Results
Minicircle
Design, Purification, Supercoiling, and Linking Number
Determination
An efficient technology for minicircle synthesis
has recently been reported that uses in vivo integrase
activity on plasmids having integrase recombination sites in the direct
orientation., Taking advantage of this technology,
we designed a custom minicircle
sequence that contained a single vTopo recognition site (5′-CCCTT-3′)
and no other similar pentapyrimidine sequences (Figure ). The sequence
was incorporated into a plasmid containing the bacteriophage λ-integrase
sites attB and attD in the direct orientation to allow disintegration
of the MC upon transformation of strain LZ54. Upon successful disintegration and decatenation, two
circular DNA molecules consisting of the MC and a larger circle containing
the accessory elements necessary for growth and replication were obtained
(Figure ). The minicircle was successfully
purified,
yielding between 5 and 10 μg of MC per 350 mL of bacterial culture
depending on the size of the MC.

The 454 bp minicircle containing
a single recognition site (MCsp) was visualized using atomic
force microscopy and consisted of topological forms with a mean of
2.7 negative supercoils [standard deviation (SD) = 1.1], corresponding
to an average superhelical density of −0.057, which matches
the expected superhelical density of closed circular
DNA isolated from Escherichia coli cells. The superhelical density of MCsp was
increased
beyond this basal level using reversible strand nicking by vTopo in
the presence of EtBr to make MCsp* (Figure ). Highly supercoiled
MCsp* was optimally generated using 1.5 μg/mL EtBr
and contained an average of 5.4 negative supercoils (SD = 1.7), corresponding
to an average superhelical density of −0.125 (twice that of
MCsp). Although all MCs migrated as single
bands during agarose gel electrophoresis, they consisted of a Gaussian
distribution of topoisomers when electrophoresis was performed using
5% polyacrylamide gels in the presence of 10 mM MgCl2,
or using a 6% native gel in the presence of chloroquine (Figure  and Figure S1 of the ).,, The 454 bp minicircle that lacked the specific site (MCns), as well as its corresponding highly supercoiled form MCns*, followed the same topological distributions as MCsp and
MCsp*.

We also prepared a larger 1752 bp minicircle
with a specific site
(MCsp2). Using agarose gel electrophoresis in the presence
of chloroquine, we determined that MCsp2 isolated from
cells had an average superhelical density of approximately −0.067
and a Gaussian topoisomer distribution with a mean of 11.2 negative
supercoils (SD = 1.4) (Figure S2 of the ).

DNA Topology Does Not Impact vTopo Nonspecific
DNA Binding Affinity
In the absence of unreactive supercoiled
substrates, it has not
been previously possible to study the contributions of DNA topology
to the nonspecific binding affinity of vTopo. Using a continuous fluorescence steady-state kinetic
assay, we measured the inhibition of DNA cleavage by vTopo using various
competitor DNAs that lacked the specific 5′-CCCTT-3′
site. In this assay, the action of vTopo
causes a linear time-dependent increase
in fluorescence intensity as DNA strand cleavage releases a FAM-labeled
7mer strand (Figure A,B). As the concentration
of supercoiled
MCns competitor DNA was increased from 0 to 10 nM, the
cleavage of the reporter substrate was completely inhibited (Figure C). In addition to MCns, this
assay was used to test the inhibitory potentials of MCnsL, MCns* (ρ = −0.125), and shorter lengths
of linear nonspecific DNAs (Figure D). Control
experiments showed that MCns was not relaxed by vTopo over
the course of these competition
binding measurements (Figure S7 of the ).

Competition assay for measuring the binding affinity of
vTopo for
various topological isoforms of MCns and nonspecific linear
DNAs of varying lengths. (A) Schematic of the continuous multiple-turnover
fluorescence assay for measuring vTopo-catalyzed strand cleavage.
The formation of a covalent complex between vTopo and the substrate
releases a highly fluorescent 3′-FAM-labeled 7mer that is otherwise
quenched in the duplex substrate by the IABK quench group on the opposite
strand’s 5′-end. The presence of the uracil ribonucleotide
in the cleavage sequence (CCCTU) results in the release of vTopo by
nucleophilic attack by the 2′-OH group. Thus, multiple steady-state turnovers are possible, and
initial linear rates can be accurately measured. (B) Competition binding
mechanism. Because the Km for the fluorescent
substrate is known, the Ki for each competitive
inhibitor (C) can be determined from the concentration dependence
of the decrease in fractional velocity (vi/v0) using eq . (C) Steady-state initial rates as a function of
MCns concentration. Error bars have been removed for the
sake of clarity but are similar in magnitude to those shown. The concentrations
indicated are based on plasmid molecular weight. (D) Fractional velocity
as a function of nucleic acid inhibitor concentration. To normalize
for the different lengths of DNA used, the concentration is noted
in molar base pairs. Most error bars have been omitted for the sake
of clarity but are similar to those shown.

For supercoiled MCns (ρ = −0.057),
we detected tight binding with a Ki of
167 ± 47 nM bp. Linearized MCnsL and highly supercoiled
MCns* were found to compete similarly, with Ki values of 310 ± 50 and 240 ± 50 nM bp, respectively.
Thus, there is no evidence that DNA topology significantly impacts
nonspecific DNA binding by vTopo. In contrast, the length of the competitor
DNA was very important. While an identical base pair concentration
of a nonspecific 35mer competed poorly, an equivalent concentration
of a nonspecific 206mer had an intermediate competitive capacity (Ki = 4.5 ± 1 μM bp) (Figure D). Because vTopo forms a C-clamp around
duplex DNA, these findings are most likely
attributed to facilitated
diffusion of the enzyme on longer DNAs and the additional possibility
of enhanced capture of the clamp on circular DNA, which does not possess
free ends for escape. Neither of these interaction modes is possible
with short oligomers.

Cleavage activity of vTopo with MCsp. (A) Cleavage
and
supercoil unwinding reactions involve a binding step, an intramolecular
search mechanism, and reversible strand cleavage (klim) prior to the formation of product through supercoil
unwinding (kp). (B) Single-turnover cleavage
and supercoil unwinding. Supercoil unwinding of 10 nM MCsp in the presence of 20 (○), 40 (□), or 80 nM vTopo
(△). The gel image shows the time course for relaxation of
MCsp by 40 nM vTopo (S is the supercoiled substrate and
P the relaxed product). The data were fit to a first-order rate equation
for the appearance of product and confirmed using Dynafit 3. The values
of klim were plotted against enzyme concentration
and gave a linear response with respect to enzyme concentration over
the accessible range (inset). Some error bars have been omitted for
the sake of clarity but are similar to those shown. (C) Steady-state
turnover under initial rate conditions. The relaxation of 5 nM MCsp in the presence of 1 nM vTopo is shown in the gel image.
The rate was independent of DNA concentration in the range from 2.5
to 10 nM, indicating that the enzyme is saturated with DNA and the
maximal steady-state velocity is being measured.

Activity of vTopo with MCns, a MC that does not contain
a consensus cleavage site. (A) Single-turnover cleavage and supercoil
unwinding. The gel image shows the time course for relaxation of 10
nM MCns by 80 nM vTopo (S is the supercoiled substrate
and P the relaxed product). MCns was also reacted with
20 (△), 40 (□), or 80 nM vTopo (○). The data
were fit to a first-order rate equation. The values of klim were plotted vs enzyme concentration and were linear
with respect to enzyme concentration over the accessible range (inset).
Some error bars have been omitted for the sake of clarity but are
similar to those shown. (B) Steady-state turnover under initial rate
conditions. The relaxation of 2.5 nM MCsp in the presence
of 1 nM vTopo is shown in the gel image.

Site Specific Cleavage Kinetics of MCsp
The presence
of multiple vTopo recognition sites on plasmid DNA substrates
has hindered a quantitative understanding of DNA cleavage because
each site has a different rate constant for cleavage and ligation. Using MCsp, we now have the opportunity
to
measure vTopo cleavage of a single, defined specific site in supercoiled
substrates (Figure A). In these measurements,
we found that the overall rate of DNA relaxation was limited by cleavage
or a nonchemical step that preceded cleavage. This step is represented
by the single
irreversible rate constant (klim) that
leads to the covalent E–MCsp complex in Figure A (the assumption of irreversibility is justified
by the rapid rate of supercoil unwinding that follows cleavage, as
described below).

For MCsp with few superhelical
turns, we expected that the substrate would be directly converted
to product because ligation cannot effectively compete with supercoil
unwinding when only a few supercoils are present (i.e., no partially
relaxed topoisomer intermediates were expected). This
expectation was confirmed in single-turnover measurements using excess
enzyme, where substrate was directly relaxed to product in a single-exponential
manner (Figure B). We observed a linear concentration
dependence
of klim for MCsp, corresponding
to a second-order rate constant (klim′)
of 1.7 × 106 M–1 s–1 (Figure B). The largest accessible klim was 0.15 s–1 at 80 nM
vTopo. This value may be compared with the previously
measured concentration-independent klim of 0.3 s–1 for pUC19, a plasmid that contains
17 vTopo specific cleavage sites.

The concentration-dependent rate of cleavage of MCsp was
intriguing given the opposite result obtained with the multiple-site
plasmid. Because the binding measurements indicate exceedingly tight
DNA binding (Figure ), the concentration dependence
for MCsp could not be attributed to a simple increase in
the concentration
of the ES complex as the enzyme concentration was increased; under
the conditions of these experiments, each MC DNA was saturated with
one or more enzyme molecules [En·MCsp (Figure A)]. Accordingly, the concentration
dependence
for MCsp must arise from rate-limiting movement of the
vTopo C clamp along the DNA until its recognition sequence is encountered. As more vTopo molecules are added, the probability
of
finding the cleavage site increases linearly because more enzyme molecules
(n) are scanning each substrate molecule for the
single recognition site [En·MCsp (Figure A)]. For pUC19, the problem
of finding a
site is alleviated because a recognition site is present at an average
density of approximately one in every 150 bp of DNA.

We also measured initial rates for reaction of MCsp under
steady-state conditions (Figure C). Using
three different substrate concentrations
in the range of 2.5–10 nM, we found that the rate constant
was concentration-independent (0.02 s–1), providing
an upper limit estimate for the Km (MCsp) of ≤0.5 nM (Figure C). The
low Km value is consistent with the low KD for
nonspecific DNA binding and supports the contention, described above,
that the concentration dependence of the single-turnover reaction
of MCsp arises from multiple enzyme molecules performing
an intramolecular transfer step.

Cleavage Kinetics of the
Nonspecific Minicircle (MCns)
It is known from
DNA cleavage studies using small duplex
oligomers that the specific 5′-CCCTT-3′ pentapyrimidine
sequence is required for vTopo activity. Using MCns, we sought to determine whether
a specific sequence was equally important for cleavage of a supercoiled
substrate. Although the time-dependent cleavage was much slower for
MCns than for MCsp, it was easily detectable
because rapid supercoil unwinding efficiently traps rare cleavage
events (Figure A). Single-turnover
rates were concentration-dependent as observed for the specific substrate,
but the apparent second-order rate constant (klim′ = 5.9 × 104 M–1 s–1) was reduced by 30-fold (Figure A, inset). As a point of comparison, we note
that this apparent sequence specificity of vTopo is much lower than
that of restriction enzymes (105–106).

Under limiting enzyme steady-state conditions,
we were able to measure an observed rate constant of 3.7 × 10–4 s–1 using 1 nM vTopo and 2.5 nM
MCns, which is ∼50-fold
less than that of MCsp under the same conditions (Figure B). Further steady-state measurements were
not possible because higher concentrations of MCns proved
to be inhibitory with respect to the reaction. This inhibition is
likely due to significant substrate inhibition. Thus, under limiting
enzyme conditions, the apparent specificity of vTopo
increases as the S:vTopo concentration ratio increases.

Supercoil Unwinding
of MCsp, MCsp*, and
MCsp2
To explore whether supercoil unwinding proceeds
through the generation of topoisomer intermediates, we extended the
relaxation experiments to MCs that contained increasing numbers of
supercoils. The expectation was that highly supercoiled substrates
would provide a greater opportunity for detection of intermediates
because the finite probability for strand ligation increases with
the number of unwinding events needed to reach the relaxed product
(Figure A).

Mechanism of supercoil unwinding using
MCsp and MCsp*. (A) The use of small minicircles
with the
potential to
form a limited number of topoisomer intermediates facilitates resolution
and allows use of a simple kinetic model for the partitioning of the
enzyme–minicircle covalent complex (E–MC) between complete
unwinding to form product (P) and formation of intermediates (I).
Intermediates result from kinetic competition between strand ligation
(ks→i) and supercoil unwinding
(ks→p). The competition between
these processes determines the number of supercoils that are released
for each rate-limiting cleavage event. For the sake of brevity, only
selected time points are shown. (B) Supercoil unwinding kinetics of
MCsp that contains 2 ± 1 negative supercoils. The
reaction mixture contained 5 nM MCsp and 5 nM vTopo. (C)
Supercoil unwinding kinetics of highly supercoiled MCsp* that contains an average of 6 ± 2 negative supercoils. The
reaction mixture contained 5 nM MCsp* and 5 nM vTopo. For
both reactions, the time dependencies of the substrate (S), product
(P), and topoisomer intermediate (I) concentrations were fit by numerical
integration with least-squares optimization to the data using Dynafit
3 and employing the model in panel A.

Unlike previous supercoil unwinding studies using
the multiple-site substrate pUC19 with excess enzyme,, our studies were performed with an E:DNA concentration ratio of
∼1
and concentrations of enzyme and DNA that exceeded the estimated KD value by at least 10-fold. Therefore, the
DNA is saturated with enzyme, and the rate-limiting step (klim) reflects an intramolecular event leading
to site specific cleavage. Accordingly, the rate constants for rapid
steps that follow cleavage (unwinding and ligation) are not revealed
in these kinetic measurements. However, the measurements robustly
report on partitioning of the initial substrate pool (s) between complete
unwinding to form product (p) or partial unwinding with ligation to
form topoisomer intermediates (i). Partitioning is quantified by the
ratio ks→p/ks→i (Figure A), which is the
key descriptor reflecting
the average number of supercoils that are unwound before a ligation
event traps a topoisomer intermediate. Because cleavage is rate-limiting,
topoisomer intermediates that accumulate must react in subsequent
cleavage–ligation events that ultimately yield relaxed product
(ki→p). For topoisomer intermediates
with lower superhelical torques, the assumption of irreversible cleavage
followed by rapid unwinding was not appropriate. Accordingly, the
model in Figure A allows for ligation of cleaved
intermediates (klig), which can compete
with the unwinding step (ki→p).
Thus, multiple rounds of cleavage (kcl) and ligation are allowed before a successful unwinding event to
give product. Further explanation of the simplifications and constraints
used in the kinetic analyses is found in the .

The expectation that intermediates would
be detected with more
highly supercoiled MCs was borne out when the relaxation of MCsp* (mean of 5.4 negative supercoils) was compared with that
of MCsp (mean of 2.7 negative supercoils) using high-resolution
polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis
to resolve topoisomers. Consistent with the results using low-resolution
agarose gel electrophoresis described above (Figure ), the unwinding of MCsp did not
generate any observable topoisomer intermediates (Figure B). However, we did resolve a minor substrate
topoisomer (s–1) with one negative supercoil that
relaxed much more slowly
than the more highly supercoiled substrate topoisomers (s–2,–3) (Figure B and Table ). We
attributed the slower relaxation rate of s–1 to
its reduced superhelical torque, which would reduce the
driving force for progressing forward to the relaxed product (ks-1→p)., Our attribution
of this effect to ks-1→p (and not kcl or klig) is supported
by previous observations that cleavage (kcl) and ligation (klig) are similar in
linear and supercoiled substrates. Thus,
topoisomer s–1 disappears more slowly because it
spends more time undergoing
repetitive cycles of cleavage and ligation before a productive unwinding
event occurs. Similarly, MCsp* showed a slowly relaxing
intermediate (i–1) that contained a single negative
supercoil. An intermediate
defined as a distinct topoisomer not present in the initial substrate
pool that accumulates and then proceeds to product over time (Figure C). The simulations of these two data sets
led to the rate constants listed in Table  and discussed further below. Qualitatively, these data demonstrate
that ligation is poorly competitive with supercoil unwinding when
5–6
supercoils are present in the starting substrate topoisomer pool,
but not when 2–3 supercoils are present. Another salient point
is that ligation can
efficiently compete with unwinding under low-superhelical density
conditions.

Kinetic Parameters for Supercoil Unwinding
of MCs by WT and K271E vTopo
 	klim (s–1)	ks→p/ks→i	ki→p/klig	
MCsp	0.029 ± 0.0012	not determined	0.0074 ± 0.0016	
MCsp*	0.014 ± 0.0006	1.2 ± 0.12	0.008 ± 0.00088	
MCsp2	0.019 ± 0.0004	 	 	
 	(0.0023 ± 0.000074)	 	 	
pool I1	 	2.1 ± 0.22	0.0084 ± 0.0013	
 	 	(7.7 ± 1.5)	(0.017 ± 0.0094)	
pool I2	 	3.8 ± 0.26	0.0032 ± 0.00026	
 	 	(15.1 ± 5.1)	(0.013 ± 0.017)	
Determined using numerical simulations
().

Fitted parameters for K271E are
shown in parentheses.

klig was set to 4 and 0.17 s–1 for WT and K271E vTopo,
respectively ().

We extended the investigation
to a larger
minicircle (MCsp2) that contained 1752 bp and an average
of 11.2 negative supercoils (Figure ). With
MCsp2, substrate topoisomers
s–14 to s–9 were overlapped in
a normal 3% agarose gel, but all other
topoisomer species generated during relaxation were resolved. The
situation of overlapped substrate bands required confirmation that
relaxation of the most highly supercoiled substrate topoisomers did
not generate relaxed topoisomers that overlapped with other substrate
topisomers (e.g., s–14 did not relax to form s–9 to s–13). This point was established
using
a chloroquine gel that resolved substrate bands, which were observed
to disappear at a uniform rate into resolved intermediate topoisomers
and not other substrate topoisomers (Figure S8 of the ). Thus,
the entire substrate pool comprised of s–14 to s–9 can be economically treated as a single species in
the kinetic
analysis (Figure A).

Processivity of supercoil
unwinding by wild-type vTopo and the
K271E mutant using highly supercoiled MCsp2. For the sake
of clarity, only selected time points are shown in the gel figures.
(A) Kinetic model for the disappearance of substrate into product
and two intermediate pools (I1 and I2), followed by reversible cleavage
and unwinding of intermediate pools to product. (B) Time course for
unwinding using 5 nM MCsp2 and 5 nM wild-type vTopo. Substrate
(S), product (P), and intermediate bands (i–2 to
i–7) were resolved by gel electrophoresis, visualized
by SYBR Green staining, imaged, and quantified using the Gaussian
curve fitting routine in QuantityOne. A representative plot of the
Gaussian fits for the time point at 120 s is shown at the right. The
time courses for the appearance and disappearance of substrate (green),
products (black), and intermediate pools (blue and red) were fit by
numerical integration and least-squares minimization to a stepwise
supercoil unwinding model shown in panel A and the . (C) Time course for unwinding using
5 nM MCsp2 and 5 nM K271E mutant. All steps in data acquisition
and analysis are identical to those described in panel A.

While supercoil unwinding of MCsp* proceeded
through a single detectable intermediate (Figure C), we now observed five intermediates that
accumulated and then disappeared during relaxation of MCsp2 [i–2 to i–7 (Figure B)]. As shown in the kinetic model in Figure A, these intermediates were divided into two pools
consisting of i–5 to i–7 (pool
I1) and i–2 to i–4 (pool I2).
This simplification was
justified because all of the intermediates within each pool appeared
and disappeared with equal rates, and pool I1 proceeded directly to
product (kI1→p) without generating
detectable amounts of pool I2 intermediates. The maximal level of
pool I1 was lower than that of pool I2, which is attributed to the
different ratios (ks→p/ks→I1 = 3.8 ± 0.26, and ks→p/ks→I2 =
2.1 ± 0.22) for the formation of the pools, as well as the different
partitioning ratios for the formation of product (kI1→p/klig = 0.0084
± 0.0013, and kI2→p/klig = 0.0032 ± 0.00026). The lower partitioning
ratios for pool I2, which has a lower average superhelical density
than pool I1, is consistent with the more efficient capture and ligation
of the rotating DNA segment as superhelical torque is decreased. In
other words, for pool I2, more rounds of cleavage and ligation occur
before a successful unwinding event generates product.

In summary,
pool I2 accumulates to a greater extent than pool I1
for two reasons. First, it takes more time to unwind the initial substrate
supercoils to generate pool I2 intermediates (i.e., ΔLk is greater),
which in turn increases the opportunity for
a successful ligation event. Also, the reduced unwinding torque for
intermediates with superhelical densities contained in pool I2 allows
for more efficient strand ligation. The optimal fitted curves for
wild-type vTopo are shown in Figure B, and
the optimized rate constants are listed in Table .

Supercoil Unwinding by K271E vTopo
Previous studies
indicated that cationic residues on vTopo interact with the negatively
charged DNA backbone of the rotating DNA segment and impact the number
of supercoils that are released per cleavage event.,, A previously characterized vTopo mutant
(K271E) was known to increase
the number of supercoils that were removed per cleavage event and
was a desirable mutant to test using MCsp2. Indeed, relaxation experiments with MCsp2 showed slower cleavage and fewer intermediates with K271E than with
wild-type vTopo (compare panels B and C of Figure ). The numerical
simulations indicated that the probability of completely unwinding
the substrate pool by K271E was increased compared to that with wild-type
vTopo (for K271E, ks→p/ks→I1 = 7.7 ± 1.5 and ks→p/ks→I2 =
15.1 ± 5.1), but unwinding of the two intermediate pools was
similar (for K271E, kI1→p/klig = 0.017 ± 0.0094 and kI2→p/klig = 0.013 ±
0.017). The increased substrate partitioning ratio for K271E compared
to that of WT vTopo suggests potential roles for this interaction.
This mutation could result in less efficient capture of the rotating
DNA segment, an increased lifetime of the covalent phosphotyrosyl
intermediate (lower klig), and/or suboptimal
positioning for strand ligation when high superhelical torque is present.

Discussion
DNA Topology and vTopo Binding
The superhelical density
of DNA could influence the topoisomerase reaction at one or more steps
along a reaction coordinate that involves DNA binding, site recognition,
strand cleavage and religation, and supercoil unwinding. In this regard,
human type IB topoisomerase (hTopo) has been suggested to sense DNA
topology and localize to regions of increased superhelical density
or node regions where double helices cross themselves., Using two nonspecific 454 bp substrates with varying levels of superhelical
density, as well as the corresponding linear sequence, we found no
topological dependence of nonspecific DNA binding to vTopo (Figure  and Table ). Although
previous studies using very high vTopo:DNA ratios detected cooperative
protein interactions that resulted in DNA synapse formation,, such interactions were minimized in our competitive binding studies
because of the very low concentration of free enzyme and the use of
a [DNA]free:[protein]free ratio much greater
than one. Therefore, the dissociation constants reflect single enzyme
binding events.

Binding to superhelical DNA nodes would be facilitated
by the presence of a secondary DNA binding site on vTopo. For hTopo,
such a site was localized to a linker region and solvent-exposed basic
residues in its core subdomain III. Although
the linker element is absent from the vTopo
enzyme structure, its C-terminal catalytic domain contains the same
conserved basic residue motif. In one
study, these residues were mutated on vTopo,
resulting in disruption of plectonomic supercoiling where two duplexes
bind to multiple vTopos and intertwine in a right-handed helix. We do not expect that this weak DNA binding
site is
relevant under the conditions of our experiments for the reasons stated
above. Instead, the weak site likely becomes important during DNA
synapsis, taking advantage of an avidity effect when multiple vTopo
molecules act cooperatively.,

Topological Effects on
DNA Strand Cleavage in Single-Site MCs
Although previous
studies with supercoiled pUC19 provided no evidence
that DNA strand cleavage was enhanced by DNA supercoiling as compared
to the rates observed with small DNA duplexes, we wanted to explore this explicitly using single-site
MCs. Using MCsp with superhelical densities of −0.062
and −0.125 (Table ), we observed a
3-fold decrease
in the cleavage rate for the more supercoiled substrate. Although
it would be tempting to conclude that an increased extent of DNA supercoiling
reduced the cleavage rate, this interpretation is confounded by the
additional observation that the single-turnover cleavage–relaxation
reactions were dependent on enzyme concentration. This concentration
dependence was unexpected because direct DNA binding affinity measurements
established that all vTopo molecules were saturated with MCs (Figure ). Similarly, the steady-state rates were
saturable with low nanomolar concentrations of DNA (Figure C). Thus, the concentration-dependent single-turnover
rates must be attributed to a concentration-dependent intramolecular
rate-limiting step that precedes DNA cleavage. We surmise that in
the case of excess enzyme over DNA, increasing the number of bound
enzyme molecules increases the probability that a vTopo C clamp will
find the cleavage site. Because of this slow intramolecular process,
the DNA strand cleavage step is not directly observed with these MCs.

Rate-limiting intramolecular transfer should result in slower apparent
cleavage rates for larger single-site substrates such as MCsp2 because of the larger amount of nonspecific decoy DNA. Although
MCsp2 does show a cleavage rate that is 50% of that of
MCsp, this is less than their size ratio in base pairs
(MCsp2:MCsp ∼ 4). The lack of a direct
proportionality between rate and size could result from DNA supercoiling,
which serves to compact MCsp2 and reduce the volume that
must be searched by intramolecular “hopping” steps.
An improved understanding of these aspects of the vTopo site recognition
mechanism is beyond the scope of these studies and methods.

Sequence-Dependent
DNA Cleavage Using Supercoiled MCs
Historically, pox virus
type IB topoisomerases have been useful in
elucidating mechanistic aspects of topoisomerase reactions because
of their specificity for cleavage at 5′-C/TCCTT-3′ pentapyrimidine
sequences., The structural basis for their
specificity has in part been suggested
from the observed structural transition that occurs between the noncovalent
and covalent enzyme–DNA complexes. In this transition, α-helix 5 docks in the major
groove upstream of the cleavage site, forming direct interactions
with the DNA bases of the pentapyrimidine sequence. Accordingly, DNA
cleavage studies using short DNA duplexes containing sequences that
diverge from the consensus sequence show markedly reduced rates in
the range 10–5000-fold for single-base changes within the sequence., To construct MCns from the specific substrate MCsp, two base changes were made (CCCTT → CGATT). These
changes would be expected
to decrease the rate of cleavage by ∼105-fold if
the known effects of the corresponding single-base changes were energetically
additive. MCns also contains
four other tetrapyrimidine
sequences (also present in MCsp) that should be cleaved
at least 104-fold slower on the basis of the sequence dependence
of site cleavage with small duplexes. With these considerations, we
anticipated that MCns would be at least 104-fold
less reactive than MCsp.

We were surprised to find
that single-turnover cleavage of MCns occurred with a second-order
rate that was only 1/30th of that of MCsp (Figure A). In part, the reduced specificity with supercoiled
MCs can be
attributed to different rate-limiting steps for cleavage of MCsp and MCns. For MCsp, intramolecular
transfer of the vTopo C clamp to the cleavage site is fully rate-limiting,
while for MCns, the slow step is most certainly cleavage.
However, other factors could also contribute to the apparent reduction
in sequence specificity for supercoiled DNA. Most notably, the dense
concentration of nonspecific cleavage sites allows multiple vTopo
molecules to act nonspecifically on the same substrate. It is also
possible that a subtle structural effect of DNA supercoiling could
enhance nonspecific cleavage relative to sequence specific cleavage.

Superhelical Density (torque) and the Mechanism of Supercoil
Unwinding
Single-molecule DNA extension measurements have
become the premiere method of investigating supercoil unwinding by
type 1B topoisomerases., Despite the unique
insights provided by these approaches, there are
merits to exploring such questions with ensemble methods using defined
substrates such as those employed here. First, the large (∼25
kb) DNA substrates used in the single-molecule methods contain ∼30
sequences that are permutations of the vTopo cleavage recognition
sequence, each of which has a unique cleavage and ligation rate that
can affect the observed unwinding originating from that site. A similar situation applies to ensemble measurements
with random plasmid sequences, but unlike single-molecule methods,
the ensemble average is not sensitive to rare relaxation events that
deviate substantially from the ensemble mean. Second, because the
single-molecule measurements are made under applied force, it is more
difficult to study negatively supercoiled DNA because the DNA tends
to denature. Thus, the most comprehensive single-molecule measurements
have been performed using positively supercoiled DNA with extrapolations
to zero force to mimic the natural condition of supercoiled DNA in
solution. In contrast, the ensemble measurements
presented
here,
and those previously made with pUC19, use negatively supercoiled minicircles,
which could behave differently. Given these considerations, we think
it is unfounded to expect quantitative agreement between these experimental
approaches. Nevertheless, both ensemble and single-molecule methods
have converged on a processive mechanism for supercoil removal that
involves removal of ∼5–19 supercoils during the lifetime
of the covalent complex.,,

The most informative new parameters derived from
our current supercoil relaxation experiments with MCsp2 (1752 bp, 11.2 negative supercoils) are partitioning ratios ks→p/ks→I1,2 and kI1,2→p/klig (Table ). Taken together,
the ks→p/ks→I1 of 3.8 and the ks→p/ks→I2 of 2.1 indicate that once
cleavage occurs there is a net 0.5 probability that a substrate topoisomer
of MCsp2 will unwind all 11 negative supercoils without
forming any intermediate. It is noteworthy that our ability to observe
intermediates is limited to two pools with low average superhelical
densities. This suggests that the increased superhelical torque present
in more highly supercoiled topoisomer intermediates prevents their
efficient trapping by strand ligation. Although the DNA rotation rate
is driven by superhelical torque, which is expected to result in a
decrease in the unwinding rate over the course of relaxation, this
effect would not be directly observable in ensemble measurements because
rotation is always more rapid than the rate of covalent complex formation
and ligation. In contrast, single-molecule experiments can directly
detect unwinding by measuring the time-dependent increase in the level
of DNA extension that results from supercoil relaxation. Nevertheless, ensemble measurements can provide
an estimate
of the average duplex unwinding rate (in rotations per second) using
the ligation rate constant as a clock. The kinetic basis for this
estimate is that intermediate pools cannot be formed any faster than klig = 4 s–1 (i.e., klig ≥ ks→I1,2). Using this upper limit for ks→I1, and the larger product partitioning ratio ks→p/ks→I1 of 3.8,
an upper limit for ks→p of ≤16
s–1 is obtained. Because 11 negative supercoils
were removed in
this time, the average unwinding rate is kuw ≤ (11 rotations)(16 s–1) ≤ 180 rotations
s–1.

In contrast to the high unwinding rate
for highly supercoiled substrate
topoisomers, the low values of kI→p/klig in the range of 0.003–0.0085
for pool I1 and I2 topoisomers indicate that cleavage and religation
occur ∼100–350 times for every unwinding event when
the torque is small. This kinetic
regime amounts to rapid equilibrium cleavage and ligation followed
by slow unwinding. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first
report of slow topoisomer unwinding in a regime of low superhelical
torque and indicates that DNA domains with low superhelical density
may persist longer in the presence of topoisomerases.

Controlled
Rotation Mechanism
vTopo is known to make
interactions with the rotating DNA segment downstream of the cleavage
site, and such interactions have been previously implicated in supercoil
unwinding., Crystal structures show that
residue K271 sits within helix 10 of
vTopo and could contribute to the positioning of the DNA segment downstream
of the cleavage site to facilitate religation. We anticipated that reversing the charge on this amino
acid might decrease the probability for religation, resulting in an
increased ks→p/ks→i ratio. Indeed, we found that the K271E mutation
increased this ratio 2- and 7-fold for pools I1 and I2, respectively,
compared to that of the wild-type enzyme (Figure C). Even though duplex rotation is rapid
with wild-type vTopo, the results with the K271E enzyme indicate that
the enzyme does form interactions with the DNA during relaxation that
serve to reduce the number of supercoils that are unwound per cleavage
event.

Mechanistic Utility of DNA Minicircles
The frequency
of use of DNA minicircles has increased in recent years as more convenient
synthesis and purification schemes have become available., The majority of these uses have been in the area of gene therapy
or for observing the local and long-range dynamics of short circularized
DNA.− In contrast, there has been limited use of minicircles
as substrates for enzymes that interact with specific DNA sites. In this work, we showed how minicircle technology
in
combination with the ability to generate specific DNA sequences by
gene synthesis allowed the creation of engineered supercoiled DNA
substrates for the investigation of specific mechanistic questions.
These engineered MCs have additional features that will allow exploration
of other interesting aspects of topoisomerase action on supercoiled
substrates. These features include (i) the introduction of specific
zinc finger protein binding sites distal to the vTopo site for exploring
the effects of the frictional drag of bound proteins on supercoil
unwinding and (ii) the opportunity to introduce chemically modified
oligonucleotide sequences between engineered Nb.BbvC1 nicking sites
that flank the vTopo cleavage site. These
modified sequences could include phosphorothioate
or methylphosphonate backbone substitutions, or unnatural base substitutions
at any site or multiple sites. Such substrates will expand the range
of structure–function studies that are possible with topoisomerase
enzymes.

Supporting Information Available
Supplemental
sequences, eight supporting figures,
and further explanation of kinetic models, including the corresponding
script files. This material is available free of charge via the Internet
at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bi500571q_si_001.pdf

The authors declare
no competing
financial interest.

Acknowledgments
We thank Helen Jun for
purifying the K271E vTopo mutant, the
Nanoscale Imaging Center at the University of Nebraska Medical Center
for generating the AFM images, Dr. L. Zechiedrich at Baylor University
(Waco, TX) for the pattD plasmid and LZ54 cells, and Dr. Zechiedrich’s
student, D. J. Catanese, for helpful discussions regarding MC integration
and purification.

Abbreviations
vTopovariola topoisomerase

EtBrethidium bromide

ntnucleotides

Lklinking number

MCminicircle.

