Genome-wide and gene-specific
mutations can lead to evolutionary variation, cancer, and neurodegenerative
and neuromuscular disease., The discovery that genetic
expansions of (CTG)·(CAG) repeated DNA sequences are the mutagenic
cause of 14 progressive diseases, including Huntington’s disease
and myotonic dystrophy, stimulated renewed interest in the formation
and repair of slipped-strand DNA structures, the supposed mutagenic
intermediates of repeat tract mutations.− Expansion mutations can
arise during postzygotic cell divisions and continue in patients as they age, coinciding with worsening
symptoms. Patients exhibit intertissue
repeat length differences as great as 5770 repeats, with larger expansions
occurring in affected tissues such as cerebral cortex, muscle, and
heart, indicating high levels of continued expansions coinciding with
disease progression. Understanding the
mechanisms of repeat instability is crucial to arresting or reversing
disease.

All models proposed to
explain repeat expansions involve DNA slippage
at the repeats (Figure S1 of the ; reviewed in refs (−)). The formation
and aberrant repair of slipped-strand DNAs are likely sources of repeat
instability. Slipped-strand DNAs produced by misalignment of the repeats
are thought to be transient mutagenic intermediates formed in mitotic
cells at replication forks or in nonmitotic cells at sites of DNA
damage or recombination (Figure S1 of the ).

Structural features of slipped DNAs can
affect repair outcome.− For example, slip-outs of CAG are repaired by human cell extracts
with greater efficiency than CTG slip-outs, and shorter slip-outs are repaired with greater efficiency than
longer slip-outs. Slipped DNA structure
can determine which proteins are recruited for repair; for example,
short but not long slip-outs require hMutSβ for repair. An overlooked component of all slipped DNAs
is the junction at which the slip-out extrudes from the complementary
paired duplex. Models of slipped mono- and dinucleotide repeats have
been limited to heteroduplexes that contain a repeat sequence in the
absence of its complementary strand [for example, a (CA)4 slip-out without a complementary (TG)n tract].− The structure of complementary three-way slipped
junctions has not been characterized for trinucleotide repeats, and
the influence of junction conformation upon repair outcome is unknown.

Two general forms of slipped junctions can form between complementary
(CTG)n·(CAG)n repeats: those with slipped-out CAG repeats and those with slipped-out
CTG repeats (Figure A). One arm of the three-way
junction is composed of the excess repeats (the slip-out, CAG or CTG),
while the other two arms are comprised of complementary paired repeat
strands. There are several possible conformers for slipped junctions,
differing by the base pairing occurring at the junction (Figure A,B). The three-way junction can contain two, one,
or no unpaired bases in the strand opposite any one of the three arms
(Figure A, nucleotides highlighted in green).
Interconversion between the fully paired J1 conformation and the two-unpaired
nucleotide J2 conformations could theoretically occur with limited
exchanges of base-pairing partners immediately at the junction. Similarly,
any of the J2 conformations may interconvert between each other. It
is unlikely that either the fully paired J1 junction or the two unpaired
J2 junctions could interconvert to the one-unpaired nucleotide conformation,
J3, as this would require breaking all base pairs in the slip-out
and at least a portion of the base pairs in one other arm of the junction.
The J3 junction would be equivalent to a J1 junction with an out-of-register
single-CTG repeat slipped-out opposite the CAG slip-out (Figure S2
of the ). Similarly,
interconversion between the fully paired J4 and the two-unpaired nucleotide
J5 conformations could theoretically occur, as might interconversions
among any of the single unpaired nucleotide J6 forms, but interconversion
between J6 and either J4 or J5 forms is unlikely. It is unknown which
of these possible conformers are present in slipped structures, if
they interconvert, or if they are processed in the same manner.

Slipped DNA
junctions formed by (CTG)·(CAG) repeats. (A and
B) Slipped DNAs are composed of three arms, two made of complementary
repeat strands and the third being the CAG (blue) or CTG (red) repeat
slip-out. Slip-outs assume intrastrand hairpins, and their structural
characterizations have been extensive.− Possible junction conformations include fully paired strands at
the slip-out or those with one or two unpaired bases at the junction,
where the latter can potentially interconvert with the fully paired
form. The angles displayed between the junction arms are not meant
to reflect the actual angles observed in the three-way junctions.
In panel A, unpaired nucleotides are highlighted in green; in panel
B, nucleotides with the potential to be unpaired are shown in green
boxes. (C) Electrophoretic migration of slipped-junction species was
slower than expected. DNAs are a single species on denaturing gels
(Figure S3 of the ).

These slipped-junction conformations provide a
potential biological
situation for unpaired bases at DNA junctions. Unpaired bases may
biophysically alter slipped junctions, as observed for three-way DNA
junctions formed by heterologous sequences,, and could modulate recognition by DNA-metabolizing proteins. While
unpaired nucleotides at RNA junctions have known biological consequences, the biological relevance of unpaired nucleotides
at three-way DNA junctions of trinucleotide repeats is unknown.

Here we determined that models of slipped-DNA junctions can assume
multiple interconverting isoforms that can be differentially recognized
by structure-specific DNA-binding proteins, and we reveal that the
junction conformation can affect DNA repair, determining whether slip-outs
are correctly repaired or lead to expansion mutations.

Experimental Procedures
Structure Formation
Oligonucleotides were ordered from
Sigma-Genosys and gel-purified twice from denaturing (sequencing)
gels (6%) to ensure they were free of n –
1 products. DNAs were uniquely 32P-labeled and structures
formed by alkaline denaturation and/or renaturation as described in
detail. Briefly, 32P-labeled
oligos were dried in a speed vacuum and then denatured in a solution
of 500 mM NaOH (yielding a pH of 13) and 0.5 M NaCl at room temperature
for 5 min. Samples were then neutralized by the addition of a 50-fold
volume of 50 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8) and 5 mM EDTA, resulting in a final
solution with 0.01 M NaOH and 0.03 M NaCl (pH 8). These conditions
favor full renaturation. Samples were then incubated at 68 °C
for 3 h, followed by two precipitations in ethanol. Longer incubations
did not change the pattern of products formed. Caution was taken to
avoid sample dehydration.

Purified Proteins
Recombinant, baculovirus-expressed
human HMGB1 (amino acids 1–215) was purchased from ATGen (catalog
no. HMG0801). Purified bacterial (Escherichia coli) MutS protein was purchased from Gene Check Inc. (catalog no. GC-001).
Recombinant, His-tagged human MutSα and MutSβ complexes
were expressed in insect cells and purified to near homogeneity as
described previously. Baculoviruses expressing
hMSH2 and His-tagged hMSH3 and hMSH6 were kindly provided by G.-M.
Li. XPG and XPF-ERCC1 were purified as previously described.

Electrophoretic Mobility Shift Assays and Cleavage Assays
Purified HMGB1 was incubated with 100 fmol of [γ-32P]ATP-labeled DNA in reaction buffer containing 50 mM NaCl, 25 mM
Tris (pH 7.5), 1 mM EDTA, 1 mM DTT, 0.3% glycerol, and 10 ng/μL
BSA in a final volume of 20 μL. Reaction mixtures were incubated
on ice for 20 min. Samples were then analyzed on a 6% native polyacrylamide
gel in Tris-borate EDTA buffer. Gels were subsequently dried and exposed
to X-ray film.

Purified bacterial MutS, human MutSα/β
complex, XPG, and XPF-ERCC1 were incubated with 100 fmol of [γ-32P]ATP-labeled DNA (only 50 fmol for MutSα/β)
in reaction buffer containing 10 mM HEPES (pH 7.5), 110 mM KCl, 1
mM EDTA, and 1 mM DTT with 2.5 ng/μL poly(dI-dC) in a final
volume of 20 μL. Reaction mixtures were incubated on ice for
20 min. Samples were then analyzed on a 6% native polyacrylamide gel
in Tris-borate EDTA buffer. Gels were subsequently dried and exposed
to X-ray film.

Repair Substrates
A set of circular heteroduplex substrates
were prepared using (CTG)n·(CAG)n repeats (n = 0, 1, 2, or 17)
contained within the human DM1 flanking sequence as previously described. Briefly, circular heteroduplex DNA was produced
by hybridizing circular single-stranded DNA with linearized double-stranded
DNA with a different number of repeats, and then heteroduplex molecules
were gel purified. The combination of zero repeats paired with 17
repeats creates a perfectly paired three-way junction; one repeat
across from 17 repeats leaves one unpaired nucleotide at the junction,
and
two repeats across from 17 repeats can create a junction with zero
to two unpaired nucleotides. Substrates are named on the basis of
the junctions that they model (from Figure A): a substrate modeling junction J1 would be called p-J1.

Extracts
Whole cell extracts were prepared as described
previously from HeLa S3 cells (National
Cell Culture Center, National Center for Research Resources, National
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD) and LoVo cells (ATCC).

Repair Reactions
Repair reactions were conducted and
efficiencies quantified as previously described. After incubation of the circular repair substrates with
cell extracts, the repeat-containing fragment was excised from the
substrates using EcoRI and HindIII
and run on 4% polyacrylamide gels before Southern blotting was conducted.
Southern probes were generated using an EcoRI/HindIII fragment from DNA containing 17 repeats. Repair
percentages were calculated as previously described, by determining the intensity of the homoduplex bands in each lane
as a percentage of all the material in the lane, followed by subtraction
of the corresponding band intensities in the starting material. Graphs
shown are based on at least three experiments.

Results
Oligonucleotide Models of Slipped-DNA Junctions
All
of the possible junction conformers shown in Figure A can be modeled by four synthetic oligonucleotides (sequences
in Table S1 of the ): two for the slipped-out CAG and two for the slipped-out CTG junctions
(Figure B; CAG repeats are colored blue and
CTG repeats red). We prepared a series of 39–41-mer sequences,
each expected to fold into three-way DNA junctions, in which the junction
sequences varied but the junction arms and their hairpin tips and
end sequences were similar (Figure B). In
this manner, the structural and biological characterization could
permit comparison of junction conformations. The following considerations
guided oligo design. Sequence organization included two inverted repeat
sequences, where the first would ensure the formation of an intrastrand
hairpin constituting one of the two non-repeat-containing junction
arms (Figure B, right arms). The second inverted
repeat sequence constituted the “slip-out” region; it
was adjoined to CTG or CAG units to facilitate its forming a distinct
junction arm that minimized alternative mispairings with the opposing
complementary CAG or CTG region. Interconversion between certain conformations
could occur with small changes immediately at the junction. Oligonucleotide
J1/2 could assume either the fully paired J1 conformation or any of
the two-unpaired nucleotide J2 forms (shown in the top left section
of Figure A). Oligonucleotide J3 could assume
a junction conformation with one extra nucleotide (any of those shown
in the top right section of Figure A). For
CTG slip-outs, oligonucleotide J4/5 could assume either the fully
paired J4 conformation or any of the two-unpaired nucleotide J5 forms
(shown in the bottom left section of Figure A). Oligonucleotide J6 could assume a junction conformation with
one extra nucleotide (any of those shown in the bottom right section
of Figure A). Other interconversions are unlikely
because of sequence constraints. The G and C content of the oligos
was kept high, to optimize the self-association of the three-arm complex.
Moreover, CTTG loops were included because they are highly stable
and thus direct folding toward a three-arm conformation. AT base pairs
were included in all three helical domains to provide spectroscopic
markers for the nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) studies.

These
junction oligos were characterized structurally (by electrophoretic
migration on polyacrylamide gels and NMR) and assessed for their interactions
with DNA structure-specific binding proteins.

Slipped Junctions Form Distinct Isoforms As Determined by Electrophoretic
Analysis
The self-association of strands was assessed by
electrophoretic migration on native polyacrylamide gels, relative
to a duplex size marker (Figure C). Each of
the oligos resolved as a major species, which in all cases migrated
slower than expected (&gt;20 bp) relative to the migration of duplexes
composed of the same number of nucleotides (Figure C). This suggested that each oligo had self-associated to
form a non-B-DNA structure. For certain
oligos, additional slower-migrating species were evident, a phenomenon
previously observed for three-way junctions containing extra nucleotides. This was most notable for J4/5, in which two
electrophoretic species were evident (Figure C). Additional electrophoretic species were previously observed for
G-A mismatches in some but not all sequence contexts, a phenomenon
confirmed by NMR analysis to be caused by structural interconversion. Others have reported various structural forms
of trinucleotide repeats and suggested the impact that such variations
might have upon instability. The slower
migration of these extra species suggested that multiple structural
conformations may be formed by each oligo; when denatured with formamide
prior to native electrophoresis or when run on denaturing gels, each
oligo ran as a single species (Figure S3 of the ). Notably, gel purification of each
of the J4/5 species resulted in a mixture of the two species, suggesting
that they may be interconverting.

Interconversion of Fully Paired and Extra-Nucleotide Junction
Isomers
Using NMR, we tested the possibility that a given
sequence could form multiple junction conformations, as suggested
by the distinct electrophoretic species. The same DNA sequences used
above were used for the NMR studies, with an overview of the NMR experiments
given in Table S2 of the . We first analyzed oligo J4/5, which yielded the greatest proportion
of an alternate electrophoretic species (Figure C). For each of the junction-forming sequences, two of the stems
of the predicted slipped junctions are each capped with stabilizing
H2-type CTTG loops for which characteristic resonances are well established
in NMR spectra. For J4/5, the TOCSY spectrum
shows T Me–T H6 correlations characteristic of two CTTG loops
(Figure A and Table S3A and supplementary
text section V of the ), supporting the formation of three-way junctions with a CTG slip-out.
In addition, the cross-peak at 7.18 ppm/1.38 ppm in Figure A corresponds to the typical position for a T in
GTG element in a B-helix; the cross-peak can be assigned to T38 because only one GTG element is present in the J4/5 sequence.
The single cross-peak for T38 also shows that the branch
arm containing T38 in J4 and J5 is well formed with a single
local conformation. The presence of multiple conformations of J4/5
is indicated by two key observations. First, multiple conformations
follow from the T Me–T H6 region of the TOCSY spectrum (Figure A, 1.6–1.9 ppm/7.2–7.6 ppm), where
14 resonances are seen for the five nonloop T’s within CTG
or GTC units (T18, T21, T29, T32, and T35). Second, four imino A:T resonances
are observed (Figure B,C and Table S3A of
the ). Resonances
2–4 are from A:T base pairs sandwiched between two GC base
pairs. Resonance 4 can be assigned to T38 because it shows,
together with one of its contacted G imino resonances, a cross-peak
to a Me proton resonating at 1.38 ppm, a chemical shift corresponding
to that of a T in a GTG sequence (Figure B).
Most importantly, resonance 3 shows an exchange cross-peak with resonance
2 (Figure C; the encircled cross peaks just
below and above diagonal in the lower left, labeled “exchange”),
indicating multiple conformations. Moreover, imino resonance 3 consists
of more than one imino resonance and involves multiple conformations,
which is evident from the eight related Me contacts of the imino of
the flanking C:G base pairs (Figure B). Also,
more than 15 resonances are observed for the 13 cytosine residues
in the sequence, indicating multiple conformations (Figure S5A,B of
the ). Hence, oligo
J4/5 folds into multiple junction conformations that interconvert
between each other (summarized in Figure D).
The multiple NMR resonances show that the interconversion between
conformations is in the slow-exchange regime; that is, the lifetime
of the conformational states is in the millisecond range or longer.
The presence of an exchange cross-peak in the two-dimensional (2D)
NOESY indicates, given a mixing time of 300 ms, a lifetime of the
conformational states not much longer than 0.5 s (Figure B,C). These lifetimes are similar to that of Hoogsteen
base pairs in canonical duplex DNA. Moreover,
this observation is consistent with the time scale required for breaking
one or two base pairs (e.g., the conversion from J4 to J5 involves
breaking two base pairs at the junction). Our findings indicate that
these junction conformations are in thermodynamic equilibrium rather
than being trapped kinetically.

NMR data reveal that slipped junctions
form multiple interconverting
conformations. (A–C) NMR spectra for J4/5. (A) T Me–T
H6 section of the 2D TOCSY spectrum in D2O at 20 °C.
(B) Imino to T Me and (C) imino to imino sections of the 600 MHz 2D
NOESY spectrum of J4/5 recorded in H2O at 10 °C with
a mixing time of 300 ms. For an explanation of the J4/5 NMR spectra
in panels A–C, see the text and a detailed description in section
V of the . In panel
A, the cross-peaks at characteristic chemical shift positions of the
T’s in the two CTTG tetraloops that cap two arms (panel D)
are labeled with their residue numbers (T13, T14, T26, and T27). The other cross-peak resonances
in panel A are numbered from 1 to 15; cross-peak 15 can be assigned
to T38. In panels B and C, the imino resonances from T’s
in A:T base pairs are numbered from 1 to 4. Except for number 1, which
shows no cross-peaks to G imino resonances (panel C), all these imino
resonances show two cross-peaks to G iminos and are thus from A:T
base pairs flanked by two C:G base pairs. The presence of multiple
conformations is indicated by, for instance, the exchange cross-peaks
in panel C (see, e.g., the encircled cross-peak between 2 and 3 labeled
exchange in the bottom left of panel C near the diagonal; note that
in NOESY spectra, the intensities of symmetry-related cross-peaks
are not always equal), and the multiple imino–methyl contacts
in panel B (see the text). Imino resonance 4 can be assigned to T38 because of the contact with the T38 Me seen in
panel B (see the text). Imino resonance 3 includes more than two imino
protons and/or multiple conformations as described in the text. (D–F)
Schematics of conformations of J4/5, J1/2, and J3, respectively, that
are consistent with their NMR spectra (NMR detailed in Figures S5–S7,
Tables S3, and sections V–VII of the ). In panel D, species J5, J4/5_1, and J4/5_2 are
the J5 variants outlined in Figure A. In panel
E, species J2, J1/2_1, and J1/2_2 are the J2 variants outlined in
Figure A. In panel F, species J3, J3_1, and
J3_2 are the J3 variants outlined in Figure A. The CAG repeats are colored blue and the CTG repeats red. The
locations of pertinent nucleotides are indicated by their sequence
order. The most likely stacking of the arms in the three-way junctions
is shown using published arm nomenclature I, II, and III (Figure S4
of the ). Stacking preferences are based on published
loop and pyrimidine rules.,

The J1/2 sequence assumed the predicted slipped-junction
conformations
of a CAG slip-out, which could interconvert between a two-unpaired
nucleotide junction, J2 (G-C nucleotides in the CTG strand opposite
the CAG slip-out, or within the CAG slip-out), and a fully paired
junction, J1 (Figure E, NMR detailed in Figure
S6A–C, Table S3B, and section VI of the ). In addition, the NMR spectra indicate
the presence of two other conformations (Figure E). Thus, both the fully paired and two-unpaired nucleotide slipped-junction
variants can form and interconvert in J1/2 and J4/5.

The slipped-junction
structure of J3 was proposed to have the potential
to have a single unpaired nucleotide either opposite or within the
CAG slip-out. The NMR spectra reveal the presence of multiple conformations
(Figure F, NMR detailed in Figure S7, Table
S3C, and section VII of the ). The NMR spectra suggest a conformation with a bulged-out T32 in the CTG strand opposite the CAG slip-out and are consistent
with the presence of an A8:A19 mispair. The
NMR spectra also indicate the presence of at least two other conformations,
in which either A8 or A19 of the A8:A19 pair is bulged out while the remaining A base pairs
with T32 (Figure F, bottom two
schematics). The presence of the single-unpaired nucleotide slipped-junction
form supports the concept that these can form at slip-outs of CTG
or CAG repeats.

In summary, the NMR data show that all the sequences
form three-way
junctions having multiple conformations, where isoforms include the
predicted base pairings or unpairings and interconversions.

Slipped-Junction Isoforms Are Differentially Recognized by DNA
Repair Proteins
Structure-specific DNA binding proteins can
sensitively detect perturbations in DNA conformation. To further confirm
the variations between related slipped-DNA junctions and to demonstrate
that not only the slip-out but also its three-way junction can affect
protein recognition, we assessed whether a series of DNA sequence-independent
structure-specific proteins could distinguish between junction isoforms.

HMGB1
The high-molecular weight protein HMGB1 binds
DNA in a sequence-independent manner, preferring DNA fragments with
preexisting bends such as those at cisplatin lesions, Holliday recombination
intermediates, and microsatellite repeats.− Binding of
HMGB1 to the slipped-junction models revealed distinct shifted products,
and in some cases multiple shifts, likely the result of complexes
with variable protein:DNA ratios and/or protein-induced bending or
unwinding of the nucleic acid structure and/or the result of weak
binding equilibrium, as previously observed, (Figure A). HMGB1 showed preferential binding
for junction substrates J1/2 and J4/5, junctions that can interchange
between fully paired and two-unpaired base conformations. There was
minimal binding of HMGB1 to J3 at the highest protein concentration
tested and no detectable interaction with J6 (Figure A). These results suggested that HMGB1 can differentially
bind to the model junctions.

Electrophoretic mobility shift assays with [γ-32P]ATP-end-labeled junction substrates J1/2, J3, J4/5, and
J6. (A)
Binding of purified human HMGB1 (0, 0.1, 1, and 10 pmol) to 100 fmol
of each [γ-32P]ATP-end-labeled junction substrate.
(B) Binding of purified bacterial MutS (0, 0.1, 1, and 10 pmol) to
100 fmol of each [γ-32P]ATP-end-labeled junction
substrate. (C) Binding of purified human MutSα and MutSβ
[0 (−), 250 (+), and 750 fmol (++)] to 50 fmol of each [γ-32P]ATP-end-labeled junction substrate. (D) Cleavage of [γ-32P]ATP end-labeled junction substrates J1/2, J3, J4/5, and
J6 by human XPG and ERCC1-XPF nucleases. XPG and ERCC1-XPF proteins
(100 fmol) were incubated with 100 fmol of each [γ-32P]ATP-end-labeled junction substrate as indicated. EMSA and cleavage
products were run on a 6% polyacrylamide gel that was dried and exposed
to X-ray film. Arrows indicate the cleavage product for each junction
substrate. Cleavage site mapping is shown in Figure S8 of the .

Mismatch Repair Proteins MutS, hMutSα, and hMutSβ
The bacterial MutS mismatch repair protein initiates repair via
recognition and binding to DNA base–base mismatches and DNA
heteroduplexes with extrahelical bases. Bacterial MutS selectively
bound to substrates J3 and J4/5 as distinct shifts as well as smears
at higher protein concentrations, likely the result of complexes with
variable protein:DNA ratios and/or protein-induced bending or unwinding
of the nucleic acid structure and/or the result of weak binding equilibrium,
as previously observed (Figure B). The MutS-bound junctions contain one or zero/two
unpaired bases with a CAG or CTG slip-out, respectively. MutS did
not bind to the J1/2 or J6 oligos. The differential interaction of
MutS with the slipped-junction isoforms supported their being in conformationally
distinct forms.

MSH2, a human homologue of the bacterial MutS
protein, forms heterodimeric complexes with MSH6 and MSH3, constituting
the hMutSα and hMutSβ complexes, respectively. Both MutSα
and MutSβ can bind to base–base mismatches and insertion–deletion
loops with as many as 5–24 excess nucleotides (ref () and references cited therein).
Binding of human MutSα or MutSβ to the slipped-junction
models revealed distinct shifted products (Figure C). Notably, hMutSα and hMutSβ selectively bound
certain slipped-junction isomers, indicating a binding preference.
hMutSα bound to J3 and only weakly to J4/5 and J1/2, but not
to J6 (Figure C). hMutSβ selectively
bound the CAG junction conformers J1/2 and J3, but not the CTG conformers
J4/5 and J6 (Figure C). These results support
a binding preference of hMutSβ for CAG slip-out junctions over
CTG slip-out junctions, and a preference for specific junction conformations.
Taken together, the differential recognition of the slipped-junction
substrates by several DNA structure-specific repair proteins confirms
their structural variations revealed by gel electrophoresis and NMR.

Nucleotide Excision Repair Proteins XPG and ERCC1-XPF
The structure-specific nucleotide excision repair nucleases XPG and
ERCC1-XPF recognize DNA substrates that contain single-stranded DNA–double-stranded
DNA junctions, such as bubble substrates and hairpins, to initiate
repair through coordinated 5′ and 3′ cleavage of the
lesion by ERCC1-XPF and XPG, respectively. We tested the ability of human XPG and ERCC1-XPF proteins to cleave
the slipped junctions (Figure D). We observed
differential cleavage of each radiolabeled junction substrate by ERCC1-XPF,
as evidenced by varying amounts of a faster-migrating product (Figure D). Cleavage sites of ERCC1-XPF were mapped on oligos
J1/2, J3, and J4/5 using denaturing gels (Figure S8 of the ). Interestingly, in each
case, cleavage occurred on the slipped-out repeat arm, with varying
locations relative to the junction point. The differential cleavage
efficiency and varying scission locations confirm that there are structural
variations between the model junctions.

Because several DNA
structure-specific proteins with different biological functions show
variation in binding preference for the slipped junctions, this supports
the NMR findings that the junctions assume distinct conformations.

Slipped-Junction Isoforms Are Differentially Repaired by Human
Cell Extracts
One might expect that because different DNA
slip-outs are repaired with varied efficiencies, distinct slipped-junction
isoforms may differentially influence repair outcome. To test this,
circular DNA repair substrates were prepared with a slip-out of up
to 17 CTG or CAG repeats, with either zero, one, or two unpaired nucleotides
at the junction (Figure A,B). These were made
by heteroduplexing single-stranded circular DNAs containing a segment
of the DM1 locus with a related linearized double-stranded plasmid
containing a greater number of repeats (causing a slip-out to form
on one strand upon hybridization). Substrates were designed to have
limited base pairing conformations at the slip-out junction: circular
substrates p-J1 and p-J4 were designed to assume only the fully paired
junctions, J1 and J4 (Figure A), as there
were no repeats in the complementary strand; substrates p-J3 and p-J6
could assume any of the one-unpaired nucleotide junction forms; substrates
p-J1/2 and p-J4/5 could form either the fully paired or any of the
two-unpaired nucleotide forms, where these could potentially interconvert
(see Figures A and A). It is likely that the slip-out would extrude in the middle of
the complementary repeat tract. Following
the initial denaturation, the repeat tracts would form intrastrand
hairpins; when the flanking nonrepetitive sequences formed base pairs,
a pseudocruciform would form that would then reanneal into a single
central slip-out. Additionally, it is likely that p-J1/2 and p-J4/5
would more readily assume the forms with two unpaired nucleotides,
because three-way junctions with unpaired nucleotides are more stable
than those that are fully paired, but
absolute proof of this would require more experimental support. All
circular substrates contained a nick 5′ of the slip-out and
modeled expansion intermediates (the nick was on the slipped-out strand).
The limited conversion of the constrained circular slipped DNAs to
other isoforms was experimentally confirmed., Circular substrates p-J1/2, p-J3, p-J4/5, and p-J6 were structural
equivalents of oligo junctions J1/2, J3, J4/5, and J6, respectively,
used above for electrophoretic analysis, NMR, and protein–DNA
interactions. The hairpins and three-way junctions formed by oligonucleotides
containing CTG or CAG repeats have been experimentally confirmed to
be similar to the junctions formed in plasmids.,, Our findings parallel the oligo-to-plasmid
studies of Holliday junctions and base–base mismatches.,,

Repair of junction structures. (A) Junction
sequences of the circular
DNA repair substrates. Slip-outs are defined by both the nucleotides
in the slip-out stem and the (CNG)n noted
above the slip-out. Where applicable, only one possible unpaired nucleotide
form is shown; other nucleotides with the potential to be unpaired
are shown in green boxes. (B) DNA repair substrates modeling possible
junction structures. Circular heteroduplexes with slipped (CNG)17·(CNG)0/1/2 repeats modeling intermediates
of expansions with nicks in the slipped CAG or CTG strand. Substrates
are named on the basis of the junctions (see Figure ) that they model: p-J1 is a circular substrate modeling junction
J1. (C) Southern blot analysis of repair of circular substrates using
HeLa extracts. “Starting material” indicates unprocessed
heteroduplexes, with the background band. The background band seen
at varying levels in the starting material is the remaining double-stranded
DNA from the heteroduplexing reaction mixture and cannot be completely
eliminated; however, the amount of background is irrelevant as the
starting material was subtracted from the repair efficiencies for
quantification (as previously described,). (D) Circular
substrate repair efficiencies (corrected for starting material). Nick-directed
repair is shown as hatched bars, and non-nick-directed repair is shown
as solid bars; error bars represent the standard deviation. Efficiency
values are based on at least three replicates. The dashed red line
indicates typical levels of non-nick-directed repair, as seen for
a G-T mismatch. Nick-directed repair:
p-J1 vs p-J3, p &lt; 0.01; p-J1 vs p-J1/2, p &lt; 0.01; p-J3 vs p-J1/2, p &lt; 0.05;
p-J4/5 vs p-J4, p &lt; 0.05; p-J4/5 vs p-J6, p &lt; 0.05. Non-nick-directed repair: p-J1 vs p-J3, p &lt; 0.05; p-J3 vs p-J1/2, p &lt; 0.05;
p-J6 vs p-J4/5, p &lt; 0.05. p values
determined by t test (n ≥
3).

Repair results for the various circular substrates
modeling slipped
junctions by HeLa cell extracts are shown in Figure C and quantified in Figure D (p values are found in the figure legend). Typically, the
correct repair of base–base mismatches, nonrepetitive insertion–deletion
loops, and repeat slip-outs is nick-directed, where the lesion is
excised from the nicked strand while the continuous strand is used
as the template by DNA polymerases during repair.,, For the expansion substrates used here,
correct (nick-directed) repair involves excision of the excess repeats
in the slip-out, yielding the shorter duplex repair products (hollow
arrow in Figure C). Failed attempts at correct
repair (escaped repair) can lead to expansion mutations through heteroduplex
retention (Figure ). Consistent with our previous
observations, the correct repair efficiency
was considerably higher for plasmids with a CAG slip-out than those
with a CTG slip-out [in Figure D, compare
hatched bars for CAG slip-outs (p-J1, p-J3, and p-J1/2) with CTG slip-outs
(p-J4, p-J6, and p-J4/5)]. Interestingly, we observed that for both
CAG and CTG slip-outs, junction structure had a significant effect
on correct repair. For CAG slip-out substrates, the correct repair
efficiency differed among all three substrates with efficiency increasing
as follows: p-J1 &lt; p-J3 &lt; p-J1/2. Similarly, the correct repair
efficiency was altered for CTG slip-out substrates: p-J4 and p-J6
&lt; p-J4/5. Thus, the least constrained junctions (p-J1/2 and p-J4/5)
are repaired with a significantly higher efficiency than the most
constrained fully paired junctions (p-J1 and p-J4). The differences
in repair efficiencies for CAG versus CTG slip-outs likely reflect
differences in the structures that they form (unpaired random coil
vs intrastrand hairpin), as previously demonstrated. If the decreased level of intrastrand pairing of CAG slip-outs
enhances their repair versus that of CTG slip-outs, it is possible
that decreasing the level of pairing at the junction (by going from
fully paired to up to two unpaired nucleotides) is what permits the
improved repair of certain junction structures. Thus, we have shown
that both slip-out sequence and slip-out junction conformation can
alter repair outcome and, consequently, determine the potential for
a slip-out to escape repair and be mutagenic.

Nick-directed vs non-nick-directed
repair. Correct repair is always
nick-directed, involving excision of the excess repeats and gap filling
using the continuous strand as a template; non-nick-directed repair
leads to retention of the excess repeats by using the nicked slipped
strand as the template for gap filling, leading to an expansion mutation
product.

As expected, correct repair of these necessarily
long slip-outs
was independent of mismatch repair proteins (Figure S9 of the ), yielding high levels
of repair similar to what is seen for long slip-outs with unconstrained
junction conformations. Although the
pattern of correct repair mediated by MMR-deficient LoVo cell extracts
(for LoVo, p-J1 = p-J3 &lt; p-J1/2; t test of p-J1
or p-J3 vs p-J1/2, p &lt; 0.05) was not identical
to that seen with MMR-proficient HeLa cell extracts (for HeLa, p-J1
&lt; p-J3 &lt; p-J1/2), we still observed considerably greater repair
for p-J1/2 compared to the other junction substrates for LoVo; thus,
MMR may not play a key role in differentiating between junction conformations.
If MMR was the main determinant of junction discrimination, we would
expect that p-J1 = p-J3 = p-J1/2; however, we cannot exclude the possibility
that MMR is contributing to some degree in junction discrimination.
Because junction conformation affects binding of MutSβ, it would
be interesting to see if repair of short slip-outs (which requires
mismatch repair proteins) is affected
by structural changes at the junction; however, it is not possible
to constrain the junction to specific conformations with short slip-outs
in our system.

Unexpectedly, certain junction conformations
had a significantly
increased level of misdirected repair to the non-nicked strand (see
the solid arrow in Figure C; in Figure D, filled bars; the dashed red line indicate levels
of non-nick-directed repair for a G-T mismatch). In contrast to correct
nick-directed repair, this aberrant repair uses the nicked strand
as the template for repair and yields fully paired products that incorporate
the excess repeats from the slip-out, essentially causing an expansion
mutation (Figure ). Other studies using this
system to analyze repair of base–base mismatches, random sequence
heteroduplexes, and slip-outs do not report levels of non-nick-directed
repair because they are much lower than the levels of correct repair
in the same substrates., For example, the G-T
mismatch yields only 3–5% non-nick-directed repair compared
to 35–40% nick-directed correct repair. However, we observed significant differences in non-nick-directed
repair efficiencies with various junctions, with the level of non-nick-directed
repair being higher for some junctions than the level of correct repair
of other junctions [in Figure D, compare p-J1
(filled bar) with p-J4 (hatched bar)]. This aberrant repair was most
striking for the CAG slip-outs p-J1 (16.4%) and p-J1/2 (13.6%) (Figure D). Generally, the non-nick-directed repair efficiency
was greater for CAG slip-outs than for CTG slip-outs, similar to the
trend observed for correct repair efficiency. Altering the junction
conformation had opposite effects for CAG slip-outs versus CTG slip-outs.
For CAG slip-outs, the largest amounts of aberrant non-nick-directed
repair arose from the fully paired (p-J1) and the zero/two-unpaired
nucleotide junctions (p-J1/2), while the smallest amounts arose from
the one-unpaired nucleotide junction (p-J3). In contrast, for CTG
slip-outs, the one-unpaired nucleotide junction (p-J6) yielded the
most aberrant non-nick-directed repair, while the other junctions
showed negligible levels. Because the levels of both correct and aberrant
repair differ between junctions, the junction conformation at a slip-out
could determine whether repair is protective or mutagenic (Figure ). While it is clear that junction conformation
can determine the levels of both correct nick-directed and aberrant
non-nick-directed repair, the mechanism by which this occurs has yet
to be elucidated.

Discussion
The structural features of DNA lesions are
crucial to their proper
recognition and processing during repair, recombination, or mutation.
Slipped DNAs necessarily contain three-way DNA junctions and slip-outs
that typically form hairpins. Hairpins of CAG repeats are distinct
from CTG repeats, having unique hairpin tips, and CAG slip-outs are more unpaired., Recent studies
have confirmed that CAG slip-outs within a three-way junction adopt
more of an open loop than a hairpin.− Perturbed base pairing
at junctions with CAG slip-outs has been reported,− with little
detail about the junction conformation. Unpaired nucleotides at three-way
DNA junctions of nonrepetitive sequences can dramatically affect the
global structure of the junction and permit increased biophysical
stability and flexibility.,,, It has been shown that for fully
paired DNA three-way junctions, coaxial stacking of two helices is
not possible without disrupting the base pairing, so fully paired
junctions form only nonstacked conformations.− Introduction
of a single-stranded region at the branch point provides additional
flexibility, allowing for formation of alternative stacked conformations.,, Moreover, the sequences surrounding
the junction play an important role in structure formation and can
be used to predict conformational preferences using the pyrimidine
rule and the loop rule. In most cases,
one of the stacked conformers is predominant., Recently, these rules were successfully employed to design DNA nanostructures, where the rules were extended from junctions
containing a quasi tetraloop to junctions with a quasi triloop at
the branch point. Alteration of the three-way junction conformation
(with unpaired bases) can be induced by various factors, including
modifying the sequence around the junction, macromolecular crowding,
hydration state, protein interaction, and small molecule interaction.,, Here we reveal the structural
heterogeneity at slipped junctions formed by complementary CTG/CAG
strands, where unpaired nucleotides can arise in either strand opposite
any arm of the junction.

Repair of various base–base
mismatches and random sequence
heteroduplexes is sensitive to DNA structure.,,− We previously reported that this
is also true for repetitive slipped DNAs, where CAG slip-outs are
repaired with greater efficiency than CTG slip-outs. An extra layer of complexity has been added considering
that slipped DNAs can assume multiple conformations at the junction,
including having unpaired nucleotides. Because either a slip-out or
unpaired nucleotides could be considered DNA damage, either one could
predominate as the lesion demanding repair. If the wrong strand is
used as the template for repair, excess slipped-out repeats can be
retained leading to expansion mutations (Figure ).

Typically, it is thought that for slipped-DNAs, the nicked
strand
will be repaired and the continuous strand will serve as the template
for repair. Loop-directed repair has been reported for large random
sequence heteroduplexes, where loops are removed regardless of nick
location.− We previously observed that loop-directed repair
does not occur for slipped CTG/CAG repeats, even following ligation of the nicks. The non-nick-directed repair
that we observe is not the same as loop repair, as it involves incorporation
of the excess repeats. In the expansion intermediates used here, the
excess slipped-out repeats are on the nicked strand, meaning that
nick-directed and loop-directed repair would both give a similar repair
outcome: excision of the slip-out and resynthesis using the shorter
continuous strand as a template. Despite this, we were able to observe
repair of both strands, both nick-directed and non-nick-directed repair,
depending on the junction conformation. While the aberrant repair
was non-nick-directed, it is likely not nick-independent (there must
be a nick located somewhere on the circular repair substrate) because
we have previously observed in this system that repair will not occur
without a nick. Because the levels of
aberrant non-nick-directed repair varied between slipped junctions
that differed in only minor ways, we suggest that this aberrant repair
depends upon junction structure. That such aberrant repair has not
been reported for other nonrepeat heteroduplex DNA substrates,− is consistent with the strong propensity of CAG/CTG repeats to mutate
with an expansion bias, a phenomenon very likely to be linked to the
unique structures these repeats assume.,,,

Structural features
of unpaired DNAs have previously been reported
to affect repair outcome. The repair efficiency of base–base
mismatches is sensitive to sequence context and increases with increasing
G and C content in the neighboring sequence.,, A G-A mismatch in a GC-rich context exhibited
a regular intrahelical structure and a high repair efficiency, while
the same mismatch in an AT-rich context assumed predominantly a looped-out
conformation and was poorly repaired. Similarly, base–base mismatches in the context of a mutation
hot spot of the K-ras gene assume a dynamic equilibrium
between an intrahelical G-A pair and a looped structure that is poorly
repaired, permitting high levels of mutation. Our observations of the effects of slipped-DNA junction structural
dynamics on repair outcomes (protective vs mutagenic) further extend
the effects of base–base mismatch structural variations.,

Several studies using slipped repeats did not detect substantial
levels of repair to the non-nicked strand.,, A potential source for the increased level
of non-nick-directed repair observed herein is the manner in which
the substrates were designed to restrain the circular substrates to
more limited structural conformations (Figure A). The ability to form and interconvert between isoforms (zero,
one, and two unpaired nucleotides opposite the slip-out) could permit
sufficient competition for repair outcomes, thereby weakening the
ability to detect products of non-nick-directed repair. Forcing the
junction into more constrained conformations could be what permitted
us to detect the different repair outcomes.

Differential protein
binding to the junction isoforms (Figure )
may explain some of the observed repair differences.
Alteration of DNA pairing in heteroduplexes may be induced upon interaction
with DNA repair proteins,,, an action thought to affect subsequent nuclease cleavage.,, Changes in DNA pairing dependent
upon binding could affect both correct and aberrant repair. As we
demonstrate herein, a decreased level of pairing seems to improve
correct repair (e.g., CAG slip-outs that may be random coils are repaired
better than CTG hairpin slip-outs). Additionally, if an endonuclease
introduced a nick into the non-nicked strand because of the conformation
after protein binding, this could cause an increase in the level of
aberrant repair. Identifying proteins that may be involved in the
repair of slipped trinucleotide repeats is an active area of investigation.

We have demonstrated the presence of multiple conformations for
trinucleotide repeat junctions in a short DNA oligo model. These same
aspects would show up in larger plasmid model systems of triplet repeats;
however, because of their size, tertiary interactions may occur that
could influence (stabilize, for instance) certain types of multiple
conformations or could enhance allowed conformational space. In vivo,
interactions with different proteins may further influence conformational
space (narrow it or expand it). The remarkable observation is that
a correlation exists between repair in plasmids and the degree of
multiplicity in conformational space. This correlation is highly suggestive
of a physically causal connection, but definitive proof would require
direct observation of multiple conformations in the plasmid or even
in vivo, neither of which is technically feasible. Nevertheless, we
provide good evidence to assume that multiple conformations at the
junction site in oligos would also play a role in larger plasmid systems
and perhaps in vivo, but with the caveats stated above. Other elegant
model systems of repeat structures suggest structural dynamics but
share the same limitations.

In
summary, the slipped-junction conformation can determine whether
expansion intermediates will be correctly repaired (excising the excess
repeats), escape repair (retain the excess repeats as a heteroduplex),
or be processed to expansions (incorporating the excess repeats).
Thus, the potential for lesions in both DNA strands at a slipped junction
can alter repair outcome, leading to correction or mutation. This
improves our understanding of how repair attempts can lead to mutagenesis.

Supporting Information Available
Tables S1–S3 and Figures
S1–S9. This material is available free of charge via the Internet
at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bi301369b_si_001.pdf

Author Present Address
⊥ Sanofi Pasteur, Steeles Avenue West, North
York, ON M2R 3T4, Canada.

Author Contributions
M.M.S. prepared
human MMR proteins and repair substrates and performed all repair
assays. K.R. performed binding and cleavage assays. M.M.S. and K.R.
ran electrophoretic analyses. K.N.E. and M.K. prepared oligos. B.W.,
F.H.T.N., R.L.E.G.A., M.T., and S.S.W. performed all NMR analysis.
O.D.S. prepared NER proteins. C.E.P. and S.S.W. designed and supervised
the project. All authors wrote the manuscript.

The authors
declare no competing interests.

