Lipoxygenases (LOXs) make up
a widespread family of enzymes that convert unsaturated fatty acids
to allyl hydroperoxides and other oxidized products. The first step
of their reaction is a net H-atom abstraction by a metal hydroxide,
usually iron but occasionally manganese, that occurs between two double bonds to generate a radical intermediate. The H-atom abstraction step is of significant
interest because of the large, nearly temperature-independent deuterium
kinetic isotope effects (KIEs) that have been reported for enzymes
from soybean and humans. The range of KIEs (30–100) is well outside the semiclassical
limits and has led to models that treat the reaction as a nonadiabatic,
proton-coupled electron transfer:, accordingly,
the proton behaves as a wave packet rather than a particle, passing
from the substrate to the product via a transition state defined by
thermally activated motions of the protein heavy atoms.

One
compelling question for LOXs, as well as other C–H bond
activating enzymes, is how each protein achieves the close donor–acceptor
distances needed for efficient tunneling. In particular, the overall
protein size and flexibility are expected to play important roles
in this phenomenon. In recent years, LOXs from cyanobacteria that
have diverged significantly from their plant and animal homologues
and are notably smaller in size have been described.− The enzyme characterized herein from Nostoc sp.
is one-half of a fusion protein that has been shown to convert α-linolenic
acid to an allylic epoxide in a two-step reaction.In vitro assays of the C-terminal domain
(residues 344–773, NspLOX) further demonstrate conversion of
α-linolenic acid and linoleic acid (LA) to hydroperoxides at
similar rates., In the study presented here,
the expression of NspLOX in Escherichia coli is shown
to yield a stable protein with ∼10% of the activity of the
LOX from soybeans (SLO-1). KIEs and their temperature dependence are
reported for wild-type (WT) NspLOX and a single-site mutant. These
studies extend the evidence for tunneling in LOX to a prokaryotic
enzyme, providing a window into the impact of altered protein structure
and size on hydrogen tunneling mechanisms.

Kinetic Parameters for
NspLOX
Reaction rates for the
oxidation of h31-LA and uniformly deuterated
LA are shown along with KIEs in Figure . The
study of LA allows direct comparisons to the well-documented reactivity
of LA with SLO-1. We observe that the Km for NspLOX toward LA is very low [0.3–1.1 μM (Table
S1 of the )], which,
together with the characteristic lag phase seen in initial rate studies
of other LOXs prevented the collection of accurate Michaelis–Menten
curves at low substrate concentrations. Reaction rates were, therefore,
measured under saturating conditions (ambient O2 and 10
μM LA) at all temperatures. NspLOX has a kcat at 20 °C of 19.0 ± 0.2 s–1 with h31-LA and a KIE of 118 ± 3. The Arrhenius
prefactor (AH) and energy of activation
(Ea) with h31-LA are quite elevated for a native LOX [AH = (2.7 ± 1.5) × 1010 s–1,
and Ea(H) = 12.4 ± 0.3 kcal/mol].
The Ea(D) is slightly lower, 11.6 ±
0.3 kcal/mol, which leads to the appearance of a KIE that increases
slightly with temperature; however, this difference between the isotopic Ea values is not statistically significant (P &lt; 0.10). The KIE therefore arises solely from differences
in prefactors (ΔΔS⧧). While this behavior is similar to that of SLO-1, the magnitude
of ΔEa is reduced in relation to
that of the plant enzyme (Table ). Additional
kinetic parameters are provided in Table S2 of the .

Temperature-dependent rates and KIEs for
WT NspLOX and its I219A
variant.

The most striking difference between
WT NspLOX and WT SLO-1 is
the large enthalpy of activation for the former. This indicates
that the properties that control the KIE are distinct from the net
barrier controlling hydrogen transfer. Nagel and co-workers
have recently described anomalously elevated values for Ea and AH in a thermophilic
alcohol dehydrogenase operating under the nonphysiologic condition
of low temperature. Their model invokes
a reversible trapping of enzyme into inactive or reduced-activity
conformational substates. The return of such molecules to the catalytically
viable region of the conformational landscape requires thermally activated
fluctuations that are the origin of the elevated Ea values.

As an alternative, the elevated Ea for
NspLOX may result from the expression of a single-domain protein,
in the absence of its in vivo-partnered enzyme activity.
However, it is fairly common for separate proteins to become fused
within prokaryotic operons and for individual domains to gain and
lose partners through the course of evolution. As described below, we pursued the mechanistic origin of
the elevated Ea value for WT NspLOX using
site-specific mutagenesis.

Preparation and Characterization of I219A
NspLOX is
smaller than SLO-1, lacking the N-terminal β-barrel found in
most LOXs. Additionally, the catalytic domain consists of 430 amino
acids in comparison to 562 for SLO-1. Sequences for core portions of the proteins are shown in Figure
S1 of the , the sequences
being 22% identical and 40% similar in the represented region. Despite
the low degree of overall homology, we identified Ile219 in NspLOX
as the analogue of the active site Leu546 in SLO-1. Leu546 sits proximal
to the active site iron in SLO-1 and has been thought to position
the reactive carbon of the substrate for C–H bond activation., The positions of Ile219 and Leu546 are within an 86-residue region
that is relatively well conserved and seven amino acids N-terminal
of a conserved isoleucine. In SLO-1, this is position 553, one helix
turn away from Leu546 (Figure S2 of the ); structures for SLO-1 mutated at position 553 or 546 (unpublished data) indicate that the
side chain positions of Leu546 and Ile553 are correlated. Thus, the
choice of Ile219 as a mimic of Leu546 in SLO-1 appears well-validated.

Analytical size-exclusion chromatography of NspLOX and I219A indicates
a mixture of monomers and dimers (Figure S3 of the ), with similar specific activities.
As a control for a possible impact of enzyme concentration on specific
activity, NspLOX was kinetically assayed at 20 °C across a range
of protein concentrations that brackets the experimental conditions.
The results (Figure S4 of the ) indicate that the rate is linear between 3 and 264 μM enzyme.

The rate constant for I219A with h31-LA at 20 °C was 15.0 ± 0.5 s–1, slightly
reduced relative to that of WT NspLOX. The deuterium KIE is elevated
to 155 ± 7. Unexpectedly, the magnitudes of both Ea and AH are greatly reduced
relative to magnitudes of those of WT NspLOX (Table ).

Role of Protein Size and Flexibility
The characterization
of I219A NspLOX provides considerable insight into the properties
of the WT variant. As shown in Table , a smaller
amino acid at position 219 in NspLOX leads to an enzyme that shows
values of Ea, ΔEa, and AH almost identical
to those of WT SLO-1. We propose that the reduction in the size of
a large side chain within the active site of NspLOX introduces a flexibility
that is absent from WT NspLOX. This increased flexibility allows the
mutant enzyme to sample catalytically viable regions of the conformational
landscape more easily (reducing the magnitude of Ea and AH in a concomitant
manner). At the same time, the magnitude of the KIE and its temperature
dependence are increased in relation to those of WT NspLOX. The latter
is similar to the behavior seen most generally in mutant variants
of C–H bond activating enzymes, i.e., an increase in the donor–acceptor
tunneling distance that can be compensated for, in part, by a temperature-dependent
search for a more suitable tunneling distance.

The fact that WT NspLOX, with a lower kcat, is strictly speaking a less effective catalyst than
SLO-1 does not necessarily mean that NspLOX is a functionally defective
form of SLO-1. While the values of Ea and
particularly ΔEa are highly informative
from a mechanistic point of view, kcat values are not necessarily reflective of evolutionary fitness. This
is especially true for enzymes whose purpose is the production of
secondary metabolites, the levels of which are tightly regulated and
often coupled to environmental conditions. The function of prokaryotic
LOXs is not known, except for a report
that Nostoc punctiforme produces fatty acid hydroperoxides
in response to cell wounding.

Kinetic Parameters for WT NspLOX,
WT SLO-1, and Their Mutants
 	kcat (s–1)	KIE	 	 	 	
 	20 °C	30 °C	20 °C	30 °C	Ea(H) (kcal/mol)	ΔEa (kcal/mol)	AH (s–1)	
WT NspLOX	19.0 ± 0.2	37.1 ± 0.8	118 ± 3	128 ± 3	12.4 ± 0.3	–0.7 ± 0.3	(2.7 ± 1.5) × 1010	
I219A NspLOX	15.0 ± 0.5	16.7 ± 2.4	155 ± 7	164 ± 26	2.7 ± 0.5	1.1 ± 0.5	(1.3 ± 1.1) × 103	
WT SLO-1	275 ± 9	297 ± 12	84 ± 11	81 ± 5	1.6 ± 0.2	1.1 ± 0.2	(4.1 ± 1.3) × 103	
L546A SLO-1	3.9 ± 0.3	4.8 ± 0.6	126 ± 3	109 ± 4	4.0 ± 0.7	1.6 ± 0.6	(4 ± 4) × 103	
Data for
WT and I219A collected
at 7.5–27.5 and 5–25 °C, respectively.

Extrapolated from an Eyring fit
(Figure ) for comparison to SLO-1 at 30 °C.

From ref ().

The key mechanistic property to emerge from the kinetic
comparison
of NspLOX and SLO-1 is the inferred change in the catalytically relevant
conformational landscape. The elevated rate together with a low Ea for C–H bond activation in SLO-1 implies
small conformational barriers to the achievement of tunneling ready
states. By contrast, the slower rate and much higher Ea of NspLOX can be explained by a reversible trapping
of the protein into noncatalytic substates. This raises the question
of which changes in protein structure and flexibility may have supported
a transition from NspLOX to SLO-1. Our demonstration that insertion
of a single, active site mutation into NspLOX reproduces the Ea of SLO-1 suggests one pathway for conferring
more conformational fitness. However, this active site alteration
in NspLOX cannot improve its rate, presumably by compromising the
ability of enzyme to properly constrain and/or position the H-donor
and -acceptor atoms with respect to one another. The currently available
sequence and structural information suggest an alternate route for
the tuning of catalytic fitness in SLO-1. The major structural difference
between SLO-1 and NspLOX appears to lie in the size of surface loops,
which are enlarged in the eukaryotic enzyme (Figure S5 and Table S3
of the ). We suggest
that a change in surface loops may have provided the catalytically
strategic alteration, simultaneously ensuring a catalytically productive
placement of the reactive carbon of substrate via retention of a bulky
active site side chain while introducing the capability for more protein
flexibility through increased surface loop size. Appropriately designed
mutagenesis studies should permit further testing of this hypothesis.

Supporting Information Available
Experimental
methods, detailed
kinetics data, and data from controls. This material is available
free of charge via the Internet at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bi500070q_si_001.pdf

Author Present Address
∥ C.A.M.C.:
Kiverdi, Inc., 2929 7th St., Berkeley, CA 94710.

Supported by
National Institutes of Health Grants GM025765 to J.P.K. and T32 GM008295
to C.A.M.C.

The authors declare no
competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
We thank Alan R. Brash for providing
the NspLOX gene.

