Peptides
such as vasopressin
analogues, oxytocin analogue, angiotensin II receptor antagonist,
antimicrobial peptides, and antidiabetic peptides are widely used
as therapeutic molecules in the management of pathological conditions., Our laboratory identified a 19-amino acid sequence (70KFVIFLDVKHFSPEDLTVK88) in chaperone protein αA-crystallin that can suppress
aggregation of denaturing proteins, and we called this peptide “αA-mini-chaperone”. The mini-chaperone was shown to prevent aggregation
of proteins denatured by heat, oxidation, and chemical methods. In
addition, αA-mini-chaperone was shown to prevent aggregation
of heat-induced denatured alcohol dehydrogenase (ADH), oxidation and ultraviolet (UV)-induced aggregation of γ-crystallins, and dithiothreitol (DTT)-induced unfolding and
aggregation of α-lactalbumin and insulin. Further, the mini-chaperone was shown to have the ability
to inhibit β-amyloid fibril formation and toxicity to pheochromocytoma
(PC12) cells. Recent work in our laboratory
also showed that αA-mini-chaperone can stabilize the mutant
αAG98R-crystallin and rescue its chaperone activity and can bind metal ion. Others have shown that αA-crymini-chaperone protects retinal
pigment epithelium (RPE) cells from oxidative damage., Using RPE cells, it was demonstrated that αB-crystallin has
both cytosolic and nuclear anti-apoptotic roles. While apoptosis in cardiac H9c2 cells was prevented by
αB-crystallin, αA-crystallin
was effective against Bax-induced apoptosis in cone-derived 661W cells. Studies have shown that acetylation of αB-crystallin
enhances both chaperone and anti-apoptotic activities, and the extent of heat and oxidative stress-induced
death in lens cells will be diminished after treatment with cell-penetrating
α-crystallin. It has been shown
that αA-mini-chaperone inhibits selenite-induced cataract in
rats. Together, these studies suggest
that αA- and αB-crystallin and αA-mini-chaperone
have the potential to become therapeutic molecules for diseases associated
with protein aggregation. The amino acid sequence corresponding to
the mini-chaperone is highly conserved across the crystallin domain
of small heat shock proteins (sHSPs) and is rich in hydrophobic residues. Secondary structural analysis of the α-crystallin
domain in sHSPs shows several regions with the propensity to form
β-sheet structure(s). The mini-chaperone sequence aligns with
the β3 and β4 region in human αA-crystallin. β-Sheet
rich, hydrophobic sequences are prone to forming amyloid fibrils., It has been reported that αA-crystallin subjected to partial
denaturation forms amyloid fibrils in vitro. Tanaka et al., and others have demonstrated that shaking the mini-chaperone
αA71–88 at 900 rpm for several hours leads to the formation
of amyloid fibril-like aggregates that bind thioflavin T. Tanaka et
al. have suggested that “the chaperone-like activity of αAC-peptides
could be correlated with their propensity to form amyloid fibrils” and demonstrated increased chaperone activity
in the fibril form of the αA71–88 peptide.

While our understanding of the structure
and function of αA-
and αB-crystallin remains incomplete, the C-terminal extensions
of αA- and αB-crystallin have been characterized as largely
unstructured and highly solvent-exposed., The unstructured C-terminal region is believed to play a role in
keeping the oligomer protein complexes as well as α-crystallin–client
protein complexes in their soluble forms. The removal of the C-terminal
region of αA-crystallin leads to decreased solubility,, and αA-crystallin truncated at the C-terminus has reduced
chaperone activity, likely because of
the reduced stability of the chaperone–client protein complex.
We hypothesized that the addition of the C-terminal sequence of αA-crystallin
to αA-mini-chaperone may enhance the solubility of the αA-mini-chaperone–client
protein complex. Further, we reasoned that because the C-terminal
EEKPTSAPSS sequence of αA-crystallin
is hydrophilic, it might diminish the extent of fibril formation in
the chimeric chaperone formed by the fusion of the αA-mini-chaperone
sequence and EEKPTSAPSS.
Our earlier studies showed that the presence of a large part of the
αA-mini-chaperone is essential for its activity.,, We therefore retained the core
sequence of αA-mini-chaperone in the chimeric chaperone peptide
(CP1), created by the fusion of αA-crystallin C-terminal residues
EEKPTSAPSS to the C-terminal
region of αA-mini-chaperone sequence DFVIFLDVKHFSPEDLT.
Here, we show that CP1 displays anti-aggregation activity, as we expected,
when tested with client proteins denatured by heat or chemical agents
and does not form fibrils after agitation for an extended period of
time. We also show that CP1 protects COS-7 cells from H2O2-induced apoptosis.

Materials and Methods
Peptide
and Proteins
Peptides used in this study (Table ) were supplied by Genscript Corp. (Piscataway,
NJ). These peptides were &gt;95% pure according to HPLC and mass spectrometry.
ADH, citrate synthase (CS), and α-lactalbumin (LA) were procured
from Sigma-Aldrich (St. Louis, MO). Recombinant αA-crystallin
was expressed and purified as described previously.

Peptide Chaperones Used in This Study
peptide	sequence	
αA-mini-chaperone	DFVIFLDVKHFSPEDLTVK	
chimeric peptide chaperone (CP1)	DFVIFLDVKHFSPEDLTEEKPTSAPSS	
CP1-Δ172–173 peptide-1	DFVIFLDVKHFSPEDLTEEKPTSAP	
CP1-Δ170–173 peptide-2	DFVIFLDVKHFSPEDLTEEKPTS	
CP1-Δ168–173 peptide-3	DFVIFLDVKHFSPEDLTEEKP	
CP1-Δ166–173 peptide-4	DFVIFLDVKHFSPEDLTEE	
αA-mini-chaperone Δ87–88	DFVIFLDVKHFSPEDLT	
αA-mini-chaperone-extended	DFVIFLDVKHFSPEDLTVKVQEDFVEI	
Chaperone Assay
To test whether the addition of the
C-terminal sequence to αA-mini-chaperone modulates its chaperone
function, αA-mini-chaperone, CP1 peptide, and its truncated
forms were challenged with denaturing client proteins. The ADH aggregation
assay was performed using 5 μM protein in 1 mL of 50 mM phosphate
buffer [150 mM NaCl and 100 mM EDTA (pH 7.2)] in the absence and presence
of either αA-mini-chaperone or CP1 peptide (40 μM) at
37 °C. The citrate synthase aggregation assay was performed using
4 μM protein in 1 mL of 40 mM HEPES-KOH buffer (pH 7.0) in the
absence of peptide and in the presence of either αA-mini-chaperone
or CP1 peptide (40 μM). For the LA aggregation assay, bovine
LA (1.2 mg) was dissolved in 1 mL of 50 mM phosphate buffer [100 mM
NaCl and 1 mM EDTA (pH 7.4)], and the aggregation was initiated by
the addition of 20 μM DTT (final concentration) at 37 °C
in the absence and presence of αA-mini-chaperone or CP1 peptide.
The extent of aggregation was monitored at 360 nm in a Shimadzu spectrophotometer
equipped with a temperature controller and a multiwell holder, as
described previously. Representative
samples were also examined under a transmission electron microscope
using a staining procedure described below. αA-Mini-chaperone
and CP1 peptide incubated under chaperone assay conditions were also
subjected to Sephadex G-50 gel filtration chromatography to determine
whether these peptides formed aggregates in assay buffers.

Incubation
and Thioflavin T (ThT) Fluorescence Assay
The ThT fluorescence
assay is commonly used as a fluorescence probe
to quantify the fibril content of amyloid peptide. The ThT assay was
performed according to the method described previously. αA-Mini chaperone or CP1 peptide was prepared
in 50 mM phosphate buffer (pH 7.20) and incubated at 37 or 42 °C
while being shaken at 250 rpm for 72 h. The ThT binding fibril content
of the samples was measured at 0 and 72 h. For the ThT assay, peptide
samples and ThT (final concentration of 10 μM) were mixed and
incubated at 37 °C for 10 min. The fluorescence intensity of
the sample was measured by excitation at 450 nm, and emission was
recorded over the wavelength range of 450–550 nm with a bandwidth
of 5 nm and a scan speed of 10 nm/min using 10 mm path length cuvettes.
An emission maximum at 480 nm was recorded.

Transmission Electron Microscopy
Study
The morphology
of amyloid-like fibrils formed by the peptide chaperones was studied
by transmission electron microscopy (TEM), following the procedure
described previously. Briefly, the peptides
(1 mg/mL) were dissolved in phosphate buffer and incubated in a 37
°C shaker kept at 250 rpm. After 24 h, 5 μL aliquots were
applied to carbon-coated 200 mesh copper grids at room temperature,
stained with freshly prepared 2% uranyl acetate, and examined under
a JEOL 1400 transmission electron microscope (120 kV). The images
were obtained using digital imaging software from Gatam Digital Micrograph
(Gatam, Inc., Warrendale, PA).

Circular Dichroism (CD)
Spectroscopy
Far-ultraviolet
(UV) CD spectra of αA-mini-chaperone, CP1, and truncated CP1
were recorded using a Jasco (Easton, MD) J-815 CD spectropolarimeter.
Peptides were prepared in 50 mM phosphate buffer (pH 7.2). Far-UV
CD measurements were conducted over the wavelength range of 190–250
nm with a bandwidth of 0.5 nm and a scan speed of 10 nm/min using
2 mm path length cuvettes. All of the reported spectra were the cumulative
averages of six scans after subtraction of the buffer blank.

Bis-ANS
Binding Studies
The fluorescence of bis-ANS
bound to peptides was measured using a Jasco FP750 spectrofluorometer.
A bis-ANS solution (10 μmol, equal to twice the amount required
to saturate the binding sites) was added to a 0.1 mg/mL peptide solution
in phosphate buffer (pH 7.2). The mixture was thoroughly mixed and
then incubated for 10 min. Fluorescence emission spectra were then
recorded at 400–600 nm using an excitation wavelength of 390
nm. The excitation and emission slits were set at 5 nm.

Cell Culture
Studies
COS-7 cells and ARPE-19 cells
were cultured in Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s medium
(DMEM), supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum, 100 units/mL penicillin,
and 100 μg/mL streptomycin at 37 °C in an incubator with
a 5% CO2 atmosphere. Experiments were conducted in eight-well,
sterile, clear-bottom slides. Cells were seeded at an appropriate
density according to the experiments (25000 cells/cm2)
and allowed to grow for 24 h, and then cells were exposed to 0–20
μg/mL chaperone peptides in BioPorter (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis,
MO) for 4 h in serum-free medium. In another set of experiments, 25–100
μg/mL αA-crystallin was used as a positive control chaperone.
The chaperone molecule-transduced cells were than exposed to H2O2 (150 μM) for 24 h. Appropriate control
experiments were conducted simultaneously.

TUNEL Assay
The
TdT-mediated digoxigenin-dUTP nick
end labeling (TUNEL) assay for in situ apoptosis
was performed according to the manufacturer’s protocol (Chemicon,
Temecula, CA). In brief, after H2O2 (150 μM)
treatment in the absence and presence of chaperone molecules, cells
were fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde overnight at 4 °C and washed
twice with phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) for 5 min. Then the cells
were postfixed in an ethanol/acetic acid mixture (2:1) for the permeability
of TUNEL reagents into the cell nucleus. The 3′ end labeling
was conducted in a mixture containing terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase,
and incorporated 3′ end labeling was detected using an anti-digoxigenin/rhodamine
solution. The cells were observed under a fluorescence microscope
(Leica DMR), and the images were recorded using an Optonics digital
camera. The percentage of apoptotic cells was calculated by counting
TUNEL-positive cells divided by total cells visualized in the given
area.

Flow Cytometry Analysis
We used a fluorescein isothiocyanate
(FITC)–annexin V apoptosis detection kit (BioLegend, San Diego,
CA) for the cell apoptosis assay. Briefly, ARPE-19 cells (1 ×
107) were treated with mini-chaperone peptides (20 μg/mL)
for 4 h in serum-free DMEM. After being treated, cells were washed
with PBS twice and incubated for 24 h in serum-free medium in the
presence of 150 μM H2O2. The next day
cells were trypsinized, washed twice with PO4 buffer, and
resuspended in 200 μL of binding buffer containing 5 μL
of annexin V (10 μg/mL) and 10 μL of PI (20 μg/mL).
The mixtures were incubated for 15 min at room temperature. Stained
cells were analyzed with a flow cytometer (BD FACScalibur) at the
University of Missouri Cytology Core Facility. Cell Quest was used
for data acquisition and analysis.

Results
Characterization
of Mini-Chaperones
Synthetic peptides
αA-mini-chaperone (αA70–88), αA-mini-chaperone
Δ87–88 (αA70–86), αA-mini-chaperone-extended
(αA70–96), and CP1 peptide (αA70–86+164–173)
and the truncated forms of CP1 [peptide 1 (CP1-Δ172–173),
peptide 2 (CP1-Δ170–173), peptide 3 (CP1-Δ168–173),
and peptide 4 (CP1-Δ166–173)] were incubated (1 mg/mL)
in PO4 buffer at 37 °C in a shaker incubator set at
250 rpm. Samples were examined via TEM and the ThT binding assay after
incubation for 24 and 72 h, respectively. The electron micrographs
showed that αA-mini-chaperone and truncated CP1 peptides, CP1-Δ168–173
and CP1-Δ166–173 assembled into unbranched fibrils ∼7
± 1 nm in width and several millimeters in length (Figure A,E,F), whereas the CP1 peptide and the extended
mini-chaperone peptide did not form fibrils or aggregates (Figure B,C,G). In contrast, CP1-Δ170–173 displayed
smaller proto-fibril-like aggregates (Figure D). As Figure  shows, no increase in ThT
fluorescence occurred with CP1 peptide after incubation for 72 h,
whereas αA-mini-chaperone showed a 3-fold increase in ThT fluorescence
under similar incubation conditions (Figure A).

TEM images of chaperone peptides incubated at 37 °C. The peptide
samples were incubated with a shaking incubator as described in  for 24 h: (A) mini-αA,
(B) CP1, (C) CP1-Δ172–173, (D) CP1-Δ170–173,
(E) CP1-Δ168–173, (F) CP1-Δ166–173, and
(G) αA70–96. The scale bar i s100 nm.

Thioflavin (ThT) fluorescence assay of peptide chaperones.
Peptides
were incubated at 37 or 42 °C for 72 h as described in . ThT (final concentration
of 10 μM) was added following incubation with or without shaking,
and the fluorescence spectra were recorded in a Jasco-750 spectrometer
after excitation of the samples at 350 nm. (A) ThT fluorescence of
mini-αA-chaperone, suggesting the presence of fibril-like structures.
(B) Absence of ThT fluorescence with the CP1 peptide, indicating the
absence of fibril-like structures.

Previous studies have shown that bis-ANS binding hydrophobic
sites
contribute to chaperone sites and that mini-chaperone binds bis-ANS.
We therefore tested whether the addition of the αA164–173
sequence (CP1) to mini-αA had any effect on bis-ANS binding.
As shown in Figure , treatment of the CP1
peptide with bis-ANS and excitation at 390 nm generated a spectrum
with emission maxima at 500 nm, similar to that of bis-ANS and the
mini-αA peptide mixture but with a slightly lower fluorescence.
However, the extended mini-chaperone showed a significant red shift
in emission maxima in the bis-ANS spectrum, indicating minimal dye
binding.

Fluorescence spectra of the hydrophobic fluorescent probe bis-ANS
in the presence of peptide chaperones. The samples were excited at
390 nm, and emission was recorded at 520 nm.

The far-UV CD spectrum of the αA-mini-chaperone and
its two-residue-truncated
form exhibited maximal ellipticity at 216 and 214 nm, respectively,
indicating that both peptides have a predominant β-sheet conformation
at 25 °C (Figure ). On the other hand,
the far-UV CD profile of the CP1 peptide and its truncated forms as
well as the mini-chaperone-extended peptide (Table ) showed maximal ellipticity at 200 nm, similar to the profile
obtained when a peptide with a random conformation is analyzed by
CD spectroscopy (Figure ). A K2d program (Dichroweb)
analysis performed on these peptide CD profiles confirmed that these
peptides are largely in the random coil conformation (data not shown).

Far-UV
CD spectra of αA-mini-chaperone and CP1 chaperone.
The sequences of the peptide chaperones are given in , as are the experimental conditions.
Far-UV spectra of mini-αA (red), mini-αA (Δ87–88,
black), and CP1 (blue). The right panel shows far-UV CD spectra of
truncated CP1 peptides.

Chaperone-like Activity of Mini-Chaperones
We investigated
the chaperone-like activity of the CP1 peptide to determine whether
the addition of αA-crystallin C-terminal residues had any effect
on anti-aggregation activity. We also compared the chaperone activity
of the CP1 peptide with that of αA-mini-chaperone using three
client proteins. Heat-induced aggregation of ADH and CS and DTT-induced
lactalbumin aggregation were used to measure the chaperone-like activity
of the peptides. When ADH was used as a client protein, the CP1 peptide
showed dose-dependent suppression of aggregation of denaturing ADH
(data not shown). Use of the CP1 peptide and ADH at a 1:8 ratio resulted
in &gt;90% suppression of light scattering. The kinetic curve shows
comparable
chaperone-like activity for the CP1 peptide and αA-mini-chaperone
(Figure ). When the chaperone assay mixtures
were examined via TEM after the assay, samples having CP1 or αA-mini-chaperone
and ADH showed similar profiles with negligible aggregates whereas
a sample from denaturing ADH showed protein aggregates (data not shown).
Heat-induced aggregation of CS was effectively (90%) prevented by
40 μM CP1, and the extent of protection was similar to that
of αA-mini-chaperone and its truncated form. When we investigated
the chaperone-like activity of the peptides against DTT-induced α-lactalbumin
aggregation, we found that 40 μM αA-mini-chaperone and
CP1 peptide had comparable chaperone-like activity (Figure D). During all chaperone assays, the formation of
light scattering particles by αA-mini-chaperone, CP1, or αA-mini-chaperone
Δ87–88 was not observed. However, during Sephadex G 50
gel filtration studies, αA-mini-chaperone eluted as two peaks,
the first peak eluting immediately after the void volume and the second
peak corresponding to the monomeric form of the peptide elution region
prior to incubation and as one peak, at the void volume region, after
incubation for 2 h. This suggested that αA-mini-chaperone is
prone to aggregation (Figure 1 of the ). Interestingly, the CP1 peptide chaperone did
not show any evidence of aggregation before or after incubation at
37 °C for 2 h because the peptide eluted from the Sephadex G-50
column at the expected elution time for the monomeric form of the
peptide each time (Figure 1 of the ). The chaperone activity of truncated forms of
the CP1 peptide was also investigated with two substrates, ADH and
CS (Figure ). All four truncated forms of
CP1 showed varying levels of chaperone activity. With ADH as a client
protein, truncated CP1 peptides 1, 3, and 4 (Table ) had increased activity compared to that of the CP1 peptide,
whereas CP1 peptide 2 showed activity comparable to that of the CP1
peptide. However, when CS was used as a client protein, truncated
CP1 peptides 1–4 displayed reduced anti-aggregation activity.
Unlike the CP1 peptide, the extended αA-mini-chaperone showed
a &gt;80% loss of chaperone activity when tested with ADH as the client
protein (Figure ).

Aggregations of denaturing
proteins in the presence of mini-αA-chaperone
or chimeric mini-chaperone (CP1). (A) Heat- and EDTA-induced ADH (5
μM) aggregation in the presence of mini-αA (40 μM)
or mini-αA (Δ87–88, 40 μM) at 37 °C.
(B) Heat-induced citrate synthase (4 μM) aggregation assay at
43 °C in the presence of mini-αA (40 μM) or CP1 (40
μM). (C) ADH (5 μM) aggregation in the presence of mini-αA
(40 μM) or CP1 (40 μM). (D) Chaperone-like activity of
mini-αA or CP1 peptide toward DDT-induced aggregation of LA
at 37 °C.

Effect of truncated CP1
peptides (CP1-Δ172–173, CP1-Δ170–173,
CP1-Δ168–173, and CP1-Δ166–173) on denaturing
proteins. (A) Heat-induced CS (4 μM) aggregation in the presence
of truncated CP1 peptides (40 μM) at 43 °C. (B) Heat- and
EDTA-induced ADH (5 μM) aggregation assay at 37 °C in the
presence of truncated CP1 peptides (40 μM).

Heat- and EDTA-induced ADH (250 μg) aggregation in the presence
of mini-αA-chaperone (40 μM) or mini-αA-extended
peptide (40 μM) at 37 °C.

Anti-Apoptotic Activity of Mini-Chaperones
To study
whether αA-mini-chaperone and CP1 peptide offer protection against
oxidative stress in mammalian cells, we incubated COS-7 cells with
0–20 μg/mL chaperone peptides for 4 h in Bio-Porter,
followed by 150 μM H2O2. In another set
of experiments, 25–100 μg/mL αA-crystallin was
used in place of chaperone peptides. We selected this concentration
for mini-chaperones because other studies have shown that αA-mini-chaperone
exerts protection against oxidative injury to RPE cells at this concentration. Apoptotic cell death was assessed by the TUNEL
assay. Our data show that both αA-mini-chaperone and CP1 protected
COS-7 cells from apoptotic cell death (Figure ). This protection was highly significant (P &lt;
0.01) when compared to the cells treated with H2O2 and without chaperone peptides. The dose-dependent effect of the
peptide chaperone against H2O2 treatment is
also shown in Figure . The CP1 peptide was
less effective than the αA-mini-chaperone, although it was protective.

Suppression
of oxidant-induced cell death by αA-mini-chaperone
or CP1-chaperone. For the data displayed in the left panel, COS-7
cells were treated with 150 μM H2O2 and
0–20 μg of either mini-αA or chimeric mini-αA
for 3 h. Apoptosis was assessed by TUNEL staining, and the percentage
of dead cells was quantified by counting grids. Asterisks indicate P &lt; 0.01 for mini-αA or CP1 at 10–20 μg
compared to control. The right panel shows TUNEL staining of the samples:
(A) control, (B) CP1 (20 μg/mL), (C) αA-mini-chaperone
(20 μg/mL), and (D) wild-type αA (100 μg/mL).

To confirm the TUNEL results,
in a separate experiment ARPE-19
cells were first treated with mini-chaperones, followed by oxidative
agents. Apoptotic cells were probed using FITC-labeled Annexin V and
nuclear stain propidium iodide (PI), for early and late apoptotic
markers, respectively. The double-stained cells were analyzed by flow
cytometry (Figure ). The data show that mini-chaperones
were effective in protecting against the H2O2-induced cell apoptotic cascade, consistent with the results from
the TUNEL assay.

H2O2-induced cell apoptosis assay
by flow
cytometry, utilizing Annexin V vs propidium iodide (PI) staining.
Cells in region R3 represent living cells (Annexin V-negative, PI-negative).
Cells in region R2 represent late apoptotic cells (Annexin V-positive,
PI-positive). Cells in region R1 represent early apoptotic cells (Annexin
V-positive, PI-negative). Cells in region R4 represent damaged membranes
only: (A) H2O2 (150 μM), (B) mini-αA
(20 μg/mL) with H2O2, and (C) CP1 (20
μg/mL) with H2O2. (D) Average of three
independent experiments.

Discussion
Effect of the Addition of the αA-Crystallin
C-Terminal
Sequence to αA-Mini-Chaperone
Substitution of the C-terminal
residues VK of αA-mini-chaperone (DFVIFLDVKHFSPEDLTVK)
with the αA-crystallin C-terminal sequence EEKPTSAPSS
decreased the pI of the peptide chaperone from 4.66 to 4.29. The pI
was 4.15 when the αA-mini-chaperone sequence was extended with
the 89VQEDFVEI96 sequence of αA-crystallin. We found no correlation between
the pI value of the peptide and chaperone activity or secondary structure.
When the extended mini-chaperone, CP1 peptide, and αA-mini-chaperone
were each incubated at 42 °C in a shaking incubator for 72 h
under sterile conditions, the sample containing αA-mini-chaperone
developed cloudiness, whereas the CP1 peptide and the extended mini-chaperone
solutions remained clear, suggesting that only αA-mini-chaperone
formed light scattering aggregates. The measurement of light scattering
by the samples at 360 nm in a spectrophotometer confirmed the presence
of light scattering in the αA-mini-chaperone sample (data not
shown). The αA-mini-chaperone fibrils that formed were similar
in appearance to that reported by Tanaka et al. after the peptide chaperone had been shaken at 900 rpm
for 24 h. Earlier we also observed fibril formation by αA-crystallin
peptides 66–80 and 67–75. Because these peptides contain the core sequence 71FVIFLD76, which also is homologous to the β-amyloid region
integral to amyloid fibril formation, one can surmise that the 71–76 region in αA-crystallin
drives fibril formation by these peptides. However, it is surprising
that the CP1 peptide and the extended mini-chaperone, in spite of
containing the FVIFLD sequence, did not form fibrils
when they were incubated under similar conditions. Further, the results
suggest that the addition of EEKPTSAPSS
and VQEDFVEI affected the fibril formation
by αA-mini-chaperone.

Amyloid fibrils interact with ThT,
and the resulting complex has increased fluorescence compared to that
of ThT by itself. When CP1 was treated
with ThT, there was no increase in fluorescence, confirming the absence
of an interaction between ThT and the peptide and the failure of CP1
to form fibril-like structures that are required for interaction with
ThT (Figure B). As expected, the addition
of ThT to αA-mini-chaperone incubated for 72 h was associated
with a 3-fold increase in fluorescence (Figure A). Such increased ThT fluorescence in the presence of αA-mini-chaperone
is consistent with TEM data that showed fibril formation by αA-mini-chaperone
and with the known correlation between ThT binding and fibril formation. To examine whether the addition of the C-terminal
sequence has any influence on the secondary structure of αA-mini-chaperone,
we performed secondary structural analysis of the peptide by CD spectrometry
(Figure ). Analysis of the far-UV CD spectrum
of the chaperone peptide indicated that the αA-mini-chaperone
peptide has β-sheet structure, which was not displayed by CP1
or its truncated peptides. These results suggest that the C-terminal
addition of two Glu residues to β-conformer peptide DFVIFLDVKHFSPEDLT
is sufficient to affect the secondary structure. The data further
suggest that the αA-crystallin C-terminal sequence EEKPTSAPSS
or residues from this peptide, when they are fused to the C-terminus
of mini-chaperone, a predominantly β-sheet peptide, impart a
random structure to the peptide. Surprisingly, the extended mini-chaperone
peptide, in spite of having the full sequence of β-sheet-forming
peptide, also did not show the CD conformation that reflects β-sheet
formation. When one of the residues in the core region of a β-sheet-forming
peptide is substituted with Pro (a β-sheet-breaking residue),
the β-sheet conformation of the peptide is known to be completely
abolished, as was also demonstrated in
our previous studies with αA-mini-chaperone as well as another β-sheet-forming peptide, αA-66–80
derived from αA-crystallin. Substitution
of Asp (corresponding to Asp-76) in αA-mini-chaperone with isomers l-β-, d-α-, and d-β-Asp
was found to change the β-sheet conformation into a random coil
structure. However, the fact that residues
away from a peptide sequence with a propensity to form β-sheet
structure influenced the conformation of the entire peptide in solution
is surprising. In all likelihood, the interactions between amino acid
residues from adjacent peptides are responsible for the apparent β-sheet
conformation in αA-mini-chaperone, whereas the lack of such
interactions in CP1 or extended mini-chaperone peptide is responsible
for random conformation in those peptides. Previously, it was reported
that an 11-residue peptide can form either α-helical or β-sheet
structure when introduced into different locations in the primary
sequence of the IgG-binding domain of protein G. The IgG study suggested that the nonlocal interactions
can determine the secondary structure of peptide sequences. Further
studies are required to determine the role of specific amino acids
in the CP1 peptide and their influence on the β-sheet conformation
of αA-mini-chaperone or truncated αA-mini-chaperone peptide
becoming a more random structure.

Interaction of Bis-ANS
with the CP1 Peptide
The emission
of bis-ANS, a hydrophobic site-specific probe, shifts to a lower wavelength,
and the fluorescence increases when it interacts with proteins or
peptides that possess significant hydrophobicity., Binding of bis-ANS to the CP1 peptide resulted in an ∼20%
decrease in the emission maximum of the fluorophore (Figure ). The bis-ANS binding property of CP1 was similar
to that of the hydrophobic probe binding to αA-mini-chaperone
or αB-mini-chaperones, as we reported previously. However, the increase in bis-ANS fluorescence
intensity observed with the CP1 peptide was ∼20% lower than
that recorded for αA-mini-chaperone and bis-ANS (Figure ). In contrast, the extended mini-chaperone showed
significantly less bis-ANS fluorescence and a red shift in the emission
maximum, indicating decreased hydrophobicity. Previous studies have
shown that the chaperone activity of αA-crystallin and mini-chaperone
is affected when the mutations lead to weakened ANS or bis-ANS binding. In our studies with the CP1 peptide, a slight
decrease in the level of bis-ANS binding had no bearing on chaperone
activity.

Effect of the CP1 Peptide and Extended Mini-Chaperone on the
Aggregation of Denaturing ADH, CS, and LA
It is known that
αA-mini-chaperone and αB-mini-chaperone, and their truncated
forms, possess substrate-dependent chaperone activity.,, Other studies have shown that
both αA- and αB-crystallins also exhibit different degrees
of chaperone efficiency with different client proteins., We previously reported that truncation of αA-mini-chaperone,
by removing five residues from the N-terminal region or from the C-terminal
region, leads to a significant reduction in chaperone activity., This study clearly demonstrates that extension of the C-terminus
of αA-mini-chaperone (Δ87–88), via fusion of the
αA-crystallin C-terminal residues EEKPTSAPSS,
does not diminish the chaperone-like activity of the mini-chaperone
toward client proteins ADH, CS, and LA, whereas a decrease in the
length of the fusion peptide affects the chaperone activity. The loss
of chaperone activity in the extended mini-chaperone peptide suggests
that, in peptide chaperones, the residues adjacent to the chaperone
sequence can also dictate the anti-aggregation activity of the peptide.
Further, the findings suggest that a peptide with negligible β-sheet
structure and significantly reduced bis-ANS binding capacity is not
a chaperone. Tanaka et al., have correlated the
chaperone-like activity of αA-mini-chaperone with its fibril
formation property. This study shows that αA-mini-chaperone
can be modified in such a way that the new peptide will display chaperone
activity when fibril forming capacity is compromised. The suppression
of fibril formation capacity in CP1 may have an advantage over the
original αA-mini-chaperone in the development of mini-chaperones
for clinical use because it is known that the peptide fibrils are
undesirable in vivo.

Mini-Chaperone Peptides
Derived from α-Crystallin Protect
COS-7 Cells from Oxidative Injury
The anti-apoptotic activity
of mini-chaperones (αA-mini-chaperone, CP1, and extended mini-chaperone)
was evaluated in COS-7 cells. Cells were treated with peptide chaperones
before being challenged with 150 mM H2O2, an
oxidative agent, and apoptotic cells were analyzed by the TUNEL assay.
The number of TUNEL-positive cells progressively decreased with increasing
concentrations of chaperone peptides (Figure ). At this time, the reason for the slight decrease in the anti-apoptotic
activity of CP1 (after correcting for the higher molecular weight)
is unclear.

Protection of ARPE-19 Cells from H2O2-Mediated
Oxidative Injury
It is well-known that H2O2 induces cell apoptosis via oxidative stress. To determine
the effect of mini-chaperones on H2O2-induced
cell apoptosis, we treated the ARPE-19 cells with 20 μg/mL chaperone
peptides before exposing the sample to 150 μM H2O2. Apoptotic cells were probed using FITC-labeled annexin V
and nuclear stain PI. The double-stained cells were analyzed by flow
cytometry. The data show that mini-chaperones effectively protected
the H2O2-induced apoptotic cascade in cells,
consistent with TUNEL assay results. The data show &gt;50% protection
against apoptosis with a peptide concentration of 20 μg/mL at
24 h. Inhibition of apoptosis in COS-7 and ARPE-19 cells exposed to
H2O2 is likely through inhibition of caspase-3,
because it has been shown that αA-mini-chaperone blocks the
conversion of pro-caspase into active caspase-3.

Conclusions
This is the first study
to show that chimeric peptide CP1 is resistant
to fibril formation, prevents protein aggregation, and protects cells
from apoptosis. These results also suggest that β-sheet structure
is not essential for the chaperone-like property of the αA-crystallin-derived
peptide chaperone.

Supporting Information Available
Elution profiles of chaperone
peptides from a Sephadex G-50 column show the aggregation propensity
of mini-αA but not CP1 peptide. This material is available free
of charge via the Internet at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bi4017268_si_002.pdf

The authors
declare no
competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
We thank Sharon Morey
for help in the preparation of the manuscript.

Abbreviations
LC–MSliquid chromatography–mass
spectrometry

RP-HPLCreverse-phase high-power liquid chromatography

TEMtransmission electron microscopy

CP1chimeric chaperone
peptide DFVIFLDVKHFSPEDLTEEKPTSAPSS

H2O2hydrogen peroxide

ADHalcohol dehydrogenase

DTTdithiothreitol

PC12pheochromocytoma

RPEretinal pigment epithelium

PIpropidium iodide

ThTthioflavin T

sHSPssmall heat shock proteins

CScitrate synthesis

LAα-lactalbumin

HEPES-KOH2-(hydroxyethyl)-1-piperazineethanesulfonic
acid potassium hydroxide

EDTAethylenediaminetetraacetic acid

CDcircular dichroism

UVultraviolet

bis-ANS4,4′-bis(1-anilinonaphthalene 8-sulfonate)

DMEMDulbecco’s
modified Eagle’s medium

TUNELTdT-mediated digoxigenin-dUTP nick end labeling

PBSphosphate-buffered
saline

FITCfluorescein
isothiocyanate.

