Cav2.1 P/Q-type channels are responsible
for the entry
of Ca2+ into synaptic terminals in many brain regions. P/Q-type function is therefore pivotal in the
regulation
of neurotransmitter release and communication throughout the central
nervous system (CNS). Indeed, mutations in the gene encoding the human
P/Q α1 subunit are responsible for a number of clinically
relevant neurological disorders. An interesting
feature of many Cav proteins
(Cav1.x and Cav2.x), including the P/Q channel,
is that channel activity is itself regulated by Ca2+. Ca2+-dependent channel modulation
manifests
as two distinct phenomena termed Ca2+-dependent inactivation
(CDI) and Ca2+-dependent facilitation
(CDF). CDI represents a mechanism by which
channels become refractory to further opening in the presence of a
sustained stimuli, whereas CDF manifests as the opposite process whereby
Ca2+ augments channel currents. Specific Ca2+-binding proteins can respond
to the entry of Ca2+ through Cav channels by
interacting directly with regulatory motifs present in the intracellular
domains of the α-subunit.− These interactions, by currently poorly understood
mechanisms, alter
channel behavior to elicit either CDI or CDF. CDI and CDF both have
a direct impact
on synaptic neurotransmitter release, the strength of synaptic signaling,
and ultimately synaptic plasticity. Understanding the basic modes
of Cav regulation at the molecular level therefore generates
insights into more abstract, higher-level, processes, including learning,
memory acquisition, and reasoning.

Of the characterized Ca2+-binding proteins that control Cav activity,
the ubiquitous small EF-hand-containing protein calmodulin (CaM) has
been most intensively studied. CaM has been shown to interact with
a consensus isoleucine-glutamine “IQ” motif present
in the carboxy terminus
of the channel, although the precise details of the interaction differ
for Cav1.x and Cav2.x subtypes., A second Ca2+-dependent CaM-binding motif immediately
C-terminal to the IQ domain has also been characterized in Cav2.1 P/Q-type channels. This CaM-binding
domain (CBD) has been found to influence
P/Q channel activity in some studies but
not others, and its true significance
remains somewhat controversial.

A number of CaM-related Ca2+-binding proteins are enriched
in the mammalian CNS and have been found to modulate the properties
of Cav channels. In all instances thus far characterized,
channel regulation is distinct from that observed with CaM, suggesting
nonredundant functions that have been thought to permit complex modes
of channel regulation and neuronal signaling. At present, two CaM-related Ca2+-binding proteins,
Ca2+-binding protein-1 (CaBP1) and visinin-like protein-2
(VILIP-2), have been shown to directly interact with P/Q-type α-subunits
to exert unique regulatory outcomes., Large numbers
of additional CaM-related small EF-hand-containing
proteins are also expressed in the mammalian CNS. Neuronal Ca2+ sensor-1 (NCS-1) is a CaM-related protein that is evolutionarily
conserved from yeast to humans and has
been implicated in specific human neuronal disorders.− Evidence of a regulatory role of NCS-1 on P/Q-type channels has
been
reported on the basis of physiological experiments in mammalian cells,
including an effect on CDF,− and a genetic study in Drosophila, although no direct
interaction between the two proteins has thus far been demonstrated.

In this paper, we aimed to use exclusive yet complementary analytical
methods to rigorously determine if there is a direct
interaction between NCS-1 and the α-subunit of the P/Q-type
channel and to provide the first evidence of an interaction between
a defined region of the C-terminal domain of the P/Q α-subunit
and NCS-1. We show that a segment of the P/Q α-subunit encoding
the IQ motif and CBD interacts with NCS-1 in a Ca2+-dependent
manner. Using mutagenesis and NMR experiments, we further refine the
NCS-1-binding site to the IQ motif and show that the interaction is
competitive with CaM. We provide further evidence using an ex vivo HeLa cell model that NCS-1 and the C-terminal tail
of Cav2.1 interact. These novel observations expand the
repertoire of P/Q-type interacting proteins and add to the potential
variety of modes by which such channels can be controlled.

Experimental
Procedures
Cloning
DNA constructs and molecular biology GST-NCS-1 and NCS-1-mCherry plasmids were as previously described. The coding
sequence for human CaM was amplified by polymerase chain reaction
(PCR) from oligo-dT(15)-primed HeLa cell RNA and reverse-transcribed
first-strand cDNA template with the following primer pair (based on
GenBank accession number M19311) containing restriction endonuclease
sites (underlined) for subcloning into N-terminal GST tag vector pGex6P-1
(Amersham Biosciences):
sense (BamHI), 5′-ATATGGATCCATGGCTGACCAACTGACTG-3′;
antisense (XhoI), 5′-ATATCTCGAGTCACTTTGCTGTCATCATTTG-3′.
GST-P/Q, encoding residues 1898–2035 of the rat P/Q channel
α1 subunit (GenBank accession
number NM_012918) was amplified by PCR from a rat brain single-strand cDNA template
with the following primer pair containing restriction endonuclease
sites (underlined) for subcloning into pGex6P-1: sense (BamHI), 5′-ATATGGATCCAAGTCCACGGACCTGACAGTG-3′;
antisense (XhoI), 5′-ATATCTCGAGCTAGGGGAGGTAGTGTTCGCTGTC-3′.
GST-CBD (residues 1950–2035) of the rat P/Q channel α1 subunit was amplified
by PCR from the GST-P/Q template using the P/Q reverse primer and
a sense primer containing a BamHI site (underlined)
for subsequent subcloning into pGex6P-1 (5′-ATATGGATCCGAGGGAGGACCCAGCCAAAAC-3′).
GST-P/QIM→EE was generated by site-directed mutagenesis
of the GST-P/Q plasmid using the QuikChange reagents and protocol
(Agilent Technologies)
and the following primer pair: sense, 5′-AAGATCTACGCAGCCATGATGGAGGAGGAGTACTACCGGCAGAGCAAG-3′;
antisense, 5′-CTTGCTCTGCCGGTAGTACTCCTCCTCCAGCAGGGCTGCGTAGATCTT-3′.

SUMO-tagged residues 1909–2035 of the rat P/Q channel α1 subunit were amplified
by PCR from the GST-P/Q template encoding residues 1898–2035
with the following primer pair for subcloning into the pOPINS vector:
sense, 5′-GCGAACAGATCGGTGGTGCAGCCATGATGATCATGGAG-3′;
antisense, 5-ATGGTCTAGAAAGCTTTAGGGGAGGTAGTGTTCGCTGT-3′.
Ligation of the PCR product and KpnI/HindIII-digested vector employed the infusion reaction method
(Clontech) according to the manufacturer’s protocol.

Myristoylated PQ (residues 1898–2035, myrPQ-YFP)
was constructed as follows. A DNA fragment
encoding the myristoylation sequence taken from ref () was inserted between the XhoI and HindIII sites of pEYFP-N1 (Clontech)
to generate pmyrEYFP-N1.
PQ1898–2035 was amplified by PCR from the existing
pGex template with
the following primer pair containing restriction endonuclease sites
(underlined) for subsequent subcloning into pmyrEYFP-N1:
sense (HindIII), 5′-ATAT AAG CTT AAG TCC ACG
GAC CTG ACA GTG-3′; antisense
(SacII), 5′-ATAT CCG CGG GGG GAG GTA GTG TTC
GCT GTC-3′. All constructs were verified by dideoxy sequencing
(The Sequencing Service, University of Dundee, Dundee, U.K.).

Cell Culture
and Plasmid Transfections
HeLa cells were
cultured in DMEM supplemented with 10% (v/v) fetal bovine serum, 1%
(v/v) penicillin/streptomycin, and 1% (v/v) nonessential amino acids.
All cells were maintained in a humidified 95% air/5% CO2 atmosphere at 37 °C. Cells were plated onto
sterile 13 mm round coverslips at a density of 0.25 ×
106 cells/well. After 24 h, cells were transiently transfected
with the indicated expression
vectors using GeneJuice transfection reagent (Novagen) according to
the manufacturer’s protocol. For single and double transfections,
1
μg of each plasmid was used.

Cell Fixation and Confocal
Imaging Analysis
Twenty-four
hours post-transfection, cells on coverslips were washed
with phosphate-buffered saline [137 mM NaCl, 2.7 mM KCl, 10 mM Na2PO4, and 2 mM NaH2PO4 (pH
7.4)] and then fixed with 4% (v/v)
formaldehyde in PBS for 6 min at room temperature. Coverslips were
subsequently air-dried and
mounted onto microscope slides using Prolong antifade glycerol (Life
Technologies). Fixed cells were imaged using a Leica
TCS-SP2 confocal system (Leica Microsystems, Heidelberg, Germany)
with a pinhole set to 1 Airy unit and a 63× oil immersion objective
with a numerical aperture of 1.3. Images were exported as TIFF files
and compiled, processed, and analyzed with ImageJ and CorelDraw X6
applications.

In Vitro Binding Assays
For the In vitro protein binding assays, 5 μM
GST fusion protein (GST-P/Q, GST-P/QIM→EE, or GST-CBD)
was immobilized onto 30 μL of glutathione-agarose resin (Thermo
Scientific) that had been prewashed in binding buffer (BB) [150 mM
KCl, 20 mM HEPES (pH 7.4), 10% (v/v) glycerol, 5 mM NTA, 5 mM EGTA,
1
mM DTT, and 0.1% (v/v) NP-40] or BB supplemented with 1 μM free
Ca2+ (BB+Ca2+) by incubation
for 30 min with constant agitation at 4 °C. GST-free
NCS-1 and CaM were added to samples at concentrations of 5 μM
(total final binding assay volumes of 100 μL) and incubations
continued for 1 h with constant agitation at 4 °C. For competition
binding assays, 5 μM GST-P/Q was prebound
to glutathione-agarose resin in BB+Ca2+ by incubation
for 30 min at 4 °C with constant agitation; 5 μM NCS-1
was then added to samples in the presence of increasing concentrations
of CaM ranging from 0 to 10 μM. Binding reactions were continued
for 1 h at 4 °C while
the mixtures were constantly agitated. For the Ca2+ dose
dependency of the NCS-1/GST-P/Q interaction, 1 μM GST-P/Q was
incubated with 1 μM NCS-1 in the presence of increasing concentrations
of free Ca2+. For all binding assays, glutathione-agarose
pellets were
collected by centrifugation (3000 rpm for
1 min at 4 °C) and
washed three times with 1 mL of BB or BB+Ca2+ and bound
proteins were extracted by boiling of final bead pellets
for 5 min in 50 μL of SDS dissociation buffer [125 mM HEPES
(pH 6.8), 10% (w/v) sucrose, 10% (v/v) glycerol, 4% (w/v)
SDS, 1% (v/v) β-mercaptoethanol, and 2 mM EDTA]. Proteins were
resolved on 4 to 12% Tris-glycine gradient gels (Novex, Life Technologies)
and transferred to nitrocellulose membranes for
Western blotting by transverse electrophoresis.

Western Blots
Nitrocellulose filters were blocked by
incubation in a blocking solution [3% (w/v) skim milk powder in PBS]
for 1 h at room temperature. Filters were subsequently incubated with
a
primary antibody [rabbit anti-NCS-1 (1:1000) or rabbit
anti-calmodulin (1:500) (AbCam)] diluted in a blocking solution overnight
at 4 °C with constant agitation. Filters were washed
three times in PBS supplemented with 0.05% (v/v) Tween 20 (PBST) and
twice with PBS before being incubated with a HRP-conjugated species
specific secondary antibody (1:400, anti-rabbit HRP, Sigma) in a blocking
solution for 1 h at room temperature. Filters were washed three times
with PBST and
twice with PBS prior to application of ECL reagents and visualization
of immunoreactivity using a Chemidoc automated gel/blot documentation
system (Bio-Rad). Densitometry analysis of developed Western blots
was performed using Quantity-1 (Bio-Rad). For the Ca2+ dose
dependency of the NCS-1/GST-P/Q interaction, densitometry data were
analyzed
by applying nonlinear curve fitting with OriginPro8 (OriginLab).

Synthetic Peptide
The peptide used corresponds to residues
1903–1929
of the human P/Q receptor. The synthetic P/Q peptide, TVGKIYAAMMIMEYYRQSKAKKLQAMR
(hereafter termed the PQIQ peptide), was purchased from GenicBio.
The peptide was delivered &gt;95% pure.

Protein Expression and
Purification
NCS-1 was expressed
in Escherichia coli strain BL21(DE3) (Novagen) and
purified as previously described. Expression
was induced overnight at 18 °C; cells were harvested, resuspended
into lysis buffer [50 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.5), 200 mM NaCl, 5 mM CaCl2, and Complete EDTA Free Protease Inhibitor (Roche
Applied Science)], lysed, centrifuged, filtered, and loaded onto the
Hiprep 16/10 Phenyl FF High Sub (GE Healthcare) column that was pre-equilibrated
with buffer A [50 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.5), 200 mM NaCl, and 5 mM CaCl2]. The column
was extensively washed with buffer A and NCS-1 eluted using Milli-Q
water.
The eluted protein was buffer exchanged into 50 mM Tris (pH 7.4) and
500 mM NaCl, and the N-terminal His tag was removed by incubating
the protein overnight at 4 °C using TEV protease
(1:20 TEV protease:NCS-1 molar ratio). His-tagged uncleaved NCS-1
and TEV protease were separated for cleaved NCS-1 using a HisTrap
FF 5 mL affinity column (GE Healthcare). The cleaved NCS-1 was further
purified
using a Superdex 75 Hiload 26/60 (Amersham Biosciences) size-exclusion
column [50 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.5) and 150 mM NaCl]. The purity of the
sample was assessed by sodium dodecyl sulfate–polyacrylamide
gel electrophoresis (SDS–PAGE) and deemed to be &gt;95% pure.
The eluted peak was concentrated and stored at −80
°C.

Calmodulin was cloned into a pET-15b (Novagen)
vector (gift from A. Kitmitto, University of Manchester, Manchester,
U.K.) and expressed in E. coli strain BL21(DE3)
(Novagen) at 37 °C. Harvested cells were resuspended
in lysis buffer [50 mM Tris (pH 7.5) and 2 mM DTT], disrupted using
a French press (Sim Aminco) at 1000 psi, and
centrifuged, and the supernatant was recovered, CaCl2 added
to a final concentration of 2 mM, and the protein solution loaded
onto a 20 mL HiPrep phenyl sepharose hydrophobic column (GE
Healthcare), pre-equilibrated with CaM buffer A [50 mM Tris (pH 7.5),
200
mM NaCl, 2 mM CaCl2, and 0.5 mM DTT]. The column was washed
with CaM buffer A, followed by buffer
B [50 mM Tris (pH 7.5), 0.5 mM CaCl2, and 0.5 mM DTT],
and pure calmodulin eluted with CaM buffer C [50 mM Tris (pH 7.5),
1
mM EGTA, and 0.5 mM DTT]. The protein was further purified using a
26/60 Superdex 75 (GE Healthcare) size-exclusion column pre-equilibrated
with CaM
gel filtration (GF) buffer [50 mM Tris (pH 7.5), 200 mM NaCl, 10 mM
CaCl2, and 0.5 mM DTT]. The sample was loaded before isocratic
elution. The purity
of the sample was assessed by SDS–PAGE and deemed to be &gt;95%
pure. CaM was dialyzed against water and lyophilized before being
stored at −20
°C.

15N-labeled SUMO-tagged PQIQ 1909–2035
was expressed in E. coli BL21(DE3) in
2M9 medium with overnight incubation 18 °C, and cells
were harvested and resuspended in lysis buffer [50 mM Tris-HCl (pH
7.4) and 500 mM NaCl] supplemented with Compete EDTA Free Protease
Inhibitor (Roche
Applied Science). The cells were lysed; 250 μg of bovine pancreas
deoxyribonuclease I (Sigma) was added, the sample
centrifuged, and the supernatant collected, filtered through 0.22
μm acrodisc, and loaded onto a HisTrap 5 mL FF column (GE Healthcare)
pre-equilibrated with buffer A [50 mM
Tris-HCl (pH 7.4) and 500 mM NaCl]. Unbound proteins were removed
through an extensive wash with buffer A, with further successive washes
with buffer A containing 10, 25, and 50 mM imidazole. SUMO-tagged
PQIQ 1909–2035 was eluted with buffer A containing 250 mM imidazole
and buffer exchanged into SUMO cleavage buffer [50 mM Tris (pH 7.4)
and 150 mM NaCl], and SUMO protease was added and the solution incubated
overnight.
Cleaved PQIQ 1909–2035 was separated from the His-SUMO tag
by reloading the sample onto
the HisTrap 5 mL FF column. PQIQ 1909–2035 was further purified
using a Superdex 57 26/60 (GE Healthcare) size-exclusion
column. The eluted protein was dialyzed against Milli-Q water and
stored as lyophilized samples. Confirmation of the identity of purified
PQIQ 1909–2035 was achieved via matrix-assisted laser desorption
ionization time-of-flight
mass spectrometry performed on unlabeled PQIQ 1909–2035 prepared
using a procedure identical to that described above.

Isothermal
Titration Calorimetry
ITC experiments were
performed using a MicroCal ITC200 instrument. Because of
limitations in PQIQ peptide solubility, NCS-1 was titrated into the
peptide. Ca2+/NCS-1 at 1 mM was prepared by buffer exchange
using a PD10 column equilibrated
in 50 mM Tris (pH 7.5), 50 mM NaCl, and 5 mM CaCl2, and
the PQIQ
peptide solution at 100 μM was prepared using the same buffer.
If necessary, minor adjustments were made to the pH of the peptide
solution. Experiments were conducted using 200 μL of 100 μM
PQIQ peptide in the cell and 60 μL of 1 mM NCS-1 in the syringe
at 25 °C. One injection of 0.2 μL, followed by 20 injections
of 2 μL, was made with a 180 s spacing to allow the baseline
to return after each injection. All
experiments were performed in triplicate. The data were analyzed with
a one-site (three-parameter) curve fitting conducted using
the MicroCal-supported ITC module within Origin version 7.

Spectrofluorimetry
To monitor the intrinsic tryptophan
fluorescence of NCS proteins,, purified recombinant
NCS-1 at a concentration of 1 μM in a buffer [50 mM Tris (pH
7.5), 50 mM NaCl, and 5 mM CaCl2] was excited at room temperature
with 280 nm wavelength light and the emission measured between 290
and 410
nm with a slit width of 20 nm using a CARY Eclipse spectrofluorimeter.
The PQIQ peptide (stocks ranging from 50 μM
to 1 mM) was then added to give an incremental increase
in peptide concentration, and emission spectra were acquired after
each addition. Experiments were performed in triplicate. The data
for the measured tryptophan fluorescence change at each peptide concentration
were fit to a logistic equation using nonlinear curve fitting in OriginPro
version 9.0.

NMR Spectroscopy
NCS-1 was prepared
in Tris buffer
(pH 6.8) in the presence of 5 mM CaCl2. NMR spectra were
recorded at 298 K on Bruker Avance II 800 and 600 MHz spectrometers
equipped with
cryoprobes. Data were processed using Bruker Software TopSpin and
analyzed
using CCPN. Sequence specific assignment
of the PQIQ peptide was
achieved using homonuclear two-dimensional TOCSY, COSY, and NOESY
data. 13C- and 15N-filtered TOCSY and NOESY
experiments were used to assign the peptide resonances in complex
with [13C,15N]NCS-1.

Results
The aim
of this study was to test, using a range of complementary
methods, the possibility that the small calcium-sensing protein NCS-1
directly interacts with the Cav2.1 P/Q-type Ca2+ channel as has been indirectly suggested in prior functional studies.− With the knowledge that other known small EF-hand Ca2+-binding proteins interact with the α-subunit of the P/Q channel
predominantly through motifs located in the C-terminal tail, we reasoned
that the same domains represent the most likely sites for an NCS-1
interaction. In initial experiments, we generated a recombinant, GST-tagged,
form of the P/Q α1 subunit C-terminal tail domain
corresponding to residues 1898–2035 (Figure , GST-PQ). This fragment encompasses
both the IQ motif (IM in the P/Q-type channel) and the CaM-binding
domain (CBD). Two further constructs
derived from this precursor were
the CBD alone [residues 1950–2035 (Figure , GST-CBD)] and an IQ motif mutant
in which the P/Q channel IM residues at positions 1913 and 1914 were
mutated to glutamic acid to generate an IM →
EE double mutant (Figure , GSTIM→EE). This mutation has been previously shown to abolish
CaM-dependent CDF and CDI of the human P/Q-type channel. We used these constructs to investigate whether
recombinant
NCS-1 could associate with P/Q-type C-terminal regulatory domains in vitro. NCS-1 exhibited Ca2+-dependent binding
to GST-PQ but was not observed to bind to either GST-CBD or GSTIM→EE under any tested conditions (Figure A), suggesting a specific interaction with residues in the
IQ region of the channel. Averaged densitometry data from three independent
binding experiments are listed in Table .

Interactions
of NCS-1 and CaM with rat PQ α1 subunit
C-terminal binding motifs. (A) Recombinant NCS-1 was incubated with
GST-PQ (residues 1898–2035 of the rat PQ α1 subunit, encompassing both the IQ and CBD motifs), GSTIM→EE (equivalent to the IQ motif present in Cav1.x channels),
and GST-CBD (residues 1950–2035 of the rat PQ α1 subunit) in the presence or absence of 1 μM free Ca2+. Bound NCS-1 was detected by Western blotting with a specific antibody.
This blot is a representative result, and averaged data from three
independent binding assays are listed in Table . (B) Densitometry quantification of an NCS-1/GST-PQ binding Ca2+ dose response. Recombinant NCS-1 (1 μM) was incubated
with 1 μM GST-PQ in the presence of increasing concentrations
of free Ca2+ and bound protein detected by Western blotting
with an anti-NCS-1 specific antibody. Western blot signal intensities
were quantified by densitometry and plotted as a function of free
Ca2+ concentration present in the binding reaction mixture.
(C) Recombinant CaM was incubated with GST-PQ, GSTIM→EE, and GST-CBD in the presence or absence of 1 μM free Ca2+. Bound CaM was detected by Western blotting with a specific
antibody.

Average Densitometry
Data for Three
Independent NCS-1/GST PQ Binding Assays Described in Figure A
condition	average NCS-1 bound
(%)	SEM (n = 3)	
GST-PQ
with Ca2+	100	–	
GST-PQ without Ca2+	31.2	3.7	
GST-CBD
with Ca2+	20.3	10.2	
GST-CBD without
Ca2+	4.9	4.9	
GSTIM→EE with
Ca2+	10.3	3.9	
GSTIM→EE without
Ca2+	2.8	2.0	
Maximal binding (NCS-1 bound
to GST-PQ in the presence of calcium for all experiments) was set
to 100% binding. Minimal binding for each assay (NCS-1 bound to either
GST-CBD or GSTIM→EE in the absence of calcium depending
on the experiment) was set to 0% binding. All other data were normalized
in this range.

A Ca2+ titration of binding of NCS-1 to GST-PQ confirmed
the Ca2+ dependency of the interaction and allowed us to
derive a Kd of 0.7 μM based on densitometry
quantification of Western blot data (Figure B). For comparison, we performed the same binding
analysis with CaM (Figure C). Similar to our
results with NCS-1, CaM displayed Ca2+-dependent binding
to GST-PQ but no detectable binding under any conditions to either
GST-CBD or GSTIM→EE.

Our initial data suggested
that both NCS-1 and CaM could interact
with the same IQ motif region of the rat P/Q-type channel, and therefore,
we extended our binding studies to evaluate the potential existence
of a common, overlapping, binding site for both proteins. Competitive
association of both proteins with GST-PQ was assessed by binding of
NCS-1 to GST-PQ in the presence of increasing concentrations of recombinant
CaM (Figure ). Western blot results from these
experiments highlighted a clear displacement of NCS-1 from GST-PQ
that was first apparent at a CaM concentration between 0.3 and 1 μM
(Figure A). Densitometry analysis of the
Western blot data confirmed a competitive association between NCS-1
and CaM for GST-PQ (Figure B). Our initial
experiments indicated that the IQ-like motif of the P/Q-type channel
is important for interaction with both NCS-1 and CaM, and therefore,
in subsequent NMR and ITC analyses, we focused on only this region
of the channel.

Competitive interaction between NCS-1 and CaM for binding
to GST-PQ.
(A) NCS-1 (5 μM) was incubated with 5 μM GST-PQ in the
presence of varying concentrations of CaM. Bound NCS-1 and CaM were
visualized by Western blotting with specific antibodies. (B) Data
from panel A were quantified by densitometry, and NCS-1/CaM bound
to GST-PQ was plotted as a function of the CaM concentration present
in the binding assay.

Further testing of the ability of NCS-1 to bind the P/Q-type
channel
and to delineate the NCS-1- and CaM-binding regions of the P/Q-type
channel was performed using NMR experiments. A sample of 15N-labeled P/Q spanning residues 1909–2035 (encompassing much
of the
IQ motif and the CBD) was prepared. Addition of CaM shows chemical
shift perturbations of glycine and tryptophan residues, whereas NCS-1
has no effect on either group of residues (Figure ). Glycine and tryptophan residues are located in the CBD
region but not in or around the IQ segment. Hence, it is clear that
NCS-1 does not bind to the CBD of the P/Q channel, although there
is an indication that there is weak binding of CaM to this site.

Delineation
of binding of NCS-1 to PQ 1909–2035. 1H–15N HSQC spectra of 15N-labeled PQ1909–2035
in the presence (A) and absence of CaM (B) and of NCS-1 (C), showing
the glycine amide resonance, and (D) tryptophan NεH resonances. Panel A shows the full 15N–1H spectrum; expanded regions show resonances from only glycine amide
(B and C) and tryptophan indole (D) groups. (E) The amino acid sequence
of PQ 1909–2035 is shown with glycine and tryptophan residues
colored blue. The likely CaM- and NCS-1-binding region is indicated.

Knowing from the
experiments
described above that the major site of binding of NCS-1 on the P/Q
C-terminal domain was likely to be the IQ motif, we used a synthetic
PQIQ peptide in subsequent experiments. The intrinsic tryptophan fluorescence
of NCS-1 was used to measure interactions with the PQIQ peptide (Figure ), using an approach similar to that described for
the interactions with the D2 dopamine receptor peptide. NCS-1 has two tryptophan residues; addition
of the PQIQ
peptide resulted in a decrease in fluorescence and allowed titration
of the peptide over a range of concentrations (Figure A). The data for the change in fluorescence versus concentration
were analyzed using a logistic fit. The dose response upon titration
with the PQIQ indicated half-maximal binding at 1.036 ±
0.07 μM with a Hill coefficient of 1.7. Hill coefficients
greater than 1 would be consistent with a 2:1 stoichiometry of peptide
binding to NCS-1 because NCS-1 itself was monomeric. ITC shows that the interaction is entropically
driven. Because of the tendency of the protein complex
to aggregate at the high peptide (100 μM) and protein concentrations
(1
mM) required to observe binding by this method, it was not possible
to obtain reliable equilibrium binding constants using ITC. The affinity
obtained for the interaction of NCS-1 with the PQIQ peptide is almost
1 order of magnitude lower than the reported affinities involving
the calmodulin lobes. From ITC experiments, Kd values of 51 ± 20 and 4.32 ±
0.39 nM were obtained for binding of the Ca2+/N and Ca2+/C lobes, respectively, to the IQ domain of
the PQ channel. The two lobes in NCS-1
are intimately linked, and attempts
to express the two NCS-1 lobes as independently folded domains soluble
at micomolar concentrations have met with little success so far. Therefore,
experiments that aimed to disentangle the relative affinities of the
two NCS-1 domains for the PQIQ peptide have not been possible.

Binding of
the PQIQ peptide to NCS-1 monitored using tryptophan
fluorescence. Changes in tryptophan fluorescence following sequential
additions of the PQIQ peptide to the final indicated concentrations.
Recombinant NCS-1 at a concentration of 1 μM in a buffer [50
mM Tris (pH 7.5), 50 mM NaCl, and 5 mM CaCl2] was titrated
with PQIQ at 50 μM to 1 mM under the same buffer conditions.
The data were fit using a logistic equation and nonlinear curve fitting.
Data are plotted as means ± SEM for three independent experiments.

To determine which region of the
PQIQ peptide forms the NCS-1-binding
site, we again used NMR. In these experiments, [13C,15N]NCS-1 was titrated into a sample of the unlabeled PQIQ
peptide and 13C- and 15N-filtered TOCSY
and NOESY data were acquired. Analysis of the side chain resonances,
in particular the methyl and tyrosine resonances, reveals selective
line broadening for 14 residues, YAAMMIMEYYRQSK
(Figure A). Hence, a subset of the 27 amino
acids in the polypeptide sequence forms the main interaction site
for NCS-1 binding, with the residues beyond this core peptide region
further enhancing the interaction. The length of this motif correlates
well with the recently reported structure of NCS-1 in complex with
the C-terminal peptide from the human D2 dopamine receptor (Protein
Data Bank entry 2YOU). The 14-amino acid motif is short enough for it to bind NCS-1 with
a stoichiometry of 2:1 (peptide:NCS-1) and supports the fluorescence
binding data.

1H TOCSY and HSQC spectra showing PQIQ–NCS-1
interactions. (A) The TOCSY spectrum of the PQIQ peptide delineates
the NCS-1-binding region. Line broadening was observed for selected
resonances in the presence of a 2-fold excess of NCS-1. Line-broadened
resolved resonances from Y4, A7, A8, I11, and R16 are highlighted:
aromatic resonances (left) and aliphatic resonances (middle and right).
(B) 1H–15N HSQC spectra of [15N]NCS-1 (0.8 mM, black) in the presence of PQIQ (final concentration
of 0.4 mM, red) in 50 mM Tris buffer (pH 6.5), 50 mM NaCl, and 5 mM
CaCl2 at 300 K.

NMR 1H–15N HSQC of NCS-1 in
the presence of a 2-fold excess of PQIQ shows resonances that are
universally broadened although
still discernible to confirm that the protein remains folded (Figure B). Addition of equimolar amounts of unlabeled CaM/Ca2+ to the preformed 15N-labeled NCS-1/PQIQ complex
led to a complete reversion of the 1H–15N HSQC C spectrum to that of free NCS-1. This is further
confirmation that NCS-1 and CaM bind to similar sites on the PQ channel,
with, as expected, CaM binding the peptide sufficiently strongly to
displace it from NCS-1.

The experiments described above show
that a direct interaction
of NCS-1 with the P/Q C-terminus could be detected using three distinct in vitro biochemical approaches. To provide evidence of
the interaction of NCS-1 with the P/Q channel regulatory domain in
a more physiological setting, we studied the localization of these
proteins ex vivo in cultured HeLa cells.
For these experiments, we returned to the use of a longer recombinant
construct encompassing both the IQ and CBD domains of the P/Q C-terminus.
We first examined the cellular localization of both NCS-1-mCherry and a C-terminally
YFP-tagged variant of P/Q 1898–2035 to which an N-terminal
myristoylation consensus sequence had been
attached (myrPQ-YFP). In previous studies, this approach
has been used to successfully direct isolated soluble domains of plasma
membrane proteins to the plasma membrane for functional analyses. NCS-1-mCherry exhibited a predominantly perinuclear
localization
consistent with its association with the TGN in addition to some
plasma membrane localization (Figure A).myrPQ-YFP was observed to target
the plasma
membrane and/or large cytosolic puncta (Figure A). Plasma membrane association of myrPQ-YFP suggested
that myristoylation of the peptide was accurately targeting a fraction
of PQ to the expected location. Interestingly, in cells exhibiting myrPQ-YFP puncta, co-expressed NCS-1-mCherry failed to localize
to the TGN or plasma membrane and instead colocalized with myrPQ-YFP on the enlarged punctate structures (Figure B). We quantified these phenomena and were able
to demonstrate that in 39.5 ± 9.2% of cells cotransfected with
NCS-1-mCherry and myrPQ-YFP puncta were observed
and that in 100% of this subpopulation NCS-1 protein was associated
with large myrPQ-YFP positive
punctate structures (Figure C, NCS-1-mCh + myrPQ-YFP). This was similar to the number of cells exhibiting
puncta in myrPQ-YFP/mCherry controls [43.6 ± 3% (Figure C, myrPQ-YFP + mCherry)]. In contrast,
control cells expressing NCS-1-mCherry along with EYFP protein exhibited
no observable formation of puncta (Figure C, NCS-1-mCh + EYFP). It should be noted that colocalization of NCS-1-mCherry
with myrPQ-YFP in punctate structures
was specific for NCS-1 as no colocalization was observed with the
soluble mCherry protein in control cotransfections (data not shown).
These observations are consistent with a direct
interaction of NCS-1-mCherry with myrPQ-YFP in a cellular
context.

Expression of NCS-1 and PQ in HeLa cells. (A) HeLa cells were cotransfected
with NCS-1-mCherry (red) and EYFP (green) or mCherry (red) or (B)
NCS-1-mCherry (red) and myrPQ-YFP (green). Regions of colocalization
are colored yellow in overlay images. Scale bars are 10 μm.
(C) Quantification of data from panels A and B. Cells were counted
and scored for the presence of puncta {three independent experiments
from each control condition [NCS-1-mCh + EYFP and myrPQ-YFP
+ mCherry (A)]} or four independent experiments [NCS-1-mCh + myrPQ-YFP (B)]. The total number of cells counted for all experiments
and for each condition is shown above the corresponding bar on the
histogram. All data are plotted as means ± SEM.

Discussion
In this paper, we set
out to examine whether NCS-1 is able to interact
directly with the C-terminus of the α1 subunit of
the P/Q-type channel. To avoid a potentially misleading indication
of a positive interaction, we tested this using three separate in vitro biochemical/biophysical assays using either a long
construct from the P/Q C-terminus or a synthetic IQ domain peptide
as well as a test through cellular colocalization. The use of multiple
techniques gives
a more rigorous approach to addressing the question of whether a significant
direct interaction does exist. In all cases, we were able to detect
a direct interaction between NCS-1 and P/Q-type Ca2+ channels.

P/Q-type channel regulation by small Ca2+-binding proteins
is essential in the mammalian CNS for the processes of CDI and CDF
that drive short-term presynaptic
plasticity. Alterations in synaptic plasticity
of this form in turn influence
information processing and neural network behavior that underpin the
normal functioning of the CNS. A large
body of experimental evidence that describes
at the molecular level how CaM is able to regulate all Cav-type channels, including those of the P/Q subtype, has accumulated.
CaM is constitutively associated with the P/Q α subunit and
is considered an auxiliary subunit of the channel. Apo-CaM is believed
to bind to the P/Q α subunit at a site outside of, but in the
proximity of, the Ca2+-dependent IQ-binding site, as determined
using a Förster resonance energy transfer approach in cultured
mammalian cells. It has been suggested
that this arrangement locates
CaM within striking distance of the regulatory IQ motif to ensure
fast responses to Ca2+ influx on channel opening. Ca2+-dependent binding of CaM to
the IQ motif
is then able to modulate both CDI and CDF depending on the precise
nature of the Ca2+ signal. Mechanistically, this system
has been resolved in elegant experiments showing that Ca2+ entry through individual P/Qα channels selectively activates
the CaM C-lobe to mediate CDF. Larger Ca2+ signals emanating
from multiple local channel opening events conversely activate the
CaM N-lobe to drive CDI.,, Our data confirming a Ca2+-dependent interaction of CaM
with the P/Q containing the IQ motif are consistent with previous
biochemical and structural analyses. A second CaM-binding site, the CaM-binding domain
(CBD),
has been reported in related studies of P/Q–channel interactions., In this study, although we have been unable to replicate binding
of CaM to this region of the rat α1A CBD using pull-down
experiments, the NMR data suggest that CaM, but not NCS-1, binds to
the proposed CBD, albeit rather weakly. The weak nature of this interaction
might explain why there are discrepancies in the literature regarding
the significance of the CBD. Pull-down-type experiments select for
high-affinity interactions, whereas NMR approaches are able to detect
lower-affinity transient binding events consistent with these results.
Our data help reconcile apparently conflicting experimental data as
some studies do observe a CaM–CBD interaction, whereas others do not.

NCS-1,
a multifunctional Ca2+ sensor conserved from
yeast to humans, has documented roles in the regulation of membrane
trafficking,, ion channel activity,, dopamine receptor signaling,, long-term depression, autism,, and memory acquisition., NCS-1 exhibits enriched
expression in mammalian brain tissue, and many of the aforementioned functions are
related to neuronal activity. NCS-1 interacts with a number of targets
in common with CaM, and a previous functional
study identified links between NCS-1 and CDF of P/Q-type channel activity
in rat primary neurons. Other studies
have additionally indicated a cellular
connection between NCS-1 and P/Q-type channel activity in bovine adrenal
chromaffin cells, and Drosophila. With this information in mind, we
have tested the possibility
that NCS-1 can directly bind to P/Q regulatory elements in common
with CaM and other EF-hand-containing Ca2+ sensors., Our data show that NCS-1 can associate with the IQ motif of rat
P/Qα1A in a Ca2+-dependent manner and
that this binding
site must overlap to some extent with that of CaM because CaM can
compete for binding to the same region leading to NCS-1 displacement.
This is the first example of a CaM-related Ca2+-sensing
protein behaving in a manner almost identical to that of CaM with
respect to IQ binding. Both CaBP1 and
VILIP-2 interact with the CBD or require
this domain for functional activity. CaM binds predominantly to the
IQ domain with a possible weak interaction with the CBD, and NCS-1
binds to only the IQ domain in the presence of Ca2+. The
weak CaM–CBD interaction that we have observed in this study
might also help to explain why CaBP1 and VILIP-2 are able to effectively
compete with CaM at this site.,

The precise details
of the NCS-1 interaction are still to be elucidated.
In rat primary neurons, NCS-1 appears to play a role during CDF, and in Drosophila, loss of
the NCS-1 orthologue Frequenin leads to a reduced level of entry of
Ca2+ into neurons and defective synaptic transmission. These data suggest that at least one function
of NCS-1
is in positively regulating P/Q channel opening. Our data now provide
an attractive biochemical explanation for these cellular studies and
act as a platform for further cellular and structural investigations
studying the interplay between CaM and NCS-1 during regulation of
P/Q channel activity. CaM is expressed in all neurons, and one possibility
is that specific neuronal populations that also express NCS-1 are
able to utilize this Ca2+ sensor as an additional modulator
of P/Q activity.
NCS-1 has a Ca2+ affinity higher than that of CaM, and therefore could potentially interact with the IQ motif over
a different range of local Ca2+ concentrations to modulate
activity in a manner independent of CaM. As Ca2+ concentrations
increase, CaM could then displace NCS-1 to exert its documented roles
in CDF and CDI. The N- and C-lobes of CaM, as described, exert distinct
modes of P/Q channel regulation. NCS-1, unlike CaM, does not have
distinct lobes but rather a compact globular structure. The orientations of the N- and C-lobes with
respect
to one another differ in the two proteins, giving rise to different
conformations of the ligand-binding site. Residues from both lobes
in NCS-1 together form a large, contiguous solvent-exposed hydrophobic
ligand-binding crevice, resembling the palm of a partially open hand.
In the Ca2+/CaM–PQIQ complex, the hydrophobic
binding pocket is more enclosed, resembling a closed hand that envelops
the PQIQ peptide. It is, therefore, not possible to model a structure
of NCS-1 in complex with the PQIQ peptide based on the Ca2+/CaM complex structure. It is likely that binding the PQIQ peptide
would require a significant conformational change to the overall structure
of NCS-1 to accommodate the peptide.

Using a combination of in vitro biochemical, NMR
and ITC biophysical, and cellular approaches, we provide the first
evidence of a direct interaction of NCS-1 with P/Q-type voltage-gated
Ca2+ channels. Voltage-gated Ca2+ channel modulation
has direct implications for synaptic plasticity and complex neural
processing in higher organisms. Our work expands the number of small
Ca2+-sensing proteins that can interact with the essential
P/Q-type neuronal channel and provides further insights into the complexity
of the regulation of voltage-gated Ca2+ channels in the
mammalian CNS. Extensive further work will be required to determine
the full structural basis for the interaction of NCS-1 with the P/Q
IQ domain.

This work was supported by Wellcome
Trust Prize Ph.D. studentships awarded to V.M.M. and P.A.C.T. and
a University of Liverpool Studentship awarded to S.R.P.

The authors declare no competing
financial interest.

Abbreviations
Ca2+calcium

CaMcalmodulin

NCS-1neuronal calcium
sensor-1

CaBPcalcium-binding
protein

Cavvoltage-gated Ca2+ channel

CDICa2+-dependent inactivation

CDFCa2+-dependent
facilitation

CNScentral nervous system

PBSphosphate-buffered saline

NTAnitrilotriacetic acid

EGTAethylene glycol tetraacetic acid

EDTAethylenediaminetetraacetic
acid

SDSsodium
dodecyl sulfate

HEPES2-[4-(2-hydroxyethyl)piperazin-1-yl]ethanesulfonic acid

DTTdithiothreitol

HRPhorseradish peroxidase

ECLenhanced chemiluminescence

ITCisothermal titration
calorimetry

NMRnuclear magnetic resonance

COSYcorrelation spectroscopy

HSQCheteronuclear single-quantum correlation

NOESYnuclear Overhauser
spectroscopy

TOCSYtotal correlation spectroscopy

SEMstandard error of the mean.

