Apolipoprotein (apo) E is a
protein of major biological and clinical importance because it regulates
lipid transport and cholesterol homeostasis in both the cardiovascular
and central nervous systems.− Human apoE is a 299-residue molecule containing two
independently folded domains: the N-terminal domain comprises a four-helix
bundle encompassing residues 1–191 that is separated by a hinge
region from the C-terminal domain, which spans residues 216–299.− The NMR structure of apoE3 indicates that there is extensive N-
and C-terminal domain interaction involving salt bridges and hydrogen
bonds and that the C-terminal domain presents a large exposed hydrophobic
surface. The protein is polymorphic and
exists as three major isoforms, apoE2, apoE3, and apoE4, each differing
by a single amino acid substitution. ApoE3, the most common isoform,
contains cysteine at position 112 and arginine at position 158, whereas
apoE2 and apoE4 contain cysteine and arginine, respectively, at both
sites. The isoforms are associated with
different degrees of disease risk. Of particular note, relative to
that for wild-type (WT) apoE3, apoE4 is associated with increased
incidence of cardiovascular disease and Alzheimer’s disease., The single amino acid substitution C112R that distinguishes apoE4
from apoE3 modulates lipid- and lipoprotein-binding properties− and the ability to interact with amyloid beta peptide in the brain., The molecular basis for these variations in properties is not understood
completely.

It is established that the basis for the different
effects of apoE3
and apoE4 on lipoprotein metabolism is due to the preferential binding
of the latter isoform to very low-density lipoprotein (VLDL).,− The interaction of apoE with a lipid surface involves conformational
reorganization of the protein molecule so that amphipathic α-helices
can insert between phospholipid (PL) molecules. Surface-bound apoE
can assume two conformations: the helix bundle domain can adopt either
open or closed conformations, depending upon the available surface
area and the ease with which the helix bundle can unfold (i.e., its
stability)., The enhanced binding of apoE4
to VLDL is a consequence of the greater lipid-binding ability of this
isoform. This effect arises in some way from a reorganization of the
C-terminal domain,, induced by intramolecular interaction between the relatively unstable
apoE4 N-terminal helix bundle domain (which contains the C112R substitution)
and the C-terminal domain, which initiates lipid-binding.,, The altered domain–domain
interaction in apoE4 is a result of a rearrangement of the R61 side
chain in the helix bundle induced by the presence of R112 that allows
R61 to interact with E255 in the C-terminal domain., Weisgraber and colleagues have further validated this concept by
observing corresponding effects in mouse apoE variants., Although alterations in R61 and E255 in human apoE (and the corresponding
positions in mouse apoE, which is six amino acids shorter) clearly influence the domain–domain interaction,
the effects may not be simply due to direct R61–E255 salt bridge
formation but rather allosteric effects. These possibilities are unresolved because the influence of R61
and E255 mutations on the structure of intact human and mouse apoE
molecules has not been determined. In addition, the consequences of
altering R61 and E255 on the stabilities of the N- and C-terminal
domains are unknown. It is important to have this information because
apoE4 differs from apoE3 not only in possessing (1) the R61–E255-mediated
domain–domain interaction but also (2) a less stable helix
bundle domain., Without knowledge of the N- and
C-terminal domain stabilities in the intact proteins, it is impossible
to unambiguously attribute differences between the properties of apoE3
and apoE4 to one or the other of these parameters.

With a goal
of resolving this problem, we examine the influence
of disruption of the R61–E255 salt bridge by introduction of
the mutations R61T and E255A into apoE4 and determining the effects
on N- and C-terminal domain stability and lipid binding. The hypothesis
being tested is that if this salt bridge disruption has no effect
on lipid binding, then the enhanced lipid binding of apoE4 (relative
to apoE3) is primarily due to the lower stability of the N-terminal
helix bundle rather than altered domain–domain interaction.
To see if these concepts apply more generally, we also study mouse
apoE, which binds lipids better than apoE3, by introducing a domain–domain
salt bridge via the T61R mutation and destabilizing the protein via
introduction of the T61R/G83T/N113G triple mutation. The lipid-binding
characteristics of the various apoE variants are evaluated by monitoring
(1) binding to lipid emulsion particles, which model lipoprotein particles
and present a stable lipid–water interface, (2) binding to
VLDL and HDL particles, which are key events in lipoprotein metabolism,
and (3) interaction with DMPC MLVs, which gives a measure of the kinetics
of lipid association and ability of apoE to solubilize PL bilayers.
The results show that the stabilities (ease of undergoing conformational
change) of the N- and C-terminal domains have a major influence on
the ability of apoE to interact with lipid and lipoprotein surfaces.
This enhanced understanding of apoE structure–function relationships
should provide a basis for manipulating the protein to ameliorate
the pathological effects of the apoE4 isoform.

Experimental Procedures
Materials
Human and mouse apoE variants were expressed
in Escherichia coli as thioredoxin
fusion proteins and isolated and purified as described., Full-length human apoE3, apoE4, and the apoE4 E255A variant have
been described previously.,, The QuikChange site-directed mutagenesis kit (Stratagene, La Jolla,
CA) was employed to introduce the R61T point mutation into apoE4.
A pET32a expression vector containing the cDNA of mouse apoE was kindly
provided by Dr. Karl Weisgraber. The
T61R and T61R/G83T/N113G mutations were introduced into mouse apoE
as described above. The apoE preparations were at least 95% pure,
as assessed by SDS-PAGE. The apoE variants were 14C-trace-labeled
by reductive methylation as described previously., In all experiments, the apoE sample was freshly dialyzed from a
6 M GdnHCl and 10 mM DTT solution into a buffer solution before use.
ApoE concentrations were determined either by a measurement of the
absorbance at 280 nm or by the Lowry procedure. HDL3 and VLDL were purified by sequential ultracentrifugation
from a pool of normolipidemic human plasma as described previously., Dimyristoylphosphatidylcholine (DMPC) was obtained from Avanti Polar
Lipids (Pelham, AL), and egg yolk phosphatidylcholine (PC) and triolein
were purchased from Sigma (St. Louis, MO). 8-Anilino-1-napthalenesulfonic
acid (ANS) was purchased from Molecular Probes (Eugene, OR).

Gel Filtration
Chromatography
ApoE samples were subjected
to gel filtration chromatography on a calibrated Superdex 200 column
using an Akta FPLC system to assess their degree of self-association,
as described previously.,,,

Binding of ApoE to Emulsion
Particles
Emulsion particles
(86 ± 7 nm diameter) were prepared by sonication of a triolein/egg
yolk PC mixture (3.5/1w/w) in pH 7.4 Tris buffer.− The binding
of apoE was monitored by incubating 14C-labeled apoE (50
μg/mL) with emulsion (300 μg PC/ml) for 1 h at room temperature
and separating free and bound apoE by centrifugation, as described
previously.

VLDL/HDL Distribution of
ApoE
The partitioning of the
apoE variants between human HDL3 and VLDL was monitored
using a previously described assay., In brief, 14C-apoE (5 μg) was incubated at 4 °C for 30 min
with 0.45 mg of VLDL protein and 0.9 mg of HDL3 protein
(these concentrations give approximately equal total VLDL and HDL3 particle surface areas available for apoE binding) in a total
volume of 1 mL of Tris buffer (pH 7.4). VLDL, HDL3, and
unbound apoE were then separated by sequential ultracentrifugation.

DMPC Clearance Assay
The kinetics of solubilization
of DMPC multilamellar vesicles (MLV) by the apoE variants were measured
by monitoring the decrease in absorbance at 325 nm, as described previously. The 10 min decrease in absorbance was measured
as a function of apoE concentration to obtain Km and Vmax values.

Fluorescence Measurements
A Hitachi
F-4500 fluorescence
spectrophotometer was used to measure the fluorescence (400–600
nm) from 250 μM ANS in Tris buffer (pH 7.4) in the presence
of 50 μg/mL apoE variant at an excitation wavelength of 395
nm. For chemical denaturation experiments,
apoE samples at a concentration of 50 μg/mL were incubated overnight
at 4 °C with urea at various concentrations. Trp emission fluorescence
was then monitored at 25 °C as described previously.

Circular Dichroism (CD) Spectroscopy
The average α-helix
content of the apoE variants was determined by measuring CD spectra
at room temperature using a Jasco J-810 spectropolarimeter. The α-helix content was derived from the
molar ellipticity at 222 nm, as described previously.

Results
Structural Characterization
Primary
Structures of Human and Mouse ApoE Variants
The mature human
and mouse apoE proteins contain 299 and 293 amino
acids, respectively, and the sequences are 70% identical when aligned
by either the Clustal or Blast programs. Hydropathy plots, of the two amino acid sequences are similar. As mentioned earlier,
the R61 side chain is organized differently in human apoE3 and apoE4; standardizing the numbering system to the human
apoE sequence (which has eight additional N-terminal residues) indicates
that the equivalent mouse side chain is T61., To investigate the consequences of having an arginine residue at
position 61, we used the mouse apoE T61R variant, the isolated N-terminal
domain fragment of which has been studied by Weisgraber and colleagues., The mouse apoE variant containing the T61R/G83T/N113G triple mutation,
which was shown to have a destabilized helix bundle, was also utilized. To remove the putative salt bridge partner
for R61 in human apoE4 and thereby alter the domain–domain
interaction, we employed the apoE4 E255A variant.,

Secondary and Tertiary Structure of ApoE Variants
The
data in Table  provides some insights into
the effects of the above mutations on the structures of human and
mouse apoE. Regarding the secondary structure, the α-helix content
of all the variants lies in the range 59 ± 5%, indicating that
major structural changes are not induced by the mutations. Prior investigations
of the surface of the human apoE molecule using ANS binding to detect
exposed hydrophobic surface showed that the C-terminal domain is largely
responsible for creating this hydrophobic surface., The data in Table  confirm that ANS binds
more to apoE4 than to apoE3. The R61T mutation increases ANS binding
a little, presumably because the packing in the four-helix bundle
is altered, which exposes some hydrophobic surface. In contrast, the
E255A mutation apparently somewhat reduces the amount of exposed hydrophobic
surface. Consistent with rodent and human apoE, which exhibit similar
structural features and biophysical characteristics,, ANS binding to mouse and human apoE3 is similar. Introducing the
T61R single mutation into the helix bundle of mouse apoE has no effect
on ANS binding, whereas the T61R/G83T/N113G triple mutation increases
hydrophobic surface exposure by ∼50%, presumably as a result
of destabilization and opening of the helix bundle (see below).

α-Helix Content and ANS Binding
for apoE Variants
apoE	% α-helix	ANS fluorescence intensity	
Human	
E3	59	1.0	
E4	59	1.15 ± 0.07	
E4 R61T	62	1.30 ± 0.15	
E4 E255A	54	1.08 ± 0.02	
Mouse	
E	62	0.91 ± 0.07	
T61R	64	1.02 ± 0.02	
T61R/G83T/N113G	61	1.34 ± 0.02	
Mean ± standard
deviation (1%
in all cases) from four measurements.

Values are ratios to human apoE3.
Mean ± SD; n = 4–8.

Self-association of ApoE
Variants
Lipid-free human
apoE molecules reversibly self-associate in a concentration-dependent
manner to form tetramers in aqueous solution. Previous gel filtration profiles showed that the tetramer/monomer
ratio is higher for apoE3 than for apoE4 when freshly dialyzed from
6 M GdnHCl solution into Tris buffer. The elution profile for apoE4 under the conditions described for
Figure  has been published previously, and the profiles for apoE4 R61T and apoE4 E255A
are not significantly different (data not shown), indicating that
apoE4 self-association is not affected by these mutations. Figure A demonstrates that, in contrast to that of human
apoE, mouse apoE exists predominantly in the monomeric state under
the same experimental conditions. The gel filtration profiles in Figure B,C indicate that introduction of the single T61R
mutation and triple T61R/G83T/N113G mutations into mouse apoE promotes
increased oligomerization. The increased surface hydrophobic exposure
with the latter variant increases the self-association such that some
larger aggregated material elutes in the void volume of the gel filtration
column.

Elution profiles upon gel filtration of mouse apoE variants (0.2
mg/mL in Tris buffer, pH 7.4) on a Superdex 200 column: (A) WT, (B)
T61R, and (C) T61R/G83T/N113G. The void and total volumes of the column
are 92 and 236 mL, respectively. Monomeric apoE elutes at 159 mL,
and the peaks at elution volumes in the range 110–150 mL correspond
to self-associated states.

Stability of ApoE Variants
Because of the separate
unfolding of the α-helices in the N- and C-terminal domains,
human apoE3 and apoE4 exhibit biphasic denaturation curves, as measured
by changes in molar ellipticity when exposed to increasing concentrations
of either GdnHCl or urea. The data in Figure A
confirm that biphasic denaturation curves are obtained when the Trp
fluorescence of apoE3 and apoE4 is monitored as a function of urea
concentration; the C-terminal domain unfolds over the range 0–2
M urea and the N-terminal helix bundle domain unfolds in the range
3–6 M urea. It is apparent that both domains are less stable
in apoE4 than in apoE3. Because the mutations in the apoE variants
involve alterations in charged amino acids, nonionic urea was used
as a denaturant rather than the ionic GdnHCl denaturant so that the
contributions of electrostatic interactions were not suppressed. Interestingly,
the two mutations, R61T and E255A, have opposite effects on the stability
of the C-terminal domain; the former mutation exerts a destabilizing
effect and the latter exerts a stabilizing one such that the C-terminal
domain stability of the apoE4 E255A variant is similar to that of
apoE3 (Figure A). The N-terminal helix bundle
domains are equally stable in these two apoE variants, with the stability
being marginally less than that of the apoE4 helix bundle.

Urea denaturation
of apoE variants monitored by Trp fluorescence.
(A) Human apoE: apoE3 (○), apoE4 (●), apoE4 R61T (Δ),
and apoE4 E255A (▼). (B) Mouse apoE: WT mouse apoE (●),
mouse apoE T61R (▲), and mouse apoE T61R/G83T/N113G (□).
The data points are averages from two independent experiments, which
gave similar results.

The denaturation curves in Figure B show
that the unfolding behavior of the mouse apoE variants is strikingly
different from that of the human apoE variants. The denaturation curves
are not biphasic, indicating that separate unfolding of the N- and
C-terminal domains is not evident; presumably, the stability across
the whole mouse apoE molecule is uniform, so the unfolding is essentially
a two-state process. It should be noted that mouse apoE contains one
less Trp residue than the seven present in human apoE (human apoE
contains W210, whereas the equivalent position in mouse apoE is F210),
but W264 and W276 are present to report on the C-terminal region in
experiments using Trp fluorescence. Monitoring the unfolding by CD
rather than Trp fluorescence also does not reveal clear biphasic denaturation
behavior (data not shown). It is apparent from the shapes of the denaturation
curves in Figure B that introduction of the
T61R point mutation into the mouse apoE molecule increases the cooperativity
of unfolding. The two-state denaturation of this variant was analyzed
as described previously, to determine its stability;
the free energy of denaturation (ΔGD) and midpoint of denaturation (D1/2)
are 3.8 ± 0.2 kcal/mol and 3.7 ± 0.4 M urea, respectively.
The D1/2 value for WT mouse apoE is 3.5
± 0.5 M urea, indicating that the amino acid substitution does
not significantly affect the overall stability of the protein. Consistent
with the lack of effect of the T61R mutation on the overall stability
of the mouse apoE molecule, this point mutation does not affect the
stability of the isolated helix bundle domain of mouse apoE. In contrast, the triple amino acid substitution
in the mouse apoE, T61R/G83T/N113G, maintains the more cooperative
unfolding seen with the R61T variant (Figure B) but destabilizes the protein (ΔGD = 3.0 ± 0.1 kcal/mol and D1/2 =
3.1 ± 0.2 M urea). It is apparent from the shape of the denaturation
curves in Figure B that the cooperativity
of unfolding of the two mouse apoE variants is similar and that the m values obtained from the analysis of the two-state denaturation
are the same (1.0 ± 0.04 kcal/mol apoE/mol urea). In comparison,
the denaturation curve for WT mouse apoE (Figure B) is less cooperative (m = 0.6 ± 0.1
kcal/mol/mol urea) because, although the data fit better to a monophasic
curve, a trend to partial biphasic denaturation is apparent (preventing
reliable determination of a ΔGD value).
Because the cooperativity of denaturation of the 22 kDa forms of WT
and T61R mouse apoE is the same, it follows
that the lower cooperativity of unfolding of intact WT mouse apoE
occurs because the C-terminal α-helices are relatively unstable
and unfold at lower urea concentrations. This latter effect is attenuated
by the presence of the T61R mutation.

Functional Characterization
Interactions
of ApoE with Lipid Emulsion Particles
As we showed previously,, apoE4 binds more than
apoE3 to lipid emulsion particles; the data in Figure A are consistent with this conclusion. Also, it is apparent
that mouse apoE binds more than apoE3 and similarly to that of apoE4.
Regarding apoE4, it is apparent that the N-terminal domain R61T mutation,
which eliminates the putative interdomain R61–E255 salt bridge,
has no effect on the amount of protein bound (Figure B). In contrast, the C-terminal domain E255A mutation increases
the degree of apoE binding. The results in Figure C show that creation of a potential interdomain salt bridge
via introduction of the T61R mutation in mouse apoE tends to increase
the degree of binding to the emulsion particles. The T61R/G83T/N113G
triple mutation, which destabilizes the protein molecule (Figure B), has no effect on binding relative to that of
WT mouse apoE, but it significantly decreases the amount bound relative
to that of the T61R variant (Figure C).

Binding of
human and mouse apoE variants to triolein/PC emulsion
particles. The binding assay described in  was used to determine the fraction of each apoE
variant that bound to the emulsion particles. This value is normalized
to the fraction (17 ± 3%, n = 5) of human apoE3
bound. (A) Comparison of the binding of human apoE3, apoE4, and mouse
apoE. (B) Influence of the R61T and E255A point mutations on the binding
ability of apoE4. (C) Influence of the T61R and T61R/G83T/N113G mutations
on the binding ability of mouse apoE. One-way analysis of variance
(ANOVA) followed by a Tukey’s multiple-comparison test using
GraphPad Prism 4.0 was used to evaluate statistically significant
differences. An asterisk above the error bar indicates that the variant
value is significantly different (p &lt; 0.05) from
the reference apoE (apoE3, apoE4, and mouse apoE in panels A, B and
C, respectively). An asterisk above a bar between the values for two
apoE variants indicates that the values are statistically different
(p &lt; 0.05).

Solubilization of DMPC MLV by ApoE
Figure A confirms that apoE4 solubilizes DMPC MLV more
rapidly than apoE3 does.,, The reason for this effect is the lower degree of self-association
of apoE4, which enhances the rate of lipid binding by the monomer
and an increased rate of DMPC bilayer conversion to discoidal HDL
particles. The clearance rate for mouse
apoE is the highest (Figure A), presumably
because mouse apoE exists mostly in the monomeric state (Figure A). The effectiveness of mouse apoE is maintained
over a range of protein concentrations (Figure B), and the calculated catalytic efficiencies (Vmax/Km) (Table ) give the order of effectiveness of DMPC MLV solubilization
as mouse apoE &gt; apoE4 &gt; apoE3. The apoE4 R61T and E255A variants
have
unaltered catalytic efficiencies (Table );
the result for the latter variant contrasts with a previous study
where we observed somewhat slower clearance relative to apoE4. The T61R mutation in mouse apoE also has no
effect on DMPC MLV clearance kinetics (Table ). In contrast, destabilization of the mouse apoE molecule by the
T61R/G83T/N113G triple mutant significantly increases the catalytic
efficiency (Table ), indicating that the rate
of DMPC MLV clearance can be sensitive to helix bundle stability.

Solubilization
of DMPC MLV by human and mouse apoE. (A) Representative
time courses of the decrease in absorbance at 325 nm (recorded every
10 s) when DMPC MLV (0.25 mg/mL) was incubated with 60 μg/mL
protein for 10 min at 24.0 ± 0.1 °C. The measured absorbance
values (solid circles) are fitted to a monoexponential decay equation
(continuous lines). (B) Effect of protein concentration on the decrease
in absorbance in 10 min; the experimental data are fitted to the Michaelis–Menten
equation.

Comparison of the
Ability of apoE
Variants to Solubilize DMPC MLV
apoE	Vmax (absorbance
decrease in 10 min)	Km (μM)	relative catalytic efficiency (Vmax/Km)	
Human	
E3	0.41 ± 0.03	4.9 ± 0.6	1.0	
E4	0.45 ± 0.03	3.1 ± 0.3	1.8	
E4 R61T	0.43 ± 0.04	3.4 ± 0.1	1.6	
E4 E255A	0.50 ± 0.07	3.3 ± 0.8	1.8	
Mouse	
E	0.56 ± 0.02	2.6 ± 0.2	2.7	
T61R	0.50 ± 0.03	2.2 ± 0.3	2.8	
T61R/G83T/N113G	0.57 ± 0.03	2.1 ± 0.3	3.4	
Kinetic parameters were obtained
from data of the type shown in Figure B and
fitting to the Michaelis–Menten equation. Values are mean ±
SE (n = 21).

Interactions of ApoE with Lipoprotein Particles
Previously,
we have examined the partitioning of apoE3 and apoE4 between VLDL
and HDL3 particles., The data in Figure A confirm that apoE4 binds better than apoE3 to
VLDL. It is apparent that mouse apoE binds more like that of apoE4
than apoE3, as also occurs with binding to lipid emulsion particles
(Figure A). This concurrence is expected because
apoE binding to VLDL and lipid emulsions occurs predominantly by interactions
with PL molecules in the particle surface. For this reason, more-or-less parallel effects of the R61T and E255A
mutations in apoE4 occur with VLDL binding (Figure B) and emulsion binding (Figure B).
The data in Figure C and C demonstrate that the T61R and T61R/G83T/N113G mutations
also have similar effects on the binding of mouse apoE to lipid emulsions
and VLDL.

Binding of human and mouse apoE variants to human VLDL. The VLDL/HDL3 distribution assay described in  was used to determine the fraction of each apoE
variant that bound to the VLDL particles, and this value is normalized
to the fraction (13 ± 1%) of human apoE3 bound. The data in panels
A–C correspond to the equivalent data in Figure . The fractional binding values are plotted as mean ±
standard deviation (SD) (n = 9). The statistical
test described for Figure  was applied, and
the asterisk indicates differences significant at the p &lt; 0.05 level.

In contrast to the interaction
of apoE with VLDL particles, where
protein–lipid interactions dominate, apoE–resident apolipoprotein
interactions are also involved in the binding to HDL3 particles. As shown in Figure A,
for this reason, apoE3 and apoE4 bind similarly to HDL3. Strikingly, mouse apoE binds to HDL3 particles to a
much reduced degree, implying that mouse apoE–resident apolipoprotein
interactions are less favorable in this case. The mutations in both
human and mouse apoE that can effect emulsion and VLDL binding (Figures  and ) have little or no
effect on HDL3 binding (Figure B,C).

Binding of human and mouse apoE variants to human HDL3. The fractional binding was determined as described in the legend
to Figure , and the values are normalized
to the value for human apoE3 (14 ± 1%). The data in panels A–C
correspond to the equivalent data in Figure . The statistical test described for Figure  was applied, and the asterisk indicates differences significant
at the p &lt; 0.05 level.

The partitioning of apoE between VLDL and HDL3 has important
consequences for clearance of triglyceride-rich lipoprotein remnants. Indeed, the enhanced VLDL/HDL3 distribution
of apoE4 compared to that of apoE3 (Figure ) is the underlying cause of the higher ratio of VLDL cholesterol/HDL3 cholesterol seen in the plasma of mice expressing apoE4 rather
than apoE3. Introduction of the N-terminal
domain R61T mutation into apoE4 reduces the VLDL/HDL3 binding
ratio to a value lower than that of apoE4 (cf. ref ()). The C-terminal domain
E255A mutation in apoE4 has little or no effect on the VLDL/HDL3 lipoprotein distribution; this is in contrast to a prior
report that used a different assay involving whole plasma and where
a decrease in the ratio was observed. Primarily because of a reduced ability to bind to HDL3, the three mouse apoE variants exhibit markedly enhanced VLDL/HDL3 binding ratios relative to either apoE3 or apoE4 (Figure ).

Relative binding of human and mouse apoE variants to VLDL
and HDL3. The VLDL/HDL3 distribution of each
protein was
calculated from the values presented in Figures  and . The ratios are plotted as mean ±
SD (n = 9), and the asterisk indicates significant
difference by ANOVA (p &lt; 0.05) from the ratio
for human apoE3.

Discussion
A major question regarding human apoE is what is the molecular
basis for the different lipid and lipoprotein binding properties of
the apoE3 and apoE4 isoforms, given that there is just a single amino
acid substitution in the 299 amino acid protein molecule? Here, we
examine the concept that a major requirement for effective interaction
of apoE with the surfaces of lipid and lipoprotein particles is the
ability to readily undergo conformational reorganization. Thus, the
stability of an apoE molecule, which reflects its ability to unfold,
is expected to modulate surface-binding events. The present results
for a series of apoE variants with altered structural stabilities,
domain properties, and binding interactions provide an experimental
test of this concept.

Human ApoE3 and ApoE4 Domain Stability and
Lipid- and Lipoprotein-Binding
Properties
The urea denaturation data in Figure A show that the N- and C-terminal domains are less
stable in apoE4 than in apoE3. The N-terminal helix bundle domain
is destabilized by replacement of the small cysteine side chain at
position 112 with the bulky and positively charged arginine side chain. This destabilization of the helix bundle domain
in apoE4 enhances lipid binding because the isolated 22 kDa N-terminal
fragment of apoE4 binds better to lipid emulsion particles and solubilizes DMPC MLV more effectively than the 22 kDa apoE3 counterpart. Relative
to the situation in apoE3, the C-terminal domain in apoE4 is destabilized
by altered interaction with the helix bundle that is mediated, at
least in part, by a R61–E255 salt bridge., Consequently, the entire apoE4 molecule is less stable and unfolds
more readily than the apoE3 molecule. As a result of this altered
structural stability of the entire molecule, apoE4 exhibits enhanced
lipid-binding activity relative to that of apoE3, as reflected by
both DMPC MLV solubilization (Figure  and
Table ) and emulsion binding (Figure A). The relative contributions of the destabilizations
of the N- and C-terminal domains to this altered functionality of
apoE4 have been unknown heretofore.

The influences on lipid
interaction of destabilization of the N-terminal helix bundle domain
as compared to the C-terminal domain can be ascertained by comparison
of the behavior of the apoE4 R61T and E255A variants. Formation of
the putative R61–E255 salt bridge that mediates interaction
between the N- and C-terminal domains is eliminated in these two proteins,
and the helix bundle stability is the same in both proteins and is
very similar to that of WT apoE4. However, the mutations have opposite
effects on apoE4 C-terminal domain stability, with the R61T change
causing some destabilization and the E255A change inducing stabilization
(Figure A). This difference in effect presumably
arises because the R61T mutation indirectly affects C-terminal domain
stability by altering domain–domain interaction, whereas the
E255A mutation has a direct local effect on the conformation of the
C-terminal domain. As far as lipid binding ability goes, the R61T
mutation has essentially no effect on emulsion binding ability (Figure B) and slightly decreases DMPC solubilization activity
(Table ). Conversely, the E255A mutation in
apoE4 increases emulsion binding and has no effect on DMPC solubilization.
Thus, by these criteria, destabilization of the C-terminal domain
(at constant helix bundle stability) tends to decrease the lipid binding
ability of apoE4, whereas stabilization of the C-terminal domain tends
to increase it. However, it is clear that, unlike the situation with
apoE4 where simultaneous destabilization of both domains leads to
a marked enhancement of lipid binding (emulsion binding and DMPC MLV
solubilization), a change in stability of the C-terminal domain alone
has relatively minor consequences for such lipid interactions. Importantly,
altering the stability of the C-terminal domain of apoE4 by the above
mutations does not decrease lipid binding to that exhibited by apoE3
(Figure A,B and Table ). Overall, the above data suggest that the stability of the entire
apoE molecule is the feature that determines its lipid-binding activity.

Interaction of Mouse ApoE Variants with Lipids
As noted
earlier, the denaturation data in Figure B
indicate that, in contrast to that of human apoE3 and apoE4, the mouse
apoE molecule unfolds essentially as a single entity. Consequently,
mouse apoE provides a suitable system for exploring the role of the
stability of the entire protein molecule. The performance of mouse
apoE in binding to lipid emulsions (Figure A), solubilizing DMPC MLV (Figure A), and
interacting with VLDL particles (Figure A)
is closer to that of apoE4 than to that of apoE3. Because mouse apoE
behaves as if it comprises a single folded domain, it is unlikely
to mirror human apoE in being able to adopt two surface conformations
(helix bundle open and closed).,

The VLDL/HDL
ratio for mouse apoE is higher than the values for apoE3 and apoE4
(Figure ) because binding to HDL3 is a lot less than occurs with apoE3 and apoE4 (Figure ). This difference in binding behavior is presumably
the basis for the variation in susceptibility to dietary-induced hypercholesterolemia
and atherosclerosis between mice expressing either apoE3 or mouse
apoE. The reduced interaction of mouse
apoE with HDL is most likely due to altered protein–resident
apolipoprotein interactions, given that the HDL particle surface is
approximately 80% protein-covered. The
T61R mutation was introduced into mouse apoE to create R61–E255-mediated
domain–domain interaction, and
this occurs without a change in overall protein stability (Figure ). This variant has similar VLDL and HDL binding
to WT mouse apoE (Figure ). This observation
indicates that the R61–E255-mediated domain–domain interaction
has little effect on partitioning of the protein between lipoproteins;
this effect occurs because the overall stability characteristics of
the apoE molecule play a more important role. On this basis, one would
expect the T61R mutation in mouse apoE to exert only a minor effect
on lipoprotein metabolism in mice. In agreement with this idea, mice
expressing either WT mouse apoE or the T61R variant have similar plasma
lipid levels and lipoprotein cholesterol profiles when fed a chow
diet; the T61R variant is associated
with slightly increased VLDL cholesterol levels for mice fed a high-fat–high-cholesterol
diet.

In conclusion, this study of the structure–function
relationships
of some human and mouse apoE variants reveals that the overall stability
of the protein exerts a major influence on its lipid- and lipoprotein-binding
properties. The C112R substitution that distinguishes human apoE4
from apoE3 is located in the N-terminal helix bundle domain where
it exerts a direct intradomain destabilizing effect. In addition,
the presence of R112 in apoE4 has an indirect interdomain effect on
the stability and organization of the C-terminal domain. The simultaneous
destabilization of the N- and C-terminal domains in apoE4 enhances
its lipid-binding capabilities relative to those of apoE3. The experimental
results presented here indicate that the direct helix bundle destabilization
induced by the presence of R112 is the major contributor to this outcome.
The pathological properties of apoE4 perhaps could be offset by increasing
the stability of the entire molecule to that of apoE3, which would
primarily involve counteracting the effects of R112 on the stability
of the helix bundle domain.

This study was
supported by National Institutes of Health grant HL56083 and Grants-in-Aid
for Scientific Research 25293006 and 25670014 from the Japan Society
for the Promotion of Science.

The authors declare no
competing financial interest.

Abbreviations Used
ANS8-anilino-1-napthalenesulfonic acid

Apoapolipoprotein

DMPCdimyristoylphosphatidylcholine

GdnHClguanidine hydrochloride

HDLhigh-density lipoprotein

MLVsmultilamellar
vesicles

PCphosphatidylcholine

PLphospholipid

VLDLvery low-density lipoprotein

WTwild type

