Double-stranded
RNAs (dsRNAs)
are involved in numerous biological processes, including cellular
localization, antiviral responses, RNA interference (RNAi), and viral
inhibition of RNAi.− A specialized class of Cys2His2 zinc finger
proteins, termed dsRNA-binding zinc finger proteins (dsRBZFPs), bind
preferentially to dsRNAs− and play important roles in the
cellular localization of dsRNAs and apoptosis., Multiple zinc finger (ZF) domains, each capable of binding to dsRNA,
may be present in dsRBZFPs;,,, for example, the dsRNA-binding
zinc finger protein a (ZFa) contains seven dsRNA-binding zinc finger
domains., Just Another Zinc finger protein (JAZ),
also known as ZNF346, is a mammalian dsRBZFP with four zinc finger
domains, all of which are highly homologous to each other and to the
zinc finger domains of Xenopus laevis ZFa,, (Figure A). The mammalian dsRBZFP Wig-1 contains three homologous
zinc finger domains and has also been shown to interact with dsRNA.
The zinc finger domains of ZFa, JAZ, and Wig-1 are separated by long
nonconserved linkers (approximately 20–40 amino acids in length),
which are likely to be unstructured.

(A) Partial
sequence alignment of the zinc finger domains of human
JAZ with each other and with those of Xenopus laevis ZFa. The sequences are aligned on the highly conserved zinc-binding
cysteine and histidine residues in each finger, which are colored
yellow and blue, respectively. Sequence identity and similarity between
fingers are indicated by colored blocks: green for hydrophobic, blue-green
for aromatic, light blue for lysine and arginine, red for aspartate
and glutamate, and pink for small and hydrophilic residues. Residue
numbers in ZF1–4 correspond to the JAZ sequence, and for ZFa,
ZF5–7 correspond to the ZFa sequence. Secondary-structure elements
present in the zinc finger domains are indicated at the bottom of
the figure (arrow, β-strand; box, α-helix). (B) Schematic
representation showing the length of the JAZ zinc finger constructs
and the N- and C-terminal residue numbers.

Published data suggest that all zinc finger domains in these
proteins
participate in binding to dsRNA,, in a sequence-independent fashion.,− However, the nature of the RNA targets and the mechanism by which
dsRBZFPs recognize dsRNA remains largely unknown, although it has
been proposed that the lack of sequence specificity implies that interactions
may be determined primarily by the shape of the A-form helix., The known binding targets of dsRBZFPs form an evolutionarily disparate
but structurally similar group of both endogenous and exogenous double-stranded
RNAs. Targets such as the adenoviral VAI RNA contain structural features in addition to canonical A-form double-stranded
RNA that could potentially be required to enhance binding, thus providing
a measure of specificity. These features include single-strand overhangs
at 3′ or 5′ ends, 5′-triphosphate groups (5′-ppp)
(which are largely unique to viral RNAs), and internal loops.

To establish whether noncanonical structural features affect the
affinity of dsRBZFPs for various RNA targets and to identify a set
of minimal RNA and protein constructs for structural studies, we employed
electrophoretic mobility-shift assays (EMSA) and NMR spectroscopy
to probe the interactions of the JAZ zinc fingers with various dsRNAs.
Experiments were also designed to establish whether dsRBZFPs such
as JAZ have differential binding activities for host dsRNAs compared
to viral RNAs and to evaluate the structural basis for the preference
of dsRBZFPs for binding to dsRNA over DNA and tRNA. The contribution
of the dsRBZFP linker regions to RNA-binding was also investigated.

Published structures of JAZ zinc finger homologues, including ZF1
and ZF2 from X. laevis ZFa and the zinc finger domain from Saccharomyces cerevisiae tRNA isopentenyltransferase
(IPTase), show a ββαα
fold and helix–kink–helix motif; these structural features
appear to be conserved among dsRBZFPs. The specificities of IPTase and JAZ zinc fingers are different:
IPTase binds to tRNA, whereas JAZ has
very little affinity for tRNA. The structure
of the tRNA–IPTase complex reveals that the helix–kink–helix
motif contacts the tRNA. The zinc finger
domains of JAZ have not been characterized structurally nor are there
structures or models of RNA complexes of ZFa or JAZ. In this work,
we describe the solution-structure determination of a JAZ zinc finger
domain by NMR and structural characterization of the complex between
this zinc finger and dsRNA sequences derived from VAI, a viral RNA
that is known to bind JAZ, and from pre-miR34a, a human microRNA of
known function with long stretches of dsRNA. Although JAZ had not
previously been shown to bind to this RNA, it is thought that one
of the functions of JAZ may be to interact with pre-miRNAs in the
cell, and it was therefore chosen as a
likely candidate for in vitro testing of JAZ binding
to an endogenous RNA. Structural information on nonspecific protein–RNA
complexes such as these is limited because of the inherent disorder
implied by the absence of specific binding sites on the A-form helix
of the RNA. Because the disorder makes solving 3D structures of such
complexes by standard NMR or X-ray crystallographic methods challenging,
we have employed the high-ambiguity-driven biomolecular docking (HADDOCK)
program to obtain 3D models of nonspecific
complexes between dsRNA and the JAZ zinc finger domain.

Materials and
Methods
Protein Construct Design and Sample Preparation
JAZ
constructs amplified from a human cDNA library were cloned into pET21a
vectors (Novagen). The following recombinant JAZ constructs were expressed:
full-length ZF1–4 (residues 1–294), ZF12 (23–169),
ZF23 (121–227), ZF34 (168–277), ZF1 (23–117),
ZF2 (115–169), ZF3 (168–227), and ZF4 (228–277).
Full-length JAZ and the fingers 2 and 3 constructs were prepared as
fusions with the B1 domain of protein G (GB1) for EMSA experiments.
A JAZ ZF23 (121–227) construct was prepared without a GB1 fusion
protein for ITC experiments. All JAZ constructs were expressed in Escherichia coli BL21(DE3) DNAY cells cultured in
M9 minimal medium to an OD600nm of approximately 0.7–1.0
absorbance units, at which time 1 mM IPTG and 150 μM ZnSO4 (final concentrations) were added to the cultures. Cells
were grown at 4 °C for 18 h before harvesting. The pellets were
suspended and lysed in 25 mM Tris, pH 7.7, 150 mM NaCl, and 10 mM
DTT. Streptomycin precipitation was used for all protein preparations:
2% streptomycin and protease inhibitors without EDTA (Roche) were
added to the lysate supernatant with the pH controlled to 8.0. The
resultant solution was spun at 5000g and then dialyzed
into FPLC buffer A (25 mM Tris, pH 7.7, and 2 mM DTT). The supernatants
were purified by cation-exchange chromatography using SP Sepharose
columns preceded in tandem by HiTrap Q-columns (GE Healthcare). Purification
was carried out by FPLC at 4 °C by eluting the SP column with
buffer B (25 mM Tris, pH 7.7, and 1 M NaCl). Protein masses were verified
using MALDI-TOF MS and SDS PAGE. Highest purity fractions were pooled
and exchanged into binding buffer for EMSA experiments. For NMR experiments,
SP fractions were pooled and further purified on a Sephadex gel-filtration
column (GE Healthcare) (in buffer A) and then exchanged into NMR buffer
(30 mM HEPES or 30 mM Tris, pH 7.4, 50 mM KCl, 2 mM DTT, 5 mM MgCl2, 50 μM ZnSO4, and 7% D2O, degassed
and filtered) using a NAP-5 column (GE Healthcare). The protein solutions
were then concentrated using centrifugal concentrators. Protein sample
concentrations were measured using a Nanodrop spectrophotometer (Thermo
Fisher Scientific). No difference in EMSA results was observed using
SP fractions compared to fractions from the gel-filtration column.

It is important to note that all work on these proteins was performed
in the absence of chelating agents such as EDTA, which are common
additives in such experiments but which have deleterious effects on
the structural integrity of zinc finger proteins. Indeed, most of the buffers used in our experiments include
ZnSO4 to discourage loss of zinc and subsequent unfolding
of the proteins.

Nucleic Acid Construct Design and Preparation
All RNA
species &gt;44 bp were synthesized by T7 DNA-templated RNA polymerase in vitro transcriptions. All
VAI RNA constructs &gt;44 bp were cloned into the puC19 vector followed
by linearization of the DNA template using restriction enzymes (New
England Biolabs) to create T7 templates for transcription reactions.
For all oligonucleotides ≤44 bp that were transcribed by T7
reactions, the DNA templates were purchased (IDT). The puC19 plasmid
encoding full-length VAI RNA was a gift from Robert J. White, University
of Glasgow, Scotland. All RNA oligonucleotides used in EMSA experiments
were purified by denaturing gel electrophoresis. The RNA bands were
cut out of the gel and then subjected to a crush and soak step (30
mM Tris and 450 mM NaCl, pH 7.8). The RNA was precipitated by diluting
the crush and soak solution 10:1 with 99% pure ethanol at −20
°C containing 1 μg/mL of glycogen. Confirmation of RNA
purity was established using reverse-phase HPLC and denaturing PAGE.
Large-scale T7 DNA-templated RNA polymerase in vitro transcriptions (20 mL) were employed to prepare milligram quantities
of VAI T57A and T57B RNAs used for NMR titrations; these RNAs were
purified by anion-exchange chromatography using HiTrap Q columns (GE
Healthcare). The molecular masses of the RNA used for NMR titrations
were verified by MALDI-TOF mass spectrometry. DNA was purchased from
IDT, and yeast tRNA, from Ambion. The purified nucleic acids were
desalted using NAP columns (GE Healthcare) to exchange the buffer
into EMSA or NMR buffers without Mg2+. The RNA or DNA oligonucleotides
were then heated at 92 °C for 5 min and snap-cooled on ice to
produce hairpins (monomolecular structures) or slow-annealed to form
duplex RNA. The composition and purity of each annealed product was
assessed following phosphorimaging of EMSA gels. After annealing,
the nucleic acid solutions (RNA or DNA) used for NMR titrations were
further exchanged into NMR buffer and concentrated using a centrifugal
concentrator followed by concentration measurements using a Nanodrop
spectrophotometer. The pH values of the DNA, RNA, and protein solutions
were verified prior to NMR titration experiments.

EMSA Experiments
Protein constructs were exchanged
into EMSA binding buffer (30 mM HEPES, pH 7.5, 50 mM KCl, 2 mM DTT,
5 mM MgCl2, 0.1% IGEPAL CA-630, a nonionic detergent (Sigma-Aldrich),
and 50 μM ZnSO4) using NAP-5 desalting columns. Binding
buffer was used to serially dilute JAZ solutions for equilibration
reactions so that each reaction had half of the protein concentration
of the preceding sample. Nucleic acid constructs were treated with
Antarctic phosphatase (AP) (New England Biolabs) to remove the 5′
phosphate; AP was then inactivated by incubating at 65 °C for
5 min. The nucleic acid solutions were allowed to cool to 25 °C
prior to 5′-end 32P-radiolabeling by T4 polynucleotide
kinase (New England Biolabs) at 37 °C. The samples were allowed
to cool to 25 °C, and the labeled nucleic acids were then purified
using Quick-Spin columns (Roche) and heated at 92 °C followed
by snap-cooling on ice to anneal to form hairpins or slow annealing
to produce oligonucleotide duplexes. Annealed nucleic acids were equilibrated
to 25 °C and then added to the binding buffer at a final concentration
of 0.5 nM to create master mix solutions (MM). The RNase inhibitor
RNasin (Promega) and nonspecific competitors (50 nM cold tRNA [unless
otherwise stated] and 25 nM bovine serum albumin) were added to the
MM. Assays were performed by adding 16 μL of MM to JAZ solutions
for a final volume of 20 μL each. Samples were equilibrated
at 25 °C for 1 h prior to electrophoresis on a 7% native polyacrylamide
Tris-borate gel free of EDTA. To each sample was added 4 μL
of loading buffer (5% Ficoll, 0.02% xylene cyanol, and 20% glycerol).
Gels were run at 4 °C and 600 V for 45 min and then dried and
exposed to a phosphor-intensifier screen (Molecular Dynamics). Gels
were scanned using a Storm-840 Imager (Molecular Dynamics).

Because multimeric binding was observed for most complexes, affinities
could not be measured by quantitative fitting of the binding data;
relative affinities (C50) were estimated from the concentration
of JAZ at which half of the RNA probe was bound.

Isothermal
Titration Calorimetry
ITC experiments of
JAZ ZF1 were performed at 25 °C using an Omega VP-ITC instrument
(MicroCal). Samples were exchanged into ITC binding buffer using NAP-25
desalting columns. The ITC binding buffer was 50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.4,
50 mM KCl, 5 mM MgCl2, 1 mM TCEP, and 50 μM ZnSO4 (50 mM HEPES, pH 7.3, 50 mM KCl, 50 μM ZnSO4, 5 mM MgCl2, and 1 mM TCEP for the JAZ ZF23 ITC experiments).
The protein and RNA solutions were repeatedly exchanged into ITC buffer
and concentrated using centrifugal concentrators. The pH values of
the DNA, RNA, and protein solutions were verified prior to ITC experiments.
Protein and RNA concentrations were measured by absorbance values
at 280 and 260 nm, respectively, using a Nanodrop spectrophotometer.
JAZ ZF1 (syringe) at 230 μM was titrated into 23 μM VAImin
RNA (cell). For the ITC experiments of JAZ ZF23, RNA (syringe) at
300–580 μM was titrated into 18–30 μM JAZ
ZF23 (cell). Each ITC experiment was started by a single injection
of 5 μL followed by 29 injections of 10 μL until all of
the solution (RNA or protein) in the syringe was injected into the
cell. Final molar ratios of up to 2.8:1 for the JAZ ZF1/RNA and up
to 6.1:1 JAZ ZF23/RNA were obtained. The heats of dilution were small
and subtracted from the calorimetric data. Thermodynamic parameters
of the binding isotherm were fitted to a one-site binding model using
Origin 7 software (MicroCal). Duplicate experiments were obtained
for JAZ ZF1, and for JAZ ZF23, four experiments were obtained (two
experiments per RNA).

Binding Affinities from Chemical-Shift Perturbations
Dissociation constants of JAZ ZF2 and JAZ ZF3 with VAImin RNA were
calculated from the changes in the chemical shifts observed in 1H–15N HSQC spectra in quantitative NMR titrations
using a two-site binding model as previously described. The binding affinities for the primary and secondary
binding sites were calculated by globally fitting the chemical shift
changes of the protein backbone resonances (both 1H and 15N) as a function of the molar ratio of RNA-to-protein. The 1H and 15N titration data were fitted using the
program nmrKd2 (developed by Dr. M. Arai). The titration
data of JAZ ZF2 were initially fitted to a one-site model, and the Kd value obtained from this initial fit was used
to approximate the dissociation constant of the primary binding site
(Kd1); the program was then used to fit
the data to a two-site binding model to calculate the dissociation
constant of the secondary binding site (Kd2). Because of the greater uncertainty in the measurement of the protein
concentration compared to that of RNA, the concentrations of JAZ ZF2
and JAZ ZF3 were allowed to vary during fitting of the experimental
data; this is the most accurate procedure for calculating Kd values from these experiments. The graphs of Δδ plotted as function
of molar ratio have corrected protein concentrations as calculated
by the global fitting parameters.

NMR Experiments and Structure Calculations
NMR spectra
were acquired on Bruker DRX600, DMX750, and AVANCE800 spectrometers
at 298 K. NMR data were analyzed using XWINNMR (Bruker), TopSpin (Bruker),
NMRpipe, and NMRview. Backbone-resonance assignments for single zinc finger protein
constructs were made using standard HNCO, HNCA, HNCOCA, HNCACB, and
CBCACOHN spectra., The concentrations of JAZ NMR
samples were 50–450 μM. The NMR buffer was 30 mM HEPES
or 30 mM Tris, pH 7.4, 50 mM KCl, 2 mM DTT, 5 mM MgCl2,
50 μM ZnSO4, and 7% D2O. Resonance assignments
were deposited in the Biological Magnetic Resonance Bank (accession
numbers 17630(ZF1), 17631(ZF2), 17679(ZF3), and 17672(ZF4).

Side-chain resonances for JAZ ZF3 were assigned from 15N-NOESY-HSQC, 15N-TOCSY-HSQC, 13C-NOESY-HSQC,
HCCH-TOCSY, and HCCH–COSY spectra. Structures of JAZ ZF3 were calculated using manually assigned unambiguous
distance restraints from 15N-NOESY-HSQC and 13C-NOESY-HSQC spectra, ϕ and ψ torsion angles derived
from chemical shifts using TALOS+, and
zinc coordination geometry restraints as described previously. Initial structures were calculated using CYANA. The final set of distance and angle constraints
was used to produce 500 structures in CYANA, and the 100 structures
with the smallest constraint violations were refined by molecular
dynamics using AMBER 9. The final refinement
was performed by simulated annealing and energy minimization that
employed a generalized-Born (GB) continuum solvent model. PROCHECK was used for analysis of the JAZ ZF3
NMR structural ensemble. The NMR structures
of the free form of JAZ ZF3 were deposited in the protein data bank
(PDB) under accession number 2MKD.

HADDOCK Modeling
Models of the complexes
formed by
interaction of JAZ ZF2 (homology modeled using the Phyre webserver), JAZ ZF3, and ZFa ZF1 with a minimal binding sequence of A-form dsRNA (determined during
the NMR experiments to be 19 base pairs) were generated using HADDOCK
version 1.2. The complex between JAZ
ZF3 and dsRNA was typical and is described in detail. Protein and
nucleic acid were docked as rigid bodies using ambiguous interaction
restraints with energy minimization. The best scoring complexes (based
on the HADDOCK score values) were then transferred to semiflexible
refinement stage. Again, best scoring complexes were then moved to
the final structural refinement step employing an explicit solvent
model (H2O). The expert interface
of the HADDOCK webserver was used for modeling. This interface of
the HADDOCK webserver allows for residue- and nucleotide-level docking
parameters for proteins and RNA (or DNA) as well as custom distance
constraints. Distance restraints to the Zn ligands were added to preserve
the correct geometry of the Zn coordination. HADDOCK complexes were
produced using surface-exposed residues with weighted 1H and 15N chemical-shift Δδ (ppm) values ≥
0.9 times the standard deviation of all measurable chemical-shift
perturbation data for the residue-level (ambiguous interaction restraints)
as docking restraints to the idealized A-form model of VAIminMut RNA,
which contains only canonical Watson–Crick base pairs. Chemical-shift
perturbations were calculated using the equationThe idealized A-form VAIminMut RNA
duplex
(19 base pairs) was created using the make-NA webserver (http://structure.usc.edu/make-na/). For all docking procedures, ambiguous
RNA-docking restraints were used for all nucleotides (except for the
terminal nucleotides), which allow RNA-contacting residues of the
zinc fingers (ambiguous interaction restraints) to interact with any
set of ≤17 bp of the duplexes. Ambiguous interaction restraints
to nucleotides 3–17 (strand 1) and nucleotides 22–36
(strand 2) were applied. Some residues in JAZ ZF3 that exhibited substantial
chemical-shift changes (Δδ) upon addition of RNA are buried
within the zinc finger domain (i.e., are not surface-exposed) and
therefore are predicted not to contact the RNA directly. These residues
were not utilized as ambiguous interaction restraints for the HADDOCK
modeling because their backbone resonances are likely perturbed indirectly
by local changes in the protein structure upon binding RNA. The HADDOCK
program was allowed to define passive residues (residues near the
interface that may play a role in the formation of the complex) as
docking parameters automatically. Distance restraints were used to
preserve the Zn coordination in all zinc finger domains. Those structures
with the highest HADDOCK scores were designated as the best models.
The residues defined as ambiguous interaction restraints for the JAZ
ZF3–RNA complex are active residues 191, 195, 198, 203, 206,
207, 208, 209, 211, and 214. The model with the highest HADDOCK score
was deposited in the PDB under accession number 2MKN.

Results
Design of Protein
and RNA Constructs
The JAZ protein
constructs, shown schematically in Figure B, include four small proteins representing the individual zinc fingers,
3 two-finger constructs (ZF12, ZF23, and ZF34), and the full-length
zinc finger domain (ZF1–4). The constructs containing the first
zinc finger (ZF1, 95 residues, and ZF12, 147 residues) are longer
than the other one- and two-finger constructs (55, 60, and 49 residues
for ZF2, ZF3, and ZF4, respectively, and 107 and 110 residues for
ZF23 and ZF34, respectively). The extended N-terminal sequence of
the ZF1 and ZF12 constructs was necessary for protein expression,
as shorter constructs were not well-expressed.

Two RNAs were
used to characterize the binding specificity of the JAZ zinc fingers:
adenoviral VAI RNA and human pre-miR34a. Both RNAs contain substantial stretches of base-paired
double-strand duplex, identified by Mfold, with loops and bulges in a number of locations. An important difference
between VAI and pre-miR34a is the presence of a five-nucleotide overhang
at the 3′ end of VAI.

Constructs of VAI were designed
on the basis of the sequence of
the apical and terminal domains (identified in Figures A, ). The terminal domain
was chosen for an extensive study of the dependence of the affinity
of JAZ upon length and local structure of the RNA with the most frequently
used fragment, T57, containing 57 nucleotides from the terminal domain
connected by tetraloop sequences of high stability. Oligonucleotide
T57A has the tetraloop sequence A–A–U–U, whereas
T57B has the loop sequence G–G–G–A. The roles of specific features of the VAI Mfold
model, such as the 3′ overhang and the various non-Watson–Crick
base pairs and bulges, were evaluated using variant nucleotide sequences,
generally by substitution with canonical G–C base pairs. Control
experiments included tests of the affinity of the JAZ fingers for
a DNA duplex of sequence corresponding to that of T57A RNA and for
a short single-stranded RNA. Following an extensive series of EMSA
and NMR experiments to establish the minimal dsRNA constructs that
would support binding of a single zinc finger, a duplex termed VAImin
was designed and utilized for quantitative estimations of the affinities
of the various JAZ zinc finger constructs.

(A) EMSA gels showing
binding of full-length (ZF1–4) and
two-finger (ZF12, ZF23, and ZF34) JAZ constructs to full-length VAI
RNA. In each gel, the first lane is free RNA. In the second lane,
the protein concentration is 20 nM (4 nM for ZF34). In each subsequent
lane, the protein concentration is doubled until [JAZ] = 5 μM
(1 μM for ZF34) in the tenth lane. (B) EMSA gels showing binding
of JAZ ZF1–4, ZF12, ZF23, and ZF34 to T57A RNA. In each gel,
the first lane is free RNA. In the second lane, the protein concentration
is 20 nM (4 nM for ZF34 and ZF23). In each subsequent lane, the protein
concentration is doubled until [JAZ] = 5 μM (1 μM for
ZF34 and ZF23) in the tenth lane. The figures of the RNA structures
were produced using Mfold. Full sequences
with RNA bases shown in larger type are given in . The JAZ constructs are identified with colors corresponding
to those in Figure B.

Affinity of JAZ Zinc Fingers for dsRNA
Adenoviral VAI
RNA binds tightly to JAZ and provides
a structural template for the investigation of the mechanisms by which
JAZ recognizes dsRNA. EMSA experiments were used to probe the RNA
interactions of full-length JAZ ZF1–4 and the 3 two-finger
constructs, ZF12, ZF23, and ZF34. Figure A
shows that each of these proteins binds to full-length VAI RNA. Figure A also shows that multimeric JAZ–RNA complexes
are formed at higher protein concentrations, likely because of binding
of multiple copies of the protein to the RNA; the formation of multimeric
species precludes quantitative analysis of the binding curves to give
accurate dissociation constants. The EMSA results were analyzed qualitatively
by estimating the concentration of JAZ at which half of the 32P-labeled RNA probe was bound (C50). JAZ ZF1–4
has the highest apparent affinity for full-length VAI RNA (C50 ≈ 20 nM); the two-finger constructs JAZ ZF12 and JAZ ZF23
have a reduced affinity (C50 ≈ 40 nM), and JAZ ZF34
has the lowest affinity (C50 ≈ 60 nM). The JAZ ZF34–RNA
complexes showed diffuse gel shifts and smearing of the labeled RNA
probe at higher protein concentrations, probably because of the dissociation
of the complex during the running of the gel.

To determine the
minimal length of RNA that would bind the JAZ zinc fingers, a number
of smaller fragments of the VAI RNA were used as probes in EMSA experiments.
An example of the behavior of one of these fragments, T57A, which
binds the JAZ zinc finger constructs with affinities comparable to
those of the full-length RNA, is shown in Figure B. Similar to their behavior with full-length VAI, JAZ ZF1–4,
ZF12, and ZF23 all bind to T57A RNA with high affinity and in a multimeric
fashion. Below a certain threshold length, the affinity was significantly
lowered. Estimates of the relative affinities of the JAZ fingers for
representative dsRNAs of various lengths and compositions are shown
in Table . Images of EMSA gels corresponding
to representative experiments summarized in this figure are shown
in , and a full compendium of
all of the RNAs studied in this work is given in .

Estimates of Relative
Affinity of
RNAs for JAZ Zinc Fingers
 	 	no. base pairs	 	 	 	binding to JAZ	
RNA	 no. nucleotides	W–C	wobble	no. bulge	no. loop	no. overhang	EMSA (ZF34)	NMR (ZF3)	
VAI	
full-length	160	46	8	16	31	5 (CUUUU)	++	nd	
apical	50	20	1	3	5 (AAUU)	0	++	++	
T52	52	17	3	8	4 (AAUU)	0	++	nd	
T57A	57	17	3	8	4 (AAUU)	5 (CUUUU)	++	++	
T57B	57	17	3	8	4 (GGGA)	5 (CUUUU)	++	++	
T57C	57	18	3	6	4 (AAUU)	5 (CUUUU)	++	nd	
T57D	57	18	3	6	4 (AAUU)	5 (CUUUU)	++	nd	
T57E	57	20	2	6	4 (AAUU)	5 (CAAAA)	++	nd	
T84	84	21	4	12	17 (GGGA)	5 (CUUUU)	++	nd	
T44	44	13	3	4	3	5 (CUUUU)	+	nd	
T37	37	10	3	4	4	5 (CUUUU)	+	++	
duplex I	53	17	3	8	0	5 (CUUUU)	+	nd	
duplex II	49	17	3	4	0	5 (CUUUU)	+	nd	
duplex III	61	21	3	8	0	5 (CUUUU)	+	++	
duplex IIIA	66	21	3	8	0	10 (2× CUUUU)	+	nd	
T57 DNA	57	17	3	8	4 (AATT)	5 (CAAAA)	–	–	
VAImin	38	16	2	2	0	0	nd	++	
VAIminMut	38	19	0	0	0	0	nd	++	
ssRNA	10	0	0	0	0	0	–	nd	
pre-miR34a	 	33	7	16	13	1	++	nd	
++ corresponds to affinity (C50) ∼
0.05–0.2 μM, +, to C50 ∼ 0.2–2
μM, and −, to C50 &gt;
2 μM.

Variants of
the terminal domain of VAI were used to test the effect
of the presence of overhangs and irregular elements on JAZ binding
affinity. Binding assays tested whether JAZ binding was influenced
by structural features such as loops, bulges, and unpaired bases,
which perturb the A-form RNA structure typical of hydrogen-bonded
Watson–Crick base pairs. The comparisons were made using JAZ
ZF34, which binds to T57A RNA with a lower apparent affinity than
the other JAZ constructs (Figure B) but for
which the multimeric complexes are less evident. In addition, the
tighter-binding JAZ constructs frequently created well-shifts (all
the labeled RNA probe was shifted by the protein, but the complexes
could not enter the gel even at low protein concentrations). The affinity
of JAZ ZF34 for the T52 VAI RNA, where the 3′ overhang (5′-CUUUU-3′)
present in T57A is absent (),
is similar to that of T57A (Figure B), suggesting
that a 3′ overhang is not necessary for binding. The influence
of non-Watson–Crick base pairs (G–A, A–C, and
G–U) in the T57A sequence on the affinity of JAZ ZF34 was tested
by examining the behavior of variants where these noncanonical base
pairs were substituted by Watson–Crick pairs, generally G–C.
Table  shows that the effects of these variant
RNA sequences (shown in ) are
negligible: all of the hairpin RNAs have affinities for JAZ ZF34 similar
to that of T57A RNA (C50 ≈ 60–80 nM). The
apical domain construct of the VAI Mfold model (VAI Apical) contains
slightly different features, including an A–C base pair and
a bulge that arises because of an unpaired guanine. This RNA hairpin
has a pentaloop instead of the tetraloops of the VAI terminal-domain
hairpin constructs. EMSA experiments show that JAZ ZF34 binds to VAI
Apical with a slightly weaker apparent affinity (C50 ≈
120 nM) compared to the terminal RNA hairpin constructs, possibly
indicating a slight effect on the affinity of an unpaired bulge. Altogether,
the EMSA binding data for the hairpin dsRNA species indicate that
when the A-form helix is perturbed in a manner that preserves base
pairing, even if that pairing is noncanonical, the affinity for JAZ
ZF34 is not significantly affected. However, a structural perturbation
that disrupts base pairing in the context of an otherwise duplex RNA
may have a small effect on binding affinity. These binding studies
suggest that JAZ ZF34 recognizes extended A-form helices independent
of either sequence or the presence of local noncanonical structures.

More significant structural perturbations of canonical A-form RNA
are found in the central domain of the VAI Mfold model. The effect
of the internal loop in VAI RNA on JAZ ZF34 binding was tested with
the T84 RNA construct (). Once
again, EMSA assays show that JAZ ZF34 binds T84 RNA with apparent
affinity (C50 ≈ 60 nM) similar to those of the T57
RNAs, suggesting that large internal loops do not contribute to JAZ–RNA
interactions.

Somewhat surprisingly, the affinity of JAZ ZF34
for duplex (nonhairpin)
RNA with the same sequence as that of T57 (duplex I) appears to be
weaker (C50 ≈ 500–1000 nM) than that of the
hairpin RNA (). Nevertheless,
RNA variants designed to test the effects of non-A-form structures,
helix-perturbing structural elements, and extensions of stable base-paired
sequences at either end on recognition by JAZ ZF34 show similar affinities
to duplex I (C50 ≈ 500 nM). Additionally, JAZ ZF34
binds to a dsRNA with two 3′ overhangs, (duplex III 2 ×
3′) with similar affinity, confirming the results with hairpin
T52 that suggest that 3′ overhangs do not influence JAZ–RNA
interactions. Although the apparent affinity of JAZ ZF34 for duplex
RNA is reduced compared to that for hairpin RNA of the corresponding
sequence when measured by EMSA, these RNA constructs bind with comparable
affinity when measured by NMR (see later section). Because the presence
or absence of a hairpin loop sequence is unlikely to influence affinity
in a sequence-specific manner, we suggest that the lower affinity
of the duplex RNAs observed by EMSA is likely due to lowered stability
or increased off-rate of the duplex RNA from the complex under the
conditions of the EMSA experiment; the engineered tetraloops clearly
stabilize the dsRNA helical structure in the hairpins. This subtle
discrimination of hairpins over duplexes by JAZ ZF34 suggests that
dsRNA stability influences JAZ–RNA interactions, but our results
nevertheless confirm that JAZ ZF34 is capable of binding to both duplex
and hairpin RNAs.

EMSA experiments confirm that JAZ ZF34 does
not interact with single-stranded
RNA (ssRNA) (). That the interactions
observed in the EMSA experiments truly represent the formation of
protein–RNA complexes is shown by the displacement of the 32P-labeled RNA by excess cold RNA (). A similar experiment evaluating competition by excess
tRNA showed that the JAZ proteins preferentially bind dsRNA rather
than tRNA ().

Our EMSA
results confirm that JAZ ZF34 is a nonspecific dsRNA-binding
protein. The length of the A-form helix may therefore be the main
determinant for the formation of JAZ–RNA complexes. RNA constructs
of various lengths based on the terminal domain of the VAI Mfold model
were tested by EMSA to determine the length of dsRNA helices necessary
for high-affinity interactions with JAZ. A significantly lower affinity
of JAZ ZF34 is observed for the shorter terminal domain hairpins T37
(total length 14 base pairs, consisting of 10 Watson–Crick
base pairs, three G–U wobble pairs, and one non-hydrogen-bonded
C–A pair) and T44 (total length 17 pairs, consisting of 12
Watson–Crick base pairs, three G–U wobble pairs, and
two non-hydrogen-bonded pairs) (C50 ≈ 500 nM) compared
to T57A (total length 24 pairs, consisting of 17 Watson–Crick
base pairs, five G–U wobble pairs, and two non-hydrogen-bonded
pairs) (C50 ≈ 60 nM), suggesting that the minimal
RNA-binding site for JAZ ZF34 is between 16 and 22 base pairs.

Interactions between JAZ and endogenous dsRNA have not previously
been reported. The endogenous human microRNA pre-miR34a was tested
by EMSA for binding to JAZ ZF34 and JAZ ZF23. The apparent binding
affinities were similar to the corresponding affinities for the binding
of the two proteins to the VAI T57A RNA (C50 ≈ 80
nM for ZF34 and ≈ 40 nM for ZF23). These results demonstrate
that JAZ ZF34 and ZF23 can interact with both endogenous and exogenous
dsRNAs with comparable affinities, suggesting that JAZ is unable to
differentiate between host dsRNAs and viral RNAs.

NMR Characterization
of the Interaction of JAZ ZF3 and ZF4 with
dsRNA
Because JAZ ZF34 appeared to have the least complicated
interaction with dsRNA from the EMSA experiments and because this
protein had been used most extensively in the EMSA characterization
of the RNA binding, we chose to examine its RNA interactions by NMR,
using JAZ ZF34 and its single zinc finger daughter constructs JAZ
ZF3 and ZF4. The 1H–15N HSQC spectra
of the three 15N-labeled proteins are well-resolved, and
the cross peaks in the spectrum of each individual finger overlay
well with a subset of the cross peaks in the ZF34 spectrum, indicating
that the zinc finger domains are independently folded and largely
monomeric in solution (Figure A,B). Size-exclusion
chromatography also indicated that the proteins were monomeric under
all solution conditions studied. Titrations of VAI T57A RNA into 15N-labeled JAZ ZF34 show shifts of the amide cross peaks in
the 1H–15N HSQC spectrum of the protein
upon addition of RNA (Figure C), indicating
the formation of a protein–RNA complex consistent with the
EMSA results shown in Figure B. One-dimensional 1H NMR spectra of the T57A RNA show that the resonances of
the hydrogen-bonded imino protons are slightly broadened by the addition
of ZF34 but are not significantly shifted, an indication that the
RNA remains in A-form conformation upon binding to JAZ (). A similar result was obtained when
duplex III was added to ZF34 (Figure D). The
shifted cross peaks in Figure C,D correspond
almost entirely to those of ZF3, a result that is corroborated by
the observation of similar shifts upon addition of RNA to the single
zinc finger protein ZF3. Moreover, the spectrum of the single zinc
finger ZF4 is unperturbed by the addition of RNA (Figure E). The NMR results show that JAZ ZF3 binds to dsRNA
in a similar manner whether it is a single finger or part of a two-finger
construct and that it binds with similar affinity to hairpin or nonhairpin
RNA. The binding observed to duplex III RNA suggests that tetraloops
are not specifically recognized by JAZ ZF3 and thus, as suggested
previously, that the increased apparent affinity for hairpin RNAs
compared to the equivalent duplex sequence in EMSA experiments is
most likely due to an increase in the stability of the free RNA hairpin
compared to the duplex. These results further indicate that JAZ ZF3
is solely responsible for the RNA interaction of JAZ ZF34, which is
consistent with the lower apparent affinity of JAZ ZF34 for dsRNA
compared with those of the other two-finger protein constructs.

1H–15N HSQC spectra of JAZ zinc finger
domains. (A) Superposition of the 600 MHz spectrum (298 K) of ZF34
(black) with that of ZF3 (blue). Red horizontal lines denote resonances
of side-chain carboxamide groups of Asn and Gln residues. Representative
assignments are indicated. (B) Superposition of the 600 MHz spectrum
(298 K) of ZF34 (black) with that of ZF4 (magenta). Blue horizontal
lines denote resonances of side-chain carboxamide groups of Asn and
Gln residues. Representative assignments are indicated. Labels in
red indicate resonances that are observed for ZF4 but not for ZF34.
(C) Superposition of part of the 800 MHz spectrum (298 K) of 100 μM
ZF34 (black) with that of 100 μM ZF34 in the presence of 220
μM VAI T57A RNA (red). Some weak peaks are missing in the spectrum
of ZF34 because of exchange broadening. (D) Superposition of part
of the 600 MHz spectrum (298 K) of 50 μM ZF3 (black) with that
of 63 μM ZF3 in the presence of 120 μM VAI T57B (red)
and that of 50 μM JAZ ZF3 in the presence of 100 μM duplex
III (green). (E) Superposition of part of the 750 MHz spectrum (298
K) of 100 μM ZF4 (blue), that of 100 μM ZF4 in the presence
of 200 μM duplex III RNA (red), and 100 μM ZF4 in the
presence of 300 μM duplex III RNA (green). The blue (free protein)
spectrum has been offset to the right for clarity by an amount indicated
by the vertical lines at the bottom of the figure.

NMR experiments were used to identify minimal RNA
constructs capable
of binding to single JAZ zinc finger domains through observation of
appreciable changes in the chemical shifts of the JAZ zinc fingers
in the presence of excess RNA. Appreciable binding to JAZ ZF3 was
observed for full-length VAI, the VAI apical domain, and the shorter
VAI terminal domain constructs T57A and T52. Both NMR and EMSA data
indicate that the T37 dsRNA (total length 14 pairs, with 10 Watson–Crick
base pairs, three G–U wobble pairs, and one non-hydrogen-bonded
C–A pair in the Mfold model) is too short for binding to JAZ
fingers. A minimal RNA duplex VAImin (total length 19 pairs, consisting
of 16 Watson–Crick base pairs, two G–U wobble pairs,
and one non-hydrogen-bonded G–A pair in the Mfold model) was
designed on the basis of the terminal domain of VAI. Because the spectra
of JAZ ZF3 in complex with VAImin and with T57B RNA are similar, the
bound form of JAZ ZF3 must be structurally similar in the two complexes
and we therefore propose that A-form RNAs approximately 19 base pairs
in length are sufficient for binding to JAZ ZF3.

The HSQC spectra
of ZF3 bound to VAImin and to a variant RNA, VAIminMut,
where all of the noncanonical base pairs are mutated to G–C
base pairs are almost identical (). This observation supports the EMSA results that show that JAZ–RNA
interactions are not influenced by tetraloops, overhanging nucleotides,
or non-Watson–Crick base pairs and their associated structural
perturbations of the A-form helix. The NMR titration results also
show that the presence or absence of 5′-triphosphate groups
does not affect the binding of JAZ. JAZ ZF3 can bind to dsRNAs that
possess 5′-ppp groups, such as VAI T57B (prepared by transcription
reactions), and also to RNAs lacking the 5′-ppp groups, such
as the VAImin RNA (prepared by chemical synthesis).

Consistent
with published observations, NMR titration
data indicate JAZ ZF3 binds only weakly to a DNA duplex
with sequence corresponding to the VAImin RNA sequence (): only very small chemical-shift perturbations
of a few of the protein-backbone resonances are observed. Most JAZ
ZF3 backbone amide resonances are unchanged even in the presence of
excess VAImin DNA. The imino proton resonances of the DNA indicate
that the DNA remains in duplex form in the presence of JAZ ZF3. The
binding affinity of JAZ ZF3 to VAImin DNA is too weak to quantitate
using NMR, EMSA, or ITC methods.

Quantitative Estimates
of JAZ–RNA Binding by NMR
NMR titration experiments
were employed to measure the binding affinities
of JAZ ZF2 and JAZ ZF3 for VAImin RNA by quantitation of chemical-shift
changes of the protein-backbone resonances in 1H–15N HSQC spectra of JAZ ZF2 (Figure A) and JAZ ZF3 (Figure B) as increasing amounts
of VAImin RNA were added. Shifted cross peaks are broadened in some
cases because of the on–off exchange rates of the complexes.
Broadening is more pronounced for ZF3, an indication that the ZF3–VAImin
RNA complex has a slightly higher affinity (slower off-rate) than
the ZF2–VAImin complex. For ZF1 (Figure C), the resonances are broadened by the same mechanism to such an
extent that the NMR data cannot be used to obtain binding constants.

(A) NMR
titration of JAZ ZF2 with increasing concentrations of
VAImin RNA. The spectra are colored by molar ratio: free ZF2, black
and [RNA]/[ZF2] 0.5, blue; 1.0, cyan; 1.5, green; 2.2, yellow; 3.7,
magenta; and 3.8, red. Inset: 1D 1H spectra (imino proton
region) of free VAImin RNA (cyan) and of a 1:1 complex with JAZ ZF2
(red). The structure of VAImin is shown at the top left. (B) NMR titration
of JAZ ZF3 with increasing concentrations of VAImin RNA. The spectra
are colored by molar ratio: free ZF3, black and [RNA]/[ZF3] 0.2, blue;
0.4, cyan; 0.6, green; 0.8, yellow; 1.0, orange; and 2.0, red. Inset:
1D 1H spectra of free VAImin RNA (cyan) and of a 1:1 complex
with JAZ ZF3 (red). The structure of VAImin is shown at the top left.
(C) NMR titration of JAZ ZF1 with VAIminMut RNA. The spectra are colored
by molar ratio: free ZF1, blue and [RNA]/[ZF1] 0.04, cyan; 0.1, green;
0.2, yellow; 2.0, magenta; and 2.5, red. The structure of VAIminMut
is shown at the top left.

The NMR titration data for both ZF2 and ZF3 indicate that
VAImin
RNA binds two zinc finger domains at saturation through a primary
binding site with a relatively high affinity and a secondary binding
site with a lower affinity. Binding affinities were determined by
globally fitting the chemical-shift changes of the protein-backbone
resonances (both 1H and 15N) as a function of
the molar ratio of RNA-to-protein for each titration point using a
two-site binding model with the program nmrKd2. Results are shown
in Figure . For the JAZ ZF3–VAImin
RNA complex, the NMR data were fit to give Kd1 = 8 ± 1 μM and Kd2 = 121 ± 10 μM. For JAZ ZF2, the dissociation constants
for VAImin RNA were estimated to be Kd1 = 10 μM (fixed during fitting) and Kd2 = 92 ± 9 μM.

Chemical-shift perturbations for all measurable
amide resonances
upon binding VAImin RNA (derived from the data of Figure ) plotted as a function of the molar ratio of [RNA]/[ZF].
Experimental data are represented by filled circles; lines of corresponding
colors show the results obtained from global fits of all of the 1H and 15N Δδ data for a given titration
to a two-site binding model using the program nmrKd2. (A) 1H data for the
ZF2/VAImin RNA titration. (B) 15N data for the ZF2/VAImin
titration. (C) 1H data for the ZF3/VAImin titration. (D) 15N data for the ZF3/VAImin titration.

Dissociation constants for the JAZ ZF1–VAImin RNA
complex
could not be determined using NMR titration experiments because of
the broadening of many of the JAZ ZF1 backbone resonances in the presence
of RNA (Figure C). The presence of exchange
broadening implies that the binding of ZF1 to the RNA is actually
tighter (slower off-rate) than that of ZF2 or ZF3; the affinity of
JAZ ZF1 for VAImin RNA could therefore be estimated by isothermal
titration calorimetry (ITC) measurements (Figure ). The data could only be reliably fit using a one-site binding
model with a Kd = 23 ± 4 μM
and a JAZ ZF1/RNA stoichiometric ratio of 2:1. This dissociation constant
is only an approximation of the Kd value
because interactions with the secondary binding site contribute to
the measured heat of interaction. It was not possible to collect data
points at higher molar ratios using ITC in order to fit using a two-site
model because of the solubility limitations of the JAZ ZF1–RNA
complex. Attempts to measure the dissociation constants of JAZ ZF23
with VAImin and a 30 bp Watson–Crick base-paired RNA using
ITC were unsuccessful because of multimeric binding that prevented
the calculation of Kd values for the complexes.
Representative traces are shown in . These results are consistent with the EMSA results (Figure ), which show clearly that JAZ ZF12 and ZF23 bind
RNA with nanomolar C50’s in a multimeric fashion.

ITC titration
of JAZ ZF1 with VAImin RNA. The curve in the lower
panel is fitted to the experimental points using a model with 2:1
ZF/RNA.

Mapping of the RNA Binding
Sites on JAZ Zinc Fingers by NMR
Backbone-resonance assignments
were made for all four of the single
zinc finger JAZ constructs. Almost complete assignments could be made
for JAZ ZF2 and ZF3, but the assignments for JAZ ZF1 were less complete
because of resonance overlap in the center of the spectrum. Assignments
for JAZ ZF4 were incomplete because of exchange broadening of cross
peaks in the triple-resonance experiments used to assign ZF34. Assigned 1H–15N HSQC spectra for the single zinc finger
proteins are shown in .

The RNA binding sites on ZF1, ZF2, and ZF3 were identified from assigned
HSQC cross peaks that shift and/or broaden in the presence of RNA.
We find that the protein resonances that are perturbed by addition
of RNA correspond to elements of the JAZ zinc fingers that are predicted
to be structured, according to sequence homology with the known structures of ZFa fingers. None of the observations made
so far on dsRBP proteins, derived either from JAZ or ZFa, suggest
that the linker regions interact directly with the RNA.

NMR Solution
Structure of JAZ ZF3
A set of 20 low-energy
solution structures (Figure A) was calculated
for JAZ ZF3 using CYANA 2.1, refined
by AMBER 9 incorporating a generalized-Born (GB) continuum solvent
model,, and included restraints for the zinc coordination
as described previously to the side chains
of residues 187, 190, 203, and 209. A 15N–1H HMQC spectrum () shows that
the zinc is coordinated by the Nε2 of H203 and by the Nδ1
of H209, as was observed for the ZFa zinc fingers. Statistics for the ensemble of the 20 lowest-energy NMR
structures of JAZ ZF3 are reported in Table .

(A) Backbone ensemble of the well-structured region (residues 180–225)
of the 20 lowest-energy NMR structures of JAZ ZF3. (B) Ribbon representation
of the lowest-energy structure of JAZ ZF3, showing the secondary structural
elements and the disordered N-terminal tail (residues 168–179).
β-strands β1 and β2 are shown in gold, α1,
in green, and α2, in blue. The zinc is shown as a gray sphere
coordinated to the side chains of C187 and C190 (yellow) and H203
and H209 (blue). Figure made with Molmol.

Structural Statistics
for JAZ ZF3
NMR Constraints	 	
total
unambiguous distance
restraints	209	
intraresidue (i, i)	54	
sequential (i, i + 1)	74	
medium range (2≤ |i – j| ≤4)	33	
long range (|i – j| &gt; 4)	48	
total dihedral angle restraints	77	
Φ	38	
Ψ	39	
χ1	0	
Ensemble Statistics	 	
Violation Analysis	 	
maximum distance violation
(angstroms)	0.19	
maximum dihedral
angle violation
(degrees)	0	
Energies	 	
mean restraint violation
energy (kcal mol–1)	2.5	
mean AMBER energy (kcal mol–1)	–1880.4	
Deviation from Idealized
Geometry	 	
bond lengths (angstroms)	0.01	
bond angles (degrees)	2.5	
rmsd from mean structure	0.43	
rmsd for all heavy atoms	1.04	
Ramachandran
Plot	 	
most favorable regions (%)	89.6	
additionally allowed regions (%)	10.4	
generously allowed regions (%)	0	
disallowed regions (%)	0	
rmsd values and Ramachandran statistics
are given for structured regions (residues 181 to 222) only.

Human JAZ ZF3 (residues 168–227)
is structured from I181
to Y222 as defined by the presence of 1H–13C and 1H–15N NOEs and TALOS+ torsion-angle
restraints (Figure ). JAZ ZF3 adopts a ββαα
fold very similar to those of ZFa ZF1 and ZF2. At the N-terminus is an antiparallel β-hairpin (residues
K185–F194); the two β-strands are connected by a type
I turn. A short structured loop (residues N195 and D196) connects
the β-hairpin to the helix–kink–helix motif, with
helix α1 spanning residues P197–V205 and helix α2,
residues K208–Y222. Two relatively well-structured residues
before the N-terminal β-strand (I181 and D182) appear to pack
against the loop at the N-terminus of the α1 helix (D196 and
P197). The zinc ligands of JAZ ZF3 are C187 in the first strand, C190
in the turn, H203 at the end of helix α1, and H209 at the beginning
of helix α2. Hydrophobic residues (F194 and Y204) participate
in packing interactions, but there is no well-defined hydrophobic
core in JAZ ZF3, which, like ZFa, requires
the presence of zinc to form a folded structure. The surface of JAZ
ZF3 is positively charged (pI = 9.3) because of the presence of numerous
surface-exposed lysines (K207, K208, K211, K215, and K217) and arginines
(R210 and R221) in the helix–kink–helix motif. A comparison
of the changes in chemical shift as dsRNA is added to JAZ ZF3 and
to ZFa ZF1 is shown in Figure A,B. These changes
are mapped onto the backbones of the two zinc finger structures in
Figure C. The similarity between the two zinc
finger structures and their structural perturbations and RNA-binding
surfaces, as revealed by the location of chemical-shift changes upon
addition of RNA, is consistent with the high sequence homology between
the structured regions of the two proteins.

(A, B) Perturbation of
the backbone amide (1H and 15N) resonances of
(A) JAZ ZF3 and (B) ZF1 of the homologous
protein ZFa. Δδ = [(ΔδHN)2 + (ΔδN/5)2]1/2. Red
horizontal lines indicate the average Δδ (0.115 for JAZ
ZF3 and 0.053 for ZFa ZF1), and blue lines indicate [average + 1×
standard deviation] (0.122 for JAZ ZF3 and 0.056 for ZFa ZF1). (C,
D) Backbone representation of the lowest-energy structures from the
ensembles of (C) JAZ ZF3 and (D) ZFa ZF1. Residues for which Δδ &gt; [average + 1× standard
deviation] are colored red and blue for JAZ ZF3 and ZFa ZF1, respectively,
and residues for which [average + 1× standard deviation] &lt;
Δδ &lt; [average] are colored orange and light blue for
JAZ ZF3 and ZFa ZF1, respectively. ZFa ZF1 has an extension (light
gray) at the N-terminus consisting of a third helix and a third β-strand. Disordered residues at the termini have been
omitted from the representation of both structures. Figure made with
Molmol.

Modeling of the JAZ ZF3–VAImin RNA Complex
The
complex between JAZ ZF3 and a 19 base pair dsRNA, VAIminMut (Figure C, ), was modeled using
the program HADDOCK utilizing backbone
chemical-shift perturbation data from NMR titrations as ambiguous
interaction restraints together with general information on protein-binding
sites on RNAs.,− No intermolecular
NOEs for the JAZ ZF3–VAImin RNA complex were observed, likely
because of the intermediate exchange observed in the HSQC spectra.
Our EMSA and NMR results indicate that binding to the dsRNA does not
depend on the base sequence of the RNA so that we are unable to define
a preferred binding site for the JAZ fingers on RNA. Input data for
the HADDOCK calculation therefore used only solvent-exposed residues
with significant chemical-shift perturbations (≥0.9 times the
standard deviation from the trimmed mean of the weighted average of 1H and 15N shift changes) as residue-level ambiguous
interaction restraints for the protein, but it included all (except
terminal) nucleotides in the RNA, consistent with the assumption that
the JAZ zinc fingers could bind at multiple sites on the surface of
the A-form RNA helix. The HADDOCK modeling program then allows any
of the atoms from each residue designated as an ambiguous interaction
restraint to interact with the dsRNA-binding partner. The entire A-form
helix (minus the termini) was used to create a solvent-exposed interaction
surface, allowing the protein to interact with any set of ≤17
bp in the RNA duplex. Models of the JAZ ZF3–VAIminMut RNA complexes
were generated by docking the lowest-energy NMR structure of JAZ ZF3
to the idealized A-form VAIminMut RNA structural model.

When
superimposed along the protein backbone, the HADDOCK models of the
JAZ ZF3–RNA complex converge to form an ensemble of complexes
in which the kink of the helix–kink–helix motif of JAZ
ZF3 interacts with the RNA backbone centered on and directed toward
the major groove (Figure A). When the same
structures are superimposed along the RNA backbone (Figure B), the binding site of JAZ ZF3 is seen to vary
between the structures: it is disordered with respect to rotation
about the long axis of the duplex. Nevertheless, in all structures,
JAZ ZF3 spans the major groove, making contacts with the phosphate
backbone and the adjacent minor groove (Figure C, D). The interaction between JAZ ZF3 and dsRNA appears to be driven
largely by the electrostatics and morphology of the A-form helix.
The helix–kink–helix motif of JAZ ZF3 contains a number
of arginine and lysine residues, which create a highly positively
charged surface that accommodates the phosphate groups of the RNA
backbone. The charge of the helix–kink–helix motif is
augmented by the dipole of the α2 helix. The models suggest
that positively charged residues of the helix–kink–helix
motif, such as the side chains of K207, K208, K211, and K215 of JAZ
ZF3, make multiple contacts with the phosphate backbone of the RNA
and with riboses in the minor groove. In addition, the amide proton
of K207 makes a hydrogen bond to the phosphate group of a guanine
(Figure C). Both the interaction and the guanine
appear to be conserved between the structures of ZF3–RNA and
IPTase–tRNA. A comparison of the
structures of JAZ ZF3 and the IPTase zinc finger protein from the
tRNA complex is shown in .

(A, B) Models
of the complex between JAZ ZF3 and the minimal dsRNA
VAIminMut shown (A) superimposed on the structured portions of the
backbone of ZF3 and (B) superimposed on the backbone of the dsRNA
duplex. (C) Model of the complex between ZF3 and the minimal dsRNA
showing interactions between the side chains of Q202, K207, K208,
K211, and Q212 (shown in red) with the phosphate backbone of the RNA.
The backbone amide of K207 (blue sphere) and the phosphorus of Cyt13
(black) are shown in close proximity in the complex. (D) Single HADDOCK
model with the dsRNA shown in a surface representation, illustrating
the docking of the JAZ ZF3 in the major groove. Figure made with (A,
B, D) PyMol and (C) Molmol.

Discussion
Multiple Complexes in the
EMSA Experiments
The EMSA
experiments of Figure  show the presence of
multiple complexes of JAZ with RNAs of various sizes. This circumstance
complicates the analysis of these data for quantitative estimates
of the affinities. A qualitative estimate is given by the C50, which is related only to the protein concentration at which half
of the RNA has disappeared from the free-RNA position on the gel regardless
of what state it has subsequently entered. It is the semiquantitative
figure C50 that is used to inform on the relative affinities
shown in Table . Using C50 as an
estimate of binding affinity, we were able to define both minimal
RNA and protein constructs for a structural study of the JAZ–RNA
complex.

The formation of a number of complexes of different
molecular weights as JAZ protein is added to the RNA is most likely
because of the binding of the protein at multiple sites on the RNA,
with each of these sites having comparable but slightly different
affinity. More bands are observed in the gels for the two-finger constructs
compared to ZF1–4, both for full-length VAI (Figure A) and for smaller RNAs (Figures B and ), likely because of the
higher stoichiometric ratio at which the two-finger proteins saturate
all of the binding sites on the RNA. Higher-order RNA–protein
complexes may also be attributable to bridging complexes in which
two or more zinc fingers from one JAZ molecule interact with multiple
RNA helices.

Does JAZ Have Any Specificity for RNA Sequence
or Structure?
The general consensus in the literature is
that JAZ and its homologues
Wig1 and ZFA have no identifiable sequence specificity for RNA binding,
although they are all specific for binding to dsRNA (and to a lesser
extent, DNA–RNA hybrids) and not to ssRNA or DNA. It has been
suggested that dsRBZFP–RNA interactions may be determined primarily
by the shape of the A-form helix,, yet a number
of target RNA molecules have been specifically identified for JAZ,
including the viral associated RNAI (VAI) RNA from adenovirus and cellular dsRNA. These molecules contain stretches of base-paired nucleotides, both
Watson–Crick and non-Watson–Crick, as well as bulges,
unpaired nucleotides, loops, and single-stranded overhangs. By examining
the nucleotide sequences of the known targets of JAZ, we identified
a series of possible RNA structural elements that could be tested
to determine whether they were important components of the binding
affinity of JAZ zinc fingers for RNA and hence could be identified
as specificity features.

Examination by EMSA and NMR shows conclusively
that there is very little effect of any of the irregularities in RNA
structure on the affinity of JAZ for RNA. Quantitation of binding
data is quite problematic for this system because of multimeric and
heterogeneous binding between the JAZ zinc fingers and RNA. However,
the RNA constructs where loops, bulges, and overhangs were systematically
removed from the target VAI RNA showed very little difference in affinity
for the JAZ zinc fingers. The finding that 3′ overhangs are
not recognized by JAZ is surprising because it has been suggested
that Wig-1 recognizes overhangs in a 21 bp RNA. The JAZ zinc fingers bind equally well to a cellular dsRNA,
pre-miR34a, as to viral dsRNA. We conclude that the presence of A-form
RNA, with or without minor defects because of noncanonical base pairing,
is all that is required for binding to JAZ zinc fingers. The only
requirement appears to be the presence of a minimal length of well-structured
RNA that adopts an A-form helix of sufficient length to provide sites
for binding. We have identified a minimal length of RNA, VAImin, which
was subsequently used to characterize the binding of individual JAZ
zinc fingers using NMR. Preferential binding of dsRNA over dsDNA by
JAZ ZF3 (Figures  and ) provides further evidence that the A-form RNA conformation
is fundamental to nucleic acid recognition by JAZ ZF3. Our data confirm
previous findings that showed JAZ and ZFa preferentially bind to A-form
over B-form helices.,

Results from EMSA experiments
and NMR titrations indicate that
the binding affinity of JAZ zinc fingers for RNA is dependent on the
length of the A-form helix. Quantitative NMR titrations of JAZ ZF3
with VAImin RNA show that dsRNA with approximately 17 base pairs provides
two binding sites, with Kd1 of the order
of 10 μM and Kd2 of the order of
100 μM, which are each occupied by one zinc finger domain. We
believe that the Kd’s differ because
the binding of the proteins is negatively cooperative. The protein
binding sites on the RNA are in close proximity; after the binding
of the first protein, the affinity of the second protein is reduced,
likely because of charge-neutralization effects. In essence, the first Kd is measuring the affinity of the protein for
the RNA, which is relatively high, whereas the second Kd is measuring the affinity of the protein for an RNA–protein
complex.

ITC and quantitative NMR titration experiments indicate
that JAZ
ZF1, ZF2, and ZF3 have similar binding affinities for VAImin RNA and
that the 2:1 (ZF/RNA) stoichiometry of the complex is conserved. Spectra
of the imino-proton resonances of VAImin RNA show this RNA remains
in an A-form conformation when bound to JAZ ZF2 or JAZ ZF3.

Role of
Multiple Zinc Fingers in RNA Binding
The RNA-binding
affinity estimated by C50 values of full-length JAZ (ZF1–4)
is higher than that of one- or two-finger constructs. Affinity for
RNA is weakest in constructs with only one RNA-binding zinc finger,
ZF1, ZF2, and ZF3, and the two-finger construct ZF34. EMSA results
demonstrate that the RNA-binding affinity of the two-finger JAZ constructs,
and the respective stoichiometric ratios of their RNA–protein
complexes depend on the number of active RNA-binding zinc finger domains
they contain (i.e., ZF1–4 &gt; ZF12 ≈ ZF23 &gt; ZF34).
JAZ
ZF1–4 produces larger gel shifts compared to those of JAZ ZF12
and JAZ ZF23, consistent with the increased mass of JAZ ZF1–4
(more than twice that of the two-finger constructs).

Our NMR
results that show that residues corresponding to the linker regions
between fingers do not interact with RNA directly suggest that these
nonconserved unstructured regions act to increase the RNA affinity
only through a proximity effect, tethering the zinc fingers and increasing
the effective local concentration of the zinc finger domains. This
behavior is unlike that of the sequence-specific dsRBDs of PKR in
which the linkers interact directly with their partner dsRNAs.− Other zinc finger proteins utilize linker regions to provide additional
site-specific affinity through protein–protein interactions
in binding RNA or DNA,, a phenomenon that we have termed a snap-lock. Interestingly, the absence of interfinger and
finger-linker interactions as well as any evidence of contact between
dsRNA and the linkers is a hallmark of the dsRBZFP proteins, both
JAZ (this work) and ZFa, and may be correlated
with the complete absence of sequence specificity for their RNA targets.

Affinities of the dsRBP Zinc Fingers for dsRNA
Studies
of the homologous proteins JAZ, ZFa, and Wig1 as well as mutagenesis
experiments on JAZ suggested that all four of the JAZ zinc finger
domains have dsRNA-binding activity. Our
EMSA and NMR studies show that JAZ ZF1, ZF2, and ZF3 all bind A-form
dsRNAs with comparable affinity, whereas JAZ ZF4 does not interact
at all with RNA. The absence of RNA binding by ZF4 is puzzling. JAZ
ZF4 is highly homologous to the RNA-binding zinc fingers of JAZ and
ZFa. In particular, ZF4 has a sequence
almost identical to those of ZFa fingers 4, 5, 6, and 7, whereas the homology is much weaker between
this set of fingers and ZF1, 2, and 3 of either of the two proteins
(Figure A). A comparison of the RNA-binding
properties of the N-terminal and C-terminal ZFa fingers suggested that the modes of binding of ZFa ZF1–3
differed in a qualitative sense from the binding of ZFa ZF4–7
or ZF3–7. In particular, the apparent binding constants reported
by Finerty and Bass for full-length ZFa
and for ZFa ZF1–3 are almost equivalent (0.5 nM), whereas the
values reported for ZFa ZF4–7 (8.4 nM) and ZFa ZF5–7
(9.0 nM) are more than an order of magnitude weaker. These binding
data suggest that ZFa ZF5, 6, and 7 have significantly lower affinities
for dsRNA than ZFa ZF1, 2, or 3. The presence of ZFa ZF4 appears to
have a negligible effect on the affinity in the context of multifinger
constructs. This observation seems to
imply that ZFa ZF4, like JAZ ZF4, is not one of the primary binding
sites for dsRNA. Finerty and Bass suggest,
on the basis of the difference in affinity of the N-terminal and C-terminal
zinc fingers of ZFa, that these regions of the protein may bind to
different forms of dsRNA or alternatively may bind in a different
manner. Our results likewise suggest that JAZ ZF4 may have a different
function in the protein, perhaps to bind to different types of nucleic
acid or possibly to other proteins. Amide resonances, largely for
the α-helix and flexible loop regions, are broadened in the 1H–15N HSQC spectrum of JAZ ZF4. Structural
modeling using CSRosetta revealed
that the C-terminus of ZF4 did not form α-helical structure
and that this region was apparently random coil.

A detailed
comparison of the particular residues that differ between the first
three zinc fingers of ZFa and JAZ on the one hand and the last four
fingers of ZFa and ZF4 of JAZ on the other reveals that the conserved
sequence HYxxKKHK, which spans the helix–kink–helix
motif in ZFa ZF1–3 and JAZ ZF1–3
(this work), is subtly changed in JAZ ZF4 (to HVSGFKHK)
and ZFa ZF4–7 (to HISGAKHK). The replacement of
the positively charged side chain of K by F (or A) may be sufficient
to lower the RNA affinity of these zinc finger domains. Another potential
substitution that could disrupt RNA binding is the presence of a glutamic
acid at position 252 of JAZ ZF4 at a position analogous to V198 of
JAZ ZF3 (and also present at this position throughout ZFa ZF4–7
(Figure B)). This residue shows significant
chemical-shift changes as VAImin RNA is added to ZF3 and appears in
the HADDOCK models as a prominent RNA contact site.

Biological
Role of JAZ
Our binding studies also shed
light on the molecular biology of JAZ. Although JAZ is thought to
participate in the nucleocytoplasmic shuttling of pre-miRNA via the
exportin pathway, an interaction between
JAZ and a pre-miRNA has not previously been reported in vitro. Our work provides the first report of a dsRNA-binding zinc finger
protein interacting with a pre-miRNA of known function. The finding
that JAZ ZF34 can bind to adenoviral VAI and human pre-miR34a dsRNAs
with similar apparent affinities suggests that JAZ cannot distinguish
between endogenous or exogenous dsRNAs. This is consistent with published
data suggesting that for a protein to bind differentially to pathogenic
dsRNA or endogenous dsRNA it must be capable of recognizing either
specific RNA sequences or structural elements.− Our results
suggest that JAZ, specifically zinc fingers 1, 2 and 3, is able to
bind and decorate any dsRNA with at least 17, not necessarily canonical
Watson–Crick, base pairs with moderate-to-high affinity.

Our results are consistent with the known role of JAZ in the transport
of small double-stranded RNAs to and from the nucleus via the exportin-5
pathway. For such a role, it makes sense
that a transport-facilitating protein such as JAZ should have quite
a modest affinity for the substrate, with no sequence specificity.
This renders JAZ unable to discriminate between endogenous RNA sequences
and pathogenic viral sequences, all of which are shuttled out of the
nucleus into the cytoplasm to perform their biological functions.
Clearly, JAZ has not evolved to discriminate between these RNA types
and therefore forms no part of the defense of the cell against infection.
In fact, JAZ appears to be a weak point in the antiviral defense system
of cells. The hijacking of the cell’s machinery by overwhelming
it with exogenous biomolecules that mimic and out-compete their endogenous
counterparts is a common method for viruses to gain ascendancy on
the way to successful infection and viral reproduction (see, for example,
ref ()). Understanding
the methods by which this hijacking is achieved in important cellular
systems may provide insights that will facilitate the design of new
therapeutic approaches to disease.

The biological roles of dsRBZFP-like
domains such as JAZ ZF4 that
do not bind dsRNA remain unclear. Other dsRBD proteins that do not
interact with RNA are often protein–protein interaction domains. JAZ has been shown to interact with the tumor
suppressor p53 and interleukin enhancer-binding
factor 3. Our studies confirm that JAZ
ZF1, ZF2, and ZF3 bind to dsRNA. Sequence analysis indicates that the linkers between the zinc finger domains
in JAZ are likely to be disordered, as they are in the homologous
protein ZFa. It is tempting to speculate that a potential role for
ZF4 of JAZ (together, perhaps, with some of the disordered linker
regions) could be to act as a protein–protein interaction domain.

Supporting Information Available
EMSA
gels for interactions
between various nucleic acid and JAZ protein constructs, secondary
structure models for all nucleic acid constructs, NMR spectra and
ITC titrations for various single-finger JAZ constructs with RNA,
and overlays of published structures of similar proteins with that
of JAZ ZF3. This material is available free of charge via the Internet
at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bi401675h_si_001.pdf

Author Present Address
† Freeslate, Inc., Sunnyvale California 94085,
United States.

This work was
supported by grant GM36643 from the National Institutes of Health
and by the Skaggs Institute for Chemical Biology.

The authors declare no
competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
We thank Joel Gottesfeld,
Michael Summers, James Williamson,
Gerard Kroon, Derrick Meinhold, Bethany Buck-Koehntop, and Donald
Kerkow for helpful discussions and assistance, Peter Haberz for assistance
with data fitting, and Martha Fedor, Joel Gottesfeld, and James Williamson
for allowing us the use of their equipment and facilities for EMSA
experiments.

Abbreviations Used
JAZjust another zinc finger (also known
as ZNF346)

dsRNAdouble-stranded RNA

tRNAtransfer RNA

ssRNAsingle-stranded RNA

dsDNAdouble-stranded DNA

dsRBDdsRNA-binding domain

dsRBZFPdsRNA-binding zinc finger protein

ZFazinc finger protein a

HSQCheteronuclear single-quantum coherence

ZFzinc finger domain

VAI RNAadenovirus
viral associated RNA I

