Interactions between proteins
and small molecules are central to life-sustaining biochemical processes
and the action of many important therapeutic agents. However, the
detailed mechanisms of these processes are often poorly understood
and can involve a variety of motions on a wide range of time scales., For instance, many large proteins are built from multiple domains
with ligand binding sites localized at the interdomain clefts. The
presence of bound substrates often stabilizes a closed conformation
of the cleft, while the absence of a ligand favors an open conformation.
These conformational transitions play critical roles in the ligand
recognition processes and are essential for diverse functions, including
transport, signaling, and enzymatic activity.() Motions between stable protein states can expand or contract a binding
site, yielding distinct chemical interactions with ligands.− This inherent protein flexibility presents an important complication
for computer-based approaches in drug discovery, as it is effectively
harder to hit a moving target.,

Conceptually,
the realization that proteins can undergo conformational changes during
or after ligand binding has led to the replacement of the traditional
view of proteins as rigid objects in the so-called “lock-and-key”
model() and to the development of the “induced-fit”
(IF)() and “conformational selection”
(CS),, models of
molecular recognition (Figure ). Both IF and
CS mechanisms incorporate the idea that proteins are free to explore
energy landscapes that often display multiple stable conformational
states in equilibrium.− The CS model describes a scenario in which the unbound
protein preexists in an ensemble of conformations. The IF model describes
structural plasticity in the protein that is mainly ligand-induced.
However, it is important to note that these models are not mutually
exclusive. Indeed, a survey of the recent literature indicates that
many recognition processes can also involve some elements of both
CS and IF mechanisms.,− Improving descriptions
of both IF and CS effects in computer-based drug discovery is a particularly
important current challenge.,,

Three
possible mechanisms for a protein–ligand association coupled
to a conformational change. (A) The apoprotein is sufficiently flexible
to exhibit open-to-closed motions, and the role of the ligand is to
stabilize the closed form (CS model). (B) The unliganded protein is
unable to reach the closed form, and structural plasticity is ligand-dependent
(IF model). (C) A mixture of both CS and IF steps is required to reach
the closed conformation.

Theoretical studies of bacterial periplasmic binding
proteins (PBPs) can provide valuable information about the key roles
of conformational changes occurring during ligand recognition. PBPs
are expressed by Gram-negative bacteria and function to transport
a variety of nutrient molecules, such as amino acids, ions, vitamins,
and carbohydrates.() Upon ligand binding,
the two domains of PBPs are able to undergo hinge-bending motions
to sequester ligands inside the interdomain cleft. This action has
been dubbed a “Venus-flytrap mechanism”, because of
its resemblance to the traps on the carnivorous plant that close only
when stimulated by prey.() Similar folds
exist in a number of important human drug targets, including glutamate
receptors.() In addition, modified PBPs
are being researched
as glucose nanosensors that could benefit more than 100 million diabetes
patients worldwide.()

Many crystallographic
structures of PBPs have been determined and provide a rich source
of information about their different stable conformational states.
However, static X-ray structures do not always provide information
about the high-energy conformers that can be used for ligand recognition.
For this reason, the detailed recognition mechanism is often unknown,
and different approaches have been used to complement crystallographic
studies and provide descriptions of the protein’s intrinsic
flexibility, such as nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopy,, fluorescence,() and molecular dynamics
(MD) simulations, as reviewed in recent publications.,, Previously, we have studied the
hinge-bending motion of the maltose binding protein (MBP) in atomic
detail.() MBP is part of the maltose/maltodextrin
system
of Escherichia coli, which is responsible for the
uptake and efficient catabolism of maltodextrins. Our simulation study
of apo MBP showed the existence of two stable apo states: the open
(O) and semi-closed (S) states (Figure ). Paramagnetic
relaxation enhancement rates were back-calculated from the simulations
and found to be consistent with previous NMR experiments.() Furthermore, a similar structure for the S state
was later produced by Kondo et al, using a different force field,() and both structures were found to be comparable
to a published NMR structure [Protein Data Bank (PDB) entry 2H25],() with a root-mean-square deviation (rmsd) of &lt;2 Å.
In addition, the study helped uncover the existence of a motion in
the balancing interface region that is coupled to the O → S
transition. However, the role of the S state during the ligand recognition
process remains unknown, and its study could lead to a deeper understanding
of recognition processes, as several other PBPs also appear to display
partially closed states, such as LAO-BP() and RBP.()

In this paper, we extend
our initial study of MBP to explore the ligand recognition mechanism
in holo MBP and study the role of the S state during ligand recognition.
In principle, conventional MD (cMD) simulations could be used to study
the exchanges between conformational states in hinge-bending proteins;
however, these conformational transitions typically consist of structural
rearrangements on spatial scales of 10–100 Å, and the
transition time for such rearrangement can be in microseconds or even
milliseconds. These slow time scales render difficult the calculation
of converged properties for domain motions, because current computer
power often limits MD simulations to the submicrosecond time scale.
Here, the accelerated MD (aMD)() method
is used to enhance the sampling by 1–2 orders of magnitude
and to allow the full characterization of the microsecond hinge-bending
motions of MBP. In addition to performing cMD and aMD simulations,
we computed free energy profiles with the adaptive biased force (ABF), method to determine the relative energy of different conformational
states. Finally, the binding affinity for a maltotriose ligand is
determined by performing thermodynamic integration (TI), using the
double-decoupling method.() The combined
results of these calculations provide an unprecedented characterization
of the thermodynamic properties underlying the recognition mechanism
in MBP.

Side and top views of MBP, showing the size and shape of the binding
site that is modulated by the conformational state of the protein.
Red indicates that the residues are close to the center of mass of
the protein, where the binding site is located. The two domains (the
N-terminal domain, NTD, and the C-terminal domain, CTD) are connected
via a short helix and a two-stranded β-sheet that form an interdomain
hinge region. X-ray structures are shown for the unliganded open state
(PDB
entry 1OMP)() and the liganded closed state (PDB entry 3MBP).() The semi-closed structure is taken from our previous computer
simulations.()

Methods
The liganded and unliganded crystal structures
of MBP (PDB entries 3MBP() and 1OMP,() respectively)
were used as the basis of our simulation systems. The 3MBP structure corresponds
to the closed conformation in the presence of maltotriose. It was
determined at a resolution of 1.70 Å. Topology files have been
prepared with the tleap module of the AMBER10 package,() and the ff03 force field,() with
TIP3P water.() TI calculations were conducted
with AMBER code, and ABF, aMD, and cMD simulations were conducted
with the NAMD2 code., Simulations were conducted in
the NVT ensemble, using a time step of 2.0 fs in combination with
the SHAKE algorithm.() The temperature
was regulated with a Langevin thermostat, using a damping coefficient
of 5 ps–1. Additional simulation parameters and
system details are as described in ref (). All the simulations are summarized in Table .

Summary of the Simulations Performed
simulation name	type (EQ, ABF, TI,
aMD)	no. and simulation time (ns)	
open-apo-EQ	EQ	2 × 50	
open-apo-aMD	aMD	2 × 50	
open-holo-EQ	EQ	10 × 40	
open-holo-aMD	aMD	10 × 40	
open-holo-TI	TI	10 × 6	
semi-apo-EQ	EQ	2 × 50	
semi-holo-EQ	EQ	10 × 40	
semi-holo-aMD	aMD	10 × 40	
semi-holo-TI	TI	10 × 6	
closed-holo-TI	TI	10 × 6	
closed-holo-ABF1	ABF	1 × 50	
closed-holo-ABF2	ABF	20 × 20	
closed-apo-ABF3	ABF	20 × 20	
Abbreviations: EQ, equilibrium;
ABF, adaptive biased force; TI, thermodynamic integration; aMD, accelerated
MD. The total simulation time was 4.1 μs.

Simulations discussed in ref ().

To study the conformational change in holo MBP, 10
aMD and 10 cMD simulations were conducted for 40 ns each, starting
from liganded O and S structures. The aMD method was able to accelerate
the sampling of hinge-bending motions by facilitating variations in
torsional angles. The following parameters were used: [Eb – V0, α] =
[1300 kcal/mol, 260 kcal/mol]. The boost parameter, Eb, was chosen to be as high as the highest energy barriers,
so that the bias potential, ΔV, is activated
most of the time. The parameter α, which controls the roughness
of the biased potential, was chosen so that the average ΔV remains around ∼40 kcal/mol during the simulations.
At this acceleration level, it was possible to enhance significantly
the hinge-bending motions, and sampling of side chain orientations,
while maintaining the integrity of the protein secondary structure.

ABF simulations were performed to generate a good pose for liganded
O and S structures and to compute free energy profiles for the O →
C transitions in apo and holo MBP. The basic idea of the ABF method
is to measure the mean force along some chosen reaction coordinate
(RC) and use it to help overcome free energy barriers and provide
estimates of the free energy. On the basis of our previous experience
with aMD simulations of apo MBP,() the radius
of gyration (Rg) calculated for all α-carbons
was found to be a good RC for studying the conformational change.
To open the liganded protein, the RC was sampled between values of
20 and 23 Å, using 500 samples prior to application of the bias
force, and a bin width of 0.1 Å. A single ABF simulation of 50
ns was able to scan the three stable states of MBP (Figure a). To ascertain the accuracy of the liganded S
and O structures, we compared unliganded structures using structural
parameters such as the rmsd and the interdomain closure angle (θ).
While a single ABF simulation can in principle provide a free energy
estimate along the RC, the efficiency of the sampling is limited by
the rate at which the system can diffuse along the RC. To accelerate
the convergence of the free energy calculations, the RC was divided
into overlapping windows with a width of 0.2, for values of Rg between 20.6 and 22.4 Å. Statistics were
accumulated by running 20 independent ABF simulations in parallel
for both apo and holo MBP, for 20 ns each, to obtain a converged profile
within 0.5 kcal/mol. The resulting free energy profile is shown in
Figure b as a function of the interdomain
closure angle
(θ), as it was found to increase nearly linearly with the RC.

TI calculations, based on the double-decoupling scheme, were performed
to study the role of the S state in ligand recognition, using maltotriose
as the ligand. In this scheme, the free energy simulations involve
gradually turning off the electrostatic and van der Waals interaction
of the ligand molecule from the rest of the system. This involves
two sets of simulations: the transfer of the ligand from bulk water
to the gas phase, ΔG°2, and
the transfer of the ligand from the binding site pocket in the complex
to the gas phase, ΔG°1. During
the latter part of the simulation, the ligand is weakly coupled to
the protein and would have to explore the entire simulation box for
ΔG°1 to converge. A practical
solution to
this problem is to use a harmonic potential that can constrain the
ligand position during the calculations and facilitate the proper
convergence of the free energy. To choose an appropriate force constant k, an analytic formula based on the equipartition theorem
is given by Gilson et al.:()where ∂r2 is is the atomic fluctuation of the constrained atom or center of
mass of the ligand during the course of a MD simulation with the fully
unperturbed potential function, R is the molar gas
constant, and T = 300 K. In this case, a harmonic
potential of 1 kcal mol–1 Å–2 was chosen, and the free energy was calculated using the appropriate
correction,() aswhere C0 is the standard concentration and the volume element, VI, can be calculated as

The binding free energy of maltotriose
was computed for MBP in the O, S, and C states. The ligand was decoupled
from its environment in several steps characterized by a λ value
between 0 and 1. The derivative of the potential energy with λ
was sampled for each λ and integrated using the trapezoid rule
to compute the free energy difference. The electrostatic interaction
was first decoupled in 11 steps, with λ values of 0.0, 0.1,
0.2, 0.3, 0.4, 0.5, 0.6, 0.7, 0.8, 0.9, and 1.0. The van der Waals
(vdW) part of the interaction energy was then decoupled in 21 steps
(every 0.05), using soft-core potentials., Each point was equilibrated prior to the production run by 0.5 ns
of MD simulation and run for at least 5 ns.

The convergence
of the calculations was ascertained by running five independent simulations
for selected λ points starting from different initial coordinates.
In addition, a time series of an error estimate, σsim(t), was back-calculated at the end of the runs
by comparing the current estimate of ∂H/∂λ
at time t and the converged ∂H/∂λ() (see also Figure a):where T is
the total number of block averages containing uncorrelated points,
[∂Ht(λ)/∂λ]λ denotes the Hamiltonian derivative, block-averaged
at time t, and [∂HT(λ)/∂λ]λ is the
ensemble average over the entire simulation time at a given λ.
The error bars calculated in this way were found to be converged within
∼0.5
kcal/mol for sampling times longer than 5 ns per λ (Figure a).

In addition to thermodynamic factors,
kinetic factors such as the rate of exchange between stable states
can affect the recognition rate. To study the impact of conformational
exchange on association kinetics, we proposed a model of the conformational
dynamics between the O and S states based on the two-state model introduced
by Szabo et al.() for studying the bimolecular
association rate in the presence of stochastic gating. In this model,
the biomolecular association rate, kG,
is calculated aswhere kUG is the
steady-state ungated biomolecular association rate to the protein
fixed in its most favorable conformations, k1 and k2 are the closing and opening
rates, respectively, (k1 + k2)−1 is the domain gating period, and
κ̃(s) is the Laplace transform of s.

For MBP, the C state is not visited in the apo
form,, and kG corresponds to the rate of O ⇔ S transitions,
whereas kUG corresponds to the recognition
rate for a
system initially fixed in the O state. Using this model, the time
for the O to S exchange becomes the domain gating period, τex, and eq  is reduced to two limiting
cases depending on the relative values of τex relative
to the characteristic diffusion relaxation time, τD:()

Equations  and  represent substrate association
in the presence of “slow” and “fast” exchange,
respectively, and imply that domain motion interferes with the substrate
binding kinetics only in the slow exchange limit (τex ≫ τD). In these equations, Dlig is the sum of the translational diffusion coefficients
of the ligand and protein, which can be approximated as the diffusion
coefficient of the ligand. The collision distance of the system, rc, can be approximated as the sum of the smallest
radii of spheres that contain each molecule.

To obtain an estimate
of the average time needed for a transition between O and S states,
τex, we used the Smoluchowski diffusion equation,
assuming a constant diffusion coefficient. The diffusion coefficient
of the protein, Dprot, was estimated with
the Hydropro method,() as the sum of the
diffusion coefficient of the two domains, setting the temperature
to 298.15 K, the viscosity to that of water at 298.15 K (0.890 cP),
and the bead radii of the protein to 3.2 Å. For the simplest
case of a flat free energy profile, the time required for the diffusion
of the two domains becomes τ0 = L2/2Dprot,() or ∼25 ns. However, for MBP, the free energy profile
is not flat and a better estimate for τex includes
a penalty caused by the roughness of the profile. This stochastic
diffusion process was modeled as a Markov chain, with discrete states
corresponding to successive milestones on the free energy profile.
Such a Markov random walk satisfies the condition of detailed balance
under equilibrium conditions in the absence of net flux, and the stochastic
evolution of the system obeys the Smoluchowski equation.() The Smoluchowski equation was discretized in
space,() using the equation kij = k0 exp[−1/2(β/ΔGij)], where β = 1/kBT, k0 is the rate for
a simple diffusion between two states i and j, and ΔGij is their free energy difference.

Results
Below we first report the results of free energy
calculations exploring the binding affinity of MBP for the maltotriose
ligand when the protein is in the O, S, and C states. Next, we present
results on kinetic aspects of the recognition process. Finally, simulations
of the conformational change that provide a complete picture of the
recognition process are described.

Free Energy Calculations
Although kinetic factors can
influence the yields of different molecular complexes in cellular
and other nonequilibrium environments, the primary factors that are
used in the analysis of molecular recognition can be described by
thermodynamics.() To explore the initial
interactions between
maltotriose and MBP, we built computational models of the liganded
O and S states (see ). After equilibration,
inspection of trajectories initiated from the O, S, and C ligand-bound
structures indicated that maltotriose interacts more favorably with
active site residues in the C state. Details of these interactions
have been described previously in detail, and involve
principally the hydroxyl groups of the sugar making hydrogen bonds
with the NTD domain of the protein (D14, N12, and E65) and aromatic
residues on the CTD (W230, Y155, W340, and Y341) that stack favorably
with the sugar ring of the ligand (Figure ).

Single ABF simulation initiated from the liganded C state to generate
models for the liganded O and S states. After equilibration (∼2
ns), the structures of the binding site were studied. With the exception
of E153 and E111 (red), all polar residues making H-bonds with maltotriose
(yellow) belong to the NTD (blue). Sugar-stacking residues (green)
all belong to the CTD, except for W62.

Interestingly, in the bound O state, several favorable
interactions with both NTD and CTD are lost because of the extended
size of the binding site. In particular, the sugar stacking residues
on the CTD (W230, Y155, W340, and Y341) are not favorably positioned.
In contrast, the sugar stacking residues in the S state can interact
more favorably with the ligand. Residues Y155 and W340 form interdomain
H-bonds, between W340 (CTD) and D65 (NTD), and between the backbone
carbonyl of E111 and Y155.() These H-bonds
help orient the sugar-stacking side chains so that they can interact
favorably with the ligand, effectively locking the protein structure
in the S state.

TI calculations were used to quantify the difference
in binding affinity for maltotriose in the O, S, and C states. The
standard Free Energy, ΔGAB, was
calculated as the energy required for removing the ligand from the
binding site and moving it into the solvent. The calculations indicated
that the O state displays only a weak affinity for the ligand (ΔGAB = −3.3 kcal/mol), whereas the S conformation
leads to a more favorable binding energy (ΔGAB = −7.5 kcal/mol). The C state was found to display
the highest affinity for maltotriose (ΔGAB = −17.7 kcal/mol). The strong binding in the C structure,
when compared to that in the O and S structures, reflects the multivalent
attachment of the maltotriose ligand to the receptor that includes
multiple additional interactions with the NTD, such as electrostatic
interactions employing the OH groups of the glucose units. When compared
to the ligand in bulk, electrostatic interactions were found to play
an important role in the high ligand affinity for the C state (ΔGelec values of −8.2, −1.0, and
−0.2 kcal/mol for the C, S, and O states, respectively), whereas
vdW interactions caused by improved sugar stacking partly explain
the difference in affinity between the O and S states (ΔGvdW values of −9.5, −6.5, and
−3.1 kcal/mol for the C, S, and O states, respectively). As
the C state is not visited by apo MBP,,, these results suggest that the S state is the most
reactive state for ligand recognition.

The binding affinities
can be compared to the affinity constants determined for MBP from
the association and dissociation rates (kon/koff) and measured with stopped-flow
fluorescence spectroscopy.() In these experiments, kon is understood to be the rate of binding to
the protein (which can be in the O or S state) whereas koff is much smaller and corresponds to the rate of dissociation
from the C state after the conformational change. The association
constant is calculated via the equation Kexp = kon/koff, and the ligand association free energy isIn our TI calculations, the time scale sampled
by the simulations does not allow for the relaxation of the apoprotein
from the Capo state into the more stable Oapo state. This was confirmed by computing the rmsd and the radius of
gyration of the final structure. Therefore, the computed dissociation
free energy for the C state corresponds only to the following transformation:

The final protein conformation (Capo) is high in energy, and the protein relaxation energy can
be calculated with the ABF method or estimated via NMR spectroscopy:()Combining eqs  and  and changing the sign of the free energy provide
an estimate of the free energy of ligand association (eq ), which is in good agreement with experiments (eq ):

To provide a complete view of the free
energy profiles, we used ABF simulations to determine the energy requirements
for opening and closing MBP. The apo and holo curves were aligned
using the value computed with TI for the maltotriose binding affinity
in the C state. The two ABF curves were found to correctly reproduce
the ligand binding energy of the O and S states, also computed with
TI (Figure b and
Table ). The C apo state was found to be high
in energy in the apo from, consistent with the observation that this
state is not visited by apo MBP. In addition, the plot highlights
the existence of a ligand-induced population shift toward the closed
structure and indicates a barrier-less transition from the O form
to the C form in holo MBP.

Free Energies (kilocalories per mole)
of Protein–Ligand Association for Maltotriose
conformation	ΔG from TI	ΔG from
ABF	
open	–3.3 ± 0.5	–2.9 ± 0.5	
semi-closed	–7.5 ± 0.5	–7.0 ± 0.5	
closed	–17.7 ± 0.5	not available	
Free energy calculations. (a) Evolution of TI estimates toward
a converged value [ΔGAB(t) – ΔGAB,conv],
as a function of the sampling per λ point, for the binding affinity
of maltotriose with MBP in the O, S, and C states. (b) Free energy
profiles computed with the ABF method used to display the ΔGAB values obtained from TI calculations. Empty
circles denote data for the apo form and filled circles data for the
holo form. The plot shows that a “population shift”
occurs in the stability of different conformations in the presence
of a ligand.

Kinetic Aspects of the Recognition Process
Although
informative, the free energy profiles presented above do not tell
us whether the S state is actually used by MBP during ligand recognition.
In practice, the biological activity of different conformational states
can be determined by several factors, in particular (I) the binding
free energy, (II) the occupancy, or population, of the different states,
(III) the accessibility of the binding site, (IV) the rate at which
the different states can exchange, (V) the ligand concentration, and
(VI) the possibility of allosteric or cooperative interactions with
the ligand. Kinetic effects could be important for MBP, as the S state
displays a high affinity for the ligand but has a low occupancy (∼5%()). If the characteristic diffusion time of the
ligand is similar to the time required for the O ⇔ S transitions,
then the ligand is likely to be presented to both states and hence
will be able to preferably bind the most favorable state (i.e., the
S state). However, if the exchange between the two states is slow
compared to ligand diffusion, the extent to which the minor S state
will be able to compensate for its small equilibrium probability is
limited, and the rate of the recognition will be influenced by the
rate of the conformational transition (eq ).

A rough estimate of the rate of exchange between the O and S states
was calculated on the basis of the computed free energy profiles,
and the Smoluchowski diffusion equation (see ). The diffusion coefficient for the two domains of MBP was assumed
to be constant at a Dprot value of ∼2
×
10–6 cm2/s (=2 × Å2/ns), which was estimated with the Hydropro method.() The two rigid domains have to move by a total distance L of ∼10 Å during the O → S transition,
and for the simplest case of a flat free energy profile, the time
required for such diffusion (τ0 = L2/2D) is 25 ns. In MBP, however, the
free energy profile is not flat, and the S state is slightly higher
in energy by ∼2 kcal/mol.() In addition,
there is an energy barrier of ∼3.7 kcal/mol that was calculated
by the ABF method. With this free energy profile, the time scale obtained
for the O → S transitions, τex, is estimated
to be ∼200 ns. Alternatively, a slightly different estimate
for the free energy barrier (∼7 kcal/mol) has been obtained
by Kondo et al.,() who used umbrella sampling.
The
small discrepancy between the two profiles may be due to the difference
in the computational models or the fact that these authors used sampling
times 40 times shorter (0.5 ns) than the sampling times per window
used here (20 ns). For instance, Kondo et al did not report observing
the motion of the balancing interface during O → S transitions,
which suggests that the shorter sampling times may have led to a slight
overestimate
of the actual energy barrier. On the basis of their profile, our estimate
for τex is ∼2 μs. Therefore, a conservative
range of values for the time scale for the O ⇔ S transitions
is between ∼200 ns and ∼2 μs. This estimate is
consistent with our observation that the O → S transition in
apo MBP occurs in aMD simulations() but
is not observed in 50 ns cMD simulations. This estimate also lies
within the larger bracket of possible time scale (20 ns to 20 μs)
indicated by NMR experiments.()

The
time scale of the O → S transition should be compared to the
characteristic diffusion time for the ligand, which was also estimated. Dlig was calculated with the Stokes–Einstein
relation as kBT/6πμr, where r is the ligand radius (∼8
Å), μ is the viscosity of water (0.001 in SI units), and rc (eq ) is set to ∼20
Å. With these values, τD is roughly ∼16
ns. Therefore, τex is found to be at least 10 times
slower than τD, which implies that the protein conformational
change is in the slow exchange mode (eq ),
a result consistent with the measured first-order kinetics.() In summary, the evaluation of kinetic factors
suggests that the S state is unlikely to compensate fully for its
low relative occupancy of ∼5%. Instead, the free energy profile
(Figure b) indicates that the O → S
conformational
change is fast and generally occurs within nanoseconds, but only after
the ligand interacts with the O state.

Standard and Accelerated MD Simulations
To confirm
the scenario outlined above, we performed direct simulations of liganded
MBP. Previous MD simulations() have indicated
that the O → C conformational change of liganded MBP occurs
within ∼30 ns. This suggests that the presence of a ligand
at the interdomain cleft can accelerate the transition from the O
state to the S state, possibly by assisting the reorganization of
relevant side chains and/or by establishing bridges linking the two
domains.

To explore these questions, we conducted 10 cMD and
10 aMD simulations for 40 ns each, starting from liganded O and S
states. During the aMD simulations, eight of the 10 trajectories showed
the conformational transitions to the C structure (Figure ). In the cMD runs, two conformational transitions
to the C form were observed. This contrasts with our previous simulations
of the apo state with cMD,() where no O
→ S transitions could be observed on a similar time scale (40
ns). Thus, simulations show that the ligand is able to accelerate
significantly the rate of the conformational change. This result is
consistent with the free energy profiles presented above and with
our estimates for the kinetic rates.

Representative trajectories. (a) Two aMD
trajectories are shown that were started from the liganded O state
and evolved toward the C state (blue). Instead, in standard MD simulations,
only one closing event was observed, and most simulations did not
reach the C state within 40 ns, as shown here for one trajectory (orange).
(b) Most cMD simulations remained in their original state (orange),
whereas most aMD simulations rapidly evolved toward the most stable
structure. Two such transitions are shown here, O → S (green)
and S → C (blue). (c) Schematic drawing of the two different
conformational changes in MBP, showing the variation of the interdomain
angle as a function of the number of new protein–ligand contacts
in the binding site.

The ligand recognition is found to proceed in the
same way in all productive trajectories, which can be described as
follows. (1) The ligand is initially interacting with the sugar-stacking
residues of the CTD (Y155 and W340) and with E111, which belongs to
the hinge region. (2) The sugar-stacking residues of the CTD improve
their positions to better stabilize the ligand, and hydrogen bonds
form between Y155 and the carbonyl group of E111 and between W340
and D65, which locks the protein in the S state. During this process,
the tip of the balancing interface moves into solution. (3) Favorable
electrostatic interactions with negatively charged ligands of the
NTD, in particular E44 and D65, exert a force pulling the NTD toward
the CTD. (4) A global conformational change occurs, reducing the interdomain
angle from ∼145° to ∼135° and the radius of
gyration from ∼21.4 to ∼20.6 Å, to reach the closed
form of MBP.

Another interesting question about the conformational
change is whether local changes in the binding site occur before or
after the global structural change in the protein. Simulations suggest
that the O → S and S → C transitions behave differently
in that respect. In the case of the O → S transition, the number
of protein–ligand contacts in the binding site (Figure ) increases only after the conformational change
is completed. For example, simulations show that the O → S
transition is less dependent on the presence of the ligand (Figure c), as it can also occur in apo MBP.() Moreover, the reverse S → O conformational change
is also observed in simulations of holo MBP (Figure a) and does not appear to be prevented by the presence of
the ligand. In contrast, the S → C transition is unidirectional
and found to be mostly driven by the interactions of the ligand with
charged side chains of the NTD (such as E44 and D65), which occur
in the simulations prior to the global conformational change.

Discussion
These results indicate that an IF model
best describes the ligand recognition mechanism in MBP. The rate of
O to S exchange in apo MBP appears to be too far below that required
for compensating fully for the small occupancy of the S state. Given
that the S state has a population of only ∼5%, it is likely
that initial ligand recognition involves predominantly the O state.
However, we have shown that the S state displays high affinity for
the ligand. This conclusion is consistent with the experiments of
Telmer and Shilton, who have reported that a point mutation in the
balancing interface region of MBP (Figure ) can improve recognition by a factor of ∼200.() This result is explained by our observation that such mutations
can induce a population shift toward the S state.() These forces are not electrostatic in nature but nevertheless
develop into long-range (&gt;20 Å) influences. Similarly, remote
mutations in viral proteins, such as HIV-1 protease, can lead to population
shifts and drug resistance without modifying the catalytic abilities
of the enzyme.() The presence of two stable
states in MBP may allow for interactions with more diverse ligands,
such as, for example, sugars with one to seven glucose units. In agreement
with this proposal, less promiscuous PBPs, such as GlnBP, do not appear
to possess a partially closed conformation,() while more promiscuous PBPs, such as LAO-BP, appear to possess a
semi-closed
apo conformation.()

Interestingly,
PBPs are able to create a selective binding site without displaying
a molecular surface complementary to the ligand on a subangstrom level.
Gerstein et al first hypothesized that in most hinge-bending proteins
the open and closed states are only slightly different in energy and
are in dynamic equilibrium at room temperature,() pointing toward a CS mechanism for most PBPs. However,
recent studies have indicated that different recognition scenarios
may operate within the PBP superfamily (Figure ). For instance, a CS mechanism has been proposed for the ferric
binding protein (FBP),() the ribose binding
protein (RBP),() the glucose/galactose
binding protein (GGBP),() and the choline
binding protein (ChoX).() This mechanism
has also been proposed for the l-lysine l-arginine l-ornithine binding protein (LAO-BP) transition,() although more recent theoretical studies point toward possible
mechanisms involving both CS and IF steps., In contrast, the glutamine binding protein (GlnBP) is believed to
be less flexible than other PBPs, and NMR paramagnetic relaxation
experiments suggest an IF mechanism.() In
addition to the protein intrinsic flexibility, the IF mechanism is
also generally more likely to prevail over the CS mechanism when the
ligand affinity is high or the ligand concentration is high.()

Findings from this study support a recognition
mechanism for MBP that involves two possible pathways: either a pure
IF mechanism or a mechanism involving both a CS step and an IF step.
The IF mechanism is found to dominate, as MBP exists predominantly
in the O state (95% occupancy), and the time scale of the conformational
change in apo MBP is slow compared to the ligand diffusion rate (∼200
ns to 2 μs vs ∼16 ns). In fact, a similar IF mechanism
may also occur in other PBPs that appear to possess minor semi-closed
states, such as LAO-BP() and RBP,() as CS effects are typically slower than IF adaptations,
due to the fact that they involve global transitions between protein
states separated by energy barriers. Our calculations of the free
energy show that the ligand induces a population shift in MBP that
helps drive the system toward the closed conformation. The similarities
we observe between all simulated pathways suggest that the shape of
the free energy well is analogous to the funnel model used to describe
protein folding pathways. The complete recognition process is best
viewed as a “Pac Man” type action where the ligand is
initially localized to one domain and naturally occurring hinge-bending
vibrations in the protein are able to assist the recognition process
by increasing the chances of a favorable encounter with side chains
on the other domain, leading to a population shift. Furthermore, ligand
binding to one domain also allostrerically affects the linker and
interdomain interface (see also ref ()). Indeed, the aMD simulations could uncover
the detailed mechanism of the population shift and indicated that
the ligand is able to create a bridge between the CTD and charged
residues of the NTD.

As new methods are being developed to incorporate
descriptions of CS and IF effects in computer-assisted drug discovery,
there are good prospects for the rational design of inhibitors targeting
flexible proteins. For instance, when comparing several popular ligand
docking tools for carbohydrates, Agostino et al. found that most codes
can reproduce accurately the ligand binding geometry (pose) of experimentally
determined structures when using X-ray structures that were determined
with the ligand bound (thereby explicitly incorporating CS and IF
effects()). However, when using the flexible
version of these docking algorithms, the poses were more unreliable
as indicated by large rmsds from the known complex. In practice, ligand-bound
structures are often not available, and it remains a significant challenge
to model accurately IF and CS effects. As shown here for MBP, free
energy calculations coupled with aMD simulations can help in the assessment
of the role of CS and IF mechanisms, as well as in determining the
role of high-energy states in molecular recognition. The aMD simulations
were found to enhance the sampling by 1 or 2 orders of magnitude,
allowing for the exploration of slow hinge-bending motions. The combination
of methods provided
key details about protein dynamics, and the relative free energy difference
between accessible states. In this regard, these methods appear far
superior to cMD and flexible docking alone. As such, they hold great
promise for future development and applications to drug discovery.

