Synthetic molecules that bind
double-stranded DNA in a sequence-specific manner are of interest
because of their potential ability to modulate gene expression. Several
modes of DNA recognition have been explored, including triple helix-forming oligonucleotides and peptide nucleic acids (PNAs) that recognize DNA through
specific hydrogen bonding between bases., Minor groove-binding
polyamides represent the most successful non-nucleic acid-based DNA-binding
molecules to date and have been used to modulate gene expression both
in vitro and in vivo.−

Intercalation is a mode of DNA binding that involves the insertion
of a flat aromatic unit between the base pairs of DNA. While a plethora
of mono- and bisintercalators have been studied,− including several investigated for therapeutic activity, only a
handful of intercalators containing three or more intercalating units
have been reported.− In addition, intercalators conjugated to polypeptides have often
shown increased sequence specificity.−

We have developed
a class of modular threading polyintercalators
by connecting 1,4,5,8-naphthalenetetracarboxylic diimide (NDI) units
together in a head-to-tail fashion via flexible peptide linkers. NDI was first discovered as a threading intercalator
by Wilson and co-workers,, and we have extended
NDI polyintercalation to include the development of the first octakisintercalator,
which was shown to bind DNA with all units intercalated, albeit without demonstrated sequence specificity
beyond a preference for GC-rich DNA.

Peptidic linkers specific
for 6 bp sequences of double-stranded
DNA− were discovered by using DNase I footprinting to screen NDI bisintercalator
libraries. Using NMR structural analysis, an NDI bisintercalator with
a Gly3Lys linker was found to bind in the major groove
to the sequence d(CG|GTAC|CG)2 with 4 bp between intercalation
sites. A second bisintercalator with
a β-Ala3Lys linker was shown to bind the sequence
d(CG|ATAA|GC)·d(GC|TTAT|CG) in the minor groove, again with 4
bp between intercalation sites.,

With these novel
specificities and peptide linkers in mind, tetraintercalator 1 was designed, synthesized, and shown to bind specifically
to a 14 bp palindromic sequence, 5′-G|ATAA|GTAC|TTAT|C-3′.
The NMR-determined structure of the 1–DNA complex
verified that the molecule bound in a sequence-specific fashion with
the linkers residing in the minor–major–minor grooves
as predicted (Figure ). The minor groove-binding portions of 1 were
the aforementioned β-Ala3Lys linkers, but the major
groove linker was derived from adipic acid, rather than Gly3Lys, to add overall C2 symmetry to the
molecule to provide for a palindromic DNA binding site, simplifying
the NMR structural analysis. This tetraintercalator was shown to bind
to its 14 bp hybrid site with a dissociation half-life of 16 days,
the longest reported half-life, to date, for any DNA-binding molecule.

Cartoon depicting threading tetraintercalation.

Herein are described the design, synthesis, footprinting,
and kinetic
analyses of new NDI tetraintercalators 2 and 3 that differ from 1 by targeting the major groove with
the Gly3Lys linker and by reversing the N to C directionality
of one of the minor groove-binding β-Ala3Lys linkers.
This change in linker symmetry and directionality is expected to have
a corresponding influence on the directionality of the preferred DNA
binding sequences of the different molecules. In addition, it is reasonable
to propose that C2 symmetric molecules
such as 1 should have a distinct advantage when it comes
to association rate constants, because overall C2 symmetry ensures that all initial encounters with DNA occur
with a backbone orientation consistent with formation of a bound complex.
Molecules with unidirectional backbones lacking C2 symmetry, such as 2 and 3,
would be expected to initially interact with DNA in the incorrect
orientation approximately half of the time, thus resulting in a corresponding
decrease in the productive association rate. Additionally, compounds 2 and 3 differ in the number of positive charges
at neutral pH, possessing overall charges of +5 and +4, respectively,
allowing for an analysis of any charge dependence of binding affinity
and specificity.

Experimental Procedures
Gel Mobility Shift Assays
Association and dissociation
kinetics were measured using gel shift mobility assays. The 24-mer
DNA () was radiolabeled
with 32P, and the association gel shift assays were performed
as described previously. For the dissociation
gel shift assays, we incubated the intercalator (1.1 μM) and
DNA (0.05 μM radiolabeled, 1.0 μM unlabeled) by heating
the DNA to 60 °C for 5 min, adding the intercalator, and cooling
the incubation to 25 °C at a rate of 0.5 °C/min. The incubations
were then allowed to remain at 25 °C overnight. Full association
was confirmed by gel electrophoresis. Dissociation was instigated
and quantified as previously described.

DNase I Footprinting
PAGE-purified primers containing
the binding sites to be tested were ordered to produce 5′-
and 3′-sticky ends for ligation into pMoPac16 (). We
annealed the primers by heating a 12.5 μM dsDNA solution at
95 °C and cooling the mixture at a rate of 1 °C/min until
room temperature was reached. The pMoPac16 vector was digested with
SfiI and purified with an agarose gel, and the annealed primers were
ligated into the digested plasmid. The 5′-32P-end-labeled
DNA fragments were prepared by polymerase chain reaction (), and DNase I footprinting
was performed according to a previously reported procedure. The length of DNA used for footprinting was
95 bp. We incubated the tetraintercalators 1–3 with radiolabeled DNA by heating the DNA to 80 °C for 5 min,
adding the intercalator, cooling the incubation at a rate of 0.5 °C/min
until it reached 25 °C, and allowing the incubations to remain
at 25 °C overnight. Incubations were digested with 2.5 units/mL
DNase I for 4 min. The adenine-specific cleavage reaction was conducted
according to the published procedure. DNA fragments were separated on a 6% denaturing polyacrylamide gel.
The gels were exposed to a phosphor screen overnight and imaged using
Quantity One version 4.6.3 (Bio-Rad).

Results
By changing the major groove-binding module
in 1 from
adipic acid to the Gly3Lys linker, we found the putative
tetraintercalators 2 and 3 have an overall
backbone directionality and no longer exhibit C2 symmetry. To emphasize this point, the arrows in Figure  indicate N to C directionality in the amide bonds
of the backbones for 1–3. Although 1 could be synthesized by cross-linking two bisintercalators on the
resin with adipic acid, 2 and 3 had to be
synthesized in a linear, stepwise fashion.

Structures of the adipic
acid-containing tetraintercalator 1 and the Gly3Lys linker-containing tetraintercalators 2 and 3 showing N to C amide bond directionality.
Tetraintercalator 2 has an N-terminal free amine, while
the N-terminal amine of 3 is capped as the acetamide.
NDI intercalating units are denoted with letters for reference.

Synthesis
Tetraintercalators 2 and 3 were synthesized using standard Fmoc solid phase peptide
synthesis (SPPS) employing an orthogonal t-Boc protection
for the lysine side chains as described previously. To minimize coupling steps and maximize yield, Fmoc-(β-Ala)3-OH and Fmoc-(Gly)3-OH were synthesized prior to
SPPS, (). While 2 was left with a terminal free amine, the
N-terminus of 3 was capped as the acetamide (using acetic
anhydride) to produce species with +5 and +4 charges, respectively,
at neutral pH.

Binding Site Design
The DNA binding site for 2 and 3 was designed by creating a hybrid 14
bp binding site from the individual bisintercalator binding sites.
A combination of the minor–major–minor groove linker
binding sites produces DNA sequence 2 (Figure ). For reference, the palindromic binding site for 1 is also shown (DNA sequence 1). Arrows in the
figure have been added to emphasize the overall expected N to C directionality
of the corresponding bound tetraintercalator. We foresaw a potential
problem with the CA intercalation step (highlighted in bold) in the
hybrid DNA sequence 2. This position is expected to be
the site of intercalation for NDI unit B, but NDI in
the context of our previously reported molecules is known to prefer
purine-purine intercalation steps, GG especially., For this reason, three other potential binding sites for 2 were designed in an attempt to evaluate this potential problem,
listed as DNA sequences 3–5. For example, in DNA sequence 3, the major groove linker binding site is modified
by switching a CG base pair to a GC base pair to allow for a GA intercalation
step. In DNA sequences 4 and 5, the second
minor groove linker binding site is modified. The AT base pair is
switched to a TA base pair in DNA sequence 4 and is exchanged
for a CG base pair in DNA sequence 5. All modifications
produce a purine-purine intercalation site, with only DNA sequence
5 allowing for a GG intercalation site.

DNA sequence 1 is the binding site for 1. DNA sequences 2–5 are the proposed binding
site sequences for 2 and 3. Arrows indicate
the overall expected N to C amide bond directionality of the corresponding
bound tetraintercalator.

DNase I Footprinting
Concentration-dependent DNase
I footprinting was used to evaluate binding of 2 and 3 to DNA sequences 2–5 (Figure ). In these studies, the DNA was heated to 80 °C,
and then the intercalator was added followed by slow cooling. Note
that footprints obtained in this way were identical to those of a
4 day incubation at 37 °C, providing confidence that equilibrium
had been reached. To compare rigorously the binding to each sequence,
the DNA used for footprinting contained only one of the proposed binding
sites with the same flanking sequences on either side (). Intercalators 2 and 3 bind DNA sequence 3 with
the lowest affinity and appear to never occupy the entire site. For DNA sequence 4, 2 begins to bind at 150 nM but
never fully occupies the sequence in the concentration range tested,
and 3 begins to occupy the site at 100 nM. For DNA sequence 2, 2 begins to occupy the site at
100 nM, while 3 gives attenuation of digestion bands
in the binding site starting at 50 nM. For DNA sequence 5, the binding site is mostly bound for both 2 and 3 at 50 nM. Thus, while all the target DNA sequences seem
to experience some binding, the footprints seen with DNA sequence
5 are the most distinct and occur at the lowest concentrations
for both 2 and 3.

Concentration-dependent
DNase I footprints of 2 and 3 with DNA sequences 2–5. Lane 1 contained
no DNase I. Lane 2 contained an adenine-specific cleavage reaction
mixture. Lane 3 contained no intercalator.
Tetraintercalator concentrations for lanes 4–7 were 50, 100,
150, and 200 nM, respectively.

DNase I footprinting studies were also performed
with 2 and 3 on DNA containing the preferred
palindromic binding
site for 1, DNA sequence 1, and with 1 on DNA containing the most promising target for 2 and 3, DNA sequence 5 (Figure ). The strong footprint of 1 with DNA sequence 1 is also shown for reference. Perhaps surprisingly,
for DNA sequence 1, both 2 and 3 display significant footprints. Compound 2 begins to
occupy the site at 100 nM, and 3 begins to bind at 50
nM, ranking these interactions the second strongest seen in the study,
behind only those seen with DNA sequence 5. For tetraintercalator 1, some binding was seen with DNA sequence 5,
with a footprint beginning to appear at 100 nM, although the site
is never fully occupied in the concentration range tested. For 2 and 3 at higher concentrations, other sites
on the DNA, generally GC-rich regions, also seem to be occupied, implying
that 2 and 3 may be less specific in binding
compared to 1 in the context of these sequences. This
is perhaps not altogether too surprising given that NDI monointercalators
prefer binding GC-rich DNA.

Concentration-dependent
DNase I footprints of 1–3 with DNA sequence
1 and of 1 with DNA sequence 5. Lane
1 contained no DNase I. Lane 2 contained
an adenine-specific cleavage reaction mixture. Lane 3 contained no intercalator. Tetraintercalator concentrations
for lanes 4–7 were 50, 100, 150, and 200 nM, respectively.

Gel Shift Analysis of Dissociation and Association Rates
The dissociation rate constants for 2 and 3 were determined with DNA sequences 1–5 using
gel shift mobility assays as previously reported. Briefly, the tetraintercalator is incubated with a stoichiometric
amount of 32P-labeled 24-mer containing a 14 bp binding
site. DNA with a bound tetraintercalator displays a retarded gel mobility
so that bound and unbound radiolabeled DNA can be quantified using
native polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (PAGE) and autoradiography.
For the dissociation rate constant analysis, complete initial binding
is confirmed by a gel shift, and then a 100-fold excess of unlabeled
DNA 24-mer is added. The large excess of unlabeled DNA duplex will
bind any dissociated tetraintercalator and thereby prevent reassociation
with radiolabeled DNA. The amount of bound versus unbound radiolabeled
DNA is monitored over time (Figure ), and
the data are fit to a monoexponential decay equation to derive dissociation
rate constants (Table  and Figure S2 of the ). Both 2 and 3 display dissociation rates that decrease in the following
order: DNA sequence 3 &gt; 4 &gt; 2 &gt; 1 &gt; 5 (spanning a roughly
30-fold range
of values). Dissociation from a control sequence, a 24-mer DNA duplex
with no known tetraintercalator binding site (5′-CATTTAACAACATGTTGTTGGCTC-3′),
was also analyzed. While the control sequence did display a gel shift
when incubated with a stoichiometric amount of 2 and 3, full association was never seen, and both were fully dissociated
from the control sequence within 1 h; therefore, reliable values could
not be determined. For the purposes of comparison, the dissociation
kinetics of compound 1 were also investigated with DNA sequence 5. The previously reported extraordinarily slow
dissociation rate constant for binding of 1 to DNA sequence 1 is also shown in Table , revealing a &gt;100-fold difference in dissociation rate constants
for 1 with DNA sequences 1 and 5.

Examples of gel shift mobility assays of the dissociation of 2 and 3 from DNA sequence 5 at 3
and 10 days. Each dissociation experiment was performed in triplicate.

Dissociation Rate Constants and Corresponding
Half-Lives of 1–3 with DNA Sequences 1–5
 	kd (×10–6 s–1)	t1/2 (h)	
 	1	2	3	1	2	3	
sequence 1	0.50 ± 0.05	2.8 ± 0.4	3.3 ± 0.4	390	69	59	
sequence 2	–	7.1 ± 1.2	5.6 ± 0.8	–	27	34	
sequence 3	–	67 ± 7	63 ± 10	–	2.9	3.1	
sequence 4	–	11 ± 2	9.5 ± 1.9	–	17	20	
sequence 5	69 ± 16	2.0 ± 0.3	2.8 ± 0.3	2.8	96	68	
See ref ().

No
measurement was attempted.

Association kinetics were also monitored by gel shift,
yielding
approximate ka values for 2 and 3 with DNA sequences 1–5, and 1 with DNA sequences 1 and 5. For
these experiments, a tetraintercalator and a radiolabeled 24-mer were
combined in stoichiometric amounts at 500, 1000, and 1500 nM. The integrated rate equation for stoichiometric
binding was used to calculate association rate constants (Table ). Note that
this experiment has historically given a relatively poor reproducibility
in repeated measurements despite our attempts to establish a systematic
protocol, explaining the relatively large errors listed in Table . Overall, for the DNA sequences that were analyzed
using compound 1 (DNA sequences 1 and 5), compound 1 bound faster than either 2 or 3. In addition, compound 2,
with one more positive charge than either 1 or 3, bound several-fold faster than 3 but not as
fast as 1. Finally, no compound showed significant association
rate differences (larger than error) between the different sequences
examined in this study.

Association Rate Constants of 1–3 with DNA Sequences 1–5
 	ka (×103 M–1 s–1)	
 	1	2	3	
sequence 1	10 ± 5	5 ± 1	1 ± 0.4	
sequence 2	–	4 ± 2	2 ± 1	
sequence 3	–	4 ± 1	1 ± 0.1	
sequence 4	–	3 ± 1	1 ± 0.5	
sequence 5	7 ± 3	5 ± 2	3 ± 2	
See ref ().

No
measurement was attempted.

Discussion
An important feature of molecules 2 and 3 is the fact that the backbone has an
overall N to C orientation
and thus a lack of C2 symmetry as emphasized
by the arrows in Figure . This contrasts with
our original tetraintercalator 1, in which there is overall C2 symmetry by virtue of a symmetric middle linker
and two external linkers with N to C directionality pointing away
from the center. This change in symmetry is expected to have two significant
consequences. First, the predicted DNA binding site for 2 and 3 is expected to exhibit a sequence progression
that reflects the overall N to C backbone orientation of these molecules,
contrasting with the palindromic binding site favored by the C2 symmetric 1. Second, the association
kinetics of 2 and 3 can also be expected
to be slower than those of 1 because of overall symmetry
considerations. This is because 1 and its known preferred
binding site, DNA sequence 1, are both C2 symmetric, ensuring that either possible orientation
of the intercalator initially associated with DNA will be aligned
correctly to intercalate fully. For 2 and 3, the initial electrostatic association of the molecules with their
binding site will place approximately half of the molecules in the
correct alignment for binding, but the other half will be required
to reverse their orientation on the DNA to match the directionality
of their binding site prior to productive complex formation. Overall,
such a requirement for proper orientation should decrease the rate
of productive association of 2 and 3 relative
to that of 1.

Overall, rather subtle sequence discrimination
was seen within
the family of tetraintercalators 1–3. DNA
sequences 2–5, the sequences tested as predicted binding
sites for 2 and 3, varied by at most 2 bp
of 14, yet significantly different footprinting results were obtained
for these sequences. The order of binding preference from most to
least preferred for 2 and 3 for these sequences
is as follows: DNA sequences 5, 2, 4, and 3. DNA sequence 2, the original
hybrid sequence composed of the minor–major–minor groove
bisintercalator binding sites, lacked a preferred purine-purine intercalation
step. DNA sequence 5 was modified from DNA sequence
2 in the second minor groove linker binding site portion to
give a more favorable GG intercalation step, so the preference of 2 and 3 for DNA sequence 5 over DNA sequence 2 is not altogether surprising. DNA sequence
4 was also modified in the second minor groove binding site
portion to give a GA intercalation step, and even though DNA
sequences 4 and 5 differ by only a single base
pair, 2 and 3 display a multifold apparent
preference for DNA sequence 5 based on the footprinting
results. DNA sequence 3 is modified in the major groove
binding site portion to allow for a GA intercalation step as well,
and this sequence was by far the least preferred. Surprisingly, footprinting
revealed the non-C2 symmetric compounds 2 and 3 also bound DNA sequence 1 quite well, only surpassed by binding to their most highly preferred
sequence, DNA sequence 5. However, the previously reported
and C2 symmetric compound 1 displayed a marked preference for the palindromic DNA sequence
1 in comparison to DNA sequence 5. Thus, while
it is clear that significant specificity has been achieved within
the family of tetraintercalators 1–3 and that
overall symmetry is important, it is not yet possible to identify
all of the structural features, on the DNA or the tetraintercalators,
responsible for the fine specificities observed.

Kinetic analyses
revealed that relative affinities for the different
DNA sequences correlated almost exclusively with dissociation rate
constants, because association rate constants were found to be relatively
sequence independent within error. Consistent with this notion, a
strong qualitative correlation was seen between the footprinting results
and relative dissociation rates, with stronger footprints at lower
concentrations being observed for interactions that also displayed
slower dissociation rates. For example, the previously reported remarkably
slow dissociation rate constant (corresponding to a 16 day half-life)
of compound 1 dissociating from its preferred binding
site (DNA sequence 1) was the slowest measured, and compound 1 binding to DNA sequence 1 also displayed the
strongest footprint at the lowest concentration of any examined. Compounds 2 and 3 also displayed a similarly strong qualitative
correlation between the overall strength of the interaction measured
by footprinting and decreasing dissociation rates. Particularly interesting
were the 5.6- and 3.4-fold differences in dissociation rates seen
for binding of 2 and 3 to DNA sequences
4 and 5, respectively, which vary by a single
base pair.

Upon comparison of 2 and 3, with +5 and
+4 charges, respectively, it is perhaps counterintuitive that the
compound with the greater positive charge, 2, displayed
a modestly increased degree of selectivity. The expectation might
be that 2 should dissociate slower than 3 from all sequences tested, because it is more highly charged. While
compound 2 does dissociate slower than 3 from DNA sequence 5, the dissociation rate constants
of 2 and 3 for dissociation from DNA
sequences 1–4 are approximately the same, within error.
The same trend is also seen qualitatively in the footprinting data
where 2 appears to bind with somewhat more discrimination
to DNA sequences 1–4 compared to 3.

We have previously reported that 1 binds with
high
specificity to DNA sequence 1 in the context of a 467
bp DNA fragment as shown by DNase I footprinting. Here again, this specificity is further demonstrated by
comparing the binding of 1 with DNA sequences 1 and 5. While 1 did show some occupation
of DNA sequence 5 with DNase I footprinting, gel shift
dissociation analysis revealed a 140-fold difference in dissociation
rates for binding of 1 to DNA sequences 1 and 5, which differ by 3 bp. While 2 and 3 show subtle sequence discrimination by exhibiting as much
as a 30-fold difference in dissociation rate constants for the sequences
tested, neither of these appears to be as specific as our previously
reported 1.

The subtle sequence discrimination
observed here with 14 bp sequences
would seem to imply that compounds 2 and 3 have all four NDI units fully intercalated in their preferred DNA
complexes. Although a detailed structural analysis is beyond the scope
of this study, a preliminary 1H NMR analysis (Figure S3
of the ) showed substantial
movement of the DNA base pair imide H atoms in the complex formed
with compound 3 bound to DNA sequence 5,
consistent with full intercalation of all four NDI moieties. Note
that for the sequences displaying weaker footprints and faster dissociation
rates, it is quite possible that only partial intercalation is occurring
across a portion of the binding site. We tacitly assume 2 and 3 bind to their preferred 14 bp DNA sequences with
the same threading polyintercalation topology seen with compound 1, although a confirmation of the bound topology for these
molecules also must await completion of a detailed structural study.

Interestingly, compounds 2 and 3 displayed
consistently slower association rates compared to those measured for
compound 1. For example, compounds 1 and 3 have identical overall charges of +4, yet their association
rate constants differ by 1 order of magnitude. It may well be the
case that overall C2 symmetry can aid
in the association of a DNA binding molecule (i.e., compound 1) because such symmetry ensures an initial encounter with
DNA will always involve the proper backbone orientation for binding
to a preferred site. Binding of molecules without C2 symmetry, such as 2 and 3,
may be at a relative association rate disadvantage because roughly
half of all DNA encounters with such molecules would take place with
the incorrect backbone directionality. This discussion assumes that
both 2 and 3 bind with a single backbone
orientation to preferred sites such as DNA sequence 5, an assumption that is strongly supported by the presence of a single
bound species in the 1H NMR analysis of 3 bound
to DNA sequence 5 (Figure S3 of the ). Of course, the symmetry analysis
described above is only one explanation for the observed increased
association rate constants seen with 1 compared with
those of 2 and 3. Other structural differences
not considered here, such as overall backbone flexibility (expected
to be greater in 1), could also be playing a significant
role.

Conclusion
Taken together, the data presented here
verify that subtle levels
of discrimination can be achieved by altering the backbone structure
and orientation within our growing family of DNA tetraintercalators.
In particular, our kinetic data support the design idea that using C2 symmetric molecules leads to faster overall
association rates. Furthermore, 1 or 2 bp changes in a 14 bp binding
site were seen to alter dissociation rates for 2 and 3 by as much as 30-fold. Relative affinities for the different
tetraintercalator–DNA binding site sequence combinations used
in this study were found to correlate with relative dissociation rates.
Nevertheless, much remains to be learned about the details of DNA
sequence recognition by our polyintercalators. For example, DNA sequence 1 differed from DNA sequence 5 by
3 bp, explaining the more than 100-fold difference in dissociation
rates seen with compound 1. However, compounds 2 and 3 displayed only modest differences in
dissociation rates when analyzed using these DNA sequences but showed
much larger differences among sequences that would seem more homologous
(i.e., DNA sequences 4 and 5).

We
are currently analyzing the details of binding of 2 and 3 to sequences such as DNA sequence 5 by NMR
to identify the structural features responsible for the subtle
recognition observed. We are also attempting to exploit the modularity
of our polyintercalating system to prepare different and longer hybrid
molecules designed to prefer extended DNA sequences.

Supporting Information Available
Monomer
synthesis, details
of solid phase peptide synthesis, characterization of 2 and 3, DNA sequence details for gel shift assays and
DNase I footprinting, representative dissociation plots, and NMR spectra
of DNA sequence 5 with and without 3 bound.
This material is available free of charge via the Internet at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bi300317n_si_001.pdf

The authors declare no
competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
We thank Steven Sorey for his help with the 1H
NMR spectra.

Abbreviations
NDI1,4,5,8-naphthalenetetracarboxylic
diimide

SPPSsolid
phase peptide synthesis

Fmoc9-fluorenylmethyloxycarbonyl

t-Boctert-butyloxycarbonyl

PAGEpolyacrylamide
gel electrophoresis.

