“We are continually faced
with a series of great opportunities
brilliantly disguised as insoluble problems.” 

- John
W. Gardner

The use of penicillin and sulfonamides
in the 1940s marked the start of a new era in the management of human
health and disease. The success of these
drugs led to the enthusiastic discovery of several new classes of
antibiotics peaking during the 1950s–1970s, a time now often
termed the “golden era” of antibiotic discovery. Unfortunately,
for each new antibiotic class discovered, reports of resistant microbes
emerged within only a few years, heralding the impending challenge
of antibiotic resistance.,

The rising tide
of multi-drug-resistant organisms (MDROs) is increasingly
diminishing the efficacy of our antibiotic arsenal. This trend is in part due to the selection of resistant
bacteria via widespread use of antibiotics and the dissemination of
resistance genes in bacterial populations across the globe.− Additionally, the unique pharmacological challenges of targeting
bacteria, coupled with economic disincentives to developing antibiotics,
have conspired to slow the rate of discovery., Despite
infection control efforts, resistance continues to outpace drug discovery,
raising the specter of a “post-antibiotic era”, a time
in the future when high mortality caused by MDROs cannot be easily
prevented.

While innovative new
approaches are underway to discover antimicrobials
with different mechanisms of action,− the most conventional
approach to overcoming resistance has involved the chemical modification
of existing antibiotic scaffolds. Our
antibiotic arsenal has undergone a stepwise tailoring of core structures,
akin to evolution, to both increase their spectrum of activity and
overcome resistance mechanisms. For example, antibiotics that maintain
the β-lactam core started with penicillins, moved forward through
“generations” of cephalosporins, and onward to carbapenems.
While these “next-generation” antibiotics could overcome
some existing resistance mechanisms, many bacteria, in turn, have
rapidly adapted to counteract these drugs (Figure ).

Cycles of drug discovery and antimicrobial resistance. An illustrative
schematic is shown presenting several generations of β-lactam
antibiotics chronologically coupled to the β-lactamases that
have emerged in clinical pathogens to counteract these “next-generation”
antibiotics.

These cycles of antibiotic
discovery and resistance illustrate
the importance of understanding how drug resistance
evolves, which is the focus of this review. Although seemingly an
intractable problem, the evolution of antibiotic resistance may represent
a great opportunity. Indeed, efforts to understand the evolution of
drug resistance could serve a dual purpose: providing a window into
how bacteria adapt to harsh environments while simultaneously elucidating
novel targets to potentiate our current antibiotic arsenal. Prior
reviews have introduced the concept of targeting evolution, and developments since have provided new insights
into the mechanisms by which genetic changes lead to heritable acquired
resistance. In this review, we focus on the biochemistry that mediates
genomic mutation by the bacterial SOS pathway or via horizontal gene
transfer (HGT). We conclude with a discussion of the feasibility,
challenges, and opportunities of targeting these pathways.

Acquired
Antibiotic Resistance
Antibiotic resistance can be classified
as either intrinsic or
acquired, and by whether the mechanism involves a genetic change.
Intrinsic resistance refers to a generalizable trait that does not
change regardless of antibiotic selective pressure. For example, resistance
to vancomycin for Gram-negative bacteria is due to differences in
their cell wall architecture relative to Gram-positive bacteria and
not a specific resistance mechanism. By contrast, acquired resistance
develops when a new trait is expressed, often because of a genetic
change that has been selected for in the setting of antibiotic exposure.
Bacteria can also mediate tolerance to antibiotics independent of
genetic change, such as with persister states or biofilm formation.

Genetic changes can confer resistance
to antibiotics through a
diverse set of mechanisms. Though other mechanisms are known, common
and prominent examples include altering the target site of the drug,
enzymatically inactivating the drug, and preventing the drug from
accessing the target. Many of these resistance mechanisms result either
from a small number of specific genomic mutations or, alternatively,
from HGT (Figure ). Point mutations can alter
the interactions between a drug and its target, as evidenced by mutations
in RNA polymerase that mediate resistance to rifampin. Point mutations
can also affect nontarget genes, as illustrated by promoter mutations
resulting in the overexpression of drug efflux pumps. Unlike point
mutations, HGT can result in the acquisition of genes with entirely
novel functions for the cell. For example, some acquired genes can
inactivate drugs, such as plasmid-encoded β-lactamases. Others
can even alter cellular metabolic or structural products, as in the
case with vancomycin-resistant enterococci, where a cassette of genes
mediates changes to a peptidoglycan motif that dramatically weakens
vancomycin binding. While the genetic
elements that directly confer resistance have been well reviewed,, the biochemical mechanisms by which these genetic changes arise
within bacteria have been less scrutinized.

Acquisition and spread
of antimicrobial resistance. Stress, including
treatment with antibiotics, promotes acquired resistance in an initially
sensitive strain by driving (A) mutagenesis or (B) horizontal gene
transfer. Strains with preexisting resistance can (C) then spread
by transmission between people.

Fixed and Transient Hypermutation
Mutation is a major contributor
to the evolution of drug resistance.
Some important pathogens, such as Mycobacterium tuberculosis (Mtb), rely almost exclusively on mutagenesis,
rather than gene transfer, to evolve resistance. Similarly, for certain classes of antibiotics, such as
fluoroquinolones, point mutations are the primary mechanism of acquired
resistance. Furthermore, although mobile
resistance genes largely account for the high prevalence of MDROs,
the evolution of these genes against “next-generation”
antibiotics also occurs at the level of mutation.

Bacteria can
acquire mutations spontaneously and at a relatively
constant rate because of the inherent mutational frequency associated
with genomic replication. However, under various conditions, mutation
rates can increase, in some cases as high as 100-fold above the basal
rates.− Two basic mechanisms are known to accelerate mutation
in bacterial strains: a loss of DNA repair or proofreading systems
and the induction of pro-mutagenic pathways.

The best-studied
disruption in DNA repair involves loss of mismatch
repair (MMR). MMR deficiency can result in a fixed hypermutator phenotype where the organism’s mutation rate is rendered
constitutively high. The clinical implications
of this phenotype are evident in cystic fibrosis patients, where hypermutator Pseudomonas aeruginosa strains with MMR deficiency are frequently
isolated. Interestingly, although MMR
deficiency is typically the result of a fixed loss of function, bacterial
strains that exhibit transient inactivation via excision and reintegration
of a cryptic prophage at a gene locus critical for MMR function have
also been isolated.

While fixed
hypermutators are important to acquired resistance,
the induction of transient pro-mutagenic pathways is another important
driving force for acquired antibiotic resistance. Transient
hypermutation has been linked to conserved stress responses
within bacteria., These stress responses are mediated
by tightly regulated genetic pathways that poise bacteria to respond
to a wide range of stressful environments, from host immune systems
to ultraviolet radiation to toxic biomolecules, including antibiotics. Different stress responses have been shown to
contribute to accelerated mutagenesis, including the starvation response
and envelope stress response;, however, the majority
of studies on induced mutagenesis have focused on the bacterial SOS
pathway, where the biochemistry of the key players in the pathway
has been well-delineated., To this end, we next
turn our attention to the biochemistry of the SOS response and opportunities
for slowing acquired drug resistance by targeting the sensor, regulator,
or effector enzymes in the pathway.

Targeting the SOS Response
The SOS pathway is a widely conserved DNA damage response pathway
that, upon detection of DNA damage, responds by expressing genes involved
in DNA repair and damage tolerance (Figure )., SOS genes lie under the control of the transcriptional
repressor LexA. In the basal, unstressed state, LexA binds to specific
operator DNA (SOS box) sequences in SOS gene promoters. In the setting of DNA damage, single-stranded
DNA (ssDNA) accumulates at stalled replication forks and serves to
activate the DNA damage sensor of the system, RecA. Activated RecA
stimulates LexA to undergo a self-cleavage reaction, which promotes
LexA dissociation and derepression of SOS genes. The induced genes
follow an interesting chronology that implies a transition from high-
to low-fidelity repair, based on damage severity. Initially, repair
genes, including those for nucleotide excision repair, are expressed;
however, later in the SOS response, error-prone translesion DNA polymerases
are induced. Notably, LexA is self-regulated,
and re-accumulation of full-length LexA upon rescue from damage can
halt the SOS response. As a result, DNA damage can cause a transient
hypermutator phenotype, known as SOS mutagenesis, which occurs for
the duration of the genotoxic stress.

The SOS response is a key regulator of
transient hypermutation
in bacteria. Activation of the stress sensor, RecA (red ovals), promotes
self-cleavage of the SOS regulator, LexA (blue ovals). LexA cleavage
results in induction of the SOS effectors, which include error-prone
DNA polymerases (green circles) that can bypass DNA lesions leading
to mutations during error-prone repair.

Genetic experiments have validated the SOS pathway as an
important
target for combating the evolution of antibiotic resistance. Experimentally
inactivating the SOS regulators, either by deletion of recA or by engineering a noncleavable LexA into the bacteria, renders
the bacteria unable to initiate the SOS response. These mutant bacteria
are hypersensitive to genotoxic antimicrobials and exhibit decreased
mutation rates.− In a particularly revealing experiment, the Romesberg
group infected mice with either wild-type Escherichia coli or E. coli harboring a noncleavable mutant of LexA.
Upon treatment with either rifampin or ciprofloxacin, the wild-type
infection showed an initial response to therapy but then rebounded
with drug-resistant bacteria. By contrast, infection with the strain
containing noncleavable LexA continued on a trajectory toward eradication
with no evidence of detectable resistance. In a different experiment by the Collins group, infecting drug-resistant E. coli with a phage overexpressing a noncleavable LexA
exerted a dominant-negative effect that prevented SOS activation and
resensitized the E. coli to antibiotics. Preventing SOS activation has also been reported
to antagonize other mechanisms that mediate survival in response to
antibiotic stress, including integron-mediated gene transfer, biofilm
formation, and bacterial persistence.,,

With regard to SOS effectors, deletion of the
SOS-induced translesion
polymerases decreases bacterial fitness, lowers their mutation rate,
and slows acquisition of drug resistance., Some of the most compelling evidence comes from studies in Mtb. While the Mtb SOS operon contains
fewer genes than other pathogens, the key effector in the pathway
is DnaE2, a translesion DNA polymerase. Deletion of dnaE2 is associated with decreased Mtb virulence in infection models and suppresses the emergence
of resistance to rifampin, a key first-line anti-tuberculosis agent. Together, these genetic studies suggest the
potential therapeutic benefits of perturbing the regulators or effectors
of the SOS pathway.

The Damage Sensor, RecA
RecA is
a highly conserved
∼38 kDa protein that plays a critical role in homologous recombination
and also acts to stimulate LexA self-cleavage. Structurally, monomeric RecA consists of three domains
with a central core RecA fold that is flanked by smaller regulatory
domains. These monomers can form large
nucleoprotein filaments on ssDNA (Figure A),
which can extend across thousands of base pairs via cooperative oligomerization
mediated by the core RecA fold. Filamentous
RecA has a deep helical groove that envelopes, stretches, and unwinds
the bound DNA, preparing it for homology searching and subsequent
DNA strand exchange. The core RecA fold binds ATP at the monomer–monomer
interface (Figure A). While only binding of ATP is required for filament formation and
simple DNA strand exchange reactions, RecA also catalyzes ATP hydrolysis,
which is important for filament depolymerization as well as some specific
types of recombination activities.

Targets of
the SOS pathway. (A) Structure of the SOS sensor, RecA,
shown as a filament (PDB entry 3CMV), with alternating monomers colored dark
or light blue. The ssDNA is shown as red spheres. The panel below
is a close-up of the ATP binding pocket (PDB entry 1XMS), a site that could
be targeted. (B) Shown is dimeric LexA, bound to SOS box DNA (PDB
entry 3JSO),
with individual monomers colored green and yellow. The C-terminal
protease domain (CTD) is connected to the N-terminal DNA binding domain
(NTD) by a structurally unresolved linker (dashed line). In the self-cleavage
mechanism, LexA undergoes a large conformational change in its C-terminal
domain between inactive (red sticks, PDB entry 1JHC) and active states
(purple sticks, PDB entry 1JHE) that positions the cleavage loop within the active
site, adjacent to the Ser/Lys dyad. The overlaid active and inactive
conformations are shown in the bottom panel. (C) Shown is a representative
Y-family polymerase, Dpo4, an error-prone polymerase, bound to DNA
(PDB entry 1JX4). Unlike high-fidelity T7 polymerase, shown for comparison (PDB
entry 1T7P),
Dpo4 possesses a more open, exposed catalytic site, which reduces
the selectivity for the incoming nucleotide, colored green.

Filamentous RecA acts as a co-protease
to stimulate self-cleavage
of LexA (discussed below), as well as other related members of the
LexA/signal peptidase superfamily, such as phage λ repressor
and UmuD in E. coli. In the case of phage repressor,
cleavage stimulates the prophage to enter the lytic cycle. Interestingly, RecA serves two roles in association
with UmuD: it stimulates self-cleavage of UmuD to UmuD′ and
is also, itself, an essential component of the associated Pol V mutasome. The LexA binding site on the RecA filament has
not been fully elucidated, but current models suggest that LexA may
span adjacent RecA monomers across the deep helical groove. ATP binding, but not hydrolysis, is required
for the co-protease activity.

As ΔrecA strains are hypersensitive to antibiotics
and less prone to acquired resistance,, RecA has been
proposed as a novel target for slowing the evolution of antibiotic
resistance. The feasibility of targeting RecA is further supported
by the existence of biological protein modulators of RecA, including
RecX and DinI, which both can antagonize SOS induction. In an effort to discover small molecule RecA
inhibitors, Singleton and colleagues have designed several high-throughput
screens largely focused on E. coli RecA ATPase activity
and identified potential inhibitors.− While antimicrobial activity
against E. coli has not yet been described, one lead
RecA probe, suramin, was characterized against Mtb, where the inhibitor was suggested to potentiate the activity of
the fluoroquinolone ciprofloxacin. Although
studies aimed at inhibiting RecA are promising, specificity is one
important consideration that needs to be explored. In mammals, RecA
has up to seven important homologues (Rad51 family). In this context, rational approaches using nucleotide analogues
to target RecA’s ATP binding site have been examined to a limited
extent. These offer a potential starting
point for applying strategies that have yielded analogous protein
kinase inhibitors that are ATP competitive and selective.

The Regulator, LexA
The ∼22 kDa LexA molecule
consists of two domains separated by a short flexible linker and exists
as a homodimer in solution. The N-terminal domain (NTD) contains specific
DNA binding activity, and the C-terminal domain (CTD) contains protease
activity (Figure B)., Dimeric LexA binds to SOS box DNA through a winged helix–turn–helix
motif in the NTD with dimerization mediated by the CTDs. The CTD contains a protease active site, with
a serine-lysine catalytic dyad. Self-cleavage occurs at a protein
loop in the same monomer, located near the linker between the two
domains. Crystal structures of well-characterized
LexA mutants show that this cleavage loop can exist in two distinct
states. In the “non-cleavable” state, the loop is far
removed from the active site. In the “cleavable” state,
it undergoes a large ∼20 Å conformational change, positioning
the scissile peptide bond adjacent to the active site serine. Interestingly, in the “cleavable”
state, LexA binds its peptide substrate in a sharp β-turn, rather
than the extended β-sheet peptide conformation common to canonical
proteases.,

Given the promising genetic
studies on bacteria with noncleavable LexA discussed above, small
molecule inhibition of LexA’s protease domain has been proposed., To this end, while LexA’s distinct active site architecture
offers potential advantages, it also poses two major challenges. First,
as the substrate is tethered in cis, any competitive
inhibitor will have to overcome the high local substrate concentration
of the internal cleavage loop. Indeed, LexA shows inhibition only
under large excesses of nonspecific protease inhibitors, such as diisopropyl
fluorophosphates. Second, given self-cleavage,
classical high-throughput protease assays, such as using fluorophore
quencher-containing peptides in trans, cannot be
readily translated to LexA. Despite these challenges, rational or
screening-based approaches to the discovery of LexA inhibitors are
well-justified.

To help inform rational inhibitor discovery
efforts, we have performed
extensive mutagenesis of LexA to elucidate the substrate specificity
determinants. These experiments suggested
that several residues within the cleavage loop make essential recognition
contacts, while other specificity determinants are likely involved
in facilitating LexA’s conformational change. Interestingly,
stabilization of the β-turn within the cleavage loop accelerates
self-cleavage, suggesting that small cyclic peptides may be tractable
rational inhibitor starting points. Alternatively,
allosteric inhibitors that prevent LexA’s conformational change
or small molecules that could disrupt the LexA–RecA interface
are viable strategies for LexA inhibition; however, our understanding
of the biochemical mechanisms involved is incomplete. Despite the
available structural snapshots, the basis for LexA’s conformational
dynamics has not been elucidated and, in particular, the LexA–RecA
interface remains poorly characterized despite dedicated efforts., Further studies are required to understand these essential elements
of RecA-induced LexA catalysis to help drive the discovery of potential
SOS inhibitors.

The Effector, Error-Prone Polymerases
Foremost among
the effectors in SOS mutagenesis are DNA polymerases (Pol II, IV,
and V in E. coli). These
polymerases catalyze translesion synthesis (TLS) by replacing the
replicative Pol III, which stalls when encountering a damaged DNA
template. The ability of these polymerases
to catalyze TLS, however, is associated with an increased frequency
of mutation because of the lack of 3′–5′ exonuclease
proofreading activity, weak processivity, and low fidelity.,

Several of the critical enzymes involved in TLS, including
Pol IV and Pol V in E. coli, are dissimilar enough
from replicative polymerases that their identity as DNA polymerases
came long only after the discovery of their role in mutagenesis., Crystal structures of several of these “Y-family”
DNA polymerases have yielded insight into their function and fidelity
(Figure C). Despite a low level of sequence
identity, the error-prone polymerases share the palm, finger, and
thumb domains characteristic of their high-fidelity relatives (Figure C);− however, a detailed comparison shows structural differences
that likely account for their lower fidelity.,, The finger and thumb domains of the error-prone
polymerases are in general shorter and appended with an additional
domain known as the little finger domain, which has specialized function
in Y-family polymerases. Further, O-helices, which typically play
a role in proper Watson–Crick base pairing, are absent from
the finger domains. Overall, these modifications result in a more
flexible and open active site that may facilitate TLS over DNA damage
due to bulky adducts or strand cross-links. Notably, elegant studies
using FRET or time-resolved crystallography have demonstrated that,
despite the appearance of a more static open active site, enzyme dynamics
are critical to lesion bypass and catalysis.,

The importance of these error-prone polymerases in generating
mutation
and resistance, combined with their relaxed fidelity, suggests the
opportunity to inhibit these enzymes with small molecules. While to
the best of our knowledge no specific inhibitors of bacterial Y-family
polymerases have been discovered, there is a rich precedent for use
of specific nucleotide drugs to combat viral infection or cancer.
The structural features of Y-family polymerases could potentially
be exploited to achieve the required specificity needed for a polymerase
inhibitor. For example, the more open active site and lack of requirement
for canonical Watson–Crick base pairing may permit incorporation
of bulky chain-terminating nucleotides that would be discriminated
against by high-fidelity polymerases. Because genotoxic antibiotics
induce the expression of these error-prone polymerases, Y-family polymerase
inhibitors would be predicted to synergize with SOS-inducing antibiotics.

Targeting Gene Transfer
While hypermutation results in the
production of novel antibiotic
resistance determinants by small, relatively random mutations, which
are not subjected to selection until after their inception, HGT involves
DNA that has already survived selective forces. Gene transfer is therefore
a highly efficient mechanism for bacteria to evolve and adapt, and
the process has resulted in the massive dissemination of antibiotic
resistance genes among, and between, different bacterial species.
HGT has been shown to occur in highly diverse environments, ranging
from the soil to intensive care units in hospitals to the human microbiome.− The clinical importance of HGT is highlighted by examples such as
the emergence and recent dissemination of carbapenem-resistant Enterobacteriaceae. For example, several reports on individual patients
harboring Klebsiella pneumoniae with plasmid-encoded
resistance to carbapenems have shown that other species, such as E. coli or Serratia marcescens, could be
isolated from the same patient containing the identical resistance
plasmid, suggesting the occurrence of HGT within the patient’s
microbiome., Notably, the exchange of genetic
information appears to be dependent on time. As a recent example,
genomic studies of the gut microbiota of more than 100 healthy individuals
revealed the presence of numerous antibiotic resistance genes in the
human gut and showed that the diversity of these resistance genes
increased with an individual’s age.

Despite the prominent role of HGT in the spread of antibiotic
resistance,
critical aspects of these processes remain poorly understood and present
challenges to the idea of therapeutically targeting HGT. For instance,
although the frequency of bacteria harboring antibiotic resistance
determinants on mobile DNA (i.e., the end products of HGT) within
certain environments is becoming better appreciated, the timing and
location of HGT within and between different clinically relevant ecosystems
remain to be elucidated. Without this information, it is difficult
to predict the impact of active HGT in clinical models, especially
when considering specific environments (e.g., intensive care units
vs the microbiome of an individual patient). Furthermore, unlike the
conserved SOS response, HGT mechanisms are highly diverse, making
the targeting of HGT conceptually more difficult. Despite these clear
challenges, the dire need for novel therapeutic paradigms highlights
the importance of seeking out commonalities in HGT mechanisms and
exploring the plausibility of targeting these pathways.

The
movement of large DNA blocks can be broken into two general
steps: DNA recombination and transport (Figure ). Both recombination and transport are subject to regulation by
stress responses. As an example, lytic gene expression of many temperate
phages has long been known to be triggered by bacterial stress, in
particular the SOS response (described above). More recent insights
into the regulation of gene transfer, however, suggest this may be
a broad theme. For instance, functional SOS boxes have been found
within integrons and shown to regulate activation of the gene transfer
by controlling expression of the integrase gene. Likewise, in pathogens such as Vibrio cholerae, a large integrative and conjugative element encoding resistance
to multiple antibiotics is under the control of a LexA homologue,
SetR, which also requires SOS activation for mobilization. Additionally, stress-linked mobile elements
are also critical to causing disease, including the superantigens
encoded by pathogenicity island genes in Staphylococcus aureus or Shiga-toxin production by some enteric pathogens., Stress responses have further been linked to natural competency
in Streptococcus pneumoniae and can enhance conjugational
recombination rates., Thus, like SOS mutagenesis, gene
transfer events that lead to acquired antibiotic resistance are closely
linked to stress.

DNA recombination and transport are targets of horizontal
gene
transfer. Within the donor cell, site-specific recombination and transposition
reactions (black arrows) can mobilize antibiotic resistance genes
(blue rectangles) to the DNA transport machinery of a bacteriophage
(transduction) or a type IV secretion system (conjugation). Environmental
naked DNA can be taken up by natural competency (transformation).
Once inside the recipient cell, the antibiotic resistance gene may
be maintained within a plasmid or recombine with the recipient genome.
DNA recombination could be targeted by inhibiting the DDE/integrase
family of transposases: a related retroviral integrase is shown in
complex with the small molecule raltegravir (PDB entry 3OYA). DNA transport
could be targeted by inhibiting relaxase enzymes: the nicking enzyme
of S. aureus is shown in complex with oriT DNA (PDB entry 4HT4).

Specialized DNA Recombination and Mobile
DNA
HGT is
mediated by natural competency and transformation, transduction, and
conjugation, with the latter mechanisms being more common in clinical
isolates. Whereas plasmid DNA can be
maintained outside the chromosome, the life cycle of other types of
mobile DNA relies on recombination with the host chromosome (Figure ). These mobile DNA elements vary greatly in size
and complexity, but all encode a specialized recombination enzyme.
These enzymes catalyze DNA breaking–joining reactions at the
element termini, thus allowing for mobilization of the DNA element
from its chromosomal site to distant sites. The simplest mobile element,
the insertion sequence (IS), encompasses only a transposase enzyme
and a pair of short inverted repeat sequences that flank the transposase
gene and function as recognition sites where the DNA breaking–joining
reactions occur. Transposons are more complex, with a set of inverted
repeats that capture additional genes between them. Finally, bacteriophage
elements may be more complex yet, encoding all the proteins necessary
to conduct the infectious life cycle. Thus, unlike a simple IS, a
transposon or phage is capable of mobilizing accessory genes that
aid in its own dissemination, often by accumulating and evolving genes
that endow its host with an increased rate of survival or pathogenicity
such as virulence factors and antibiotic resistance determinants.

Integrons make up a related class of DNA
elements that function as gene assembly platforms to direct the expression
of exogenous genes. As with transposons,
integrons may similarly be enriched with antibiotic resistance and
virulence genes. Whereas transposons “hop” from location
to location, occasionally capturing functionality along the way, integrons
are stationary elements that collect exogenous genes and insert them
into their DNA locus. Remarkably, once a set of genes is a part of
the integron, the integrase enzyme can catalyze the rearrangement
of those genes with respect to the promoter, thus changing which genes
are expressed. In this way, integrons can serve as a cache of antibiotic-resistant
genes to be deployed for future use if needed.

The two major
classes of specialized recombination enzymes are
site-specific recombinases and transposases. Both conduct transesterification
reactions of the DNA phosphodiester backbone without a requirement
for high-energy cofactors such as ATP., Site-specific
recombinases contain an active site Tyr (or Ser) residue, which forms
a covalent intermediate with the DNA backbone. This allows them to
conduct a conservative two-step reaction that catalyzes strand exchange
between two different pieces of double-stranded DNA (dsDNA), resulting
in an intact, ligated dsDNA product. Bacterial transposases generally
fall into the DDE/integrase superfamily of enzymes, containing protein
folds remarkably similar to integrases encoded by retroviruses. The protein folds of these enzymes are topologically
similar and bring at least three acidic residues (typically DDE) in
the proximity of one another. The active
site acidic residues bind divalent metal cations, required cofactors
for catalysis, which promote transesterification reactions via a two-metal
ion mechanism without any protein–DNA covalent intermediate.,

Although there have been only a few studies identifying small
molecule
inhibitors of specialized bacterial recombination enzymes, the targeting
of the retroviral integrase of HIV-1, a prominent integrase/DDE superfamily
member, has been a significant clinical achievement and serves as
a model for efforts to inhibit other specialized recombinases. The
crystal structure of the Prototype Foamy Virus (PFV) retroviral integrase
bound to donor DNA and different strand transfer inhibitors has been
determined (Figure ). The structure supports a model in which the “diketo acid-like”
pharmacophore of the inhibitors binds to the two active site divalent
cations of the activated enzyme–donor DNA intasome complex.
Inhibitor binding displaces the reactive 3′-OH of the donor
DNA, thus deactivating the complex and inhibiting strand transfer.
Diketo acid-like inhibitors have also been found for the Holliday
junction (HJ) resolving enzyme encoded by poxviruses and for the Tn5
transposase,, suggesting that the motif may
represent a general scheme for inhibiting members of this enzyme family.
Small peptide inhibitors of site-specific Tyr recombinases that specifically
bind to HJ DNA to interrupt enzymatic DNA transactions have also been
identified. One candidate peptide was
able to block prophage excision by trapping such an intermediate,
which also additionally resulted in antimicrobial activity, perhaps
because of interference with DNA replication and repair.

DNA Transport
For a DNA molecule
to transfer between
bacteria, it must cross lipid membranes, which is energetically disfavored.
Large multiprotein molecular machines for natural competency, conjugation,
and transduction allow for DNA shuttling and therefore represent potential
targets for preventing the spread of resistance determinants (Figure ). We refer our readers to recent reviews covering
the molecular mechanisms and structural biology of each of these topics,
noting that targeting of these processes with small molecules is virtually
unexplored.− However, here we will highlight recent discoveries
regarding the inhibition of a bacterial conjugation system with small
molecules developed through rational design.

In bacterial conjugation,
one strand (T-strand) of a dsDNA plasmid is transferred between organisms,
ultimately resulting in the complete transfer of the genetic information
encoded on the plasmid. The major components of conjugation are a
relaxase enzyme, a type IV coupling protein (T4CP), and the membrane
pore and pilus of a type IV secretion system (T4SS). The relaxase
enzyme, often as part of a multiprotein “relaxasome”,
recognizes the origin of transfer (oriT) sequence
on the plasmid and nicks the T-strand to form a covalent 5′-phosphotyrosine
linkage, thus creating a free DNA end to be transported through the
membrane pore of the T4SS. After DNA transport and synthesis of the
complementary strand, relaxase again nicks oriT,
this time resulting in release and recircularization of the T-strand.

Recently, the Redinbo laboratory has discovered inhibitors for
two types of relaxase enzymes using rational design based on structural
insights. First, they determined the structure of an F-plasmid relaxase,
whose catalytic cycle includes two simultaneous phosphotyrosine linkages
to oriT. In the structure, they observed that a single
divalent metal ion stabilized the formation of both phosphotyrosine
linkages. On this basis, they reasoned that bisphosphonates could
serve as functional mimics and potential inhibitors. After a directed
screen against a small library of bisphosphonates, they found several
that inhibited relaxase in vitro and inhibited conjugation
in a relaxase and F-plasmid-dependent manner in cell-based assays. In a different study, the group also determined
the crystal structure of the nicking enzyme of S. aureus (NES) in complex with oriT DNA (Figure ). NES is present on clinically important conjugative
plasmids known to result in vancomycin-resistant S. aureus. Unlike the F-plasmid relaxase, NES forms only one phosphotyrosine
linkage. In this case, catalysis could be disrupted using a small
polyamide designed to bind specifically to a five-nucleotide region
of oriT that makes critical contacts with NES.

These examples, although preliminary,
suggest specific targeting
of the relaxasome is feasible and highlights the potential clinical
utility of inhibitors of bacterial conjugation. Interestingly, in
the F-plasmid case, inhibition of the relaxasome led to cell death. Because gene transfer mechanisms are highly
activated during antibiotic stress, this finding raises the interesting
possibility that inhibiting effector pathways in creative ways could
not only curtail gene transfer but also lead to cell death by poisoning
the cell with trapped intermediates.

Opportunities and Challenges
for Targeting the Evolution of
Resistance
We have provided an overview of two mechanisms
for the evolution
and spread of antibiotic resistance within and between organisms:
stress-induced mutagenesis caused by the SOS pathway and acquisition
of resistance genes by HGT. Studying these and related pathways could
not only provide insight into how bacteria evolve and adapt but also
expose weaknesses that we are hopeful can be exploited in the form
of new, “anti-evolutionary” therapeutics.

Pursuit
of such therapies will pose a unique set of challenges
and open up new areas of inquiry. As one notable challenge, purely
anti-evolutionary drugs will not reverse preexisting genetic resistance
in either nature or patients. Indeed, this problem is ancient and
embedded in natural history, as the analyses of bacteria present before
the rise of civilization have shown that antibiotic resistance genes
far predate our use of antibiotics. However,
rather than focusing on the existing pool of resistance, we posit
that anti-evolutionary agents could prevent, or at least delay, the de novo generation and acquisition of resistance in pathogens.
Clinical cases in which pathogens are repeatedly exposed to antimicrobial
therapy, as in the case of cystic fibrosis, severely immunosuppressed
patients, complicated medical device infections, or mycobacterial
infections, are the main areas in which such novel therapies might
be employed. Additionally, the examples of the SOS response, prophage
excision, and relaxase function suggest targeting of these processes
can potentially lead to the accumulation of toxic intermediates and
cell death.,, Further, as stress responses are linked to bacterial persistence,
biofilm formation, and the expression of virulence factors, targeting
evolutionary processes may decrease pathogenicity.,, In the case of HGT-mediated
antibiotic resistance, while there is an assumption that all clinically
relevant gene transfer events have already occurred by the time a
patient shows signs of an infection, we do not know the timing of
such events and, at a minimum, preventative strategies for patients
at high risk of acquiring new resistant pathogens via HGT could be
entertained. Despite challenges, the impetus for pursuing anti-evolutionary
drugs comes from their potential to offer a one–two punch,
potentiating the action of existing antibiotics that trigger stress
responses and blocking the development of resistance.

Our overview
also highlights the gaps in basic science knowledge
regarding how to assess the clinical viability of targeting evolution.
With genomic advances, we are learning more about the relative frequencies
of clinically relevant resistance determinants. Many studies are also
beginning to look at transmission events between patients within hospital
settings, and even the molecular relationship between resistance genes
found in human pathogens and the environment.− However, insight into the relative rates, timing, and location of
each of these events remains lacking. Does antibiotic stress enhance
the mutation rate to a degree that has biological consequences within
an individual patient? What is the rate of clinically relevant HGT
within microbial ecosystems such as the human gut? A similar set of
questions applies to understanding the clinical relevance of nongenetic
mechanisms for antibiotic tolerance, such as bacterial persistence
and biofilm formation. This type of knowledge, broken down by relevant
ecosystem and pathogen, and coupled to the kinetics of the biochemical
steps, would offer enormous insight into which mechanisms to target,
as it would tell us what the “rate-limiting” steps are
in evolution and adaptation to antibiotics. We are hopeful further
technological advances in DNA sequencing and microbiome research will
lead to answers to these questions.

On the surface, the problem
of antibiotic resistance appears insurmountable,
but bridging the gaps in our knowledge holds the promise of unmasking
great opportunities to intervene. The scale of the clinical problem
suggests the need for innovative new approaches to antibacterials.
It is our hope that these efforts will take many forms: from augmenting
natural product discovery by accessing the uncharted molecular diversity
present within “unculturable” organisms to counteracting
nongenetic mechanisms that mediate antibiotic tolerance and, finally,
targeting the very mechanisms that underpin the evolution of genetic
resistance.,,

Author Contributions
M.J.C. and
C.Y.M. contributed equally to this work.

We acknowledge
funding from the National Institutes of Health (NIH Director’s
New Innovator Award DP2-GM105444 to R.M.K., Training Grant T32 GM7229
for C.Y.M., and Grant T32 AR007442 for M.J.C.), the Doris Duke Charitable
Foundation, and the Edward J. Mallinckrodt, Jr. Foundation.

The authors declare no
competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
We gratefully acknowledge Mary Leonard for assistance with
Figure  and Jeff Kubiak and Mandie Samuels
for editorial assistance.

Abbreviations
MDROsmulti-drug-resistant organisms

HGThorizontal gene
transfer

MMRmismatch
repair

ssDNAsingle-stranded
DNA

TLStranslesion
synthesis

ISinsertion
sequence

dsDNAdouble-stranded
DNA

HJHolliday
junction

PDBProtein
Data Bank.

