Peroxisome
proliferator-activated
receptor α (PPARα) and liver X receptor α (LXRα)
are ligand-activated transcription factors that belong to the steroid
hormone receptor superfamily. Both nuclear receptors are known to
function as obligate heterodimers with retinoid X receptor α
(RXRα) and bind specific DNA sequences [peroxisome proliferator
response elements (PPREs) and liver X receptor response elements (LXREs)]
in their target genes., Moreover, these receptors function
as nutrient sensors to affect the regulation of genes involved in
metabolism and energy homeostasis., High fatty
acid levels lead to increased PPARα activity, inducing transcription
of genes involved in fatty acid uptake and oxidation. LXRα agonists (including oxysterols and intermediates
in the cholesterol biosynthetic pathway) increase the level of transcription
of multiple genes in cholesterol elimination, while decreasing that
of genes in cholesterol synthesis., As important
modulators of pathways whose misregulation leads to metabolic disorders,
including diabetes, cardiovascular disease, and atherosclerosis, these
receptors have been the focus in an attempt to better understand mechanistically
how these processes are controlled.

Several studies have shown
that cross-talk exists between PPARα
and LXRα. Such studies suggest that each receptor can repress
genes regulated by the other receptor, presumably through competition
for available RXRα., This cross-talk may
be even more complicated, as PPRE sequences have been found in the
LXRα promoter region and PPARα
has been identified as an LXRα target gene, suggesting that each receptor may regulate the level of
the other. Recent chromatin immunoprecipitation experiments have demonstrated
binding of PPARα to LXRα–RXRα response elements,
although under the examined conditions only one of these proteins
bound to the DNA sequence at a time. Moreover,
it has been suggested that PPARα and LXRα themselves may
function as heterodimeric partners;, however, the
significance of this finding is unclear, and the effect of endogenous
ligands has yet to be elucidated.

As endogenous ligands of PPARα,
binding of long chain fatty
acids (LCFAs) and their CoA thioesters [long chain fatty acyl-CoA
(LCFA-CoA)] induces conformational changes leading to altered cofactor
recruitment and increased levels of transactivation of β-oxidation
enzymes.,− Because ligand-induced
conformational changes in protein structure could affect not only
cofactor recruitment and binding but also interaction with heterodimer
partners, binding of LCFA or LCFA-CoA to PPARα could affect
PPARα’s ability to heterodimerize with RXRα or
LXRα. In this case, conformational changes to any of the three
proteins could have an effect on PPARα or LXRα activity.
Moreover, as LCFA levels are often elevated in metabolic diseases,
understanding the role these nutrients play in these regulatory processes
is important.

This study focuses on the ability of PPARα
and LXRα
to heterodimerize in the absence or presence of LCFA or LCFA-CoA.
The affinity and overall conformational changes of these receptors
were determined in vitro, and the resulting effects
on DNA binding and transactivation were examined. If PPARα can
heterodimerize to either RXRα or LXRα, then ligand binding
may provide a mechanism for determining the heterodimer choice.

Experimental
Procedures
Chemicals
Coenzyme A, palmitic acid, oleic acid, linoleic
acid, eicosapentaenoic acid, palmitoyl-CoA, oleoyl-CoA, linoleoyl-CoA,
and clofibrate were from Sigma (St. Louis, MO). Eicosapentaenoyl-CoA
was synthesized as previously described and purified by high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC). All CoA thioesters, whether freshly synthesized
or obtained commercially, were &gt;98% undegraded. The human glucocorticoid
receptor (hGR) was purchased from Pierce Thermo Scientific (Rockford,
IL). Monoclonal antibodies for PPARα and polyclonal antibodies
for LXRα (each specific for the α isotype) were purchased
from Pierce Thermo Scientific. Polyclonal antibodies for PPARα,
RXRα, and GR were purchased from Santa Cruz Biotechnology (Santa
Cruz, CA). Anti-rabbit IgG secondary antibodies were from Sigma.

Construction of Plasmids for Recombinant Expression of hLXRα
and hPPARα
An N-terminal polyhistidine tag (six His
residues) was added to the GST open reading frame in the pGEX6P vector
(Amersham Biosciences, Piscataway, NJ) by overlap polymerase chain
reaction (PCR). The plasmid for expression of recombinant human PPARα
(hPPARα) has been described previously. Human LXRα (hLXRα) and human retinoid X receptor α
(hRXRα) were amplified from cDNA derived from HepG2 cells using
the following primers: 5′-ggatccATGTCCTTGTGGCTGGGGGCCCCTGTG-3′
and 5′-aagcttCTCGAGTCATTCGTGCACATCCCAGATCTC-3′
(hLXRα), 5′-cgaattcATGGACACCAAACATTTCCTGCCGCT-3′
and 5′-ctcgagCTAAGTCATTGGGTGCGGCGCCTCC-3′
(hRXRα). In these and subsequent primers, the lowercase letters
represent nucleotides outside of the target sequence with restriction
sites underlined. Each PCR product was cloned into the pGEM-T easy
vector (Promega, Madison, WI) and subsequently transferred into the BamHI–HindIII or EcoRI–XhoI sites of the pGEX-6P derivative to
produce 6xHis-GST-hLXRα and 6xHis-GST-hRXRα, respectively.

Purification of Recombinant hPPARα and hLXRα Protein
Plasmids for hPPARα, hRXRα, and hLXRα recombinant
protein expression were transformed into Rosetta 2 competent cells
(Novagen, Gibbstown, NJ) or a DNAK mutant derived from a K12 strain
(JW0013, Coli Genetic Stock Center, New Haven, CT). Protein purification
was conducted through affinity chromatography with the GST tag and
on-column digestion as previously described for hPPARα. Protein concentrations were estimated by the
Bradford assay (Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA) and by absorbance spectroscopy
using the molar extinction coefficients for each protein. Protein
purity was ascertained by sodium dodecyl sulfate–polyacrylamide
gel electrophoresis (SDS–PAGE), followed by Coomassie Blue
staining and Western blotting.

Circular Dichroism
Circular dichroism was used to examine
changes in conformation upon heterodimerization of hPPARα and
hLXRα or interaction with ligands, and hGR was used as a negative
control. A J-815 spectropolarimeter (JASCO Inc., Easton, MD) was used
to record the circular dichroic spectra of individual proteins in
the absence of ligand, individual proteins in the presence of ligands,
and protein/protein mixtures in the presence and absence of ligands
as previously described.,, To examine possible protein–protein interactions, spectra
of hPPARα (0.42 μM), hGR (0.40 μM), hLXRα
(0.44 μM), 0.21 μM hPPARα with 0.22 μM hLXRα,
and 0.21 μM hPPARα with 0.20 μM hGR (the final amino
acid molarity in each sample was equal to 0.0002 M) were recorded
in 0.5 mM HEPES (pH 8.0), 5 μM EDTA, 5 mM KCl, and 0.04% glycerol
at 23 °C in a 1 mm cuvette. To examine ligand effects, spectra
were recorded in the presence of each ligand at a concentration of
0.5 μM, and the final ethanol concentration in each reaction
was &lt;0.05%. Replicate spectra were recorded five times over the
far-UV region from 185 to 260 nm at a scan rate of 50 nm/min with
a 2 nm bandwidth and a 1 s DIT. Spectra were corrected for buffer
and solvent effects, and the spectral result was used to determine
the percent composition of α-helices, β-strands, turns,
and unordered structures with CONTIN of the CDPro software package
(http://lamar.colostate.edu/∼sreeram/CDPro). The CD spectrum of the mixed proteins was compared
to a theoretical spectrum of combined but noninteracting proteins.
This spectrum was calculated by averaging the spectra of each protein
analyzed separately at a concentration equal to that in the mixture.

Binding Assays with hPPARα and hLXRα
Proteins in
the Presence and Absence of PPARα Ligands
Recombinant
hPPARα, hLXRα, and hGR proteins were fluorescently labeled
with Cy3 or Cy5 dyes using Fluorolink-antibody Cy3 and Cy5 labeling
kits (Amersham Biosciences, Pittsburgh, PA). Absorbance measurements
were used to determine protein concentrations and dye:protein ratios.
Emission spectra (560–700 nm) of 25 nM Cy3-labeled hLXRα
were recorded in PBS upon excitation at 550 nm with increasing concentrations
of unlabeled hPPARα or hGR protein in a PC1 photon counting
spectrofluorometer (ISS Inc., Champaign, IL) at 24 °C. The spectra
were corrected for background (buffer, solvent, and each protein individually),
and the maximal intensities were measured using Vinci version 1.5
(ISS Inc.). To determine dye effects, emission spectra (660–700
nm) of 25 nM Cy5-labeled hPPARα titrated with increasing concentrations
of unlabeled hLXRα were recorded upon excitation at 650 nm.
To determine the effect of PPARα ligands on this interaction,
these experiments were repeated in the presence of each ligand at
a concentration of 25 nM. The dissociation constant (Kd) and the number of binding sites (n) were obtained from a double-reciprocal plot of 1/(1 – F/Fmax) and CL/F/Fmax,
where F represents the fluorescence intensity at
a given concentration of ligand, Fmax is
the maximal fluorescence obtained, and CL is the ligand concentration (the slope of the linear line is equal
to 1/Kd, and the number of linear lines
is equal to n), as previously described. Binding curves were generated by nonlinear regression
analysis using the ligand binding function in Sigma Plot (SPSS Inc.,
Chicago, IL).

Co-Immunoprecipitation
The co-immunoprecipitation
of
native proteins from human cells was performed as previously described
for Co-IP from liver homogenate. HepG2
cells were grown to 95% confluency in DMEM supplemented with 10% FBS
at 37 °C and 5% CO2. Cells were lysed and proteins
immunoprecipitated with the ProFound mammalian co-immunoprecipitation
kit (Pierce Biotechnology, Rockford, IL) and antibodies to PPARα,
LXRα, and GR (negative control). Antibodies specific to the
α isotypes of the PPAR and LXR were utilized to ensure only
the α forms were precipitated. A no-antibody resin was also
used as a negative control. This kit was chosen because antibodies
are cross-linked to resin and are not eluted in the samples. Eluted
proteins were visualized by Western blotting for PPARα, LXRα,
and GR with polyclonal antibodies.

Electrophoretic Mobility
Shift Assays
The PPRE sequence
from the rat acyl-CoA oxidase (ACOX) promoter was used to identify a similar sequence from the human ACOX promoter,
resulting in 5′-GAACTAGAAGGTCAGCTGTCAAGCAGCCA-3′. The LXRE
sequence from mouse sterol regulatory element binding protein 1c (SREBP-1c) was used to identify the human sequence, composed of 5′-GCCAGTGACCGCCAGTAACCCCGGAGAC-3′,
where underlined sequences represent response element half-sites.
Purified recombinant proteins (0.2 μg) were incubated with 40
ng of double-stranded PPRE or LXRE oligonucleotides in binding buffer
[2 mM Tris (pH 8.0), 10 mM KCl, 0.5 mM MgCl2, 2.5% glycerol,
0.2 mM DTT, and 0.05% NP-40] at room
temperature for 20 min in the presence or absence of LCFA. The resulting
mixture was cross-linked at 120 mJ/cm2 in a DNA cross-linker
(Stratagene, La Jolla, CA), mixed with gel loading buffer, and electrophoresed
in 7% native PAGE gels at 100 V for 50 min. For supershift assays,
antibodies to either PPARα or LXRα were added to the mixture
prior to cross-linking, and the mixture was electrophoresed in 4%
native PAGE gels. Gels were stained for both DNA and protein with
a commercially available kit (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA) per the manufacturer’s
instructions and imaged on a cooled charge-coupled device camera (Fujifilm
Medical Systems, Stamford, CT). The band intensity was measured as
mean 8-bit gray scale density with ImageJ (NIH, available by anonymous
FTP).

Construction of Plasmids for Mammalian Expression of hLXRα,
hPPARα, and Luciferase Reporters for Cell Assays
hLXRα
was amplified from 6xHis-GST-hLXRα using the following primers:
5′-catcggatccaccATGTCCTTGTGGCTGGGGGCCCCTGTG-3′
and 5′-CCGGGAGCTGCATGTGTCAGAGG-3′.
The PCR product was cloned into the pGEM-T easy vector (Promega),
and a BamHI–end-filled XhoI fragment was subsequently transferred into the multiple cloning
site of pSG5 (Stratagene; BamHI–end-filled BglII) to produce pSG5-hLXRα. hPPARα was amplified
from 6xHis-GST-hPPARα using the following primers: 5′-catcggatccaccATGGTGGACACGGAAAGCCCA-3′
and 5′-CCGGGAGCTGCATGTGTCAGAGG-3′.
The PCR product was cloned into the pGEM-T easy vector, and a BamHI–end-filled SalI fragment was
subsequently transferred into the multiple cloning site of pSG5 (BamHI–end-filled BglII) to produce
pSG5-hPPARα.

The human acyl-CoA oxidase (ACOX) promoter
(2.3 kb) was amplified from genomic DNA derived from HepG2 cells with
the following primers: 5′-cggtaccATGACTCTGTTTTCTATGACCT-3′
and 5′-cgagctcGCTCCGAAGGTCAAGAAACT-3′.
The PCR product was cloned into the pGEM-T easy vector and subsequently
transferred into the KpnI–SacI sites of pGL4.17 (Promega) to produce ACOX2.3-pGL4.17. The mouse
sterol regulatory element binding protein 1c (SREBP-1c) promoter (1.5
kb) was amplified from mouse genomic DNA with the following primers:
5′-cggtaccTCGAGCACTTGCAGGCTGGA
and cgagctcGCCCCTAGGGCGTGCAGACG-3′.
The PCR product was cloned into the pGEM-T easy vector and subsequently
transferred into the KpnI–SacI sites of pGL4.17 (Promega) to produce SREBP1c1.5-pGL4.17. All plasmid
constructs were confirmed by DNA sequencing in the Center for Genomics
Research at Wright State University.

Transactivation Assays
HepG2 cells (ATCC, Manassas,
VA) grown in 24-well culture plates were transfected with 0.4 μg
of each full-length mammalian expression vector (pSG5-hPPARα,
pSG5-hLXRα, or empty vector, pSG5), 0.4 μg of luciferase
reporter construct (ACOX2.3-pGL4.17, SREBP1c1.5-pGL4.17, or empty
reporter, pGL4.13), and 0.04 μg of the internal transfection
control plasmid pRL-CMV (Promega) with Lipofectamine 2000 reagent
(Invitrogen) according to the manufacturer’s instructions.
Following transfection incubation, the medium was replaced with serum-free
EMEM (Invitrogen) for 2 h, and then ligands were added and cells grown
for an additional 20 h. Fatty acids were added to cells as a complex
with BSA as previously described,, and clofibrate
was used as a positive control. Each ligand was examined at four concentrations
(1, 5, 10, and 20 μM) for each of the reporter constructs. Firefly
luciferase activity, normalized to Renilla luciferase (for transfection
efficiency), was determined with the dual-luciferase reporter assay
system (Promega), according to the manufacturer’s instructions.
Luminescence was measured with a SAFIRE TECAN 96-well plate reader (Tecan Systems, Inc., San Jose, CA).
The sample with 1 μM clofibrate for the ACOX assays was arbitrarily
set to 100%.

Statistical Analysis
All results
are expressed as means
± the standard error. Statistical significance between samples
in the presence or absence of ligands was determined by using the
Student’s t test or analysis of variance with p &lt; 0.05.

Results
Protein Expression and
Purification
Purified full-length
recombinant hPPARα and hLXRα proteins were electrophoresed
via 12% SDS–PAGE (Figure ). Each gel
showed a band of approximately 50 kDa, corresponding to the expected
size of hPPARα and hLXRα (estimated molecular masses of
52636 and 51768 Da, respectively). Densitometry of these samples indicated
&gt;85% purity. Western blot analyses using antibodies for PPARα
and LXRα confirmed the identity of these bands (data not shown),
further indicating the purification of the full-length, untagged protein.

SDS–PAGE
and Coomassie blue staining of 4 μg of purified,
full-length hLXRα (left) and hPPARα (right) proteins showing
the relative purity. The prominent bands at ∼52 kDa represent
untagged, full-length hLXRα and hPPARα proteins.

Circular Dichroism: Effect
of the PPARα–LXRα
Interaction on Protein Conformation
Although the circular
dichroism (CD) spectra of hPPARα and hLXRα were qualitatively
similar (Figure A), suggesting a similar overall
secondary structure, the negative ellipticities at 210 and 222 nm
were stronger for hPPARα than for hLXRα. Quantitative
analyses of these samples showed that hPPARα had an α-helical
content slightly higher than that of hLXRα (Table ). To examine the possibility that PPARα and LXRα
interacted, proteins were mixed in a 1:1 amino acid molar ratio and
the experimental, or observed, CD spectrum of this mixture was compared
to the calculated average of the two proteins (expected outcome if
no conformational change occurred). Minor but significant changes
in the spectra (Figure B) and the percent
composition (Table ) were noted for the mixture,
suggesting that hPPARα and hLXRα interact and undergo
a change in conformation upon interaction. In contrast, the experimentally
observed spectra of hLXRα with hGR (Figure C) and hPPARα with hGR (Figure D) both overlaid the calculated average for the two proteins, suggesting
no conformational change and no interaction between these proteins.
Quantitative analyses confirmed these data, with no significant changes
for either protein with hGR (Table ).

Secondary Structure of hPPARα
and hLXRα in the Absence of Ligands
protein	α-helix
regular H(r)
(%)	α-helix distorted H(d)
(%)	β-sheet regular S(r)
(%)	β-sheet distorted S(d)
(%)	turns T (%)	unordered U (%)	
PPARα	8.3 ± 0.1	8.5 ± 0.3	18.7 ± 0.4	10.3 ± 0.3	19.4 ± 0.6	34 ± 1	
LXRα	6.8 ± 0.4	7.2 ± 0.5	20.1 ± 0.6	11.1 ± 0.3	20.6 ± 0.4	34 ± 1	
GR	1.2 ± 0.2	4.6 ± 0.2	24.6 ± 0.4	12.4 ± 0.3	21.6 ± 0.6	36 ± 1	
PPARα/LXRα (obs)	6.4 ± 0.5	7.8 ± 0.6	21.6 ± 0.7	11.0 ± 0.3	20.5 ± 0.5	32 ± 1	
PPARα/LXRα
(calcd)	7.8 ± 0.2	7.9 ± 0.5	18.9 ± 0.5	10.8 ± 0.3	20.4 ± 0.6	34 ± 1	
LXRα/GR (obs)	4.0 ± 0.9	6.7 ± 0.6	23 ± 1	11.6 ± 0.4	20.5 ± 0.5	34 ± 1	
LXRα/GR (calcd)	3.2 ± 0.6	5.9 ± 0.6	22.8 ± 0.6	11.9 ± 0.3	21.4 ± 0.5	34 ± 1	
PPARα/GR (obs)	6.2 ± 0.7	7.5 ± 0.4	21.6 ± 0.7	10.7 ± 0.5	19.5 ± 0.9	34 ± 2	
PPARα/GR (calcd)	4.6 ± 0.7	6.8 ± 0.4	22.1 ± 0.5	11.4 ± 0.3	20.7 ± 0.5	34 ± 1	
Definitions: obs, obtained experimentally;
calcd, calculated average. Significant differences were determined
between observed and calcd for each protein mixture (n = 4–6).

p &lt; 0.05.

p = 0.06.

Circular dichroic
spectra of hPPARα and hLXRα proteins.
(A) Circular dichroic spectra of 0.42 μM hPPARα (●)
and 0.44 μM hLXRα (○). (B) Experimentally observed
circular dichroic spectrum of a mixture of 0.21 μM hPPARα
and 0.22 μM hLXRα (Obs, ●) compared to the calculated
average of the individually obtained hPPARα and hLXRα
spectra (Calc, ○) representing no interaction between the two
proteins. (C) Experimentally observed circular dichroic spectrum of
a mixture of 0.22 μM hLXRα and 0.20 μM hGR (Obs,
●) compared to the calculated average of the individually obtained
hLXRα and hGR spectra (Calc, ○) representing no interaction
between the two proteins. (D) Experimentally observed circular dichroic
spectrum of a mixture of 0.21 μM hPPARα and 0.20 μM
hGR (Obs, ●) compared to the calculated average of the individually
obtained hPPARα and hGR spectra (Calc, ○) representing
no interaction between the two proteins. The amino acid molarity for
each spectrum was 0.0002 M, and each spectrum represents the average
of at least three replicates, scanned 10 times per replicate.

Protein–Protein
Binding
As the CD spectrum shows
only a change in conformation, protein–protein binding experiments
were conducted to determine the affinity of hPPARα for hLXRα.
Each protein was fluorescently labeled with either Cy3 or Cy5 dye
at essentially one dye per protein molecule. Upon titration of Cy5-labeled
hPPARα protein with nonfluorescent hLXRα, the fluorescence
intensity decreased, suggesting either a conformational change in
Cy5-hPPARα or quenching of the Cy5 fluorophore upon hLXRα
binding. This change in fluorescence intensity plotted as a function
of hLXRα concentration resulted in a strongly saturable binding
curve [Kd = 6 ± 2 nM (Figure A)]. Transformation of these values into a double-reciprocal
plot resulted in a single straight line, suggesting a single binding
site (Figure A, inset). To ensure that the
fluorophore did not alter protein–protein binding, the reverse
experiment was conducted. Upon titration of Cy3-labeled hLXRα
with nonfluorescent hPPARα, the fluorescence intensity increased.
This change in fluorescence intensity plotted as a function of hPPARα
concentration also resulted in a saturable binding curve (Figure B) at a single binding site (inset), but with slightly
weaker affinity (Kd = 42 ± 16 nM).
To determine whether this binding was specific for LXRα and
PPARα, Cy5-labeled hLXRα was titrated with nonfluorescent
hGR (Figure C); however, the shape of the
curve was nonsaturable and almost linear, suggesting only weak or
nonspecific binding.

Fluorescent protein–protein binding assays with
labeled
protein titrated against increasing concentrations of unlabeled protein.
(A) Change in the fluorescence intensity of 25 nM Cy5-labeled hPPARα
titrated with increasing hLXRα concentrations of 0–250
nM. (B) Change in the fluorescence intensity of 25 nM Cy3-labeled
hLXRα titrated with increasing concentrations of hPPARα.
(C) Change in the fluorescence intensity of 25 nM Cy5-labeled hPPARα
titrated with increasing hGR concentrations of 0–250 nM as
a control. Insets represent double-reciprocal linear plots of each
binding curve. Values represent means ± the standard error (n = 3–6).

With regard to the small differences noted between the binding
affinities calculated from the changes in the fluorescence intensity
of Cy5-labeled hPPARα versus Cy3-labeled LXRα, differences
in labeling efficiency or location could contribute to some of the
observed differences. Even though dye labeling of each protein occurred
in an essentially 1:1 ratio, slight differences in labeling efficiency
were noted, with the labeling of hPPARα (1.0:1) being slightly
more efficient than the labeling of hLXRα (0.93:1). This slightly
lower labeling efficiency for Cy3-hLXRα could yield an underestimation
of the binding affinity and explain in part some of the differences
noted between the two assays. It is also possible that the addition
of the fluorophore on the hLXRα protein was more inhibitory
than the addition of the fluorophore on the hPPARα protein.
Because of this possibility, we chose to use the Cy5-PPARα for
subsequent assays to examine ligand effects. Regardless of any inhibitory
effects of the fluorophore, both assays resulted in strong, saturable
binding, demonstrating a direct, high-affinity interaction between
the two receptors, which was not observed with hGR.

Co-Immunoprecipitation
To demonstrate that these proteins
could interact in vivo, co-immunoprecipitation of
native proteins from HepG2 cells was performed. Samples that co-immunoprecipitated
with the PPARα antibody showed a prominent band for both PPARα
and LXRα, but no band was seen for GR (Figure , column 1). While the resultant PPARα band was present
as a doublet, this was expected, as both the monoclonal PPARα
antibody used for the co-immunoprecipitation (specific for the α
isotype) and the polyclonal PPARα
antibody used for the Western blot have both been shown to produce
a doublet from liver samples, presumably because of the phosphorylation
of PPARα., Similar results were obtained
for the LXRα antibody (Figure , column
2), suggesting that native PPARα and LXRα can interact
in cells but that GR does not. To further confirm these results, a
GR specific antibody was used, and this resulted in only precipitation
of GR (Figure , column 3), further confirming
a specific interaction of hPPARα with hLXRα.

Co-immunoprecipitation
of endogenous hPPARα, hLXRα,
and hGR proteins from HepG2 cells. The cell lysate from HepG2 cells
was immunoprecipitated with antibodies to PPARα, LXRα,
or GR or no antibody as a negative control (Neg). The total protein
attached to each antibody was separated via 12% SDS–PAGE and
then subjected to Western blot analysis for the presence of GR, LXRα,
and PPARα (indicated at the left). An input sample (equivalent
to 10% of that used for the co-immunoprecipitation) was used as a
positive control.

Effect of PPARα Ligands
on PPARα–LXRα
Secondary Structure
Because ligand-activated nuclear receptors
undergo conformational changes upon ligand binding, and because significant
differences were noted for the interaction of hPPARα with hLXRα,
CD was used to determine whether ligand binding affected the overall
conformation of the hPPARα–hLXRα heterodimer. For
this study, eight known endogenous hPPARα ligands were utilized.
These ligands were chosen on the basis of similar binding affinities
but variations in chemical structure, including a saturated LCFA (C16:0),
monounsaturated LCFA (C18:1), two polyunsaturated LCFAs (C18:2 and
C20:5), and their CoA thioesters. While each of the examined ligands
has been shown to bind hPPARα with similar affinity (Kd values of 12–34 nM for LCFA and 11–16
nM for LCFA-CoA), binding of each ligand results in slightly different
hPPARα conformational changes.

To distinguish effects on the heterodimer pair from effects on only
hPPARα, or even hLXRα, spectra of hPPARα with hLXRα
in the presence of solvent or ligand were compared to the calculated
average of each individual protein in the presence of ligand (Figure ). The spectrum of hPPARα with hLXRα
in the presence of palmitic acid [Figure A
(●)] showed strong changes compared to the spectrum of hPPARα
with hLXRα and solvent [Figure A (▼)],
suggesting an effect of palmitic acid. Furthermore, the spectrum of
hPPARα with hLXRα in the presence of palmitic acid was
also different from the spectrum of the calculated average of each
protein in the presence of palmitic acid [Figure A (○)], suggesting that the two proteins are still
interacting and the new spectrum is a result of palmitic acid altering
the heterodimer secondary structure. Quantitative analyses of these
samples showed a lower estimated percentage of α-helices and
slightly higher β-sheet contents for hPPARα with hLXRα
and palmitic acid than for either hPPARα with hLXRα and
solvent or the calculated average of hPPARα with hLXRα
and palmitic acid (Table ). On the contrary,
the spectrum of hPPARα with hLXRα and palmitoyl-CoA completely
overlaid the spectrum of the calculated average for these proteins
(Figure B), suggesting that the addition of
palmitoyl-CoA might weaken the interaction of hPPARα with hLXRα.
The estimated percent composition further supported this, with the
hPPARα–hLXRα–palmitoyl-CoA structure having
significant changes in α-helical and β-sheet content compared
to those of the hPPARα–hLXRα structure in the presence
of solvent, but no changes compared to the calculated average (Table ). For all of the examined ligands, each ligand
seemed to have some effect on structure, with eicosapentaenoyl-CoA
resulting in the smallest spectral changes (Figure H). Addition of oleoyl-CoA (Figure D) and linoleic acid (Figure E) resulted
in spectral changes similar to those of palmitic acid, suggesting
that these ligands affect the heterodimer. Oleic acid (Figure C), linoleoyl-CoA (Figure F), eicosapentaenoic acid (Figure G), and
eicosapentaenoyl-CoA (Figure H) resulted in
spectra that were similar to the calculated average of the individual
proteins, similar to that of palmitoyl-CoA, suggesting that these
ligands may be affecting the individual proteins (rather than the
heterodimer) and possibly inhibiting heterodimer formation.

Secondary Structures of hPPARα
and hLXRα, Individually and as a Mixture (corrected for the
solvent effect) in the Presence and Absence of Fatty Acids
protein	α-helix regular H(r)
(%)	α-helix distorted H(d)
(%)	β-sheet regular S(r)
(%)	β-sheet distorted S(d)
(%)	turns T (%)	unordered U (%)	
PPARα/LXRα/solvent	5.6 ± 0.6	7.2 ± 0.5	21.2 ± 0.9	11.1 ± 0.3	20.4 ± 0.6	35 ± 1	
PPARα/LXRα/16:0 (obs)	3.1 ± 0.9	6.0 ± 0.9	23 ± 2	11.8 ± 0.6	21.4 ± 0.7	35 ± 1	
PPARα/16:0 and LXRα/16:0
(calcd)	4 ± 1	6.7 ± 0.7	22 ± 2	11.5 ± 0.5	21.5 ± 0.7	34 ± 1	
PPARα/LXRα/16:0-CoA
(obs)	2.3 ± 0.7	5.6 ± 0.6	24.7 ± 0.7	12.0 ± 0.2	21.3 ± 0.4	34 ± 1	
PPARα/16:0-CoA and LXRα/16:0-CoA (calcd)	3 ± 1	5.8 ± 0.7	24.3 ± 0.7	12.1 ± 0.3	21.3 ± 0.4	34 ± 1	
PPARα/LXRα/18:1 (obs)	4 ± 1	6.2 ± 0.7	23 ± 1	11.7 ± 0.4	21.1 ± 0.7	34 ± 1	
PPARα/18:1 and LXRα/18:1 (calcd)	1.7 ± 0.4	5.1 ± 0.2	25.4 ± 0.5	12.2 ± 0.1	21.7 ± 0.4	34.1 ± 0.7	
PPARα/LXRα/18:1-CoA
(obs)	4 ± 1	6.2 ± 0.8	23 ± 1	11.3 ± 0.4	21.5 ± 0.5	34 ± 1	
PPARα/18:1-CoA and
LXRα/18:1-CoA (calcd)	6 ± 1	7.7 ± 0.7	21 ± 1	11.0 ± 0.4	20.9 ± 0.7	34 ± 2	
PPARα/LXRα/18:2
(obs)	3.4 ± 0.7	5.9 ± 0.7	24 ± 1	11.7 ± 0.4	21.1 ± 0.6	34 ± 1	
PPARα/18:2
and LXRα/18:2 (calcd)	4 ± 1	6.2 ± 0.6	23 ± 1	11.4 ± 0.2	20.4 ± 0.5	35 ± 1	
PPARα/LXRα/18:2-CoA
(obs)	3 ± 1	6.0 ± 0.9	19 ± 3	11.7 ± 0.5	21.5 ± 0.7	35 ± 1	
PPARα/18:2-CoA and
LXRα/18:2-CoA (calcd)	5 ± 1	6.8 ± 0.5	22.4 ± 0.7	11.4 ± 0.2	21.0 ± 0.6	35 ± 1	
PPARα/LXRα/20:5
(obs)	4.1 ± 0.9	6.3 ± 0.7	22 ± 1	11.4 ± 0.5	21.2 ± 0.8	34 ± 1	
PPARα/20:5 and LXRα/20:5
(calcd)	4 ± 1	6.4 ± 0.7	23 ± 1	11.4 ± 0.4	21.2 ± 0.8	34 ± 1	
PPARα/LXRα/20:5-CoA
(obs)	5 ± 1	6.9 ± 0.7	22 ± 1	11.1 ± 0.3	20.4 ± 0.7	34 ± 2	
PPARα/20:5-CoA and
LXRα/20:5-CoA (calcd)	5 ± 1	6.9 ± 0.8	22 ± 1	11.2 ± 0.3	20.8 ± 0.7	35 ± 2	
Definitions: obs,
observed; calcd,
calculated average. Significant differences were determined between
the obs value and the PPARα/LXRα/solvent value for each
protein mixture (n = 3–6).

p &lt; 0.05.

p &lt; 0.01.

p = 0.08.

Circular dichroic spectra of a mixture
of hPPARα and hLXRα
in the absence and presence of LCFA and LCFA-CoA. Far-UV spectra obtained
experimentally of a mixture of equal amino acid molarities of hPPARα
and hLXRα in the absence of ligands (▼), experimentally
observed spectra of a mixture of equal amino acid molarities of hPPARα
and hLXRα in the presence of ligands (Obs, ●), and the
calculated average of the two proteins individually examined in the
presence of ligand (Calc, ○). Ligands include (A) palmitic
acid (C16:0), (B) palmitoyl-CoA (C16:0-CoA), (C) oleic acid (C18:1),
(D) oleoyl-CoA (C18:1-CoA), (E) linoleic acid (C18:2), (F) linoleoyl-CoA
(C18:2-CoA), (G) eicosapentaenoic acid (C20:5), and (H) eicosapentaenoyl-CoA
(C20:5-CoA). Each spectrum is representative of an average of 10 scans
taken from at least three replicates.

PPARα Ligands Affect hPPARα’s Affinity for
hLXRα
To determine whether the structural changes noted
by CD affected the affinity of PPARα for LXRα, the protein–protein
binding experiments were repeated in the presence of LCFA and LCFA-CoA.
Because previous experiments have shown that hPPARα binds LCFA
and LCFA-CoA with high affinity and at a single binding site, equal molarities of hPPARα and ligand
were mixed and allowed to bind prior to elucidation of hPPARα’s
affinity for hLXRα. Titration of Cy5-hPPARα with hLXRα
in the presence of palmitic acid resulted in a sharply saturable change
in the fluorescence intensity (Figure A),
suggesting high-affinity binding similar to that seen in the absence
of palmitic acid (Table ). Transformation
of these data into a double-reciprocal plot resulted in a single straight
line, indicating a single binding site (Figure A, inset). Although the change in fluorescence intensity was not
as sharp in the presence of palmitoyl-CoA (Figure B), oleic acid (Figure C), oleoyl-CoA
(Figure D), or linoleoyl-CoA (Figure F), binding was saturable with binding affinities
between 27 and 53 nM (Table ). However, the
changes in fluorescence intensity in the presence of linoleic acid
(Figure E), eicosapentaenoic acid (Figure G), and eicosapentaenoyl-CoA (Figure H) were not saturable at 300 nM hLXRα, suggesting very
weak or nonspecific binding. These data further confirmed the structural
changes seen by CD and indicated that some LCFA decrease the affinity
of hPPARα for hLXRα (Table ).

Binding Affinities of hPPARα
for hLXRα, in the Absence and Presence of LCFA or LCFA-CoA
 	Kd (nM)	
ligand	LCFA	LCFA-CoA	
none	6 ± 2	
C16:0	7 ± 2	53 ± 17	
C18:1	37 ± 10	27 ± 12	
C18:2	209 ± 89	36 ± 11	
C20:5	&gt;600	135 ± 85	
Fluorescent
protein–protein binding assays of Cy5-labeled
hPPARα titrated against increasing concentrations of unlabeled
hLXRα in the presence of LCFA and LCFA-CoA. The change in fluorescence
intensity of 25 nM Cy5-labeled hPPARα titrated with increasing
concentrations (0–250 nM) of hLXRα in the presence of
25 nM (A) palmitic acid, (B) palmitoyl-CoA, (C) oleic acid, (D) oleoyl-CoA,
(E) linoleic acid, (F) linoleoyl-CoA, (G) eicosapentaenoic acid, and
(H) eicosapentaenoyl-CoA. Insets represent double-reciprocal linear
plots of each binding curve. Values represent means ± the standard
error (n = 3–5).

Effect of PPARα Ligands on the Ability of the PPARα–LXRα
Structure To Bind Response Elements
Electrophoretic mobility
shift assays were used to determine whether the hPPARα–hLXRα
heterodimer could bind to either PPRE or LXRE sequences. As the RXRα
homodimer binds to both response elements,, hRXRα binding to each response element was used as a positive
control. This binding resulted in the strongest band observed for
either response element (Figure A). PPARα
(in the absence of RXRα or LXRα) showed no binding to
either response element. However, a very weak band was noted for LXRα
(in the absence of RXRα or PPARα) binding to the PPRE,
and a stronger band was noted for LXRE binding, suggesting that LXRα
homodimers may be able to bind to the LXRE. Although only weak binding
by the PPARα–LXRα heterodimer was noted for PPRE
binding, LXRE binding was stronger (Figure A). Supershift assays were conducted to ensure that this observed
binding was due to the PPARα–LXRα heterodimer (and
not just LXRα binding). The addition of either a PPARα
or LXRα antibody resulted in supershifted bands (Figure A). While the LXRα antibody resulted in a
single supershifted band, two bands were noted with the addition of
the PPARα antibody: one shifted band and one supershifted band
(Figure A). It is possible that the two bands
represent DNA bound by the PPARα–LXRα heterodimer
(top band) and DNA bound by LXRα homodimers (lower band). As
PPARα is unable to bind either response element alone, these
data further indicate DNA binding by the PPARα–LXRα
heterodimer.

(A) Electrophoretic mobility shift assays of DNA binding
by each
individual protein (hPPARα, hLXRα, and hRXRα), a
mixture of hPPARα and hLXRα proteins, and a mixture of
hPPARα and hLXRα proteins in the presence of anti-PPARα
or anti-LXRα. The left side of the gel shows binding to the
hACOX PPRE; the middle lane is a no DNA control, and the right side
of the gel shows binding to the hSREBP-1c LXRE. (B) Representative
electrophoretic mobility shift assays showing DNA binding. The top
gel shows PPRE binding for the hPPARα–hLXRα heterodimer
in the presence of LCFA or clofibrate (agonist). The bottom gel shows
LXRE binding for the hPPARα–hLXRα heterodimer in
the presence of LCFA or T0901317 (agonist). (C) Relative DNA binding
to a PPRE sequence by hPPARα–hLXRα heterodimers
in the absence (none) or presence of LCFA. Values are presented relative
to binding to the same response element by hPPARα–hRXRα
heterodimers in the presence of clofibrate, a known PPARα agonist.
(D) Relative DNA binding to an LXRE sequence by hPPARα–hLXRα
heterodimers in the absence (none) or presence of LCFA. Values are
presented relative to binding to the same response element by hLXRα–hRXRα
heterodimers in the presence of T0901317, a known LXRα agonist.
DNA binding was determined by electrophoretic mobility shift assays,
and resulting bands were quantified by densitometry. Values represent
means ± the standard error (n = 4 or 5). Asterisks
denote significant differences due to the addition of ligand: *p &lt; 0.05, and **p &lt; 0.01.

Because many PPARα ligands altered the PPARα–LXRα
conformation and several decreased the protein–protein binding
affinity, whether these changes also altered DNA binding was examined.
Neither LCFA nor clofibrate, a known PPARα agonist, had any
effect on the binding of the PPARα–LXRα heterodimer
to the PPRE from the ACOX promoter (Figure B,C). As the level of binding of the PPARα–LXRα
heterodimer to the PPRE was already very low, any changes may be below
the limit of detection. In contrast, the presence of LCFA or T0901317,
a known LXRα agonist, decreased the level of binding of the
PPARα–LXRα heterodimer to the LXRE from the SREBP-1c
promoter (Figure C), possibly because of weakened
heterodimer interactions. This binding of the PPARα–LXRα
heterodimer was compared to the binding of the respective RXRα
heterodimer to the same sequences in the presence of LCFA (Figure
S1 of the ). Although
DNA binding was weaker for the PPARα–LXRα heterodimer
than for either the PPARα–RXRα or LXRα–RXRα
heterodimer, LCFA effects were similar for each response element (Figure
S1A,C of the ). LCFA
addition had no effect on PPRE binding by either heterodimer pair
(Figure S1B,D of the ), suggesting that these ligand-induced conformational changes do
not affect PPRE binding. However, LXRE binding by both LXRα–PPARα
and LXRα–RXRα heterodimers was weakened by the
addition of LCFA, suggesting either a direct consequence of the altered
PPARα affinity for LXRα or an altered affinity for DNA
in the presence of LCFA.

Effect of PPARα Ligands on PPARα–LXRα
Transactivation of the PPRE or LXRE
Because the addition
of ligand had only minor effects on DNA binding, but altered protein
conformation, the ability of PPARα ligands to affect transactivation
was examined. For PPARα activity, the ACOX promoter was cloned
into a promoter-less luciferase reporter, while the SREBP-1c promoter
was used as an LXRα target. HepG2 cells were transfected to
overexpress hPPARα, hLXRα, hPPARα, and hLXRα
or an empty vector (pGS5), and the effects of LCFA were examined.
Overexpression of hPPARα or hLXRα alone had no effect
on ACOX-luciferase activity compared to that with the empty vector,
while overexpression of both slightly increased hPPARα activity
(Figure A,B). Although LCFA have been shown
to strongly transactivate ACOX-luciferase reporters in cells overexpressing
both PPARα and RXRα,, no significant
changes were noted for the addition of LCFA or clofibrate to cells
overexpressing hPPARα and hLXRα (Figure A,B). Because binding of the hPPARα–hLXRα
heterodimer to this PPRE sequence was weak, the effect of the hPPARα–hLXRα
heterodimer on PPARα transactivation may not be as significant
as the effect of the hPPARα–hRXRα heterodimer.
However, HepG2 cells endogenously express each of these proteins,
as well as hRXRα, so if LXRα and PPARα were only
competing for available RXRα, it would be expected that repression
would be observed in cells ectopically expressing LXRα. These
data suggest that the increased activity seen in cells overexpressing
both receptors may be due to hPPARα–hLXRα interactions.

Normalized
firefly luciferase levels driven by promoters containing
response elements for PPARα or LXRα. Transactivation of
the PPARα-regulated gene, ACOX, in the absence and presence
of 1 μM (A) and 10 μM LCFA (B). Transactivation of the
LXRα-regulated gene, SREBP-1c, in the absence and presence of
1 μM (C) and 10 μM LCFA (D). Number symbols denote significant
differences due to ligand as compared to no-ligand controls for all
panels: #p &lt; 0.05, ##p &lt; 0.01,
and ###p &lt; 0.001 Asterisks denote significant
differences between overexpression cell lines for a given ligand treatment:
*p &lt; 0.05, **p &lt; 0.01, and
***p &lt; 0.001. @@@ indicates all overexpression
cell lines were significantly different from each other at the p &lt; 0.001 level.

However, striking differences were noted for effects on LXRα
activity. In the absence of ligand, cells overexpressing only hLXRα
or hLXRa and hPPARa showed increased activity versus cells with the
empty vector (Figure C,D). Because HepG2 cells
endogenously express hPPARα, hLXRα, and hRXRα, the
activity seen in cells overexpressing only hLXRα may be due
in part to hLXRα–hRXRα interactions. With the addition
of 1 μM ligand, activity levels for cells overexpressing hPPARα
alone and cells overexpressing both hPPARα and hLXRα significantly
decreased and were similar to those for cells with the empty vector
(Figure C). The addition of 10 μM ligand
resulted in decreased activity with each of the examined ligands for
all cells, with eicosapentaenoic acid resulting in the largest changes
(Figure D). These results were consistent
with both the decreased affinity of PPARα for LXRα and
the decreased level of LXRE binding seen in the presence of eicosapentaenoic
acid. These data suggested that LCFA decrease LXRα activity,
in the presence and absence of hPPARα. This further suggests
that such repression may be due to more than just competition between
PPARα and LXRα for RXRα.

Discussion
Nuclear
receptor-mediated metabolic regulation is complex. Both
PPARα and LXRα play important roles in such regulation
through transcriptional control of genes involved in fatty acid oxidation,
cholesterol metabolism, and fatty acid synthesis, yet how these receptors
coordinate such regulation is not fully understood. Previous experiments
have indicated that cross-talk occurs between PPARα and LXRα,
and it has been suggested that these two receptors may even directly
interact., However, the significance of this finding
is unclear, and the effect of endogenous ligands remains to be elucidated.
To clarify the role that PPARα ligands play in the PPARα–LXRα
interaction, tag-free, full-length human PPARα and LXRα
proteins were used for these studies. These studies provide several
new insights into PPARα–LXRα cross-talk and the
importance of ligand binding on heterodimerization.

These data
demonstrate a direct, very high-affinity interaction
between hPPARα and hLXRα, with binding affinities in the
low nanomolar range. Further, our data show that endogenous, high-affinity
PPARα ligands could alter hPPARα–hLXRα binding.
While only a subset of known endogenous hPPARα ligands were
examined, the structural changes noted by CD suggested that ligand
binding either altered the secondary structure of the heterodimer
or suppressed heterodimerization. Protein–protein binding experiments
confirmed these results, with high-affinity binding of hPPARα
to hLXRα in the presence of the shorter chain saturated LCFA,
palmitic acid, and decreased hPPARα–hLXRα affinity
in the presence of the longer, unsaturated LCFA, eicosapentaenoic
acid. As each of the examined ligands has been shown to bind hPPARα
with similar affinity (Kd values of 12–34
nM for LCFA and 11–16 nM for LCFA-CoA), altered heterodimer formation may stem from unique ligand-induced
conformational changes.

While we clearly observed binding of
the hPPARα–hLXRα
heterodimer to DNA, previous experiments have suggested that the heterodimer
of mouse PPARα (mPPARα) and hLXRα is incapable of
binding DNA. Because PPARα is an
obligate heterodimer, requiring dimerization to bind the PPRE, it
is possible that the hPPARα–hLXRα interaction is
stronger than the mPPARα–hLXRα interaction, resulting
in more stable DNA binding. It is also possible that mPPARα
and hPPARα preferentially bind different degenerate PPRE sequences,
as previous experiments have shown species variation in rodent and
human PPRE sequence binding. Because
previous studies examined the binding of the mPPARα–hLXRα
heterodimer to a rat PPRE and this work examined binding of the hPPARα–hLXRα
heterodimer to a human PPRE, this may explain some of the observed
differences. However, the existence of a specific, high-affinity hPPARα–hLXRα
response element, separate from the PPRE or LXRE, remains to be identified.

These data suggest a specific role for a PPARα–LXRα
heterodimer rather than just competition between the two proteins
for heterodimerization with RXRα. Previous experiments have
shown that LXRα can repress an ACOX-luciferase reporter, presumably
through competition for RXR. Data presented
herein actually show an elevated level of expression from an ACOX-luciferase
reporter in cells overexpressing both PPARα and LXRα,
and no effect on cells overexpressing only LXRα. These activity
differences are likely due to differences in the constructs used for
the expression assays. The previous experiment used a synthetic hybrid
of the TK promoter possessing three copies of the PPRE from rat ACOX.
Our studies used a 2.3 kb fragment of human DNA comprising the endogenous
PPRE and ACOX promoter. Thus, a human PPRE within the native environment
of an ACOX promoter displays regulation by the human PPARα–LXRα
heterodimer and strengthens the idea that there is cross-talk between
the PPARα- and LXRα-regulated pathways.

Previously
published data have suggested that LCFA decrease SREBP-1c
levels due to activation of PPARα, leading to an increased level
of PPARα–RXRα heterodimer formation and consequently
fewer LXRα–RXRα heterodimers. However, data included herein suggest that other mechanisms
may be responsible. In addition to the presence of an LXRα–PPARα
heterodimer, ligand interactions influence the activities of the nuclear
receptors involved. For example, the level of binding of the LXRα–RXRα
heterodimer to DNA was reduced in the presence of LCFA, even in the
absence of PPARα, suggesting that LCFA may directly affect the
LXRα–RXRα heterodimer. This idea is further supported
by studies showing that the RXRα–LBD species can bind
polyunsaturated LCFA.

In summary,
these data show for the first time a direct, high-affinity
interaction between full-length human PPARα and human LXRα
proteins. Furthermore, this interaction could be altered by the addition
of PPARα ligands (LCFA or LCFA-CoA), with polyunsaturated fatty
acids abolishing the high-affinity interaction. Although DNA binding
was weak compared to that of the RXRα heterodimers, binding
did occur, suggesting a specific role for the PPARα–LXRα
heterodimer. In addition, cells overexpressing both PPARα and
LXRα showed altered transactivation of both a PPARα and
LXRα target reporter, with LCFA decreasing the extent of LXRE
transactivation. Taken together, these data suggest that ligand binding
may determine heterodimer choice and downstream gene regulation of
these nuclear receptors.

Supporting Information Available
Electrophoretic mobility shift
assays showing DNA binding by the hPPARα–hLXRα
heterodimer versus that of the hPPARα–hRXRα or
hLXRα–hRXRα heterodimer. This material is available
free of charge via the Internet at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bi401679y_si_001.pdf

The authors declare no
competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
We thank Mr.
Dhawal P. Oswal for his help with protein purification.

Abbreviations
PPARperoxisome proliferator-activated
receptor

LXRliver
X receptor

RXRretinoid
X receptor

PPREperoxisome proliferator response element

LXREliver X receptor response element

PPARαperoxisome proliferator-activated
receptor α

LXRαliver X receptor α

LCFAlong chain fatty acid

LCFA-CoAlong chain fatty acyl-CoA

hGRhuman glucocorticoid
receptor

hPPARαhuman PPARα

hLXRαhuman LXRα

ACOXacyl-CoA oxidase

SREBP-1csterol regulatory element binding protein-1c

CDcircular dichroism

LBDligand binding domain

mPPARαmouse
PPARα.

