Insulin therapy is the most
widely used treatment for diabetes. Despite improvements
in insulin therapy over the past few decades, the goal of achieving
complete glycemic control in diabetic patients has
still not been achieved. Postprandial hyperglycemia persists in diabetes,
even with aggressive insulin therapy, due, in part, to the imbalance of secreted hormones that normally
work together to achieve normal glucose homeostasis.

Human islet amyloid polypeptide (hIAPP or amylin)
is a neuropancreatic
hormone produced in the pancreatic β-cells. The polypeptide
is stored in the insulin secretory granule and cosecreted with insulin., Mature hIAPP is 37 residues in
length and contains an amidated C-terminus and a disulfide bond between
Cys-2 and Cys-7 (Figure ). hIAPP normally
complements insulin by suppressing postprandial glucagon secretion,
helping to regulate the rate of gastric emptying, and inducing satiety.− The polypeptide forms amyloid in the pancreatic islets of Langerhans
in type 2 diabetes by an unknown mechanism. hIAPP amyloid deposits
are associated with reduced β-cell mass, and islet amyloidosis
is believed to contribute to type 2 diabetes.,− Islet amyloidosis also contributes to the failure of islet transplantation,
and recent work has shown that prevention of islet amyloid formation
enhances graft survival., hIAPP also aggregates
aggressively in vitro and is one of the most aggregation
prone naturally occurring sequences known.

Sequences of human IAPP
(hIAPP), rat IAPP (rIAPP), pramlintide
(PM), H18R pramlintide (QM), H18R/G24P/I26P IAPP (TM-a), S20R/G24P/I26P
IAPP (TM-b), and H18R/I26P IAPP (DM). Each peptide contains a disulfide
bond connecting Cys-2 and Cys-7 and an amidated C-terminus. Residues
that differ from those of human IAPP are colored red.

hIAPP is deficient in both type 1 and type 2 diabetes
patients− and is a promising adjunct
to insulin therapy. However, clinical use of hIAPP is not practical
because of its aggressive tendency to aggregate in vitro, leading to difficulties in formulation and storage, and because
some hIAPP aggregates are toxic to β-cells.

Not all species
form islet amyloid, and the ability to do so correlates
with the primary sequence of IAPP. A number of nonamyloidgenic IAPP
variants contain multiple proline substitutions, a well-known
breaker of β-structure within the segment of residues 20–29., Early work led to the suggestion that the sequence in this region
controls the amyloidogenicity of the polypeptide. The situation has
subsequently been shown to be more complex. Variations outside of
the segment of residues 20–29 can influence significantly the
amyloidogenicity of IAPP, and multiple proline substitutions in other
segments of the molecule can inhibit amyloid formation., In addition, the charge state of residue 18 and the charge state
of the N-terminus play an important role in modifying the tendency
to aggregate and form amyloid. Nevertheless,
substitutions within the region of residues 20–29 are very
important in determining the amyloidogencity of IAPP.,− Analysis of the relationship
between sequence and amyloidogenicity has led to the development of
IAPP analogues, based upon rat IAPP (rIAPP),
that are less prone to aggregation than hIAPP.

rIAPP
differs from the human polypeptide at six positions,
with five of the substitutions, including three prolines, found between
residues 20 and 29. rIAPP is not toxic, does not form amyloid, and
is more soluble than hIAPP, due in part to the three prolines
at positions 25, 28, and 29., These residues are
Ala, Ser, and Ser, respectively, in the human polypeptide (Figure ). The sequence differences between rat and human
IAPP have been exploited to develop a more soluble analogue of hIAPP,
pramlintide (PM, also known as Symlin), that has been clinically approved
as an adjunct to insulin therapy, in which residues 25, 28, and 29
of hIAPP are substituted with proline (Figure ). These substitutions render the human peptide nonamyloidgenic under
typical conditions. Clinical studies show that PM retains
the activity of hIAPP, and the addition of PM to insulin therapy improves
postprandial glycemic control in patients with type 1 and type 2 diabetes.,−

PM still has solubility issues, particularly at physiological
pH.
PM is more soluble at acidic pH where the N-terminus and His-18 will
be fully protonated and is formulated under these conditions, while
insulin is formulated at near neutral pH. This prevents the coformulation
of insulin and PM, leading to increased cost in combination therapies
and potentially reducing patient compliance, due to the need for multiple injections. There is also interest
in the coformulation of IAPP or PM with other proteins, and IAPP analogues
with improved
solubility should be useful in this context, as well.−

Here, we describe an approach for rationally designing analogues
of hIAPP with improved solubility that involves minimal substitutions.
The strategy relies on mutating select residues to proline and making
an additional substitution to increase the net charge of the molecule.
We demonstrate the approach with an H18R/G24P/I26P triple mutant (TM-a)
and an H18R/Ala-25/Ser-28/Ser-29 quadruple mutant (QM). Both are significantly
more soluble than hIAPP or PM, and both are nonamyloidogenic and are
not toxic to INS-1 β-cells.
The approach is not limited to these two cases, and additional analogues
can be designed using this strategy (Figure ). We illustrate this point with an S20R/G24P/I26P triple mutant
(TM-b) and an H18R/I26P double mutant (DM).

Materials and Methods
Peptide
Synthesis
All peptides were synthesized on
a 0.1 mmol scale using a CEM microwave peptide synthesizer. 9-Fluorenylmethoxycarbonyl
(Fmoc) chemistry was utilized. 5-(4′-Fmoc-aminomethyl-3′,5-dimethoxyphenol)
valeric acid (PAL-PEG) resin was used to afford an amidated C-terminus.
For hIAPP, TM-a,
TM-b, and DM, Fmoc-protected pseudoproline (oxazolidine) dipeptide
derivatives were incorporated to improve the yield as previously described. For PM and QM, only Fmoc-Ala-Thr(ΨMe, Mepro)-OH and Fmoc-Leu-Ser(ΨMe, Mepro)-OH
were utilized. Standard Fmoc reaction cycles were used as previously
described. The first residue attached
to the resin, all β-branched residues, and all pseudoproline
dipeptide derivatives were double-coupled. The peptides were cleaved
from the resin using standard trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) methods.

Oxidation and Purification of Peptides
Crude peptides
collected after cleavage were dissolved in 20% (v/v) acetic acid and
lyophilized. This step was repeated several times before oxidation
and purification to improve the solubility of the peptides. The peptides
were oxidized in 100% dimethyl sulfoxide at room temperature to form
the disulfide bond and then purified via reverse-phase high-performance
liquid chromatography (RP-HPLC) using a Vydac C18 preparative column. The masses of the pure peptides was confirmed
by matrix-assisted laser desorption ionization time-of-flight mass
spectrometry: hIAPP, expected 3903.6, observed 3904.6; PM, expected
3949.3, observed 3949.2; QM, expected 3969.4, observed 3968.1; TM-a,
expected 3946.9, observed 3945.7; TM-b, expected 3997.4, observed,
3997.1; DM, expected 3907.3, observed, 3908.1.

Sample Preparation
Each peptide was dissolved in 100%
hexafluoroisoproponal (HFIP) to make a 1.6 mM stock solution. Stock
solutions were filtered using a 0.45 μM Acrodisc syringe filter
with a GHP membrane, and the required amount
of peptide was lyophilized overnight to remove HFIP. Dry peptide was
dissolved into the appropriate buffer for the fluorescence assays.

Fluorescence Assays
Thioflavin-T binding assays, conducted
without stirring at 25 °C, were utilized to monitor amyloid formation
kinetics. Fluorescence measurements were performed using a Beckman
Coulter DTX 880 plate reader with a multimode detector using an excitation
wavelength of 430 nm and an emission wavelength of 485 nm. Samples
were prepared by dissolving the dry peptide into Tris-HCl buffer and
a thioflavin-T solution immediately before the measurement. The final
concentrations were 16 μM hIAPP or 160 μM analogue (each
one) and 32 μM thioflavin-T in 20 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.4).

Solubility
Measurements
Dry peptides were dissolved
in PBS buffer containing 10 mM PO43–,
137 mM NaCl, and 2.7 mM KCl (pH 7.4) at different initial
concentrations and incubated for 7 days at 25 °C without being
stirred. Each sample was then centrifuged using a Beckman Coulter
Microfuge 22R centrifuge at 24 °C for 20 min. The relative centrifugal
force used was 1.75 ×
104g. The solubility of each
sample was approximated by measuring the absorbance of the corresponding
supernatant at 280 nm measured using a Beckman Coulter DU 730 UV/vis
spectrophotometer. All of the peptides contain a single Tyr, three
Phe residues, and a disulfide bond and no Trp; thus, their extinction
coefficients at 280 nm are identical.

Liquid Chromatography–Mass
Spectroscopy (LC–MS)
Experiments
Samples were prepared by dissolving insulin,
at an equimolar ratio, with either PM, DM, or TM-a in PBS buffer (pH
7.4) at an initial concentration of 500 μM. Aliquots were removed
at time zero (control). Additional aliquots were removed after incubation
for 24 h and centrifuged (17500g for 20 min). Aliquots
were immediately frozen with liquid nitrogen and lyophilized.
LC–UV–MS measurements were taken by redissolving the samples and
immediately injecting them. Samples were analyzed using an Agilent
1260 HPLC instrument and an Agilent G6224A TOF mass spectrometer.
The HPLC method used a Kinetex C18 column [100 Å,
2.6 μm, 100 mm × 2.1 mm (Phenomenex)] at 35 °C and
a flow rate of 0.60 mL/min. The HPLC solvents were (A) H2O [0.1% (v/v) acetic acid and 0.1% (v/v) TFA] and (B) CH3CN [0.1% (v/v) acetic acid and 0.1% (v/v) TFA]. The HPLC solvent
gradient consisted of the following: 10% B from 0 to 1.5 min, 10 to
50%
B from 1.5 to 21.5 min, and 50 to 95% B from 21.5 to 31.5. Mass spectra
were acquired in the range of m/z 300–3200 with internal calibration using five standards in
profile mode at 5 Hz. Electrospray ionization in the positive mode
was used: cap voltage
of 4000 V, gas temperature of 325 °C, drying gas of 12 L/min,
nebulizer of 55 psi, and fragmentor voltage of 200 V.

UV chromatograms
were acquired with a diode array detector
(DAD) operating with a 10 Hz acquisition rate and a 2 nm bandwidth
in the range of 205–500 nm. The absorbance was recorded at
215
±
8 and 280 ±
8 nm with a 500 ±
50 nm reference wavelength to obtain integrated UV areas.
ESI+, TIC (total ion current) mass chromatograms were integrated,
and averaged mass spectra were acquired from the integrated peaks
with background subtraction. The mass spectra of the target peptides
were observed in predominantly the +3 and +4 charge states. The resolution
of the mass spectrometer in the described state and in this m/z range is ∼13000. This resolution
allows the isotopic distribution of the peptide m/z peaks in these charge states to be fully resolved.
Mass spectra were deconvoluted using the Agilent Resolved Isotope
Deconvolution algorithm. The monoisotopic, neutral masses were determined
with an accuracy of ±10 ppm. The extracted ion chromatograms
(EIC) were used with the two most intense m/z ions from the +3 and +4 charge states
for relative quantitation from the mass chromatograms.

Transmission
Electron Microscopy (TEM)
TEM images were
collected at the Life Science Microscopy Center at the State University
of New York at Stony Brook. Aliquots (15 μL) of the samples
used for fluorescence assays
were removed at the end of each kinetic experiment, blotted on a carbon-coated
200-mesh copper grid for 1 min, and then negatively stained with saturated
uranyl acetate for 1 min.

Circular Dichroism (CD)
Far-UV CD
experiments were
performed on an Applied Photophysics Chirascan CD spectrophotometer
at 25 °C. Aliquots from the kinetic experiments were removed
at the end of
each experiment, and the spectra were recorded as the average of three
repeats over a range of 190–260 nm, at 1 nm intervals. A 0.1
cm quartz cuvette was used, and a background
spectrum was subtracted from the data.

Cell Culture
Transformed
rat insulinoma-1 (INS-1) pancreatic
β-cells were grown in RPMI 1640 supplemented with 10% fetal
bovine serum (FBS), 11 mM glucose, 10 mM Hepes, 2 mM l-glutamine,
1 mM sodium pyruvate, 50 μM β-mercaptoethanol,
100 units/mL penicillin, and 100 units/mL streptomycin. Cells were
maintained at 37 °C under 5% CO2.

AlamarBlue
Cell Viability Assays
Cytotoxicity was measured
by AlamarBlue reduction assays. INS-1 β-cells were seeded at
a density of 30000 cells/well in 96-well plates and cultured for 24
h
prior to being stimulated with wild-type hIAPP and mutant IAPP
peptides. Peptides dissolved in RPMI were added directly to cells
and incubated on cells for 24 and 48 h. AlamarBlue was diluted 10-fold
in culture media and incubated on cells for an additional 5 h at 37
°C. The fluorescence (excitation at 530 nm and emission at 590
nm) was measured on a Beckman Coulter DTX880
fluorescent plate reader. Values were calculated relative to those
of control cells treated with buffer only. All values represent means
± the standard error of the mean (n = 4).

Results and Discussion
Design of Soluble Analogues
The
rate of amyloid formation
by hIAPP is strongly dependent on pH and is significantly faster above
neutral pH, because of changes in the ionization state of the N-terminus
and His-18.,− PM and hIAPP
both contain a His
residue at position 18, while rIAPP contains an Arg. These observations
led us to suspect that the solubility of PM could be significantly
increased by ensuring that residue 18 remains positively charged in
the pH range of interest. The two choices for substitution among the
genetically encoded amino acids are Lys and Arg. Either would accomplish
this goal; however, the Arg replacement is found in a number of IAPP
sequences, while the Lys replacement is not. In addition, the amino
group in Lys is generally more reactive than the guanidino group of
Arg because of its lower pKa; thus, we
chose to replace His-18 in the human peptide
with Arg to generate the quadruple mutant, H18R/A25P/S28P/S29P IAPP,
denoted QM. This mutant can also be viewed as an H18R mutant of pramlintide.

It is natural to inquire if three proline substitutions are
required and if the proline substitutions need to be located at positions
25, 28, and 29; thus, we designed a second analogue that contains
only two prolines in addition to the H18R substitution. A single proline
mutation at position 24 or 26 of hIAPP weakens the tendency of the
peptide to aggregate and converts the peptide into a moderately effective
inhibitor of amyloid formation by wild-type hIAPP., The motivation for originally choosing these sites was that substitutions
with proline were shown to have large effects on amyloid formation
by a set of 10-residue fragments of hIAPP. However, each of the single-proline mutants of hIAPP still forms
nonamyloid
aggregates at neutral pH, even at low concentrations; thus, we prepared
an analogue (TM-a) in which both residues 24 and 26 were mutated to
proline and which included the H18R mutation.

The Analogues Do Not Form
Amyloid in a Homogenous Solution
We first tested the propensity
of the different analogues to form
amyloid at pH 7.4 using thioflavin-T fluorescence assays and transmission
electron microscopy (TEM). Thioflavin-T is a small dye that undergoes
an increase in quantum yield upon binding to amyloid fibrils and provides
a convenient probe for monitoring the kinetics of amyloid formation.
The dye does not perturb the kinetics of hIAPP amyloid formation under the
conditions used here. Amyloid formation follows a sigmoidal time course
consisting of a lag phase, in which few or no fibrils are formed,
followed by a growth phase and then a saturation phase in which amyloid
fibrils are in equilibrium with the soluble peptide. Amyloid formation
by hIAPP reached the saturation phase within 40 h under the conditions
used here, while none of the analogues tested
(PM, TM-a, and QM) formed any detectable amyloid during the time course
of the experiments (∼140 h) as indicated by flat fluorescence
curves and by TEM, even though
they were examined at a concentration 10-fold higher than that of
hIAPP (Figure ). The thioflavin-T fluorescence
signal derives
from the fibril-bound dye, and the intensity is highly dependent on
how well the dye binds; hence, thioflavin-T studies can sometimes
be misleading. Therefore, we conducted
TEM measurements of the samples collected at the end of each kinetic
experiment. TEM images of hIAPP showed typical amyloid fibril morphology,
while no fibrils were found in the TEM images of samples of the three
analogues (PM, TM-a, and QM) (Figure ).

Thioflavin-T
fluorescence assays of hIAPP, TM-a, QM, and PM: blue
for hIAPP, black for TM-a, red for QM, and green for PM. The black,
red, and green curves overlap. The experiments were conducted in 20
mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.4), without stirring at 25 °C. The concentration
of hIAPP was 16 μM. The concentration of the other peptides
was 160 μM.

TEM images of (A) hIAPP,
(B) TM-a, (C) QM, and (D) PM recorded
from samples that were collected at the end of the kinetic experiments
shown in Figure . Scale bars are 100 nm.

The Analogues Are Significantly
More Soluble Than PM at Neutral
pH
We next compared the apparent solubilities of PM, TM-a,
and QM at pH 7.4. Each peptide was incubated in PBS buffer containing
10 mM PO43–, 137 mM NaCl, and 2.7 mM
KCl for 7 days at three different
initial concentrations (100 μM, 500 μM, and 1 mM), and
the solution was then centrifuged. The apparent
solubility of each sample was approximated by the absorbance of the
supernatant measured at 280 nm. The extinction coefficients of all
of the polypeptides are identical at 280 nm because they contain the
same aromatic residues and each contains a disulfide bond; thus, the
absorbance of the supernatant is a direct readout of the relative
solubility of the different samples. A sample of hIAPP, prepared at
an initial concentration of 1 mM, was used as a control. At 100 μM,
there were detectable differences in the amount of peptide in the
soluble fraction. The supernatant of the QM sample had an absorbance,
0.16, higher than that of TM-a (0.10) or PM (0.11) (Figure ). At higher concentrations (500 μM and 1
mM), the amount of peptide remaining in solution was significantly
higher for both analogues than for PM. At 1 mM, the absorbances of
the soluble fractions of TM-a and QM were 1.2 and 1.3, respectively,
while the value for the PM sample was only 0.35. In comparison, the
absorbance of the supernatant of the 1 mM hIAPP sample was just 0.11
(Figure ). For the samples prepared at an
initial concentration of 500 μM, the absorbances of the supernatants
of the TM-a and QM solutions
were 0.61 and 0.72, respectively, and both were significantly higher
than that of PM (0.33) (Figure ).

Comparison
of the apparent solubilities of TM-a, QM, PM, and hIAPP.
The apparent solubility in PBS buffer at pH 7.4 is represented by
the absorbance at 280 nm and was measured after 7 days. (A) Amount
of peptide remaining in the supernatant of samples of TM-a (black),
QM (red), PM (green), and hIAPP (blue) prepared at an initial concentration
of 1 mM. (B) Amount of peptide remaining in the supernatant of samples
of TM-a, QM, and PM measured for different initial concentrations
after incubation for 7 days. The same color coding is used as in panel
A. The absorbance was measured after centrifugation at 24 °C
for 20 min at 1.75 × 104g.

Neither TM-a nor QM Is
Toxic to β-Cells
We tested
the effects of the analogues on cell viability using rat INS-1 β-cells,
a pancreatic cell line that is commonly employed in studies of hIAPP
toxicity. Cell viability was monitored by AlamarBlue assays for peptide
samples at 21 and 42 μM. hIAPP was used as a positive control.
Incubating INS-1 β-cells
with 21 μM hIAPP led to clearly detectable toxicity; cell viability
was reduced
to 62 ± 4% relative to that of the medium alone control after
incubation for
24 h and to 54 ± 5% after incubation for 48 h. In contrast, incubation
of cells with either
TM-a or QM at 21 μM barely decreased cell viability (Figure ). Increasing the hIAPP concentration to 42 μM
resulted in even more significant effects; cell viability was reduced
to only 14 ± 9% after incubation for 24 h and 9 ± 9% after
incubation
for 48 h. In striking contrast, no obvious cytotoxicity
was observed for TM-a or QM at 42 μM (Figure ). These results demonstrate that,
unlike hIAPP, TM-a and QM are not toxic to cells at the concentrations
examined.

hIAPP is toxic to INS-1 β-cells, but TM-a and QM are not.
(A and B) Comparison of cell toxicity induced by hIAPP, TM-a and QM
at a peptide concentration of 21 μM. (A) Cell viability measured
after incubation of cells with the peptides for 24 h. (B) Cell viability
measured after incubation of cells with the peptides for 48 h. (C
and D) Comparison of cell toxicity induced by the three peptides at
42 μM. (C) Cell viability measured after incubation of cells
with the peptides for 24 h. (D) Cell viability measured after incubation
of cells with the peptides for 48 h. Cell viability was assessed using AlamarBlue reduction assays. Error bars represent the standard deviation determined
from four repeated measurements.

The Strategy Can Be Extended To Include Charged Substitutions
at Different Sites
We wanted to test if a charge substitution
at a different site would also lead to an enhanced solubility and
reduced amyloidogenicity. We chose to target Ser-20. Substitution
of a glycine at this site leads to accelerated amyloid formation,
while replacement with a Lys has been shown to slow but not prevent
amyloid formation.

We prepared
a S20R/G24P/I26P triple mutant (TM-b) and tested both its ability
to form amyloid and its apparent solubility at neutral pH. Thioflavin-T
fluorescence experiments and TEM confirmed that TM-b did not form
amyloid fibrils during the time course of the experiments, even at
a peptide concentration of 160 μM (Figure ). We then compared the apparent solubility of TM-b with PM and TM-a
at pH 7.4 using the same method described above (Figure ). TM-b was more soluble than PM and TM-a. The absorbances
of the soluble fractions of samples of TM-b, TM-a, and PM prepared
at an initial concentration of 100 μM were 0.16, 0.10, and 0.11,
respectively. Examination of samples
prepared at higher initial concentrations revealed that TM-b was much
more soluble than PM and somewhat more soluble than TM-a. We tested
samples prepared at initial concentrations of 500 μM and 1 mM.
The absorbances of the supernatants of samples of TM-b
prepared at initial concentrations of 500 μM and 1 mM were 0.79
and 1.5, respectively, while the values for PM
were 0.33 and 0.35, respectively.

TM-b does not form amyloid, even after
incubation for 140 h. (A)
Thioflavin-T fluorescence assays. The kinetic experiment was conducted
in 20 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.4), without stirring at 25 °C. The concentration
of TM-b was 160 μM. (B) TEM image of a sample collected at the
end of the experiment shown in panel A. The scale bar is 100 nm.

Comparison of the apparent solubility of samples
of TM-a, TM-b,
and PM prepared at different initial concentrations. The apparent
solubility of the peptides in PBS buffer at pH 7.4 is represented
by the absorbance at 280 nm and was measured after incubation for
7 days: black for TM-a, red for TM-b, and green for PM. The absorbance
was measured after centrifugation at 24 °C for 20 min at 1.75
× 104g.

Multiple Proline Substitutions Are Not Required To Design Soluble
Analogues
Single-proline substitutions have been reported to
reduce the amyloidgenicity of hIAPP. To
test if multiple proline substitutions together with the charged mutations
are required to improve the solubility at neutral pH, we tested an
H18R/I26P double mutant of hIAPP (DM). This peptide did not form amyloid
during the time course of the experiments, as demonstrated by a flat
thioflavin-T fluorescence curve and by TEM (Figure ). DM was more soluble at neutral pH than PM, even though
this peptide has only one proline substitution, while PM has three
(Figure ). The absorbances of the soluble
fractions of 1 mM, 500 μM, and 100 μM samples of DM measured
after incubation for 1 week were 1.2 for the 1 mM sample,
0.67 for the 500 μM sample, and 0.10 for the 100 μM sample.

DM does
not form amyloid, even after incubation for 140 h. (A)
Thioflavin-T fluorescence assays. The kinetic experiment was conducted
in 20 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.4), without stirring at 25 °C. The concentration
of DM was 160 μM. (B) TEM image of a sample collected at the
end of the experiments shown in panel A. The scale bar is 100 nm.

Comparison of the apparent solubilities of samples
of TM-a, TM-b,
PM, and DM prepared at different initial concentrations. The apparent
solubility of the peptides in PBS buffer at pH 7.4 is represented
by the absorbance at 280 nm and was measured after 7 days: black for
TM-a, red for TM-b, green for PM, and yellow for DM. The absorbance
was measured after centrifugation at 24 °C for 20 min at 1.75
× 104g.

Designed Analogues Are More Soluble Than Pramlintide in the
Presence of Insulin
We examined a subset of the analogues
in the presence of insulin to test if they are more soluble than PM
when insulin is present. We chose TM-a and DM for comparison to PM,
because TM-a and DM differ from each other only at position 24, which
is a proline in TM-a. Comparison of the two analogues, thus, tests
if multiple Pro substitutions are required for increased solubility
in the presence of insulin. The three polypeptides were individually
incubated with equimolar insulin at an initial concentration of 500
μM in PBS buffer containing 10 mM PO43–, 137 mM NaCl, and 2.7 mM KCl at pH 7.4, and the amount of
each IAPP analogue remaining in solution after 24 h was analyzed.
Samples were centrifuged and aliquots of the supernatant
analyzed by LC–MS. Insulin could be separated from the analogues
by LC (), allowing quantification of the amount
of each IAPP analogue remaining in solution. The amount of PM in the
soluble fraction was notably reduced after 24 h, with more than 37%
of the material having been lost, as judged by
the absorbance at 280 nm, or by the extracted ion chromatography (EIC)
peak intensity ().
The two designed analogues
were more soluble than PM in the presence of insulin, and considerably
less material was lost to the insoluble fraction (&lt;15% for TM-a
and &lt;17% for DM). Any difference between the two designed analogues
was modest, as judged by the absorbance of the samples, indicating
that a single, strategically placed, proline together with a charge
substitution is capable of generating an analogue that has improved
solubility in the presence of insulin.

Conclusions
We
have developed a simple strategy for designing nonamyloidgenic,
nontoxic analogues of hIAPP with solubility at neutral
pH significantly better than that of PM. The strategy includes a minimum
combination of mutations that increases the net charge of the peptide
with single or multiple proline substitutions. Our results demonstrate
that the approach is not limited to a specific site and there is no
strict requirement for the number of proline substitutions. In this
case, we have localized the proline substitutions within the region
of residues 20–29; however, it is known that multiple proline
substitutions outside this segment can reduce amyloidogenicity, and
thus, the approach may be even more general. It is likely that N-methylated amino acids could also be used, because
they, like proline, are
β-sheet breakers., Nongenetically encoded
amino acids such as ornithine could likely be used instead
of Lys or Arg. Of course using just the genetically encoded amino
acids facilities peptide production by recombinant means. Analogues
such as the ones described here, and next-generation variants, are
potential adjuncts to insulin therapy that will allow coformulation
with insulin.

Supporting Information Available
LC chromatographs
from LC–MS measurements of
mixtures of insulin with PM, TM-a, and DM recorded for freshly dissolved
(control, time zero) samples and for samples that were incubated for
24 h with insulin; plots showing the normalized integrated intensity
of the extracted ion chromatography peak intensity of PM, TM-a, and
DM for freshly dissolved (control, time zero) samples and samples
that were incubated for 24 h with insulin; and plots showing the normalized
integrated absorbance
at 280 nm of PM, TM-a, and DM for freshly dissolved (control, time
zero) samples and samples that were incubated for 24 with insulin.
This material is available free of charge via the Internet at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bi500592p_si_001.pdf

This work was supported by National Institutes of
Health Grant GM078114 to D.P.R.

The authors
declare a competing financial interest. A patent for the design and
application of soluble IAPP analogues has been submitted.

Acknowledgments
We thank Dr. Ping Cao
for assistance with the toxicity assays.
We thank Mr. Tyler Wilkinson for assistance with peptide synthesis
and purification.

Abbreviations
CDcircular dichroism

DMH18R/I26P double
mutant

EICextracted
ion chromatograms

FBSfetal bovine serum

Fmoc9-fluorenylmethoxycarbonyl

HFIPhexafluoroisoproponal

hIAPPhuman islet amyloid
polypeptide

INS-1rat insulinoma-1

LC–MSliquid chromatography–mass spectrometry

PAL-PEG5-(4′-Fmoc-aminomethyl-3′,5-dimethoxyphenol)
valeric acid

PMpramlintide

QMH18R/Ala-25/Ser-28/Ser-29 quadruple
mutant

rIAPPrat
IAPP

RP-HPLCreverse-phase
high-performance liquid chromatography

TEMtransmission electron microscopy

TM-aH18R/G24P/I26P triple
mutant

TM-bS20R/G24P/I26P
triple mutant.

