The protective
antigen (PA)
component of anthrax toxin binds receptors on mammalian cells and
is proteolytically processed into a 63 kDa fragment that homo-oligomerizes
to form ring-shaped heptamers and octamers called prepores.− The PA63 prepore recruits the toxin’s enzymatic moieties,
edema factor (EF) and lethal factor (LF), and upon reaching an intracellular
compartment converts into a membrane-spanning pore that translocates
the enzymes to the cell cytosol.−

The conversion from prepore to pore is a coordinated
process that
is inititated by acidic conditions and involves large structural rearrangements
within the toxin–receptor complex.− Studies have revealed that each PA63 monomer of the
prepore binds a receptor through two domains. Interaction of PA domain
4 with the receptor is retained throughout the conversion process,
whereas domain 2 contacts are lost.,, Loss of the receptor–domain 2 contacts allows
a loop to disengage the core of domain 2 and assemble into a β-barrel
that projects below the ring-shaped cap of the prepore and embeds
in the endosomal membrane.,, The seven loops from a heptamer, or eight loops from an octamer,
would have to insert in a concerted manner so that hydrogen bonding
requirements of the β-hairpin loops could be satisfied within
the hydrophobic membrane environment; the low-pH trigger may facilitate
productive insertion events by providing signals simultaneously to
each monomer of the prepore.

The pH threshold at which the prepore
to pore conversion occurs
depends on the receptor to which the prepore is bound. The anthrax
toxin receptor 1 (ANTXR1)-bound prepore converts to a pore when it
reaches a pH 6 compartment, whereas the ANTXR2-bound prepore undergoes
this transition in a pH 5 compartment., The distinct
pH thresholds result from differences in the strengths of the PA63–receptor
contacts that must be disrupted for pore formation to occur.,

ANTXR1 and ANTXR2 are type I membrane proteins that bind PA
through
an extracellular I domain., The sequences of the
I domains of the receptors are ∼60% identical and contain metal
ion-dependent adhesion site (MIDAS) residues that bind a divalent
cation., An acidic residue from domain 4 of PA binds
the cation directly, which is a type of interaction that also occurs
between integrin I domains and their natural ligands, components of
the extracellular matrix. This interaction
is not, however, responsible for the receptor-specific pH thresholds;
homology scanning mutagenesis identified receptor residues that contact
domain 2 as being primarily responsible for influencing the pH threshold. These receptor residues of ANTXR2 form a pocket
that makes contact with a PA domain 2 loop (amino acids 340–348)
that is thought to shift during pore formation to allow the assembly
of the β-barrel., Thus, interactions between the
prepore and the receptors restrict pore formation until a suitably
acidic compartment has been accessed. A low pH is required to unfold
the enzymatic moieties and to provide the force that drives translocation.−

Here we have mutated residue G342 of PA, which is at the tip
of
the loop that inserts into the ANTXR2 pocket, and have found that
an alanine substitution increased the pH threshold of pore formation
for the ANTXR2-bound prepore. Mixtures of PA and PA-G342A were toxic
to cells, suggesting that hetero-oligomers consisting of PA63 monomers
with distinct pH thresholds are able to form pores and that intermonomer
interactions may coordinate the assembly of the membrane-inserted
β-barrel.

Materials and Methods
ANTXR Constructs
The coding sequence of ANTXR1-sv1-HA
was subcloned from pcDNA3-ANTXR1-sv1-HA into pLJM1 (Addgene plasmid 19319).
The existing EcoRI site in ANTXR1-sv1 was silently abolished using
QuikChange site-directed mutagenesis (Stratagene). Polymerase chain
reaction (PCR) was used to amplify the coding sequence and insert
an AgeI site 5′ to the Kozak sequence and an EcoRI site 3′
to the stop codon after the HA tag DNA sequence. The AgeI- and EcoRI-digested
PCR fragment was ligated into the AgeI- and EcoRI-digested pLJM1 vector.
The resultant pLJM1-ANTXR1-sv1-HA sequence was confirmed by DNA sequencing.

Similarly, the ANTXR2-sv2-HA coding sequence was subcloned from
pcDNA3-ANTXR2-sv2-HA into pLJM1. AgeI
and EcoRI sites flanking the Kozak sequence followed by the ANTXR2-sv2-HA
coding sequences were added via PCR amplification. The AgeI- and EcoRI-digested
PCR fragment was ligated into the AgeI- and EcoRI-digested pLJM1 vector,
and the resultant pLJM1-ANTXR2-sv2-HA sequence was confirmed by DNA
sequencing.

Stable Cell Lines
ANTXR1-HA and
ANTXR2-HA were stably
introduced into anthrax receptor-negative CHOR1.1 cells via transduction with lentiviral particles.
Viral particles were produced by transfecting HEK 293T cells with
2.5 μg of pLJM1-ANTXR1-sv1-HA or pLJM1-ANTXR2-sv2-HA, 1.75 μg
of psPAX2 (Addgene plasmid 12260), and 0.87 μg of pMD2.G (Addgene
plasmid 12259) with 16 μg of polyethylenimine. Viral particle-containing
medium was collected 20 h post-transfection and filtered through a
0.45 μm pore, and 2 mL was added to CHOR1.1 cells (80% confluent
10 cm culture dish). Cells were subjected to selective media (10 μg/mL
puromycin) 24 h postinfection, and stable expression of carboxy-terminal
HA-tagged ANTXR1 and ANTXR2 was assayed via Western blotting using
a polyclonal anti-HA antibody (Santa Cruz Biotechnology). CHOR1.1-ANTXR1-HA
and CHOR1.1-ANTXR2-HA were maintained in selective media.

Transient Transfections
Receptor-negative CHOR1.1 cells
were maintained in Ham’s F12 medium supplemented with 10% fetal
bovine serum and kept at 37 °C and 5% CO2. The cells
were plated at a density of 1 × 106 cells/10 cm dish
20 h prior to transfection. Cells were transiently transfected with
5 μg of plasmid encoding a C-terminally HA-tagged ANTXR1 or
ANTXR2 and 25 μg of polyethylenimine.

Cytotoxicity Assay
CHOR1.1-ANTXR1-HA and CHOR1.1-ANTXR2-HA
stable cell lines were plated at a density of 1 × 104 cells/well in 96-well plates 24 h prior to treatment. LFNDTA (a fusion between the PA-binding domain of anthrax lethal factor
and the catalytic domain of diphtheria toxin), PA, and PA-G342 mutants
were expressed and purified as described previously. Cells were then treated with a mixture of PA or PA-G342
mutants (1 × 10–11 to 1 × 10–7 M) and 1 × 10–9 M LFNDTA in Ham’s
F12 medium (supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum) and incubated
at 37 °C in 5% CO2 for 24 h in the presence or absence
of 10 mM NH4Cl. Cell viability was determined using the
CellTiter 96 AQueous Non-Radioactive Cell Proliferation
Assay (Promega). Following the manufacturer’s instructions,
20 μL of prepared reagent was added to the existing 100 μL
of cell medium, and the cells were incubated for 3 h at 37 °C
and 5% CO2. The absorbance at 490 nm was then recorded.
The values were corrected for background (no cells present) and normalized
to toxin-untreated controls for each respective stable cell line.
For each experiment, the conditions were assayed in triplicate and
the mean was determined. The average of the means of three independent
experiments ± the standard error of the mean (SEM) was then plotted
using GraphPad Prism version 4.

In experiments in which various
molar ratios of PA-G342A and wild-type PA were used to form hetero-oligomers,
the concentration of total PA (i.e., PA-G342A + PA) was kept constant
at 1 × 10–7 M. All other conditions were identical
to those described above.

PA Binding Assay
CHOR1.1 cells stably
expressing ANTXR1-HA
or ANTXR2-HA were grown to ∼80% confluency and treated with
1 × 10–8 M furin-resistant PA or the PA-G342
mutant for 2 h at 4 °C in Ham’s F12 medium supplemented
with 1% bovine serum albumin and buffered with 20 mM 2-[4-(2-hydroxyethyl)piperazin-1-yl]ethanesulfonic
acid (HEPES) (pH 8). Cells were washed three times with phosphate-buffered
saline (PBS) (pH 7.4) to remove unbound PA and then lysed. Equal amounts
of cell lysates were subjected to sodium dodecyl sulfate–polyacrylamide
gel electrophoresis (SDS–PAGE) and analyzed by Western blotting
using a polyclonal anti-PA antibody raised in rabbits. Blots were
stripped and reprobed with an anti-β-actin antibody (Sigma)
to ensure equal loading. Bands were visualized using chemiluminescence
and a Kodak Image Station 4000MM Pro. The amount of PA and PA-G342
mutant bound to cell surface receptors was determined via densitometry
using Carestream Molecular Imaging Software (Carestream Health Inc.).
Values were corrected for background and normalized to the amount
of PA bound to each cell type. The mean of three independent experiments
± SEM was determined and plotted using GraphPad Prism version
4.

Cell Surface SDS-Resistant Pore Formation Assay
Receptor-negative
CHOR1.1 cells were transiently transfected with a plasmid encoding
either ANTXR1-HA or ANTXR2-HA. The transfected cells were then treated
with 1 × 10–8 M PA in Ham’s F12 medium
supplemented with 20 mM HEPES (pH 8.0) and 1% bovine serum albumin
for 2 h at 4 °C while being gently rocked. Cells were then rinsed
three times with PBS (pH 7.4), and cell surface SDS-resistant pore
formation was induced by pulsing the cells for 3 min at 37 °C
and 5% CO2 with prewarmed pH-adjusted PBS solutions: 50
mM Tris at pH 6.8, 50 mM Tris at pH 6.5, 50 mM MES at pH 6.0, 50 mM
MES at pH 5.6, 50 mM MES at pH 5.4, and 50 mM sodium acetate at pH
5.0. Cell lysates were then analyzed by Western blotting for the presence
of SDS-resistant pores using a rabbit polyclonal anti-PA antibody.
Blots were reprobed with a mouse monoclonal anti-β-actin antibody
(Sigma) to ensure equal loading.

Results
PA Point Mutations
Selectively Decrease the Extent of ANTXR2-Mediated
Cell Killing
Several substitution mutations of PA residue
G342 were made to improve our understanding of receptor-specific differences
in toxin assembly and function. The PA340–348 loop
fits closely into an ANTXR2 pocket that is in part formed by ANTXR2
residues 152DGLVPS157. These residues are not
conserved in ANTXR1 (154HEDLFF159),,, and by comparison of the ANTXR1
and ANTXR2 I domain structures, it has been suggested that the PA340–348 loop would not make close contact with ANTXR1. These data suggest that mutation of G342 to
larger amino acids would selectively impair binding of PA to ANTXR2,
but not to ANTXR1.

PA residue G342 was mutated to hydrophobic
amino acids alanine, valine, leucine, isoleucine, and tryptophan.
Each mutant was assessed for the ability to deliver LFNDTA (the PA-binding domain of LF fused to the catalytic domain of
diphtheria toxin) into cells expressing either ANTXR1 or ANTXR2. Each
of the mutants intoxicated ANTXR1-expressing cells as effectively
as wild-type PA (Figure A). In contrast, the
mutants were defective in their abilities to intoxicate ANTXR2-expressing
cells, with the exception of PA-G342A, which exhibited activity similar
to that of wild-type PA (Figure B). An inverse
correlation was noted between the size of the side chain and the extent
of death of ANTXR2-expressing cells observed at the highest concentration
of mutant used.

Mutation of PA domain 2 residue G342 results in inefficient
killing
of ANTXR2-expressing cells. Cells expressing (A) ANTXR1-HA or (B)
ANTXR2-HA were exposed to a mixture of PA or PA-G342 mutants (1 ×
10–11 to 1 × 10–7 M) and
LFNDTA (1 × 10–9 M) for 24 h. Each
treatment condition was assayed in triplicate. The amount of cell
death compared to that of the untreated control was then estimated
using a metabolic cell proliferation assay. The average of the means
of three independent experiments was plotted using GraphPad Prism
version 4. The error reported is the standard error of the mean: (■)
WT PA, (▲) PA-G342A, (◆) PA-G342V, (▼) PA-G342L,
(●) PA-G342I, (□) PA-G342W, and (△) PA-ΔG342.

In an attempt to shorten the PA340–348 loop,
we constructed PA-ΔG342 and assayed this mutant in cytoxocity
assays. This mutant was completely defective at intoxicating cells
that expressed either ANTXR1 or ANTXR2 (Figure A,B).

PA-G342 Point Mutations Result in an Increased Level of Binding
to ANTXR1-Expressing Cells
We next measured the binding of
the PA-G342 mutants to ANTXR1- and ANTXR2-expressing cells using the
PASSSR mutant background, which prevents cleavage by furin
to ensure that monovalent interactions were being assessed. Surprisingly,
each of the PA-G342 mutations resulted in an increased level of binding
of PA to ANTXR1-expressing cells, except for the deletion mutation
that did not affect the amount bound (Figure A). The increase in the amount of mutant PA bound to these cells
ranged from ∼2-fold (G342L) to ∼6-fold (G342V). In contrast
to these results, PA-G342A bound ANTXR2-expressing cells at a level
similar to that of wild-type PA, and the remaining mutants exhibited
very low levels of binding (Figure B). These
data are consistent with the notion that binding of PA brings G342
in apposition with ANTXR2, but not with ANTXR1.

Mutation of PA residue
G342 differentially affects binding of PA
to ANTXRs. Cells expressing (A) ANTXR1-HA or (B) ANTXR2-HA were exposed
to furin-resistant PA or PA-G342 mutants for 2 h. Untransfected cells
(UT) served as a negative control. Cell lysates were analyzed by Western
blotting using an α-PA antibody (top). Blots were reanalyzed
using an anti-β-actin antibody to ensure equal loading. Blots
are representative of three independent experiments. The amount of
surface-bound PA was determined via densitometry (bottom). The amount
of PA-G342 mutant bound to ANTXR1 and ANTXR2 was normalized to that
of PA. The mean of three independent experiments and the standard
error of the mean are shown.

The PA-G342A Mutation Increases the pH Required for ANTXR2-Mediated
Intoxication
We next assessed the effects of the G342 mutations
on the pH threshold of the prepore to pore conversion because the
interaction between the PA340–348 loop and the receptors
influences this process., NH4Cl treatment
protects ANTXR2-expressing cells, but not ANTXR1-expressing cells,
from intoxication because NH4Cl increases the pH of intracellular
compartments above the lower pH threshold of ANTXR2-bound prepore
conversion. The G342 substitution mutants
were able to intoxicate ANTXR1-expressing cells in the presence or
absence of NH4Cl (Figure A). Although
the NH4Cl treatment protected ANTXR2-expressing cells from
wild-type PA, it did not confer protection from the G342 substitution
mutants (Figure B). These results suggest
that the increased strength of the interaction between the PA mutants
and ANTXR1 was not sufficient to affect the pH threshold, whereas
the decreased strength between the PA mutants and ANTXR2 increased
the pH threshold.

Ammonium chloride does not protect ANTXR2-expressing cells
from
PA-G342A-mediated intoxication. (A) ANTXR1- or (B) ANTXR2-expressing
cells were exposed to PA or PA-G342 mutants (1 × 10–8 M) and LFNDTA (1 × 10–9 M) for
24 h in the presence (black bars) or absence (white bars) of 10 mM
ammonium chloride. Each experimental condition was assayed in triplicate,
and the amount of cell death was normalized to the toxin-untreated
control. The average of the means of three independent experiments
and the standard error of the mean are shown.

We investigated PA-G342A further because it is the only mutant
that is not defective at binding or intoxicating ANTXR2-expressing
cells yet exhibits an increased pH threshold of prepore to pore conversion.
Cells expressing either ANTXR1 or ANTXR2 were incubated at 4 °C
with wild-type PA or PA-G342A, washed, and then exposed to a buffer
at pH values ranging from 6.8 to 5.0 to induce pore formation on the
cell surface. Pore formation was monitored by Western blotting because
pores remain oligomeric during SDS–PAGE, whereas prepores dissociate
to PA63 monomers. As expected, PA and
PA-G342A formed SDS-resistant pores at pH ≤6.0 when bound to
ANTXR1 (Figure A). ANTXR2-bound PA formed
SDS-resistant pores at pH ∼5.0, but PA-G342A pore formation
was triggered at pH ∼5.6 (Figure B).
Notably, the 0.6 pH unit increase observed here mimics the pH shift
resulting from the mutation of ANTXR2 residues 152–157 to the
corresponding residues of ANTXR1.

PA-G342A mutation
increases the pH required for ANTXR2-mediated
SDS-resistant pore formation. Cells expressing either (A) ANTXR1 or
(B) ANTXR2 were treated with PA or PA-G342A for 2 h. Unbound PA or
PA-G342A was removed, and cells were pulsed in pH-adjusted buffer
for 3 min at 37 °C to induce cell surface pore formation. Cell
lysates were analyzed by Western blotting with an α-PA antibody
and reanalyzed using an anti-β-actin antibody to ensure equal
loading. Blots are representative of three independent experiments.

Mixtures of PA-G342A and
Wild-Type PA Intoxicate Cells
To investigate PA cooperativity
during pore formation, we sought
to determine whether mixtures of PA-G342A and wild-type PA could intoxicate
cells. ANTXR1-expressing cells were killed by the mutant/wild-type
PA mixtures (molar ratios ranging from 1:20 to 10:1) in the presence
and absence of NH4Cl (Figure A).
This was an expected result because the pH threshold for both wild-type
PA and PA-G342A prepores is ∼6, so it follows that hetero-oligomers
would not be inhibited by NH4Cl. The PA mixtures were also
able to intoxicate ANTXR2-expressing cells, but intoxication was increasingly
sensitive to NH4Cl as the mutant:wild-type PA ratio increased
(Figure B). These data suggest that the pH
threshold of membrane insertion of an ANTXR2-bound prepore formed
by wild-type PA and PA-G342A is determined by the ratio of the two
within a hetero-oligomer: neither wild-type PA nor PA-G342A has complete
dominance over the pH threshold.

Ammonium chloride protection in the presence
of PA-G342A/PA hetero-oligomers.
(A) ANTXR1- or (B) ANTXR2-expressing cells were subjected to toxin
mixtures containing various molar ratios of PA-G342A and PA (1:20
to 10:1; 1 × 10–7 M combined total) and LFNDTA (1 × 10–9 M) in the presence (▲)
or absence (■) of ammonium chloride. The level of cell death
was determined after 24 h and normalized to the that of the toxin-untreated
control. Each experimental condition was assayed in triplicate. The
average of the means of three independent experiments and the standard
error of the mean were plotted using GraphPad Prism version 4.

Discussion
The
anthrax toxin pore forms when seven membrane insertion loops
from a PA63 heptamer (or eight loops from an octamer) simultaneously
embed into the lipid bilayer and assemble into a β-barrel. The
coordinated insertion of each loop is required to satisfy the hydrogen
bonding requirements of the β-strands within the bilayer and
is thought to be accomplished by the simultaneous sensing of an acidic
environment by each PA63 monomer–receptor complex. Our findings
now suggest that the loop insertions are not completely independent
events and that mechanisms for coordinating them exist.

We found
one mutation, G342A, that does not adversely affect the
association of PA with ANTXR2-expressing cells yet increases the pH
threshold of toxin insertion closer to that of an ANTXR1-bound prepore.
By allowing hetero-oligomers of wild-type and G342A PA63 monomers
to form from an equimolar mixture of the proteins, we then addressed
whether each monomer within a PA63 oligomer must reach its pH threshold
before a productive insertion event can occur. If the stronger wild-type
PA63–ANTXR2 interaction were completely dominant, then only
1% of prepores (i.e., the mutant homo-oligomers) would form pores
in the presence of NH4Cl. What was observed, however, was
a level of intoxication that was inconsistent with the notion that
a single wild-type PA63 monomer prevents heteropore formation in a
pH ∼6 compartment.

This result suggests that PA63-G342A
monomers induced wild-type
PA63 monomers to insert into the membrane at a pH that is normally
too high to trigger the wild-type prepore. Because ∼6% of the
oligomers would contain one mutant PA63 monomer or no mutant PA63
monomers and NH4Cl treatment led to an ∼15% increase
in cell viability, our results further imply that at least two or
three molecules of PA63-G342A in a hetero-oligomer are required to
induce pore formation at an elevated pH. The disruption of the PA
domain 2–receptor interaction in more than one PA63–receptor
complex may be needed to induce similar rearrangements in neighboring
monomers before a productive insertion event can occur. We note, however,
that we have not demonstrated that the assembly of wild-type and mutant
PA63 monomers occurs in an even ratio and in a purely random manner,
so our estimation of the number of mutant monomers required to exert
dominance in a hetero-oligomer may be inexact.

Mutation of G342
to amino acids larger than alanine weakened the
binding of PA to ANTXR2, either because the side chains do not fit
well into the ANTXR2 pocket or because they interfere with the salt
bridge between PA residue R344 and ANTXR2 residue E122. Interestingly, ANTXR1-expressing cells bound
larger amounts of the G342 substitution mutants than wild-type PA.
A valine residue at this position was optimal among the amino acids
tested, although the increased level of binding of this mutant did
not have a significant impact on the LD50 and did not shift
the pH threshold of pore formation to a degree that caused sensitivity
to NH4Cl treatment. The fact that the larger amino acid
side chains did not interfere with translocation of the enzymatic
cargo through the channel is not surprising because the side chain
of residue 342 projects outward from the β-barrel, rather than
inward to the channel.

PA-ΔG342
was the only mutant that showed no activity in the
cytotoxicity assays despite exhibiting wild-type levels of binding
to ANTXR1-expressing cells, suggesting that the deletion of G342 may
inhibit the assembly of the β-barrel. Conductance experiments
suggest that the channel interior of the pore is lined with amino
acids from a domain 2 β-hairpin; the amino-terminal side of
the β-hairpin extends below the cap of the pore toward the membrane
from amino acid 276 to the tip of the hairpin (amino acids 313–314)
and then back toward the cap to amino acid 351. An alternating pattern of side chain accessibility to the
channel interior, consistent with β-strands, was broken between
residues 282 and 284 on the amino-terminal strand and at residue 341
on the carboxy-terminal strand. Nassi and colleagues suggest that
these β-bulges produce a kink in the β-sheets and may
be important for joining the β-barrel to the cap of the pore. Further experiments are required to understand
how residue 342 contributes to the assembly of the pore.

The authors
declare no
competing financial interest.

