Bacterial
elongation factor
Tu (EF-Tu) is an important component of the multistep ribosomal decoding
pathway that ensures rapid and accurate translation. In its GTP bound
form, EF-Tu preferentially binds the aminoacylated form of each elongator
tRNA (aa-tRNA), and the resulting ternary complex binds ribosomes
with the correct codon–anticodon match at a rate substantially
faster than free aa-tRNA. A cocrystal structure between Escherichia
coli EF-Tu and aminoacyl-tRNA (aa-tRNA) shows an extensive
interface that can be considered to have three parts. First, 16 residues in Domains 1 and 3 of the protein form
hydrogen bonds and ion pairs primarily with the helical backbone of
the acceptor and T-stems of aa-tRNA. Second, 6 residues form a network
of hydrogen bonds with the single-stranded NCCA terminus of aa-tRNA.
Finally, 5 residues form a pocket large enough to accommodate the
20 different side chains of the esterified amino acid. Numerous experiments
with EF-Tu mutants and modified aa-tRNAs have established that, while
all three regions contribute to the affinity of aa-tRNA to EF-Tu,
the relative amount that each region contributes depends strongly
upon the identity of both the tRNA body and its esterified amino acid. For each bacterial tRNA species, the sequence
of three base pairs in the T-stem modulates the protein binding affinity
in a manner that offsets the variable affinity of the esterified amino
acid such that the overall affinity of all aa-tRNAs are nearly uniform., This “thermodynamic compensation” mechanism appears
to be conserved in bacteria and has evolved
to ensure that all cellular aa-tRNAs can compete equally for the common
elongation factor.

When the EF-Tu–aa-tRNA-GTP
ternary complex binds encoded E. coli 70S ribosomes,
a conformation change occurs resulting
in structural changes in both the tRNA and the protein portions of
the complex.− Nevertheless, the structural details of much of the interface are
unchanged compared to the free complex. This includes nearly all the
interactions between EF-Tu and the acceptor and T-stems as well as
the general structure of the amino acid binding pocket. Only the positions
of single-stranded residues C74 and C75 and the associated amino acids
of EF-Tu are significantly changed upon ribosome binding. In addition
to the similar structure of the interface, there is some data indicating
that the thermodynamic properties of the interface between aa-tRNA
and EF-Tu are retained after ribosome binding. Complexes made using
mutations in the T-stem of E. coli tRNAVal that hyperstabilize binding to EF-Tu by differing amounts were found
to bind E. coli ribosomes and hydrolyze GTP normally,
but release from EF-Tu-GDP more slowly than normal and thereby have
correspondingly slower rates of dipeptide bond formation. Thus, the mechanism of thermodynamic compensation
that evolved to ensure uniform aa-tRNA binding to EF-Tu may also be
used to maintain a uniform rate of release from EF-Tu during ribosomal
decoding. The affinity of EF-Tu to aa-tRNA has therefore been optimized
by evolution in response to two opposing selective pressures. It must
be tight enough to initially bind aa-tRNAs but not so tight that it
cannot be disrupted during the ribosomal decoding process.

This
contribution presents an initial characterization of the biochemical
properties of 19 point mutants of E. coli EF-Tu amino
acids that make up much of the interface with aa-tRNA. By measuring
their affinities to two different aa-tRNAs, an overview of how this
protein achieves its affinity and specificity for its substrate is
obtained. In addition, by comparing these data with a similar set
of experiments previously performed with EF-Tu from the distantly
related thermophile, Thermus thermophilus, a detailed thermodynamic comparison of how two
orthologous, but structurally somewhat different proteins bind the
same aa-tRNA. Finally, the activity of these mutant proteins on E. coli ribosomes, shows how the stability of this protein–aa-tRNA
interface has been optimized for translation.

Materials and Methods
EF-Tu
Mutagenesis, Expression, and Purification
The
expression vector pROEX HTb (Invitrogen) contained a TEV protease
cleavage site between the 6x His tag, and E. coli EF-Tu gene was provided by Rachel Green. After TEV cleavage, the N-terminal amino acid sequence of the recombinant
protein becomes GGASK, which differs from the native MSK sequence
by three residues. All 19 EF-Tu mutants were generated using QuikChange
XL site-directed mutagenesis kit (Agilent Technologies). The sequence
of each mutant was confirmed by DNA sequencing, and they were expressed
in BL21-Gold (DE3) cells (Agilent Technologies). Cells were grown in LB media supplemented with 100 μg/mL
ampicillin at 37 °C with continuous shaking. They were induced
after the optical density at 600 nm reached 0.5 using 1 mM IPTG and
harvested after 3 h of induction. For all of the mutations, analysis
of lysates on SDS gels showed an amount of the slightly longer recombinant
protein that exceeded the amount of the abundant native EF-Tu. For
R223A mutant, protein expression levels were at least 3-fold less
than the other mutations.

The method for affinity purification
of the mutant proteins was somewhat altered from the one previously
used in order to minimize aggregation
of EF-Tu and thereby improve TEV cleavage efficiency and avoid contamination
by native EF-Tu. After cell lysis, 6xHis-tagged EF-Tu was bound to
Ni-NTA column in 50 mM HEPES at pH 7.5, 1 M KCl, 10 mM MgCl2, 20% glycerol, 10 mM imidazole, 5 mM β-mercaptoethanol (BME),
100 μM GDP, and 0.5% Tween-20. The proteins were eluted from
the column with 50 mM HEPES pH 7.5, 500 mM KCl, 10 mM MgCl2, 500 mM imidazole, 20% glycerol, 5 mM β-mercaptoethanol, and
100 μM GDP. After elution of the EF-Tu from the Ni-NTA resin,
the His-tag was proteolytically removed from EF-Tu in the elution
buffer by reacting His-tagged TEV with His-tagged EF-Tu at a 1:50
molar ratio for about 20 h at 4 °C. The glycerol in the buffers
minimized aggregation, and the high concentrations
of imidazole and KCl were crucial to improve the accessibility of
TEV protease to the TEV cleavage site and thereby increase the yield
of the cleavage reaction. Following proteolysis, proteins were dialyzed
into elution buffer that lacked imidazole and contained 200 mM KCl.
TEV protease cleaved EF-Tu was separated from uncleaved protein by
passing the protease cleavage reaction again over a Ni-NTA column
and collecting the flow through fraction. The amount of aggregation
of purified EF-Tu mutants was determined using an analytical Superose
6 column (GE Healthcare), and over 80% of the protein was monomeric.
The final purification used a Superdex 75 column equilibrated with
50 mM HEPES pH 7.5, 200 mM KCl, 10 mM MgCl2, 10% glycerol,
5 mM BME, and 100 μM GDP. The proteins were stored in 50 mM
HEPES pH 7.5, 200 mM KCl, 10 mM MgCl2, 50% glycerol, 5
mM dl-Dithiothreitol (DTT), and 100 μM GDP. The concentration
of each mutant protein was determined using the Pierce 660 nm Protein
Assay.

Preparation of RNA
Yeast tRNAPhe was purchased
from Sigma-Aldrich and resuspended and stored in 1× TE buffer. E. coli tRNATyr and the hyperstabilized T1 tRNATyr were prepared by in vitro transcription
from DNA templates prepared by primer extension of two annealed synthetic
oligonucleotides as previously described except that 1 U/μL
RNasin was included in the transcription reaction.,, The transcription reaction products were
purified on a 10% denaturating polyacrylamide gel. After ethanol precipitation,
each transcript was resuspended and stored in 1× TE buffer. tRNAs
were aminoacylated with [3H]-phenylalanine (MP Biomedicals)
or [3H]-tyrosine (PerkinElmer) using Ni-NTA purified yeast
phenylalanyl synthetase or E. coli tyrosyl synthetase. Aminoacylated tRNAs were resuspended and stored
in 5 mM NaOAc buffer at pH 5 after phenol/chloroform extraction and
ethanol precipitation steps.

32P-labeled T1 tRNATyr was prepared to measure rates of dipeptide bond formation
of EF-Tu variants. T1 tRNATyr was labeled with [α-32P]-ATP at the 3′ -CCA
end and aminoacylated with tyrosine using published methods.,

Ribosomes from E. coli MRE600 cells were
purified
as described by Powers and Noller to
be used in GTP hydrolysis and dipeptide bond formation assays. In
order to program ribosomes, tightly coupled 70S ribosomes were heat
activated prior to mRNA and fMet-tRNAfMet addition.,

A chemically synthesized RNA oligomer with the sequence GGC
AAG
GAG GUA AAA AUG UAC GCA CGU (IDT) was resuspended in TE buffer and
used as the mRNA for the GTPase and kpep experiments.

Dissociation Rate Constant (koff) Measurements
One μM of EF-Tu, 0.1–0.4
μM
of [3H]-Phe-tRNAPhe or [3H]-Tyr-tRNATyr, and 10 μM GTP were mixed to form ternary complex
in 50 mM HEPES pH 7, 30 mM KCl, 70 mM NH4Cl, 10 mM MgCl2, 10 μM GTP, 3 mM phosphoenolpyruvate, 50 μg/mL
of pyruvate kinase, and 1 mM DTT. Dissociation rate constants were
measured using ribonuclease protection assay in a 96-well microtiter plate format on ice.,,, For a more
accurate error analysis, koff measurements
were repeated at least three times and the standard deviation is reported
for each mutant.

GTP Hydrolysis Rate Measurement
Ternary complex was
formed by mixing 0.4 μM EF-Tu with 1.2 μM Tyr-tRNATyr or 1.2 μM Tyr-T1 Tyr-tRNATyr, and 50 μM
γ-32P-GTP in 50 mM HEPES pH 7, 30 mM KCl, 70 mM NH4Cl, 10 mM MgCl2, 10 μM GTP, 3 mM phosphoenolpyruvate,
50 μg/mL of pyruvate kinase, and 1 mM DTT according to published
protocols.,,, Heat activated ternary complex solution was passed
through two Bio-Spin 6 columns (BIO-RAD) to remove excess [γ-32P]-GTP. At each specific time point, equal volumes of 0.4
μM ternary complex and 2 μM programmed ribosomes were
mixed and quenched with 40% formic acid using KinTek quench flow instrument
at 20 °C. The hydrolyzed GTP fraction was calculated by analyzing
the samples on TLC plates coated with PEI cellulose. The reaction
rates were calculated by plotting the fraction of GTP hydrolyzed vs
time and fitting the data to a single exponential curve.

Peptide Bond Formation Rate (kpep) Measurement
After heat activation, 2 μM
ribosomes
were combined with 6 μM mRNA and 4 μM fMet-tRNAfMet in order to program ribosomes for kpep measurements. Ternary complex was formed
by mixing 1 μM of GTP bound EF-Tu with 40 nM of [3′ 32P]-Tyr-T1 tRNATyr. The slow kinetics of Tyr-T1
tRNATyr allowed us to perform the experiments on benchtop
in a 96-well microtiter plate at room temperature. For each time point,
4 μL of ternary complex was reacted with 4 μL of programmed
ribosomes complex in 50 mM HEPES pH 7, 30 mM KCl, 70 mM NH4Cl, 10 mM MgCl2, 10 μM GTP, 3 mM phosphoenolpyruvate,
50 μg/mL of pyruvate kinase, and 1 mM DTT, and the reaction
was quenched using 24 μL of 5 mM NaOAc at pH 5 and 100 μM
EDTA buffer. The products were digested using Nuclease P-1 from Penicillium citrinum (Sigma-Aldrich) and separated on Flexible
TLC Plates coated with PEI-cellulose (Sigma-Aldrich) in 70% isopropanol
and 1.5 M HCl. The kpep was determined
from the slope of the fraction of dipeptide produced vs time plot
that was fitted to a single exponential equation.,, The kpep values
for each mutant were repeated at least three times, and the standard
deviation was calculated.

Results
Purification
and aa-tRNA Binding Properties of Mutant E. coli EF-Tu
Proteins
The crystal structure of E. coli EF-Tu GTP bound to yeast Phe-tRNAPhe (pdb 1OB2) was used to choose
19 residues along the protein–RNA interface that were close
enough to potentially alter the binding affinity to aa-tRNA. The mutated
residues and the closest tRNA functional groups are highlighted in
a diagram of the interface in Figure . All
of the mutated residues are highly conserved among bacterial EF-Tus. In every case, the native amino acid was mutated
to a smaller side chain (usually alanine), thereby removing the potential
stabilizing contact without introducing steric clash. A few of these E. coli EF-Tu mutant proteins had been biochemically characterized
previously− and the aa-tRNA binding properties of many of the orthologous mutations
in T. thermophilus EF-Tu have been determined.

Diagram of the interface between E. coli EF-Tu
and yeast Phe-tRNAPhe. All main chain and side chain residues
of EF-Tu within 5 Å of the aa-tRNA in the X-ray crystal structure
are shown (pdb 1OB2). Dotted lines indicate the closest functional groups that could
potentially form stabilizing interactions. The residues marked in
red were mutated in this study.

All 19 mutations were inserted into an expression vector
containing
the EF-Tu gene with an upstream 6x His followed by the TEV protease
cleavage site. As discussed in the , the buffers used in the purification
protocol were altered from those previously used to minimize protein aggregation. The known ability of E. coli EF-Tu to aggregate,, is a particular problem for the isolation of EF-Tu
mutants expressed in E. coli because of the potential
for the abundant untagged endogenous cellular protein to associate
with the tagged mutant protein and thereby be retained on the Ni-NTA
resin and contaminate the final preparation of mutant protein. To
evaluate the efficacy of our revised protocol, we used it to purify
the H84A mutant protein. Since H84 coordinates the scissile phosphate
in the GTPase reaction,,, its mutation reduces its GTPase activity by many orders of magnitude.,− As others have found,, we observed
that our H84A protein preparation binds GTP and aa-tRNA very similarly
to the wild-type protein, but the complex produces undetectable amounts
of dipeptide product on ribosomes (figure in ). On the basis of the detection limits of the dipeptide
assay, the H84A protein contains less than 1% contaminating wild-type
protein, thereby validating our revised purification protocol.

To evaluate how well the mutant EF-Tu proteins bound aa-tRNA, 1
μM of each protein was activated with GTP, mixed with 0.1–0.2
μM yeast Phe-tRNAPhe, and the dissociation rate measured
using a ribonuclease protection assay at 0 °C. The high concentration and excess of protein over aa-tRNA
favors complex formation even if the protein is only partially active
or has a weak KD. For all mutant proteins,
full RNase protection of Phe-tRNAPhe was observed and a koff value determined (Table ). The ΔΔGo of each
mutation compared to the wild-type protein was also calculated using
the value of kon = 0.11 μM–1 s–1 determined previously., Of
the 19 interface mutations tested, one bound EF-Tu somewhat more tightly
than the wild-type protein (ΔΔGo = −0.4 kcal/mol). Six showed little or no effect (ΔΔGo = −0.3 to +0.3 kcal/mol), nine showed
a clear reduction in binding affinity (ΔΔGo = +0.3 to +1.0 kcal/mol), and three had a large effect
on Phe-tRNAPhe affinity (ΔΔGo = &gt;1.0 kcal/mol).

Dissociation Rate
Constants (koff) and Corresponding
Differences in Free Energies (ΔΔGo) with Respect to WT EF-Tu for Complexes
Containing Mutant Proteins and Different aa-tRNAs
 	yeast
Phe-tRNA	E. coli Tyr-tRNA	T1 Tyr-tRNA	
 	koff × 104 (s–1)	ΔΔGo (kcal/mol)	koff × 104 (s–1)	ΔΔGo (kcal/mol)	koff × 104 (s–1)	ΔΔGo (kcal/mol)	
WT	8.7 ± 2.5	0.0 ± 0.2	19 ± 4	0.0 ± 0.2	0.16	0.0	
E54A	5.7 ± 0.9	–0.2 ± 0.2	21 ± 2	0.1 ± 0.1	a	–	
E55A	34 ± 18	0.7 ± 0.3	41 ± 4	0.4 ± 0.1	a	–	
E259A	16 ± 1	0.3 ± 0.2	36 ± 6	0.4 ± 0.1	11 ± 2	2.3 ± 0.1	
E378A	32 ± 11	0.7 ± 0.2	14 ± 2	–0.2 ± 0.1	4.2 ± 1.6	1.8 ± 0.2	
H66A	115 ± 7	1.4 ± 0.2	342 ± 100	1.6 ± 0.2	10 ± 1	2.3 ± 0.2	
K89A	12 ± 4	0.2 ± 0.2	30 ± 8	0.3 ± 0.2	a	–	
N51A	10 ± 1	0.1 ± 0.2	16 ± 2	–0.1 ± 0.1	a	–	
N90A	20 ± 9	0.5 ± 0.3	18 ± 2	–0.0 ± 0.1	a	–	
Q329A	79 ± 19	1.2 ± 0.2	105 ± 27	0.9 ± 0.2	17 ± 7	2.6 ± 0.2	
R58A	24 ± 12	0.6 ± 0.3	39 ± 4	0.4 ± 0.1	a	–	
R223A	4.3 ± 2.1	–0.4 ± 0.3	7.5 ± 1.0	–0.5 ± 0.1	a	–	
R262A	38 ± 3	0.8 ± 0.2	121 ± 45	1.0 ± 0.2	3.5 ± 0.8	1.7 ± 0.1	
R377A	215 ± 35	1.8 ± 0.2	437 ± 140	1.7 ± 0.2	41 ± 5	3.0 ± 0.1	
R283A	23 ± 3	0.5 ± 0.2	58 ± 5	0.6 ± 0.1	a	–	
R288A	39 ± 7	0.8 ± 0.2	223 ± 85	1.3 ± 0.2	a	–	
S219A	11 ± 3	0.1 ± 0.2	25 ± 7	0.2 ± 0.2	a	–	
T320A	47 ± 1	0.9 ± 0.2	74 ± 23	0.7 ± 0.2	5.3 ± 0.8	1.9 ± 0.1	
T338A	20 ± 1	0.5 ± 0.2	21 ± 5	0.1 ± 0.2	a	–	
Y87F	11 ± 3	0.1 ± 0.2	25 ± 1	0.2 ± 0.1	a	–	
koff is determined in 50 mM HEPES pH 7, 30 mM
KCl, 70 mM NH4Cl, 10 mM MgCl2, 10 μM GTP,
3 mM phosphoenolpyruvate,
50 μg/mL of pyruvate kinase, and 1 mM DTT at 0 °C.

Standard deviations are calculated
from at least three independent determinations.

ΔΔGo =
−RT ln(KDwt/KDmut), KD = koff/(1.1 × 105 M–1 s–1)

Estimated value for koff.

a = value too
slow to measure (koff &lt; 2.4 ×
104/s).

The fact
that the majority of the interface mutations caused a
change in the binding affinity supports the notion that the X-ray
crystal structure depicts the interface formed in solution. However,
not all of the mutations lead to a significant ΔΔGo, and there is no clear correlation between
the “quality” of the crystallographic contact and the
value of ΔΔGo. For example,
even though the amino nitrogen of K89 is within 2.9 Å of the
OP1 of G65 of tRNA and thus clearly forms a charged hydrogen bond,
the ΔΔGo of the K89A mutation
is very small. In contrast, a very large ΔΔGo is seen for the E55A mutation although the carboxylate
is more than 6 Å from the nearest tRNA residue. Such inconsistencies
may simply reflect differences between the crystal and solution structures
due to a rearrangement caused by the crystal lattice contacts. Additionally,
the much higher ionic strength used in crystallization compared to
the solution binding experiments could alter the occupancy of ions
essential for protein folding or tRNA binding. However, several other
explanations are possible. Mutation of a contacting amino acid to
alanine not only removes a putative stabilizing contact, but also
introduces a space in the interface that is occupied by one or more
solvent molecules. Thus, the net effect of an alanine mutation on
ΔGo will depend on the identity
of the original amino acid as well as the energetics of sequestering
the solvent molecules. Another potentially important contributor to
ΔGo is any change in the structure
of free EF-Tu that occurs upon aa-tRNA binding. For example, R58 makes
an ion pair with E54 in the free form of EF-Tu (pdb 1EXM) that is disrupted
when it binds the OP1 of G3 of the aa-tRNA. Thus, the ΔΔGo of the R58A
mutation reflects the net free energy change of disrupting both these
interactions. Finally, since a crystal structure of a complex emphasizes
the static features of the interaction characterized by ΔH and not the changes in the dynamics of the two components
characterized by ΔS, it is not always a good
predictor of ΔGo. Indeed, a wide
range of ΔΔGo values and apparent
inconsistencies with the crystal structure of the complex have been
observed when other protein–protein− or protein–nucleic
acid interfaces are “scanned”
with alanine mutations.

In order to evaluate how E.
coli EF-Tu achieves
specificity for other aa-tRNAs, koff values
for each of the 19 mutant EF-Tu proteins bound to E. coli Tyr-tRNATyr were determined (Table ). On the basis of experiments with misacylated tRNAs, it is known
that the tRNATyr body binds EF-Tu about 1.1 kcal/mol weaker
than the tRNAPhe body, so
the two tRNAs are expected to respond differently to the panel of
EF-Tu mutations. The data in Table  show that,
within the accuracy of the measurements, 15 of the interface mutations
have the same values of ΔΔGo for the two tRNAs. However, there are four mutations at two different
interface locations where the ΔΔGo values differ. First, E378A and T338A both have a substantial
(0.5 kcal/mol) effect on Phe-tRNAPhe affinity and almost
no (0 and 0.1 kcal/mol) effect on Tyr-tRNATyr affinity.
Since E378 and T338 both make contacts with the T-stem where most
of the RNA sequence specificity occurs, these data can be understood
by the different T-stem sequences of the two tRNAs. E378 stabilizes
binding to tRNAs by forming a hydrogen bond to the amino group of
guanine at either position of the 51–63 base pair. Since tRNAPhe has a G51-C63 pair
while tRNATyr contains an A51-U63 pair and therefore lacks
an amino group, only tRNAPhe can be destabilized by the
E378A mutation. The hydroxyl group of T338 forms a hydrogen bond with
the 2′ hydroxyl of ribose 65, and this interaction contributes
to the sequence specificity at the 49–65 base pair. Since the
C49-G65 pair present in tRNAPhe contributes about 0.5 kcal/mol
more to binding than the G49-C65 pair present in tRNATyr, the T338A mutation has a much larger
effect on tRNAPhe.

The second region of the interface
where the panel of EF-Tu mutants
appears to respond differently with the two tRNAs involves the adjacent
contacts of R288 and N90 with the 5′ terminal G residue present
in in both tRNAs. The guanidinium group R288 forms an ion pair with
the 5′ terminal phosphate of tRNA, while the amide group of
N90 interacts with the 2′ O of ribose 1 (Figure ). The R288A mutation destabilizes tRNATyr by 1.3
kcal/mol and tRNAPhe by 0.8 kcal/mol. In contrast, the
N90A mutation destabilizes tRNAPhe by 0.5 kcal/mol and
has no effect on tRNATyr binding. While no ternary complex
structure of EF-Tu with tRNATyr is available, a simple
explanation of the data is that the positions of the 5′ ends
of the two tRNAs differ slightly such that tRNATyr only
contacts R288, while tRNAPhe contacts both amino acids.
This could be the result of a small change in the helical pitch resulting
from the two different acceptor T-helix sequences. Alternatively,
the stronger T-stem contacts that form with tRNAPhe could
slightly change the position of the 5′ end of the molecule.

Introducing the T-stem base pairs of tRNAGly, one of
the tightest binding tRNA bodies, into tRNATyr, one of
the weakest tRNA bodies, creates the T1 tRNATyr mutation.
When aminoacylated with the tight-binding amino acid Tyr, the resulting
Tyr-T1 tRNATyr binds exceptionally tightly to E.
coli EF-Tu., Under normal conditions, the dissociation
rate is so slow that it is difficult to obtain accurately. However,
estimates based upon sequence or by extrapolation
from koff values obtained at different
conditions suggest that that the koff for
the Tyr-T1 tRNATyr is from 60- to 120-fold slower than
wild-type Tyr-tRNATyr, corresponding to a ΔΔGo from 2.2 to 2.6 kcal/mol., Since
T1 tRNATyr is such an extreme example of a substrate for
EF-Tu, it was of interest to determine how it bound to the panel of
EF-Tu mutants. In addition, these data help to interpret experiments
that assay the function of T1 tRNATyr on the ribosome discussed
in the next section.

While all 19 EF-Tu mutations were able
to fully protect Tyr-T1
tRNATyr from ribonuclease digestion, 12 of the complexes
were so stable that no significant digestion occurred after 60 min
of incubation, preventing a reliable determination of koff. However, while dissociation rates for the remaining
seven mutants were also quite slow, they were sufficiently fast to
obtain reproducible koff values (Table ). ΔΔGo values
for these mutations are also reported, but since they had to be calculated
using an estimated value for the wild type protein, they are less
reliable than those obtained with Tyr-tRNATyr. A comparison
of the binding properties of the panel of EF-Tu mutants to Tyr-tRNATyr and Tyr-T1 tRNATyr reveals that the two tRNAs
interact with EF-Tu in a very similar manner. Thus, with three exceptions,
the EF-Tu mutations that greatly weaken tRNATyr binding
(ΔΔGo = +0.7 kcal/mol or more)
were found to bind weakly enough to T1 tRNATyr that a koff could be obtained, while the EF-Tu mutations
that have a modest or no effect on tRNATyr binding (ΔΔGo = +0.6 kcal/mol or less) were found to bind
so tightly to T1 tRNATyr that no koff could be obtained. Of the three exceptions, the fact that
E378A substantially weakens T1 tRNATyr and not tRNATyr is expected because the T1 mutation introduces a G51-C63
pair that forms an additional stabilizing contact with E378. The second
exception, R288A, has a large (+1.3 kcal/mol) effect in tRNATyr binding, but is sufficiently smaller to not be detectable with T1
tRNATyr. As discussed above, this reduced contribution
of R288 was also seen for tRNAPhe and may be the result
of a slight change in the position of the 5′ phosphate that
results from the tighter contact in the T-stem. The final exception
is that E259A has a very large effect on binding to T1 tRNATyr but only a modest effect on binding to tRNATyr or tRNAPhe. Taken together, the data indicate that, while this unusually
stable tRNATyr mutation interacts with EF-Tu in a manner
that is generally similar to that of tRNATyr, the additional
binding energy derives not only from a new contact made in the region
of the mutation but also from changes in the strengths of contacts
at distal sites.

Activity of EF-Tu Interface Mutations on E. coli Ribosomes
Although the structure of the
interface between
EF-Tu and aa-tRNA is largely unchanged when the ternary complex binds
ribosomes and undergoes the conformational change that activates GTP
hydrolysis,, it is possible that the energetics
of this thermodynamically tuned interface may in some way participate
in this first phase of the decoding reaction. Thus, it was important
to evaluate whether the interface mutants could affect the rate of
GTP hydrolysis on the ribosome. For an initial screen, ternary complexes
containing Tyr-tRNATyr and [γ-32P] GTP
was prepared for 17 of the mutants and the rate of GTP hydrolysis
measured using ribosomes with fMet-tRNAfMet in the P site.
Several of the mutants were also assayed using Tyr-T1 tRNATyr. Since the experiments used 0.4 μM EF-Tu and a small excess
of aa-tRNA, most of the protein will be in ternary complex for wild
type EF-Tu but significant amounts of free protein will be present
for the weaker binding mutants. The ternary complexes were then mixed
with 1 μM ribosomes, and time points taken to give a rate of
GTP hydrolysis. These reaction conditions are subsaturating for ribosome
binding in order to maximize the sensitivity of the assay for changes
in activity due to the mutations.

GTPase progress curves for
wild-type and four mutant proteins are shown in Figure , and the calculated values of kobs are summarized in Table . With one exception,
all of the mutations show robust GTPase activities with reaction rates
and extents within 2-fold of those of the wild-type protein. Since
the GTPase assays in this screen were only performed under a single
set of reaction conditions, it is not possible to interpret the differences
in rate and extent. For example in Figure , the low reaction extents for the R262A and R288A mutations are
likely to be the result of incomplete formation of complex due to
their weak aa-tRNA binding, while the low extent observed for the
N90A mutation, which binds aa-tRNA normally, may result from incomplete
GTP binding or a partially denatured
protein. Nevertheless, all but one of the mutations are effective
GTPases and therefore do not significantly interfere with the conformational
change and subsequent GTP hydrolysis associated with the decoding
reaction. The five mutations assayed with Tyr-T1-tRNATyr also showed rates of GTP hydrolysis comparable to those of the wild-type
protein.

Time courses of ribosome-catalyzed GTP hydrolysis of ternary complexes
containing Tyr-tRNATyr and the indicated EF-Tu mutations.
Experiments were performed in 50 mM HEPES pH 7, 30 mM KCl, 70 mM NH4Cl, 10 mM MgCl2, 10 μM GTP, 3 mM phosphoenolpyruvate,
50 μg/mL of pyruvate kinase, and 1 mM DTT at 20 °C. Lines
for each mutant indicate the best fit to a single binding equilibrium
adjusted to an extent and a kobs. Values
for all mutants are given in Table 

Rates of GTP Hydrolysis
(kobs) of EF-Tu Mutants at Subsaturating
Encoded Ribosomes
 	Tyr-tRNATyr	T1 Tyr-tRNATyr	
 	kobs (s–1)	kobs (s–1)	
WT	14 ± 4	12 ± 4	
E54A	11 ± 4	–	
E55A	13 ± 2	–	
E259A	14 ± 3	8.0 ± 4.4	
E378A	8.7 ± 4.8	–	
H66A	a	–	
K89A	16 ± 2	7.2 ± 3.4	
N51A	11 ± 5	–	
N90A	21 ± 4	22 ± 3	
Q329A	17 ± 4	–	
R223A	0.8 ± 0.2	–	
R262A	13 ± 5	–	
R283A	12 ± 3	13 ± 4	
R288A	14 ± 2	17 ± 1	
S219A	12 ± 3	–	
T320A	15 ± 4	–	
T338A	9.5 ± 1.6	–	
Y87F	13 ± 2	–	
Experiments are
performed using
1 μM encoded ribosomes in 50 mM HEPES pH 7, 30 mM KCl, 70 mM
NH4Cl, 10 mM MgCl2, 10 μM GTP, 3 mM phosphoenolpyruvate,
50 μg/mL of pyruvate kinase, and 1 mM DTT at 20 °C.

Standard deviations are calculated
from at least three independent determinations.

a = insufficient ternary complex
formed.

R223A is the single
EF-Tu interface mutation that shows a dramatically
reduced rate of GTP hydrolysis. As shown in Figure , while the reaction extent is substantial, its kobs is at least 15-fold slower than that of the wild type
despite the fact that it efficiently forms ternary complex and dissociates
from Tyr-tRNATyr similarly to wild-type protein. While
additional experiments will be required to understand the underlying
reason for this low activity, it is interesting that R223 is the only
interface amino acid that also contacts the ribosome. In the ternary
complex R223 interacts with E259 prior to ribosome binding, whereas
after ribosome binding R223 contacts U368 of 23S rRNA.,, Thus, the most straightforward
explanations for the reduced GTPase of the R223A ternary complex are
that it either binds the ribosome poorly or is unable to maintain
the reoriented conformation needed for GTP hydrolysis.

Since
the second phase of decoding involves disruption of the interface
between EF-Tu and aa-tRNA, accommodation of the aa-tRNA into the A
site, and the subsequent formation of the dipeptide bond, it seemed
possible that EF-Tu interface mutants could alter kpep, the rate of dipeptide bond formation. However, many
experiments− suggest that the observed value of kpep reflects the rate of accommodation, the conformational
change that accompanies the movement of aa-tRNA into the A site, and
not the rates of earlier steps such as release of Pi or release of aa-tRNA from EF-Tu− which are significantly
faster. In support of this, mutations in the T-stem of tRNAVal that dissociate faster from EF-Tu than wild-type tRNAVal had the same values of kpep as that
of wild-type tRNAVal, consistent
with the idea that kpep is limited by
the subsequent slower accommodation step in both cases. Since all
but one of the EF-Tu interface mutants either weaken EF-Tu binding
or have no effect, they would also not be expected to affect kpep. Indeed, kpep values reported for H66A and E378A EF-Tu were found to be identical
to cthose of the wild-type protein, and N90A,
E259A, and H66A have activities comparable to those of wild-type protein
using a polyU directed translation assay.,

In order to compare the thermodynamic properties of the interface
between EF-Tu and aa-tRNA on the ribosome with those of the free complex,
we made use of the T1 tRNATyr mutant, which binds free
EF-Tu at least 60-fold tighter than tRNATyr. Since this
tRNA showed a 57-fold slower kpep, it
was proposed that in this case kpep reflected
release from EF-Tu and not accommodation. Subsequent experiments measuring the release of a fluorescent derivative
of EF-Tu from a hyperstabilized tRNAVal support this proposal. Thus, an EF-Tu interface mutation that destabilized
its interaction with Tyr-T1 tRNATyr during decoding would
be expected to increase its rate of release and thereby show a faster kpep. Similarly, interface mutations that had
little or no effect on binding Tyr-T1 tRNATyr would continue
to show the very slow kpep observed for
wild type EF-Tu. Therefore, by measuring the kpep values of Tyr-T1 tRNATyr for the panel of interface
mutations, a view of the thermodynamic behavior of the ternary complex
during the aa-tRNA release step of decoding can be obtained.

Ternary complexes formed between 1 μM of each of the 19 EF-Tu
interface mutations and 40 nM [3′-32P]Tyr-T1 tRNATyr were mixed with 2 μM ribosomes containing fMet-tRNAfMet in the P site and the rates of formation of dipeptide
determined using a TLC assay. Since kpep is so slow for wild-type EF-Tu, manual pipetting
could be used for time points between 5 and 200 s. As shown for the
wild-type EF-Tu in Figure , a nearly complete
progress curve could be obtained and a kpep calculated of 0.087/s. This value is much slower than the kpep of about 1/s that we typically obtain for
native Tyr-tRNATyr, therefore
indicating that release from EF-Tu is limiting kpep with the hyperstable T1 tRNATyr. Figure  shows several examples of EF-Tu interface mutants
which also show kpep &gt; 0.25/s and thus
are also rate limited by product release. Also shown are several other
EF-Tu mutants that were substantially complete by the 5 s time point
and thus are able to partially or fully suppress the effect of the
hyperstable T1 tRNATyr. Data for 18 of the 19 mutants are
summarized in Table . The R223A mutation did
not give appreciable amounts of dipeptide, consistent with the observation
that it showed very poor GTPase activity.

Time courses of fMet-Tyr
formation using ternary complexes containing
Tyr-T1 tRNATyr and the indicated EF-Tu mutations. Experimentally
determined extents are normalized relative to WT values. Rates are
given in Table 

Rates of fMet-Tyr Formation with EF-Tu
Mutants Complexed with Tyr-T1 tRNATyr
 	peptide bond formation	
 	kpep (s–1)	
WT	0.055 ± 0.026	
K89A	0.015 ± 0.003	
E54A	0.096 ± 0.011	
E55A	0.052 ± 0.016	
E259A	&gt;0.25	
E378A	&gt;0.25	
H66A	0.073 ± 0.008	
N51A	0.045 ± 0.004	
N90A	0.17 ± 0.05	
Q329A	&gt;0.25	
R58A	0.099 ± 0.006	
R223A	0.002 ± 0.001	
R262A	&gt;0.25	
R283A	&gt;0.25	
R288A	&gt;0.25	
R377A	&gt;0.25	
S219A	0.084 ± 0.046	
T320A	&gt;0.25	
T338A	&gt;0.25	
Y87F	0.056 ± 0.034	
Experiments performed in 50 mM HEPES
pH 7, 30 mM KCl, 70 mM NH4Cl, 10 mM MgCl2, 10
μM GTP, 3 mM phosphoenolpyruvate, 50 μg/mL of pyruvate
kinase, and 1 mM DTT at 20 °C.

Standard deviations are calculated
for at least 3 independent determinations.

For the majority of the interface mutants, the kpep data with Tyr-T1 tRNATyr are
very consistent
with the corresponding koff data summarized
in Table . Eight of the mutations which show kpep values slower than 0.25/s and thus appear
to be rate limiting for release from EF-Tu are all mutations that
have little or no effect (ΔΔGo &lt; 0.5 kcal/mol) on aa-tRNA binding and therefore behave similarly
to the wild-type protein on the ribosome. In addition, eight mutations
that show very fast kpep values and thus
suppress the effect of the hyperstable Tyr-T1 tRNATyr are
all proteins that substantially weaken binding to aa-tRNA (ΔΔGo &gt; 0.6 kcal/mol). This striking correlation
between the kpep and koff data for 16 of the EF-Tu mutations suggests that the
thermodynamic “profile” of the interface mutants on
the ribosome after GTP hydrolysis is very similar to the one observed
for the formation of the free ternary complex. A similar correlation
between kpep and koff was observed for a series of tRNAVal mutations
that hyperstabilize binding to EF-Tu to differing extents.

However, there are two clear exceptions
to this correlation between
the kpep and koff data. First, the H66A mutation, which destabilizes binding to Tyr-T1
tRNATyr by more than 2 kcal/mol, is unlike the other eight
strongly destabilizing mutations in that it shows a slow kpep value of 0.073/s similar to that of wild-type EF-Tu.
Since H66 stacks on the esterified amino acid, the H66A mutation is
known to strongly destabilize aa-tRNAs esterified with aromatic amino
acids, so the effect on the koff of Tyr-T1 tRNATyr was expected. However,
the position of H66 is unchanged in the ribosome-bound complex after
GTP hydrolysis, so the stacking interaction would
be expected to still be stabilizing. Furthermore, the H66A mutation
showed a normal kpep value when assayed
with Ala-tRNAAla, indicating
that the mutation does not hinder the ribosome from performing peptide
bond formation in some unknown manner.

A second mutation in
which kpep and koff do not correlate is T338A, which has little
effect on Tyr-tRNATyr binding and binds Tyr-T1 tRNATyr tighter than our limit of measurement. Nevertheless, T338A
shows a fast (&lt;0.25/s) kpep value with
Tyr-T1 tRNATyr, suggesting that the complex on the ribosome
is destabilized sufficiently so that release from EF-Tu is not rate
limiting. Interestingly, in the ternary complex T338 contacts the
T-stem directly and also helps position adjacent amino acids which
form thermodynamically important contacts. However, the position of
T338 is unchanged in the ribosome-bound complex, so it is unclear
why the complex is less stable.

Discussion
The
X-ray crystal structure of the E. coli EF-Tu–GTP-Phe-tRNAPhe complex allowed the identification of alanine mutations
at 13 different positions within the protein–nucleic acid interface
that significantly altered the stability of the complex and 6 that
had little or no effect. Although the many possible ways that a mutation
can affect the observed binding affinity prohibited a straightforward
interpretation the ΔΔGo values
in terms of the crystal structure of the complex, it is clear that
the stability of the complex is the result of interactions that span
the entire interface from the esterified amino acid to the T-loop
53 Å away. Since the formation and disruption of this complex
is essential to the mechanism of ribosomal decoding, this panel of
mutations is a useful tool for understanding several features of this
mechanism.

Thirteen of the aa-tRNA interface mutants in E. coli EF-Tu studied here were previously made at the orthologous
positions
of T. thermophilus EF-Tu, permitting comparison of the aa-tRNA binding properties of the same
mutations in EF-Tus from two distantly related bacteria. Although
the T. thermophilus protein is 13 residues longer
and the two proteins differ in sequence at 105 additional positions, 23 of the 26 interface residues are identical,
including all 13 of the sites of common mutations. Since crystal structures
of yeast Phe-tRNAPhe bound to both proteins are available
(pdb 1OB2 and 1TTT), this aa-tRNA was chosen to make the comparison. The calculated
ΔΔGo value between wild type
and mutant protein at each of the 13 positions in the two systems
are compared in Figure . It is striking that
for 10 of the mutations the ΔΔGo values in the two systems were the same within the error of measurement
despite the many sequence differences between the two proteins and
the fact that one is from a mesophile and the other from a thermophile.
Only three mutations showed significantly different ΔΔGo values in the two systems. The E259A mutation
has a much larger deleterious effect on Phe-tRNAPhe binding
when made in T. thermophilus EF-Tu than when made
in E. coli EF-Tu. In contrast, the R58A and R288A
mutations affect Phe-tRNAPhe binding to the E.
coli EF-Tu much more than when they are introduced into the T. thermophilus protein. Although the crystal structures
of the two complexes reveal several small differences in the positions
of the interface amino acids, it is unlikely that they explain the
differing response to the E259, R58, and R288 mutations as the positions
of these three side chains are very similar in the two structures.
It is interesting that the E. coli E259A and R288A
mutations, which showed different ΔΔGo values than in T. thermophilus, also
showed different ΔΔGo values
when Phe-tRNAPhe and Tyr-tRNATyr were compared.
As is further discussed below, this may reflect a slightly different
mode of aa-tRNA binding that is shared by all EF-Tu proteins. If this
is the case, the thermodynamic properties of binding aa-tRNAs to the
distantly related E. coli and T. thermophilus EF-Tu proteins are nearly identical, suggesting that they are identical
for all bacterial species. This conclusion agrees with our recent
analysis of the T-stem sequences of bacterial tRNAs which concludes
that there is a “code” for the sequence-specific recognition
of tRNA that is the same in all bacteria.

Comparison
of yeast Phe-tRNAPhe binding to mutations
made in E. coli EF-Tu (Table ) with identical mutations made at orthologous sites in T.
thermophilus EF-Tu.E. coli numbering is used. Experiments performed in 50 mM
HEPES pH 7, 30 mM KCl, 70 mM NH4Cl, 10 mM MgCl2, 10 μM GTP, 3 mM phosphoenolpyruvate, 50 μg/mL of pyruvate
kinase, and 1 mM DTT at 0 °C for E. coli EF-Tu.
ΔΔGo values for each mutation
were calculated relative to those of corresponding wild-type proteins
(ΔGo = 10.1 ± 0.3 for E. coli and 9.8 ± 0.2 for T. thermophilus). Since the complex was not stable enough, ΔΔGo value displays the lower limit for T. thermophilus E259A, and the actual value is larger than
1.8.

Since the free energy of binding of different tRNA bodies
to EF-Tu
varies considerably, it could be anticipated that tRNAs would respond
differently to the panel of 19 interface mutations. This expectation
was born out when the ΔΔGo values comparing each mutant to wild type were measured using Phe-tRNAPhe, a tighter binding tRNA, and Tyr-tRNATyr, a
weaker binding tRNA. While 15 of the mutants showed the same ΔΔGo values for the two aa-tRNAs, there were four
“specificity” amino acids where the ΔΔGo values differed between the two tRNAs. Two
of these residues are involved in contacts with the T-stem where the
sequences of the two tRNAs were different. Since tRNA mutagenesis
studies have established that the T-stem sequence defines EF-Tu binding
specificity, it is not surprising that
mutations in the contacting amino acids will differentially effect
binding to the two tRNAs. More interestingly, the other two “specificity”
amino acids participated in contacts at the 5′ end of tRNA
where the sequences of the two tRNAs were identical. Although the
underlying reason for this source of specificity is not yet understood,
it is clear that the two aa-tRNAs tested interact with EF-Tu in a
thermodynamically distinct manner using contacts throughout the interface
and are not limited to the regions where the two tRNA sequences differ.
It seems likely that when the binding of other aa-tRNAs to the panel
of interface mutants are tested, other unique specificity amino acids
will be identified. Indeed, when the panel of interface mutants of T. thermophilus EF-Tu were tested with four different aa-tRNAs,
five “specificity” amino acids were identified, including
the expected residues that contact the T-stem as well as the orthologs
of T320 and R262 which were not identified in this work. Interestingly, the orthologs of R288A and N90A
identified here were not found to be “specificity” amino
acids in the T. thermophilus experiments.

The
protein mutagenesis experiments therefore give a more nuanced
view of how EF-Tu achieves its broad range of binding affinities for
different tRNA bodies than was previously obtained from tRNA mutagenesis
experiments. An analysis of nearly 100 base pair mutations in three
different tRNA backgrounds led to the view that nearly all the variable
affinity was due to the sequence of three or sometimes four base pairs
in the T-stem, while binding to the remainder of the tRNA was essentially
the same for all tRNAs. Although the protein
mutagenesis experiments confirm that the amino acids that contact
the T-stem contribute strongly to the specificity, they also indicate
that other interface amino acids that contribute to the binding affinity
may also contribute to the specificity. Thus, rather than the specificity
being solely due to the interactions in the T-stem, it can also result
from variable thermodynamic contributions of contacts made throughout
the entire interface that occur when the protein contacts the slightly
different geometries of the acceptor and T-helices of the different
tRNAs. In most cases these thermodynamic differences will be the result
of a small change in the relative positions of the atoms in the same
contact. However, it is possible that some tRNAs will actually form
different contacts with the protein. Indeed, although they have not
been thermodynamically analyzed, several of the proposed contacts
present in the cocrystal structure of E. coli Cys-tRNACys with Thermusaquaticus (T. aquaticus) EF-Tu (PDB 1B23) are different from those seen with yeast Phe-tRNAPhe with the same protein (PDB 1OB2). Thus, in order to bind the many different tRNA bodies,
the interface residues of EF-Tu appear to have evolved to be thermodynamically
and possibly structurally “malleable” so that the appropriate
free energy of binding can be achieved.

Although the data were
somewhat limited, ΔΔGo values
for the panel of interface mutations
that compared the stabilizing T1 mutation of E. coli tRNATyr and wild-type tRNATyr revealed several
“specificity” amino acids that contacted the acceptor
stem, well away from the T1 mutation. This indicates that a sequence
change made in one part of tRNA can modify the contribution of contacts
at quite distal sites, suggesting that the thermodynamics of the entire
interface was subtly altered. A similar phenomenon was observed when
the affinities of certain mutations of MS2 coat protein were determined
using a panel of phosphorothioate derivatives of the RNA hairpin binding
site. For several of the mutant proteins,
the effect of substituting a phosphate with a phosphorothioate on
the binding affinity was quite different from what had been measured
with the wild-type protein. Thus, the protein mutation had subtly
altered the strength of contacts elsewhere on protein–nucleic
acid interface.

Two assays were chosen to provide a preliminary
view of how the
interface mutations affect the multistep ribosomal decoding pathway.
The first measured the rate of GTP hydrolysis under conditions where
the ternary complex was at least partially formed, but at subsaturating
concentrations of encoded ribosomes. While the extents of reaction
varied, all but one of the mutations showed a rate of GTP hydrolysis
quite similar to that of wild-type protein. The sole exception (R223A)
can be attributed to weaker binding of the ternary complex to the
ribosome, resulting from disruption of a contact that forms between
them. Thus, the energetics of the interface do not contribute to the
rate-limiting GTPase activation step that precedes GTP hydrolysis. This is consistent with observation that the
structure of the interface just prior to GTP hydrolysis (pdb 2XQD) is nearly the same as its structure in the ternary complex
(pdb 1OB2 and 1TTT). The conformational changes associated with GTPase activation
are known to involve the nearby switch I loop and switch II region
of EF-Tu, and mutation of these residues can substantially reduce
the GTPase activity.,−,−

The second assay to evaluate the interface mutations on the
ribosome
employed a variant of tRNATyr that when bound to wild-type
EF-Tu is so stable that its release from EF-Tu GDP is sufficiently
slow that, unlike normal aa-tRNAs, it limits the rate of peptide bond
formation. Thus, this synthetic system
could evaluate the contribution of each interface residue to the interaction
between aa-tRNA and EF-Tu-GDP on the ribosome by measuring how well
they are able to destabilize the hyperstabilized complex and thereby
restore the rate of peptide bond formation to its normal value. It
was found that the effects on kpep for
all but two of the mutations were completely consistent with their
stabilities in the free ternary complex. Thus, the thermodynamic properties
of the interface between aa-tRNA and EF-Tu in the free ternary complex
largely resemble those on the ribosome when aa-tRNA is released from
EF-Tu after GTP hydrolysis. While this result is consistent with the
observation that the positions of virtually all the interface residues
in the ternary complex remain unchanged after GTP hydrolysis on the
ribosome (pdb 2XQD, 2WRQ, and 2Y14), it is nonetheless
striking considering that both the aa-tRNA and EF-Tu are making multiple
additional contacts with the ribosome that apparently do not change
the energetics of their interface.

The fact that both the structure
and the thermodynamic properties
of the EF-Tu-aa-tRNA interaction are largely unchanged as EF-Tu goes
through its catalytic cycle may be a consequence of the complex evolutionary
pressure that the interface is subjected to. For the formation of
the ternary complex, the interface residues evolved so that they could
interact with each tRNA body in a slightly different manner to give
a characteristic binding affinity that complements the binding affinity
of the cognate esterified amino acid and thereby ensures that the
affinities of all aa-tRNAs are roughly uniform. After the ternary
complex binds the ribosome and GTP is hydrolyzed, tRNA dissociates
from the protein and accommodates into the A site at a rate that exceeds
7/s at 20 °C, a rate that is substantially
faster than the 3/s dissociation rate of EF-Tu from the ribosome under
similar conditions. Although the interface
is substantially weaker, it appears likely that the balance between
the affinities of the tRNA body and the esterified amino acid need
to be maintained to ensure all aa-tRNAs release from the protein with
a rate fast enough so as not to limit the rate of peptide bond formation.
If the relative thermodynamic properties of the release step were
to differ substantially from those of the binding step, certain aa-tRNAs
could potentially show anomalously low incorporation rates. Thus,
the similarity of binding affinities might be a universal mechanism
to adjust incorporation rates of individual amino acid into the proteins.
Indeed, genome-wide analysis of ribosome pausing sites in E. coli revealed little evidence of rate-limiting elongation
kinetics dependent upon aa-tRNA identity.

In the context of the above argument, it is intriguing that
our
screen revealed two mutations, H66A and T338A that affect the binding
and release steps quite differently. H66, which strongly contributes
to the specificity of the esterified amino acid in the binding step,
appears not to contribute to stabilizing the complex prior to release.
In contrast, T338 contributes little to aa-tRNA binding, but appears
to be important in maintaining the stability of the complex after
GTP hydrolysis. These two exceptions may be an indication of an additional
step in either the binding or release pathways. Alternatively they
may be some anomaly of either the type of mutant made or the particular
assays employed in our screen. A more thorough analysis of the enzymatic
properties of these mutant proteins is clearly a priority.

Supporting Information Available
This material
is available
free of charge via the Internet at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bi500533x_si_001.pdf

The authors declare no
competing financial interest.

