Cellular Redox Signaling and Its Impact on Health
The cell signaling that drives all homeostatic and disease processes
involves specific interactions between proteins and low-molecular
weight compounds at precise intra- and extracellular locations. Cell
signaling is dysregulated under numerous pathological conditions,
both genetic and acquired. Because all aspects of healthy cell signaling
are highly specific and precise, researchers were surprised to discover,
over the past few decades, that many essential cellular signaling
processes involve reactive oxygen species (ROS), which had initially
been characterized as agents of rapid, damaging redox chemistry. Progress
toward redox-related therapies is now coming from studies ranging
from analyses of the inheritance of high levels of redox-active compounds
to clinical trials of the effectiveness of applying such compounds
to combat cancer., However, the mechanisms that control
the production and function of cellular ROS remain subjects of much
intense study. Compartmentalization of ROS in the redoxosome (i.e.,
the redox-active endosome) is one important means of controlling cellular
ROS signals and is a main focus of this review. Redoxosomes are signaling
endosomes that form within cells in response to specific extracellular
stimuli. Their formation is closely linked with endocytic machinery
and the coordinated endocytosis of ROS-producing enzymes and signal-specific
proteins from the cell surface. Specific to redoxosomes is the requirement
for ROS production in the interior of the endosome that induces redox-dependent
changes in protein structure on or near the cytoplasmic surface of
the redoxosome. These redox-dependent signals trigger translocation
of cytoplasmic proteins to endosomal receptor complexes that are required
for activation and signal transduction. These pathways are covered
in detail in this review. Newly discovered and less studied areas
of ROS production within the nuclear envelope will also be briefly
reviewed.

What Are ROS?
In the field of redox signaling biology,
and in particular in the field of redoxosomal signaling, only hydrogen
peroxide (H2O2) and superoxide (O2•–, or more simply designated
as O2–) are commonly considered to be
the signaling ROS (Table ). In broader terms,
ROS can include ordinary molecular triplet-state oxygen (O2), hydroxyl radical (OH•), singlet
oxygen (1O2), and ozone (O3). In addition, the term “ROS” has
often been extended to include several nitrogen-containing compounds,
which are also known as reactive nitrogen species, such as nitric
oxide (NO•), nitroxyl anion (NO–), and peroxynitrite (ONOO–); these
nitrogen-containing compounds function in many cell signaling pathways
but have not been demonstrated to participate in redoxosomal signaling.

Redoxosome Signaling Components
protein or molecule	function(s) in redoxosome-mediated signaling	redox-modified?	
NOX1 or -2	transfers electrons from NADPH onto O2, producing
O2– inside the redoxosomal lumen	unknown	
p67phox (NOXA1?)	binds and thereby activates NOX	unknown	
p47phox (NOXO1, Tks4, Tks5?)	“organizes” NOX (necessary for NOX activity)	unknown	
p22phox	binds and thereby activates NOX	unknown	
superoxide (O2–)	anion, free radical ROS; may exit some redoxosomes via anion
channels; dismutates, spontaneously or with the help of SOD, to form
H2O2; may be involved in several redox reactions
that trigger signaling	N/A	
hydrogen peroxide (H2O2)	neutral
(uncharged) ROS, not a free radical; might diffuse
through redoxosomal membranes or be transported by aquaporins; oxidizing
agent, can oxidize specific redox-active cysteine residues to form
sulfenamides, sulfenic acids, or disulfides	N/A	
ClC-3 and IClswell	anion
channels, may allow controlled diffusion of O2– out of the redoxosomal lumen in specific signal
transduction pathways; may control charge and pH gradients at redoxosomal
membranes	unknown	
interleukin 1-β (IL-1β)	cytokine, initiates redoxosomal signaling, eventually
activates
NF-κB signaling pathway	unknown	
tumor necrosis factor α (TNFα)	cytokine, initiates redoxosomal signaling,
eventually activates
the NF-κB and/or ATF-1 signaling pathway	unknown	
interferon γ (IFNγ)	cytokine, might activate some redoxosomal
signaling pathways	unknown	
cholesterol	structure of lipid raft; essential for
NOX2 activation in phagosomes
and likely essential in redoxosomes; may bind acylated tails of Src
family proteins	unknown	
sphingolipids	structure of lipid raft; may hold membrane leaflets together	unknown	
caveolin	coats
the cytoplasmic face of a lipid raft prior to endocytosis	unknown	
dynamin	pinches vesicle
neck to form nascent endosome; usually but
perhaps not always involved in all redoxosome formation	unknown	
early endosome antigen 1 (EEA1)	marker of early endosomes;
function in redoxosome signaling
unclear	unknown	
Rab5	biogenesis and trafficking of endosomes; as a GTPase, might
be involved in the regulation of Rac activity	unknown	
IL-1R	dimer of IL-1R1 and IL-1RAcP; serves as a receptor for IL-1β	unknown	
rho guanine nucleotide dissociation inhibitor (RhoGDI)	sequesters the prenylated tail of Rac, thereby preventing Rac
from translocating to membranes; keeps Rac in the cytosol; after IL-1R
binds IL-1β, RhoGDI becomes phosphorylated by unknown means,
releasing Rac	unknown	
Rac1
or -2	as a GTPase, dephosphorylates GTP to GDP, stopping
NOX activity;
when bound to GTP, actively turns on NOX activity	yes	
Vav1 (or Vav2?)	guanine exchange factor
(GEF), exchanges GTP for GDP on Rac;
is recruited to lipid rafts, function at rafts unclear	unknown	
c-Src	activates redoxosomal
signaling, mechanism(s) unknown; may
phosphorylate Vav1 or -2	probably	
MyD88	adaptor, links
IL-1R to downstream IKK kinases	unknown	
protein tyrosine phosphatases (PTPs)	can activate c-Src; direct evidence
of the participation of PTP in redoxosomal signaling remains elusive	yes	
superoxide dismutase 1 (SOD1;
Cu,Zn SOD)	dismutates O2– to H2O2; binds Rac, preventing conversion
of Rac from the GTP-
to GDP-bound form; by binding Rac, keeps NOX active	unknown	
TRAF6	recruited to
IL-1R, activates downstream IKK kinase proteins	probably	
IRAK	recruited to IL-1R, activates
downstream IKK kinase proteins	unknown	
TNFR1	receptor for TNFα	unknown	
TRAF2	recruited to TNFR1, activating
downstream IKK kinase proteins	probably	
TRADD/RIP	recruited to TNFR1, activating downstream
IKK kinase proteins	unknown	
alsin	GEF activity, might act as a GEF on Rac1 or Rab5;
implicated
in ALS; affects ROS levels at the redoxosomal level in glia	unknown	
angiotensin II	activates Rac1/NOX2-active redoxosomes
in cardiac myocytes	unlikely	
Signal Transduction by ROS
Homeostatic
signal transduction
by ROS requires that a physiological trigger induce the production
of a particular ROS molecule, in the right quantities and at the right
cellular location, and that this ROS react with a very specific target.
Furthermore, the signal must be terminated or reversed at the appropriate
time and location. Such control is achieved by the interactions of
many activator and inhibitor proteins, often within membrane-bound
organelles. The reaction of one O2– molecule
with another (dismutation) to form H2O2 is vital
in most of the well-described signaling pathways, because it is often
H2O2 (rather than O2–) that transduces the signal, by oxidizing a specific amino acid
(usually cysteine) at a certain site within a specific protein.

Specific Signaling Functions of ROS: Many Signaling Proteins
Are ROS Targets
Among the many redox-modifiable proteins
that contribute to cellular signaling are receptors, kinases, phosphatases,
transcription factors, and peroxiredoxins.− These proteins contain redox-active
cysteines or methionines whose oxidation by ROS affects their signaling
activity either positively or negatively. Two of the major families
of redox-modifiable proteins are the kinases of the Src family and
the protein tyrosine phosphatases (PTPs); both are discussed below
(see also Table ). Although a number of specific
cysteine and methionine residues on various proteins have been identified
as participants in redox signaling, their counterparts on many other
proteins known to be vital to redox signaling remain unidentified.

PTP Redox Modifications
One notable example of redox
signaling is the inhibition of PTPs by H2O2.
The mammalian genome encodes approximately 100 PTPs. These proteins contain a catalytic site that features a
redox-active cysteine with an unusually low pKa (&lt;6.0), whose oxidation by H2O2 produces
the sulfenic acid (RS-OH) form of cysteine. In the presence of either
a low-molecular weight thiol such as cysteine or glutathione or a
neighboring cysteine residue within the same PTP protein, this sulfenic
acid can be further oxidized to the disulfide (RS-SR′) form., Once the PTP active site contains a disulfide, it can be reduced
back to the original free thiol form by a specific thiol-reducing
protein, such as peroxiredoxin, thioredoxin, or glutaredoxin (all
of which also have redox-active cysteines that interact with additional
redox-active, cysteine-containing enzymes). Another oxidative reaction
in which the active-site cysteine residue of PTP participates is the
formation of a sulfenamide bond, between the sulfur atom of the catalytic
cysteine and the amide nitrogen atom of a neighboring serine residue. Like sulfenic acid and disulfide modifications,
sulfenamide bonds in PTPs are reversible. However, reversal requires
a reduction reaction, and until this occurs, the oxidized (sulfenamide-,
sulfenic acid-, or disulfide-containing) PTP is inactive as a phosphatase.
This redox-mediated inactivation is crucial in signaling because each
of the numerous PTPs has very specific targets, and when any one PTP is inactivated, every one of its downstream
signaling molecules is affected. As one specific example, analysis
of insulin signaling has shown that in a cell that is not being stimulated
by insulin PTP1B actively blocks intracellular insulin signaling pathways,
whereas when insulin binds at the cell surface, H2O2 is immediately produced, PTP1B is oxidatively inactivated,
and insulin signaling is initiated., Similarly,
a study of growth factor signaling (which also is associated with
elevations in levels of ROS and inactivation of PTPs) demonstrated
that PTP cysteines were oxidized by H2O2 (and
not O2–).

c-Src Redox Modifications
In addition to the PTPs,
c-Src and the Src family of protein tyrosine kinases are redox-sensitive
and important members of redox signaling pathways. Src-regulated redox pathways include those that are active
in endosomes, and, in particular, redoxosomes, as described below.
The mechanism whereby Src contributes to redox signaling is not entirely
understood but appears to involve multiple layers of redox control
(see Table ). Oxidation of certain cysteines
within c-Src itself may have distinct results depending on the residues
affected. On one hand, H2O2-mediated oxidation
of C245 and C487 (according to the numbering of the chicken sequence)
may lead to the formation of an intramolecular disulfide bond and
c-Src activation. By contrast, H2O2-mediated oxidation of C277 may result in the
formation of an intermolecular disulfide bridge with C277 of a second
c-Src molecule, producing an inactive homodimer. It has also been suggested that the formation of a disulfide
bond between c-Src and vascular endothelial growth factor receptor
may activate c-Src. The mechanisms underlying
the seemingly contradictory consequences of H2O2-mediated disulfide formation for c-Src activity depending on the
affected cysteine residues have yet to be elucidated. One partial
explanation may involve unique binding partners of c-Src that alter
its conformation and subcellular localization, thus influencing the
cysteines in c-Src that are exposed to H2O2.
However, specific c-Src partners that might mediate such effects remain
unidentified., A second point that may bear
on the outcome of redox signaling through c-Src is that c-Src is also
known to be directly and indirectly influenced by the PTPs and their
oxidation status,, as described below. Most studies
of c-Src oxidation have revealed H2O2 to be
the relevant oxidizing agent. However, in some tumor cells, O2– instead appears to play the major role, even though it (but not H2O2) can act as a reducing agent. The chemical
mechanism underlying this difference has not been determined.

CSK: Possible
Layers of Redox Control
Notably, the
terminology for c-Src in the literature can lead to some confusion.
Because c-Src is a tyrosine kinase, it has frequently been called
both “tyrosine kinase Src” and “Src tyrosine
kinase”., However, c-Src is not to be confused
with a different protein, “tyrosine protein kinase CSK”,
which is more commonly termed simply CSK (for “c-Src kinase”).
The primary known function of CSK is to phosphorylate c-Src at a specific
tyrosine residue in the C-terminal tail and thereby inactivate c-Src.
Interestingly, like c-Src, CSK is regulated by PTPs. Thus, c-Src may be redox-regulated at numerous levels.

Adding to the confusion over the terminology is the fact that a great
deal of the research on c-Src has been based on the proteins from
two organisms: mouse and chicken. These proteins, of course, have
slightly different amino acid sequences, and the numbering of the
relevant cysteines and tyrosines varies somewhat among species. Thus,
although very important findings have been made using the two protein
sequences, it is important to be aware of the different terminologies
when following these advances.

Redox Signaling Enzymes That Produce ROS
Mammalian
cells express a great number of enzymes that produce
either O2– or H2O2. Among these are the protein complexes of the mitochondrial transport
chain, xanthine oxidase, cytochrome P450 proteins, cyclooxygenases,
NADPH oxidases (NOXes), lipoxygenases, nitric oxide synthases, and
others. Many of these enzymes are implicated in subcellular redox
signaling at specific membrane-bound organelles. However, we will
focus primarily on NOXes because they are the only ROS-producing enzymes
for which an association with redoxosomes and the nuclear envelope
has been demonstrated.

NADPH Oxidases
The NOX family of
ROS-producing enzymes
includes transmembrane proteins NOX1, NOX2, NOX3, NOX4, NOX5, Duox1,
and Duox2. NOX2 was the first of these to be described and was first
discovered in a nonsignaling role. That is, this enzyme (also known
as gp91phox) produces O2– during
the microbicidal respiratory (oxidative) burst of neutrophils. NOX2
utilizes reduced nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate (NADPH)
as its substrate. It transfers an electron from NADPH on the cytosolic
side of a phagosomal membrane, via two hemes, to O2 on
the lumenal side of the membrane and thus releases O2– directly into the phagosome. Downstream derivatives
of the O2– then kill microbes. In unmodified
form, NOX2 has a molecular mass of ∼65 kDa, but once it is
glycosylated, it weighs 91 kDa (hence, the name gp91phox, where “phox” stands for “phagocyte oxidase”). The microbicidal activity of NOX2 in phagosomes
depends on several binding partners, namely, p22phox, p47phox, p40phox, p67phox, and Rac2. In
nonphagocytic cells, NOX2 produces O2– during nonmicrobicidal signaling activity by interacting with almost
all of these binding partners, the exceptions being that Rac2 is replaced
by Rac1, which is expressed in most cell types (Table ), and that p40phox is primarily found in phagocytes.
Except for the transmembrane protein p22phox, these binding
partners are cytosolic and interact with the cytoskeleton, a very
dynamic structure that controls their subcellular localization. Schematic diagrams of p22phox have
frequently been drawn with only two transmembrane helices, but this
view may be incorrect. Recently, in silico modeling
suggested that the most stable form of p22phox has three
transmembrane helices. According to this
new model, when p22phox is at the plasma membrane, its
N-terminus is extracellular and its C-terminus is intracellular. As for NOX2 itself, it has six transmembrane
domains with both N- and C-termini in the cytoplasm.

NOX1 was identified after NOX2, and shortly thereafter
NOX3, -4, and -5 as well as Duox1 and 2 were discovered (see ref () and references cited therein).
All seven of these proteins have several shared features: six transmembrane
domains (minimally), two hemes, one FAD-binding domain, and one NADPH-binding
domain. They all transfer electrons from NADPH to O2 across
a membrane, producing O2– on the opposite
side of the membrane (Table ). With regard
to the formation of oligomers, NOX1–4 bind p22phox, but NOX5 and Duox1 and -2 do not seem to do so., NOX1 has several additional binding partners not known to interact
with NOX2. For example, NOX1 is capable of binding not only p47phox but also the p47phox homologues NOXO1, Tks4,
and Tks5. Furthermore, NOX1 can bind
either p67phox or its homologue, NOXA1. Rac1 and Rac2 can bind and activate either NOX1 or NOX2., Importantly, the interactions of the various binding partners with
NOX1 are not static but dynamic and are controlled by many cellular
processes. For example, phosphorylation of NOXA1 at either Ser-282
or Ser-172 has been observed to cause a decrease in the level of binding
of NOXA1 to NOX1 and Rac1, decreasing NOX1 activity. NOX3 also seems to bind several of the cytosolic proteins
mentioned above, although this is not yet well characterized. NOX5
and the Duox proteins have calcium-binding domains; thus, their activity
is strongly regulated by the intracellular calcium concentration.
Instead of binding p22phox, the Duoxes bind DuoxA1 and
DuoxA2, each of which probably has five transmembrane helices rather
than three like p22phox. To
date, studies of redoxosomes have identified only NOX1 and NOX2 activity
in these organelles; however, the other NOX family members might be
involved in as yet unidentified redoxosomal signaling pathways. By
contrast, as described below, NOX4 at the nuclear envelope appears
to control superoxide production.

Redox-Signaling
Organelles
Although this review focuses
primarily on redox signaling by endosomes, these are by no means the
only intracellular organelles with significant redox signaling functions.
The best-studied ROS-producing organelle is the mitochondrion. The
production of ROS by this organelle was once thought to be a dangerous
and unwanted side effect of respiration. However, more recent reports have conclusively demonstrated that
mitochondrial ROS have many signaling roles.,,

The plasma membrane is also a site
of local ROS signaling, even in the absence of endocytosis. In this case, specific domains of and structures
within the plasma membrane (such as rafts, caveolae, focal adhesions,
cell–cell junctions, or leading-edge lamellipodia in the case
of migrating cells) appear to be the locations of ROS release.

The endoplasmic reticulum (ER) is heavily
involved in redox signaling.
As a major site of protein folding, which in many cases requires the
formation of disulfide bonds, the ER lumen is a much more oxidizing
environment than the cytosol. Proteins that promote this oxidizing
environment include the well-known Ero1 and peroxiredoxin IV, () and also NADPH oxidases, in particular NOX4. ROS in the ER may directly oxidize thiols in
glutathione peroxidases and peroxiredoxins, allowing these proteins
to promote oxidative folding.

Another
organelle that is probably important in redox cell signaling
is the perinuclear space (PNS), located between the nuclear envelope
membranes. Although the PNS is continuous with the ER lumen, the inner
nuclear membrane incorporates transmembrane proteins that are not
found in the ER and that directly bind heterochromatin, nuclear pores,
and other nuclear structures. Thus, redox functions of this membrane-enclosed
compartment may differ from those of the non-nuclear ER. Recent evidence
suggests that ROS may influence chromatin function through the epigenetic
modifications made by histone- and DNA-modifying enzymes (i.e., DNA
methyltransferases, histone demethylases, histone acetyltransferases,
and histone deacetylases).− For example, H2O2 recruits DNA methyltransferases
to chromatin, and this process has been
implicated in redox-dependent transcriptional alterations in atherosclerosis. Thus, it is plausible that ROS production in
the nuclear envelope could directly regulate nuclear transcription
and play an important role in health and disease. Furthermore, production
of ROS in the nuclear envelope may directly regulate the activity
of redox-sensitive transcription factors such as HIF-1α, NF-κB,
and AP-1.,− It is interesting to
note that the distance across the PNS, ranging from &lt;50 nm to several
hundred nanometers,, is comparable to the 100–300
nm diameter of a typical redoxosome. Thus,
local signaling events regulated by diffusion or transport of ROS
across nuclear membranes may function in some ways like redoxosomes.

Both endosomal membranes and nuclear membranes are major sites
of redox activity and, in particular, NOX activity. NOX4-dependent
ROS production at the nucleus is confined to the PNS. However, unlike NOX1 and NOX2 that can be regulated by
recruitment of cytosolic subunits to redoxosomes, NOX4 is not always
regulated in this fashion and has been shown in certain instances
to have constitutive activity. Interestingly,
NOX4 activity in the nuclear envelope appears to be, at least in part,
controlled by the local production of its substrate (NADPH) through
glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD). It has been demonstrated that NADPH is 2–3 orders of magnitude
more dilute in the nucleus than in the cytoplasm. This observation suggests that NADPH is not able to diffuse
freely in and out of the nucleus. G6PD, a primarily cytoplasmic enzyme,
exists at low concentrations in nuclei. In isolated nuclei, G6PD produces NADPH from NADP+ and
G6P, leading to NOX4-dependent O2– production. The ability of isolated hepatic nuclei to produce
NOX4-dependent O2– in the presence of
NADP+ and G6P is also decreased in G6PD mutant mice and
following shRNA-mediated knockdown of G6PD. Immunofluorescence staining
of nuclei demonstrated colocalization of punctate areas of G6PD and
NOX4 expression, in agreement with the hypothesis that the direct
supply of NADPH to NOX4 is from G6PD.

Other organelles such as the Golgi and lysosomes are also involved in
redox signaling, but their precise roles have not been extensively
characterized. Redox signaling also occurs in trafficking pathways
that involve endocytosis but in which ROS generation and redox reactions
occur at a cellular site other than the endosome. One example of this
is signaling by granulocyte colony stimulating factor (G-CSF), a cytokine
that activates hematopoietic cells. When G-CSF is endocytosed, the
signaling endosome that forms does not have any known redox activity.
However, when that endosome is brought into the proximity of the ER,
where NOX4 is active, G-CSF endosomal signaling is moderated. Similarly, in an endothelin 1-mediated pathway
that was recently described in endothelial cells, the endolysosome
contributes to activation of downstream ER pathways, eventually stimulating
endothelial nitric oxide synthase to produce NO•, causing vascular smooth muscle to relax.

The Biology of Redoxosomal
Signaling
Endosomal Signaling
Before continuing on the subject
of redox signaling and delving specifically into the details of redoxosomal
signaling, we will take a step back at this point to describe general
non-redox endosome-mediated signaling to demonstrate how redoxosomes
fit into the broader picture of cell signaling. In a discussion of
the nascent field of redoxosomal signaling, it is important to recognize
that the concept of endosome-mediated signaling, regardless of whether
it is redox-mediated, is still fairly new. In fact, endocytosis was
long considered a cellular mechanism for turning signals off rather
than on. Most endosomal signaling begins
with receptors on the plasma membrane. Of course, endosomal signaling
is only one of several mechanisms by which such cell-surface receptors
transduce signals. As described in a previous review, receptor-mediated signaling can involve various types of
pathways, some of which are more complex than others. For example,
in the case of type I signals, ligand binding to a receptor results
in direct signal transduction to the cell interior. Type II signaling,
in contrast, involves a second messenger that is first recruited to
the receptor and initiates downstream signaling. Type III signaling
involves endosomes and can be even more complex: the endosome, with
all of its associated proteins, may recruit cytosolic proteins to
transduce a signal (type IIIA); alternatively, the endosome may fuse
with another intracellular vesicle before transducing a signal (type
IIIB).

The existence of signaling endosomes first came to light
in 1994, with studies of liver parenchyma demonstrating that epidermal
growth factor receptor (EGFR) is internalized in response to the administration
of epidermal growth factor, and that the resultant signaling is specific
to the EGFR pathway. Soon afterward,
researchers found that transforming growth factor β (TGF-β)
signaling, nerve growth factor (NGF) signaling, and G-protein-coupled
receptor (GPCR) signaling involve additional distinct endosomal pathways. Another early study, demonstrating that tumor
necrosis factor α [TNFα (see Table )] signaling proceeds by endocytosis, was of special relevance to the field of cytokine signaling. Because
TNFα can sometimes cause apoptosis, the study focused on the
pathway responsible for this phenomenon. It demonstrated that the
following sequence of events occurs following ligand binding (compare
also Table ). First, RIP-1 and TRAF-2 are
recruited to TNF receptor 1 (TNFR1). Next, TNFR1 is internalized (this
step is dependent on the presence of an internalization signal between
amino acids 205 and 214 of TNFR1), and then TRADD, FADD, and caspase-8
are recruited to the complex to form a “receptosome”.
Finally, the receptosome fuses with the Golgi to further transduce
the apoptotic death signal.

The
receptosome versus redoxosome terminology is useful in distinguishing
between specific categories of endosomes. A receptosome is a signaling
endosome that has endocytosed a receptor after ligand binding. In
many cases, redoxosomes represent a subcategory of receptosome in
which ROS production within the endosome is required for signal transduction.
However, as discussed below in relation to hypoxia and reoxygenation,
some redoxosomes may not require ligand binding for endocytosis to
proceed and thus would not fall into the category of receptosomes.

Receptor-based endosomal signaling is now well accepted as a means
of controlling the interconnectivity of numerous cellular signaling
pathways. Endosomes can either isolate
pathways from one another or mediate crosstalk between them, and at
least 49 distinct endosomal “scaffolds” (i.e., endosome-mediated
organizations of distinct pathways) have been identified. Not all of these have been thoroughly characterized,
and as the field advances, additional complexities may be uncovered.
Describing the crosstalk between endosomal signaling pathways as “scaffold-mediated”
should not be misconstrued to indicate that these organelles are static
in space or time. On the contrary, endosomal pathways are dynamic
and involve rapidly changing membrane structures.

Endosome Dynamics
Historically, endocytosis has been
classified on the basis of whether the endocytic process was clathrin-dependent
or -independent. The clathrin-dependent endocytic pathways require
the formation of a polygonal lattice of clathrin proteins, which are
recruited from the cytosol to the site of vesicle formation. This results in the formation of a clathrin-coated
pit that encloses an area of the membrane with a high concentration
of phosphatidylinositol 4,5-bisphosphate. Dynamin, in conjunction
with other proteins, then pinches the neck of the vesicle to form
a new subcellular compartment (Table ), after
which the nascent vesicle loses its clathrin coating. By contrast,
clathrin-independent pathways of endocytosis do not necessarily require
dynamin for the pinching off of a new vesicle, although many other
proteins such as ADP-ribosylation factors and actin are sometimes
involved. In some of these clathrin-independent
endocytic events, a caveolin protein (Table ) coats the pit (often localized at a lipid raft region of the plasma
membrane), and the pit is pinched off in a dynamin-dependent manner,
much as in clathrin-dependent endocytosis. Indeed, clathrin-independent
endocytosis in many cases, though not all, generates the endosome
from an area of the plasma membrane where a high concentration of
cholesterol or lipid raft is found (Table )., A lipid raft is a specialized region of
a membrane that will be discussed in more detail below. Many other
combinations of proteins and lipids can also lead to endocytic events.

In the endosome signaling literature,
a nascent vesicle (formed by a clathrin-dependent or -independent
mechanism) is sometimes identified as an “early endosome”.
In other cases, the nascent vesicle is described as maturing into
the organelle called the early endosome, or fusing with a preexisting,
membrane-bound organelle and only then becoming known as the early
endosome. This confusing terminology
arises because the events immediately following vesicle formation
in many signaling pathways are not yet well understood. In any event,
a newly formed endosome or “early endosome” has several
marker proteins, including EEA1 and Rab5 (Table ),, and its membrane is marked by a high concentration
of the phospholipid phosphatidylinositol 3-phosphate. After the early endosome forms, complex molecular interactions
determine the fates of “cargo”, endocytosed membrane
and nonmembrane molecules (i.e., proteins, lipids, and any other molecules
that were endocytosed). Some cargoes (including some receptors) are
recycled to the cell surface by either rapid or slow recycling systems,
often via “tubular recycling endosomes”. Other cargoes are sorted and moved to compartments
such as late endosomes, the trans-Golgi network, multivesicular bodies,
and lysosomes. Although Rab5 and EEA1 are present in early endosomes,
they are absent in late and recycling endosomes, where Rab7 and Rab11
are present, respectively. These Rab proteins serve as “zip
codes” for endosomal movement within cells. The membranes of
individual endosomes contain specific domains in which these marker
proteins cluster. Depending on the exact
combination of protein, lipid, and other molecules present in a particular
early endosome, very different signaling or metabolic pathways are
activated. Thus, as mentioned above, signaling endosomes may interact
with other endosomes or organelles in dynamic scaffolds that may either
prevent or facilitate crosstalk between pathways.

Lipid Rafts
Given that mammalian
cells contain many
thousands of types of lipids, lipid rafts
have proven to be difficult to investigate. The current general consensus
is that lipid rafts exist as dynamic, transient domains within lipid
bilayers of the cell, primarily in the plasma membrane but possibly
also in the membranes of various organelles. These raft domains can
be described as “liquid-ordered” because they have a
higher percentage of saturated lipids than other membrane regions
and are thus more tightly packed. The
lipids within these domains include cholesterol, sphingolipids, and
saturated phospholipids (Table ); because
of the size of these molecules, a raft is generally slightly thicker
than other areas of the plasma membrane., A raft includes lipids of both leaflets of the lipid bilayer, but
the reasons for this are not completely clear. One proposed explanation
is that the extra length of some sphingolipids may allow them to extend
from the exoplasmic leaflet into the opposite (cytosolic) leaflet
of a bilayer membrane, thus holding both leaflets together. The major chemical and physical impact of lipid
rafts is that they bring specific proteins and glycoproteins together
within a dynamic and ordered, yet easily movable, area. In neutrophils,
the transmembrane protein NOX2 resides in lipid rafts constitutively,
whereas the cytosolic subunits p40phox, p47phox, and p67phox are recruited to the raft (and to NOX2)
in response to stimuli of phagocytosis. The cholesterol of lipid rafts is required for NOX2 activation in
neutrophils, as demonstrated by the observation that cholesterol sequestration
inhibits NOX2 activation. NOXes also
are found in lipid rafts of other cell types, and their presence in
these rafts is necessary for NOX signaling. Rafts are also collection points for palmitoylated and myristoylated
proteins and cholesterol-binding proteins. For example, acylation of tyrosine kinases of the Src family triggers
the localization of these proteins to lipid rafts.

Redox-Active Endosomes (Redoxosomes)
Because of the
rapidly growing bodies of knowledge on the subjects of both endosomal
signaling in nonredox pathways and redox signaling by such transmembrane
proteins as the NOXes, it was natural to investigate the possibility
that endosomal membranes could serve as sites of NOX or redox signaling.
Redox-active signaling endosomes were first discovered by Li et al.
in 2006 and were named “redoxosomes”
by Oakley et al. in 2009., Prior to the discovery
of redoxosomes, many extracellular ligands, in particular cytokines,
had been shown to induce cellular ROS production. Indeed, indirect
evidence of this was available more than 20 years ago, as treatment
of Jurkat T cells with either the cytokine TNFα or H2O2 was sufficient to trigger the same response, an increase
in NF-κB activity. Because TNFα
is endocytosed, this finding was important
to the eventual discovery of redox-signaling endosomes.

The
redoxosomes that have been studied to date have all been found to
utilize either NOX1 or NOX2. The cell types that have been demonstrated
to use redoxosomal signaling pathways include MCF-7 (an immortalized
human mammary carcinoma cell line),,,, mouse and human aortic
smooth muscle cells (SMCs),− human neutrophils, primary
mouse embryonic fibroblasts,, primary mouse dermal
fibroblasts,, HeLa cells (immortalized human
cervical cancer cells), brain cells,
spinal cord cells, immortalized glial and neuronal cells,, Kupffer cells, hepatocytes, and additional liver cell types that
have not yet been clearly identified., Another cell
type in which redoxosome signaling might occur is the renal mesangial
cell, where a high level of glucose stimulates NOX activity in a caveolin-dependent
manner. This was observed to lead to
the activation of both RhoA and protein kinase C and thus to upregulation
of the cytokine TGF-β, a known cause of renal matrix overproduction
and diabetic nephropathy. This study
did not address the question of whether the caveolae involved in the
observed ROS-mediated damage were pinched off by dynamin to form endosomes;
although caveolae were certainly implicated, it seems possible that
redoxosomal pathways may also have been activated in this high-glucose
model. This wide range of cell types indicates that redoxosomal signaling
is probably fairly universal.

Dynamin
Studies
of cytokine signaling in MCF-7 cells
have shown that endosomal fractions from cells treated with TNFα
or IL-1β (Table ) contain greatly elevated
levels of Rac, p47phox, and p67phox, as compared
to such fractions from untreated cells, and that the recruitment of
these proteins is largely dependent on dynamin-mediated endocytosis., Specifically, the expression of dominant-negative dynamin greatly
inhibited the recruitment of these proteins to endosomes., Dynamin was also found to be essential for ROS formation in these
redoxosomes. Similar, though not identical, results have been reported
for SMCs. TNFα treatment of these cells led to dynamin- and
NOX1-dependent ROS production in endosomes and, in turn, to activation
of the phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K)–Akt-activating
transcription factor-1 (ATF-1) pathway.

A dynamin-independent, nonendocytic mechanism whereby ROS-producing
membrane-bound organelles could conceivably enter the cell from the
plasma membrane is pinocytosis. Additionally, pinocytosis of membrane-associated
regulatory proteins could constitute part of a system whereby NOX
activity, and thus redoxosomal signaling, is terminated.

ROS Diffusion
Throughout the past
two decades, the
study of how specificity is conferred to ROS signaling has been plagued
by the problem of H2O2 diffusion and membrane
permeability. The concern was that O2– dismutates extremely rapidly to form H2O2,
which then might freely diffuse through lipid bilayers and indiscriminately
oxidize many molecules; thus, O2– and
H2O2 would be too nonspecific for most signaling
functions. It was suggested that ROS have signaling properties at
low concentrations, but only host-defense functions at high concentrations
(as in phagosomes). Indeed, it is now
clear that ROS concentrations have an important influence on outcomes.
However, concentration alone is not as simple a consideration as once
thought, because the H2O2 concentrations at
different sites within a single cell can differ significantly. In
fact, this is the case even within the cytoplasm. Notably, the H2O2 concentration increases slightly at protein
surfaces, with the mathematical probability of H2O2 diffusion decreasing as it nears the surface of a protein. Because the cytoplasm is not a well-mixed homogeneous
aqueous solution, but rather a dynamic and complex arrangement of
the protein machinery, the concentration and rate of diffusion of
H2O2 vary across the cytoplasm. Furthermore, membranes (both the plasma membrane and the
organelle membranes) significantly inhibit H2O2 diffusion. Recent research shows that, although H2O2 is uncharged, it is not as freely membrane permeable as was
once thought., The membrane permeability of
H2O2 depends on the biophysical properties of
the membrane in question and, in many cases, requires the presence
of an appropriate aquaporin channel., The concentration
of H2O2 therefore can vary significantly between
membrane-enclosed subcellular compartments. As an anion, O2– is not membrane permeable and cannot freely diffuse
across membranes. However, specific anion channels may be able to
transport O2– across membranes. The fledgling field of redoxosomal signaling
has greatly broadened the research area of the transfer of O2– across membranes, suggesting that in specific
instances O2– may be transported out
of redoxosomes in a controlled manner (see below).

ROS Concentration
via Compartmentalization in Redoxosomes
As we have previously
demonstrated, the rate of ROS production
in the redoxosome is in the micromolar per second range, whereas that in the phagosome is in the millimolar
per second range. In both of these organelles,
the ROS concentration is much higher inside than outside, because
of the topology of the NOX transmembrane domains. One interesting
consideration regarding NOX activity at the membrane of any organelle
is the placement of negatively charged O2– within the lumen, while the H+ produced remains at the
other side of the membrane (i.e., in the cytoplasm). This not only
introduces the possibility of ROS accumulation and thus redox chemistry
but also affects the electrogenic potential of the membrane across
which O2– is formed. If positive charge
builds up in the cytoplasm, while negative charge builds up in the
endosome, there might be signaling effects even in the absence of
ROS-triggered redox chemistry. Studies investigating this possibility
have focused primarily on the chloride channel ClC-3,, which is essential for the respiratory bursts of neutrophils because
it facilitates the necessary charge neutralization of the phagosome. The data that are currently available indicate
that this channel might also direct O2– out of some redoxosomal lumens. In these cases, O2– might compete with Cl– for flux
across the endosomal membrane. In addition
to ClC-3, several other membrane ion transporters, including IClswell (Table ), may possibly allow
charge neutralization of redoxosomes, by either transporting cations
into the lumen or transporting O2– (or
other anions) out., The activities of these ion
transporters could, at least theoretically, affect the lumenal pH
and thereby the rate of spontaneous dismutation of O2– and ultimately H2O2 levels.
If O2– dismutation were significantly
slowed by an increase in the redoxosomal lumenal pH, the increasing
concentration of O2– within the redoxosome
would act as a chemical driving force for movement of O2– out of the redoxosome via ClC-3 or another anion
channel, and a corresponding decrease in the rate of diffusion of
the competing ion, Cl–. By contrast, a decrease
in the redoxosomal lumenal pH, as might be observed following fusion
with the late endosomal compartment, would increase the rate of spontaneous
dismutation of O2– and might enhance
the diffusion of H2O2 across the endosomal membrane.
Thus, the downstream effects of redoxosome signaling may depend on
the number and types of anion channels in their membranes. The membrane
composition of anion channels may also be influenced by the fusion
of redoxosomes with other vesicular compartments. Interestingly, when
anion channels (including ClC-3) in MCF-7 cells were blocked by applying
4′-diisothiocyano-2,2′-disulfonic acid stilbene (DIDS)
or niflumic acid (NFA), O2– was prevented
from exiting redoxosomes. These anion
channel inhibitors did not significantly change the level of ROS production
in these endosomes. In contrast, in the redoxosomes of SMCs, ClC-3
knockout led to a block of ROS production. Furthermore, the application
of DIDS and NFA to these cells blocked downstream signaling by NF-κB. Why blocking anion channels inhibited ROS production
in the redoxosomes of SMCs, but not those of MCF-7 cells, is not clear.
One possible explanation relates to the fact that redoxosomes in MCF-7
cells use NOX2 whereas those in SMCs
use NOX1. Thus, the two signaling pathways
probably utilize different downstream proteins; also, the anion channels
involved in charge neutralization of endosomal membranes may differ
among cell types.

Cytokines and
Redoxosomes
Cytokines are secreted peptides
or proteins with signaling functions and may act on either the cells
that secrete them (autocrine) or others (paracrine or endocrine).
They do so by binding to receptors on the cell surface, which in turn
leads to the stimulation of intracellular signaling pathways. Hundreds
of cytokines exist, and it is possible that many of them stimulate
specific redoxosomal signaling pathways. However, only a few have
been studied in this regard. Those best studied for their roles in
redoxosome signaling are IL-1β and TNFα. The application
of these cytokines to cultured cells was first shown to elicit ROS
production more than 20 years ago., Nevertheless,
the steps involved in redoxosomal signaling by these cytokines were
delineated only recently. These are outlined below (see also Table ).

IL-1β Redoxosome Signaling
In the case of IL-1β,
its binding to the IL1 receptor (IL-1R) on the plasma membrane triggers
the following complex chain of signaling events (see also Figure  and Table ). Specific proteins
(described below) are recruited to the plasma membrane. The receptor–ligand
complex is endocytosed. Additional specific proteins are recruited,
and the signal is transduced to the nucleus. IL-1R is a heterodimer
composed of IL-1R1 and IL-1RAcP. The binding of IL-1β to this
IL-1R complex is followed by recruitment of both MyD88 [a cytosolic
protein (see Table )] and the GTPase Rac1.
Prior to its recruitment, Rac1 in its inactive, GDP-bound form is
held in the cytosol, through binding by a Rho guanine nucleotide dissociation
inhibitor [RhoGDI (see Table )]. When IL-1β
binds to IL-1R, the RhoGDI becomes phosphorylated by mechanisms that
are not entirely clear and releases Rac1-GDP. Rac1 in this form is
subject to two events: its translocation to the plasma membrane and
the exchange of GTP in place of its bound GDP. Which of these occurs
first is not known. The replacement of GDP with GTP is essential for
Rac to become “activated” (see below and Table ). This exchange requires a guanine exchange factor
(GEF) protein. Some studies have indicated that Vav2, phosphorylated
by c-Src, acts in this capacity, whereas
other studies have implicated Vav1 or another GEF in this role (Table ). In the case of
MCF-7 redoxosomes, Vav1 has been characterized as a GEF capable of
activating Rac1 after IL-1β stimulation, but whether Vav1 is phosphorylated by c-Src in this pathway
remains unknown. Differences in the GEF protein involved and the other
factors that act in these pathways are probably dependent on cell
type.

Schematic illustration of redoxosomal pathways: IL-1β pathway
(left), TNFα pathway (middle), and hypoxia/reoxygenation (H/R)
pathway (right). Major proteins known or strongly supported by data
are shown. In all three pathways, a triggering event (receptor binding
by cytokine IL-1β or TNFα, or an H/R event) initiates
endocytosis (often dynamin-dependent). AC denotes anion channel. For
more details, see Table  and the text.

Rac bound to GTP is in its “active”
conformation
and theoretically able to promote NOX activity. However, as mentioned
above, Rac must be recruited to the plasma membrane, specifically
to a site near the IL-1R complex, to conduct its signaling function.
Rac associates with membranes by means of its prenylated tail, which
is inaccessible as long as Rac is bound to RhoGDI. Lipid raft studies
in MCF-7 cells have demonstrated that Vav1 is recruited to these domains
simultaneously with Rac1; it is thus possible that the GDP to GTP
exchange occurs after Rac has been recruited to the raft.

Once Rac1 is recruited to IL-1R within
the lipid raft, it facilitates
recruitment of NOX2 to the receptor complex prior to endocytosis;
this ultimately results in assembly of the entire NOX2 complex (including
p67phox, p47phox, and other associated proteins),
though whether the recruitment of these cytosolic subunits is completed
at the plasma membrane or at the endocytosed vesicle remains unclear.
It is clear, however, that endocytosis of IL-1R requires MyD88, but
not Rac1, and that Rac1 is required for recruitment of NOX2 into the
endosome with the IL-1R–MyD88–Rac-1 complex (see Table ). In the absence of
Rac1, the IL-1β-stimulated IL-1R–MyD88 complex will undergo
endocytosis without NOX2. In the absence of MyD88, IL-1β-stimulated
IL-1R remains at the plasma membrane. Endocytosis of the IL-1β–IL-1R–IL-1RAcP–MyD88–Rac-1–NOX2
receptor complex is often caveolin- and dynamin-dependent and leads
to the formation of Rab5 positive endosomes.,

Following endocytosis, additional protein recruitment takes
place.
Specifically, superoxide dismutase 1 (SOD1) is recruited to the redoxosome
surface and binds to Rac-1,, and IRAK/TRAF6 is recruited
and binds to IL-1R (Table ). Key redox-dependent
processes are required for this last step; NOX-dependent ROS produced
in the interior of the endosomal compartment is required for recruitment
of TRAF6 to the IL-1R complex. Neutralization
of ROS within newly formed redoxosomes, using an excess of extracellular
ROS scavenger enzymes (SOD and catalase), prevents TRAF6 recruitment
and downstream signal activation (Table ).
H2O2 appears to be the key ROS involved in the
redox regulation of TRAF6 and its recruitment to IL-1R; however, it remains unclear if the redox changes
occur on TRAF6 and/or IL-1R. Either way, O2– produced by IL-1R-activated redoxosomes will be dismutated to H2O2 (either spontaneously or through SOD1 on its
surface), providing a local redox driving force for the recruitment
of TRAF6 to the IL-1R complex. This mechanism is thought to spatially
restrict the recruitment of TRAF6 to the surface of ligand-activated
redoxosomes. Subsequently, the IKKk protein is recruited, IKK is phosphorylated
and activated, IκB is phosphorylated and degraded, and NF-κB
is liberated to enter the nucleus and initiate transcriptional responses.

The recruitment of SOD1 to the surface of redoxosomes, where it binds Rac-1 (see Table ), is of substantial importance to redoxosome function and
has at least two functions in addition to the possible dismutation
of O2– molecules (Figure ). First, SOD1 inhibits the conversion of Rac-GTP to Rac-GDP; this decrease in the intrinsic GTPase activity
of Rac promotes NOX activation. Second, the binding of SOD1 to Rac-1
is redox-regulated; specifically, when Rac is oxidized by H2O2, SOD1 dissociates from Rac-1. This dissociation of SOD1 enhances the intrinsic GTPase activity
of Rac, leading to the inactivation of Rac-1 and thus also NOX. Thus,
the SOD1–Rac-1 complex on redoxosomes serves as a self-limiting
redox sensor for NOX-derived superoxide production. Whether SOD1 dismutase
activity is required for the function of this sensor remains to be
determined.

Schematic illustration of SOD1 and Rac interactions on the surface
of redoxosomes and how this interaction controls NOX-mediated ROS
production. In step 1, following redoxosome formation, SOD1 is recruited
to the surface of the endosome and binds Rac-GTP. Binding of SOD1
to Rac stabilizes the GTP-bound conformation by inhibiting the intrinsic
GTPase activity of Rac. NOX is active while bound to Rac-GTP, and
NADPH supplies electrons to NOX, which transfers electrons onto oxygen
inside the endosome. Protons may remain in the cytoplasm and thus
perhaps build up a membrane potential with the lumenal side becoming
more negative as O2– accumulates. This
membrane potential may help to facilitate movement of O2– out of the redoxosome via an anion channel (AC).
Upon exiting, the O2– may be dismutated
by SOD1 at the redoxosomal surface. O2– may also spontaneously dismutate within the redoxosomal lumen and
passively diffuse as H2O2 across the redoxosomal
membrane (not shown). The accumulation of H2O2 at the redoxosomal surfaces transduces oxidative signals that allow
for activation of the receptor complex (not shown) and the induction
of pathways such as NF-κB. In step 2, as the concentration of
H2O2 at the redoxosomal surface increases, Rac
becomes oxidized. In step 3, the oxidation of Rac leads to the dissociation
of SOD1. In the absence of binding of SOD1 to Rac, the intrinsic GTPase
activity of Rac leads to rapid hydrolysis of GTP to GDP and the inactivation
of the NOX complex. In this state, the activated receptor complex
can likely still transduce its signal (not shown) but ROS production
is terminated. In this manner, redoxosomes self-regulate the local
production of ROS required to transduce its redox signal.

At least two additional mechanisms whereby redoxosomal
signals
may be terminated have been proposed. According to one, the early
endosome fuses with a macropinosome and the proteins of the redoxosomal
complex are recycled. In the other, negative
charges build up inside the redoxosome whereas the cytoplasm is positively
charged, until NOX can no longer pump electrons against the charge
gradient. These three mechanisms for
turning off a redoxosomal signal (dissociation of SOD1 from Rac, recycling,
and the buildup of charge gradients) are not necessarily mutually
exclusive, and additional mechanisms may also exist. Furthermore,
the function of the SOD1/Rac-1 sensor on redoxosomes will be influenced
by the rate of spontaneous dismutation within the redoxosome lumen,
and thus as this endosomal compartment becomes more acidic (which
occurs following fusion with late endosomes), the extent of uncoupling
of SOD1 from Rac-1 would likely increase, leading to inactivation
of NOX. Future studies will be necessary to identify specific events
that dictate which mechanisms are utilized at the end of any given
redoxosomal signaling event.

TNFα Redoxosome Signaling
When TNFα binds
to the TNF receptor (TNFR1), redoxosome signaling is activated in
a manner similar to that described above for binding of IL-1β
to IL-1R. However, the two pathways differ in a few important respects.
In particular, a distinct set of proteins is recruited, with TRADD,
TRAF2, and RIP replacing MyD88, IRAK, and TRAF6 (Table ). Moreover, TRAF2 recruitment is redox-dependent, as demonstrated
by the fact that the loading of endosomes with SOD1 and catalase greatly
decreased this recruitment; notably,
levels of TRADD recruitment and TNFR1 endocytosis did not decrease
with this treatment. Furthermore, TRAF2 recruitment is mediated by
H2O2 formed from NOX2-generated O2–. This leads to initiation of TNFα-specific
downstream signals.

Consistent with the differences in IL-1β-
and TNFα-triggered endocytosis described above, Rac1-containing
endosomes isolated after IL-1β stimulation were positive for
IL-1R1 and TRAF6, but not for TNFR1 or TRAF2 (see Table ). Conversely, Rac1-containing endosomes isolated after TNFα
stimulation were positive for TNFR1 and TRAF2, but not for IL-1R1
or TRAF6. These results demonstrated
that redoxosomal signaling specificity is dependent on the triggering
ligand and reinforces the idea that ROS generated by redoxosomes acts
locally to facilitate signal transduction.

Redoxosome
Signaling in the Context of Disease
Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis
(ALS) is a motor neuron disease characterized by neurodegeneration
and loss of voluntary muscle action. A small minority of ALS cases
harbor specific mutations of SOD1. This fact, in combination with
recent findings about the importance of SOD1 in the control of redoxosomal
ROS in neuronal tissues, suggests that
redoxosomal pathways are of importance in ALS. Notably, another protein
that has been associated with this disease, alsin (see Table ), is an early endosome-associated RhoGEF that is
involved in redoxosomal signaling during ALS, particularly in the
context of TNFα signaling (see Table ). Overexpression of either alsin or the ALS-associated SOD1 mutant
SOD1G93A in glial cells was sufficient to cause pro-inflammatory
TNFα secretion. Overexpression
of either alsin or SOD1G93A in glial cells also caused
increases in endosomal ROS levels and Rac1 activation, and a decrease
in the number of surviving of neuronal cells cocultured with these
glial cells. Knockdown of NOX2 in glial cells in the context of glial
SOD1G93A overexpression was protective to neuronal cocultured
cells. Interestingly, when alsin and SOD1G93A were co-overexpressed
in such glial cells, the pro-inflammatory effects were attenuated
and neuronal toxicity decreased. The
RhoGEF activity of alsin is probably targeted to Rac1 and/or Rab5
and likely mediates at least some of these effects. Furthermore, the
recruitment of alsin specifically to the endosomal compartment appeared
to regulate endosomal ROS induced by SOD1G93A. These findings
indicate that alsin and SOD1 interact in multiple and complex pro-inflammatory
and anti-inflammatory redoxosomal pathways during redoxosomal signaling,
in both glia and neurons. Thus, targeting endocytic events that activate
NOX2 in glia may be an effective means of decreasing the symptoms
and severity of ALS.

Liver Ischemia/Reperfusion Injury
Ischemia followed
by reperfusion of liver tissue, as occurs during liver transplantation,
leads to the activation of inflammatory pathways, liver tissue damage,
and increased TNFα levels in the plasma. In models of this condition
using hypoxia/reoxygenation (H/R) treatment of cells in culture (see
Figure ), c-Src is recruited to the early
endosomes and activated at the redoxosomal level in the absence of
known ligands. This ligand-independent
endocytic event is dynamin-dependent and leads to NF-κB activation
as a consequence of NOX activation in redoxosomes. Both PTP and c-Src can be activated in the context of H/R,, and the activation of c-Src in this context may therefore involve
either direct oxidative activation or indirect activation as a consequence
of PTP oxidation; this has not been tested yet. Recently, we demonstrated
that the c-Src-dependent H/R-mediated redoxosomal pathways that are
activated in cell culture are relevant in vivo in
the context of liver ischemia/reperfusion (I/R). Wild-type mice subjected to surgically induced liver I/R
produced higher levels of redoxosomal ROS than c-Src knockout counterparts.
These higher levels of ROS correlated with an increased level of NF-κB
activation in the liver, as well as with increased TNFα levels
in plasma. Mouse strains in which NOX1 and NOX2, p47phox, or Rac-1 and/or Rac-2 are knocked out were also studied. In agreement
with previous studies on redoxosome signaling, we found that these
proteins were all important in the overall inflammatory response to
I/R; however, several of these genes appear to play specific roles
in hepatocytes and Kupffer cells of the liver. We found that hepatocytes themselves could produce low
levels of TNFα after H/R and that this facilitated much higher
levels of TNFα production by Kupffer cells. Thus, it appears
that “ligand-independent” (I/R-dependent) redoxosomal
signaling in hepatocytes leads to the production of TNFα, and
that the endocytosis of this TNFα by nearby Kupffer cells leads
to “ligand-dependent”, redoxosome-mediated NF-κB
signaling in Kupffer cells. These cells in turn produce much higher
levels of plasma TNFα. The molecular mechanism whereby endocytosis
is initiated in hepatocytes after an I/R or H/R event is not known.

We refer to I/R- or H/R-triggered endocytosis as ligand-independent
because no initiating ligand has been described, although we cannot
exclude the possibility that an unidentified ligand may be involved. Cell types as diverse as HeLa cells, primary
mouse dermal fibroblasts, and primary mouse hepatocytes can initiate
endocytosis in response to reoxygenation., Is this endocytosis a direct response to extracellular O2 molecules that flood the medium during reoxygenation? Perhaps, as
it is conceivable that endocytosis is triggered by oxidative modifications
of lipids or proteins that are brought to the cell surface during
hypoxia. Alternatively, unidentified autocrine or paracrine factors
secreted during hypoxia may function as oxygen-dependent ligands,
activating receptor-mediated endocytosis upon reoxygenation. It seems
likely that such modifications or factors would also be produced during
liver I/R in vivo. Our data indicate that hepatocytes
utilize redoxosomal pathways to initiate a rapid cascade of TNFα
production in response to reperfusion. Similarly, a study using redox-sensitive green fluorescent protein,
roGFP, in a mouse I/R model has revealed
that the overall level of oxidation in the mouse liver increases in vivo within minutes of reperfusion. Therefore, the time course of reperfusion probably allows
almost instant induction of some ROS during initial formation of the
first postreoxygenation redoxosomes. Specific reperfusion-activated
autocrine or paracrine ligands or cell-surface modifications remain
to be identified. Even TNFα itself could conceivably be one
such reperfusion-activated ligand. For example, although the de novo synthesis of TNFα is NF-κB-dependent,
in some cells, a small amount of precursor protein might already be
present and available for release in soluble form. Given that the
release or cleavage of the soluble ligand by TNFα-converting
enzyme is indirectly redox-dependent, this cleavage may involve some of the as yet uncharacterized initiating
redox events that occur during the first moments after reperfusion.
Determining whether TNFα or other ligands function as postreoxygenation
initiating factors will be important therapeutically. Such initiating
factors could prove to be useful targets in preventing liver I/R inflammatory
injury in the surgical setting. Endocytosis itself, and the signaling
pathways that are activated during this process, may also prove to
be useful targets in this context.

Cardiac Hypertrophy and
Hypertension
Dysregulated angiotensin
II signaling is a major contributor to hypertension and subsequent
cardiac hypertrophy, which involves enlargement of cardiomyocytes.
Redoxosomal signaling is very likely an important event in both healthy
and diseased cardiomyocytes. In these cells, Rac1-regulated NOX2 produces
O2– in response to stimulation with angiotensin
II (Table ), and this leads to activation
of the Akt signaling pathway and cardiomyocyte hypertrophy. It is possible that this ROS production occurs
in early endosomes, because a recent report indicates that, at least
in vascular SMCs, Akt signaling occurs at EEA1-positive early endosomes
and regulates p38 MAP kinases. If a
similar pathway is active in cardiomyocytes, the redoxosome may be
an important component of their Akt activation pathway, as well. However,
the pathways may be somewhat different in these cell types, as suggested
by the fact that NOX2 is important for ROS production in cardiomyocytes,
leading to cardiac hypertrophy, whereas
it is NOX1 activation that leads to Akt signaling in the endosomes
of SMCs, leading to neointimal hyperplasia that can be associated
with hypertension.,

Studies of cardiomyocyte
responses to angiotensin II have suggested that redox signaling may
occur not only in the canonical early endosome type of redoxosomes
but also in some late endosomes. This concept is based on studies
of the activation of CamKII in these cells, an event that requires
the oxidation of specific methionines in CamKII. Recent data showed
that when angiotensin II activates the p38K pathway, CamKII methionines
are oxidized in biphasic fashion. The
delayed phase of this signaling was found to depend on endocytosis;
although the upstream trigger has not been identified, it could be
NOX-generated ROS within early, or perhaps even late, endosomes. This
delayed phase of signaling led to the expression of specific mRNAs
several hours after the initial endocytic event. Thus, although early endosomes are the best characterized
of the redoxosomes, the maturation and fusion of NOX-containing early
endosomes with the later endosomal compartment may perhaps also play
a part in some oxidative redox signaling pathways. Further studies
to investigate these possibilities are needed. It should be noted
that angiotensin II signaling involving redox chemistry is not limited
to endosomal pathways; in neuronal cells, angiotensin II-dependent
mitochondrial NOX4 signaling has been demonstrated, as well. For the development of specific therapies for
hypertension and cardiac hypertrophy, a much improved understanding
of the redox pathways in SMC and cardiomyocyte endosomes is needed.

Infection and Immunity
Recently, redoxosome activity
was described as part of the neutrophil-mediated immune response to
invading pathogens. Neutrophils not only form their canonical NOX2-containing
phagosomes but also can form NOX2-containing redoxosomes in response
to endotoxin. The redoxosomal signaling
pathway thus triggered leads to neutrophil priming activity.

Redoxosomes might also act within the
adaptive branch of the immune system, in antigen-presenting cells.
This possibility is implied by the discovery that the redox state
of late endosomes in antigen-presenting cells is regulated by γ-interferon-inducible
lysosomal thiol reductase (GILT), which
reduces disulfide bonds in proteins in the late endosomes of monocytes. The need for reduction of these cysteine thiols
could imply that these residues had been oxidized upstream of this
late endosome event, perhaps during an early redoxosomal NOX-mediated
oxidizing event. Thus, it may be that not only IL-1β and TNFα
but also IFNγ can activate redoxosomal signaling pathways (Table ).

Chronic hepatitis B currently infects ∼1
million Americans,
and several thousand die of this disease every year in this country
alone. During hepatitis B infection of human HepaRG cell lines, the
transport of viral particles subjects the virus to reducing conditions
in late endosomes. Thus, as in the case
of GILT, reduction of proteins is observed specifically in late endosomes.

A Pattern of Redox Function in Early and Late Endosomes
In pathological states as diverse as liver I/R, bacterial infection,
ALS, and cardiac hypertrophy, production of ROS and oxidation of signaling
proteins take place specifically in early endosomes, as described
above. In contrast, in the studies of antigen-presenting cells and
hepatitis B mentioned above, reduction of previously oxidized thiols
occurs in the late endosomes. Fluorescence microscopy studies have
also shown reduction of disulfide bonds in late endosomes. Thus, comparing the findings regarding early
versus late endosomes suggests that the former most frequently facilitate
oxidative redox reactions that contribute to cell signaling pathways,
whereas the late endosomes typically support reducing reactions that
may or may not qualify as “signaling” events. Possibly,
exceptions to this pattern may exist (see the description of CamKII
above). In any event, therapies targeted at blocking either oxidative
signaling specifically at the early endosome or reduction of thiols
specifically at the late endosome, in specific cell types, may prove
to be beneficial in future drug development.

Future Directions
The activation of cytokine-dependent signaling
pathways by redoxosomes
is enormously complex, and the differences between cell types have
only begun to be evident. The therapeutic potential of uncovering
these details is tremendous. For example, diseases as diverse as ALS
and liver I/R injury, both of which involve TNFα-mediated redoxosomes,
could potentially be prevented or at least ameliorated if specific
targets in or related to their specific redoxosomes can be identified.
IL-1β-mediated disease states are also numerous and diverse. Moreover, hundreds of other cytokines might
be able to initiate redoxosome-mediated signaling, and the potential
links to cardiac, vascular, and infectious diseases are further indications
of the huge diversity of processes that may potentially be treated
by therapies targeting specific mediators of redoxosomal pathways.

Clearly, effective targets will have to have very specialized roles
and be highly localized within the cell, as systemic administration
of “antioxidants”, which indiscriminately and loosely
target all ROS, has failed repeatedly in clinical trials., One major challenge will be to find cellular redoxosome-associated
targets that are specific enough to avoid disrupting major signaling
pathways that are crucial to good health. In this regard, the current
state of redoxosome research strongly points to NF-κB activation
and possibly a few other signaling pathways. Determining exactly how
these diverse redoxosome signals contribute to the transduction of
specific NF-κB and/or other signals will be extremely important.
As shown in Figure , all known redoxosome
signaling pathways activate NF-κB signaling. Conversely, not
all TNFα-mediated NF-κB signaling leads to disease states
such as ALS or reperfusion-type liver damage. Thus, a precise understanding
of the downstream effects of redoxosomal signals in specific cell
types will be vital to identifying appropriate targets of therapy.
A second challenge will be to engineer drugs or other therapies that
affect these precise targets in very specific ways. As shown in Table , the majority of proteins involved in redoxosomal
signaling are not known to be redox-modified. However, research on
these proteins is generally incomplete, and if some are in fact redox-modified,
their redox-active cysteines, methionines, or other residues might
represent useful therapeutic targets. As such, the possibilities for
future research and discovery on cytokine-mediated redoxosomal signaling
appear to be numerous.

This work
was supported
by National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases
Grants R01 DK051315 and K01 DK083429, the Animal Models Core funded
through the Center for Gene Therapy (P30 DK54759), and the Roy J.
Carver Chair in Molecular Medicine.

The authors declare no
competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
We express gratitude
to Dr. Christine Blaumueller for her
expert editorial assistance in the preparation of the manuscript.

Abbreviations
ALSamyotrophic lateral sclerosis

ATF-1Akt-activating
transcription factor-1

CSKc-Src kinase

DIDS4′-diisothiocyano-2,2′-disulfonic acid stilbene

EGFRepidermal growth
factor receptor

ERendoplasmic reticulum

G-CSFgranulocyte colony stimulating factor

GEFguanine exchange factor

GILTγ-interferon-inducible
lysosomal thiol reductase

GPCRG-protein-coupled receptor

H/Rhypoxia/reoxygenation

IFNγinterferon γ

IL-1βinterleukin-1β

IL-1RIL1 receptor

I/Rischemia/reperfusion

NFAniflumic acid

NGFnerve growth factor

NOXNADPH oxidase

PI3Kphosphatidylinositol
3-kinase

PNSperinuclear
space

PTPprotein
tyrosine phosphatase

RhoGDIrho guanine nucleotide dissociation inhibitor

ROSreactive oxygen species

SMCsmooth muscle cell

SODsuperoxide dismutase

TGF-βtransforming
growth factor β

TNFtumor necrosis factor

TNFRTNF receptor.

