Predictable
environmental changes
arising from the rotation of Earth about its axis set the fundamental
diurnal tempo of our lives. Intrinsic molecular clocks synchronize
behavior and physiology into circadian (about a day) rhythms that
are coordinated with the solar day to provide stability within an
ever-changing environment. While modern society allows us to live
outside of these ancient routines through the use of artificial lights,
discrepancies between our behavior and intrinsic circadian clock elicit
comorbid metabolic syndromes, cardiovascular disease, and/or cancer. Understanding how circadian timekeeping occurs
at the molecular level could inform new strategies for therapeutic
discovery that aim to reinforce circadian systemic synchronization
for its numerous health benefits.

While the past 15 years has
seen major advances in our understanding
of the genetic basis of circadian timing, we have not yet achieved
a level of mechanistic insight comparable to those of other important
global regulatory processes such as the cell cycle. A recent explosion
of high-resolution structures of mammalian clock proteins, cistrome
mapping, and biochemical data support some aspects of the canonical
model for clock function and challenge others. Our goal in this review
is to present an analysis of these data to suggest how remodeling
of clock protein complexes throughout the 24 h cycle might regulate
circadian timing. We start with an overview of the current model of
the transcription/translation feedback mechanism and then discuss
this clock mechanism from a biochemical and structural perspective.

Transcription
Feedback Loops of the Mammalian Clock
At the heart of the
mammalian circadian timekeeping system, a group
of dedicated clock proteins work in concert with one another to generate
transcription/translation-based feedback loops (TTFL) with ∼24
h periodicity (Figure A). The basic helix–loop–helix
Per-Arnt-Sim (bHLH-PAS) proteins CLOCK and BMAL1 constitute a heterodimeric
transcription factor that is the driving force behind the molecular
clock in mammals., Transcriptional activation by
CLOCK:BMAL1 at E/E′ boxes in the promoters of the core clock
genes Period, Cryptochrome, and Rev-Erb initiates the beginning of negative feedback within
the loop, which is ultimately closed when these factors enter the
nucleus and repress transcription.− Subsequent cycles of activation and repression
generate circadian oscillations (i.e., one peak per day) in the expression
of clock proteins to determine the intrinsic timing of the molecular
clock. In addition to the core clock genes, the TTFL regulates the
expression of output genes to confer circadian timing to physiological
processes in a tissue-specific manner (Figure B)., Post-transcriptional regulation also plays
an important role through RNA processing and stabilization to establish
intrinsic circadian timing and clock-controlled output genes− (see ).

Transcription/translation
feedback loops control mammalian circadian
timing. (A) Core clock proteins interact with one another to regulate
transcription. (B) The circadian feedback loop creates oscillations
in the tissue-specific expression of clock-controlled genes with 24
h periodicity.

The current model of
the core feedback loop is defined by periodic
regulation of CLOCK:BMAL1 activity from repressive complexes containing
PER and CRY proteins. The intrinsic ∼24 h periodicity of the
clock is regulated in large part by controlling the subcellular localization
and stability of PER:CRY complexes through the opposing activity of
kinases, phosphatases, and ubiquitin E3 ligases.− Loss of a single phosphoacceptor site within PER or modulation of
kinase activity (by mutation or pharmacological inhibition) elicits
periods ranging from ∼20 to 44 h,− underscoring an amazing flexibility
that is inherent within the architecture of the circadian feedback
loop. Therefore, post-translational regulation of PER and CRY helps
to establish critical delays in feedback regulation that contribute
to the 24 h period of the clock.

A second, interlocked feedback
loop involves the nuclear receptors
ROR and REV-ERB, which generate oscillations in Bmal1 expression and the cyclic repression of other gene targets.− Phenotypes of mice with deletions of individual genes within this
interlocked feedback loop are mild; however,
deletion of both Rev-Erbα and Rev-Erbβ genes disrupts circadian rhythms, demonstrating that cyclical repression
at RORE and REV-Re elements by the REV-ERB proteins represents a critical
component of circadian timekeeping. In
addition to ROR/REV-ERB, many other proteins work in concert with
core clock proteins to regulate the epigenome and influence circadian
transcriptional activity (MLL1, MLL3, SIRT1, EZH2, etc.).−

Determining how PER and CRY regulate CLOCK:BMAL1 activity
will
illuminate regulatory nodes within the feedback loop that can be further
targeted for therapeutic intervention. A comprehensive mapping of
the circadian cistrome in mouse liver shows that core circadian factors
(CRY1/CRY2, PER1/PER2, and CLOCK:BMAL1) are coordinately recruited
to nearly 1500 sites in the genome.,, The temporal pattern of their recruitment to clock-controlled
genes such as Dbp (Figure A) generally agrees with the canonical TTFL model in which CLOCK:BMAL1
activity is repressed by a PER:CRY complex in the evening from CT12
to CT20. Analysis of native PER:CRY complexes by mass spectrometry
and co-IP demonstrates that they contain additional proteins capable
of eliciting transcription termination and epigenetic changes that
reduce the extent of transcriptional activation (Figure C)., PER:CRY complexes are very large,
approaching several megadaltons in mass, and recent studies show that
constituents of the complex can evolve over time,, expanding the initial, simplified view of a static PER:CRY repressive
complex.

Multiple transcriptional regulatory complexes within the circadian
feedback loop. (A) UCSC genome browser view of core clock protein
occupancy at a portion of the Dbp locus on chromosome 7 (chr7), representing
normalized chromatin immunoprecipitation and massively parallel sequencing
read coverage at single time points within the circadian cycle. Six
time points are shown every 4 h beginning at circadian time 0 (CT0)
and ending at CT20, with knockout (KO) mice as controls. (B) Binding
coverage profiles [RPM (reads per million) × 10] from ChIP-Seq
data illustrate the temporal basis of clock protein recruitment to
their 1444 common sites. Gray boxes behind the data illustrate the
composition of the putative clock protein complexes. Parts A and B
reproduced from ref (). Copyright 2012 American Association for the Advancement of Science.
(C) Cartoon schematics of distinct clock regulatory complexes based
on ChIP-Seq and proteomic data, including the large early repressive
PER:CRY complexes, and the late ternary CLOCK:BMAL1:CRY complex.

Perhaps the most striking conclusion
to arise from recent studies
is the clear evidence of a late repressive complex constituted by
DNA-bound CLOCK:BMAL1 with CRY1, independent of PER proteins, that
exists from CT0 to CT4 (Figure B).,, The foundation for this emerging
model of the clock originates from biochemical studies in the Sancar
lab providing the first evidence of a ternary CLOCK:BMAL1:CRY complex in vitro and in vivo that is incompatible
with PER binding. ChIP-Seq studies in
mouse liver indicate that recruitment of the early repressive PER:CRY
complex, recruitment of the late repressive CRY1 complex, and recruitment
of the transcriptional activators CBP/p300 to CLOCK:BMAL1 are three
temporally distinct phases of the molecular cycle. Concomitant analysis
of RNA Pol II complexes throughout the circadian cycle indicates that
the late, CRY1-containing repressive complex most likely represents
a poised but inactive form of CLOCK:BMAL1 (Figure C). These studies suggest that binding of CRY1 to CLOCK:BMAL1
may hold off activation by coactivators CBP/p300 and thus transcriptional
initiation until CT8. This model is consistent
with a critical role for the delayed expression of Cry1 and its exclusive ability to support cycling in minimal cellular
oscillators.− Accumulating evidence from genetic, chemogenetic,
and computational modeling studies further supports the spatiotemporal
separation of key PER and CRY functions in the feedback loop.− Recent structural and biochemical data further support this exciting
new role for CRY1 and will be discussed below.

Protein Architecture of
Core Circadian Transcriptional Regulators
The repertoire
of high-resolution structures of mammalian clock
proteins has grown dramatically in the past three years to include
most of the structured domains of the core positive and negative circadian
regulators (Table  and Figure ). These structures provide a foundation for understanding
the biochemistry of clock proteins and yield insight into the disruptive
power of mutations that arise from forward genetic screens. The conservation
of domain architectures between positive and negative regulators suggests
that they use common structural motifs to interact with DNA and/or
core clock proteins (Figure ). For example,
REV-ERB proteins share the same common nuclear receptor architecture
as the RORs, although they bind different ligands within their LBDs
and lack a specific helix that is needed to interact with transcriptional
coactivators, thus designating them as constitutive repressors. By contrast, CLOCK and BMAL1 are defined by
their tandem PAS domains, which mediate heterodimerization, and disordered C-termini that regulate their
activity.,− PER proteins also have
tandem PAS domains that control formation of PER homo- and heterodimers, followed by a long, disordered C-terminus that contains binding
sites for kinases and cryptochrome.,

Domain architecture
of core circadian transcriptional regulators.
The location and size of conserved domains within core clock proteins
are indicated according to the scale bar.

Mammalian Clock Protein Structures
protein	domain(s)	ligand	method	resolution (Å)	PDB entry	year	
mCLOCK:mBMAL1	bHLH	DNA	xtal	2.27	4H10	2012	
mCLOCK:mBMAL1	bHLH-PAS-AB	 	xtal	2.40	4F3L	2012	
mBMAL2	PAS-B	 	NMR	 	2KDK	2011	
mPER1	PAS-AB	 	xtal	2.75	4DJ2	2012	
mPER2	PAS-AB	 	xtal	2.40	3GDI	2009	
mPER3	PAS-AB	 	xtal	2.50	4DJ3	2012	
mCRY1	PHR-CC	 	xtal	2.65	4K0R	2013	
mCRY1	PHR-CC	PER2 CBD	xtal	2.45	4CT0	2014	
mCRY2	PHR-CC	 	xtal	2.70	4I6E	2013	
mCRY2	PHR-CC	FAD	xtal	2.20	4I6G	2013	
mCRY2	PHR-CC	FBXL3-SKP1	xtal	2.70	4I6J	2013	
mCRY2	PHR-CC	KL001	xtal	1.94	4MLP	2013	
hREV-ERBα	LBD	NCoR peptide	xtal	2.60	3N00	2010	
hREV-ERBα	DBD	DNA	xtal	2.80	1HLZ	2001	
hREV-ERBβ	LBD	 	xtal	2.40	2V0V	2007	
hREV-ERBβ	LBD	heme	xtal	1.90	3CQV	2008	
hRORα	LBD	cholesterol	xtal	1.63	1N83	2002	
rRORβ	LBD	retinoic acid	xtal	1.50	1NQ7	2003	
hRORγ	LBD	hydroxycholesterol	xtal	2.35	3KYT	2010	
Core transcriptional
regulators
only.

The NMR structure
represents 10
lowest-energy structures.

Release date.

Cryptochromes
have a protein architecture distinctly different
from those of the other core clock proteins as they lack PAS domains.
Most of the protein is composed of a photolyase homology region (PHR)
that is strongly structurally similar to photolyase. In addition to the PHR, cryptochromes possess disordered
C-termini that are not present in photolyase ancestors. Also unique
to mammalian cryptochromes is a highly conserved helix just after
the PHR that has a periodic spacing of nonpolar residues common to
coiled coils, thus designated the CC helix. The CC helix plays a central role in the biochemistry of the mammalian
clock by facilitating competitive interactions between CRY and its
E3 ubiquitin ligase FBXL3 and PER to
regulate its stability and by mediating the ability of CRY to repress
the CLOCK:BMAL1 complex. The structural
basis of competition for the cryptochrome CC helix will be discussed
below.

PAS Domains
Present in tandem in three of the four
core clock proteins, PAS
domains have a central role in clock protein function. Originally identified through conservation of
a minimal sequence motif from Drosophila to mammals
(Figure A), PAS
domains function as sensors of chemicals and light and act as oligomerization
nodes. Since the original identification of the PAS motif, the definition
of a PAS domain has been expanded to include the highly conserved
secondary structure topology, consisting of a five-stranded antiparallel
β-sheet flanked on one side by a series of α-helices.
These strands are named alphabetically from the first (Aβ) to
the final β-strand (Iβ) of the domain (Figure B). The original PAS
motif is restricted to the conserved residues that form the short
helices that run along the front of the PAS domain, and the accompanying
PAS-associated C-terminal (PAC) motif encompasses part of the β-sheet.
While acknowledging the historical significance and sequence conservation
of PAS motifs, we argue that it is important to define PAS domains
as their folded, biologically relevant domains rather than fragmented
sequence motifs. A comparison of the boundaries of PAS domains identified
in the recent crystal structures of clock proteins to the bioinformatic
PAS/PAC predictions is illustrated in Table .

PAS domain. (A) Alignment of UniPROT PAS motifs for mammalian CLOCK,
BMAL1, and PER2. (B) Secondary structure topology of PAS domains.
The core PAS fold is encoded by the structural elements colored light
gray, while the dark gray A′α and Jα helices represent
structural elements associated with certain PAS domains. N indicates
the N-terminus and C the C-terminus. (C) Tertiary structure of a PAS
domain. Secondary structure elements are labeled throughout the mouse
BMAL1 PAS-B domain (PDB entry 4F3L). (D) Conservation of the PAS domain
core in PAS-A and PAS-B domains despite distinct changes in domain
size: gray, BMAL1 PAS-B domain; blue, BMAL1 PAS-A domain (PDB entry 4F3L). Note the lack
of structured FG, GH, and HI loops (dashed blue lines) and the presence
of an A′α helix for the PAS-A crystal structure.

PAS Domain Boundaries
in Representative
Clock Proteins
protein	domain	residues	motif	residues	
CLOCK	PAS-A	106–258	PAS 1	107–177	
 	PAS-B	274–376	PAS 2	262–332	
 	 	 	PAC	336–379	
BMAL1	PAS-A	142–320	PAS 1	143–215	
 	PAS-B	353–442	PAS 2	327–397	
 	 	 	PAC	402–445	
PER2	PAS-A	191–315	PAS 1	179–246	
 	PAS-B	329–435	PAS 2	319–385	
 	 	 	PAC	393–436	
UniPROT accession numbers: mCLOCK,
O08785; mBMAL1, Q9WTL8–4; mPER2, O54943.

Determined from domain boundaries
in crystal structures 4F3L and 3GDI; includes A′α helix (PAS-A) or Jα helix (PAS-B)
where appropriate.

From
the UniPROT database (http://www.uniprot.org).

Several features distinguish the
PAS-A and PAS-B domains of tandem
PAS-containing proteins, although they share the same core PAS domain
fold (Figure D). PAS-A domains frequently
possess an N-terminal helix termed A′α that docks onto
the β-sheet to mediate PAS–PAS interactions (Figure B,D). PAS-A domains
also tend to have longer flexible loops (∼25–35 residues)
between the Gβ–Hβ and Hβ–Iβ
strands (known as the GH and HI loops, respectively). The importance
of these disordered loops within PAS-A domains is generally not well
understood within the bHLH-PAS family. The loops could be regulated
by post-translational modification or mediate interactions with transcriptional
regulatory proteins, both of which are facilitated by backbone flexibility. Along these lines, the BMAL1 PAS-A domain is
sumoylated at a conserved lysine in the GH loop to regulate CLOCK:BMAL1
activity through an unknown mechanism. By contrast, PAS-B domains are generally much more compact than
PAS-A domains with shorter loops (Figure D).
Some PAS-B domains have a C-terminal helix termed Jα (Figure B) that can dock onto either the α-helical
or β-sheet face of the PAS-B domain in a reversible manner to
regulate PAS domain function., Therefore, not all
PAS domains are alike, although they share a common core fold, suggesting
that PAS-A and PAS-B domains could contribute to clock regulation
through different mechanisms.

Both the α-helical and β-sheet
interfaces of PAS domains
can interact with PAS domains and other proteins in a variety of modes
to control the architecture of transcriptional regulatory complexes.,− For example, the ARNT PAS-B domain simultaneously
mediates heterodimer formation with the PAS-B domain of its bHLH-PAS
partner HIF-2α and recruits coactivators needed to activate
gene expression for hypoxia adaptation. Notably, the PAS domains of CLOCK, BMAL1, and PER have been implicated
in the recruitment of PER to the CLOCK:BMAL1 complex by truncation/co-IP
studies from cells, but we still lack
biochemical confirmation of direct interactions in vitro. Understanding how the PAS domains of mammalian clock proteins assemble
transcriptional regulatory complexes will provide important insight
into clock function.

The close relationship of mammalian PAS
domains to those in plants
and bacteria that bind small molecule ligands and possess direct sensory
capabilities suggests the intriguing possibility that small molecule
metabolites could regulate clock function through the PAS domains. Indeed, the PAS domains of PER, CLOCK, and NPAS2
are reported to bind heme in vitro;− however, there is some disagreement over heme binding, and the physiological relevance of these interactions
has yet to be clearly demonstrated in cell-based assays or in vivo.− The general plasticity of PAS domains that allows this small conserved
fold to accommodate chemically diverse ligands has been exploited
to find small molecules that bind within the solvated cores of PAS
domains in the mammalian hypoxia adaptation response pathway. Ligand binding within the PAS-B domains of HIF-2α
and ARNT allosterically regulates protein interactions to inhibit
transcriptional responses to hypoxia.− While researchers may have yet
to identify endogenous ligands for PAS domains in circadian proteins,
it may be possible to identify exogenous ligands that target PAS domains
of the molecular clock to exploit them for regulation.

Period: A PAS
Dimer at the Heart of the Clock
PER proteins have a fundamentally
important role within the mammalian
circadian clock, as changes in their post-translational modification
state throughout the day exert exquisite control over the stability
and localization of early PER:CRY repressive complexes. Attenuating this process with kinase inhibitors
can lengthen the period of the molecular clock,,,,, demonstrating that PER proteins help establish the
rather long, circadian period of the feedback loop. Moreover, induction
of Per mRNA by external stimuli known as zeitgebers (time givers) controls the phase of the molecular
oscillator to synchronize internal clocks with the environment. Because PER proteins are stoichiometrically
limiting for the assembly of clock protein complexes, the introduction of naïve PER protein at different
points within the feedback loop appears to advance or delay the molecular
oscillator by controlling assembly of the early repressive complex.
Therefore, understanding the biochemical basis of PER interactions
with other clock proteins and transcriptional regulators will provide
key insights into the molecular basis of circadian timing.

PER
proteins exist as homo- and heterodimers in vivo, and given the observation of PAS dimers
in other systems, attention focused on
the PAS domains as likely candidates for dimerization domains. Crystal
structures have been determined for the tandem PAS domains of all
three PER proteins, each displaying the same PAS-B-mediated dimer
(Figure A,B)., The PAS-B
β-sheets interact in an antiparallel orientation (Figure E,F) like the HIF-2α:ARNT PAS-B dimer, using a highly conserved tryptophan in the HI
loop (W419 in PER2) to pack onto a predominantly hydrophobic cleft
on the β-sheet of its partner (Figure G). This appears to be the predominant dimer interface within full-length
proteins, and disruption of these interactions alters the mobility
of full-length PER proteins in the cell. Moreover, in-frame deletion of the PAS-B domain in the Per2Brdm mutant disrupts clock function, but it is unclear whether the phenotype arises
from loss of PER dimers or disruption of other functions. One such
role could be subcellular localization, as each PAS-B domain has a
C-terminal Jα helix that comprises an active nuclear export
signal. Residues of the export motif
also mediate direct interaction with the α-helical face of the
PAS-B domain,, suggesting that the structure
represents an inhibited NES and that the interaction is regulated
and/or reversible in solution. Given that the β-TrCP-dependent
PER2 phosphodegron is also located immediately downstream of the Jα
helix, these structural insights hint
that there is still rich biochemistry to explore within the PAS domain
structures.

PER2 PAS-AB dimer structure. (A) Crystal structure of the mouse
PER2 tandem PAS-AB domains (PDB entry 3GDI). Monomers are colored orange and olive
and the Jα helices tan. The conserved LXXLL motif in PER2 PAS-A
is colored red. Dashed lines represent disordered loops absent in
the crystal structure. (B) Cartoon of the relative PAS domain orientations
in the crystal structure. (C) PER2 has an LXXLL motif not conserved
in PER1 or PER3. (D) Close-up of the LXXLL motif in the PER2 PAS-A
domain with side chains of the motif leucines labeled. (E) Antiparallel
orientation of the PAS-B dimer, shown without PAS-A domains for the
sake of clarity. (F) Cartoon of the relative orientation of the PAS-B
domains, illustrating contacts between the HI loop of one domain and
the β-sheet of the other domain. (G) Close-up of the HI loop
with the side chain of residue W419 shown docking into its hydrophobic
cleft on the β-sheet of its partner PAS domain.

The PAS-A domains sit above the PAS-B dimer and
lack substantial
contacts with either the PAS-B domains or each other, suggesting that
they have the ability to assume various structures in solution. The
PER2 PAS-A domain has an LXXLL motif that is needed to interact with
REV-ERBα and other nuclear receptors (Figure A–C). Canonical LXXLL
motifs present the conserved leucine side chains on one face of a
helix to interact with a host of transcriptional regulators., However, the LXXLL motif in PER2 is embedded with the Iβ strand
of the PAS-A domain (Figure D), suggesting
that it may not have a role in direct binding, at least in terms of
a canonical LXXLL motif. Nevertheless, mutational analyses of this
region show that this PAS-AB interface is important for interaction
with nuclear receptors. Further study
here will help to define how PERs could regulate transcription outside
of the core clock loop, consistent with their recruitment to thousands
of sites throughout the day outside of CLOCK:BMAL1 control, including
nuclear receptor motifs.

A region
comprising the tandem PAS domains of PER has been found
to interact with the PAS-containing regions of individual CLOCK and
BMAL1 proteins by co-IP, and is generally presumed
to represent the basis for recruitment of PER:CRY complexes to CLOCK:BMAL1
early in the repressive phase of the feedback loop. However, full-length
PER2 purified from insect or mammalian cells either as a pure protein
or in complex with CRY1, respectively, does not interact directly
with the CLOCK:BMAL1 complex on DNA in vitro;, either the purified protein(s) lacks essential post-translational
modification(s) needed to interact with each other, or other proteins
are needed to bridge the interaction. While co-IP assays provide some
insight into protein complexes, they lack the ability to elucidate
direct protein interactions within complexes or discriminate possible
heterogeneity of complexes in solution. Therefore, the question of
how early repressive PER:CRY complexes are recruited to DNA-bound
CLOCK:BMAL1 remains one of the central unanswered questions in the
biochemistry of the mammalian clock.

Aside from the tandem PAS
domains, PER proteins are largely unstructured,
a feature that PER proteins share with their functional analogue FRQ
in Neurospora. The lack
of intrinsic structure in a protein with many interaction partners
provides a thermodynamic advantage by allowing specificity and affinity to be tuned
for multiple partners., In addition to binding promiscuity,
unstructured regions could allow for variable post-translational modifications
and rapid degradation when not in complex with their binding partners.
Many examples of how intrinsic disorder modulates protein stability
have been noted in other systems, including
the immediate post-translational degradation of the Neurospora
crassa clock protein FRQ when not in complex with its partner,
FRH. Because the lack of tertiary structure
removes purely architectural constraints on conservation, alignment
of intrinsically disordered regions tends to highlight functionally
important residues. Algorithms such as PONDR use sequence biases to
predict disorder, but of particular interest
are predictions for short regions of order within long stretches of
disorder, represented as downward spikes in the PONDR prediction (Figure A). These “minima” represent regions
with increased propensity to form secondary structure, typically α-helices,
which often act to nucleate formation of protein interactions. Aside from the ordered PAS domains, many of
the minima in PER2 have weak predictions of secondary structure and
high levels of sequence conservation, serving as a useful guide for
future biochemical studies of PER function.

Conservation and disorder
in PER2. (A) The domain architecture
of PER2 is aligned above the PONDR prediction of disorder. Within
this plot, curves below the red dashed line are predicted to be ordered
while those above the line are flexible; stretches longer than 30
residues are classified as “intrinsic disorder”. Regions
exhibiting a high degree of conservation (cons.) between PER1 and
PER2 are represented as black bars below the domain schematic. Gray
boxes denote known regions of functional importance: PAS dimer, kinase-binding
SYQ/LT regions, and the CRY-binding domain (CBD). (B) Alignment of
the SYQ-phosphorylation-LT region shows conservation of key sequence
motifs among human and Drosophila PER proteins and
the C. elegans PER-homologue LIN-42, isoform b.

Binding sites for kinases CKIδ
and CKIε represented
by the SYQ and LT motifs are minima that are highly conserved in PER
across phyla (Figure A,B). Conservation of these regions with the Caenorhabditis
elegans PER homologue LIN-42, which controls developmental timing,, and in Drosophila where it impacts PER clock function suggests that they represent an ancient site
for regulation of PER activity. The multisite phosphorylation cassette
that controls subcellular localization of mammalian PERs is located
between the SYQ and LT motifs (Figure B). We speculate that additional conserved minima
in PER2 may recruit other proteins to form the native megadalton transcriptional
regulatory complexes seen in vivo.− The extreme
C-terminus of PER1 and PER2, but not PER3, harbors a conserved CRY-binding
domain (CBD) that is essential for clock function.,, Control of CRY through its interaction with
PER at this site represents a critical component of the mammalian
feedback loop. Therefore, the absence of this motif in PER3 may explain
its nonessential role in the circadian feedback loop,, while still allowing for modulation of circadian timing through
heterodimer formation with PER1 or PER2 to titrate CRY recruitment
from the early repressive complex.

CRY1:
The Circadian Repressor
Since their discovery 15 years ago,
CRY proteins have been acknowledged
as a key negative regulator of the core circadian feedback loop. Cryptochromes
repress CLOCK:BMAL1 transcriptional activation in reporter assays,
and their loss in Cry1–/–Cry2–/– animals leads to an increased level of expression of clock
target genes and disruption of the feedback loop, consistent with
global derepression of CLOCK:BMAL1.,,, However, the mechanism
by which cryptochromes repress CLOCK:BMAL1 to “close”
the feedback loop on a daily basis is still not known. Early studies
of native clock proteins by co-IP demonstrated that PER:CRY complexes
interact with CLOCK:BMAL1 in the early phase of repression, helping
to establish the canonical model for the feedback loop (Figure A). Concurrent with
these studies, it was observed that CRY can repress CLOCK:BMAL1 after
transient transfection in cell-based reporter assays without stoichiometric
PER, including in heterologous systems that lack all mammalian PERs. While these initial studies provided clear
evidence that CRY does not need PER to assert its repressive function
on CLOCK:BMAL1, concerns over artifacts from transfection studies
proved the need for further studies to resolve the roles of PER and
CRY in the clock.

Recent biochemical, structural, and genomic
mapping studies highlight
several lines of evidence that challenge the canonical feedback loop
model. First, CRY interacts with the CLOCK:BMAL1 complex on DNA in vitro and in vivo to form what has been
dubbed the “late repressive complex” (Figure C).,, In the mouse liver, CRY is found at the CLOCK:BMAL1 complex on DNA
in the early morning without PER; this ternary complex is suggested
to represent a poised but repressed state that holds off activation
by the histone acetyltransferases p300/CBP until the appropriate time
of day. Consistent with this, PER proteins
are not needed for CRY to repress CLOCK:BMAL1 activation of the Dbp locus in vivo.() Second, PER proteins titrate CRY away from ternary CLOCK:BMAL1:CRY
complexes in vitro and in vivo.(,,) The C-terminal CRY-binding domain
(CBD) of PER1 and PER2 is sufficient for this activity,, and the feedback loop is disrupted when the PER2 CBD is constitutively
expressed. Thus, one function of early
repressive complexes may be to protect and hold CRY stably in reserve,
bound to PER, until the initiation of the late repressive phase when
CRY interacts directly with CLOCK:BMAL1., This model may explain the sensitivity of the circadian feedback
loop to PER:CRY stoichiometry.,, Given the body of evidence that points to both independent and combined
roles for PER and CRY, it is time to reevaluate the canonical model
for the mammalian circadian feedback loop.

Cryptochrome structure
is largely based on its homology to photolyase,
encompassing an ∼50 kDa photolyase homology region (PHR) with
an N-terminal α/β-domain and C-terminal α-helical
domain that harbors the canonical flavin-binding site. Mammalian CRYs bind FAD weakly because of structural
variations that create a flavin-binding site much shallower than that
of photolyases., The predominant structural features
that distinguish CRYs from photolyase are their disordered C-terminal
tails. The CRY C-termini are divergent
from one another and dispensable for generating the molecular feedback
loop, but their deletion alters the period and amplitude of cycling,, indicating that they can modulate clock protein function. Consistent
with this regulatory role, the C-termini possess several phosphorylation
sites and a nuclear localization signal.− To date, no CRY structures have included the C-terminal tails, most
likely because of their intrinsic flexibility. However, the C-termini
interact in trans with the PHR in vitro and are partially protected from proteolysis in the full-length
protein, suggesting that interaction with the PHR may impart some
order to the tails., Understanding the cryptic role
of CRY C-termini interactions with the PHR and other clock proteins
represents a structural biology challenge that may require moving
beyond X-ray crystallography.

Two highly conserved motifs on
CRY are needed for its function
in the clock: a hydrophobic motif adjacent to the flavin-binding site
termed the interface loop or C-terminal lid, and the CC helix. The PER2 CBD and the E3 ubiquitin ligase FBXL3 both engage these motifs, wrapping snugly around
the CC helix (Figure A). The overlapping nature
of binding sites on the CRY CC helix nicely explains the stabilizing
effect that PER has on CRY in vivo;, by interacting with the PER2 CBD, CRY is restricted from interacting
with its E3 ubiquitin ligase. Moreover,
these structures demonstrate how the small molecule KL001 stabilizes
CRY by competing with the FBXL3 C-terminus for binding at the flavin-binding
cleft., Altogether, an elegant integration of high-resolution
structures, biochemistry, and in vivo studies provides
a solid model for regulation of CRY stability and localization predicated
on antagonistic interactions at overlapping binding sites.

Competition
for the CC helix controls CRY function in the feedback
loop. (A) Crystal structures of mouse CRY2 in complex with FBXL3:SKP1
(top, PDB entry 4I6J) and mouse CRY1 in complex with PER2 CBD (bottom, PDB entry 4CT0) illustrate their
overlapping binding sites. The location of FBXL3 Afterhours and Overtime mutations is depicted with the residues
shown as spheres (citron). The location of CRY1:PER2-coordinated zinc
is shown as a sphere (teal). (B) Crystal structure of apo mouse CRY2
(PDB entry 4I6E) colored red with residues needed for repression of CLOCK:BMAL1
colored blue. Residues that confer CRY1 activity to CRY2 are colored
yellow. (C) Close-up of one face of CRY illustrating residues needed
for CLOCK:BMAL1 repression. Side chains for CRY1 residues that confer
cycling ability to CRY2 are colored yellow, with black labels; side
chains for residues needed to repress CLOCK:BMAL1 are colored blue,
with blue labels above the box.

The elusive role of Timeless in the mammalian clock may result from its involvement in this competitive,
regulatory mechanism through its interactions with the CRY CC helix. As a replication fork-associated factor, Timeless is involved in DNA damage repair and
checkpoint activation, and its expression is strictly controlled by
the cell cycle.,,− Therefore, its interaction with CRY suggests that it may serve to
connect the circadian clock with cellular proliferation. Exciting studies also suggest that Timeless
could play a role in conveying phase-resetting zeitgebers arising from DNA damage to the core feedback loop.,− Finally, like PER, cryptochromes also interact
with nuclear receptors and are recruited
to thousands of sites outside of CLOCK:BMAL1 regulation each day to
expand the scope of circadian transcriptional regulation. Defining the molecular basis of these interactions
with CRY will provide further insight into its regulation and activity
in the core clock feedback loop and beyond.

Underscoring the
importance of competition for CRY regulation,
the same interface used as a hot spot to regulate CRY localization
and stability is also needed to regulate CLOCK:BMAL1 activity., The CC helix interacts directly with the transcriptional activation
domain (TAD) of BMAL1 in vitro, and mutations of the BMAL1 TAD or CRY CC decrease the level
of repression by CRY.,, Additional residues needed to repress CLOCK:BMAL1 activity and drive
the feedback loop surround the CC helix (Figure B,C). Some of these residues are unique to CRY1 and can confer the
ability to drive cycling in minimal cellular oscillators to CRY2,
a property it otherwise lacks without compensation from systemic properties., The presence of distinctive residues within the CRY1 PHR required
for repression that do not overlay the PER2 CBD-binding site suggests they may be involved in interactions
with CLOCK:BMAL1. While the model that holds CRY may function by antagonizing
coactivators to hold off transcription has been slowly emerging over
the past few years, the mechanism by which cryptochromes interact
with and repress CLOCK:BMAL1 has not yet been elucidated.

CLOCK:BMAL1:
The Principal Circadian Transcription Factor
Although a detailed
model of the core circadian feedback loop is
beginning to emerge, many questions remain. Recent structures of the
CLOCK:BMAL1 heterodimer provide a solid foundation for these models
by elucidating the protein architecture of the primary circadian transcription
factor and how it binds DNA. Functional studies augment the crystal
structure models and demonstrate that intrinsically disordered regions
in both CLOCK and BMAL1 (Figure A) play critical
roles in regulation of CLOCK:BMAL1 activity in vivo,,−,, as they do within the larger
bHLH-PAS family of transcription factors.

CLOCK:BMAL1
bHLH-PAS dimer structure. (A) Crystal structures of
the bHLH dimer:E-box complex (orange, PDB entry 4H10) and the bHLH-PAS-AB
dimer (PDB entry 4F3L) overlaid with CLOCK (green) and BMAL1 (blue). Dashed lines indicate
intrinsically disordered C-terminal regions containing functionally
important regions, including CLOCK exon 19, the acetyl-CoA-binding
motif (Ac), the glutamine-rich (Q-rich) region, and the BMAL1 transcriptional
activation domain (TAD). K259 (dark blue) is the SUMOylation site
on BMAL1 PAS-A. (B) Depiction of interactions between the PAS-A domains,
shown in isolation at a 90° rotation relative to the left structure
in panel A. (C) Depiction of interactions between the PAS-B domains,
shown in isolation, with mutations within the CLOCK PAS-B domain that
decrease the level of CRY binding and/or repression of the CLOCK:BMAL1
complex.

During the active phase of the
circadian complex, the transcriptional
coactivators CBP and p300 interact directly with BMAL1 to initiate
transcription through acetylation of histone H3 and recruitment of
basal transcriptional machinery at E-box promoter regions.,− Somewhat perplexingly, CBP and p300 also interact with PER and are
found in the early repressive PER:CRY complex, while they are absent
from the late repressive complex that contains CRY1. CLOCK:BMAL1 also recruits additional coactivators during
the active phase of transcription, including MLL and TRAP150.,, The molecular mechanisms that
lead to transcriptional activation at CLOCK:BMAL1 sites, and therefore
reinitiation of the feedback loop, are still relatively poorly defined
but play an important role in the feedback loop mechanism.

A
structure of the bHLH heterodimer in complex with its cognate
E-box recognition sequence provides the first detailed view of interactions
that determine the specificity of recruitment of CLOCK:BMAL1 to DNA
and its regulation by phosphorylation., In contrast
to studies showing a dramatic effect of the redox state of NAD cofactors
on DNA binding in vitro,, this new study finds no effect of NAD cofactors on the conformation
of the bHLH heterodimers or their affinity for DNA. Moreover, the redox ratios of NAD cofactors previously
found to influence the CLOCK:BMAL1 complex are not likely to occur
in cells, indicating that DNA binding
is probably not regulated directly by changes in NAD redox status.
The structure of the isolated bHLH domains bound to DNA is highly
similar to that of bHLH domains within the larger bHLH-PAS-AB heterodimer
structure obtained in the absence of DNA (Figure A), suggesting that large changes
in conformation of the bHLH domains upon DNA binding are unlikely.

CLOCK and BMAL1 PAS domains form the major basis for heterodimer
recognition and stability of the complex. Within the complex, both BMAL1 PAS domains are presented on one
face and the CLOCK PAS domains on the other (Figure A). The PAS-A domains form the heart of the heterodimer complex
by swapping their A′α helices to interact with the β-sheet
of the opposing PAS-A domain (Figure B), and
disruption of this helical embrace significantly disrupts heterodimer
stability in cells. A mutation in the
linker between the CLOCK PAS-A and PAS-B domains (I254N) found in
a zebrafish ENU screen causes a short period; Ile254 is buried under the CLOCK:BMAL1 PAS-B domains and
relatively inaccessible to solvent, suggesting that the mutation may
influence the packing or flexibility of the two PAS-B domains in relation
to the bHLH-PAS-A core of the complex. The BMAL1 PAS-B domain β-sheet
sits atop the α-helical face of the CLOCK PAS-B domain in a
parallel orientation (Figure C). One consequence
of this tandem arrangement is that the β-sheet of CLOCK PAS-B
remains largely exposed, in contrast to most other PAS domains studied
to date, which seem to have an obligate requirement to engage their
β-sheets in protein interactions.

In addition to mediating heterodimerization of bHLH-PAS proteins,
PAS domains can also recruit regulatory proteins to control transcription.,,, As noted earlier, it is unclear if PER proteins can interact directly
with the CLOCK:BMAL1 complex on DNA., CRY interacts
with the CLOCK PAS-B domain by a yeast two-hybrid form, and mutation
of two residues within the HI loop of the PAS-B domain disrupts binding. Other mutations within the HI loop or directly
adjacent to it on the CLOCK PAS-B domain reduce the level of CRY repression
of the CLOCK:BMAL1 complex in vivo (Figure C)., Furthermore, mutation of the
BMAL1 TAD disrupts interactions with the CRY1 CC helix and synergistically
decreases the level of repression by CRY when assayed with CLOCK PAS-B
mutants., These data suggest that CRY interacts with
multiple distinct sites on CLOCK:BMAL1, likely a component of its
potent repressive activity toward the complex.

Regions downstream
of the PAS domains lack ordered structure, and
few in vitro biochemical or biophysical studies have
been conducted on the isolated CLOCK or BMAL1 C-termini. However, we believe that the C-termini represent
an exciting frontier that is rich with unexplored biology because
they are essential for regulating the activity of CLOCK:BMAL1.,−,,,, The activity of the CLOCK:BMAL1 complex is not simply predicated
on DNA binding as it bound to E-boxes throughout much of the day (Figure B)., Therefore, describing the mechanisms
by which positive and negative acting factors are recruited via the
C-termini to control the activity of the complex should yield important
insight into clock function. As noted earlier, flexibility of the
C-termini is likely an important aspect of CLOCK:BMAL1 function, a
property that is common to other “malleable machines”
involved in transcriptional regulation. For example, how the acetyl CoA-binding motif of CLOCK confers acetylation
to clock proteins, in the absence of a canonical
MYST family HAT domain structure remains
to be shown. Moreover, short regions of predicted order such as the
51-residue α-helical exon 19 are essential for clock function by interacting with positive and negative transcriptional
regulators, yet exist within a sea of disordered
protein. The intrinsic flexibility of these regions may allow them
to interact with a host of binding partners in a temporally dependent
manner, allowing intrinsic timekeeping of the circadian clock to be
finely tuned by interactions between regulatory proteins, possibly
in a tissue-specific manner.

Conclusion
We believe that continuing
to integrate in vivo and in vitro studies will provide deep insight
into the fundamental, biochemical processes that establish circadian
timing in mammals. The recent abundance of high-resolution structures
has provided a much-needed visualization of clock proteins and their
interactions at the atomic level. However, many important regions
of clock proteins are not depicted in these crystal structures because
they lack a single, static structure. Protein flexibility is inherent
to transcriptional regulators because it dramatically expands their
repertoire of protein interactions,, even helping
to establish the time scale and/or magnitude of gene activation. Therefore, it is important that a wide range
of techniques (crystallography, NMR, SAXS, EM, HDX MS, and native
MS) be utilized to fully describe protein interactions and their dynamics
that give rise to circadian timing.

Looking forward, we believe
this is a truly exciting time for the
field of circadian biology. We now possess the tools to probe clock
protein function from complex animal models down to the resolution
of structural details to learn how the clock sets intrinsic timing
and interfaces with metabolism, tissue-specific factors, and pathophysiological
states. There is no shortage of surprises at the complex and elegant
biochemistry of the clock. The recent discovery of ancient, redox-based
post-translational circadian oscillators conserved from archaebacteria
to humans, (and see review by O’Neill
et al. in this issue) highlights that we are still learning ways in
which living organisms have evolved to coordinate their activity with
the environment.

This work
was
supported by a grant from the National Institutes of Health (R01 GM107069)
and the University of California Cancer Research Coordinating Committee
to C.L.P.

The authors
declare no competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
We thank Eva Wolf for
sharing coordinates of the mCRY1:PER2
CBD crystal structure (PDB entry 4CT0) prior to its release. We apologize to
colleagues whose work could not be cited because of space considerations.

Abbreviations
Acacetyl-CoA-binding motif

ARNTaryl hydrocarbon nuclear
translocator

ARNTLARNT-like 1

bHLHbasic helix–loop–helix

BMAL1brain and muscle ARNT-like 1

CBDCRY-binding domain

CBPCREB-binding protein

CCcoiled coil

CCGclock-controlled gene

ChIP-Seqchromatin
immunoprecipitation sequencing

CKIcasein kinase I

CLOCKcircadian locomotor output cycles kaput

co-IPco-immunoprecipitation

CREBcyclic AMP response
element-binding protein

CRYcryptochrome

CTcircadian time

DBDDNA-binding domain

DBPD site-binding protein

EMelectron microscopy

EMSAelectrophoretic mobility shift assay

ENUN-ethyl-N-nitrosourea

FRQfrequency

GRglucocorticoid receptor

HAThistone acetyltransferase

HDX MShydrogen–deuterium exchange mass spectrometry

LBDligand-binding
domain

NMRnuclear
magnetic resonance

NRnuclear receptor

PASPER-ARNT-SIM

PDBProtein Data Bank

PERperiod

REV-ERBreverse strand of ERB

REV-ReREV-ERB response element

RORretinoic acid-related orphan receptor

ROREROR response element

SAXSsmall-angle X-ray
scattering

SIMsingle-minded

TADtranscriptional
activation domain

TTFLtranscription/translation feedback loop.

