Canonical
DNA and RNA polymerases
all synthesize nucleic acids in the 5′–3′ direction
by virtue of the attack of a 3′-hydroxyl from the growing polynucleotide
chain on the 5′-triphosphate of an incoming NTP., Enzymes of the tRNAHis guanylyltransferase (Thg1)/Thg1-like
protein (TLP) superfamily are the only known exceptions to this rule., Thg1/TLP enzymes use the reverse chemistry, promoting the 3′-hydroxyl
of an incoming NTP to attack a 5′-triphosphate (or similarly
activated 5′-end) on the growing polynucleotide chain, thus
achieving nucleotide addition in the opposite (3′–5′)
direction compared to all other known polymerases., In
eukaryotes, Thg1 enzymes use the 3′–5′ addition
reaction to add a single G residue (G–1) to the
5′-end of tRNAHis,,, while TLPs utilize 3′–5′ polymerase
chemistry to repair 5′-truncated tRNAs, which is a required
reaction during mitochondrial 5′-tRNA editing and is likely
involved in additional physiological processes.,− Despite the fact that Thg1 enzymes share no obvious
sequence similarity with any other known enzyme family, the crystal
structures of human Thg1 and bacterial TLP revealed that Thg1 family
enzymes utilize a conserved active site that is strikingly similar
to that of canonical 5′–3′ DNA/RNA polymerases
to catalyze the 3′–5′ addition reaction., This observation raises new questions about the relationship between
5′–3′ and 3′–5′ polymerase
enzymes and the possibility of more widespread use of the 3′–5′
polymerase active site in biology.

Transient kinetic assays
have been developed to characterize each
of the three chemical steps that comprise the single-nucleotide (G–1) addition reaction, which is observed with 5′-monophosporylated
eukaryotic (A73-containing) tRNAHis substrates.
These chemical steps are (1) activation of the 5′-monophosphorylated
tRNA by adenylylation, (2) nucleotidyl transfer to add the incoming
NTP to the activated 5′-end of the tRNA, and (3) removal of
the 5′-pyrophosphate from the added G–1 nucleotide
(Figure S1 of the ). Thg1 enzymes can also catalyze 3′–5′
addition via an ATP-independent mechanism that bypasses the first
of these three chemical steps and utilizes a 5′-triphosphorylated
tRNA as the activated substrate for nucleotidyl transfer (Figure S1
of the ). This ATP-independent
reaction was first observed in vitro with 5′-triphosphorylated
transcripts and also occurs during the
3′–5′ polymerase reaction, once the first nucleotide
has been added to the 5′-end of the tRNA (Figure B). The transient kinetic
assays, in combination with alterations of Thg1 active site residues,
revealed information about the molecular function of two nucleotides
visualized in the Thg1 structure., Despite this
information, many questions about the molecular mechanism of Thg1
catalysis remain unanswered, including the positions of the bound
tRNA substrate and the incoming NTP that is added to the 5′-end,
the basis for selection of a non-WC templated G–1 versus Watson–Crick (WC) base-pairing nucleotides during
tRNA repair, and the roles of multiple conformational changes that
are likely to occur during the reaction.

Alternative biochemical
reactions catalyzed by SceThg1. (A) SceThg1
catalyzes non-Watson–Crick addition of G–1 to wild-type (A73-containing) tRNAHis. After
addition of the G–1 residue, SceThg1 removes pyrophosphate
from the 5′-end of the wild-type tRNA. (B) SceThg1 catalyzes
Watson–Crick-dependent 3′–5′ polymerization
with C73-containing tRNAHis variant substrates.
For this reaction, SceThg1 is presumed to use the 5′-triphosphate
generated after each nucleotide is added as the activated end for
the next nucleotide addition. Red boxes indicate the 5′- and
3′-termini of tRNA transcripts used as substrates to study
pyrophosphate removal vs nucleotide addition in this work.

One unanswered question is the molecular basis
for distinct biochemical
properties associated with eukaryotic Thg1-type enzymes compared with
their largely bacterial and archaeal TLP counterparts. Eukaryotic
Thg1 enzymes such as Saccharomyces cerevisiae Thg1
(SceThg1, formerly termed yThg1) catalyze two different types of 3′–5′
addition reactions with similar kinetic efficiency, depending on the
tRNAHis substrate (Figure ). The first reaction is non-WC base-paired addition
of G–1 opposite A73 observed with wild-type
tRNAHis (Figure A), and the second
is WC-templated 3′–5′ polymerization of multiple
G-C or C-G base pairs observed with tRNAHis variants (Figure B). TLPs, on the other hand, are exclusively template-dependent
3′–5′ polymerases and do not efficiently add
the non-WC paired G–1 nucleotide., Moreover,
SceThg1 does not polymerize multiple A-U or U-A base pairs with tRNAHis, while TLPs catalyze polymerization of all four WC base-paired
nucleotides., A key feature of the eukaryote-specific
G–1 addition activity is the ability of the enzyme
to terminate addition after only a single G–1 nucleotide
is added to wild-type (A73-containing) tRNAHis, despite the presence of the downstream C74 and C75 residues in the tRNA, which are used as the template for
addition of multiple G residues in the C73-containing tRNAHis variants. This property of SceThg1 is the focus of this
study.

According to the proposed mechanism of 3′–5′
addition, the presence of a 5′-triphosphate could be a controlling
factor for the ability of Thg1 to add more than one nucleotide to
the 5′-end of an RNA. When Thg1 adds multiple nucleotides,
it is proposed to use the 5′-triphosphorylated end from the
previous nucleotide addition as the activated end for each subsequent
nucleotide addition (Figure B); however, SceThg1
also catalyzes removal of the 5′-pyrophosphate from the added
G–1 nucleotide, and hydrolysis of this activated
end could consequently prevent further nucleotide addition (Figure A). Thus, the pyrophosphate removal and nucleotide
addition activities of SceThg1 could compete for available 5′-triphosphorylated
ends generated by G–1 addition, impacting the balance
between single- and multiple-nucleotide addition reactions.

To test whether differences in the efficiency of pyrophosphate
removal versus nucleotide addition steps catalyzed by SceThg1 explain
the differences between single- and multiple-nucleotide addition reactions
observed with different tRNAHis substrates, we developed
transient kinetic assays to directly measure pyrophosphate removal
and polymerization activities with a series of substrates that contain
different combinations of N–1:N73 base
pairs, in the presence of various NTPs. Here we demonstrate that the
varied abilities of SceThg1 to remove the 5′-pyrophosphate
from each tRNAHis substrate correlate well with the observed
addition of multiple nucleotides to some tRNA substrates, but single
nucleotides to others. Thus, the existence of the 5′-pyrophosphate
removal activity catalyzed by SceThg1 is an important trait that is
required for control of the 3′–5′ addition reaction
with tRNAHis.

Materials and Methods
Nucleotides and Reagents
NTPs (100 mM LiCl salts) used
for enzyme assays were purchased from Roche; [γ-32P]GTP (6000 Ci/mmol), [α-32P]CTP (3000 Ci/mmol),
[α-32P]GTP (3000 Ci/mmol), and [α-32P]UTP (3000 Ci/mmol) were purchased from Perkin-Elmer. For Thg1 transient
kinetic assays, ribonuclease A (RNase A) and ribonuclease T1 (RNase
T1) were purchased from Ambion; calf alkaline intestinal phosphatase
(CIP) was purchased from Invitrogen, and P1 nuclease was purchased
from Sigma.

SceThg1 Expression and Purification
Escherichia
coli strain BL21-DE3(pLysS) was used for overexpression and
purification of SceThg1, which were performed as previously described
for the N-terminally His6-tagged enzyme., Briefly, SceThg1 was purified from a 0.5 L culture using immobilized
metal ion affinity chromatography, dialyzed into buffer containing
50% glycerol for storage at −20 °C, and assessed for purity
(≥90% as judged by visual inspection of the purified enzyme
preparation) using sodium dodecyl sulfate–polyacrylamide gel
electrophoresis.

In Vitro Transcription of
Labeled and Unlabeled
tRNA
In vitro transcription reactions were
performed with T7 RNA polymerase using runoff transcription from digested
plasmids that encode the various tRNA genes downstream of the T7 RNA
polymerase promoter, as previously described., To
create γ-32P-labeled tRNA (p*pp-tRNA), tRNAs were
transcribed in the presence of [γ-32P]GTP, according
to published methods. To generate the
α-labeled tRNA (ppp*-tRNA) species used for some assays (see
below), unlabeled 5′-triphosphorylated tRNA variants were similarly
transcribed by T7 RNA polymerase in the presence of NTPs (2 mM each).
All tRNA transcripts (labeled or unlabeled) were gel-purified after
electrophoresis on 10% polyacrylamide, 4 M urea gels, followed by
phenol/chloroform extraction and ethanol precipitation. The resulting
purified tRNAs were resuspended in 10 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.5) and stored
at −20 °C.

[γ-32P]G–1-tRNAHis Assays
Kinetic parameters for turnover
of the γ-32P-labeled p*ppG–1tRNAHis substrates
were determined at room temperature by reacting 5′-p*pp-G–1:A73tRNAHis or 5′-p*pp-G–1:C73tRNAHis with an at least
10-fold excess of purified enzyme in the presence or absence of the
indicated concentrations of GTP. Thg1 reaction buffer (used for all
assays) contained 10 mM MgCl2, 3 mM dithiothreitol (DTT),
125 mM NaCl, 0.2 mg/mL BSA, and 25 mM 4-2-hydroxyethyl-1-piperazineethanesulfonic
acid (HEPES) (pH 7.5). At desired time points, aliquots (3 μL)
were removed and added to a new tube containing 1 μL of 250
mM EDTA to quench the reactions; then 2 μL of each quenched
time point was spotted on PEI-cellulose TLC plates (EM Science). Plates
were washed in 100% methanol, air-dried, and resolved using a 0.5
M potassium phosphate (pH 6.3)/methanol [80:20 (v:v)] solvent system
to separate the labeled pyrophosphate (P*Pi) from unreacted
labeled tRNA. For the determination of KD,app,GTP, reaction mixtures contained varied concentrations of GTP (0.01–1
mM) and a saturating concentration of enzyme (15 μM). For the
determination of KD,app,tRNA, observed
rates were measured from reaction mixtures containing labeled tRNA
with or without 1 mM GTP, initiated by the addition of varied enzyme
concentrations (1.0–30 μM).

Time courses of product
formation were plotted and fit to a single-exponential rate equation
(eq ) using Kaleidagraph (Synergy Software)where Pobs is
the percent product formed at each time and Pmax is the maximal percent of product formation observed during
each time course. Pmax values of 80–90%
were routinely observed, with the amount of unreacted substrate remaining
in each assay likely due to minor amounts of incorrectly folded tRNA
that are typically observed in enzyme assays with in vitro-transcribed RNAs.

The resulting kobs values determined
for each concentration of GTP or SceThg1 were plotted and fit to eq  or , respectively, as described
in the text to yield pseudo-first-order maximal rate constants and
dissociation constants. All reported kinetic parameters were determined
using kobs values derived from fits to
data obtained from at least two independent experiments unless otherwise
indicated, and reported errors in kmax and KD,app are the least-squares estimate
of the standard error derived from a fit to the combined data from
all independent experiments using Kaleidagraph.

For time courses that continued to exhibit linear rates of
conversion
to product even after reaction for 3 h, kobs was estimated using the method of initial rates, according to eq where vo is the
linear initial rate derived from the slope of the fraction product
versus time plots and Pmax is the maximal
fraction of product conversion observed in NTP-stimulated reactions.

Construction of [α-32P]N–1tRNAHis Substrates
α-32P-labeled
tRNAHis substrates containing ppp*G–1 or ppp*C–1 were generated by reacting 15 μM
SceThg1 with 20 pmol of 5′-triphosphorylated tRNAHis transcripts initiated at the +1 position and containing the desired
3′-terminal sequence and 20 pmol of [α-32P]GTP
or [α-32P]CTP, respectively, in Thg1 reaction buffer
at room temperature for 5–30 min. The ppp*U–1:A73-tRNAHis substrate was generated by reacting
20 μM purified TLP4 from Dictyostelium discoideum() with 80 pmol of 5′-triphosphorylated
tRNAHis transcript initiated at the +1 position and 80
pmol of [α-32P]UTP in reaction buffer at room temperature
for 3–4 h. The resulting labeled tRNA species were isolated
after electrophoresis (10% polyacrylamide, 4 M urea gel) and purified
by phenol/chloroform extraction followed by ethanol precipitation.
Conditions (time and enzyme concentration) for labeling each substrate
were chosen to minimize the amount of pyrophosphate removed from the
added N–1 nucleotide and thus to maximize the yield
of the desired ppp*N–1-tRNA. The fraction of each
purified substrate that retained the ppp*N–1 5′-end
(as opposed to p*N–1 that results from pyrophosphate
removal) was determined by P1 nuclease digestion, which generates
5′-phosphorylated mononucleotides (5′-p*N–1 and 5′-ppp*N–1) that can be resolved using
PEI-cellulose TLC in a 1 M LiCl solvent system. All substrates utilized
for this work were obtained with a minimum of 80% 5′-ppp*N–1 using this method (see Figure S3 of the ).

[α-32P]N–1tRNAHis Assays
Intrinsic (without NTP)
Rate of Pyrophosphate Removal
Kinetic parameters for the
reaction of the α-32P-labeled
(ppp*N–1-containing) tRNAHis substrates
were determined at room temperature by reacting tRNA substrates (≤40
nM each) in the presence of 15 μM SceThg1 in Thg1 reaction buffer
as described above. At various time points, aliquots (10 μL)
were quenched by removal and addition to a new tube containing a phenol/chloroform/isoamyl
alcohol mixture [25:24:1 (v:v:v)] and purified by extraction followed
by ethanol precipitation. The purified concentrated reaction mixtures
were then digested with P1 nuclease to generate p*N–1 (from pyrophosphate removal) or ppp*N–1 (resulting
from unreacted tRNA) (Scheme ; P1 digestion
products indicated in parentheses below each species). These digestion
products were resolved using PEI-cellulose TLC in a 1 M LiCl solvent
system, and time courses of product formation were fit to a single-exponential
rate equation (eq ) or by the method of linear
initial rates for slow reactions (eq ) to yield
the kobs and Pmax for pyrophosphate removal in the absence of added NTP.

Rates of
Nucleotide Addition and Pyrophosphate Removal in the
Presence of NTPs
For reaction mixtures containing added NTP
[where either nucleotide addition or pyrophosphate removal could occur
(see Scheme )], aliquots from reaction mixtures
containing 15 μM (saturating) SceThg1 and the indicated NTP
at 1 mM were taken at various time points and split into two separate
digestion reaction mixtures.

To directly measure time courses of nucleotide addition,
aliquots
(5 μL) were digested with nucleases (RNase A for reaction mixtures
containing GTP or ATP or RNase T1 for reaction mixtures containing
CTP or UTP) and then treated with CIP to remove terminal phosphates
from the labeled nucleotide or oligonucleotide products. This treatment
yields two products, either labeled oligonucleotides corresponding
to the relevant nucleotide addition products (as indicated below)
or inorganic phosphate (P*i), which is derived from two
possible sources: unreacted tRNA substrate or generation of p*tRNA
by pyrophosphate removal. The labeled oligonucleotides and P*i are resolved as described previously by silica TLC in a 1-propanol/NH4OH/H2O [55:35:10 (v:v:v)] solvent system. Addition of ATP or GTP yields labeled oligonucleotide
A–2p*N–1pGpC or G–2p*N–1pGpC, respectively, after RNase A/CIP treatment,
and addition of CTP or UTP yields oligonucleotide C–2p*N–1pG+1 or U–2p*N–1pG+1, respectively, after RNase T1/CIP
treatment. The percent of total products due to addition (Padd) can be determined directly from the amount
of labeled oligonucleotide(s) compared to the total amount of radioactivity
at each time point.

To simultaneously measure the total rate
of reaction by both pathways
(see Scheme ), a second digestion with nuclease
P1 (as described above for the reactions without NTP) was performed
on 10 μL aliquots taken at the same time points as for the RNase
A/T1 digests described above. In these reactions, p*N is produced
either directly by pyrophosphate removal or as a consequence of nucleotide
addition (because nuclease P1 also cleaves the addition products shown
in Scheme  to yield a labeled p*N–1). p*N–1 and ppp*N–1 (corresponding
to unreacted substrate) were resolved by PEI-cellulose TLC and quantified
as described above for the reactions without NTP. These reactions
also provide an indirect measurement of the percent of product produced
specifically by pyrophosphate removal (PPPr), as indicated in eq where Ptotal corresponds
to the observed p*G from the nuclease P1 digest and Padd corresponds to the observed addition products from
the RNase/CIP digest.

The kobs and Pmax for pyrophosphate removal versus nucleotide
addition reactions
were determined either by a fit of the time courses of each product
formation (Padd measured directly and PPPr calculated from eq ) to the single-exponential rate equation (eq ) or by the method of linear initial rates for slow reactions (eq ), as indicated.

For tRNA substrates with WC
base-paired N–1–N73 ends assayed
in the presence of the correct WC base pairing
NTP, such that nucleotide addition is an abundantly observed reaction
product, the indirect subtraction method (eq ) generates correspondingly small values for the percent of pyrophosphate
removal (PPPr) reaction products. The
fits of these PPPr data to eq  yield kobs values for
pyrophosphate removal that are incompatible with the observed reaction
amplitudes. Therefore, a kinetic partitioning method was used for
these reactions, as indicated in each table, to calculate the kobs for PPr (eq ). For
this approach, the fraction of total reaction products due specifically
to nucleotide addition at the completion of the reaction (i.e., when
[ES] is maximal) was determined from the maximal amplitude of the
N–2 addition reaction (Padd,max) divided by the total reaction amplitude (Ptotal). Thus, using the kobs for
the addition reaction (kadd) that was
directly measured by the RNase/CIP digest, the kobs for pyrophosphate removal (kppr) could be calculated from eq .

Results
The Intrinsic
Rate of Removal of Pyrophosphate from the G–1 Residue
of Base-Paired tRNAHis Substrates
Is Slow
Previously, we developed transient kinetic assays
to measure the pyrophosphate removal step of the G–1 addition reaction (Figure S1 of the ); these assays used 5′-γ-32P-triphosphorylated tRNAHis (p*pp-tRNAHis)
transcripts as substrates for the pyrophosphate removal reaction,
to mimic the G–1-containing products after the nucleotidyl
transfer (G–1 addition) step had been catalyzed
(i.e., the termini of the substrate are as indicated by the red box
in Figure A). Because a 5′-triphosphorylated end on the tRNA is generated
regardless of whether the G–1 nucleotide is added
by the adenylylation-dependent or adenylylation-independent pathway
of 3′–5′ addition (Figure S1 of the ), assays that measure
reactivity with ppp-tRNA species (generated by various methods as
described below) are appropriate for studying the kinetics of the
reaction with the intermediate generated subsequent to N–1 addition.

The rate constant for pyrophosphate removal activity
(kppr) of SceThg1 with wild-type (p*ppG–1:A73) tRNAHis was determined
by incubating labeled tRNA with excess enzyme in the absence of any
added nucleotide under single-turnover conditions. In this assay,
SceThg1-catalyzed hydrolysis of the 5′-triphosphate causes
the release of labeled pyrophosphate, which was quantified to determine
the pseudo-first-order rate constant (kppr) of 0.030 ± 0.003 min–1 under standard SceThg1
reaction conditions (Table ). To determine whether the presence of the C73 nucleotide in the tRNAHis variant that is a substrate
for multiple-G addition alters the inherent ability of SceThg1 to
remove the 5′-pyrophosphate, the same reactions were performed
with 5′-γ-32P-triphosphorylated, G–1-containing C73-tRNAHis (i.e., the termini
of the substrate are as indicated by the red box in Figure B). With this substrate (p*ppG–1:C73), even in the presence of high concentrations of
SceThg1 (15 μM, which is significantly greater than the measured KD,app for the pppG–1:A73-tRNAHis substrate), time courses of product formation
remained linear after 3 h, and less than 10% of the tRNA was converted
to product (Figure A). Using the method of
initial rates (eq ), the observed rate of pyrophosphate
removal for the G–1:C73 variant substrate
was estimated from these data to be ∼0.0006 min–1 (Table ). Thus, SceThg1 exhibits a very
limited intrinsic ability to remove the 5′-pyrophosphate from
the C73-containing tRNA, as compared to the robust rate
of removal of 5′-pyrophosphate from the wild-type substrate.

Pyrophosphate
release measured with γ-32P-labeled
p*ppG–1:C73-tRNAHis. (A) Plot
of percent pyrophosphate removal reaction products vs time with p*ppG–1:C73-tRNAHis and 15 μM
SceThg1 in the absence of any added nucleotide cofactor. The slope
of the line fit to the data was used to determine kobs by the method of initial rates (eq ). (B) Plot of percent pyrophosphate removal reaction products
vs time with p*ppG–1:C73-tRNAHis in the presence of 1 mM GTP and 1 (■), 3 (▲), 5 (+),
15 (×), 25 (●), and 30 μM (◆) SceThg1. Lines
represent fits of each time course to a single-exponential equation
(eq ) to yield kobs. (C) Observed rates of pyrophosphate removal plotted as a function
of SceThg1 concentration and fit to eq  to
determine the maximal rate constant (kppr) and apparent dissociation constant (KD,app) for pppG–1:C73-tRNAHis.

Kinetics of 5′-Pyrophosphate
Removal Measured with γ-Labeled (p*ppG–1)
tRNAHis
 	1 mM
GTP	
without
NTP	enzyme
titration	GTP
titration	
tRNAHis	kppr (min–1)	KD,tRNA (μM)	kppr (min–1)	KD,tRNA (μM)	kppr (min–1)	KD,GTP (μM)	
G–1:A73	0.030 ± 0.003	1.6 ± 0.7	0.77 ± 0.04	2.5 ± 0.4	0.19 ± 0.01	92 ± 15	
G–1:C73	0.0006	ND	0.43 ± 0.04	16 ± 4	0.43 ± 0.05	106 ± 30	
kppr estimate determined
using the method of initial rates.

Parameter not determined.

Previously, however, we observed that addition of 1 mM GTP stimulated
the kppr with wild-type tRNAHis, despite the fact that GTP does not appear to compulsorily participate
in the chemistry of the 5′-pyrosphosphate removal reaction
(see Figure A). Because GTP is necessarily included in standard G addition assays
(and is also present in the cell at concentrations similar to those
employed in these assays), the ability to remove pyrophosphate from
the base-paired G–1:C73 variant tRNA
might also be enhanced in the presence of GTP. Indeed, time courses
of release of labeled pyrophosphate from the reactions with p*pp-G–1:C73 substrate in the presence of GTP were
readily observed and fit well to the single-exponential equation (eq ) (Figure B). From these
assays, we determined the kppr and KD,app,tRNA for the release of pyrophosphate
from the p*pp-G–1:C73 substrate based
on the hyperbolic dependence of the observed rates of nucleotide addition
on the concentration of SceThg1 (Figure C
and Table ). Importantly, however, this assay
with γ-32P-labeled tRNA cannot distinguish whether
the stimulated release of PPi observed in the presence
of GTP is due to pyrophosphate hydrolysis from the 5′-triphosphorylated
G–1 nucleotide (i.e., pyrophosphate removal as in
Figure A) or the addition of the next (G–2) nucleotide to the substrate (as in Figure B), because labeled P*Pi would be released
as a consequence of either of these reactions. Repeating the single-turnover
measurements to determine kobs as a function
of varied GTP concentration yielded similar kinetic parameters (for kppr and KD,app,GTP) for both G–1:A73 and G–1:C73 substrates (Figure S2 of the  and Table ).
Therefore, existing assays using γ-32P-labeled tRNA
are not sufficient to distinguish between the products of the pyrophosphate
removal and nucleotide addition activities of SceThg1.

A New Assay
for Distinguishing between Removal of 5′-Pyrophosphate
and Addition of G–2
We developed a new
enzyme assay that allows simultaneous detection of both pyrophosphate
removal and nucleotide addition products. In doing so, we also sought
to develop an assay that would permit characterization of tRNAHis variants that contain other combinations of N–1:N73 nucleotides, because the identity of the −1:73
base pair is known to affect the number of nucleotides added by SceThg1. Because transcripts that are initiated with 5′-triphosphorylated
nucleotides other than G–1 are not efficiently produced
by wild-type T7 RNA polymerase, an alternative strategy that takes
advantage of the inherent 3′–5′ addition activity
of Thg1 to generate labeled tRNAs to be used as substrates in the
assays was developed.

The assay developed here utilizes 5′-[α-32P]tRNAHis (ppp*-tRNAHis) substrates
generated by incubating Thg1 with various combinations of [α-32P]NTPs and tRNAHis transcripts engineered to lack
a −1 nucleotide (as described in ). In this labeling scheme, Thg1 catalyzes the addition
of the desired α-labeled NTP to the −1 position of the
tRNA, thus generating a 5′-triphosphorylated tRNA (shown in
the red box in Figure ) similar to the earlier
substrates generated by in vitro transcription, but
with two important advantages. First, the substrates are labeled at
the α-phosphate, allowing for separate quantification of both
pyrophosphate removal and nucleotide addition products, as described
below. Second, because the 5′-nucleotide of each substrate
is incorporated by Thg1, and not by T7 RNA polymerase, substrates
that are initiated uniquely with α-labeled 5′-triphosphorylated
nucleotides other than G can be generated by this approach. A series
of substrates were generated in which the identity of the terminal
ppp*N–1:N73 base pair was varied by including
different tRNAHis transcripts and labeled NTPs in the Thg1
labeling reactions. All substrates used for assays described below
were demonstrated to contain a minimum of 80% 5′-triphosphate
after purification by the P1 nuclease analysis described above (Figure
S3 of the ).

Labeling scheme
for generating α-32P-labeled tRNAHis substrates.
5′-ppp*N–1-tRNAHis substrates
were generated by incubating excess Thg1 (from
various sources, as indicated in ) with the desired [α-32P]NTP and tRNAHis transcripts that are initiated with G+1. Reaction conditions
were optimized to yield major reaction products as indicated in the
red box, while minimizing the amount of subsequent removal of pyrophosphate
from the tRNA (indicated by the tRNA in brackets). The purity of the
resulting labeled substrates was determined by P1 nuclease digestion
of the purified labeled tRNA and subsequent TLC analysis (see Figure
S3 of the ). P1 cleavage
of the substrate with an intact 5′-triphosphate yields ppp*N;
if the 5′-pyrophosphate was removed during the preparation
of the substrate, this is visualized as p*N.

Validation of the α-Labeled Assay with the Wild Type and
C73-tRNAHis Variants
Rates of reaction
were measured with ppp*G–1:A73- and ppp*G–1:C73-tRNAHis [for which rates
had been determined previously using γ-32P-labeled
tRNA (Table )] as described in . In the absence of any added NTP, the
only possible reaction outcome is the removal of the 5′-pyrophosphate,
generating p*G–1 after nuclease digestion, which
is readily resolved from ppp*G–1 derived from unreacted
tRNA (Scheme ). These products were quantified
for both tRNA substrates (Figure A,B). The
observed intrinsic (without NTP) rates of pyrophosphate removal for
both ppp*G–1:A73- and ppp*G–1:C73-tRNA substrates were in excellent agreement with
the kppr obtained with γ-32P-labeled substrates described above (compare Tables  and ).

α-Labeled digestion
assays for simultaneously measuring the
kinetics of pyrophosphate removal and nucleotide addition reactions
with 5′-ppp*-tRNAHis. (A and B) Representative single-turnover
assays for determining kobs for pyrophosphate
removal in the absence of added GTP with (A) ppp*G–1:A73-tRNAHis or (B) ppp*G–1:C73-tRNAHis. Reactions shown are time courses
of activity with 15 μM SceThg1 in excess over tRNA substrate;
aliquots from each time point were digested with P1 nuclease followed
by resolution on PEI-cellulose TLC plates. Plots of product vs time
as quantified from these data were fit to eq  to yield kobs and Pmax. (C and D) Representative single-turnover assays for
determining kobs and Pmax for addition of a nucleotide to (C) ppp*G–1:A73-tRNAHis or (D) ppp*G–1:C73-tRNAHis. Reactions shown are time courses
of activity with 15 μM SceThg1 in excess over tRNA substrate
and in the presence of 1 mM GTP; aliquots at indicated time points
were digested with RNase A, followed by treatment with calf intestinal
phosphatase, and products were resolved by silica TLC. Plots of addition
product (Padd) vs time as quantified from
these data were fit to eq  to yield kobs and Pmax. (E
and F) Representative single-turnover assays for determining the GTP-stimulated kobs for the removal of pyrophosphate from (E)
ppp*G–1:A73-tRNAHis or (F)
ppp*G–1:C73-tRNAHis. Aliquots
from the same reactions analyzed in panels C and D were removed at
each time point, digested with nuclease P1, and subsequently resolved
by PEI-cellulose TLC. The total reaction products (Ptotal) from either G–2 addition or pyrophosphate
removal were quantified as the percent of p*G [which is produced by
either reaction product (see Scheme )] observed
as a function of time. Subtraction of the percent product due to addition
(Padd measured in panels C and D) from Ptotal yields the apparent product specifically
arising from pyrophosphate removal (PPPr) at each time point (eq ). For substrates
with non-WC base-paired ends, PPPr is
fit directly to eq  to yield kobs and Pmax. For the WC base-paired
substrates in the presence of a base-pairing NTP (such as the substrate
assayed in panels B, D, and F), a kinetic partitioning mechanism (eq ) is used to calculate kobs for the removal of pyrophosphate (kppr) from the measured kadd, Padd, and Ptotal.

Kinetics of 5′-Pyrophosphate
Removal vs Nucleotide Addition Measured with α-Labeled (ppp*N–1) tRNAHis
 	without
NTP	1 mM
GTP	
 	pyrophosphate
removal	pyrophosphate
removal	nucleotide
(G–2) addition	
tRNAHis	kobs (min–1)	Pmax (%)	kobs (min–1)	Pmax (%)	kobs (min–1)	Pmax (%)	
G–1:A73	0.025 ± 0.001	75 ± 1	0.31 ± 0.03	84 ± 2	0.05 ± 0.01	7 ± 1	
G–1:G73	0.021 ± 0.003	48 ± 2	0.20 ± 0.03	67 ± 2	0.05 ± 0.02	16 ± 2	
G–1:U73	0.022 ± 0.003	59 ± 2	0.26 ± 0.02	38 ± 1	0.17 ± 0.03	43 ± 2	
G–1:C73	0.0002	5	0.02 ± 0.01	N/A	0.25 ± 0.01	83 ± 1	
C–1:G73	0.0006	12	0.02 ± 0.01	N/A	0.21 ± 0.02	74 ± 2	
U–1:A73	0.017 ± 0.001	69 ± 2	1.2 ± 0.5	N/A	0.4 ± 0.1	19 ± 1	
kobs estimate derived using the method of initial rates.

Maximal amount of product observed
after reaction for 3–4 h.

kobs for the removal of pyrophosphate
from WC base-paired substrates
calculated by partitioning from eq , as described
in . The Pmax for these products is not applicable (N/A) because
rates were not derived from the fit to eq .

Next, assays were performed
with the same substrates (ppp*G–1:A73 and ppp*G–1:C73) in the presence of
added GTP, and separate digestions were
used to simultaneously measure the rates of nucleotide addition and
pyrophosphate removal, as described in . Nucleotide addition products were measured directly
by RNase A/phosphatase treatment and resolution of an oligonucleotide
corresponding to the nucleotide addition product (i.e., G–2p*G–1pGpC) from labeled inorganic phosphate (P*i), which is derived from either unreacted tRNA substrate or
5′-p*tRNA generated by pyrophosphate removal (Figure C,D). The total reaction progress (total product
generated by both pyrophosphate removal and nucleotide addition) was
determined by nuclease P1 digestion, as described above for the reactions
without NTP (Figure E,F). Single-turnover
rate constants and maximal product formation were determined from
plots of the percent of each product observed as a function of time,
as described in  (Figure  and Table ).

Determination
of kinetic parameters for pyrophosphate removal vs
nucleotide addition with ppp*G–1:A73-
and ppp*G–1:C73-tRNAHis. Time
courses of product formation by pyrophosphate removal for reactions
without any added NTP [PPPr, −NTP
(◆)], for nucleotide (G–2/G–3) addition observed in the presence of 1 mM GTP [Padd,
+GTP (●)], and for pyrophosphate removal products in the presence
of 1 mM GTP calculated according to eq  [Ptotal-Padd, +GTP
(■)] were all measured as described with (A) ppp*G–1:A73-tRNAHis or (B) ppp*G–1:C73-tRNAHis. Reactions were the same reactions
analyzed in Figure ; fits to derive kobs and Pmax for
each reaction are as indicated in .

As expected, but now explicitly
shown by the direct enzyme assay,
the 5′-p-tRNA product of pyrophosphate removal is the major
product (84%) generated from the wild-type (G–1:A73) tRNAHis in the presence of GTP (Table  and Figure ). Likewise,
nucleotide addition products are the major products (83%) generated
from the reactions under the same conditions with G–1:C73-tRNAHis (Table  and Figure ). For G–1:A73-tRNAHis, the kobs for pyrophosphate removal measured with the α-labeled assay
was 0.31 ± 0.03 min–1, which agrees well with
the average kppr measured with the γ-labeled
assay (0.5 ± 0.3 min–1) (Tables  and ). For G–1:C73-tRNAHis, the kobs for nucleotide addition measured with the α-labeled assay
was 0.25 ± 0.01 min–1, which again compares
well with the value of 0.43 ± 0.05 min–1 measured
with the previous assay.

A Kinetic Mechanism Accounts for the Termination
of Addition
after a Single Nucleotide Is Added to Mismatch-Terminating tRNAHis
We used the α-labeled assay to measure activities
with two tRNAHis variant substrates containing other non-WC
N–1:N73 base pairs (G–1:G73 and G–1:U73), to determine
whether the fact that the rate of pyrophosphate removal is faster
than that of nucleotide addition is a unique property of the universally
conserved eukaryotic G–1:A73 terminal
base pair or whether the same outcome would be observed for other
mismatched tRNA termini. The α-32P-labeled (ppp*-tRNA)
versions of each substrate were generated by SceThg1-catalyzed addition
of [α-32P]GTP to in vitro tRNAHis transcripts containing G73 or U73 (Figure S3 of the ). Rates were first measured in the absence of added GTP (as in Figure ) where the intrinsic rate of pyrophosphate removal
for each substrate was readily measurable; time courses fit well to
a single-exponential equation, yielding kobs values for both substrates that were almost identical to that observed
for the G–1:A73-tRNA (Table ).

In the presence of GTP, where either pyrophosphate
removal or nucleotide addition is a possible outcome of the reaction
(Figure  and Scheme ), the kobs values for pyrophosphate
removal were stimulated ∼10-fold for both G–1:G73 and G–1:U73 substrates,
similar to the observed stimulation of G–1:A73-tRNA (Table ). For rates of nucleotide
addition, however, there were some differences between the two non-WC
variants. Reaction with the G–1:G73 mismatched
substrate was similar to that with G–1:A73-tRNAHis, with only slightly larger amounts of G–2 added (Pmax of 16% for G–1:G73 vs 7% for G–1:A73).
For the G–1:U73 substrate, the kobs for G–2 addition was measurably
higher and similar to kobs for pyrophosphate
removal, leading to roughly equivalent amounts of reaction products
that can be attributed to the addition of G–2 versus
pyrophosphate removal (Table ). Thus, a kinetic
partitioning mechanism in which the relative rates of pyrophosphate
removal versus nucleotide addition reactions determine the reaction
outcome seems to apply to these tRNAs.

Mechanistic Rationale for
Differences with G:C versus A:U Base
Pairs
As described above, an advantage of the α labeling
scheme is the ability to introduce labeled triphosphorylated nucleotides
other than G to the 5′-end of the tRNA substrates. We took
advantage of this feature to investigate an earlier observation that
SceThg1, unlike TLPs, exhibits a preference for G:C or C:G base pairs.
Even when a poly(A) or poly(U) sequence is engineered into the 3′-end
of tRNAHis, multiple additions of U or A nucleotides by
SceThg1 are not observed. Variant tRNAHis substrates ppp*C–1:G73 and
ppp*U–1:A73 were created (Figure S3 of
the ) and tested
to determine whether the identity of the −1:73 base pair affects
the kinetic behavior of SceThg1.

As observed for G–1:C73-tRNA, the intrinsic (without GTP) rate of pyrophosphate
removal with the ppp*C–1:G73 variant
was extremely slow; time courses revealed only ∼12% removal
of pyrophosphate even after long times, and the kobs was estimated to be ∼0.0006 min–1 using the method of initial rates (Table ). Likewise, for reactions performed in the presence of GTP where
partitioning between the two pathways is possible, kobs and end point Pmax calculated
for nucleotide addition and pyrophosphate removal reactions were similar
to those observed for the G–1:C73 substrate
(Table ) and suggest that a faster rate of
nucleotide addition than of pyrophosphate removal leads to the prevalence
of nucleotide addition products observed with these tRNAs.

We
hypothesized that the U–1:A73 variant
might exhibit behavior different from that of substrates with G:C/C:G
base-paired termini because SceThg1 did not polymerize multiple U:A
or A:U base pairs in earlier primer extension assays. Consistent with this observation, the maximal product observed
(Pmax) due to addition of a nucleotide
to the U:A base-paired ppp*tRNA was only 19% of the total substrate
in the reactions (Figure S4 of the  and Table ). Interestingly,
the kobs for addition was relatively fast,
similar to that observed other WC base-paired substrates (Table ), but this was accompanied by a correspondingly
higher rate of pyrophosphate removal, as calculated according to the
observed partitioning between addition and pyrophosphate removal reaction
products (eq ).

Rates of Pyrophosphate
Removal Depend on the Identity of the
NTP Included in Reactions
The substrates described above
contain different N–1:N73 base pairs,
but all of the tested tRNAs contain a canonical 3′-C74CA end; thus, assays performed so far in the presence of GTP reflect
the addition of a WC-templated G–2 to form G–2:C74 (and possibly additional base pairs
as shown in Figure B). We sought to determine
whether the identity of the potential N–2 nucleotide
affects the relative rates of SceThg1-catalyzed reactions. Kinetic
parameters for pyrophosphate removal versus addition of N–2 to the N–1:N73-tRNA substrates described
above were measured in the presence of each of the other three NTPs
(ATP, UTP, and CTP) so that all possible interactions of N–2 with the C74 nucleotide could be tested. Assays with
ppp*-tRNA were performed as described earlier (Figure ), except that to detect addition of U–2 or C–2, reaction mixtures were digested with RNase
T1 instead of RNase A (see ).

The NTP dependence of the observed reaction kinetics was
nearly identical with all three substrates that terminate in non-WC
(G–1:A73, G–1:G73, and G–1:U73) base pairs. For
all three substrates, as with GTP, the majorities (60–80%)
of products observed in the presence of ATP, UTP, or CTP were pyrophosphate
removal products, and kobs values were
readily determined from these time courses (Table ). Little or no detectable N–2 addition
was observed for any of the other NTPs, and thus, the kobs for addition could not be accurately measured for
most reactions (Table S1 of the ). For the few combinations in which a small amount of observed N–2 addition allowed rates to be determined, the observed
rates of pyrophosphate removal (Table ) were
nevertheless faster than the kobs for
addition, consistent with the observed abundance of pyrophosphate
removal products. The kobs values for
pyrophosphate removal were consistently slowest in the presence of
ATP (by ∼2-fold relative to those with GTP) and fastest in
the presence of CTP (∼2–3-fold higher than rates in
the presence of GTP), suggesting specific interactions between SceThg1
and the NTP bound in the active site that affect the ability of each
NTP to promote the rate of pyrophosphate removal.

Kinetics of Pyrophosphate Removal
Measured with α-Labeled (ppp*N-1) tRNAHis in the
Presence of NTPs (1 mM each)
 	kobs (min–1)	
tRNAHis	without NTP	GTP	ATP	CTP	UTP	
G–1:A73	0.025 ± 0.001	0.31 ± 0.03	0.12 ± 0.03	0.8 ± 0.3	0.4 ± 0.1	
G–1:G73	0.021 ± 0.003	0.20 ± 0.03	0.16 ± 0.02	0.8 ± 0.2	0.3 ± 0.1	
G–1:U73	0.022 ± 0.003	0.26 ± 0.02	0.13 ± 0.01	0.7 ± 0.1	0.4 ± 0.1	
G–1:C73	0.0002	0.02 ± 0.01	0.003	0.026 ± 0.002	0.014 ± 0.002	
C–1:G73	0.0006	0.02 ± 0.01	0.05 ± 0.01	0.17 ± 0.05	0.05 ± 0.01	
U–1:A73	0.017 ± 0.001	1.2 ± 0.5	0.18 ± 0.01	0.4 ± 0.1	0.26 ± 0.04	
Values as reported
previously in
Table  and shown for comparison.

kobs estimate
derived from observed rates determined using the method
of initial rates.

kobs for pyrophosphate removal calculated by
partitioning from eq , as described in .

kobs derived from a fit to data obtained from
a single experiment with
this tRNA/NTP combination.

For substrates containing WC base pairs at the N–1:N73 position (G–1:C73, C–1:G73, and U–1:A73), the same kinetic comparison revealed two important features. First,
efficient N–2 addition of any NTP other than GTP
was not observed (Table S1 of the ), and therefore, the kobs for pyrophosphate
removal in the presence of ATP, CTP, or UTP was determined by the
subtraction method (eq ) and fitting the time
courses of calculated pyrophosphate removal products to eq  (Table ). Second, as with
reactions measured in the presence of GTP, the distinct behavior of
SceThg1 with G–1:C73/C–1:G73-tRNAs versus U–1:A73-tRNA was clear. The kobs values for
the removal of pyrophosphate from the ppp*U–1:A73 substrate in the presence of each NTP were strikingly similar
to the kobs values with the mismatch-containing
tRNAs (Table ). In contrast, for ppp*G–1:C73- and ppp*C–1:G73-tRNA, although the kobs values
for the pyrophosphate removal reaction in the presence of other NTPs
were all stimulated to various extents above the intrinsic (without
NTP) kobs, there was no obvious trend
correlating kobs with the identity of
the NTP included in the reaction (Table ).

Template Dependence of N–2 Addition
Efficient
addition of N–2 by SceThg1 in the preceding
experiments appears to require two components. First, the tRNA substrate
must contain a G:C/C:G WC base-paired end, and second, the correct
NTP to make a WC base pair with N74 (GTP in the previous
examples) must be included in the reaction. To further probe the apparently
special preference of SceThg1 for synthesis of G/C base pairs, two
variant tRNA substrates were generated that similarly contain WC terminal
G:C/C:G base pairs but have alterations in the 3′-end template
bases of the acceptor stem (to either A74 or G74/G75), and thus template the incorporation of U–2 or C–2, respectively (Figure S2 of the ). Assays were performed
to measure the rates and amplitudes for pyrophosphate removal versus
nucleotide addition reactions with these α-32P-labeled
(ppp*-tRNA) substrates in the presence of each of the four NTPs (Table ).

Kinetics of Pyrophosphate
Removal
versus Nucleotide Addition Measured with α-Labeled (ppp*N–1) tRNAHis Substrates with Variations at
N74
 	GTP	ATP	CTP	UTP	
tRNAHis	kobs (min–1)	Pmax (%)	kobs (min–1)	Pmax (%)	kobs (min–1)	Pmax (%)	kobs (min–1)	Pmax (%)	
Pyrophosphate Removal	
G:CC74CA	0.02 ± 0.01	N/A	0.003	34	0.026 ± 0.002	82 ± 3	0.014 ± 0.002	72 ± 4	
G:CA74CA	0.08 ± 0.02	N/A	0.001	13	0.012 ± 0.001	88 ± 2	0.05 ± 0.01	N/A	
C:GC74CA	0.02 ± 0.01	N/A	0.05 ± 0.01	59 ± 6	0.17 ± 0.05	78 ± 4	0.05 ± 0.01	79 ± 5	
C:GG74GA	0.06 ± 0.01	N/A	0.006 ± 0.001	60 ± 10	0.08 ± 0.01	N/A	0.014 ± 0.001	78 ± 1	
Nucleotide Addition	
G:CC74CA	0.25 ± 0.01	83 ± 1	ND	ND	ND	ND	ND	ND	
G:CA74CA	0.03 ± 0.01	22 ± 3	ND	ND	ND	ND	0.016 ± 0.001	22 ± 1	
C:GC74CA	0.21 ± 0.02	74 ± 2	ND	ND	ND	ND	ND	ND	
C:GG74GA	0.013 ± 0.001	12 ± 1	ND	ND	0.120 ± 0.012	54 ± 1	ND	ND	
kmax estimate derived from observed rates
determined using the method
of initial rates.

Maximal
amount of product observed
after reaction for 3–4 h.

kobs for pyrophosphate removal calculated
by partitioning from eq , as described in ; Pmax for these products
not applicable (N/A) because rate constants were not derived from
a fit to eq .

Not determined because of the &lt;3%
product detected in assays.

Comparison of kobs and Pmax for pyrophosphate removal versus N–2 addition with the A74-containing tRNA (G:CACA) revealed two salient features. First, introduction
of A74 in place of C74 caused a significant
increase in the extent and rate of addition of U–2, with a corresponding decrease in the extent of addition of G–2 (Table ). Interestingly,
despite the apparent ability of SceThg1 to recognize and form a U–2:A74 base pair, the U–2 addition products constitute only a minor fraction (∼20%)
of the total products. Second, the calculated kobs for pyrophosphate removal with this substrate (0.049 min–1) remains faster than the rate of subsequent addition
(0.016 min–1), consistent with the minority of U–2 addition products (Table ).

For the tRNAHis variant containing G74/G75, the extent of product formation by the two competing
pathways
is also largely consistent with WC base pairing requirements. Addition
of C–2 to G74-tRNAHis accounted
for 54% of the total products (as compared with no detectable C–2 addition to the analogous C74-containing
tRNA) (Table ). There was a correspondingly
dramatic decrease in the Pmax due to nucleotide
addition observed in the presence of GTP [12% for G74-tRNA
compared with 74% when the GTP can make a base pair with C74 (Table )]. While SceThg1 catalyzed little
to no detectable non-WC addition of ATP, CTP, or UTP, a low level
(10–20%) of G–2 addition was observed with
both N74 variant substrates. This limited, but detectable,
ability of SceThg1 to add G–2 to create non-WC base
pairs (in this case, G–2:A74 or G–2:G74) may reflect features of the eukaryotic
Thg1 active site that evolved to specifically allow addition of a
non-WC G–1 nucleotide during tRNAHis maturation.

The GTP 3′-OH Is Required To Stimulate Pyrophosphate
Removal
The role of the nucleotide cofactor in enhancing
pyrophosphate removal was investigated further by testing the effects
of GTP nucleotide analogues on the kinetics of the pyrophosphate removal
reaction with wild-type (p*ppG–1:A73)
tRNAHis. Time courses of pyrophosphate removal for reaction
mixtures containing 15 μM enzyme and GTP analogues (1 mM each)
revealed that 2′-dGTP stimulated the kobs 6-fold, comparable to the 10-fold stimulation of the rate
observed with the standard GTP nucleotide. While 3′-methoxy-GTP
exerted only a modest stimulatory effect (2-fold) on the rate of the
reaction, no stimulation was observed with either 3′-dGTP or
2′3′-ddGTP (Figure  and Table
S2 of the ).

Rates of pyrophosphate
removal with p*ppG–1:A73-tRNAHis in the presence of GTP nucleotide analogues.
Single-turnover measurements of kobs for
pyrophosphate removal with limiting pppG–1:A73tRNAHis substrate determined in the presence of
15 μM SceThg1 and 1 mM GTP (●), 3′-dGTP (□),
2′-dGTP (◇), 2′,3′-ddGTP (○), and
3′-methoxy-GTP (△) or without NTP (open +). Product
formation was measured by time courses of labeled pyrophosphate formation
visualized on PEI-cellulose TLC, plotted as a function of time and
fit to a single-exponential equation (eq )
to yield the observed rate (kobs) for
reaction in the presence of each NTP analogue (Table S2 of the ).

Discussion
Here, we used kinetic assays to investigate
the interplay between
two competing reactions: pyrophosphate removal and nucleotide addition
catalyzed by SceThg1. Taken together, the data suggest that with wild-type
tRNAHis, a kinetic mechanism in which the rate of removal
of pyrophosphate from the 5′ pppG–1:A73-containing tRNAHis is faster than the rate of
addition of G–2 to this same tRNA effectively terminates
the reaction after the single G–1 nucleotide is
added by SceThg1 (Tables  and ). The data also reveal a complex role for additional NTPs
in both reactions. Rate constants and the maximal amplitude of product
formation for the pyrophosphate removal versus nucleotide addition
reactions depend on the identity of the base pair at the −1:73
terminus, as well as on the identity of the potential base pair to
be formed between the incoming NTP and the N74 nucleotide
(Tables  and ). Finally,
we reveal that the kinetic preference for catalyzing the removal of
pyrophosphate from U–1:A73-containing
tRNAHis effectively limits the ability of SceThg1 to efficiently
add subsequent nucleotides to substrates that terminate with a U:A
base pair, thus rationalizing the previously observed lack of multiple
U or A additions by the 3′–5′ polymerase activity
(Tables –).

On the basis of the shared ability of all Thg1/TLP enzymes to catalyze
3′–5′ polymerase activity, this WC-dependent
polymerization reaction is suggested to be the ancestral activity
of Thg1 family enzymes. Thus, the 5′-pyrophosphate
removal reaction may have been exploited by eukaryotes as a means
of limiting this ancestral 3′–5′ polymerase activity
for the purposes of tRNAHis maturation and thus could provide
a rationale for the acquisition of the A73 discriminator
nucleotide, as opposed to the C73 found nearly universally
in bacteria and archaea.,, The pressure to evolve a mechanism to limit the addition of nucleotides
to tRNAHis may have arisen from the need to avoid perturbation
of the structure of the 3′-CCA end, where base-paired interactions
between extra 5′-nucleotides and the 3′-terminal CCA
could interfere with the optimal function of the translation machinery. Interestingly, the presence of additional (G–2 and G–3) nucleotides on tRNAHis does not interfere with histidylation of tRNAHisin vivo in yeast and,
in fact, enhances the reaction of the HisRS slightly, suggesting that
avoiding defects in aminoacylation was not specifically the critical
driving force for evolution of 5′-pyrophosphate removal activity.

The use of a kinetic mechanism to control relative rates, and therefore
outcomes, of competing reactions is well-documented in biology. Canonical
5′–3′ DNA polymerases employ a similar kinetic
partitioning mechanism whereby the rate of nucleotide addition is
dramatically decreased once a mismatched (non-WC) base pair is formed
during a preceding 5′–3′ addition reaction. This permits the proofreading exonuclease activity
to compete more effectively with polymerase activity at the site of
a nucleotide misincorporation. The molecular basis for the faster
rate of removal of 5′-pyrophosphate from non-WC base-paired
substrates than from base-paired termini by SceThg1 is not yet apparent.
Although we previously used site-directed mutagenesis combined with
structural data to identity residues that play roles in the adenylylation
and nucleotidyl transfer steps of the G–1 addition
reaction, protein residues that participate uniquely in the 5′-pyrophosphate
removal step have not been identified. Identification of residues that are important for this step, such
as a general base that could deprotonate a nucleophilic water to enhance
attack on the α–β phosphodiester bond, could help
to rationalize the distinct outcomes of different substrates in terms
of 5′-pyrophosphate removal. It is also possible that the nucleophilic
water is coordinated solely by either of the two essential active
site metals and/or the NTP or tRNA substrates, and that unique protein
residues that participate directly in the chemistry of this step may
not be identified. The role of the stimulating NTP in the pyrophosphate
removal step, despite the fact that no NTP is formally required for
the chemistry of pyrophosphate removal (Figure A), is particularly enigmatic. The kinetic studies reported here
demonstrate that the identity of the NTP included in the reactions
has a significant effect on the observed rates of pyrophosphate removal,
and in particular that the 3′-hydroxyl is required for this
stimulation (Table  and Figure ). Under conditions that favor pyrophosphate removal, the
3′-hydroxyl of the stimulating NTP might stabilize the catalytic
metal ions, might help to optimally position the tRNA and/or nucleophilic
water molecule, or might induce a conformation of the [ES] complex
that increases the accessibility of the active site to water.

Through this work, we provide a kinetic basis for the previously
unexplained observation that SceThg1 efficiently catalyzes the formation
of G:C and C:G WC base pairs but does not efficiently polymerize A-U
base pairs with any substrate. We observed that the pyrophosphate
removal activity under all conditions preferentially acts upon tRNAs
containing a U–1:A73 terminating base
pair (Tables  and ). Thus, although SceThg1 can add UTP to create a U:A base pair,
it efficiently removes the activated 5′-end from this added
nucleotide and effectively terminates subsequent addition reactions.
We note that this is not due to an inability of SceThg1 to distinguish
a U:A base pair from a mismatched base-pairing combination, because
the preference for addition of U–2 over other nucleotides
to the A74-containing tRNAHis variant was readily
observed in our assays (Table ). This distinct
behavior with G-C versus U-A base pairs is a significant way that
eukaryotic Thg1-type enzymes differ from TLPs that catalyze tRNA repair,
because TLPs readily polymerize all four WC base pairs with various
truncated tRNA substrates.,,,

An added advantage to the
α-labeled enzyme assays developed
here is the ability to investigate the apparent kinetics of addition
of the N–2 nucleotide to tRNAHis substrates
catalyzed by SceThg1. Under the conditions tested here (1 mM NTP,
which is well above the KD,GTP of 25 μM
for the G–1 addition reaction catalyzed by SceThg1), the kobs and Pmax for adding a WC base-paired G–2 or C–2 nucleotide are significantly greater than
the corresponding values for formation of non-WC base pairs (Table ), yet the overall rate constants for G–2 addition are slower than the kobs for
G–1 addition (∼0.25 min–1 for G–2 measured here vs 3.0 min–1 for G–1 measured previously). These results suggest that although SceThg1 exhibits 3′–5′
polymerization with some tRNA substrates, addition of a nucleotide
at the −1 position is the preferred reaction of SceThg1.

Interestingly, TLPs from Acanthamoeba castellanii and Spizellomyces punctatus do not appear to efficiently
remove the 5′-pyrophosphate from nucleotide addition products
generated by their 3′–5′ polymerase activity,
as judged by the accumulation of 5′-triphosphorylated tRNA
on the ends of tRNA species repaired by these enzymes;, however, the editing reaction catalyzed by TLPs also requires formation
of a discrete 5′-end, and these enzymes must therefore possess
a mechanism for terminating addition after completing repair of the
tRNA aminoacyl-acceptor stem. The retention of the 5′-triphosphate
by TLPs implies that a different mechanism may be used by these enzymes
to terminate 3′–5′ addition and that the pyrophosphate
removal activity is a unique adaptation of eukaryotic Thg1 enzymes
involved specifically in tRNAHis maturation. It remains
possible that the activated 5′-end of the fully repaired tRNA
is removed by TLPs under reaction conditions that have not yet been
identified, or by other unidentified enzyme(s) in the cell. Interestingly,
removal of the 5′-pyrophosphate from the G–1 residue is not necessarily a ubiquitous reaction even in eukaryotes.
In chicken mitochondria, the presence of a 5′-triphosphorylated
G–1 on tRNAHis was inferred by the ability
of the in vivo-isolated tRNA to be capped by the
capping guanylyltransferase, which requires a free 5′-triphosphate. A more complete investigation of the 5′-phosphorylation
status of Thg1 and TLP reaction products in vivo may
provide important evidence for how these reactions are controlled
in various members of the Thg1 enzyme superfamily.

Supporting Information Available
Parameters for nucleotide addition
kinetics with N–1:N73-tRNAHis variants (Table S1), observed rates of pyrophosphate release in
the presence of GTP analogues (Table S2), alternative reaction pathways
for addition of G–1 to yeast tRNAHis (Figure
S1), GTP dependence of pyrophosphate release kinetics for G–1:A73-tRNAHis versus G–1:C73-tRNAHis (Figure S2), assessment of the 5′-phosphorylation
status of ppp*-tRNAHis substrates for α-labeled digestion
assays (Figure S3), and assays for measuring the kinetics of reactions
with ppp*U–1:A73-tRNAHis (Figure
S4). This material is available free of charge via the Internet at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bi4014648_si_001.pdf

The authors declare no
competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
We thank Dr. Kurt Fredrick and members of the Jackman
lab
for valuable discussions during preparation of the manuscript.

Abbreviations
HisRShistidyl-tRNA synthetase

Thg1tRNAHis guanylyltransferase

TLPsThg1-like proteins

SceThg1S.
cerevisiae Thg1 (formerly yThg1)

p-tRNAHis5′-monophosphorylated
tRNAHis

ppp-tRNAHis5′-triphosphorylated tRNAHis

pppG–1-tRNAHis5′-triphosphorylated G–1-containing tRNAHis

WCWatson–Crick

DTTdithiothreitol

EDTAethylenediaminetetraacetic acid

HEPES4-2-hydroxyethyl-1-piperazineethanesulfonic
acid

RNase Aribonuclease
A

pprpyrophosphate
removal.

