NAD(P)-dependent oxidoreductases occur in virtually
all organisms
and catalyze the reversible oxidation of primary and secondary alcohols
into aldehydes and ketones, respectively. Medium-chain alcohol dehydrogenases
(ADHs, EC 1.1.1.1) contain 327–376 amino acid residues per
chain and are usually zinc-dependent. The
ADHs in higher eukaryotes (plants and animals) are usually dimeric,
whereas those in prokaryotes and lower eukaryotes (yeast) are tetrameric.
The dimeric horse liver ADH (374 amino acid residues, 80000 Da) was
the first of this superfamily to be studied by X-ray crystallography
and is a model for the other ADHs.− In yeast, constitutive
ADH1 catalyzes the reduction of acetaldehyde to ethanol during the
fermentation of glucose. The enzyme was purified and crystallized
with ammonium sulfate, and its kinetic, chemical, and physical properties
have been studied extensively.− Yeast ADH1 is a tetramer of four identical subunits
with 347 amino acid residues each and a calculated mass of 147396
Da. The amino acid and gene sequences of yeast ADH1 were determined., Molecular modeling shows that yeast ADH is homologous to horse liver
ADH, but deletion of 21 amino acid residues
from the catalytic domain of yeast ADH1 and other gaps and insertions
make exact comparisons problematic.

Yeast ADH1 was one of the
first enzymes to be crystallized. Thin,
hexagonal crystals were also found in anaerobically
grown yeast, apparently with a tetrahedral arrangement of subunits
in the P312 space group., Crystals that diffracted well for X-ray crystallography were reported
previously,, and we collected many data sets;
however, most crystals were twinned, and a structure could not be
determined by molecular replacement (despite the availability of several
ADH structures) or by multiple isomorphous replacement. We found one,
only partially twinned, crystal with different cell dimensions and
determined the structure by molecular replacement using the structure
of the tetrameric Pseudomonas aeruginosa ADH. The structure of yeast ADH1 now permits comparisons
with other ADHs and a better understanding of previous studies of
ADH1.

Experimental Procedures
Protein Preparation
The gene for Saccharomyces
cerevisiae ADH1 (adc1, YOL086c; UniProtKB
entry P00330), the constitutive, fermentative enzyme from the laboratory
strain of baker’s yeast, was expressed from plasmid YEp13 in
host yeast that did not express any of the three medium-chain, zinc-containing
alcohol dehydrogenases,,, and the protein was purified to homogeneity as described previously.

Crystallization
Crystals were obtained
by the hanging
drop, vapor diffusion method using Fluka polyethylene glycol 5000
monomethyl ether (MPEG-5000) as the precipitating agent. The hanging
drop contained 16 μL of 10 mg/mL protein in 125 mM sodium N-tris(hydroxymethyl)methyl-3-aminopropanesulfonic acid
buffer (pH 8.4) (at 25 °C), 1.7 mM nicotinamide 8-iodoadenine
dinucleotide (8ID, kindly provided by N. J. Oppenheimer), 0.1 M 2,2,2-trifluoroethanol
(TFE), 0.16 mM EDTA, and 7% MPEG-5000 and was equilibrated over 0.73–0.84
mL of a reservoir solution containing 22–26% MPEG-5000 and
0.1 M TFE. Crystals grew in 2 weeks at 4 °C. Crystals were soaked
in ∼1 mL of the same buffer with 30% MPEG-5000 and 0.5 M TFE
(but no 8ID because no more was available) for 5 days during their
shipment on ice from Iowa to Germany before flash vitrification in
liquid N2 and data collection.

Data Collection and Structure
Determination
X-ray data
were collected July 28, 1995, on synchrotron beamline BW7A at the
EMBL/DESY Hamburg unit using a single crystal at 100 K and a 300 mm
MAR Research imaging plate detector and a wavelength of 0.8570 Å.
The data were processed with d*TREK. The structure was determined using molecular replacement using AMORE and P. aeruginosa ADH [Protein
Data Bank (PDB) entry 1LLU, sequence 42% identical to that of yeast ADH1] as
the search model. The estimated solvent content of the crystals is
53%, and the Matthews coefficient, VM,
is 2.62 Å3/Da. O and
REFMAC were used for model building and
refinement, respectively. Refinement was improved by including the
twin operator (0.713 for h, k, l and 0.287 for −h, −k, l) and by using eight TLS elements representing
the catalytic domains, residues 1–154 and 294–347, and
the coenzyme binding domain, residues 155–293, for each of
the four subunits. See Table  for data collection
and refinement statistics.

X-ray Data Collection
and Refinement
Statistics
PDB entry	4W6Z	
space
group	P321	
no.
of different subunits
in the asymmetric unit	4	
cell
dimensions (Å)	144.39, 144.39, 128.20	
cell angles (deg)	90, 90, 120	
resolution range (Å)	28.1–2.4	
no. of measured
reflections
(total, unique)	229310,
59568	
completeness
(%) (outer
shell)	98.5 (92.7)	
Rmeas (outer shell)	0.134 (0.484)	
mean ⟨I⟩/σ⟨I⟩ (outer shell)	8.0 (3.5)	
Rvalue, Rfree, test
(%)	0.178, 0.222, 2.5	
rmsd for bond distances
(Å), angles (deg)	0.015, 1.82	
no. of protein atoms	10328	
8 Zn, 2 NAD(8-Iodo), 4 TFE
atoms	122	
no. of waters	151	
mean B value
(Å2), Wilson, REFMAC	39.4, 40.2	
estimated coordinate error
(Å)	0.15	
Rmeas = Rrim, with redundancy-independent
merging.

Rvalue = (∑|F0 – kFc|)/∑|F0|, where k is a scale factor. Rfree was
calculated with the indicated percentage of reflections not used in
the refinement.

Root-mean-square deviations from
ideal geometry.

Results and Discussion
Structure
Solution Overview
The diffracting crystals
of ADH1 reported previously in space
group P622 turned out to be twinned, and the structure could not be determined. Extensive attempts
to prepare other crystal forms and to prepare heavy atom derivatives
were also not successful except for one crystal that was prepared
in the presence of trifluoroethanol and nicotinamide 8-iodoadenine
dinucleotide (8ID in the PDB file, hereafter termed NAD), which we
thought might be useful for phasing. This crystal was unusual in that
it was shipped in crystallization media that did not contain NAD,
but with 0.5 M TFE in an attempt to stabilize the ternary complex.

The asymmetric unit contains four crystallographically different,
but structurally similar, subunits arranged as two dimers that we
named AB and CD and are similar to the dimeric horse liver ADH (Figure A). Each subunit in a dimer has a coenzyme binding
domain typical of the Rossmann fold (six-stranded parallel β-pleated
sheet with two helices on each side of the sheet) to which the coenzyme
binds at the carboxyl terminal end. Extensive
interactions of the two coenzyme binding domains produce an extended
β-sheet in a dimer. Each subunit also has a catalytic domain
that contains the zinc atom to which the alcohol binds and a structural
zinc in a distant loop. The substrates bind in the cleft between the
domains. The A and C subunits have a “closed” conformation
and contain NAD and TFE bound to the catalytic zinc in the “classic”
coordination, whereas subunits B and D have an “open”
conformation with TFE in the substrate binding pocket near the catalytic
zinc, which has an alternative coordination, and no bound coenzyme.
Packing considerations lead to the conclusion that the unit cell contains
three biological molecules each of two different tetramers with AB:AB
and CD:CD subunits (Figure B).

Stereoviews of one asymmetric
unit, an AB dimer, and of the biologic
AB:AB tetramer in a back-to-back orientation. (A) In the AB dimer,
the A subunit has bound NAD and TFE (in ball and stick representation)
and a closed conformation, whereas the B subunit has only TFE and
an open conformation. The zinc atoms are shown as gray spheres. (B)
In the tetramer, the catalytic subunits of the two A subunits (blue,
with NAD and TFE colored green) are most closely associated with one
another in the tetramer, and the catalytic domains of B subunits (magenta)
are likewise associated. These figures were made with the PyMOL Molecular
Graphics System, version 1.7, from Schrödinger, LLC.

Subunit and Dimer Structures
Superpositioning of the
α-carbon atoms of the coenzyme or catalytic domains, or the
complete subunits, shows that the conformations of the A and C subunits
(containing NAD and TFE) are very similar to one another (average
rmsd of 0.30 Å); the B and D subunits (containing only TFE) are
also similar to one another [rmsd of 0.54 Å (see Table 1S of
the )]. The higher
rmsd value for B and D subunits relative to that for the A and C subunits
results from disorder, or poor electron density, for residues in some
loops of the D subunit: 49–59, 246–251, and 269–274.

The dimers have similar structures, as superposition of dimers
AB and CD gives an rmsd value of 0.45 Å. However, the A and C
subunits differ somewhat from the B and D subunits in coenzyme and
catalytic domain structures (average rmsd of 0.87 Å) and in the
overall subunits (average rmsd of 1.97 Å). The conformation of
the A and C subunits is more closed than that of the B and D subunits.
After the coenzyme binding domains of subunits A and B are superimposed,
a rotation of ∼13° around an effective hinge axis superimposes the catalytic domains of the A
and B subunits. Horse liver ADH was the first enzyme shown in atomic
detail by X-ray crystallography to undergo a conformational change
when substrates bind; a rotation of ∼10° closes up the
substrate binding cleft. The extent of
conformational change for ADHs from different sources varies; the
rotation of the open and closed subunits differs by ∼7°
in cod liver ADH and ∼12° in Escherichia coli ADH.− The conformational change is important for coenzyme
binding and catalytic efficiency.

Quaternary
Interactions
The packing of the symmetry-related
dimers in the unit cell could produce two different tetramers: a “back-to-back”
dimer of dimers, AB:AB and CD:CD, in which the active sites are on
the “front” sides and fully available to bind substrates;
or “front-to-front” dimers, AB:CD, in which the active
sites would be opposed and less accessible to solvent. The sensible
choice favors the back-to-back arrangement (Figure B), and this fits with calculations of buried surface area
(Table 2S of the ). The formation of the dimers (AB or CD) buries ∼3400 Å2 of the 30000 Å2 of combined area of the monomers.
The formation of the AB:AB or CD:CD tetramers buries ∼4400
Å2 of the 54000 Å2 of combined area
of the dimers. On the other hand, the formation of an AB:CD tetramer
would bury only ∼1700 Å2 of the combined area.
Each tetramer contains two different subunits, A1B1:A2B2 or C1D1:C2D2
(1 and 2 being symmetry-related subunits), in a quasi-tetrahedral
arrangement, about a noncrystallographic, molecular 2-fold axis (near
residues 277 and 290). The back-to-back arrangement of dimers in the
tetramer is also found in the other tetrameric ADHs.

The buried
surface area is an indicator of the fit between protein subunits,
but the specific interactions between subunits in the dimers and tetramers
are important for understanding oligomer formation and the heat stability
of yeast ADH1 in comparison to those of the more stable yeast ADH2.
Most of the interactions between subunits A and B (or C and D) in
the dimers involve residues from the coenzyme binding domains of the
Rossmann fold (Figure 1S of the ). Several hydrogen bonds connect the peptide backbones of the antiparallel
β-strands that include residues 274–280 and 288–292
around the dimeric molecular 2-fold axis. A short α-helix links
these two β-strands. These interactions produce the extended
coenzyme binding domain. Such interactions were also identified in
horse liver ADH in the βS and βF elements in horse liver
ADH, linked by a short 310-helix.

Side chains of several residues (101–110) from the
structural
zinc binding loop of the catalytic domain of one subunit also interact
with residues (260–262) of the coenzyme binding domain of the
other subunit in a dimer. The carboxylate of Glu-101 forms a salt
bridge with the guanidinium group of Arg-260 between subunits of both
dimers. The side chain of Asn-110 in subunit A (or C) interacts with
side chains of Asn-262 and Ser-287 in subunit B (or D). Because the
conformations of the subunits are slightly different, due to the relative
rotations of the catalytic and coenzyme binding domains within a subunit,
the interactions between subunits are not symmetrical. Some water-mediated
hydrogen bonds link Gly-237 and Ala-261 backbone atoms to Tyr-102.
Altogether, the intradimer interactions amount to 21–22 hydrogen
bonds, 2–4 electrostatic interactions, 14–15 “hydrophobic”
interactions (van der Waals interactions, ≤∼4 Å),
and one disulfide bond.

The disulfide bond is formed between
Cys-277 residues across the
molecular 2-fold axis in a dimer (Figure 2S of the ). As presented in the , a disulfide bond was also found in
the purified and crystallized commercial enzyme. Treatment of ADH1
with 10 mM dithiothreitol at pH 7.0 decreased the t50 (temperature at which 50% of enzyme activity was lost)
from ∼59 to ∼38 °C and promoted dissociation to
inactive subunits, making the stability of enzyme similar to that
of the chimeric ADH1(1–258)–ADH2(259–347) that
has Cys-277 substituted with Ser. However,
this chimeric enzyme also has six other substitutions, which may destabilize
the enzyme. [Yeast ADH1 and ADH2 differ in 24 amino acid residues,
and ADH2 has a t50 of ∼70 °C
(see below also).] The disulfide bond may not be important for heat
stability, as the cysteine residue is not conserved in medium-chain
ADHs, including thermophilic ADHs.

As illustrated in Figure B, the tetramer
has the symmetry-related AB:AB dimers with subunit A1 most closely
juxtaposed with subunit A2, and B1 with B2, but there are also interactions
of A1 with B2 and A2 with B1. The interactions between dimers that
produce the tetramers are also extensive (Figure 1S of the ). Interactions within
the CD:CD tetramer are similar, and we identify approximately 4–6
electrostatic interactions, 16–20 hydrogen bonding interactions,
and 30–34 hydrophobic interactions in each tetramer.

The tetrameric enzyme dissociates to enzymatically inactive dimers
or monomers upon mild heat treatment, and yeast ADH1 is less stable
than ADH2. Construction of seven different
chimeric ADH1/2 enzymes showed that the heat stability (t50 values) increased from ∼35 to ∼59 °C
in the enzyme with the G229S, L232V, D236N, and V242I substitutions
and additionally increased to ∼72 °C with the M168R and
V173A substitutions. Site-specific substitutions should be used to
determine which of these residues are responsible. Introduction of
several additional electrostatic interactions between subunits in
the mesophilic ADH from Clostridium beijerinckii increased
themostability (T1/2) only from 63.8 to
69.5 °C and did not yield the stability found for the homologous
thermophilic ADH from Thermoanaerobacter brockii of
93.8 °C.

Structural Similarities
among Medium-Chain ADHs
Comparison
of dehydrogenase structures provides information about evolutionary
and structure–function relationships., Progressive sequence alignments showed only ∼24% sequence
identity between yeast and horse ADHs, but detailed molecular modeling showed that the three-dimensional
structures were probably very similar, with conservation of space
filling in hydrophobic cores, glycine residues, zinc ligands, and
catalytic residues in the active site. Nevertheless, 14 deletions (or insertions) in various loops, including
the apparent deletion of 21 amino acids in yeast ADH corresponding
to residues 119–139 in the liver enzyme, indicated that the
structures were different in many places. Comparison of the actual
three-dimensional structures (PDB entries 4DXH and 4W6Z, A chains) shows that 312 residues of
horse and yeast ADHs are in similar secondary structures and that
11 of the 15 changes we identified agree in most respects with the
modeling (Table ). Good models can be useful
approximations for homologous structures, but experimental verification
is needed. An automated multiple-sequence alignment located 9 of the
15 differences at positions similar to those found by comparison of
the three-dimensional structures. Almost
all of the insertions or deletions are in the loops connecting α-helices
and β-sheet strands and thus do not alter the overall folding
of the protein (Table ). Nevertheless, the
differences in the horse and yeast enzymes are reflected in some shifts
in helices and sheets so that the subunits do not exactly superimpose.

None of the substitutions in yeast ADH appears to generate interactions
that would explain why yeast ADH is a tetramer whereas horse ADH is
a dimer. The deletion of 21 amino acid residues from the horse enzyme,
which leads to differences in residues 114–122 in yeast ADH,
was suggested to be responsible for the tetrameric structure of yeast
ADH. Multiple-sequence alignments of
alcohol dehydrogenases were consistent with this possibility, indicating
a distant divergence in evolution of dimers and tetramers., A recent analysis has labeled this particular sequence as the “quaternary
structure-determining loop”, but
the structural basis needs to be established. Superpositioning the
horse liver dimer onto the corresponding dimers in the yeast tetramer
shows that the extra loop would probably not prevent formation of
a tetrameric horse enzyme, as the subunits could fit together, with
a few good interactions and some close contacts that could be accommodated
by amino acid substitutions and small structural changes. Because
the oligomeric state and the length of the residues in the loop region
are not strictly correlated,, it would be interesting
to explore the interconversion of dimeric and tetrameric ADHs by protein
engineering and to create active yeast ADH dimers and liver ADH tetramers.
We do not yet understand the evolutionary basis or significance for
the formation of the oligomeric enzymes.

The medium-chain ADHs
are homologous, and we identified the common
core elements among 13 three-dimensional structures of diverse dimeric
and tetrameric ADHs (Table ), some with &lt;25%
sequence identity (Table 3S of the ). The common core has 248 amino acid residues in
structurally similar elements (Table 4S of the ). Although the structures are similar,
the enzymes differ in substrate specificity and catalytic activity.

Zinc Content and Coordination
Each subunit of yeast
ADH1 in the crystals contains a “catalytic” zinc and
a “structural” zinc, with no known functional role.
Determination of the number of zinc atoms in yeast ADH1 has produced
differing results (see the ), but the crystallography clearly shows that two zincs per subunit
can be present. The coordination of these zincs is tetrahedral, and
the distances are typical for ADHs; however, the catalytic zincs in
subunits A and C ligate TFE, with Glu-67 OE2 in the second sphere,
and the zincs in subunits B and D ligate Glu-67 OE2, with TFE in the
second sphere (Table 5S of the ).

With a closed conformation, one subunit (A or C) in each
asymmetric dimer binds NAD and TFE with the catalytic zincs coordinated
in the “classical” manner with Cys-43, His-66, Cys-153,
and the oxygen of TFE (Figure A). This figure
also shows that the methylene carbon of TFE would have its pro-R hydrogen directed toward the re-face
of the nicotinamide ring. In an open conformation, the other subunit
(B or D) coordinates the catalytic zinc in an “alternative”
manner, to Cys-43, His-66, Glu-67, and Cys-153 with the oxygen of
TFE in the second sphere (Figure B). An overlay
of the catalytic domains of subunits A and B shows that the zinc coordination
is inverted, accompanied by small movements of the zinc ligands, as
the zinc moves ∼2.6 Å closer to Glu-67.

Stereoviews of the two
different types of coordination of the catalytic
zinc. (A) Classical found in subunits A and C, which has TFE ligated
to the zinc, bound NAD, and Glu-67 5 Å from the zinc (gray sphere).
(B) “Alternative”, found in subunits B and D, in which
TFE interacts with His-66 and not with the zinc, but Glu-67 is ligated
to the zinc, and no NAD is bound. The electron density maps are contoured
at 1.5σ. These figures were made with the PyMOL Molecular Graphics
System, version 1.7.

The classical and alternative coordinations of the catalytic
zincs
are also found in other ADHs. Of particular interest is the fact that
subunits of human ADH3 complexed with NADH (PDB entries 1TEH and 1MC5) or ADP-ribose (PDB
entry 2FZE)
apparently have both the classical and alternative coordinations,
with crystallographic evidence for partial occupancy at two different
positions for the zinc separated by 2.3 Å. At low resolution, it can appear that the zinc has a bipyramidal
coordination., The structures with human ADH3
can illustrate an intermediate in the mechanism after the coenzyme
is bound and before the substrate (e.g., alcohol) binds. It is clear that the alternative coordination
is common and that the active site zinc coordination is flexible,
which leads to a proposal for a mechanism by which zinc-bound water
is replaced by an alcohol or aldehyde (see below).

Asymmetry within
the Tetrameric Molecule
The asymmetry
within the dimeric units of yeast ADH1 raises questions about potential
cooperativity in the catalytic mechanism of the molecule, in particular,
“half-of-the-sites” reactivity. However, the dimers
are the crystallographic asymmetric units, and the subunits can be
different because of the crystal lattice contacts. The horse liver
ADH1E holoenzyme and the cod liver ADH1 also have a dimer as the asymmetric unit, and
both subunits bind coenzyme; however, the subunits in the cod enzyme
have different extents of closure of the cleft between the coenzyme
and catalytic domains. The yeast cinnamyl alcohol dehydrogenase (monoclinic
form) also has an asymmetric dimer, and nucleotide is bound to only
one subunit. If the asymmetry in the
crystal of yeast ADH reflects a preexisting state that is present
in solution, biochemical studies could provide information about the
stoichiometry or cooperativity of coenzyme binding.

Accurate
determination of the number of binding sites for coenzyme is uncertain
because it depends upon having “pure” enzyme, probably
with the full complement of eight zincs per tetramer and sulfhydryl
groups in the proper state of oxidation, and knowing the enzyme concentration
and the molecular weight of the tetramer (see the ). Various studies have given results
that range from 2.0 to 3.6 NADH molecules binding per tetramer. In
numerous preparations of recombinant yeast ADH1 in our laboratory,
we used titration with NAD+ in the presence of 10 or 100
mM pyrazole to determine the concentration of active sites for calculation
of turnover numbers. The NAD+–pyrazole complex forms
tightly (Kd ∼ 1 μM, too tight
to obtain a good value for Kd with micromolar
enzyme concentrations) and absorbs light with maxima in the difference
spectrum at 285 and 293 nm, with a difference extinction coefficient
at 293 nm of ∼12000 M–1 cm–1, so that the concentration of active sites is readily estimated
for solutions of ∼1 mg/mL enzyme in split cuvettes with a path
length of 0.435 cm.− (A structure of the horse liver enzyme complexed
with NAD+ and pyrazole shows a partial covalent bond between
C4N of the nicotinamide ring and a N of pyrazole, with the other N
of pyrazole ligated to the catalytic zinc; the difference absorbance
maximum is relatively flat at 284–296 nm.) With many batches of purified yeast ADH, we found concentrations
of active sites that averaged 72% (range of 50–90%) of the
concentration of protein subunits calculated from the ε280 of 1.26 cm–1 mg–1 mL.
We suggest that such titrations establish that the enzyme can bind
one coenzyme per subunit, but heterogeneity in the enzyme preparations
can decrease the observed capacity. Such titrations, however, do not
eliminate the possibility that binding of coenzyme is cooperative.
Numerous studies show that enzyme activity with ethanol and acetaldehyde
also fits Michaelis–Menten kinetics, but such studies do not
define the number of sites that are active at any moment. Radiation
inactivation studies suggest that each monomer is active.

Because yeast ADH1 appears to be able
to bind one NAD per subunit,
can the asymmetry in the crystal structure be explained by the preparation
of the crystals? It is relevant that the crystals were soaked for
several days and shipped in a mother liquor that contained no added
NAD+. The dissociation constant for NAD+ is
920 μM, and the Ki for TFE is 2.8
mM; therefore, most (96% by estimation for an ordered mechanism) of
the enzyme should be in the ternary complex in solution during the
crystallization. However, subsequent soaking
of the crystal in buffer without coenzyme could allow most of the
coenzyme to dissociate. Nevertheless, if crystal lattice contacts
maintained the subunit in the closed conformation, coenzyme dissociation
should be prevented (as observed in subunits A and C), and if the
crystal lattice contacts held one subunit in the open conformation,
the affinity for coenzyme could be greatly diminished. For instance,
with horse liver alcohol dehydrogenase, mutations that seem to “lock”
the subunits “open” increase the Kd for NAD+ from 27 to 1100 μM (and the Kd for NADH from 0.50 to 320 μM), and the
position of the nicotinamide riboside is not clearly defined in the
structure. Examination of the crystal
lattice contacts for yeast ADH1 suggests that the contacts around
subunits A and C are somewhat different than those around the B and
D subunits, consistent with the asymmetry, and it appears that coenzyme
could dissociate from the open B and D subunits. Although the asymmetry
in the structure of yeast ADH1 could result from inherent structural
differences in solution, there is no evidence of “negative”
cooperativity in the binding of coenzymes or the kinetics of catalysis.,− It seems most likely that the enzyme crystallized in the asymmetric
form and that coenzyme dissociated from the subunits in the open conformation
when the crystals were soaked without coenzyme. In any case, we believe
that the different structures of the subunits represent energetically
accessible states that fortuitously provide significant information
for the catalytic mechanism. The differences in energy between the
open and closed apoenzyme or enzyme–NAD+ complexes
of horse liver ADH are calculated to be relatively small,, and this may be true for yeast ADH.

Active Site in Subunits
A and C
Coenzyme and the substrate
analogue, TFE, bind to one of the two subunits in each dimer, in what
appears to be a mimic of a Michaelis complex (Figure ). The structure is very similar to that found in the holoenzyme
complex of horse liver ADH (PDB entry 4DXH). The TFE
alcohol oxygen is ligated to the zinc, and the methylene carbon is
∼3.7 Å from C4N of the coenzyme ring with the pro-R hydrogen directed toward the re face
of the nicotinamide ring as expected for the known stereochemistry. (The distance was determined at 1.12 Å
resolution in the horse liver enzyme to be 3.44 ± 0.02 Å.) The oxygen of TFE is hydrogen-bonded to OG1
of Thr-45, which is in turn hydrogen-bonded to O2′ of the nicotinamide
ribose. This constitutes the inner part of the proposed proton relay
system that links the buried alcohol to solvent, as discovered in
the horse liver enzyme., In contrast to the
structures of the horse liver enzyme, where imidazole NE2 of His-51
interacts with the O2′ ribose hydroxyl group and could act
directly as a base, imidazole NE2 of His-48 in yeast ADH interacts
with the O3′ hydroxyl group of the nicotinamide ribose, while
ND1 interacts with OD1 of Asp-53. This conformation puts the imidazole
CD2 closest to the O2′ ribose hydroxyl group, but flipping
the imidazole group would place ND1 in a hydrogen bond with the O2′
hydroxyl and allow His-48 to act as a base. Alternatively, unhindered
rotation about the χ1 angle of His-48 could place
NE2 in a hydrogen bond with the O2′ hydroxyl, in position to
act as a base, at 2.6 Å.

Active site in subunit A showing the proton
relay system, including
the alcohol ligated to the catalytic zinc. His-48 forms a hydrogen
bond with nicotinamide ribose O3′ but can readily swing to
form a hydrogen bond with ribose O2′ and complete the proton
relay system from the bound alcohol and His-48. This figure was made
with the Molray web interface in Uppsala, Sweden.

Modification of approximately
one histidine per subunit with diethyl
pyrocarbonate inactivates the enzyme, with a rate constant increasing
with pH and a pK value of 7.1, apparently because
a histidine is involved in ternary complex formation rather than binding
of coenzyme.− The H48Q substitution decreases the catalytic efficiency
for oxidation of ethanol by 11-fold and alters the pH dependence., The change in activity is consistent with a role for His-48 in catalysis,
similar to that found for the horse liver enzyme with the H51Q substitution,
which affects both coenzyme binding and subsequent catalytic reactions.,

The two cysteines at the active site that chelate the catalytic
zinc, Cys-43 and Cys-153, are chemically modified by different reagents
with loss of activity., The structure shows that the
modifications would disrupt binding of substrates and affect ternary
complex formation with coenzymes and substrate analogues.

Coenzyme Binding
The coenzyme is bound in the extended
conformation typical of ADHs. The pyrophosphate oxygen atoms interact
with several NH groups: O1A interacts with Gly-181 N, O2A with His-44
ND1, O1N with Leu-182 N, and O2N with Arg-340 NH1. O1A also interacts
with Gly-339 O and Arg-340 NH1 via a water. O1N also interacts with
a water that interacts with Ala-245 O, Gly-177 O, and Gly-183 N. These
interactions are similar to those found for the horse liver structures., Water molecules in the coenzyme binding interface are also found
in many dinucleotide binding domains and may be important for specificity
and modulating affinity.

The H44R
substitution in yeast ADH1 decreased the dissociation constants for
NAD+ and NADH by 2–4-fold and decreased turnover
numbers by 4–6-fold. Although
these effects are small, they are physiologically significant because
the decreased rate of reduction of acetaldehyde apparently leads to
a more reduced intracellular state during fermentation and protects
the yeast against toxicity due to oxidation of allyl alcohol to acrolein. Aerobic growth of yeast in the presence of allyl
alcohol is inversely correlated with the catalytic efficiency of six
different ADH mutants, whereas anaerobic growth in the absence of
allyl alcohol is positively correlated with the catalytic efficiency.

As compared to horse liver ADH1E, yeast ADH1 has 40–100-fold
faster turnover and 30–60-fold weaker binding of coenzymes,
and it is of interest to identify the responsible structural features
(in addition to His-44). Enzymes binding NAD or FAD have the signature
sequence GXGXXG within the ADP binding βαβ-fold
that connects the first β-strand to the first α-helix
and makes a tight turn to accommodate the coenzyme., The sequence in horse liver ADH consists of residues 199–204,
GLGGVG, whereas in yeast ADH1 it consists of residues 177–183,
GAAGGLG. Converting the Ala-Ala sequence in yeast ADH1 to Leu with
the A178Deletion:A179L substitution (AA:L) decreased by 5–23-fold
the affinity for NAD+ (Kia)
and the turnover number and catalytic efficiency for ethanol oxidation. Comparison of the yeast and horse ADH structures
suggests that the AA:L substitution should have been readily accommodated,
which perhaps fits with the small changes in kinetics. The GXGXXG
motif sometimes has Ala instead of the final Gly. In yeast ADH1, the
G183A substitution decreased the affinity for coenzymes and adenosine
nucleotides, and turnover numbers and catalytic efficiencies by 10–400-fold. Addition of the methyl group (with G183A) would
create steric hindrance with Gly-177 and Ala-178 that would distort
the structure and affect activity.

At the end of the second
β-strand of the βαβ-fold
in NAD-dependent ADHs is usually a conserved aspartic acid residue,
Asp-201 in yeast ADH (Asp-223 in horse), which forms hydrogen bonds
with O2′ and O3′ of the adenosine ribose and interferes
with binding of NADP. Lys-206 (Lys-228 in horse ADH) also interacts
with O3′ of the adenosine ribose. The critical role of Asp-201
was demonstrated with the D201G substitution, which eliminates the
specificity for NAD+, and allows the enzyme to use NADP+ about as well as NAD+; however, the affinity for
NAD+ decreases by ∼15-fold, and the turnover number
for ethanol oxidation decreases by ∼8-fold. The conserved aspartate is replaced with a neutral residue
(Gly, Ala, Val, Ser, Thr, Asn, and Leu), and one of the next two residues
is usually an Arg in NADP-dependent ADHs. In an attempt to improve
the catalytic activity of yeast ADH with NADP, the G203R and D201G:G203R
enzymes were created. The G203R enzyme had kinetic constants quite
similar to those of the wild-type enzyme, whereas the kinetic constants
for the D201G:G203R enzyme with NAD+ or NADP+ were very similar to those for the D201G enzyme. Apparently, the introduced Arg-203 is exposed to solvent
and does not swing into place to interact with the 2′-phosphate
of NADP.

The adenine ring of the NAD+ bound to yeast
ADH is sandwiched
between Phe-221 on one side and Ser-246, Ser-248, and Ala-251 on the
other side, as compared to the more hydrophobic residues in horse
liver ADH (Phe-198, Ile-224, and Ile-269). [NAD and 8-I-NAD should
bind similarly, as the 8-iodo substituent of 8-I-NAD is exposed to
solvent, but close (4.1–4.2 Å) to CB of Val-247.] Attempting
to increase the affinity of yeast ADH for coenzymes, we introduced
the S176F, G202I, and S246I substitutions, which could have increased
the hydrophobic character near the adenine ring, but for all three
enzymes, the affinity for coenzymes decreased! The kinetics of the G202I enzyme were similar to those
of wild-type ADH1; however, turnover numbers for the S176F enzyme
decreased ∼10-fold, and turnover numbers for the S246I enzyme
decreased ∼350-fold. Inspection of the yeast ADH1 structure
suggests that Ile-202 might interact with Phe-221 (in contact with
the adenine ring) but not generate new interactions with the adenine
ring. Phe-176 would apparently fit into the adenine binding pocket
if Tyr-258 could swing out of its position, so there might be some
small structural rearrangements that account for the relatively large
changes in kinetics. The S246I change is the most enigmatic because
it would seem that Ile-246 could interact well with the adenine ring,
but the S246I enzyme exhibited very large decreases in catalytic efficiency.
For comparison, I224G (Gly-202 in yeast) and I269S (Ser-246 in yeast)
substitutions in horse liver ADH decreased the affinity for both coenzymes
60- and 350-fold, respectively, and increased the turnover number
for ethanol by 7- and 26-fold, respectively, but did not change the
catalytic efficiency for ethanol oxidation or acetaldehyde reduction. The increases in turnover numbers are due to
faster release of NADH, which is rate-limiting for the horse enzyme.
It is satisfying that the horse I224G ADH has binding constants for
coenzymes that are similar to those for wild-type yeast ADH, but the
reverse G202I substitution in yeast ADH also has dissociation constants
(lower affinity) larger (5–9-fold) than those of wild-type
yeast ADH. Comparing the results for
the mutagenesis studies on the yeast and liver enzymes suggests that
it is easier to diminish catalytic activity than to enhance it. More
extensive, and multiple, substitutions that are designed on the known
structures may more successfully explain the differences in activity
of the yeast and horse ADHs.

Substrate Binding Site
The substrate
binding site is
illustrated in Figure . Several large hydrophobic
residues, Trp-54, Trp-92, Met-270, and Tyr-294, produce a cavity that
accommodates ethanol as the best substrate. Longer, branched, or secondary alcohols are poorer substrates for
ADH1., The catalytic efficiencies (V/Km substrate) of the three recombinant
ADHs from S. cerevisiae on primary alcohols decrease
with chain length, but the M270L substitution in ADH1 (yeast ADH numbering,
Val-294 in horse ADH) increases activity on pentanol and hexanol by
10-fold, without affecting activity on ethanol or propanol, and reproduces
the pattern of specificity found in ADH2 and ADH3, which have Leu-270. However, ADH2 has 8-fold higher activity than
ADH1 on ethanol, which must be due to substitutions of residues that
are not in the active site and probably affect dynamics of catalysis.
Early mutagenesis studies showed surprisingly modest effects (∼5-fold)
of T45S, W92F, W92A, T45S:W92F, and T45S:W92A substitutions on specificities
of oxidation of the series of primary alcohols from ethanol to hexanol. Subsequent studies showed that the single T45S
and W54M substitutions and the triple T45S:W54M:W92A (to mimic human and monkey ADH1A, αα-isoenzyme)
substitution decrease activity on primary alcohols relative to that
of wild-type ADH1, and activity decreases as chain length increases. In contrast, the W92A and T45S:W92A substitutions
decrease activity on ethanol by ∼400-fold but increase activity
by 3–9-fold on hexanol (an ∼1000-fold inversion of activity),
with a pattern of activity that resembles that observed with monkey
ADH1A. The W92A substitution also confers
weak activity on cyclohexanol (no detectable activity with wild-type
yeast ADH1), but the activity is less than 1/105 of that
of monkey ADH1A. Increasing the size of the binding pocket with these
several substitutions and the W54L substitution also increases activity
on branched-chain alcohols.

Substrate binding
pocket, in subunits A and C. This figure was
made with the Molray web interface in Uppsala, Sweden.

Engineering the substrate specificity of yeast ADH based
on a model
constructed from the horse liver enzyme structure gave some patterns
of activity that were expected, but changes in catalytic efficiencies
are difficult to predict. Comparison of the yeast and horse enzyme
active sites suggests that this is due in part to the insertions or
deletions (Trp-54 and Tyr-119) near the active site and to differences
in rotamers (Trp-92), the peptide backbone, and the particular amino
acid residues at and near the active site.

Yeast ADH1 is highly
specific for transfer of the (4R)-nicotinamide hydrogen
of NADH to aldehydes and the pro-R hydrogen from
ethanol or octanol to NAD+.− However, it has weak
activity (1/800 of that on ethanol) on 2-propanol,
which indicates that the enzyme can accommodate (poorly) a methyl
substituent on the oxidizable carbon. ADH1 has highly preferential activity on (S)-2-butanol
as compared to (R)-2-butanol, and it appears that
the methyl group of (S)-2-butanol must be accommodated
near Trp-92., Yeast ADH does not measurably
oxidize secondary alcohols with both substituents larger than a methyl
group, so that there are limits to the flexibility of the active site.

Mechanistic Implications of Asymmetry and
Alternative Coordination
of Catalytic Zinc
The two different conformational states
of the subunits can represent two relevant structures in the mechanism,
the apoenzyme and the ternary complex. The kinetic mechanism for the
yeast enzyme acting on ethanol appears to be ordered (or preferred
ordered) in which coenzyme binds to free apoenzyme subunits with the
open conformation and then isomerizes to form the closed conformation., The isomerization step has been described for the horse liver enzyme., Transient kinetic evidence is lacking for an enzyme–coenzyme
isomerization for the yeast enzyme, but effects of pressure on V/K for benzyl alcohol oxidation led to
the suggestion that the E–NAD+ ↔ E*–NAD+ equilibrium constant is 75 ± 13. Hydrogen–deuterium exchange studies also suggest
that binding of NAD+ results in a conformational change.

The next step in the mechanism, the binding
of alcohol to the enzyme–NAD+ complex, may occur
by direct displacement of Glu-67 by the alcohol or by a double displacement
of a water that could bind to the zinc in the enzyme–NAD+ complex. The homologous E. coli enzyme complexed
with NAD has water bound to the catalytic zinc. The mechanism for ligand exchange in ADHs is controversial.
The observation of the alternative zinc coordination (Figure B) and the many examples of such coordination in
other ADHs (Table 6S of the ) are significant because they indicate that the zinc coordination
can change during catalysis and can lead to a reasonable mechanism
for the exchange of ligands. Computational studies suggest that the
carboxyl group of Glu-68 in liver ADH (Glu-67 in yeast ADH) could
transiently displace a zinc-bound water and then allow the alcohol
to bind by displacing the carboxyl group. This ligand exchange mechanism is more energetically feasible than
associative (tight, intermediate five coordination) or dissociative
(intermediate three coordination) mechanisms. The exchange would occur
as the zinc moved closer to Glu-67, to form a loose, transient intermediate,
trigonal–bipyramidal pentacoordinate zinc with the water and
glutamate in axial positions. The configuration
of the zinc is essentially inverted, and then alcohol displaces the
Glu to restore the configuration.

The alternative zinc locations
in human ADH3 structures provide
evidence of an exchange mechanism.− Moreover, the substitution of
the highly conserved Glu with Leu in
ADH3 decreased catalytic efficiency by 3000-fold for oxidation of
(S)-hydroxymethylglutathione, without large changes
in the protein structure or binding of the coenzyme. Likewise, for yeast ADH1, the E67Q substitution decreased
the catalytic efficiency for ethanol oxidation or acetaldehyde reduction
by ∼100-fold and shifted pH dependencies. The results from the site-directed substitutions are consistent
with the proposed mechanism, but electrostatic effects and local,
small structural changes could also affect the dynamics of catalysis.

Although a structure for the binary yeast ADH1–coenzyme
complex is not available, we propose, by analogy to human ADH3 structures
(PDB entries 1TEH and 1MC5),
that the binding of Glu-67 to the zinc may be weakened when the coenzyme
binds because Glu-67 interacts with Arg-340, which in turn interacts
with a phosphate oxygen of the coenzyme. Such an interaction is common
in most tetrameric ADHs complexed with NAD(P)(H). In apoenzyme subunits
(B and D) of yeast ADH1, Glu-67 is ligated to the zinc and does not
interact with Arg-340, but in the holoenzyme subunits (A and C), Glu-67
interacts with Arg-340. In the proposed binary enzyme–coenzyme
complex, ligand exchange of water, alcohol, and aldehyde would be
facilitated by a modulated interaction of Glu-67 with the zinc.

The binding of alcohol to the zinc to form ternary complexes (of
horse liver ADH) appears to require deprotonation of the zinc-bound
water in the enzyme–NAD+ complex before ligands
bind to the zinc. This deprotonation
appears to be facilitated by a proton relay system (see Figure  for yeast ADH) in the hydrogen-bonded system that
includes the zinc-bound water, the hydroxyl group of Ser-48, the 2′-hydroxyl
group of the nicotinamide ribose, and the imidazole group of His-51., Dissociation of hydroxide from zinc is likely to be less favorable
than release of water, but displacement by the glutamate carboxylate
could be energetically favorable. After a neutral alcohol binds to
the zinc and displaces the glutamate, the alcohol would be deprotonated
via the proton relay system to form the zinc alkoxide that is the
ground state for the hydride transfer step.,, The dissociation of aldehyde and binding
of water could also occur by an inversion of the zinc coordination,
which is illustrated by the complexes of human ADH3 with NADH.

An alternative mechanism for ligand exchange could involve a transient
pentacoordinated zinc. Pentacoordinate
zinc was observed in the binary complex of horse liver ADH with 1,10-phenanthroline,
indicating some flexibility of the zinc coordination. However, the first structures of ternary complexes (coenzyme
and substrate analogue) showed that no water remained bound to the
zinc., Nevertheless, such a pentacoordinated zinc
could be a transient species during the replacement of the water with
the alcohol. A pentacoordinated zinc has not been observed in any
ternary complexes of ADHs, except for the complex of sorbitol dehydrogenase
with a chelating (“transition state analogue”) inhibitor
that mimics the substrate sorbitol (PDB entry 1P16).

Another version of a mechanism involving a pentacoordinate
zinc
was proposed to account for alternative waters bound to the catalytic
zinc and to C6N of the nicotinamide ring in binary complexes with
NADH, but this mechanism is not supported by structures of ternary
complexes.,

Time-resolved X-ray absorption
studies of the transient reaction
of T. brockii ADH with NADP+ and the substrate
2-propanol showed that two different pentacoordinate species formed
at 5 and 15 ms (during the “burst” phase) but then perhaps
reverted (to tetracoordination) during the steady state phase. These results could fit with the X-ray structure
of the complex with NADPH, where the zinc is essentially bipyramidal
with the oxygens of Ser-39 and Glu-60 ∼3.7 Å from the
zinc, and 2-propanol displaces the Ser oxygen. A mechanism that involves
displacement of Glu-60 with water and then binding of alcohol to form
the reactive complex was proposed, but the water was not assigned
a catalytic role. The proposed mechanism seems to be more elaborate
than chemically necessary. Nevertheless, evidence of transient species
is required to describe the exchange mechanism. Experimental support
for a catalytic role of Glu-60 in this enzyme is limited as the substitution
with Ala or Asp decreases the catalytic efficiency by only 4- or 8-fold,
respectively. The mechanisms for ligand
exchange may differ in the enzymes with two carboxylates bound to
the zinc instead of two cysteine sulfhydryl groups.

Transition
State Studies
The transition state of yeast
ADH has been extensively characterized. Structure–activity
correlations for para-substituted benzyl alcohols and benzaldehydes
suggested a transition state with little change in charge relative
to that of the alcohol, whereas α-secondary isotope effects
suggested a transition state that resembled aldehyde.− Other studies provided values for intrinsic isotope effects.− In a landmark study, yeast ADH was used to show that the transfer
of hydrogen from benzyl alcohol to NAD+ occurs with quantum
mechanical tunneling. Subsequent studies
with horse liver and bacterial ADHs show that the tunneling, along
with coupled motions, is a general phenomenon that can explain the
results with yeast ADH.− Pressure diminishes substrate and solvent isotope effects, perhaps
by affecting a “mechanical” component involving vibrational
dynamics.− These early studies used benzyl alcohol as a substrate (where hydrogen
transfer is rate-limiting for catalytic turnover because of small
“commitment factors”) and commercial yeast ADH, which
contains mostly ADH1, but which has ∼40000-fold more activity
on ethanol than on benzyl alcohol. In
contrast, yeast ADH2 is ∼100-fold more active than ADH1 on
benzyl alcohol; fortunately, the structure–activity relationships
for ADH1 and ADH2 with the substituted benzyl alcohols and benzaldehydes
are similar. Subsequently, the secondary
and equilibrium isotope effects for reduction of substituted benzaldehydes
were determined for yeast ADH2, and a model that describes the “tunneling
ready state”, explains the isotope and substituent effects,
and fits the three-dimensional structure was created. Interestingly, the distance between the methylene
carbon of the alcohol and C4N of the nicotinamide ring was calculated
to be 3.2 Å, which is close to the distance of 3.8 Å for
the structure with TFE. Benzyl alcohol can fit with some close contacts
into the active site, in particular with the M270L substitution, and local equilibrium motions could bring the
donor–acceptor distance to 3.2 Å. The structure of yeast
ADH1 provides a framework for further calculations to explain the
catalysis of hydride transfer.

Common Structural
Elements in Horse
and Yeast ADHs Interrupted by Insertions or Deletions
similarities	differences	 	
horse	yeast	horse	yeast	location
of change	
 	 	1–6	1–3	amino terminal	
7–57	4–54	58	55–57	substrate binding site	
59–94	58–93	95	94, 95	start of
structural Zn loop	
96–113	96–113	114–143	114–122	excursionary loop	
144–183	123–162	184, 185	163	connect αA, βA	
186–199	164–177	200	178, 179	connect
βA, αB	
201–216	180–195	217, 218	196	connect αB, βB	
219–247	197–225	248, 249	226	connect βC, αCD	
250–283	227–260	284, 285	261	connect αE, βE	
286–296	262–272	297, 298	273	connect βE, βS	
299–309	274–284	310	285, 286	connect βS, βF	
311–319	287–295	320–323	296	connect βF, α3	
324–339	297–312	340–347	313–317	connect α3, βI:5	
348–366	318–336	367	337–338	connect α4, βI:6	
368–374	339–345	 	346, 347	carboxyl terminal	
The structures
of the ternary complexes
of yeast (PDB entry 4W6Z) and horse liver (PDB entry 4DXH) with NAD and 2,2,2-trifluoroethanol,
A chains, were superimposed with O, using 16 common structural elements
with 248 residues (Table 4S of the ). Inspection of the structures identified the similar
structural elements (helices, β-strands, and loops), as described
previously, and the sites of insertions
and deletions. Differences of ∼3 Å in Cα positions
were tolerated, as there are shifts in the structural elements, with
retention of the conformation. PDBeFold on the EMBL-EBI server aligned
319 residues in 21 structural elements with an rmsd of 2.3 Å,
but the structure differed at 11 positions because of shifts of a
residue in the alignment.

Supporting Information Available
Additional figures and tables
illustrating the packing interactions of yeast ADH, crystallographic
and chemical evidence of a disulfide bond, structural homology of
13 diverse medium-chain ADHs, zinc content and coordination in yeast
ADH and other ADHs, and a summary of the methods and results used
to determine protein concentrations, molecular weights, and stoichiometries
of coenzyme binding sites. This material is available free of charge
via the Internet at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bi5006442_si_001.pdf

Accession Codes
The X-ray coordinates
and structure factors have been deposited in the Protein Data Bank
as entry 4W6Z (making the earlier deposition of 2HCY obsolete). Coordinates for the biological
tetramers can be generated by applying the rotation matrix found in
the header of the PDB file.

Author Present Address
† S.B.R.: Lawson State Community College,
Birmingham, AL 35216.

Author Present Address
‡ S.R.:
Institute for Stem Cell Biology and Regenerative Medicine
(inSTEM), National Center for Biological Sciences, GKVK Post, Bellary
Road, Bangalore 560065, India.

This work was
supported by NSF grant MCB 9118657 and NIH grant AA00279.

The authors
declare no competing financial interests.

Acknowledgments
We thank
Kristine B. Berst for protein chemistry and The University
of Iowa Molecular Analysis Facility for amino acid and molecular mass
analyses. We also appreciated the numerous efforts by Darla Ann Kratzer,
Susan Souhrada, Andrew D. Hershey, Fan Fan, Doo-Hong Park, Suresh
Pal, Henry A. Charlier, Jr., and Mark Hermes to prepare crystals of
yeast ADH. We thank Lokesh Gakhar in The University of Iowa Crystallography
Facility for advice. We also thank the staff and support at beamline
BW7A at the EMBL/DESY Hamburg synchrotron. S.R. collected the data
while working in the Department of Molecular Biology at the Swedish
University of Agricultural Sciences (Uppsala, Sweden) and determined
the structure at The University of Iowa.

Abbreviations
ADHalcohol dehydrogenase

TFE2,2,2-trifluoroethanol
(ETF in the PDB entry, with the methylene carbon labeled “2”)

rmsdroot-mean-square
deviation

amino acid substitutions,
e.g., D236NAsp-236 substituted with Asn.

