Identification of the product(s)
of an enzyme-catalyzed reaction is essential to understanding both
the catalytic mechanism of the enzyme and its role in metabolism.
In many cases, the initial product is unstable, hindering structural
characterization.− Product identification in such cases requires a combination of chemical
logic, characterization of stable compounds produced upon further
reaction, and/or synthesis of the authentic product or an analogue.
Two specific examples occur in the reactions of flavin amine oxidases
and pterin-dependent hydroxylases. The former is a large group of
enzymes that catalyze the oxidation of a C–N bond in the substrate
to an imine; the imine typically hydrolyzes
to form an aldehyde or ketone and a different amine as the stable
products, the products that are routinely detected. The difficulty
in detecting the initial imine product because of its instability
raised the question of whether the hydrolysis is enzyme-catalyzed.
The formation of an l-amino acid during turnover of d-amino acid oxidase in the presence of sodium borohydride provided
the initial evidence of an imine as the product released by a flavin
amine oxidase; this was subsequently confirmed
by the use of a cyclic amine so that the imine product was stable. Direct detection of an unstable imine product
required the use of an organic solvent for the reaction, thereby preventing
hydrolysis of the imine. However, in the
absence of evidence that an imine is always the product of flavoprotein-catalyzed
amine oxidation, enzyme-catalyzed hydrolysis of the imine product
is still being proposed for flavin amine oxidases.−

The pterin-dependent
aromatic amino acid hydroxylases catalyze
the incorporation of one atom of molecular oxygen into the side chain
of the amino acid substrate and the other atom into the pterin substrate
to form a 4a-hydroxypterin (4a-HO-pterin) (Scheme ). The latter readily dehydrates
in solution to form a quinonoid dihydropterin. The initial demonstration
that the pterin product of these enzymes is a hydroxypterin was based
on the similarity of the near-UV absorbance spectrum of the pterin
product of the phenylalanine hydroxylase (PheH) reaction to that of
a synthetic and stable 4a-hydroxy-5-deazapterin; further support for the structure of the product came from
the 13C nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectrum of the
product formed from a specifically labeled tetrahydropterin at cryogenic
temperatures. Species with similar absorbance
spectra were subsequently identified as products in the reactions
catalyzed by tyrosine hydroxylase (TyrH) and tryptophan hydroxylase., While effective with the wild-type enzymes, the use of absorbance
spectra to identify the pterin products of these enzymes is less straightforward
when it is applied to mutant enzymes in which multiple pterin products
are formed. Although deconvolution of product spectra to quantitate
the partitioning among different products can be successful,, such an approach is problematic when the partitioning becomes complex.
It is also not applicable in addressing the possibility that novel
pterin products are formed.

We describe here the use of continuous-flow mass spectrometry
(CFMS)
to characterize the initial products in the reactions catalyzed by
the flavin-dependent amino oxidase N-acetylpolyamine
oxidase (PAO) and by the pterin-dependent hydroxylases PheH and TyrH.
Structurally, PAO is a member of the monoamine oxidase (MAO) family,
a large family of flavoproteins that includes MAO A, MAO B, LSD1,
and the l-amino acid oxidases. PAO catalyzes the oxidative cleavage of N1-acetylspermine and N1-acetylspermidine,
yielding 3-acetamidopropanal and spermidine or putrescine. In the case of maize PAO, the reaction has been
proposed to involve initial oxidation to an imine followed by its
hydrolysis within the enzyme active site to form the final products.N,N′-Dibenzyl-1,4-diaminobutane
(DBDB) (Scheme ) was selected as a substrate
for our studies because oxidation of the amine is the rate-limiting
step with it as the substrate for PAO, whereas product release is rate-limiting with physiological substrates. PheH was selected for the characterization of
the product of a pterin-dependent enzyme because it was used in the
initial demonstration of the 4a-HO-pterin; in addition, analysis of
the TyrH reaction products was conducted with both the wild-type enzyme
and a mutant protein in which tetrahydropterin oxidation and amino
acid oxidation are uncoupled, so that the 4a-HO-pterin is not the
exclusive product.

Experimental Procedures
Materials
6-Methyl-5,6,7,8-tetrahydropterin
(6MPH4) was purchased from Schircks Laboratories (Jona,
Switzerland).
Isopropyl β-d-1-thiogalactopyranoside was from Research
Products International (Mount Prospect, IL). Diethylenetriaminepentaacetic
acid (DTPA), pepstatin A, l-phenylalanine, and l-tyrosine were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich (St. Louis, MO). Leupeptin
was from Peptide Institute (Osaka, Japan). N,N′-Dibenzyl-1,4-diaminobutane (DBDB) was purchased
from Prime Organics, Inc. (Woburn, MA). N,N′-Bis-perdeuterobenzyl-1,4-diaminobutane (DBDB-d14) was synthesized by the procedure of Henderson
Pozzi et al.

To synthesize ethylenediammonium
diacetate (EDDA), acetic acid (71 mL, 2.4 equiv) was added dropwise
to ethylenediamine (30.5 g) in 500 mL of dichloromethane at 4 °C.
After the addition of acetic acid, solvent and excess acetic acid
were removed from the precipitate by rotary evaporation at 30 °C.
The off-white solid was washed with dichloromethane and dried under
vacuum at room temperature to yield EDDA (97.6 g) as a fluffy, white
solid: 1H NMR (600 MHz, D2O) δ 1.87 (6H,
s), 3.30 (4H, s); 13C NMR (175 MHz, D2O) δ
22.76, 36.36, 180.78.

Expression and purification of His6-tagged mouse PAO
were performed as described by Royo and Fitzpatrick, omitting the final chromatography on Sephacryl S-200. Rat
phenylalanine hydroxylase lacking the N-terminal regulatory domain
(PheH Δ117) was expressed and purified as described by Roberts
et al. Expression and purification of
wild-type and E332A rat TyrH were performed using the procedure of
Daubner et al. with modifications. Bacterial
cells were grown at 37 °C to an OD600 of 0.3; the
temperature was then decreased to 20 °C. At an OD600 of 0.7–0.8, isopropyl β-d-1-thiogalactopyranoside
was added to induce protein expression. After 21 h at 20 °C,
the cells were harvested by centrifugation at 5000g for 30 min or 7500g for 15 min. The cell pellets
were stored at −80 °C. Cells were resuspended in buffer
containing 50 mM 4-(2-hydroxyethyl)-1-piperazineethanesulfonic acid
(HEPES), 75 μM diethylenetriaminepentaacetic acid (DTPA), 100
μg/mL phenylmethanesulfonyl fluoride, 10% glycerol, 1 μM
leupeptin, 1 μM pepstatin A, and 10% glycerol (pH 7.0) and sonicated.
Nucleic acids were precipitated with streptomycin at a final concentration
of 1%. The protein was precipitated by addition of ammonium sulfate
to 45% saturation and resuspended in the same buffer. The purified
protein was obtained by separation on a heparin-Sepharose column using
a 0 to 0.8 M sodium chloride gradient. The purified protein was dialyzed
against 50 mM HEPES, 100 mM sodium chloride, 20 mM nitrilotriacetic
acid, 20 mM DTPA, 1 μM leupeptin, and 1 μM pepstatin A
(pH 7.0) to remove bound iron. The chelators were removed by further
dialysis against 50 mM HEPES, 100 mM sodium chloride, 1 μM leupeptin,
and 1 μM pepstatin A (pH 7.0).

Assays
The oxidation
of DBDB by PAO was followed directly
in chemical-quench assays by monitoring the concentration of DBDB
using a BioLogic (Claix, France) QFM-400 quenched-flow apparatus.
Assays were performed by mixing 50 μL of 80 μM DBDB in
10% methanol and 50 mM ammonium acetate (pH 8.5) with 50 μL
of 40 μM PAO in 50 mM ammonium acetate (pH 8.5) at 30 °C. N-Methylphenethylamine (MPEA) was included with DBDB at
a concentration of 80 μM as an internal standard. Reactions
were quenched with 50 μL of 2 M hydrochloric acid. Samples representing t0 were obtained by first mixing DBDB with 2
M hydrochloric acid and then adding PAO to the mixture. The quenched
samples were centrifuged to remove protein; the resulting supernatants
were diluted 10-fold with 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid in water before
being injected onto a Phenomenex Gemini-NX C18 high-performance liquid
chromatography (HPLC) column (3.0 μm, 2.0 mm × 150 mm).
DBDB was eluted using an isocratic mobile phase of 0.1% trifluoroacetic
acid and 17.5% acetonitrile in water and detected by fluorescence,
with excitation at 255 nm and emission at 278 nm. The amount of DBDB
was determined by comparison with a standard curve.

Steady-state
deuterium isotope effects for the oxidation of DBDB by PAO were measured
by monitoring oxygen consumption over a range of substrate concentrations
using a Yellow Springs Inc. (Yellow Springs, OH) 5300A biological
oxygen monitor. Assays contained 2.5–250 μM DBDB or DBDB-d14 and 1.6 μM PAO in 5% methanol and 50
mM ammonium acetate (pH 8.5) at 30 °C; the total reaction volume
was 1 mL. Reactions were initiated by the addition of enzyme.

Continuous-Flow
Mass Spectrometry
DBDB oxidation was
monitored by high-resolution mass spectrometry using a Thermo Scientific
(Waltham, MA) LTQ OrbiTrap Discovery mass spectrometer equipped with
a custom nanoelectrospray ionization source incorporating a temperature-controlled
nanovolume continuous-flow mixer (Eksigent, Dublin, CA). To minimize
delay volumes, New Objective (Woburn, MA) SilicaTip emitters with
20 μm inside diameters and 10 μm tips were mounted directly
onto the mixing chip. Reactions were performed by mixing the substrate
and enzyme solutions at equal flow rates using the same conditions
that were used for the chemical-quench assays. MPEA was included with
the substrate as an internal standard at a final concentration after
mixing of 40 μM. Flow rates ranging from 0.6 to 10 μL/min
were used to obtain multiple reaction times. A sample corresponding
to a reaction time of 0 s was obtained by mixing DBDB with buffer
only. Product isotope measurements were taken using a mixture of 6.7
μM DBDB and 33 μM DBDB-d14. Reaction mixtures were monitored in spectral mode over the range
of m/z 85–400. Substrates
and reaction products were identified by their respective [M + H]+ ions with a mass error of &lt;2 ppm. Each data point represents
an average of at least 200 scans. Ion intensities were normalized
against the intensity of MPEA at each flow rate.

For CFMS of
pterin oxidation by PheH Δ117, 3 volumes of 25 μM PheH
Δ117 and 2.7 mM l-phenylalanine in 50 mM ammonium acetate
and 1% methanol (pH 7.0) was mixed with 1 volume of 4.0 mM 6MPH4 in 1 mM HCl and 1% methanol at 5 °C at a flow rate of
5.0 μL/min. Mass scanning of the reaction mixtures was performed
over the range of m/z 100–300.
Determination of MS/MS spectra of reaction species was performed at
a rate of 1.0 μL/min.

CFMS assays of pterin oxidation
by wild-type and E332A TyrH were
performed by mixing an anaerobic solution of 20 μM enzyme and
500 μM tyrosine in 100 mM EDDA/ethylenediamine (pH 8.0) with
an equal volume of an aerobic solution of 100 μM 6MPH4 in 25 mM ammonium chloride/HCl and 10% methanol (pH 3.0) at 5 °C.
The enzyme/substrate mixture was prepared in several steps. The stock
apoenzyme was exchanged into 100 mM EDDA/ethylenediamine (pH 8.0)
using a Sephadex G-25 column (1.0 cm × 17.5 cm) and added to
a tonometer containing tyrosine in the same buffer. A side arm containing
1 equiv of ferrous ammonium sulfate in 2 mM HCl was attached. The
tonometer was made anaerobic by alternating vacuum and argon for 15
cycles. The contents were then mixed by gently inverting the contents
into the side arm several times. Five additional vacuum–argon
cycles were applied, and the tonometer was immediately mounted onto
the CFMS system. Mass scanning of reactions was performed over the
range of m/z 130–400.

Data Analysis
Kinetic data from individual experiments
were fit using KaleidaGraph (Synergy Software, Reading, PA). KinTek
Explorer (KinTek Corp., Austin, TX) was
used to perform global analyses of multiple time-dependent data sets
through singular-value decomposition to determine observed rate values.
The FitSpace Explorer package of KinTek
Explorer was used to estimate the confidence in the best-fit values
by determining the sum square error for all pairs of parameters. The
reported confidence intervals are the ranges of values for each parameter
for which global fitting gives X2 values
no more than 40% greater than the X2 value
obtained using the best-fit values; this is termed a X2 threshold of 1.4.

Results and Discussion
Kinetics
of Oxidation of DBDB
To utilize CFMS to analyze
the kinetics of oxidation of DBDB by PAO, it was necessary to first
calibrate the system. For continuous-flow methods, the reaction time
at which the analysis occurs is determined by both the flow rate of
the reactants and the volume between the mixer and the detector. Either
can be varied to analyze the time course of reactions., In the continuous-flow approach used here, different reaction times
were obtained by varying the flow rate. Calculation of the reaction
times thus required knowledge of the volume (Vapp) from mixing until the reaction is quenched by desolvation
upon electrospray (ESI). The value of Vapp can be determined by monitoring the progress of a reaction with
established kinetics at various flow rates (Q), an
approach that is commonly used to calibrate rapid-quench systems and
determine dead times for stopped-flow instruments. Consequently, the
kinetics of oxidation of DBDB by PAO were first analyzed by chemical-quench
methods to determine the rate constant for the reaction. To do so,
the enzyme was mixed with DBDB and the reaction was quenched at 0.25–8
s. The amount of DBDB remaining at each time was then determined by
HPLC with fluorescence detection. Because the concentration of DBDB
used was below its KM value under these
conditions (50 μM), the time-dependent loss of DBDB (Figure ) could be fit reasonably well as an exponential
decrease (eq ), yielding a value for the observed
rate constant (kobs) for DBDB oxidation
of 0.14 ± 0.01 s–1.

Time
course for the oxidation of DBDB by PAO: (●) chemical-quench
assays and (□) continuous-flow mass spectrometry. The reaction
conditions were 40 μM DBDB, 20 μM polyamine oxidase, 50
mM ammonium acetate, 5% methanol, pH 8.5, and 30 °C. All concentrations
are after mixing. The line indicates the best-fit curve for the chemical-quench
data to eq .

Next, DBDB and PAO were reacted in the CFMS system under
conditions
identical to those used for the chemical-quench assays, varying the
flow rate to obtain multiple reaction times. As with other mass spectrometry
methods, the quantification of ions of interest by CFMS requires normalization
against an internal standard. However, quantification using ESI is
further complicated by the observation that the intensity of an ion
signal varies somewhat with the concentration of the enzyme and the
flow rate. In our hands, high concentrations of enzyme decrease the
ion intensity, likely because of an increase in the viscosity and
surface tension of the reaction mixture, which disrupt the desolvation
process of the electrospray. The flow rate dependence of the ion intensity
is the result of variations in droplet size and the extent of desolvation., We have found that this flow-dependent signal variation is ion-specific,
such that the signal ratios for two ions may vary significantly at
different flow rates. To correct for this, several analogues of DBDB
were tested as internal standards, including N,N′-dibenzyl-1,2-diaminoethane, diphenylamine, lysine,
and N-methylphenethylamine. N-Methylphenethylamine
(MPEA) gave the behavior most consistent with that of DBDB across
a range of flow rates, and it is not a substrate for PAO. Consequently,
the concentration of DBDB remaining upon detection at each flow rate
was determined by normalizing the ion signal against that for MPEA
as an internal standard and the known concentration of DBDB at t0.

The reaction time for a continuous-flow
analysis is proportional
to the inverse of flow rate Q (eq ).The value of Vapp can
be determined by combining eqs  and  and substituting in the value for kobs from the chemical-quench experiment (eq ).This approach yielded a value
for Vapp of 100 ± 20 nL for the mixer
used for the experiments described here. Figure  shows an overlay of the data from the rapid-quench and MS analyses
using this Vapp value to determine the
reaction times. A similar analysis conducted with a second mixer yielded
a value of 210 ± 20 nL for Vapp,
demonstrating the necessity of determining Vapp upon any change in the experimental system.

Products of
the Oxidation of DBDB by PAO
As noted above,
a major advantage of CFMS in following reactions is the ability to
gain structural insight into transient reactant products. When the
oxidation of DBDB was monitored by scanning the range of m/z 85–400, several additional ions were seen
during the reaction (Figure ). The intensities
of these ions varied with reaction time in a manner consistent with
them being reaction products (Figure ). Ion 1 was seen at the earliest reaction time (0.6 s) and had an m/z value of 267.1855. This is exactly
two hydrogen atoms less than the m/z value for the [M + H]+ ion of DBDB (m/z 269.2012). The simplest possibility for such
a species is that it is an imine (m/z 267.1856) formed by abstraction of two protons and two electrons
from DBDB (Scheme ). The magnitude of the
signal for 1 increased over the first few seconds of
the reaction and then slowly decayed (Figure ), indicating that 1 is not the final product in the
reaction. Consistent with such a conclusion, the magnitude of the
signal for an additional species with an m/z value of 179.1540 increased more gradually over the first
5 s of the reaction (Figures  and ). This mass is consistent with the [M + H]+ ion of N-benzyl-1,4-diaminobutane (BDB, m/z 179.1543). As BDB is the expected product
in the hydrolysis of an exo-imine formed from DBDB
(Scheme ), 1 can be identified
as N-benzyl-N′-benzylidene-1,4-diaminobutane.
No significant signal was observed for the ion of benzylamine or N-benzyl-4-aminobutanal, ruling out the endo-imine of DBDB as the major enzymatic product. The intensity of the
signal for BDB decayed at later times, and that of an additional ion
(2) at m/z 177.1384
increased (Figure ). The m/z value of the latter ion is exactly two hydrogen
atoms less than the signal for BDB, indicating that it represents
the [M + H]+ ion (m/z 177.1386) of a dehydrogenation product of BDB. The fact that 2 derives from BDB and not DBDB is supported by the observation
of a lag phase in its formation. Similar to 1, 2 can be reasonably assigned as N-benzylidene-1,4-diaminobutane,
the exo-imine of BDB (Scheme ). This establishes that BDB is also a substrate for PAO. As with 1, the magnitude of the signal for 2 decreased
with time; this decay was accompanied by the slow increase after several
seconds in the magnitude of a signal at m/z 89.1072 (Figure ). This matches
well the [M + H]+ ion of putrescine (m/z 89.1073), consistent with hydrolysis of 2 (Scheme ). Benzaldehyde must be
an additional product in the hydrolyses of 1 and 2 to BDB and putrescine, respectively. However, benzaldehyde
is not readily ionized under ESI conditions, and no corresponding
ion was observed. Overall, the oxidation of DBDB by PAO can be described
by the pathway in Scheme . As ESI-MS is sufficiently
gentle to keep multimeric protein complexes intact,− reaction products that have not
dissociated from the enzyme are not expected to be detectable as individual
ions by CFMS. The direct observation of both 1 and 2 in these assays indicates that the imine products are released
from the enzyme with their subsequent hydrolysis occurring in solution.

Representative mass spectrum from the experiment in Figure  at a reaction time of 4.8 s. The spectrum represents
the average of 250 scans at a flow rate of 1250 nL/min. Ion signals
are normalized to the most intense ion ([1 + H]+).

Time dependence for products of the PAO-catalyzed
oxidation of
DBDB. The data are reported as the ion intensities for 1 (●), BDB (■), 2 (○), and putrescine
(□) relative to that of MPEA. Assay conditions are identical
to those described in the legend of Figure . The lines are from global fits of the model in Scheme  with the values for the rate constants listed in
Table .

To obtain the values of the rate constants for the steps
in Scheme , the kinetics of formation and
decay of the MS
signals for DBDB and the different reaction products were analyzed
globally using KinTek Explorer. A simple
four-step model (Scheme ) was sufficient to
fit the complete reaction (Figure ). In the
first step, DBDB is oxidized to 1 by PAO. The second
step is the nonenzymatic hydrolysis of the free imine 1 to BDB. The two subsequent steps arise from turnover with BDB as
the substrate. The rate constants for the two hydrolysis steps (kH2O) were assumed to be identical
in the analysis, because allowing their rate constants to vary independently
did not significantly improve the fit and gave similar values for
all rate constants. The values from the analysis are listed in Table .

Kinetic Parameters
for the Kinetic
Mechanism in Scheme 
k1	6.0 mM–1 s–1 (4.9–7.1)	
k2	33 mM–1 s–1 (26–62)	
kH2O	0.52 s–1 (0.43–0.62)	
Values for the rate constants were
determined globally with KinTek Explorer and the data from Figures  and . The values in parentheses
are the confidence intervals reported by FitSpace at a X2 threshold of 1.4, that is, the change in the value that
results in an increase in X2 of 40% if
all of the other parameters are allowed to vary to improve the fit.

Because these analyses were
conducted at a low concentration of
DBDB, rate constants k1 and k2 equal the kcat/KM values for DBDB and BDB, respectively. The value for
BDB is ∼5-fold greater than that for DBDB, consistent with
the former being the better substrate. These results do not allow
us to distinguish whether the differences are due to a difference
in binding or chemistry. For oxidation of a polyamine, PAO requires
that the reacting nitrogen be neutral and that a different nitrogen
be charged. The primary nitrogen in BDB
would have a pKa value higher than that
of the benzylic nitrogens in DBDB or BDB, so that more of the latter
would be correctly protonated at the pH of these analyses, 8.5. In
addition, because the active sites of polyamine oxidases are appropriate
for linear saturated substrates,, the absence
in BDB of the bulky and rigid second aromatic ring present in DBDB
may result in better binding of the former in the active site. As
the rates of product release do not contribute to kcat/KM, differences in the
rate constants for product release are not responsible for the differences.

Kinetic Isotope Effects for the Oxidation of DBDB
The
ability of the CFMS system to directly monitor substrate and products
during the oxidation of DBDB by PAO suggested that it should be possible
to directly measure the isotope effect on DBDB oxidation. Deuterium
isotope effects on steady-state kinetic parameters were first determined
by noncompetitive initial rate assays. Rates of oxygen consumption
were measured with either DBDB or N,N′-bis-perdeuterobenzyl-1,4-diaminobutane (DBDB-d14) as the substrate for PAO, using conditions similar
to those used for the MS-based assays. The data were well fit using
eq , which applies for an identical isotope
effect (Dk) on the kcat and kcat/KDBDB values, yielding an isotope effect of 6.7 ±
0.6.Alternative
analyses assuming different isotope
effects on the kcat and kcat/KDBDB values did not yield
improved fits. This result is consistent with rate-limiting chemistry
with this substrate, as previously concluded.

The isotope effect was then measured by CFMS. A mixture of
DBDB and DBDB-d14 was used as the substrate
for PAO, again following the products over time. The initial concentration
of DBDB-d14 was ∼5-fold greater
than that for the undeuterated substrate to compensate for the decreased
rate of formation of the deuterated product due to the large isotope
effect measured in the steady-state assays. Figure  shows the time dependence for the observed isotope effect
on the formation of 1; the value at time zero yields
an intrinsic isotope effect of 7.7 ± 0.3. This value is similar
to the value for Dk determined in the
steady-state assays and more precise. Because of the large isotope
effect on imine formation, ion intensities for 2 were
too low to perform a similar analysis for the oxidation of BDB in
the second turnover.

Measurement of the deuterium isotope effect for oxidation
of DBDB
by PAO determined by continuous-flow mass spectrometry. The relative
intensities of the ions for deuterated (d13) and undeuterated (h13) 1 were determined at different flow rates. Reaction mixtures contained
6.7 μM DBDB, 33 μM DBDB-d14, and 40 μM PAO in 5% methanol and 50 mM ammonium acetate (pH
8.5) at 30 °C. All concentrations are after mixing. The line
indicates the best fit to a single exponential.

Pterin Products of the Aromatic Amino Acid Hydroxylases
The CFMS system was also used to characterize the pterin products
produced by wild-type aromatic amino acid hydroxylases and a mutant
enzyme. Initial analyses used PheH Δ117, a truncated enzyme
that lacks the N-terminal regulatory domain and thus no longer exhibits
allostery, simplifying the kinetics., In reactions
with 6MPH4 and l-phenylalanine as substrates,
the ion for tyrosine (m/z 182.0811),
the amino acid product of the reaction, could be resolved from that
of 6MPH4 (m/z 182.1036),
despite their very similar masses (Figure A, inset). In addition, two ions that could be identified as pterin
oxidation products were clearly seen (Figure A). One had an m/z value of 180.0877,
exactly two hydrogen atoms less than that for 6MPH4, indicating
that this species is the [M + H]+ ion of a dihydropterin
[6MPH2, m/z 180.0880
(Scheme )]. The second ion had an m/z value of 198.0982, greater than that
of 6MPH4 by the mass of a single oxygen atom. The likely
candidate for this product is the unstable 4a-hydroxy-6-methyltrihydropterin
(4a-HO-pterin, m/z 198.0986), formed
during the reaction by the incorporation of one atom of molecular
oxygen at position 4a of 6MPH4 (Scheme ).

(A) Mass spectrum for the reaction of 20 μM PheH Δ117,
2.0 mM l-phenylalanine, and 1.0 mM 6MPH4 at a
reaction time of 1.2 s. All concentrations are after mixing. The spectrum
is the average of 20 scans. Ion signals are normalized to the most
intense ion ([6MPH4 + H]+). The inset is a close-up
of the spectrum across the range of m/z 182.07–187.12 showing the resolved peaks for l-tyrosine
(Tyr) and 6MPH4. (B) MS/MS spectrum of the 4a-HO-pterin
product (m/z 198.0982) from the
reaction with PheH Δ117. Reaction conditions were identical
to those used for panel A at a reaction time of 6 s. The spectrum
is the average of 10 scans. Ion signals are normalized to the most
intense ion ([M – CO2]+).

The site of attachment of the hydroxyl moiety in
the 4a-hydroxypterin
product of the aromatic amino acid hydroxylases was previously established
by analysis of the NMR spectrum of the product formed under cryogenic
conditions from 6MPH4 that had been specifically labeled
with 13C at position 4a. The
ability to directly detect the HO-pterin by mass spectrometry allowed
us to confirm this conclusion with unlabeled substrates at ambient
temperatures. The MS/MS spectrum of the putative 4a-HO-pterin (Figure B) showed three major product ions at m/z 170.1035, 154.1087, and 86.0348. The first two
ions likely result from a fragmentation pathway wherein the pyrimidine
ring contracts into an imidazole, resulting in the loss of the carbonyl
carbon as CO or CO2 (Scheme ).
The observation that this contraction occurs both with and without
loss of the second oxygen atom suggests that the additional oxygen
atom is in the proximity of the carbonyl. The third product ion, [M
– C5H8N2O]+, is
generated by the loss of the methylpiperazine ring and an oxygen atom,
indicating that the oxygen atom incorporated during the reaction is
bound to the piperazine ring. These observations confirm the incorporation
of oxygen at position 4a, as this position is a member of the piperazine
ring and adjacent to the carbonyl. Consistent with this conclusion,
the same product ion at m/z 86.0348
([M – C5H8N2]+)
was also present in the MS/MS spectrum of 6MPH4 (not shown);
in this case, it would be formed by loss of the methylpiperazine alone
from the substrate lacking the second oxygen atom.

A similar analysis
of the reaction of wild-type TyrH with 6MPH4 and l-tyrosine was conducted. Again, two pterin
products with m/z values consistent
with the dihydropterin and the 4a-HO-pterin were readily detectable
(Figure A), confirming directly the latter
as a product of the reaction catalyzed by this enzyme. The magnitude
of the relative signal for 6MPH2 increased at longer reaction
times, quickly becoming the dominant signal, while the magnitude of
the signal for 6MPH4 decayed as the reaction progressed.
In contrast, the magnitude of the signal for the 4a-HO-pterin decreased
with time, indicating that this product dehydrates to give the dihydropterin.

Mass spectrum
for the reaction of 10 μM wild-type (A) or
E332A (B) TyrH, 250 μM l-tyrosine, and 50 μM
6MPH4 at a reaction time of 1.5 s. All concentrations are
after mixing. The spectra are averages of 150 scans. Ion signals are
normalized to the most intense ion.

The mutant enzyme E332A TyrH shows almost complete uncoupling
of
tetrahydropterin oxidation from amino acid hydroxylation. Spectroscopic studies of this protein suggested
that both the amino acid and the pterin substrate bind normally and
convert the iron to the same oxygen-reactive form that is found in
the wild-type enzyme, but did not establish the point
in the subsequent reaction at which uncoupling occurred. Stopped-flow
absorbance spectroscopy was previously used to obtain the absorbance
spectrum of the pterin product(s) to clarify the step at which the
reaction became unproductive. Comparison of the spectrum with those
of known pterins suggested that a pterin distinct from the 4a-HO-pterin
was formed in the reaction, possibly a hydroperoxypterin. CFMS was used to more definitively identify
the pterin product(s) produced by E332A TyrH. The mass spectrum of
the reaction mixture did not show evidence of the formation of the
4a-HO-pterin (Figure B). Instead, the dihydropterin
(6MPH2) was the only pterin product detected. It is not
possible to determine from the mass spectrum which tautomer of 6MPH2 forms, but the near-UV absorbance spectrum of the reaction
exhibits absorbance between 300 and 400 nm consistent with a significant
amount of quinonoid 6MPH2. The lack of a signal for a hydroperoxypterin intermediate suggests
that it did not form, and that the enzyme oxidizes 6MPH4 directly to 6MPH2. However, we cannot rule out the possibility
that the hydroperoxypterin is too unstable to detect even at these
short times. The absence of a signal for the 4a-HO-pterin establishes
that the E332A TyrH reaction does not catalyze the appropriate heterolytic
cleavage of molecular oxygen to generate the Fe(IV)O. Our present
understanding of the mechanism of the pterin-dependent hydroxylases
is shown in Scheme . The altered binding of
the pterin due to mutagenesis of Glu332 alters the initial reaction
of the enzyme with oxygen, resulting in direct oxidation of the tetrahydropterin,
or the mutation prevents the heterolytic cleavage of the oxygen–oxygen
bond in the initial intermediate. The previous proposal of Chow et
al. that Glu332 is responsible for protonation
of one of the oxygen atoms to facilitate oxygen bond cleavage would
be consistent with the results presented here.

Conclusion
The
data presented here establish the utility of continuous-flow
mass spectrometry for detecting unstable products of enzyme-catalyzed
reactions. In contrast to previous methods for isolating imine products
of reactions by flavoproteins, which relied on the formation of stable
imine products or anhydrous conditions, this approach established
directly that an unstable imine is the product of the reaction catalyzed
by PAO and allowed measurement of the deuterium kinetic isotope effect
for the formation of the imine. It also allowed analysis of the kinetics
of further oxidation of the enzymatic products in the reaction. In
the reactions of the pterin-dependent enzymes, CFMS definitively identified
the unstable 4a-HO-pterin proposed as a product for both PheH and
TyrH and ruled out the 4a-HO-pterin as a significant product in the
reaction of a mutant TyrH.

The authors declare no
competing financial interest.

Abbreviations
PheHphenylalanine hydroxylase

PheH Δ117phenylalanine
hydroxylase lacking the N-terminal regulatory domain

TyrHtyrosine hydroxylase

CFMScontinuous-flow
mass spectrometry

PAON-acetylpolyamine oxidase

MAOmonoamine oxidase

DBDBN,N′-dibenzyl-1,4-diaminobutane

DBDB-d14N,N′-bis-perdeuterobenzyl-1,4-diaminobutane

6MPH46-methyl-5,6,7,8-tetrahydropterin

6MPH26-methyldihydropterin

4-HO-pterin4a-hydroxy-6-methyltrihydropterin

DTPAdiethylenetriaminepentaacetic
acid

EDDAethylenediammonium
diacetate

HEPES4-(2-hydroxyethyl)-1-piperazineethanesulfonic acid

ESIelectrospray ionization

MPEAN-methylphenethylamine

BDBN-benzyl-1,4-diaminobutane.

The single-exponential fit is not
meant to imply a pseudo-first-order condition of the assay but simply
represents a descriptive reflection of the data that can be used as
a calibration for the CFMS system.

