Inteins are intervening sequences
that are post-translationally excised from precursor proteins with
simultaneous splicing of flanking regions, termed the exteins, to
form mature proteins.() Standard protein
splicing is believed to occur via the mechanism summarized in Scheme .− All standard inteins utilize a Cys, Thr, or Ser residue
at position 1 to perform an acyl rearrangement and form a (thio)ester
linkage at the N-terminal splice junction in the first step of the
reaction (Scheme , step 1).() Splicing is blocked upon nonconservative substitution of
this residue., Therefore, it has long been believed
that noncanonical inteins, such as Methanococcus jannaschii KlbA (Mja KlbA) intein, which harbors an Ala at
position 1 (Ala1), cannot undergo splicing. Nevertheless, it has been
shown that the Mja KlbA intein splices efficiently
in vivo and does so by an alternative splicing mechanism (Scheme ).() In this mechanism,
a nucleophilic attack by the Cys located at the N-terminus of the
C-extein (Cys+1) on the peptide bond at the N-terminal splice junction
occurs as the first step of the splicing reaction (Scheme , step 1).() This step
results in the formation of a branched intermediate with two N-termini,
one of the N-extein and another of the intein. This situation is fundamentally
different from what is observed in the standard intein pathway, in
which the C-extein nucleophile attacks a previously formed linear
(thio)ester intermediate resulting in the formation of the branched
intermediate (Scheme , step 2).() In both pathways, the branched intermediate is resolved
during a transamidation step performed by the C-terminal intein residue,
Asn, which results in the release of the intein (Scheme , step 3; Scheme , step 2). A spontaneous
S–N or O–N acyl shift, which results in the formation
of a peptide bond between the N- and C-exteins, completes the reaction
(Scheme , step 4; Scheme , step 3). More recently, another class of atypical inteins
was identified, which splices by a third mechanism involving two branched
intermediates.() Intein splicing mechanisms
are now divided into three classes. Class 1 inteins follow the standard
splicing pathway. Class 2 inteins follow the Mja KlbA
splicing pathway. Class 3 inteins follow the two-branch intermediate
splicing pathway.

Standard Class 1 Intein Splicing Pathway
(1) N–S or
−O
acyl shift, (2) transesterification, (3) Asn cyclization, and (4)
S– or O–N acyl shift. The succinimide ring in the excised
intein might undergo hydrolysis to form Asn or isoAsn. Side reactions
expected to occur under certain conditions are (i) and (iii) Asn cyclization
resulting in C-terminal cleavage and (ii) attack of the (thio)ester
by an exogenous nucleophile resulting in N-terminal cleavage. The
filled rectangle represents the N-extein, the empty rectangle the
intein, and the shaded rectangle the C-extein. The solid arrows indicate
steps in the main pathway, while the dashed arrows indicate side reactions.
X corresponds to either -SH or -OH.

Class 2 Mja KlbA Intein Splicing Pathway
(1) Nucleophilic
attack by
nucleophile at position 1, (2) Asn cyclization, and (3) S–N
acyl shift. Side reactions expected to occur are identical to those
described in the footnote of Scheme . The
filled rectangle represents the N-extein, the empty rectangle the
intein, and the shaded rectangle the C-extein. The solid arrows indicate
steps in the main pathway, while the dashed arrows indicate side reactions.

Side reactions off the main splicing pathway
have been detected
in all classes of inteins, often as a consequence of improper coordination
between various steps of the splicing mechanism resulting from substitution
of catalytically important amino acid residues. The side products
arise from cleavage at either or both splice junctions without concomitant
ligation (Schemes  and , steps i–iii). Previous studies have shown that substitution
of essential catalytic residues at one splice junction usually inhibits
splicing and isolates the cleavage side reaction at the other junction.
It has also been shown that nucleophiles such as DTT, hydroxylamine,
and sodium 2-mercaptoethanesulfonate (MESNA) can intercept the (thio)ester
intermediates (linear and branched), resulting in the formation of
N-terminal cleavage products (Schemes  and , step ii).

In this study, we sought to define
the kinetic details of the nonstandard Mja KlbA intein
splicing reaction to improve our understanding
of its mechanism. To this end, we designed an intein–mini-extein
precursor with a redox switch and synthesized it by intein-mediated
protein ligation [IPL, also known as expressed protein ligation (EPL)].
This system allowed us for the first time to dissect the kinetics
of cleavage and cis splicing of this novel intein from an active precursor
with no substitutions in known nucleophiles or assisting groups. The
effects of pH variation and of substitution of catalytic and assisting
groups on the kinetics of the overall splicing reaction and individual
steps were further examined with this system. On the basis of our
results, we suggest an explanation for how a direct attack on a peptide
bond at the N-terminal splice site by Cys+1 is facilitated in the Mja KlbA intein when it has been blocked in all standard
inteins studied to date.

Materials and Methods
Materials
Bacto yeast extract and Bacto tryptone were
purchased from Becton, Dickinson, and Company (Sparks, MD). Dextrose,
magnesium chloride, sodium hydroxide, tris(hydroxymethyl)aminomethane
(Tris), sodium chloride, and urea were purchased from J. T. Baker
Chemical Co. (Phillipsburg, NJ). Isopropyl β-d-thiogalactopyranoside
(IPTG), MESNA, chloramphenicol, N-(2-hydroxyethyl)piperazine-N′-2-ethanesulfonic acid (HEPES), and Sephadex-G50
were purchased from Sigma (St. Louis, MO). Ampicillin was purchased
from America Pharmaceutical Partners, Inc. (Schaumburg, IL). Sodium
dodecyl sulfate (SDS) was purchased from Bio-Rad (Hercules, CA). Oligonucleotide
primers, reagents for the polymerase chain reaction (PCR), restriction
enzymes, 10× CP buffer, pTWIN1 and pMAL-c2X vectors, and competent Escherichia coli cells (NEB TURBO and T7 Express) were obtained
from New England Biolabs (NEB). The pRIL vector was purchased from
Stratagene (La Jolla, CA).

Peptides used in this study are summarized
in Table  and comprise native C-extein sequences. P1NC, P2AC, P3QC, P4NS, and P5NA were synthesized at NEB. P1NCs, P2ACs, and P6NT were purchased from AnaSpec (San Jose,
CA). Peptides P1NC and P1NCs, and peptides P2AC and P2ACs, respectively, are identical in the nature of their functional
residues but differ in their lengths (Table ). The pure forms of the peptides were characterized as the desired
products by electrospray ionization time-of-flight mass spectrometry
(ESI-TOF) using a 6210 ESI-TOF mass spectrometer with a capillary
electrospray ionization source (Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara,
CA).

Peptides Used in IPL Reactions
peptide	sequence	
P1NC	H-CNCSGTLHANSADEAILRLTSPPMNVPKIMLT-Lys(5(6)-FAM)-OH	
P1NCs	H-CNCSGTLHANSA-Lys(5(6)-FAM)-OH	
P2AC	H-CACSGTLHANSADEAILRLTSPPMNVPKIMLT- Lys(5(6)-FAM)-OH	
P2ACs	H-CACSGTLHANSA-Lys(5(6)-FAM)-OH	
P3QC	H-CQCSGTLHANSADEAILRLTSPPMNVPKIMLT-Lys(5(6)-FAM)-OH	
P4NS	H-CNSSGTLHANSADEAILRLTSPPMNVPKIMLT-Lys(5(6)-FAM)-OH	
P5NA	H-CNASGTLHANSADEAILRLTSPPMNVPKIMLT-Lys(5(6)-FAM)-OH	
P6NT	H-CNTSGTLHANSA-Lys(5(6)-FAM)-OH	
Bold residues correspond to the
last two residues of the Mja KlbA intein. Underlined
residues correspond to the first 10 or 30 C-extein residues. Lys(5(6)-FAM)
is the abbreviation for Lys[5(6)-carboxyfluorescein].

Construction of the MI166 Expression Vector
The previously described Mja KlbA intein precursor,
which encodes the native intein (168 residues) flanked by seven native
N-extein residues (MNTGHDG) and six native C-extein residues (CSGTLH),() was used as the initial PCR template. PCR was
conducted using a sense primer (5′-ATAAACTGCCAGGAATTGGGGATCGG-3′),
which anneals to a sequence upstream of the NdeI
restriction site, and an antisense primer (5′-TGTTACGCTCTTCTGCAAGCAGCAAAACCTTCGTTTTTTCC-3′), which truncates
the intein after residue 166. The antisense primer also introduces
a substitution at codon Val166 [GTC (V) to GCT (A), triplet complement
in bold] and a SapI restriction site (underlined).
PCR resulted in a 650 bp fragment, which was then digested with NdeI and SapI, and ligated into the pTWIN1
vector (NEB) digested with the same enzymes. To introduce a maltose
binding protein (MBP) tag at the N-terminus of the precursor preceding
the Mja KlbA seven-amino acid native N-extein, we
first cut the resultant plasmid with NdeI to yield
a linear vector. Next, a HindIII site was introduced
adjacent to the NdeI site by insertion of a double-stranded
oligonucleotide cassette (5′-TATGCTAGGCAAGCTTGTA-3′
and 5′-TATACAAGCTTGCCTAGCA-3′). Finally, the resultant
plasmid was digested with NdeI-HindIII and ligated to the 1201 bp NdeI-HindIII restriction fragment of pMAL-c2X, carrying the malE gene encoding MBP, to yield the desired expression vector, pTWIN1-MI166. MI166 corresponds to the MBP-tagged (N-terminus) Mja KlbA intein with seven native N-extein residues and
with intein truncated at residue A166.

Variants of MI166
Single-site substitutions
were introduced into pTWIN1-MI166 using the Phusion Site-Directed
Mutagenesis Kit (NEB). The primers used are listed in Table . PCRs were conducted according to the manufacturer’s
instructions. After amplification, the parental DNA strand was digested
with DpnI restriction enzyme, and the digested mixture
was used to transform NEB Turbo competent E. coli cells.

Primers Used for Construction of MI166 Variants
variant	sense primer	antisense
primer	
T93A	GATTACGCTAGCCCACGACC	GGTCGTGGGCTAGCGTAATC	
D147A	GGACACATATATGCGTTAACAGTTGAAGATAATCACAC	GTGTGATTATCTTCAACTGTTAACGCATATATGTGTCC	
D147E	GGACACATATATGAGCTCACAGTTGAAGATAATCACAC	GTGTGATTATCTTCAACTGTGAGCTCATATATGTGTCC	
Y156A	GAAGATAATCACACAGCAATTGCTGGAAAA	TTTTCCAGCAATTGCTGTGTGATTATCTTC	
In bold are the codons introducing
the desired substitutions. Underlined are the sequences introducing
new restriction sites.

The sequences of the coding regions of all plasmid
constructs prepared
in this study were verified to ensure the absence of unwanted mutations.
Sequencing was performed at the NEB DNA Sequencing Facility.

Expression and Purification of MI166 and Variants
E. coli T7 Express cells were transformed with
pTWIN1-MI166 and pRIL plasmids. pRIL encodes cognate tRNAs
for rare codons AGG/AGA, AUA, and CUA and confers resistance to chloramphenicol
(Stratagene). Transformed cells were grown with vigorous aeration
at 37 °C in LB medium containing 10 g/L tryptone, 5 g/L yeast
extract, 10 g/L NaCl, 1 g/L dextrose, 1 g/L MgCl2 (pH 7.2),
0.25 g/L ampicillin, and 0.025 g/L chloramphenicol. Details of the
growth protocol have been described previously.()

Ligation of MI166 into the NdeI and SapI sites of pTWIN1 results in the fusion
of the Mycobacterium xenopi GyrA (Mxe GyrA) intein to the C-terminus of the expressed protein. The chitin-binding
domain present on the Mxe GyrA intein allows the
affinity purification of the expressed protein on a chitin resin.
MI166 and variant fusion proteins were purified as instructed
in the IMPACT-TWIN manual (NEB). Buffer A [20 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.5)
and 500 mM NaCl] was used during sonication of harvested cells, and
buffer B [20 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.5), 500 mM NaCl, and 50 mM MESNA] was
used as the elution buffer. Fractions containing the protein of interest,
as judged by sodium dodecyl sulfate–polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis
(SDS–PAGE), were pooled and concentrated to ∼10 mg/mL
using an ultrafiltration spin column with a YM30 membrane (Vivascience).
The concentration of the protein was determined with the Bio-Rad Bradford
protein assay kit standardized with BSA. The MI166 protein
was flash-frozen in liquid N2 and stored at −80
°C until it was used. SDS–PAGE revealed the protein to
be &gt;98% pure. A typical yield was ∼10 mg/g of cell paste.

IPL Reaction
A typical IPL reaction mixture contained,
in a final volume of 160 μL, 100 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.5), 10 mM
MESNA, 50–80 μM MI166 protein, and 0.5 mM
peptide P. All of the steps were performed at 4 °C
unless stated otherwise. The reaction sample was incubated for ∼15
h for ligation to occur before it was applied to a Sephadex-G50 spin
column for removal of MESNA. The column fractions were analyzed on
a Novex 10–20% Tris-glycine polyacrylamide gel (Invitrogen,
Carlsbad, CA). The concentrations of protein fractions containing
the IPL product, MI166-P (also known as the
precursor), were determined using the Bradford method. These fractions
were flash-frozen in liquid N2 and stored at −80
°C until they were used.

Protein Splicing Assay
A typical protein splicing assay
mixture contained, in a final volume of 540 μL, 20 mM Tris-HCl
(pH 7.5), 500 mM NaCl, 0.1 μg/μL precursor, and 1, 5,
or 25 mM DTT. Protein splicing was initiated by the addition of DTT
after incubation of the other components of the assay mixture at 42
°C for 5 min. Aliquots (20 μL) of the assay mixture were
removed at designated times, added to blue loading buffer [6% (w/v)
SDS] containing 8 M buffered urea [1 M Tris-HCl
(pH 8.0)], and placed on dry ice until all time point samples were
collected. Some of the samples were then incubated in a boiling water
bath for 5 min prior to being loaded on a Novex 10–20% Tris-glycine
polyacrylamide gel for analysis, whereas others were loaded directly
on the gel, as illustrated in . Coomassie
Brilliant Blue R250 staining was used to visualize protein bands.

For pH effect studies, 20 mM sodium phosphate (Na2HPO4/NaH2PO4) buffer (pH 6.0), 20 mM HEPES
(pH 6.5 or 8.0), or 20 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.5 or 9.0) was substituted
for 20 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.5) in the assay described above.

Acquisition of Data and Kinetic Analysis
Fluorescent
band signals were detected using a CCD camera (ChemiDoc XRS, Bio-Rad)
and quantified using Bio-Rad’s Quantity One. Kinetic traces
were plotted as [Ii]
versus time (seconds), where [Ii] = Ii/(I1 + I2 + I3 + ... In) and I1 = I°1 – Ib, I2 = I°2 – Ib, I3 = I°3 – Ib, etc. (I° is the measured fluorescence intensity
of the species at time t, Ib is the background intensity, and Ii is I1, I2, I3, ..., or In).

The ratio of the sum of fluorescent
intensities at time t [∑(I1 + I2 + I3 + ... In)t] to the sum of fluorescent intensities at time zero [∑(I1 + I2 + I3 + ... In)0] was determined to be ∼1, which ensures no loss of
fluorescence intensity over the time course of the experiment.

Kinetic simulations were performed using KinTekSim (KinTek Corp.,
Austin, TX) according to the simulation models provided in the corresponding
figures.

N-Terminal Sequencing
For N-terminal sequencing, protein
bands from 10–20% Tris-glycine polyacrylamide gels were transferred
to a PVDF membrane (Problott, Applied Biosystems Inc.) according to
the procedure of Matsudaira,() with modifications
described previously.() The membrane was
stained with Coomassie Blue R250, and the desired bands were excised
from the surrounding membrane and subjected to sequential degradation
on a Procise 494 protein/peptide sequencer (Applied Biosystems Inc.).()

Results
Rationale for the Construction of the Mja KlbA
Intein–Mini-Extein Precursor (MI166-P)
The in vitro characterization of protein splicing of any
intein (cis splicing or trans splicing) requires the assembly of an
unspliced and active form of the intein known as the precursor and
a mechanism for initiating splicing at the desired time. For example,
the cis splicing Pyrococcus GB-D DNA polymerase (GB-D
pol) intein can be purified in a precursor form when inserted into
the MBP-paramyosin ΔSal gene and its splicing initiated by an
increase in temperature or pH.() Other examples
include naturally and artificially split inteins, which are isolated
as two or more separate precursor fragments and splice only upon assembly
of these fragments. Attempts to identify conditions that would slow
the splicing of the wild-type Mja KlbA intein in E. coli and allow for the isolation of an intact precursor
were not successful. As an alternative approach, we resorted to IPL
to construct a functional precursor, which would maintain the splicing
efficiency exhibited by the wild-type Mja KlbA intein
in vivo. The crucial design feature is a built-in redox switch consisting
of a disulfide linkage between the existant Cys +1 and an engineered
neighboring Cys. The approach was inspired by previous studies employing
thiol–disulfide redox switches to control other protein activities.−

The IPL system consists of two protein fragments, the recombinantly
expressed N-terminal portion of the precursor with a C-terminal thioester-activated
bond and a synthetic peptide fragment bearing a Cys as the first residue.
Each synthetic peptide fragment encodes the last residues of the Mja KlbA intein, when required, followed by native Mja KlbA C-extein sequences. A number of Mja KlbA site-directed variants were prepared to determine the best
site for peptide ligation (). Two major concerns were the positioning of the engineered Cys
in the proximity of Cys+1 and the identity of the C-terminal amino
acid of the expressed fragment. Previous studies showed that a C-terminal
Val, Thr, and Ile often diminish ligation efficiency, whereas His,
Cys, and Gly give the most efficient ligation with an N-terminal Cys
peptide.() Assessments of ligation and
splicing efficiencies showed that the best position for truncation
of the Mja KlbA intein is Val166, which is substituted
with Ala to increase the efficiency of ligation. The peptide has Ser167
as the first residue, which is substituted with Cys to permit ligation
of the peptide to the expressed protein fragment and formation of
a deactivating disulfide with Cys+1. As a result, the IPL system used
in our study consists of a recombinant fragment, MI166,
and the chemically synthesized peptide, P. MI166 comprises MBP, seven native N-extein residues
(MNTGHDG), and the first 166 intein residues with Ala166 as the last
residue. P contains the two most C-terminal intein residues
(S167C and N168), 10 or 30 native C-extein residues (depending on
the P used), and a fluorescein tag (FAM) (Figure ). The V166A substitution and the S167C substitution
were tested independently in a standard precursor and shown not to
inhibit splicing in vivo (Tables S1 and S2 of the ).

Disulfide redox switch that controls the
triggering of the splicing
reaction of MI166-P. Expressed MI166 eluted off the chitin resin with MESNA, resulting in MI166-MESNA. (1) This analogue is reacted with synthesized P in the IPL reaction at pH 8.5, yielding MI166-P. (2) The IPL product sample is then applied to G50 resin to remove
excess MESNA and form oxidized MI166-P. (3)
Addition of DTT reduces the disulfide bond of MI166-P and initiates (4) the splicing reaction. EN corresponds
to N-extein (seven native residues) with an N-terminal MBP tag; EC corresponds to C-extein (10 or 30 native residues), and the
star corresponds to the Lys(5(6)-FAM) tag.

Assembly of MI166-P1NCs Using IPL
MI166 expressed in E. coli, as detailed in , was
readily purified with a chitin affinity column using MESNA as the
pTWIN vector intein–thioester cleavage reagent. The MI166-MESNA analogue (Figure ) was incubated
with an 8–10-fold molar excess of P1NCs for ∼15 h at 4 °C. Under these conditions,
a strongly fluorescent major new band at an apparent molecular mass
of 65.8 kDa was detected, confirming the formation of the ligated
product (the splicing precursor) (Figure ).
The ligation reaction does not go to completion: not all of MI166 (64.3 kDa) is converted to MI166-P1NCs, as seen in Figure . However, neither the splicing products [ligated exteins
(EN-EC) (46.4 kDa) and
free intein (I) (19.4 kDa)] nor the cleavage side products [MBP-N-extein
(EN) (44.9 kDa) and intein-C-extein
(I-EC) (20.9 kDa)] form at detectable levels, indicating
that the conditions under which the ligation reaction is performed
are optimal. Upon removal of excess MESNA by chromatography on G50
resin, the desired disulfide of MI166-P1NCs apparently forms (Figure ), as the precursor is then stable until the initiating reducing
agent, DTT, is added, after which the splicing reaction occurs (Figure ). Formation of the splicing products, EN-EC and I, is confirmed with a denaturing gel (Figure , lane 7) and ESI-TOF MS (Figure S4 of the ).

SDS–PAGE gel of
the IPL reaction between MI166 and P1NCs showing the formation
of the precursor, MI166-P1NCs, and demonstrating the stability of the formed precursor in
the absence of DTT. From left to right: lane 1, broad range molecular
mass marker; lane 2, products of the IPL reaction between MI166 (30 μM) and P1NCs (0.6
mM) after incubation for 15 h at 4 °C; lane 3, IPL product desalted
on a G50 column [elution fraction 1 (E1)]; lane 4, G50 elution fraction
2 (E2); lane 5, unreacted MI166; lane 6, E1 after incubation
for 24 h at 42 °C; lane 7, E1 after incubation for 180 min at
42 °C in the presence of 1 mM DTT. The top panel is a Coomassie
blue-stained gel, and the bottom panel is the same gel visualized
with a Bio-Rad CCD camera (ChemiDoc XRS). The fluorescent smear running
below the 16.5 kDa marker is unreacted fluorescent peptide, P1NCs.

Reactions of MI166-P1NC and the MI166-P2AC Variant
Initiation of the MI166-P1NC splicing reaction with 1 mM DTT at 42 °C results in the
appearance of four new species over the course of 3 h (Figure A): EN-EC (47.9 kDa), EN (44.9 kDa), I-EC (23.1 kDa), and I (19.4 kDa).
Only two of these species are fluorescent, EN-EC and I-EC (Figure B). The assignment
of these species is done on the basis of: (i) their estimated molecular
masses determined in comparison to a broad range molecular mass marker,
(ii) the products that are expected to form during the reaction of
MI166-P1NC, and (iii)
the fluorescent properties of the species (only those species with
intact EC should fluoresce). Kinetic traces for this reaction
exhibit an exponential decay for MI166-P1NC [Figure C (●)],
an exponential rise for EN-EC [Figure C (■)], and transient behavior for I-EC [Figure C (▲)].

Time course reaction
of MI166-P1NC in the
presence of 1 mM DTT at 42 °C. (A) The
formation of four new species, EN-EC (47.9 kDa),
EN (44.9 kDa), I-EC (23.1 kDa), and I (19.4
kDa), is detected over the course of 3 h on a Coomassie blue-stained
10–20% Tris-glycine polyacrylamide gel. The molecular mass
markers (kilodaltons) indicate the positions of the protein standards
of the broad range prestained protein marker (NEB) on the gel. (B)
EN-EC and I-EC are shown to be fluorescent.
The dashed and dotted arrows indicate the precursor MI166-P1NC (68.1 kDa) and unreacted
MI166 (64.3 kDa), respectively. Data for the kinetic decay
of MI166-P1NC and
formation of EN-EC and I-EC are shown
in panel C. The circles correspond to data for MI166-P1NC, the squares to data for EN-EC, and the triangles to data for I-EC. The details of the protein splicing assay and quantitation of the
various species are as described in . Samples were quenched in blue loading buffer [6% (w/v)
SDS] containing 8 M buffered urea, flash-frozen on dry ice, and then
boiled for 5 min before being loaded on the gel. MI166-P1NC was used at a final concentration
of 0.15 μg/μL. Error bars represent the standard error
of the mean.

Mixing of MI166-P2AC, a variant precursor disabled in the C-terminal
cleavage reaction
by the substitution of N168 with A, with 1 mM DTT at 42 °C results
in the formation of two new species (Figure A,B). These species are assigned as EN (44.9 kDa) and
I-EC (23.1 kDa), products of the N-terminal cleavage side
reaction. Species I-EC appears to be stable [Figure C (■)].

Time course reaction of MI166-P2AC in the presence of 1 mM
DTT at 42 °C. (A) Only
two products, EN (44.9 kDa) and I-EC (23.1 kDa),
are formed over the course of 3 h, as observed on a Coomassie blue-stained
10–20% Tris-glycine polyacrylamide gel. The molecular mass
markers (kilodaltons) indicate the positions of the protein standards
of the broad range prestained protein marker (NEB) on the gel. (B)
Two species, MI166-P2AC and I-EC, are observed on a fluorescent gel. The dashed
and dotted arrows correspond to the precursor, MI166-P2AC (68.0 kDa), and unreacted MI166 (64.3 kDa), respectively. Data for the kinetic decay of
MI166-P2AC and formation
of I-EC are shown in panel C. The circles correspond to
data for MI166-P2AC and the squares to data for I-EC. The details of the
protein splicing assay and quantitation of the various species are
as described in . Samples
were quenched in blue loading buffer [6% (w/v) SDS] containing 8 M
buffered urea, flash-frozen on dry ice, and then boiled for 5 min
before being loaded on the gel. MI166-P2AC was used at a final concentration of 0.1 μg/μL.
Error bars represent the standard error of the mean.

Trapping of the Branched Intermediate
We were puzzled
by the transient nature of I-EC in the reaction of MI166-P1NC (Figure C). A possible interpretation is that the decay
of I-EC is a result of Asn cyclization, which would lead
to the release of EC and formation of free I. The detection
of stable I-EC in the reaction of MI166-P2AC strengthens this interpretation
(Figure C). However, our attempts to simulate
the kinetic traces obtained in the reaction of MI166-P1NC with such a model were unsuccessful.
It was necessary to invoke the accumulation of an intermediate, which
decays via two constituent pathways to form EN-EC and I in one pathway and I-EC and EN in the
other (Figure B; discussed in the next section),
to reproduce the experimental data. We suggest that this intermediate
is the branched thioester intermediate, as discussed below.

Studies of the in vivo splicing reaction of the Mja KlbA N168A intein variant suggest that the branched intermediate
does accumulate. In an attempt to capture the branched intermediate
in vitro, we omitted the heat quench step from the analysis of the
MI166-P2AC reaction, anticipating
that heating might result in the hydrolysis of the trapped branched
thioester intermediate.() Interestingly,
a new band at an apparent molecular mass comparable to that of the
precursor accumulates, whereas species I-EC is hardly detected
under the new quenching conditions (Figure ). Sequential Edman degradation of the new species detected the presence
of two residues in each cycle: one residue corresponds to the N-terminus
of MBP, and the other is equivalent to that of the intein. This result,
in addition to the fact that this species is fluorescent, leads us
to conclude that the species formed when heat quenching is omitted
is the branched intermediate. On the other hand, sequential Edman
degradation of the protein in the band assigned as I-EC revealed that the first 10 residues do indeed correspond to the
sequence of the intein consistent with this assignment.

Time points from the
reaction of MI166-P2AC in the presence of 1 mM DTT at 42 °C,
which were quenched in blue loading buffer, containing 8 M buffered
urea, and were loaded on the gel without prior boiling, demonstrate
the accumulation of the branched intermediate on (A) a Coomassie blue-stained
gel and (B) a fluorescent gel. The dashed and dotted arrows correspond
to the precursor, MI166-P2AC (68.0 kDa), and unreacted MI166 (64.3 kDa), respectively.
The double-headed arrow with both dashed and dotted symbols points
to the supposed position of I-EC. The details of the protein
splicing assay and quantitation of the various species are as described
in . MI166-P2AC was used at a final concentration
of 0.1 μg/μL.

In the MI166-P1NC reaction, the species observed on a denaturing gel
are equivalent,
regardless of the quenching procedure (data not shown). The branched
intermediate is not observed, by contrast to the MI166-P2AC reaction. However, kinetic simulations
of the MI166-P1NC time
course, as discussed in detail in the next section, point to the accumulation
of the branched intermediate during the reaction. Therefore, we conclude
that the branched intermediate in the MI166-P1NC reaction decomposes upon quenching, hydrolyzing
to form I-EC and EN.

Kinetic Simulations of the MI166-P1NC and MI166-P2AC Reactions
Simulation of the kinetics of
the MI166-P1NC reaction
at varying DTT concentrations (1, 5, and 25 mM) was used to uncover
the mechanistic details of the reaction (Figure A). The mechanism for
which simulated traces best agreed with the experimental data is summarized
in Figure B. The precursor is a heterogeneous
mixture of two forms: unreactive, (MI166-P1NC)U, and reactive, (MI166-P1NC)R. Formation
of the branched intermediate (Branched) from the reactive precursor
is reversible with a forward rate constant (k1) of 1.5 × 10–3 s–1 and a reverse rate constant (k–1) of 1.7 × 10–5 s–1. It
decays via two pathways. The first is productive and results in the
formation of the spliced products, EN-EC and
I. This pathway is relatively fast, with an apparent first-order rate
constant (k2) of 2.2 × 10–3 s–1; the second pathway is the N-terminal cleavage
side reaction. It has a pseudo first-order rate constant (k3) of (2.0 × 10–5 mM–1 s–1) × [DTT] and is slower
than the productive pathway at the DTT concentration used in our experiments.
The N-terminal cleavage product, I-EC, further undergoes
Asn cyclization, yielding EC and I with a k4 of 1.7 × 10–5 s–1. The simulated trace for the transient species is the sum of the
concentrations of Branched and IEC (Figure C, triangles, solid line), consistent with our deduction that
Branched hydrolyzes upon quenching. The transient behavior is attributable
to the accumulation of Branched (Figure C,
dashed line) rather than IEC (Figure C, dotted line).

Kinetic simulations of data (symbols) obtained in the
reaction
MI166-P1NC at 42 °C
in the presence of (A) 1 (—), 5 (---), and 25 mM (···)
DTT, according to the kinetic mechanism described in panel B. Symbols
represent the experimental data for the precursor MI166-P1NC (●, ○, and
×),  EN (■, □, and ◇), and I-EC (▲, △, and ▽). Experimental details
are identical to those described in the legend of Figure . (B) Kinetic simulation model used to fit the experimental
data. The percentage values used in the simulation model for (MI166-P1NC)R are
64, 56, and 68% in the presence of 1, 5, and 25 mM DTT, respectively.
(C) Simulation output for the transient species, represented as a
solid line fitting the triangles, which is the sum of the simulation
outputs for Branched (---) and I-EC (···).
Error bars represent the standard error of the mean.

Kinetic simulations of the MI166-P2AC reaction, performed under the
same conditions
as for the reaction of MI166-P1NC, reveal interesting differences between the two mechanisms
(Figure ). First, precursor structural isomers,
(MI166-P2AC)I and (MI166-P2AC)II, are both reactive, with (MI166-P2AC)I decaying to form (MI166-P2AC)II with a k0 of 1.7 × 10–5 s–1 (Figure B); second,
Branched decays reversibly into another intermediate species with
a reverse rate constant (k–2 =
3.3 × 10–2 s–1) that is considerably
greater than the forward rate constant [k2 = (6.7 × 10–4 mM–1 s–1) × [DTT]] at the DTT concentrations interrogated
(Figure B). The nature of this species is
unclear, but it is proposed to be an intermediate formed between MI166-P2AC Branched and
DTT, a species predicted not to form in the reaction of MI166-P1NC. We designate this intermediate
(Branched·DTT) (Figure S1 of the ). (Branched·DTT) undergoes N-terminal cleavage
at a k3 of 1.7 × 10–4 s–1, which is 10-fold greater than the rate constant
for N-terminal cleavage in the MI166-P1NC reaction at 1 mM DTT. As expected for this
variant, no C-terminal cleavage products are detected.

(A) Kinetic simulations
of the reaction of MI166-P2AC in the presence of DTT at 42
°C and (B) kinetic simulation model used to fit the experimental
data. Experimental details are identical to those described in the
legend of Figure . Simulations of the reaction
of MI166-P2AC in the
presence of 1, 5, and 25 mM DTT at 42 °C are represented as solid,
dashed, and dotted, respectively. Symbols represent the experimental
data for the precursor MI166-P2AC (●, ○, and ×), Branched (■, □,
and ◇), and I-EC (▲, △, and ▽).
The percentage values used in the simulation model for (MI166-P2AC)I are 27, 24,
and 27% and for (MI166-P2AC)II are 56, 69, and 57% in presence of 1, 5, and
25 mM DTT, respectively. Error bars represent the standard error of
the mean.

Interestingly, MI166-P1NC and MI166-P2AC Branched are both less reactive to thiolysis by
DTT, as evident
from the extracted rate constants (Figures B and B), than has been previously observed
for standard inteins such as the Sce VMA intein,()Ssp DnaE intein,() and Pab PolII intein., This explains the productive formation of spliced product in the
former and the stability of Branched in the latter, despite the presence
of relatively high concentrations of DTT, which have been shown to
intercept the (thio)ester intermediates in the splicing pathways of
other inteins.−,

Effect of Peptide Length on the Kinetics of MI166-P1NC and MI166-P2AC Reactions
The lengths
of peptides P1NC and P2AC were reduced from 32 amino acids to 12
amino acids (P1NCs and P2ACs) (Table ) to study the effect of peptide length on the assigned rate constants
of the various steps of the MI166-P1NC and MI166-P2AC reactions. The results obtained indicate that precursors with
a longer EC exhibit higher Keq values in the equilibrium step between the reactive precursor and
Branched (Figure S2 of the ). It was not necessary to vary other rate constants to accommodate
the data for the reactions of the precursors formed with either P1NC or P2AC.

Kinetic Analysis of the Reaction of MI166-P3QC
Replacement of the N168 residue
with Q prevents C-terminal cleavage in vivo. In vitro, reaction of
MI166-P3QC in the
presence of 1 mM DTT at 42 °C results in the formation of three
new species (Figure ). The first species starts
with the first 10 amino acids of MBP, as shown by N-terminal sequencing,
and is not fluorescent. It further runs at the same position as EN, observed in the reactions of MI166-P1NC and MI166-P2AC, and is therefore identified as EN (44.9 kDa), the product of the N-terminal cleavage side reaction.
Each of the two other species has the N-terminus of the intein and
the C-terminus of EC (as designated by their fluorescence
properties), which indicates that both are I-EC products
(I-EC I and I-EC II). It is unclear why these
species exhibit distinct mobilities on a denaturing gel.

Time course
reaction of MI166-P3QC in the presence of 1 mM DTT at 42 °C. (A) The
species formed, over the course of 3 h, are EN (44.9 kDa),
I-EC I (∼29.0 kDa), and I-EC II (23.0
kDa), as observed on a Coomassie blue-stained 10–20% Tris-glycine
polyacrylamide gel. (B) Species MI166-P3QC, I-EC I, and I-EC II
are observed on a fluorescent gel. The molecular mass markers (kilodaltons)
indicate the positions of the protein standards of the broad range
prestained protein marker (NEB) on the gel. The dashed and dotted
arrows correspond to the precursor, MI166-P3QC (68.0 kDa), and unreacted MI166 (64.3 kDa), respectively. The details of the protein splicing assay
and quantitation of the various species are as described in . Samples were quenched in
blue loading buffer, containing 8 M buffered urea, and were loaded
on the gel without prior boiling. MI166-P3QC was used at a final concentration of 0.1 μg/μL.

Kinetic simulations reveal that the MI166-P3QC precursor is heterogeneous
in nature,
with two different conformations that are stable and undergo their
own decay pathways (Figure ). In pathway I,
(MI166-P3QC)I decays reversibly to form a branched intermediate (Branched I),
which is then subject to rapid N-terminal cleavage by DTT with a k2 of (1.0 × 10–2 mM–1 s–1) × [DTT] to form I-EC I. In pathway II, a branched intermediate (Branched II) is
formed reversibly from (MI166-P3QC)II, with a Keq that is slightly larger than that observed for the formation of
Branched I. Branched II is then subject to thiolysis to form (Branched
II·DTT) reversibly [k2 = (1.3 ×
10–3 mM–1 s–1) × [DTT], and k–2 = 1.2
× 10–3 s–1]. In the last
step, (Branched II·DTT) undergoes N-terminal cleavage to form
I-EC II with a k3 of 1.7 ×
10–4 s–1. According to the simulations,
I-EC I and I-EC II form in parallel. This deduction
offers an explanation for the detection of two different forms of
I-EC on a denaturing gel.

(A) Kinetic simulations of the reaction
of MI166-P3QC in the
presence of DTT at 42
°C and (B) kinetic simulation model used to fit the experimental
data. Experimental details are identical to those described in the
legend of Figure . Solid, dashed, and dotted
lines correspond to the simulation results of the experimental kinetic
data for the reaction of MI166-P3QC in the presence of 1, 5, and 25 mM DTT, respectively,
at 42 °C. Symbols represent the experimental data for the precursor
MI166-P3QC (●,
○, and ×), I-EC I (■, □, and
◇), and I-EC II (▲, △, and ▽).
The percentage values used in the simulation model for (MI166-P3QC)I are 37, 28,
and 38% and for (MI166-P3QC)II are 21, 20, and 32% in the reaction in the presence
of 1, 5, and 25 mM DTT, respectively. Error bars represent the standard
error of the mean.

Intriguingly, the intermediates in pathway I are
analogous of those
in the MI166-P1NC reaction,
whereas the intermediates in pathway II are analogous of those in
the MI166-P2AC reaction.
However, the kinetic parameters indicate that Branched I and Branched
II are more reactive toward DTT in comparison with the cognate intermediates
in the MI166-P1NC and
MI166-P2AC reactions.
This increased reactivity with DTT can explain why more I-EC is formed in the MI166-P3QC reaction than in the MI166-P2AC reaction at matching DTT concentrations.

Splicing Reactions of Thr93, Tyr156, Asp147, and Cys+1 Variants
Variants with substitutions of residues implicated in the splicing
reaction of the Mja KlbA intein have been examined
in this study. The Cys+1 variants, MI166-P4NS, MI166-P5NA, and MI166-P6NT, which are expected to inhibit N-terminal cleavage
and result in C-terminal cleavage products,() showed no evidence of the formation of C-terminal cleavage products
in vitro (Figure S3 of the ). Only ∼4% of the precursor decays after 20 h at 42 °C
to yield what might be the products of the slow intrinsic hydrolysis
reaction of the scissile peptide (the bands’ identities were
confirmed by N-terminal sequencing as EN and I-EC). Other variants examined include MI166/T93A-P1NCs, MI166/Y156A-P1NCs, and MI166/D147A(E)-P1NCs. In vitro, the reaction of MI166/T93A-P1NCs in the
presence of 1 mM DTT at 42 °C showed the formation of the splicing
products but at a very diminished rate. N-terminal cleavage products
were also detected in the reaction (Figure A,B). This is consistent with the role of block B Thr93, which is
a member of the catalytic triad (Thr93, His96, and Cys+1) thought
to facilitate reactions at the N-terminal splice junction.() It is also consistent with in vivo reports in
which replacement of Thr93 with Ala is shown to slow the splicing
reaction of Mja KlbA intein without disrupting it.() Kinetic simulation of this reaction at 42 °C
shows that only 33% of the precursor is reactive. The rate constants
for both N- and C-terminal catalytic cleavage events are much lower
than those observed for MI166-P1NCs. Rate constants of the side reactions remain the
same (Figure A). Another variant tested was
MI166/Y156A-P1NCs.
Residue Tyr156 of block F is highly conserved among inteins as either
Phe or Tyr. The NMR structure of the Mja KlbA intein
shows that Tyr156 is centrally located in the active site.() Mutation studies suggest that the role performed
by Tyr156 is structural and not catalytic.() In vivo, replacement of Tyr156 with Phe does not affect the splicing
efficiency of the intein, while replacement with Ala results in equal
amounts of precursor, N-terminal single-cleavage products, and free
intein.() Interestingly, no C-terminal
cleavage is observed in the reaction of MI166/Y156A-P1NCs in the presence of 1 mM DTT
at 42 °C in vitro. The only products detected are those of N-terminal
cleavage by DTT (Figure C,D). Simulation
provides evidence that this substitution renders the protein mostly
inactive (only 10% of the Y156A precursor is reactive) and results
in the slow production of I-EC (Figure B). Last but not least, substitution of block F Asp147 with
Glu or Ala [MI166/D147E(A)-P1NCs] was examined in vitro in the presence of 1 mM DTT at 42 °C.
Asp147 is believed to play a role in Branched formation as well as
Asn cyclization/C-terminal cleavage.() In
vivo, replacement of Asp147 with Glu results in predominant formation
of the C-terminal cleavage product, while its replacement with Ala
inhibits both N- and C-terminal cleavage reactions.() In this study, both of these substitutions inhibit N- and
C-terminal cleavage events in the reaction of MI166/D147E(A)-P1NCs (data not shown).

Time course
reactions of MI166/T93A-P1NCs (A and B) and MI166/Y156A-P1NCs (C and D) in the presence of
1 mM DTT at 42 °C. (A) Formation of EN-EC (46.4 kDa), EN (44.9 kDa), I-EC (20.9 kDa),
and I (19.4 kDa) detected over the course of 10 h on a Coomassie blue-stained
10–20% Tris-glycine polyacrylamide gel. (B) MI166/T93A-P1NCs, EN-EC, and I-EC are fluorescent. (C) Only two products,
EN (44.9 kDa) and I-EC (20.9 kDa), are formed
over the course of 9 h, as observed on a Coomassie blue-stained 10–20%
Tris-glycine polyacrylamide gel. (D) MI166/Y156A-P1NCs and I-EC are fluorescent.
The dashed arrows correspond to the precursors, MI166/T93A-P1NCs (65.8 kDa) and MI166/Y156A-P1NCs (65.7 kDa). The
dotted arrow corresponds to unreacted MI166 (64.3 kDa).
The molecular mass markers (kilodaltons) indicate the positions of
the protein standards of the broad range prestained protein marker
(NEB) on the gel. MI166/T93A-P1NCs and MI166/Y156A-P1NCs were used at final concentrations of 0.1 and 0.08 μg/μL,
respectively.

Kinetic simulations of (A) MI166/T93A-P1NCs and (B) MI166/Y156A-P1NCs in the presence of 1 mM DTT
at 42 °C. The circles are kinetic data points obtained for the
precursor, squares for EN-EC, and triangles
for I-EC. The kinetic model used for the simulation of
the variant reactions is identical to that used for MI166-P1NC, described in the legend
of Figure B, with variation in rate constants.
(C) The percentage value used in the simulation model for (MI166/T93A-P1NCs)R was 33%. (D) The percentage value used in the simulation model for
(MI166/Y156A-P1NCs)R was 10%. The details of the protein splicing assays
and quantitation of the various species are as described in . Samples were quenched in
blue loading buffer [6% (w/v) SDS] containing 8 M buffered urea and
loaded on a 10–20% Tris-glycine gel without prior boiling.
MI166/T93A-P1NCs and
MI166/Y156A-P1NCs were
used at a final concentration of 0.1 μg/μL. Error bars
represent the standard error of the mean.

Despite the fact that evidence of C-terminal single-cleavage
reactions,
in the absence of N-terminal cleavage, has been observed for mutant Mja KlbA inteins in vivo, results from our in vitro studies
of T93, D147, and C+1 variants support tight coupling between the
C-terminal and N-terminal cleavage steps in the Mja KlbA intein–mini-extein precursor.

Effect of pH on the Kinetics of the MI166-P1NC Reaction
As an additional probe
of the splicing mechanisms, the pH was varied in the reaction of MI166-P1NCs in the presence
of 1 mM DTT at 42 °C. The effects on the rate constants of the
various steps of the MI166-P1NCs reaction are summarized in Table .
The results indicate that physiological pH (7.0–7.5) gives
the most efficient formation of the spliced product (maximal values
for Keq = k1/k–1 and k2 are obtained in this range). A bell-shaped effect of pH on k1 is also observed. This profile most likely
reflects general acid–base catalysis during the generation
of the branched intermediate. High pH disfavors Branched in its equilibrium
with the precursor. This observation can be explained by the greater
stability of amides relative to (thio)esters at elevated pH.,k2 decreases at pH &gt;7.5, implying
a
decreased efficiency of Asn cyclization, possibly because of inhibition
of the protonation of the amide N of the scissile bond during succinimide
formation or deprotonation or misalignment of a yet to be identified
residue that assists Asn cyclization. Similar observations for the
decreased efficiency of splicing at high pH have been reported in
various other inteins, such as the Pyrococcus DNA
polymerase intein,()Mycobacterium
tuberculosis RecA intein (Mtu RecA),() DnaE split intein from Synechocystis sp. PCC6803 (Ssp DnaE),() and Pyrococcus abyssi PolII intein (Pab PolII).() Conversely, the increase in k3 at pH &gt;7.5 is explained by an increase
in
the nucleophilicity of DTT upon thiol deprotonation. This has also
been observed for the Ssp DnaE intein.() pH variation appears to have no effect on k4.

Effect of pH Variation on Rate Constants
(s–1) in the Splicing Reaction of MI166-P1NCs at 42 °C
 	pH 6.0	pH 6.5	pH 7.0	pH 7.5	pH 8.0	pH 8.5	pH 9.0	
k1	3.3 ×
10–4	5.0 ×
10–4	6.7 ×
10–4	6.7 ×
10–4	8.3 ×
10–4	8.3 ×
10–4	6.7 ×
10–4	
k–1	1.7 ×
10–4	1.7 ×
10–4	1.7 ×
10–4	1.7 ×
10–4	5.0 ×
10–4	5.0 ×
10–4	5.0 ×
10–4	
k2	1.7 ×
10–3	2.0 ×
10–3	1.7 ×
10–3	2.2 ×
10–3	1.5 ×
10–3	1.2 ×
10–3	8.3 ×
10–4	
k3	1.7 ×
10–5	1.7 ×
10–5	1.7 ×
10–5	1.7 ×
10–5	3.3 ×
10–4	6.7 ×
10–4	6.7 ×
10–4	
k4	1.7 ×
10–5	1.7 ×
10–5	1.7 ×
10–5	1.7 ×
10–5	1.7 ×
10–5	1.7 ×
10–5	1.7 ×
10–5	
The time course and kinetic simulation
of the splicing reaction of MI166-P1NCs at pH 7.5 and 42 °C are presented in panels A and C
of Figure S2 of the , respectively.

Discussion
A fundamental unanswered question in the
noncanonical splicing
mechanism of the Mja KlbA intein has been how Ala1
inteins overcome the barrier to direct attack of a distal Cys residue
on the scissile amide bond, when the equivalent attack apparently
cannot occur in standard inteins with a C1A substitution. In an effort
to address this question, we previously determined the structure of
the Mja KlbA intein by NMR spectroscopy., The structure suggests that a widening in the active site of the Mja KlbA intein as compared to standard inteins, such as Thermococcus kodakaraensis Pol-2 intein,()Saccharomyces cerevisiae VMA intein (Sce VMA),() and Mxe GyrA intein,() could allow the C+1 nucleophile
to access the −1 carbonyl group. Steric hindrance blocks such
attack at the N-terminal bond in standard inteins. In this study,
we have performed a kinetic dissection of the cis splicing mechanism
of the Mja KlbA intein, utilizing an intein–mini-extein
system with a disulfide redox switch, to shed additional light on
the various steps of this reaction. Intriguingly, our results reveal
that the rate constants for formation of the branched intermediate
and its resolution to spliced products in the MEI166-P1NC reaction are almost indistinguishable
(Figure  and Table ). This observation contrasts with what has previously been observed
for standard inteins (cis and trans splicing), in which C-terminal
cleavage (Asn or Gln cyclization) has been identified as the slowest
step of the splicing reaction (a summary of rate constants from various
intein systems is presented in Table ). In Pab PolII intein, C-terminal cleavage is 10-fold slower
than N-terminal cleavage., In the Ssp DnaE intein, it is ∼7-fold slower.() A recent study by the Muir group directly monitoring the formation
of the succinimide product from a semisynthetic branched intermediate
presents strong evidence that favors intein-succinimide formation
being the slowest step in the Mxe GyrA intein splicing
mechanism.() Another study by the same
group reports rate constants for branched intermediate formation being
significantly greater than the rate constants of spliced product formation
in the trans splicing reactions of Ssp DnaE and the
chimeric split intein, composed of the N-terminal Nostoc punctiforme DnaE intein and C-terminal Ssp intein (Npu*), both
inteins with model N- and C-exteins and a C+1S substitution.()

Summary of Rate Constants for the
Different Steps in the Splicing Reactions of Various Intein Systems
intein	linear	branched	splicing	N-terminal
cleavage	C-terminal
cleavage	T (°C)	ref	
Pab PolII
(cis)	nd	nd	9.3 ×
10–6 s–1	∼1.0
× 10–4 s–1	1.2 ×
10–5 s–1	60	(), ()	
Sce VMA (artificial/trans)	nd	nd	0.9–2.0
× 10–3 s–1	nd	1.7 ×
10–3 s–1	25	()	
Sce VMA
(cis)	nd	nd	 	1.9
×
10–3 s–1	nd	23	()	
Ssp DnaB
(artificial/trans)	nd	nd	9.9
×
10–4 s–1	nd	nd	25	()	
Ssp DnaE
(trans)	nd	nd	0.7–3.3
× 10–4 s–1	∼1.3
× 10–3 s–1	1.9 ×
10–4 s–1	23	(), (), (), ()	
Ssp DnaE
(trans)	nd	8.9 ×
10–5 s–1	nd	nd	nd	30	()	
Npu DnaE
(trans)	nd	nd	1.1 ×
10–2 s–1	nd	nd	37	()	
Npu*	nd	1.1 ×
10–4 s–1	3.9 ×
10–5 s–1	nd	nd	30	()	
Mxe GyrA
(cis)	1.0 ×
10–3 s–1	nd	2.0
×
10–5 s–1	nd	nd	25	(), ()	
 	 	 	2.0 ×
10–3 s–1	 	 	 	 	
Mxe GyrA
(cis)	nd	nd	nd	3.6 ×
10–2 s–1	nd	23	()	
Mja KlbA	–	(k1 = 1.5 × 10–3 s–1; k–1 =
1.7 × 10–5 s–1)	2.2 ×
10–3 s–1	(2.0 × 10–2 M–1 s–1) × [DTT]	1.7 ×
10–5 s–1	42	this work	
Rate constant for the overall reaction
except in the cases of Mja KlbA and Npu* where it
is the rate constant for the production of ligated exteins from a
branched intermediate. For Mxe GyrA, see footnotes
f and g.

DTT-induced N-terminal
cleavage.

Not determined.

Artificially split trans-acting
intein.

A chimeric split
intein composed
of the N-terminal Npu DnaE intein and the C-terminal Ssp intein.

Rate
constant for succinimide formation.

Rate constant for the O–N
acyl shift.

k1 is
the forward rate constant and k–1 the reverse rate constant in the reversible step for Branched formation.

Rate constant for formation
of the
double-cleavage product.

It is plausible that the diminished rate at which
the branched
intermediate forms in the context of the splicing reaction of the Mja KlbA intein might be attributed to the greater entropy
of activation relative to the entropy of attack by the neighboring
Cys in the standard inteins, which adds to the enthalpic cost for
conversion of an amide to a (thio)ester. Despite this discrepancy
between the Mja KlbA intein and the standard inteins,
the value of the rate constant for formation of the branched intermediate
in the Mja KlbA intein is comparable to the rate
constant for formation of the linear (thio)ester intermediate in the Mxe GyrA intein and is 10-fold greater than the values of
the rate constants for formation of the branched intermediates in
the Ssp DnaE and Npu* inteins (Table ). This situation reflects a surprising efficiency of the Mja KlbA intein in directing the attack by the distant C+1
nucleophile on the scissile peptide bond, a step standard inteins
are incapable of performing in the absence of the N-terminal nucleophile.
It is conceivable that such efficiency is the result of a highly ordered
conformation for the active form of the Mja KlbA
precursor, in which the spatial orientation of C+1 relative to the
scissile amide bond mimics that of C1 in standard inteins. Another
possibility would be a strained geometry of the active site, which
would lead to ground-state destabilization of the precursor and perhaps
compensate for the energetically costly rearrangement of an amide
bond to a thioester.

Several observations made in this study
support the idea that the Mja KlbA intein has evolved
to tightly control its active
site for effective splicing via a complex network of hydrogen bonds
involving not only catalytic but also second- and third-sphere residues.
Results showing that Keq describing the
formation of the branched intermediate is diminished with a shorter EC imply that splicing is driven forward not
only by intradomain protein contacts (residues within the intein active
site) but also by interdomain protein contacts (residues in the N-
and C-terminal extein domains and the intein domain), which probably
result in transition-state stabilization for branched intermediate
formation. Furthermore, larger extein domains are probably better
at excluding water or thiol molecules from the active site of the
intein, which would explain why more off-pathway products are usually
observed with heterologous exteins. More insight into the role of
interdomain contacts in the overall splicing reaction is gained by
the in vitro evidence presented for tight coupling between the N-
and C-termini. Substitution of T93, which is involved in N-terminal
activation, with A substantially decreases the rates of both branched
formation and Asn cyclization. Substitution of C+1 or D147 (shown
by an NMR structural model to be hydrogen-bonded via its side chain
to Sγ of C+1()) with any residue
abrogates both N- and C-terminal cleavage events. In light of these
observations, and in consideration of the absence of an absolute requirement
for N-terminal cleavage to precede C-terminal cleavage in vivo, we
suggest the presence of a regulated cross communication between the
two termini in the form of a network of shared bonds. The inconsistency
of the in vitro and in vivo results could be explained by slight differences
in the folding pattern of the intein, which would again indicate sensitivity
in the described network to minor disruptions in bonding or folding
patterns. Other intein systems, such as the Ssp DnaE
intein, the Mtu RecA intein, and the Sce VMA intein, exhibit tight coordination between the N- and C-terminal
cleavage events that is explained in terms of a conformational change
during N-terminal cleavage, which optimally positions residues for
C-terminal cleavage.,, Furthermore, it has been observed that residues in the N- and C-terminal
motifs, flanking the catalytic center, impose a dramatic effect on
the splicing reaction at both N- and C-terminal junctions in these
same inteins., A similar explanation could be
extended to the Mja KlbA intein, where local conformational
changes could be triggered during or after branched intermediate formation
to assist in positioning of essential residues for C-terminal cleavage.

The sensitivity of the Mja KlbA intein environment
to changes in its catalytic and assisting residues is underscored
by (i) the existence of structural isomers of the MI166-P1NC, MI166-P2AC, and MI166-P3QC precursors and (ii) their varying reactivities,
as predicted by kinetic simulations. This sensitivity is clearly emphasized
in the MI166-P3QC reaction,
in which the folding properties of the precursor result in two parallel
splicing trajectories. Moreover, a disparity in the reactivity of
the branched intermediate formed in theses reactions toward DTT most
likely reflects subtle conformational differences in these species.
MI166-P3QC Branched
I and II are both susceptible to thiolysis, whereas the MI166-P1NC and MI166-P2AC Branched species are much less
so. It is quite interesting, though, that Branched I (thought to mimic
MI166-P1NC Branched)
undergoes faster thiolysis than Branched II (thought to mimic MI166-P2AC Branched). This
greater susceptibility would indicate a more open active site for
the former species and perhaps explain the stability of Branched in
MI166-P2AC. Furthermore,
it is intriguing that DTT-induced N-terminal cleavage leads solely
to the formation of the N-terminal cleavage side reaction products
in various standard inteins such as the Sce VMA intein,()Ssp DnaE intein,() and Pab PolII intein,, while in the case of the Mja KlbA intein, the presence
of even 50 mM DTT still leads mostly to the formation of the splicing
products, ligated exteins and intein. The values of the N-terminal
cleavage rate constants for the various inteins are comparable when
compared at the same temperature in the presence of 50 mM DTT (Table ). However, the rate for formation of the succinimide-intein
product from the branched intermediate is what dictates the fate of
the reaction products in the presence of DTT in either case. In the
studied standard inteins, Asn/Gln cyclization is the slowest step
of the reaction and is ∼10-fold slower than N-terminal cleavage
(Table ). As a result, the reaction is directed
toward formation of N-terminal cleavage products in the presence of
high DTT concentrations. On the other hand, in the Mja KlbA intein, Asn cyclization occurs at a rate comparable to that
of branched formation and that of N-terminal cleavage in the presence
of 50 mM DTT. This results in the bifurcation of the reaction in two
pathways and allows the formation of the splicing products as well
as N-terminal cleavage products.

In summary, we have constructed
an intein–mini-extein system,
which closely mimics the native Mja KlbA precursor,
with seven native N-extein residues and 30 native C-extein residues,
and a triggerable redox switch. Our system has permitted a detailed
kinetic dissection of the splicing mechanism of this intein with the
assignment of rate constants for every step involved in the splicing
reaction, a task unprecedented not only for noncanonical inteins such
as the Mja KlbA intein but also for standard inteins.
Importantly, our kinetic data provide a number of “firsts”
that distinguish the Mja KlbA noncanonical intein
from all studied standard inteins. (1) The rate constant for formation
of the branched intermediate is comparable if not slightly less than
the rate constant of Asn cyclization. (2) Despite the slow nature
of formation of a branched intermediate in the splicing reaction of
the Mja KlbA intein, it still occurs efficiently
at a rate equivalent to that of linear (thio)ester intermediate formation
and ∼10-fold faster than branched intermediate formation in
standard inteins. (3) The branched intermediate is not susceptible
to thiolysis by DTT, as are the linear (thio)ester and branched intermediates
in standard inteins, and this stability is ensured by comparable rates
of formation of branched and succinimide-intein adducts, which guarantees
that the reaction proceeds toward the productive formation of the
splicing products. Therefore, although the exact molecular mechanism
that allows the Mja KlbA intein to overcome the barrier
present in standard inteins that prevents attack on an amide bond
at the intein N-terminus is yet to be determined, the kinetics of
the reaction described herein demonstrate that splicing in this Ala1
intein is not limited by kinetic parameters.

Acknowledgments
We thank Dr. Catherine L. Madinger for performing ESI-TOF
mass spectrometric analysis on the purified peptides. We thank Shelley
Cushing for conducting N-terminal sequencing. We also thank Dr. Christopher
J. Noren for his scientific input. We thank Dr. Don Comb for support
and encouragement.

Supporting Information Available
Determination of the site for
peptide ligation in the Mja KlbA intein–mini-extein
system (text and Tables S1 and S2) and proposed structures of Branched·DTT,
kinetic simulations of the MI166-P1NCs and MI166-P2ACs reactions, in vitro products for the MI166-P6NT reaction, and mass spectrometric
analysis of the products of the splicing reaction of MI166-P1NCs (Figures S1–S4,
respectively). This material is available free of charge via the Internet
at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bi200810j_si_001.pdf

No splicing activity was detected
for any of the assembled precursors in the presence of 6 M buffered
urea.

The addition of an MBP
tag at the
N-terminus distinguishes the N-terminal cleavage product and ligated
exteins on an SDS–PAGE gel.

EN corresponds to the seven
native N-extein residues with an N-terminal MBP tag.

Abbreviations
Branchedbranched intermediate

ENseven native
N-extein residues with an N-terminal MBP tag

EC10 or 30 native C-extein
residues

EN-ECligated exteins

EPLexpressed protein ligation

ESI-TOF MSelectrospray ionization time-of-flight
mass spectrometry

HEPESN-(2-hydroxyethyl)piperazine-N′-2-ethanesulfonic acid

Ifree intein

I-ECintein-C-extein

IPTGisopropyl β-d-thiogalactopyranoside

krate constant

Keqequilibrium constant

Lys(5(6)-FAM)Lys[5(6)-carboxyfluorescein]

MBPmaltose binding
protein

MI166MBP-tagged (N-terminus) Mja KlbA intein with seven
native N-extein residues and with intein truncated at residue Ala166

MI166-Pprecursor resulting from ligation of MI166 and P

(MI166-P1NC)Uunreactive
form of MI166-P1NC

(MI166-P1NC)Rreactive form of MI166-P1NC

MESNAsodium 2-mercaptoethanesulfonate

NEBNew England Biolabs

PCRpolymerase chain
reaction

SDS–PAGEsodium dodecyl sulfate–polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis

Tristris(hydroxymethyl)aminomethane.

