Lantipeptides are ribosomally
synthesized and posttranslationally modified peptides, characterized
by the thioether amino acids lanthionine (Lan) and methyllanthionine
(MeLan)., Lantipeptides with antimicrobial activities
are called lantibiotics. In lantipeptide-producing
organisms, the precursor peptides, termed LanAs, are expressed with
an N-terminal leader sequence and a C-terminal core peptide (e.g.,
Figure A). The core peptide is modified by
a dehydratase, generating dehydroalanine (Dha) and dehydrobutyrine
(Dhb) from Ser and Thr, respectively (Figure B). Subsequently, intramolecular additions of the thiols of Cys to
the Dha and Dhb residues generate the thioether cross-links (Figure B). In class II lantipeptides, these two sequential
modifications are conducted by one enzyme, generically called LanM. The leader peptide is removed in the final step
of lantipeptide biosynthesis to form the mature products.

Precursor peptides of the 29 prochlorosins from Prochlorococcus MIT9313 and enzymatic transformations during
biosynthesis of lantipeptides.
(A) Sequence alignment of the 29 precursor peptides illustrating the
high degree of conservation in their leader peptides and the high
degree of diversity in their core peptides. The four peptides investigated
here are denoted with pink boxes at the left. (B) Dehydration and
cyclization reactions during the biosynthesis of lantibiotics and
lantipeptides.

Prochlorosins (Pcns) make up a group of lantipeptides
produced
by Prochlorococcus. In Prochlorococcus MIT9313, 29 different peptide substrates
are modified by a single promiscuous enzyme, ProcM, forming the characteristic
thioether rings. The 29 precursor peptides
have highly conserved leader peptides but highly diverse core peptides
where the posttranslational modifications occur (Figure A). This class of lanthionine-containing peptides is of interest
not only because of the remarkable promiscuity of the enzyme but also
because the organisms carrying these genes are cyanobacteria accounting
for as much as half of the chlorophyll in the tropical and subtropical
oceans with a lifestyle very different from those of other known lantipeptide-producing
organisms. They are single-cell organisms
living in oligotrophic environments at very dilute concentrations,
making it debatable whether prochlorosins serve as antimicrobial defenses
like most other known lantipeptides.

Analysis of the Global Oceanic Survey showed that the genes for
production of these lanthionine-containing peptides are widespread., Their transcription levels respond to nitrogen starvation, suggesting
that the prochlorosins are functional. However, it remains unclear why the organisms produce this class
of secondary metabolites and what their functions are. To address
these questions as well as understand the remarkable substrate tolerance
of ProcM, it is important to know the chemical structures of prochlorosins,
including their ring topologies and the stereochemical configurations
of their Lan and MeLan residues.

Preliminary structural characterization
of several prochlorosins
has been achieved by tandem mass spectrometry (MS). The presence of a thioether cross-link prohibits fragmentation
of the peptide in the ring, and therefore, the fragmentation pattern
can be used for ring topology prediction., However, tandem
MS encounters difficulties in elucidating the ring topology for structures
that contain overlapping rings. In such cases, mutagenesis is usually
employed to prevent the formation of one or several overlapping rings
such that the topology of the remaining rings can be established using
tandem MS. However, because ProcM exhibits a very low substrate specificity
under laboratory conditions and can generate a variety of ring structures,
it is possible that the ring topology of the mutants is not that of
the wild-type prochlorosins. Indeed, a single point mutation in ProcA4.3
has been shown to change the original ring pattern. Therefore, tandem MS has its limitations for the determination
of the structures of prochlorosins, and other complementary techniques
are required. In this study, we used nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR)
spectroscopy to determine the ring topologies of four prochlorosins
(Pcn1.1, Pcn1.7, Pcn3.3, and Pcn4.3) for which the precursor genes
have been shown to be transcribed under nitrogen starvation.

In addition to questions about the ring patterns of prochlorosins,
the stereochemical configurations of their Lan and MeLan residues
have not been determined. Lan and MeLan residues in lantipeptides
and lantibiotics for which the stereochemistry has been determined
all exhibit (2S,6R) and (2S,3S,6R) configurations,
respectively. Because ProcM generates
such a diversity of ring topologies, we previously speculated that
perhaps only some rings are formed enzymatically, thus preorganizing
the partially cyclized peptides for nonenzymatic cyclization to generate
the final ring structures. Determination
of the configuration of Lan and MeLan residues in prochlorosins could
potentially serve to assess whether a ring is formed enzymatically
or nonenzymatically.

To address this hypothesis, we investigated
the stereochemical
configuration of Lan and MeLan residues of seven prochlorosins (Pcn1.1,
Pcn1.7, Pcn2.8, Pcn2.11, Pcn3.2, Pcn3.3, and Pcn4.3) by gas chromatography
and MS (GC–MS) with a chiral stationary phase and compared
them with synthetic standards.− We were able to conduct these
experiments by producing milligram quantities of the selected prochlorosins
by heterologous coexpression of the precursor peptides with ProcM
in Escherichia coli.

Materials and Methods
General Methods
All polymerase chain reactions (PCRs)
were conducted on a C1000 thermal cycler (Bio-Rad). DNA sequencing
was performed by ACGT, Inc. Preparative high-performance liquid chromatography
(HPLC) was performed using a Waters Delta 600 instrument equipped
with appropriate columns. Matrix-assisted laser desorption ionization
time-of-flight mass spectrometry (MALDI-TOF MS) was conducted on a
Voyager-DE-STR (Applied Biosystems). Overexpression and purification
of the modified precursor peptides were performed using previously
reported procedures.

Construction of pRSFDuet-1 Derivatives for Coexpression of ProcM
and ProcAs
The genes encoding ProcA1.1G–1E and ProcA4.3
were cloned from previously reported vectors and inserted into multiple cloning site 1 of the pRSFDuet-1/procM-2
vector using the EcoRI and NotI restriction sites. Primer sequences
are listed in Table S1 of the . Negative numbers are used for amino acids in the leader peptide
counting backward from the putative leader peptide cleavage site.
The sequences of the constructed vectors were confirmed by DNA sequencing.
The pRSFDuet-1/procM-2, pRSFDuet-1/procM-2-procA3.3G–1K, pRSFDuet-1/procM-2-procA1.7G–1R,
pRSFDuet-1/procM-2-procA2.8, pRSFDuet-1/procM-2-procA2.11G–1K,
pRSFDuet-1/procM-2-procA3.2, pRSFDuet-1/procM-2-procA4.3G–1R,
and pRSFDuet-1/procM-2-procA4.3G–1E vectors were obtained as
reported previously.

Protease Cleavage and Purification of Prochlorosin Core Peptides
Posttranslationally modified ProcA mutants were treated with the
commercial protease GluC to remove the leader peptides. For some peptides,
additional proteases were used to process the long leader peptides
into smaller fragments, which sometimes proved to be advantageous
for purification (LysC for ProcA1.1G–1E and ProcA3.3G–1K
and trypsin for ProcA4.3). In such instances, the modified core peptide
was not proteolyzed even if it contained potential cleavage sites
for LysC or trypsin, presumably because the presence of dehydrated
amino acids and/or (Me)Lan residues greatly reduced the proteolytic
efficiency. The protease cleavage reactions were quenched with 0.5%
TFA, and the desired products were confirmed by MALDI-TOF MS and purified
by reversed phase HPLC (RP-HPLC) using a Jupiter proteo C12 column
(5 μm, 90 Å, 250 mm × 10.0 mm). Solvents for RP-HPLC
were solvent A (0.1% TFA in water) and solvent B (0.086% TFA in 80%
acetonitrile and 20% water). The desired core peptides eluted from
the column between 40 and 60% solvent B, and pure fractions were lyophilized.

NMR Spectroscopy
NMR spectra were acquired at the NMR
Facility (School of Chemical Sciences, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign)
on Varian INOVA 600 or 500 MHz spectrometers equipped with a 5 mm
triple-resonance (1H, 13C, 15N) triaxial
gradient probe. Lyophilized peptides were dissolved in a 90% H2O/10% D2O mixture to a final concentration of 5–7
mM and a pH of 3.5 to improve solubility. NMR spectra were acquired
at 20 °C for 2048 direct and 256 of 400 indirect data points
with 16 or 32 scans depending on the peptide concentration. TOCSY (mixing time of 0.080 s), gradient double-quantum-filtered
COSY (gDQCOSY), and NOESY spectra were acquired with solvent suppression by presaturation
or water gate pulse sequences. The lyophilized peptides were dissolved
in 100% D2O, and NOESY spectra were acquired without exchangeable
proton signals. NOESY spectra of Pcn1.1 and -3.3 were acquired with
a mixing time of 0.20 s, while those of Pcn1.7 and -4.3 were acquired
with a mixing time of 0.40 s, which resulted in clearer nuclear Overhauser
effect (NOE) signals. Spectra were processed with NMRPipe and analyzed in Sparky.

GC–MS Analysis
The synthesis of Lan and MeLan
standards and the preparation of samples for GC–MS analysis
were conducted following a reported procedure. For Pcn1.1, -1.7, -3.3, and -4.3, the purified modified
core peptides were used, whereas for Pcn2.8, -2.11, and -3.2, the
ProcM-modified precursor peptides with their leader sequences still
attached were used. The derivatized samples were analyzed by GC–MS
using an Agilent HP 6890N mass spectrometer equipped with a Varian
CP-Chirasil-l-Val fused silica column (25 m × 0.25 mm
× 0.15 μm). Samples were dissolved in methanol and introduced
into the instrument via splitless injection at a flow rate of 1.7
or 2.0 mL/min in helium gas. The following temperature gradient was
used: 160 °C for 5 min, from 160 to 180 °C at a rate of
3 °C/min, and 180 °C for 10 min. The mass spectrometer was
operated in simultaneous scan/selected-ion monitoring (SIM) mode,
monitoring at the characteristic fragment masses of 365 Da for Lan
and 379 Da for MeLan residues.

Results
Coexpression of ProcAs and ProcM in E. coli
To obtain milligram quantities of peptides required for
NMR characterization, a heterologous coexpression system was employed
using E. coli as a host.,− Using a pRSFDuet vector, ProcM and His-tagged ProcAs were coexpressed
and the modified precursor peptides were purified by immobilized metal
affinity chromatography (IMAC) followed by RP-HPLC. Using this procedure,
∼80 mg of modified prochlorosins with their leader peptides
still attached could be obtained from 1 L of LB culture. Protease
cleavage sites were engineered at the −1 position to remove
the leader peptides and produce the mature core peptides. These mutant
peptides were all fully processed by ProcM except for ProcA4.3G–1R
and ProcA4.3G–1E. As a result, wild-type ProcA4.3 was used
for coexpression, and the Glu at position −6 was used as a
cleavage site for endoproteinase GluC to generate a core peptide with
five residues at its N-terminus that remained from the leader peptide.
Unlike ProcA4.3, ProcA1.7 and ProcA3.3 mutated at position −1
(G–1R and G–1K, respectively) were still processed by
ProcM to generate the fully modified products. However, for ProcA3.3,
the engineered cleavage site was close to a dehydrated amino acid,
resulting in a greatly reduced efficiency of removal of the leader
peptide by endoproteinase LysC, whereas for ProcA1.7, the selected
protease (trypsin) caused cleavage in the core peptide, which greatly
reduced the yield. To obtain sufficient amounts of the modified core
peptides, the Glu at position −6 was also used for these two
peptides to remove most of the leader peptide with GluC endoproteinase.
MALDI-TOF mass spectra of the resulting modified core peptides are
shown in Figure S1 of the .

NMR Spectral Assignments
To determine the ring topology,
the observed NMR resonances were first assigned. A series of one-dimensional
(1D) and two-dimensional NMR experiments were performed for this purpose.
The amino acid assignments were obtained primarily from TOCSY and
gDQCOSY spectra. The TOCSY spectrum of Pcn1.7 is shown in Figure  as an example. TOCSY spectra for the other three
prochlorosins are shown in Figure S3 (Pcn1.1), Figure S6 (Pcn3.3),
and Figure S9 (Pcn4.3) of the . The chemical shifts of amide protons in these peptides in 90% H2O and 10% D2O were between 7 and 10 ppm, most of
which showed good dispersion. The number of amide protons was determined
by integration of 1D 1H NMR spectra. Each vertical line
in each TOCSY spectrum corresponds to the spin system of one amino
acid, with the amide proton resonance on the x-axis
and the chemical shifts of the side chain proton resonances on the y-axis. The N-terminal residues have no amide resonance
and hence were not observed. The amide signals of all amino acids
were observed for each of the four prochlorosins. They were assigned
to a specific amino acid by taking into account the observed chemical
shifts and numbers of resonances of the side chain protons to which
the amide protons were correlated in the TOCSY spectra. The amide
proton signals of Dhb residues always appeared as singlets in the
low field region with chemical shifts of &gt;9.3 ppm, and the β/γ
proton signals of Dhb displayed weak correlations to their corresponding
amide protons in the TOCSY spectra.

Water-suppressed TOCSY spectrum identifying
all residues of Pcn1.7.
Each vertical line indicates a spin system corresponding to an amino
acid. A water-suppressed NOESY spectrum (Figure S2 of the ) along with the gene sequence
was used to assign the residue numbering.

Assignments of each residue to a specific position
in the amino
acid sequence were made on the basis of the connectivity of dNN(i,i+1) as
well as dαN(i,i+1) in the NOESY spectra (Figure S2 for Pcn1.7, Figure
S4 for Pcn1.1, Figure S7 for Pcn3.3, and Figure S10 for Pcn4.3), taking
into consideration the amino acid sequences deduced from the procA genes.

Ring Topology Assigned by NMR Spectroscopy
In the discussion
below, the fragment of the Lan residues originating from Ser will
be designated Ala(S) and the fragment that originates from Cys will
be designated Cys (Ala and Cys are colored red and green, respectively,
in Figure A). Similarly, the fragment of MeLan
residues that originates from Thr will be designated Abu(S) (for 2-aminobutyric
acid), and the fragment originating from Cys will be designated Cys.
The chemical shifts for the β protons of putative Ala(S) and
Abu(S) residues observed in the TOCSY experiments provided the first
evidence of ring formation. Dha/Dhb residues that were converted into
thioether cross-links had chemical shifts of their β protons
of ∼3 ppm, whereas Dha/Dhb residues that were not involved
in ring formation displayed β proton chemical shifts between
6 and 7 ppm.

Illustration of the method used to establish thioether
connectivities.
(A) Schematic illustration of the proton correlations used to determine
ring topologies. (B) Section of the NOESY spectrum (mixing time of
0.40 s) of Pcn1.7 in D2O showing the correlations between
β protons. (C) Section of the NOESY spectrum showing the correlations
of the α protons with α and β protons across the
thioether bridge. (D) Section of the NOESY spectrum showing the correlations
of the γ protons with α and β protons across the
thioether bridge. In panels B–D, correlations are assigned
to rings A, B, and C of Pcn1.7 (see also Figure ). For enlarged panels B and C, see Figures S18 and S19 of the .

Next, NOESY spectra were acquired in D2O to simplify
the spectrum and focus on the NOEs involving the Lan/MeLan protons,
which allow assignment of the ring topology− (Figure  for Pcn1.7, Figure S5 for Pcn1.1,
Figure S8 for Pcn3.3, and Figure S11 for Pcn4.3). A longer NOESY mixing
time of 0.40 s was used for Pcn1.7 and -4.3. Intense NOE signals between
the β protons of an Ala(S)/Abu(S) and a Cys were taken as evidence
of a cross-link between these residues (Figure B). These assignments were further supported by correlations of α
protons of Ala(S)/Abu(S) with the β protons of the Cys with
which it was cross-linked, as well as correlations between α
protons of Cys residues and the β protons of Ala(S)/Abu(S) residues
(Figure C). In the case of MeLan, the γ
protons on the methyl groups of Abu(S) residues showed additional
correlations with the α and β protons of their partner
Cys (Figure D). For some prochlorosins (i.e.,
Pcn1.1, -3.3, and -4.3), these latter correlations were particularly
diagnostic to confirm the deduced ring structures because less signal
overlap was present in this region of the spectra (Figures S5, S8,
and S11 of the ).
Collectively, this approach allowed assignment of all resonances to
individual residues and therefore established the topology of the
rings (Figure ). For Pcn1.1, Pcn1.7, and Pcn3.3,
the NMR assignments agreed with the previous tandem MS data. For Pcn4.3, the NMR results in this study allowed
assignment of the second ring that was not possible by MS. The NMR data clearly show that this ring is formed
from Thr8 and Cys12, and that Ser9 remained unmodified.

Ring topology of four
selected
prochlorosins assigned by NMR spectroscopy in this work. Arrows indicate
the start of the putative core peptide. Asterisks indicate prochlorosins
containing five more residues at their N-terminus that originate from
the leader peptides. Blue residues are the engineered cleavage sites
at position −1 in the leader peptides.

We note that the additional amino acids remaining
from the leader
peptides in prochlorosins 1.7, 3.3, and 4.3 showed fewer correlation
signals in the NOESY spectrum, suggesting that the N-terminus is conformationally
more flexible than the modified core peptide.

Determination of the Stereochemistry of Lan and MeLan Residues
To determine the stereochemical configurations of the Lan and MeLan
residues in the four prochlorosins for which the NMR structures were
determined, the peptides were hydrolyzed in 6 M HCl, derivatized to
their corresponding pentafluoropropionamide methyl esters, and analyzed
by GC–MS with a chiral stationary phase. Lan and MeLan standards
with different stereochemical configurations were synthesized and
derivatized using previously reported methods. A Chirasil-l-Val-coated GC column was used for
analysis, and the GC trace was monitored for a characteristic fragment
of 365 Da for Lan and 379 Da for MeLan using electron impact mass
spectrometry. Figure  displays the GC–MS
traces for the products from Pcn1.7 as well as the Lan and MeLan standards.
As shown in Figure A, the derivatized MeLan
standards with dl (2S,3S,6R) and ll (2R,3R,6R) configuration were well separated,
with retention times of 14.1–14.4 and 14.4–14.7 min,
respectively. The derivatized Lan standards with dd (2S,6S), dl (2S,6R), and ll (2R,6R) configurations eluted later than the MeLan standards
and were also well separated with retention times of 18.2–18.6,
18.6–19.0, and 19.0–19.4 min, respectively (Figure B). Derivatized MeLan originating from Pcn1.7 eluted
with a retention time of 14.1–14.4 min (Figure C), indicating that the MeLan in Pcn1.7 has a dl configuration.
To further confirm this result, the derivatized dl and ll MeLan standards were co-injected with the derivatized MeLan
originating from the peptide. As illustrated in Figure , the derivatized MeLan fragment from Pcn1.7 coeluted with
the dl MeLan standard (Figure C),
but not with the ll MeLan standard (Figure D). MeLan standards with the d-allo-l (2S,3R,6R) and l-allo-l (2R,3S,6R) configuration were not
synthesized in this study because the reported elution times of the
derivatized MeLan diastereomers on a Chirasil-l-Val-coated
GC column increase in the following order: dl &lt; ll &lt; l-allo-l &lt; d-allo-l. In
this work, no derivatized MeLan residues were observed to elute after
the ll standard, ruling out the presence of MeLan residues
with an l-allo-l or d-allo-l configuration. The MeLan residues present
in the other three prochlorosins were analyzed using the same procedure,
and all had the dl configuration (Figure S12 for Pcn1.1,
Figure S13 for Pcn3.3, and Figure S14 for Pcn4.3).

GC–MS traces (selected
ion monitoring, SIM, at 365 Da for
Lan and 379 Da for MeLan) of derivatized (Me)Lan standards and co-injections
with derivatized Lan/MeLan obtained from Pcn1.7. (A) Derivatized dl-MeLan (—) and ll-MeLan (---) standards. (B)
Derivatized dd-Lan (···), dl-Lan
(—), and ll-Lan (---) standards. (C) Hydrolyzed and
derivatized amino acids from Pcn1.7 (---) and co-injected with the dl-MeLan standard (—). (D) Hydrolyzed and derivatized
amino acids from Pcn1.7 (---) and co-injected with the derivatized ll-MeLan standard (—). (E) Hydrolyzed and derivatized
amino acids from Pcn1.7 (---) and co-injected with the dd-Lan standard (—). (F) Hydrolyzed and derivatized amino acids
from Pcn1.7 (---) and co-injected with the dl-Lan standard
(—). (G) Hydrolyzed and derivatized amino acids from Pcn1.7
(---) and co-injected with the ll-Lan standard (—).
Lan and MeLan from Pcn1.7 used for overlays were adjusted
to 70% intensity for the sake of clarity.

Similarly, derivatized Lan originating from Pcn1.7
coeluted with
the Lan standard with the dl configuration but not with either
the dd or ll Lan standard (Figure E–G). The small shoulders on the derivatized dl-Lan peak arising from Pcn1.7 are believed to be caused by partial
epimerization during HCl hydrolysis, which has been reported previously. The GC trace for Pcn4.3, the other prochlorosin
investigated here that contains Lan, was more complicated. Although
the derivatized dl-Lan was still the dominant peak, an additional
peak in the GC trace accounted for ∼20% of the total Lan (Figure A). The material giving rise to this peak was confirmed
to be derivatized ll-Lan by co-injections (Figure S14E of
the ). This result
was in agreement with the NMR data (1D water-suppressed spectrum shown
in Figure B), which exhibited minor peaks
with integration values around 25% of that of the main peaks. These
NMR data demonstrate that the ll-Lan was already present
in Pcn4.3 before acid hydrolysis and derivatization and was not introduced
by epimerization during HCl hydrolysis.

ll-Lan diastereomer
in Pcn4.3 and its relative abundance.
(A) GC–MS trace of hydrolyzed and derivatized amino acids of
Pcn4.3 monitored for Lan. dd-Lan (18.2–18.6 min), dl-Lan (18.6–19.0 min), and ll-Lan (19.0–19.4
min) eluted from the column, with the relative peak areas indicated.
(B) 1D water-suppressed NMR spectrum of Pcn4.3. Minor peaks originate
from a different diastereomer of Pcn4.3 containing ll-Lan
as shown in panel A. Integrations of two pairs of major and minor
peaks are shown to estimate the relative amount of the diastereomer.

In addition to the prochlorosins for which the
NMR structures were
determined, the stereochemistry of the Lan and MeLan residues was
determined for three other ProcA substrates that were posttranslationally
modified by ProcM in E. coli (ProcA2.8, ProcA2.11,
and ProcA3.2). The corresponding prochlorosins could not be produced
in sufficient purity after leader peptide removal for NMR studies,
but after hydrolysis and derivatization of the resulting amino acids,
GC–MS analysis demonstrated that they contained Lan and MeLan
residues with the same configurations as in the other prochlorosins
(Figures S15–S17 of the ).

Discussion
In this study, we set out to investigate
three aspects of prochlorosin
biosynthesis: whether tandem MS is reliable for determination of ring
topologies, whether sufficient quantities of material can be produced
such that NMR spectroscopy can be used when MS data are inconclusive,
and whether the stereochemistries of the Lan and MeLan residues are
the same as those in other lantipeptides. To address these questions,
we first produced larger amounts of prochlorosins by heterologous
expression in E. coli because less than 10 μg
of impure products was obtained from 20 L of culture of Prochlorococcus MIT9313. Although the peptides obtained
by proteolysis with commercial proteases contain additional amino
acids at their N-termini compared to authentic prochlorosins, for
determination of the ring topology and stereochemistry of (Me)Lan
residues, these five additional amino acids of the leader peptide
are inconsequential.

The NMR data reported here confirm the
ring topologies of three
prochlorosins that were previously proposed on the basis of tandem
mass spectrometry in combination with site-directed mutagenesis. Thus,
the concern that a highly promiscuous enzyme like ProcM might process
a mutant peptide differently from a wild-type peptide appears not
to be corroborated for these compounds. Mass spectrometric approaches
used in the previous study could not answer the question of whether
Thr8 or Ser9 was involved in the B-ring of Pcn4.3. The NMR data in this study show conclusively that it is
Thr8 that is dehydrated in wt ProcA4.3 and that it makes a thioether
cross-link with Cys12 (Figure ).

Collectively,
these results raise the question of why mutants of
ProcA1.7 and ProcA3.3 that were made in the previous study to deduce their ring topologies by tandem MS
were processed correctly by ProcM, as shown by the NMR data in this
study, whereas mutants of ProcA4.3 were not. Although we cannot address
this question directly, processing of ProcA4.3 by ProcM appears to
be less robust in general. First, mutations at the −1 position
in ProcA4.3 completely abolished ProcM activity in this study, whereas
ProcM fully processed mutants at the −1 position for the other
three ProcA substrates. Second, whereas all Lan and MeLan residues
in Pcn1.1, Pcn1.7, and Pcn3.3 were formed in high stereochemical purity
with the same stereochemistry (dl), the Lan in Pcn4.3 was
decidedly less pure and contained ∼20% of the ll diastereomer.
As shown in Figure , the A-ring of Pcn4.3
contains two Gly residues between the Dha and Cys that form this lanthionine,
and perhaps the resulting increased conformational freedom allows
enzymatic cyclization that results in protonation of the enolate from
the opposite face. Alternatively, the lower stereochemical fidelity
of cyclization of this particular Lan structure could be the result
of nonenzymatic cyclization as discussed below.

The determination
of the ring topologies of four different prochlorosins
in this study demonstrates the remarkable substrate flexibility of
the ProcM enzyme. Inspection of Figure  illustrates
that the structures of the four selected prochlorosins do not exhibit
any similarity to each other or to any other known lantibiotics/lantipeptides. The rings generated by ProcM contain very different
numbers of amino acids, from four residues in the A-rings of Pcn1.7
and Pcn4.3 to 11 residues in the A-ring of Pcn3.3. Furthermore, the
rings are generated either from a Cys that is located N-terminally
to the dehydro amino acid with which it reacts (A-ring of Pcn 1.1
and B-ring of Pcn3.3) or from a Cys located C-terminally of its partner
dehydro amino acid (all other rings). Finally, Pcn1.1 and -4.3 have
nonoverlapping rings; Pcn1.7 has overlapping rings, and Pcn3.3 contains
a ring within a ring. Although many lantipeptide cyclases achieve
formation of different sized rings with different topologies, ProcM,
and presumably its many orthologs in the world’s oceans, is
unique in that it acts on so many different substrates.

It was
this unprecedented flexibility that led to a proposal that
perhaps the enzyme generates only a subset of the rings and that the
partially cyclized intermediates would have a preorganized structure
for nonenzymatic cyclization of the remaining rings. This proposal was bolstered by the previously observed
facile nonenzymatic intramolecular addition of Cys to dehydro amino
acids located N-terminal to the Cys residue.− These model studies of nonenzymatic cyclization showed that formation
of individual small rings is often stereoselective and results in
the same stereochemistry that is observed for enzymatic cyclization.
However, for larger rings or multiple-ring structures, nonenzymatic
cyclization has been shown to give mixtures of diastereomers and/or
constitutional isomers,,, and cyclization involving a Cys located N-terminally to its partner
dehydro amino acid has been shown to be nonstereoselective. Therefore, in this investigation, the stereochemistry
of the Lan and MeLan structures of prochlorosins was determined to
test for nonenzymatic cyclization. The GC–MS data clearly illustrate
that the Lan residues in prochlorosins have the (2S,6R) configuration and that the MeLan residues have
the (2S,3S,6R)
configuration. These configurations are the same as those found for
all lantibiotics for which the stereochemistry has been determined. As discussed above, the only exception was the
Lan in Pcn4.3, which had a 4:1 ratio of dl and ll diastereomers. Although these results do not rule out nonenzymatic
cyclization, they also do not provide support for nonenzymatic cyclization,
and on the basis of the data in this study on seven prochlorosins
with very different ring structures, we favor a model in which ProcM
does generate all thioether cross-links. One interesting unique aspect
of ProcM and its orthologs is the fact that on the basis of sequence
alignments, its catalytic Zn2+ is liganded by three Cys
residues rather than the two Cys residues and one His residue that
are found for all other LanM and LanC lanthionine cyclases investigated
thus far.− The Zn2+ has been proposed to activate the Cys residues
of the substrate for nucleophilic attack on the dehydro amino acids. Model studies of activation of thiolate nucleophiles
by Zn2+ have demonstrated increased reactivity with an
increased number of thiolate ligands.− Therefore, ProcM may derive its promiscuity
in part from a highly active Zn2+ site with three Cys ligands
from ProcM and one Cys ligand from the substrate.

In summary,
we report here the NMR structures of four prochlorosins
and show for seven prochlorosins that they contain Lan and MeLan residues
with the same configuration that is found in other lantibiotics and
lantipeptides. These data suggest that most, if not all, of the rings
are generated by the ProcM enzyme despite the remarkable structural
diversity of its products.

Supporting Information Available
Additional data and experimental
details. This material is available free of charge via the Internet
at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bi300255s_si_001.pdf

The authors declare
no
competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
We thank Ms. Yanxiang Shi and Ms. Xiao Yang for the preparation
of coexpression vectors for ProcA2.8, ProcA4.3G–1R, and ProcA4.3G–1E,
Jennifer Rapp and Feng Lin for assistance with acquisition of the
NMR spectra, Dr. Alexander V. Ulanov for help with GC–MS, and
Prof. Chad Rienstra for helpful discussions.

Abbreviations
Lanlanthionine

MeLanmethyllanthionine

Dhadehydroalanine

Dhbdehydrobutyrine

Pcnprochlorosin

MALDI-TOF MSmatrix-assisted
laser desorption ionization time-of-flight mass spectrometry

IMACimmobilized metal affinity
chromatography.

