Skp1 from the social amoeba Dictyostelium is subject to posttranslational modification
in the form of prolyl hydroxylation at Pro143 and subsequent glycosylation
resulting in, ultimately, assembly of a defined linear pentasaccharide
(see Figure A). Genes for each of the enzymes catalyzing these reactions have been
cloned and disrupted, and characterization of the mutants has revealed
a role for the modification pathway in O2 regulation of
starvation-induced development.− Recent studies have indicated
that the Skp1 modification pathway has an O2-sensing role
in the regulation of proliferation of the intracellular parasite Toxoplasma gondii.

Skp1 isoforms.
(A) Skp1 is modified stepwise by the indicated enzymes
in Dictyostelium. PhyA is a prolyl 4-trans-hydroxylase, Gnt1 an α-GlcNAc-transferase, PgtA a dual-function
β3-galactosyltransferase/α2-fucosyltransferase, and AgtA
a dual-function α-galactosyltransferase. The primary structure
of the linear Gal-Gal-Fuc-Gal-GalcNAc pentasaccharide appended to
Pro143 of Skp1 is represented below the pathway schematic, and the
full glycan is abbreviated as GGFGGn. (B) Coomassie blue-stained SDS–PAGE
gel of purified Skp1 isoforms. Note the reduced mobility of higher
glycoforms. (C) Western blots using isoform-specific antibodies. (D)
MALDI-TOF MS analysis of Skp1 isoforms. Expected and observed average m/z values and m/z differences relative to the panel above are indicated.
The peak corresponding to a matrix adduct is indicated in the third
panel.

A major function of Skp1 is as
an adapter in the Skp1/cullin1/F-box
protein (SCF) family of E3 ubiquitin ligase complexes, linking the
Cul1 scaffold protein to an exchangeable F-box protein (FBP) that
targets substrate proteins, or the FBP itself, for polyubiquitination. The covalent attachment of ubiquitin and subsequent
assembly of a Lys48-linked polyubiquitin chain is a signal for proteasomal
degradation. The SCF complex is diversified
by the existence of multiple FBPs, which range in number from ∼20
in yeast to 70 in humans and 800 in some plants, with each FBP potentially recognizing multiple targets
for polyubiquitination. Some substrates
are activated by phosphorylation or glycosylation. The SCF E3 ligases
themselves are also regulated by neddylation of cullin-1, which influences docking of the Skp1/FBP subcomplex
with cullin-1, but what is missing is a mechanism specific to the
SCF class of cullin ring ligases. Selective regulation may involve
its unique subunit Skp1, which is subject to prolyl hydroxylation,
glycosylation, and phosphorylation in different organisms and is represented
by a gene family in others., Indeed, the interaction
of Skp1 with some FBPs appears to be regulated in cells., Though the Skp1–F-box interface is hydrophobic and characterized
by a high affinity, the potential for equilibrative exchange is suggested
by in vitro studies and
the observation that some FBPs form distinct complexes with Skp1 and
other proteins in cells.

Structural
studies of Skp1 in complex with six different FBPs reveal
a common mode of interaction that involves the 70 C-terminal amino
acids of Skp1 with so-called core and variable subregions., Pro143 is located at the start of a stretch that in some cases folds
into an α-helix that contributes to the variable component of
the interface but can exhibit alternative
secondary structure and is thus positioned
to influence the conformation of Skp1 and its interaction with F-box
domains. However, the conformation of native Skp1 is not known because
of its recalcitrance to crystallization. Solution studies indicate
that the FBP Fbs1 (also known as Fbg1 or OCP1), which is unusual in
its solubility in the absence of Skp1, confers conformational order
to unstructured regions of Skp1 upon binding. This effect is reminiscent of the Skp1 homologue elongin C that,
based on nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) studies, exhibits dynamic
flexibility that is stabilized by the binding of a von Hippel–Lindau
peptide or elongin A.,

These observations led
to our hypothesis that the glycosylation
of Skp1 has an impact on interactions with FBPs because of intrinsic
effects on its conformation. To address this, we first developed methods
for preparing milligram quantities of homogeneous glycoforms, using
a combination strategy of co-expressing untagged Skp1 in Escherichia
coli with its early modification enzymes and in vitro extension of the monosaccharide with recombinant enzymes. While
all Skp1 isoforms were competent to bind Fbs1, glycosylated glycoforms
bound preferentially. This correlated with an increased level of secondary
structure and order as indicated by CD and SAXS experiments and with
a decreased level of homodimerization. We suggest that the conformational
changes in Skp1 induced by glycosylation are responsible for enhanced
binding to Fbs1 and propose that this represents a novel form of specific
regulation of E3SCFUb ligases and contributes to the role
of Skp1 glycosylation in O2 sensing in cells.

Experimental
Procedures
Expression and Purification of Unmodified and Hydroxylated Skp1
in E. coli
Unmodified Skp1A (without peptide
tags) was expressed and purified as previously described. For the expression of HO-Skp1, plasmid pET19b-Skp1A-PhyA
was constructed by excision of the full-length PhyA cDNA containing
an N-terminal His6 tag from pET15TEVi-PhyA, using HindIII and BglII, and ligation into the HindIII and BamHI sites of pET19b-Skp1A, generating
a dual-expression plasmid termed pET19b-Skp1A-PhyA. pET19b-Skp1A-PhyA
(AmpR) was transformed into E. coli Gold
BL21 Competent Cells. At an OD600 of 0.5–0.6 in
LB-ampicillin, Skp1A and His6PhyA co-expression was induced
by addition of 1 mM IPTG at 22 °C. After 16 h, cells were recovered
in 20 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.0) and resuspended in cell lysis buffer [100
mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.2), 5 mM benzamidine, 0.5 μg/mL pepstatin
A, 5 μg/mL aprotinin, 5 μg/mL leupeptin, 0.5 mM PMSF,
and 1 mg/mL lysozyme] on ice using a Dounce tissue grinder. Cells
were lysed using a French pressure cell and supplemented with 10 μg/mL
DNase I and 50 μg/mL RNase A (final concentrations). The lysate
was centrifuged at 100000g and 4 °C for 1 h.
The supernatant was purified by successive chromatography over DEAE-Sepharose
Fast Flow, Phenyl-Sepharose Fast Flow (Hi-Sub), Q-Sepharose High Performance,
and Superdex 200 HiLoad 16/60 columns under nondenaturing conditions
as described previously. Essentially,
quantitative hydroxylation of Skp1A was confirmed by Western blotting
with pAb UOK87 and pAb UOK85, which selectively recognize Skp1 and
HO-Skp1, respectively, and detection of
unmodified and hydroxylated peptides, after digestion with endo Lys-C,
by MALDI-TOF-TOF MS using α-cyanocinnamic acid as the matrix.

Expression and Purification of Gn-Skp1 in E. coli
Expression plasmid pACYCDuet-DdDpGnt1 was
constructed by
excision of the chimeric DdDpGnt1 coding sequence (a chimeric Gnt1
constructed from sequences of two closely related Dictyostelium species, D. discoideum and D. purpureum) from pDEST527-DdDpGnt1 using HindIII and MluI, followed by ligation
into the first MCS of pACYCDuet-1 (EMD Millipore) using the same restriction
sites. pACYCDuet-DdDpGnt1 (CmR) and pET19b-Skp1A-PhyA
(AmpR) were cotransformed into E. coli Gold BL21 Competent Cells. Expression and purification were performed
as described for HO-Skp1. Glycosylation of Skp1A was confirmed by
Western blotting with pAb UOK85 and mAb 1C9, which selectively recognize
HO-Skp1 and Gn-Skp1, respectively, and
by direct analysis of the highly purified protein by MALDI-TOF-TOF
MS.

Preparation and Purification of FGGn-Skp1
The full-length
cDNA for the dual-function glycosyltransferase PgtA was amplified from pTYCBD-FT by polymerase chain reaction using primers 5′-GCAGATCTATGAATGATTCACCAATAATAAGTGTAGTT-3′
and 5′-CGTGATCATTAAGAAATAAAAAGTTCACCAATATGAACAC-3′
and ligated into pCR4-TOPO (Invitrogen). The pgtA cDNA was excised by digestion with BglII and SpeI (underlined in primer sequences) and ligated into a
similarly digested extrachromosomal pDM320 vector (gift of Y. Abu-Kwaik), designed to introduce a FLAG tag
at the N-terminus of PgtA (sequence). The pDM320-FLAG-PgtA vector
was electroporated into the D. discoideum strain
Ax3. Transformed cells were selected
under 20 μg/mL G418 without being cloned and grown to a density
of 1 × 108 cells/mL. An S100 cytosolic fraction was
prepared from 1 L of culture medium, and FLAG-PgtA was purified on
a 90 mL DEAE-Sepharose Fast Flow anion exchange column as described
previously. Eluted DEAE fractions containing
FLAG-PgtA, as determined by Western blotting with anti-FLAG M2 Ab,
were applied to a column containing 250 μL of M2-EZ view beads
(Sigma) equilibrated in 50 mM HEPES (pH 7.4), 15% (v/v) glycerol,
150 mM NaCl, 5 mM MgCl2, 0.1 mM EDTA, 1 mM DTT, 5 μg/mL
aprotinin, and 5 μg/mL leupeptin, washed under gravity flow
with equilibration buffer, and eluted with 300 μL aliquots of
0.1 mg/mL 3×-FLAG peptide in equilibration buffer.

Gn-Skp1
(4 mg) was incubated with FLAG-PgtA (5% of the yield from the preparation
described above) in 50 mM HEPES-NaOH (pH 7.4), 100 mM NaCl, 15 mM
MgCl2, 2 mM MnCl2, 2 mM DTT, 0.1% (v/v) Tween
20, 2 mM ATP, 3 mM NaF, 0.004 unit/mL calf intestinal phosphatase,
15 μM GDP-Fuc, and 15 μM UDP-Gal for 18 h at 22 °C.
Reaction progress was monitored by the disappearance of binding by
mAb 1C9 (recognizes Gn-Skp1 but not GGn-Skp1 or FGGn-Skp1) in a dot-blot
protocol.

The reaction mixture was extensively dialyzed against
50 mM Tris-HCl
(pH 7.4), 0.1 mM EDTA, and 1 mM DTT and loaded onto a 1 mL Q-Sepharose
HiTrap column (GE Healthcare) equilibrated in the same buffer. PgtA-modified
Skp1 was eluted using a gradient from 0 to 300 mM NaCl in the same
buffer. Formation of FGGn-Skp1 was verified by MALDI-TOF MS using
DHB matrix and SDS–PAGE analysis after staining with Coomassie
Brilliant Blue.

Preparation and Purification of GGFGGn-Skp1
His6AgtA was prepared in E. coli and
purified
on a 1 mL Ni2+-Sepharose HiTrap column as described previously. Fractions containing His6AgtA were
identified using an anti-His mAb (Novagen) in a dot-blot protocol
and immediately chromatographed at 4 °C on a Superdex 200 HiLoad
size-exclusion column in 50 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.0), 0.2 mM EDTA, and
5 mM β-mercaptoethanol.

FGGn-Skp1 was incubated at 22
°C with His6AgtA in 50 mM HEPES-NaOH (pH 7.2), 50
mM NaCl, 2 mM MnCl2, 5 mM DTT, and 20 μM UDP-Gal.
After 24 h, the mixture was dialyzed for 6 h at 4 °C in the same
buffer lacking UDP-Gal, and the reaction was continued for an additional
24 h after the mixture had been supplemented with additional equal
amounts of His6AgtA and UDP-Gal. Reaction progress was
monitored by MALDI-TOF MS. After &gt;95% modification, Skp1 was purified
from His6AgtA on a Superdex 200 HiLoad column at 22 °C
in 50 mM HEPES-NaOH (pH 7.2), 50 mM NaCl, 2 mM MnCl2, and
1 mM DTT. Essentially complete formation of the expected product was
confirmed by MALDI-TOF MS analysis of intact Skp1 and after endo Lys-C
digestion as described above.

Ni2+-Sepharose
Pull-Down Assay
His6Fbs1 was expressed and purified
as previously described. Skp1 isoforms
(0.1 μM) were preincubated
with 1 mg/mL bovine serum albumin in the presence or absence of His6Fbs1 (0.3 μM) for 1.5 h at 4 °C in pull-down buffer
containing 20 mM imidazole, 50 mM HEPES-NaOH (pH 7.4), 250 mM NaCl,
1 mM MgCl2, 0.1 mM EDTA, 1 mM DTT, 10 μg/mL aprotinin,
and 10 μg/mL leupeptin. Ten microliters was used to resuspend
10 μL of packed Ni2+-Sepharose HP beads (GE Healthcare).
After rotation for 1.5 h at 4 °C, beads were collected by centrifugation
at 2000g for 1 min and washed three times with 150
μL of pull-down buffer, exchanging tubes after the first wash.
Beads were then boiled in SDS–PAGE sample buffer for 3 min
and analyzed by SDS–PAGE and Western blotting using an anti-His
mAb (Novagen) or the pan-specific Skp1 mAb 4E1, and Alexa-680-conjugated
rabbit anti-mouse IgG. Fluorescence was detected using an Odyssey
infrared scanner (Li-Cor), and images were densitometrically analyzed
using ImageJ (version 1.47, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda,
MD), at intensity levels that were linearly related to input protein
levels.

Analytical Gel Filtration Chromatography
Skp1 (and
isoforms) at 2 μM with or without His6Fbs1 at a limiting
concentration of 1.5 μM was preincubated for 1 h at 4 °C
in a total reaction volume of 100 μL of column buffer containing
20 mM HEPES-NaOH (pH 7.4), 150 mM NaCl, 5 mM MgCl2, 0.1
mM EDTA, and 1 mM DTT. Of the 100 μL reaction mixture, 50 μL
was injected onto a Superdex 200 PC 3.2/30 column using Pharmacia
SMARTSystem high-performance liquid chromatography at a flow rate
of 80 μL/min in column buffer. Fractions of 50 μL were
collected and analyzed by SDS–PAGE, Western blotting, and densitometry
as described above.

Circular Dichroism
Skp1 and its
various isoforms were
purified essentially to homogeneity and extensively dialyzed simultaneously
against CD buffer [20 mM sodium phosphate (pH 7.4), 50 mM NaCl, 1
mM MgCl2, 0.1 mM EDTA, and 1 mM TCEP]. Prior to analysis,
samples were filtered through a Corning Costar Spin-X 0.22 μm
cellulose acetate microcentrifuge tube filter. Far-UV (ultraviolet)
CD spectra were recorded for each protein at 0.2 mg/mL in 210 μL
of CD buffer in a N2-purged 1.0 mm quartz cuvette on a
Jasco J-715 spectropolarimeter equipped with a Jasco PTC-348WI Peltier
temperature controller operated at a 1.0 nm bandwidth in 1 nm steps
from 200 to 260 nm. Three spectra were summed for the final readout.
For secondary structure prediction, the Jasco mdeg data files were
converted into molar ellipticity per residue and analyzed using three
predictors (SELCON3, CDSSTR, and CONTINLL) in CDPro (http://lamar.colostate.edu/∼sreeram/CDPro/main.html) using reference file no. 4 for soluble, nonmembrane proteins. Thermal
denaturation experiments were performed by monitoring the ellipticity
at 220 nm from 20 to 95 °C, and vice versa, at a rate of 2 °C/min.
Thermal denaturation data were fit to a two-state Boltzmann sigmoidal
model using GraphPad Prism (GraphPad Software, La Jolla, CA) to obtain
the reported thermal unfolding midpoint temperatures (Tm).

CD data have been deposited at the Protein Circular
Dichroism Data Bank (PCDDB) located at http://pcddb.cryst.bbk.ac.uk. The sample codes are as follows: unmodified DdSkp1A, CD0004330000;
HO-Skp1, CD0004331000; Gn-Skp1, CD0004332000; FGGn-Skp1, CD0004333000;
GGFGGn-Skp1, CD0004334000.

Small-Angle X-ray Scattering
Frozen,
unmodified, and
fully glycosylated Skp1 samples were thawed and extensively dialyzed
against SAXS buffer [50 mM HEPES-NaOH (pH 7.4), 50 mM NaCl, 2 mM MnCl2, 1 mM TCEP, and 3% (v/v) glycerol]. Samples were immediately
shipped to Stanford Synchrotron Radiation Lightsource (SSRL) beamline
4-2 on ice packs and, just prior to the
collection of SAXS data, were centrifuged through a Corning Costar
Spin-X 0.22 μm cellulose acetate microcentrifuge tube filter.
Scattering data were collected over a concentration range of 1.2–9.4
mg/mL for unmodified Skp1 and 1.5–3.0 mg/mL for fully modified
Skp1 in 30 μL volumes at 10 °C in oscillating quartz cuvettes
with a Rayonix MX255-HE detector. Samples were loaded with a custom-built
liquid handling robot. The X-ray wavelength
was 1.1263 Å. The sample to detector distance was set to 1700
mm. Twelve 1 s exposures were recorded for each sample. SAXS data
were collected from buffer samples between each protein sample. SAXS
curves [I(q) vs q, where I(q) is the scattering
intensity, q = 4π sin θ/λ, 2θ
is the scattering angle, and λ is the X-ray wavelength] were
generated from image files using SAXSPipe (SSRL). The scattering curves
from successive images were compared to check for radiation damage
before being averaged together. Averaging and buffer subtraction were
performed using PRIMUS. Guinier analysis in PRIMUS was used to screen for
concentration-dependent effects on the radius of gyration (Rg); the SAXS curves from concentrations showing
linearity in the Guinier regions were averaged, and Kratky and P(r) function plots were generated using GNOM(,) to determine the maximal particle
distance, Dmax. Molecular weight estimation
using the experimental SAXS curves was performed using the “SAXS
MoW” online web tool (http://www.if.sc.usp.br/∼saxs/saxsmow.html) and SCÅTTER version 1.7i (http://www.bioisis.net/scatter) for comparison. For each protein, 10 independent ab initio molecular envelopes were generated using DAMMIF() in “slow” mode imposing P2 symmetry using the scattering data from the highest-concentration
sample. The 10 models were aligned, averaged, and filtered by a cutoff
volume (the averaged volume of the models) using DAMAVER. Figures were prepared using PyMOL. SAXS data have been
deposited at http://www.bioisis.net. Reference codes are
SKP1UP (unmodified DdSkp1A) and SKP1FP (Dd-GGFGGn-Skp1A).

Glycan Modeling
The Skp1 glycan conformation was modeled
using the GLYCAM Carbohydrate Builder at http://glycam.ccrc.uga.edu. The predicted Galα1,2Galα1,3Fucα1,2Galβ1,3GlcNAcα-
structure was used.

Chemical Cross-Linking
Skp1 preparations at 0.2, 2,
or 3 μM were mixed with the nonspecific chemical cross-linking
reagent disuccinimidyl suberate [DSS (Thermo Scientific/Pierce)] at
either 0.1 or 1 mM in cross-linking buffer [20 mM HEPES-NaOH (pH 7.4),
150 mM NaCl, and 0.1 mM EDTA] in the presence or absence of 5 mM MgCl2. Reaction mixtures were incubated at room temperature for
5 min and reactions quenched by the addition of 1 M Tris-HCl (pH 7.4)
to a final concentration of 50 mM. Samples were analyzed by gel filtration
as described above or SDS–PAGE followed by staining with Coomassie
Brilliant Blue or Western blotting using the pan-specific Skp1 mAb
4E1 and Alexa-680-conjugated rabbit anti-mouse IgG. Fluorescence was
quantitated as described above.

Results
Preparation
of Skp1 Isoforms
Previous studies on Skp1
isoforms have been constrained by the availability of native material
that can be isolated from Dictyostelium, so recombinant
methods were developed to generate adequate quantities for biophysical
and biochemical studies. Native Dictyostelium Skp1A
is expressed well in E. coli() and was purified to near homogeneity under nondenaturing conditions
based on DEAE-Sepharose, phenyl Sepharose, Q-Sepharose, and gel filtration
chromatographies. Epitope tags were not employed because of evidence
of interference with Skp1 modifications in cells. HO-Skp1 was prepared by co-expression of DdPhyA from a
dual-expression plasmid with Skp1 in E. coli and
purified in the same way. Gn-Skp1 was similarly prepared from an E. coli strain harboring a second plasmid encoding DdGnt1.
Because DdPgtA was not expressed well as a soluble active enzyme in E. coli, FLAG-PgtA was transiently overexpressed in Dictyostelium, partially purified by DEAE ion exchange chromatography
and anti-FLAG affinity chromatography, and used to quantitatively
convert Gn-Skp1 to FGGn-Skp1 in vitro. FGGn-Skp1
was repurified, and assembly of the final pentasaccharide isoform
was achieved by incubation with purified Dd-His6AgtA prepared
from E. coli. Examples of preparations used for this
study are shown using SDS–PAGE gels stained for total protein
(Figure B). A decreasing
mobility corresponds to higher glycosylation states. The modification
status of Skp1 was confirmed by Western blot analysis using isoform-specific
antibodies (Figure C) and MALDI-TOF MS of
the intact protein (Figure D). MALDI-TOF MS
analysis of proteolytic fragments generated by endo Lys-C confirmed
that the modifications occurred on Pro143 as expected (data not shown).

The FBP Fbs1 Preferentially Binds Glycosylated Skp1s
To
test the functionality of the recombinantly expressed Skp1 isoforms,
we prepared the naturally soluble mammalian FBP His6Fbs1,
also known as Fbg1 and OCP1, from E. coli as an expected
Skp1 binding partner. Previous biophysical studies showed that Fbs1
and mammalian Skp1 form a high-affinity 1:1 complex. Pull-down studies with Ni2+ beads showed that
each Skp1 isoform was fully competent at 0.1 μM to bind Fbs1
in a 3-fold concentration excess, indicative of normal function (Figure A). This interaction was analyzed in 20 mM imidazole
and high salt (250 mM) to prevent intrinsic binding of Skp1 to the
beads, potentially mediated by an internal His-rich region, R(59)HHHQHP.

Skp1 binds
guinea pig Fbs1. (A) Ni2+-Sepharose pull-down
assay using 0.3 μM His6Fbs1 and purified Skp1 isoforms
(0.1 μM), labeled according to the substitution status of Pro143.
Data derive from densitometric analysis of Western blots. Average
values ± SEM from two independent trials are shown. (B) His6Fbs1 (1.5 μM) and a pool of three Skp1 isoforms (Skp1,
HO-Skp1, and Gn-Skp1, 2 μM each) were fractionated on a Superdex
200 gel filtration column separately or after preincubation. Elution
was monitored by A280, which favors detection
of Fbs1 because of its higher extinction coefficient. Elution positions
for bovine serum albumin (66000) and carbonic anhydrase (29000) are
indicated. (C) Western blots of the fractions using the pan-specific
anti-Skp1 mAb 4E1 or the isoform-specific antibodies shown in Figure C. (D) Densitometric analysis of the data depicted
in panel C. (E) Similar gel filtration experiment with His6Fbs1 and a mixture of Skp1 and GGFGGn-Skp1 monitored by SDS–PAGE
and silver staining. As indicated by the double bar, GGFGGn-Skp1 migrates
more slowly than Skp1 during SDS–PAGE. (F) Densitometric analysis
of the data depicted in panel E. Also included are data, denoted with
an asterisk, from probing a parallel Western blot for unmodified Skp1
using pAb UOK87. Results similar to those in panels C and E were obtained
in independent experiments.

To probe for possible differential binding in a more physiological
buffer, a pool of three Skp1 isoforms (unmodified, HO-Skp1, and Gn-Skp1,
2 μM each) was preincubated in the absence or presence of a
limiting concentration of Fbs1 and subjected to gel filtration in
column buffer [20 mM HEPES-NaOH (pH 7.4), 150 mM NaCl, 5 mM MgCl2, 0.1 mM EDTA, and 1 mM DTT]. As shown in Figure B, His6Fbs1 eluted as a nearly symmetrical
peak corresponding approximately to its monomeric Mr value of 35000, with a shoulder potentially corresponding
to the previously reported homodimer. Skp1 (unmodified Mr = 18710) eluted
as a symmetrical peak between that of Fbs1 and the Mr = 29000 globular standard, which is likely due to partial
dimerization, a high axial ratio, and a partially unfolded state,
leading to an increased apparent volume, as discussed below. Western
blot analysis of the fractions using isoform-specific antibodies and
densitometry showed that Skp1 isoforms eluted in fractions 12 and
13 (Figure C,D), with unmodified Skp1 showing
a slightly enhanced presence in fraction 12 versus fraction 13, consistent
with a stronger tendency to dimerize (see below). Preincubation of
Fbs1 and the Skp1 pool resulted in an earlier eluting peak that depleted
the Fbs1 and Skp1 peaks, consistent with formation of a stable complex.
The peak eluted after the Mr = 66000 standard,
consistent with a 1:1 stoichiometry as previously reported for mammalian
Skp1, contained His6Fbs1 based
on Western blotting (not shown), and was followed by a trailing shoulder.
Western blot analysis and densitometry showed that of the three Skp1
isoforms, Gn-Skp1 was most heavily represented in peak fraction 10,
whereas HO-Skp1 was most heavily represented in fraction 11 and unmodified
Skp1 in fraction 12 (Figure E,F). Thus, Gn-Skp1
preferentially associated in this competitive setting in which the
Fbs1 concentration was limiting.

To extend the analysis, Fbs1
(1.5 μM) and a mixture of unmodified
and fully glycosylated GGFGGn-Skp1 (2.5 μM each) were analyzed
similarly using silver staining because specific probes are not available
for the longer glycoforms (Figure E). As in
the experiment depicted in Figure C, the Skp1
mixture alone eluted in fractions 12 and 13 and emerged earlier in
the presence of Fbs1. On the basis of densitometric analysis (Figure F), the peak elution position of GGFGGn-Skp1 shifted
to fraction 11 whereas that of unmodified Skp1 remained in fraction
12, and proportionately more GGFGGn-Skp1 than unmodified Skp1 emerged
in fraction 10. The elution profile of unmodified Skp1 was confirmed
by Western blotting using pAb UOK87 (Figure F). Although it was not feasible to differentiate GGFGGn-Skp1 and
Gn-Skp1 in the same run, comparison of elution positions between runs
(Figure D,F) suggests that Fbs1 preferentially
associates with Gn-Skp1. Thus, a hierarchy of Fbs1 association was
observed: Gn-Skp1 &gt; GGFGGn-Skp1 ≥ HO-Skp1 &gt; Skp1.

Glycosylation
Alters the Secondary Structure Composition
To investigate
the basis for preferential binding of glycosylated
isoforms of Skp1 to Fbs1, their conformations were assessed using
circular dichroism (CD) spectroscopy (Figure A). When compared at the same concentration in the same phosphate-based
CD buffer, all isoforms exhibited differential far-UV absorption from
200 to 245 nm, with discrete minima at 208–222 nm indicative
of β-strand and α-helical secondary structure, consistent
with previous studies of guinea pig and Dictyostelium Skp1s., Whereas Skp1 and HO-Skp1 exhibited indistinguishable
spectra, Gn-Skp1 showed increased negative ellipticity indicative
of a substantially increased level of secondary structure under these
buffer conditions that correlated with an increased level of binding
to Fbs1. This difference is unlikely to be contributed directly by
the sugar moiety given the typically low mean residue ellipticity
of glycans., FGGn-Skp1 was indistinguishable
from Gn-Skp1, whereas fully modified GGFGGn-Skp1 exhibited intermediate
values also correlated with an increased level of Fbs1 binding. Secondary
structure deconvolution analysis indicated that addition of α-GlcNAc
results in greater α-helical content, at the partial expense
of β-sheet content (Figure B). To a
lesser extent, this trend was maintained by the pentasaccharide-modified
glycoform, which correlated with slightly less apparent Fbs1 binding
potential. In comparison, a previous study reported a higher α-helical
content of unmodified Dictyostelium Skp1 when the analysis was conducted in a no-salt
Tris buffer [10 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.4), 5 mM MgCl2, 0.1 mM
EDTA, and 1 mM DTT], in comparison to the more physiological and CD-compatible
buffer [20 mM sodium phosphate (pH 7.4), 50 mM NaCl, 1 mM MgCl2, 0.1 mM EDTA, and 1 mM TCEP] employed for the present comparison.
Conformational sensitivity to ionic strength is known for other proteins
(e.g., ref ()).

Circular
dichroism spectroscopy of Skp1 isoforms. (A) CD spectra
of Skp1 isoforms (10 μM) in CD buffer. Replicates of samples
subjected to additional freeze–thaw cycle are included. Replicate
studies on independent protein preparations qualitatively confirmed
these differences (data not shown). (B) Secondary structure analysis
using three predictors (SELCON3, CDSSTR, and CONTINLL) agreed within
7%. The averages of estimates for α-helix, β-sheet, β-turn,
and disordered content are plotted as a function of Skp1 modification
status. (C) Thermal denaturation of Skp1 isoforms monitored by ellipticity
at 220 nm. Data were proportionately scaled to similar initial and
terminal values to facilitate comparison. Apparent Tm values based on the inflection between 50 and 80 °C
are listed.

Energetic Analyses
To examine the thermodynamic consequences
of these differences, thermal denaturation experiments were conducted
in CD buffer by monitoring ellipticity at 220 nm. As shown in Figure C, Skp1 (black trace) exhibited a gradual loss of
secondary structure upon being heated from 22 to 95 °C, with
a modest inflection at 64 °C indicative of cooperative partial
loss of secondary structure, consistent with previous studies., Indistinguishable results were obtained for the other isoforms,
which were scaled to facilitate comparison in Figure C. As shown previously for Skp1,, temperature-dependent unfolding is largely reversible for all isoforms
(data not shown). Thus, the similar thermal instabilities indicate
similar energetics of folding, suggesting that glycosylation influences
secondary structure in an energy neutral way that may allow facile
interconversion between α-helix- and β-sheet-rich conformations.

Glycosylation Increases the Folding Order and Alters the Overall
Shape
Small-angle X-ray scattering (SAXS) experiments were
performed on unmodified and fully glycosylated Skp1 in solution to
interpret the impact of secondary structure changes and glycosylation
on Skp1 structure and conformation. Studies were conducted in SAXS
buffer [50 mM HEPES-NaOH (pH 7.4), 50 mM NaCl, 2 mM MnCl2, 1 mM TCEP, and 3% glycerol], which had an ionic strength (12% increase)
similar to that of CD buffer but employed a different buffer type.
Other experimental parameters are listed in Table . To address potential concentration-dependent effects, SAXS
exposures were conducted on a series of Skp1 dilutions. The scattering
curves showed no evidence of aggregates and interparticle effects
at very low q values. The Guinier analysis of the
SAXS curves revealed linearity in the
low-q regions (where qRg &lt; 1.3), indicating that samples were monodisperse and free from
aggregation (Figure A). The parallel plots
indicate no change in the radius of gyration (Rg) with a change in concentration. The Guinier plots also showed
that the Rg of Skp1 was 11.4% larger when
it was fully modified (Figure A and Table ). The experimental SAXS data shown in the Guinier
plots were averaged (Figure B) and then transformed
into Kratky plots [q2I(q) vs q]. The Kratky plots showed
that both proteins exhibited typical globular behavior at 60–460
μM, with a bell-shaped curve at low q values
(Figure C). However, unmodified Skp1 displayed
increasing values of q2I(q) at higher q values, indicating
a larger unfolded component. This interpretation
was confirmed by analysis of the Porod–Debye plot of the scattering
data (Figure D), where the Porod–Debye
plateau of GGFGGn-Skp1 implies a homogeneous conformation and the
continuing rise for unmodified Skp1 indicates flexibility. Pairwise distance distribution functions [P(r)] of the averaged SAXS curves were
calculated (Figure E), and inverse Fourier
transformations showed excellent agreement with the experimental data
(Figure B, red traces). The P(r) plots revealed an increased maximal particle
size (Dmax) for fully glycosylated Skp1,
independent of concentration (Figure C and
Table ). Three independent methods of Mr estimation for unmodified Skp1 were in close
agreement and yielded an average value of 39300, similar to the expected Mr (37174) of a Skp1 dimer (Table ). The calculations for GGFGGn-Skp1 yielded an average increment
of 4200, which contrasts with the expected difference of 1704 (852
× 2). Thus, increased Rg, Dmax, and Mr values
were consistent with the covalent addition of the pentasaccharide;
the Skp1s were dimeric, and unmodified Skp1 was partially disorganized.

SAXS analysis
of Skp1 and GGFGGn-Skp1. Skp1 and GGFGGn-Skp1 were
analyzed at concentrations of 60–460 μM in SAXS buffer.
(A) Guinier analysis at different Skp1 concentrations, where q = 4π sin θ/λ (2θ is the scattering
angle and λ the X-ray wavelength). (B) Scattering intensity
plots averaged from the concentrations shown in panel A, for unmodified
Skp1 (black) and GGFGGn-Skp1 (blue). Fourier transformations of the
scattering data are shown as the P(r) functions in panel E; the red traces represent the inverse Fourier
transformations of the P(r) functions.
(C) Kratky plots of Skp1 were generated from the averaged data shown
in panel B. (D) Porod–Debye representation of the data shown
in panel B. (E) Pairwise distance distribution functions of the averaged
data.

Data Collection and
Scattering-Derived
Parameters
 	unmodified Skp1	GGFGGn-Skp1	
Data Collection
Parameters	
beamline	SSRL beamline 4-2	
beam geometry	0.3 mm × 0.3 mm, pinhole camera	
detector	Rayonix MX255-HE	
wavelength (Å)	1.1263	
q range (Å–1)	0.03–0.30	
exposure time (s)	12 × 1	
temperature (K)	283	
concentration range (mg/mL)	1.2–9.4	1.5–3.0	
Structural Parameters	
I(0) (real space)	7438 ± 3	3191 ± 6	
Rg (Å) (real space)	25.3 ± 0.1	27.2 ± 0.1	
I(0)
(Guinier)	7130 ± 10	3158 ± 7	
Rg (Å) (Guinier)	23.9 ± 1.1	26.6 ± 0.6	
Dmax (Å)	79	91	
Porod volume estimate (Å3)	64693	76000	
DAMMIF volume (Å3)	87753	98971	
mean NSD of 10 DAMMIF models	0.750 ± 0.080	0.728 ± 0.059	
Molecular Mass
Determination	
calculated
monomeric Mr from sequence	18587	19481	
molecular mass Mr estimate	 	 	
from SAXS
MoW	38800	46400	
from SCÅTTER (real space)	38800	40200	
from SCÅTTER (Guinier)	40300	43900	
Software	
primary
data reduction	SAXSPipe (SSRL)	
data processing	PRIMUS, GNOM, SCÅTTER, SAXS
MoW	
ab initio analysis	DAMMIF	
validation and averaging	DAMAVER	
three-dimensional graphics representations	PyMOL	
Reported for averaged data over
a concentration range.

Reported
for the highest-concentration
data.

Normalized spatial
discrepancy.

SAXS ab initio molecular envelopes were generated
for each isoform using DAMMIF, imposing P2 symmetry according to evidence of dimerization (Figure A). Because the CD data suggested a change in the
secondary structure content of Skp1, we decided that it was not appropriate
to use multiphase bead modeling by using the scattering data simultaneously
from Skp1 and GGFGGn-Skp1. The envelope for unmodified Skp1 easily
accommodates two copies of the Skp1 structure present in complexes
with F-box proteins, with additional volume that might represent conformational
dynamics. In agreement with the greater Rg and Dmax from the raw scattering data,
the molecular envelope of GGFGGn-Skp1 presents an elongated structure
(Figure B), most consistent with localization
of the C-terminal glycans at or near the opposite ends of an antiparallel
dimer (Figure C). The calculated increase
in volume of 12.7% for GGFGGn-Skp1 relative to that of Skp1 (Table ) is in close agreement with the increase in Rg and apparent Mr, but ∼2.5-fold greater than the actual Mr increment of 4.6%. This discrepancy likely reflects
a combination of contributions from the increased volume that can
be attributed to glycan chain flexibility and the decreased volume of the polypeptide core because of increased
folding order (Figure C,E).

SAXS envelopes. Ab initio molecular envelopes
were calculated from data collected from 9.4 mg/mL unmodified Skp1
(A) or 3.0 mg/mL GGFGGn-Skp1 (C), based on the average of 10 iterations
using DAMMIF. (B) Overlay of panels A and C. In panels
A and C, images of two Skp1 molecules excerpted from the crystal structure
of a complex with the FBP Tir1 (Protein Data Bank entry 2P1N) are modeled with P2 symmetry within the
envelope of Skp1 and GGFGGn-Skp1. The Skp1 pentasaccharide was modeled
using GLYCAM, and the reducing terminus is positioned
near the Pro143 attachment site. The bottom two rows represent 90°
relative rotations as indicated.

Modifications Weaken Skp1 Dimerization
The SAXS analyses
indicate that at higher concentrations both isoforms exist as homodimers,
in agreement with data for free mammalian Skp1s.,, We also consistently observed that via denaturing
SDS–PAGE, a fraction of unmodified Skp1 larger than that of
HO-Skp1 and Gn-Skp1 migrates as a dimer (Figure A), suggesting that modifications inhibit dimerization. When the
suspected dimer state was stabilized by mild treatment with a nonspecific
amine-targeted cross-linker with a 13 Å linker distance, DSS,
a greater fraction of the Skp1s migrated as the dimer. The fraction
of Skp1 in the dimer was greatest for unmodified Skp1, as confirmed
by densitometric analysis (Figure C, fourth
panel from the top). The difference between Skp1 and HO-Skp1 was also
apparent as determined by analytical gel filtration, in which both
cross-linked proteins migrated predominantly as dimers, HO-Skp1 predominantly
as monomer, and Skp1 at an intermediate position consistent with a
mixture of monomer and dimer states (Figure B). The unexpectedly small difference in elution volumes is attributed
to a conformation of the dimer that is more globular than that of
the monomer, which may occupy a larger than expected volume because
of a larger axial ratio and partially unfolded conformation based
on the SAXS data (Figures  and ). The effect of glycosylation on dimerization was examined
for all isoforms at a variety of Skp1 concentrations and ratios of
cross-linker to protein. As shown in Figure C, an increasing level of glycosylation resulted in a modest but
reproducible reduction in the level of dimerization under all conditions,
regardless of the average degree of cross-linking achieved. Mg2+ (≤5 mM) did not have a systematic effect on cross-linking.
The decreased dimerization potential of glycosylated relative to nonglycosylated
Skp1s correlated with a stronger propensity to associate with Fbs1
but did not precisely hold between partially and fully glycosylated
Skp1s.

Analysis of Skp1 dimerization. (A) Skp1 isoform solutions (3 μM)
in cross-linking buffer were heated at 100 °C in SDS and 50 mM
DTT followed by standard SDS–PAGE and Western blotting using
mAb 4E1. Parallel samples were first subjected to DSS cross-linking
for 5 min as indicated. (B) Similar samples (3 μM) were subjected
to gel filtration on an analytical Superdex 200 column, and elution
was monitored at A280. (C) Summary of
densitometric measurements of the dimer fraction after DSS cross-linking
for 5 min at the indicated concentrations of Skp1s and DSS. SDS–PAGE
gels were stained with Coomassie blue (○) or Western blotted
with mAb 4E1 (■). Error bars represent the SEM of technical
replicates.

Discussion
E. coli was found to be an efficient biosynthetic
vessel for producing prolyl 4-hydroxylated and α-GlcNAcylated
Skp1 based on enzyme co-expression (Figure ). Further glycosylation was not amenable to this approach, though,
because insufficient functional PgtA could be produced in E. coli. However, PgtA could be efficiently overexpressed
in Dictyostelium, which allowed for quantitative
production of FGGn-Skp1 in an in vitro reaction.
Finally, fully glycosylated Skp1 could be generated by a subsequent in vitro reaction conducted in the presence of AgtA, which
was easily expressed in and purified from E. coli. Skp1, which was expressed as its native sequence without epitope
tags and in the absence of native binding partners, was purified under
nondenaturing conditions to maximize the likelihood of assuming its
native conformation(s). Thus, multimilligram quantities of highly
purified native Skp1 isoforms with zero, one, three, or five sugars
could be evaluated. An isoform with two sugars could in principle
be produced by withholding the donor for the third sugar, GDP-Fuc,
from the PgtA diglycosyltransferase reaction. An isoform with four sugars would be more challenging to produce,
as the bifunctional AgtA utilizes the same donor, UDP-Gal, for both
additions of sugar. However, the finding that the tetrasaccharide
form of Skp1 transiently accumulated in the AgtA reaction opens the
possibility of recovering this intermediate for future studies.

Each Skp1 isoform was capable of high-affinity binding to a natively
soluble F-box protein, Fbs1, based on pull-down studies (Figure A), indicating that the modifications are not required
for FBP interaction as previously shown for FbxA. However, analytical gel filtration analysis of competitive
binding reactions revealed a preference of Fbs1 for binding of glycosylated
relative to unmodified Skp1s, with evidence for the following hierarchy:
Gn-Skp1 &gt; GGFGGn-Skp1 ≥ HO-Skp1 &gt; Skp1 (Figure C–F). Because probes for selectively detecting
GGFGGn-Skp1
are not available, it was not feasible to directly compare the binding
of fully glycosylated and Gn-Skp1 using the analytical gel filtration
method. Pull-down approaches based on the N-terminal His6 tag of Fbs1 were confounded by intrinsic binding to Ni2+ beads, possibly because of a His-rich region in Dictyostelium Skp1 that might also contribute to Skp1 folding.

Because preferential
binding of Fbs1 to glycosylated isoforms of
Skp1 occurred in binary isolation, it is likely that the sugars either
influence the conformation of the F-box binding region of Skp1 or
expand the interaction surface that is recognized by Fbs1. However,
the latter seemed unlikely as Fbs1 is a mammalian protein and Skp1
is evidently not glycosylated in chordates. In favor of the former prediction, CD revealed substantially increased
levels of α-helical secondary structure in glycosylated Skp1
isoforms, compared to those of unmodified and hydroxylated Skp1 (Figure A,B). The increase came mainly at the expense of
apparent β-sheet organization. Thus, glycosylation invoked substantial
conformational reorganization of the Skp1 polypeptide, which may be
the basis for improved binding to Fbs1. Notably, the higher α-helical
content of glycosylated Skp1s is consistent with the value for Skp1s
from Arabidopsis, Saccharomyces,
and mammals that are complexed with various FBPs (e.g., refs (), (), and ()), suggesting that glycosylation
promotes a conformational state of free Skp1 that better mimics that
of the final complex and therefore may promote the interaction with
Fbs1. The indistinguishable Tm values
as inferred from temperature-induced denaturation (Figure C) suggest that the conformational differences at
22 °C are not separated by a substantial energy barrier and that
both conformational extremes may be accessible by all isoforms, thus
explaining the intrinsic ability of each isoform to bind Fbs1 with
high affinity.

Previous studies revealed that mammalian Skp1
homodimerizes with
a Kd of 1 μM, and the SAXS data confirmed the homodimeric status of Dictyostelium Skp1s at 60 μM (Figure  and Table ). Furthermore, gel filtration
analysis indicated that at 2 μM, unmodified Skp1 exhibits a
strong tendency to homodimerize relative to that of HO-Skp1 unless
the latter was stabilized with a nonspecific amine cross-linker (Figure B). Analysis of cross-linked Skp1s (0.2–3
μM) by SDS–PAGE indicated that an increasing level of
modification resulted in a progressively decreased level of homodimerization
irrespective of cross-linker concentration. On the basis of findings
that binding of Skp1 to Fbs1 and binding to itself are mutually antagonistic, a weakened tendency to homodimerize may contribute
to, but does not fully explain, the increased level of binding of
glycosylated isoforms of Skp1 to Fbs1.

Further support for conformational
differences between unmodified
and glycosylated Skp1s emerged from SAXS analysis. While the Kratky
plots confirmed a typical globular organization, a substantially higher
degree of disorder was observed for unmodified Skp1 relative to GGFGGn-Skp1
(Figure C). Substantial disorder for unmodified
mammalian Skp1 at a similar salt concentration, but at a lower pH
of 6.0 compared to the pH of 7.4 used here, was described on the basis
of 1H–15N HSQC NMR studies. A comparison of pairwise distance distribution
functions and envelopes indicates that glycosylated Skp1 is elongated
with a 13% larger volume, greater than the 4.6% Mr increment of the dimer (Figure E and Table ). The increased volume was concentrated
at opposing ends of the structure (Figure ) and may in part be assigned to the glycans whose typically dynamic
time-averaged conformations normally occupy more volume than stably
folded polypeptides of the same mass. However, it is difficult to exclude the possibility that the terminal
knobs were occupied by C-terminal peptide regions that were reoriented
by internally disposed glycans. Because the predicted overall volume
of unmodified Skp1 was smaller than that of GGFGGn-Skp1, the increased
volume expected to be contributed by the disordered polypeptide in
unmodified Skp1 might be accommodated within voids that are smaller
than the SAXS resolution of 20 Å (Figure A). Indeed, the modestly slimmer profile of the GGFGGn-Skp1 dimer
envelope (Figure C) had difficulty in accommodating
the homodimer model, excerpted from a crystal structure with the FBP
Tir1, that easily fit inside the unmodified
envelope (Figure A). Thus, some reorganization
of the Skp1 polypeptide dimer caused by glycosylation was implied.
Although the increased disorder of unmodified Skp1 correlated with
a reduced α-helical content relative to that of GGFGGn-Skp1,
it did not correlate with an increased β-sheet content. These
results suggested that increased disorder lies in the organization
of secondary structure elements relative to each other rather than
to the total secondary structure content.

Pro143 is near but
oriented away from the F-box combining region
and initiates the C-terminal α-helix that is observed in most
crystal structures with FBPs. Regions upstream of Pro143 contribute
to the core interface that is sufficient for high-affinity binding in vitro to the FBP Skp2. Additional contacts are contributed
by the downstream region, and this so-called variable region of the
interface is essential for in vivo function. This region can fold as α-helix 8 or as
a loop in the complex with Fbs1, which is evidently not an artifact
of crystal packing. This indicates that
Skp1 is conformationally flexible in its complexes with FBPs, which
is consistent with the proposed conformational sensitivity to Pro143
modifications. Previous thermodynamic studies have suggested that
the Fbs1–mammalian Skp1 interaction does not satisfy conditions
of a rigid body interaction, implying that matching conformational
changes accompany complex formation, which
is consistent with NMR data for the Skp1 homologue elongin C as it
associates with a peptide from its von Hippel–Lindau protein
binding partner., We speculate that posttranslational
modifications of Pro143 modify the ensemble of energetically similar
conformations of Skp1 as indicated by the results of the CD and SAXS
studies and Fbs1 binding studies.

Although evidence of the conformational
effects of glycans on polypeptide
folding is generally sparse, there is precedence for the effects of
covalently attached sugars on peptide conformation and protein dimerization.
Notable examples at the peptide level include effects of single sugars
and neutral glycans on mucin domains,− and β-linked GlcNAc
on an estrogen receptor peptide. In another
peptide, O-glycosylation can affect the trans:cis rotamer ratio of nearby Pro residues, and at the protein level, N-glycans affect
dimerization of the FGF receptor. Potentially,
modification of Skp1 Pro143 could modify the pucker of its pyrrolidine
ring and/or trans:cis isomerization
of the Thr–Pro143 peptide bond that could initiate the global
conformational reorganization that we propose results in improved
Fbs1 binding. In cells, an increased level of binding to FBPs would
be expected to promote the activity of the respective E3SCFubiquitin ligases, resulting in timely turnover of target proteins
consistent with normal O2-dependent developmental progression.

The authors declare no
competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
We thank Dr. Augen Pioszak for his advice
on multiplasmid
co-expression studies in E. coli and Drs. Thomas
Weiss, Tsutomu Matsui, and Lester Carter (SSRL beamline 4-2) for assistance
with SAXS data collection and initial evaluation.

Abbreviations
CDcircular dichroism

CRLcullin ring ligase

Ddprefix indicating origination
from D. discoideum

FBPF-box protein

SAXSsmall-angle X-ray scattering

GGFGGn-glycan notation in which G is d-galactose, F is l-fucose, and Gn is d-GlcNAc
or N-acetyl-d-glucosamine

MALDI-TOF MSmatrix-assisted laser desorption
ionization mass spectrometry

SCFCRL1 subcomplex consisting of Skp1, cullin-1, and an F-box
protein

SDS–PAGEsodium dodecyl sulfate–polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis

SEMstandard error
of the mean

Ububiquitin.

