DNA polymerases are critical enzymes responsible
for faithful replication
of the genome. However, various DNA-damaging agents can lead to the
formation of DNA lesions that often stall the progress of high-fidelity
replicative DNA polymerases. The recently discovered Y-family DNA
polymerases are able to bypass various types of DNA damage and rescue
the stalled replication machinery in a process known as lesion bypass. However, these Y-family lesion bypass polymerases
are characterized by low fidelity, poor processivity, and a lack of
intrinsic proofreading activity when replicating undamaged DNA.− Therefore, the switching between replicative and Y-family DNA polymerases
during lesion bypass must be well regulated to prevent the introduction
of unnecessary mutations by Y-family DNA polymerases. DNA polymerase
IV from Sulfolobus solfataricus (Dpo4), the enzyme
used in this study, is a model Y-family polymerase and has been extensively
characterized through both structural− and kinetic studies.,−

In solution, DNA polymerases,
like many enzymes, are inherently
flexible molecules that can undergo a variety of motions ranging from
localized vibrations of side chains to translations and rotations
of loops and secondary structures and even concerted global conformational
transitions. These conformational rearrangements
are critical for the functions of enzymes, including catalysis, signal transduction, allosteric regulation, and structural-stability
modification. While substrate binding
and catalysis usually occur at a specific “active site”
in an enzyme involving only a few residues, structural changes are
often observed at residues far from the active site and may involve
rigid body motions of large protein domains or secondary structure
elements consisting of many residues.

All DNA polymerases share
a structurally conserved polymerase core
with a “right hand” architecture, consisting of Finger,
Thumb, and Palm domains, while Y-family DNA polymerases contain a
unique Little Finger (LF) domain in addition to the polymerase core.,− Upon binding to an incoming nucleotide, many DNA
polymerases have been shown to undergo a Finger domain closing conformational
change that helps bring functionally important enzyme residues in
contact with the nucleotide and serve as a fidelity check point for
preventing misincorporations. Crystal
structures of Y-family DNA polymerases such as Dpo4 bound to DNA do
not reveal a large domain swing upon nucleotide binding analogous
to the Finger domain closing observed for other DNA polymerases., Nevertheless, stopped-flow studies monitoring both Trp fluorescence and FRET as well
as hydrogen–deuterium exchange experiments have provided information about global conformational changes
that occur throughout each of the four domains of Dpo4 during correct
nucleotide binding and catalysis. Furthermore, it was shown that these
conformational changes are altered by the presence of a lesion in
the DNA template., Additionally, X-ray crystallography
and tryptophan fluorescence studies have shown that Dpo4 undergoes
a large conformational change from the apo form to the DNA-bound binary
state characterized by a rotation of the LF domain relative to the
polymerase core. In a recent study, this
conformational change was proposed to be involved in polymerase switching
during lesion bypass.

Our previous
studies made use of two FRET systems to monitor changes
in distance either between the DNA substrate and each domain of Dpo4
or between the Finger and LF domain. Here,
we have further investigated the conformational changes during nucleotide
binding and incorporation by utilizing a FRET system with a donor
in the LF domain and an acceptor in the Palm domain as well as an
additional FRET system with a donor in the Palm domain and an acceptor
in each of the remaining domains of Dpo4. Furthermore, both intrinsic
tryptophan fluorescence and FRET spectroscopy were used to investigate
the conformational changes of the LF domain relative to the polymerase
core of Dpo4 during DNA binding and dissociation.

Materials and
Methods
Materials
The cysteine reactive dye, 7-(diethylamino)-3-(4′-maleimidylphenyl)-4-methylcoumarin
(CPM), was obtained from Invitrogen. The DNA substrate consisted of
two synthetic oligodeoxynucleotides synthesized by Integrated DNA
Technologies (IDT), a 21-mer primer (5′-CG AGC CGT CGC ATC
CTA CCG C-3′) and a 30-mer template (5′-G
ATG CTG CAG CGG TAG GAT GCG ACG GCT CG-3′). The primer 21-mer
in the DNA substrate 21/30-mer is either normal (DNAOH)
or 3′-dideoxy-terminated (DNAH) as synthesized by
Integrated DNA Technologies. The DNA substrates were purified by denaturing
polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (17% polyacrylamide and 8 M urea),
and the concentrations were determined by UV absorbance at 260 nm
using the corresponding extinction coefficients.

Mutagenesis,
Purification, and Labeling of Dpo4
The
expression plasmid containing the S. solfataricus dpo4 gene was constructed as described previously. Mutations were introduced by using the Quikchange kit (Stratagene)
according to the manufacturer’s instructions. First, to avoid
the ambiguity of labeling, the sole native cysteine of Dpo4 was mutated
to serine (C31S). Second, using the C31S mutant as a template, a unique
intrinsic fluorescence donor Trp residue was introduced individually
into the LF (Y274W) or Palm (Y108W) domain of Dpo4. Finally, on the
basis of this double mutant, a single cysteine was individually substituted
on the domains of Dpo4 to serve as the specific site of attachment
for the acceptor CPM. These mutations were confirmed by DNA sequencing
and are shown in Figure . The Dpo4 mutants
were expressed and purified as described for wild-type (wt) Dpo4. The concentration of each mutant was determined
spectrophotometrically at 280 nm using a molar extinction coefficient
of 28068 M–1 cm–1, which was calculated
on the basis of the sequence of wt Dpo4 containing a single Tyr to
Trp mutation.

Locations for the introduction of a fluorophore into the
binary
structure of Dpo4 and DNA. The positions for attachment of a CPM acceptor
fluorophore are shown as orange spheres, and the Trp donor residues
are shown as a black ball and stick model. The Finger, Thumb, Palm,
and LF domains are colored blue, green, red, and purple, respectively,
with α helices L and M in the LF domain indicated. The DNA substrate
is colored gray.

The labeling of Dpo4
mutants was performed in the labeling buffer
[50 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.5), 0.15 M NaCl, 10% glycerol, and 0.5 mM TCEP].
A 10–20-fold molar excess of CPM was added dropwise to a 50–100
μM protein solution. The labeling reaction was allowed to proceed
while the mixture was slowly and constantly mixed at 4 °C overnight,
and unreacted dye was quenched by adding an equimolar amount of glutathione.
Labeled protein was separated from the unbound fraction of dye by
size exclusion gel filtration (Sephadex G-25 resin). Eluted protein
was extensively dialyzed against the Dpo4 storage buffer and stored
as aliquots at −80 °C. The protein concentration was determined
by using the Bradford assay (Bio-Rad) with wt Dpo4 as a standard,
and the degree of labeling was typically ≥90%.

Buffers
All experiments, if not specified, were conducted
in buffer R, consisting of 50 mM HEPES (pH 7.5) at 20 °C, 6 mM
MgCl2, 50 mM NaCl, 0.1 mM EDTA, 1 mM DTT, and 10% glycerol.

Steady-State Fluorescence Spectroscopy Assays
Steady-state
fluorescence spectra were recorded on a Fluoromax-4 instrument (Jobin
Yvon Horiba). The assay solution typically contained 200 nM CPM-labeled
mutant proteins in the reaction buffer equilibrated at 20 °C.
To this solution were added sequentially 300 nM DNA substrate and
1 mM dNTP. Fluorescence spectra were recorded after each addition
of DNA and dNTP at the excitation wavelength of tryptophan (290 nm)
with slits set at 5 nm for both excitation and emission. Reported
spectra were corrected for dilution and for the intrinsic fluorescence
of buffer components and dTTP, which were measured in the absence
of DNA and any protein.

Circular Dichroism Spectroscopy Assays
Circular dichroism
(CD) spectra were recorded using a model 62A DS spectrometer (Aviv)
in a 1 mm path length cuvette at 37 °C. The spectra were recorded
in the buffer [25 mM sodium phosphate (pH 7.5), 50 mM NaCl, and 5
mM MgCl2]. Data points from 270 to 200 nm were recorded
for Dpo4 and its mutants at 1 nm intervals. Each data point was averaged
for 5 s. All measurements were corrected for the background signal.

Stopped-Flow Assays
Stopped-flow fluorescence experiments
were performed on an Applied Photophysics SX20 system at a constant
temperature of 20 °C. Samples were excited at 290 nm, and the
fluorescence of Trp or CPM was monitored by using a 305 or 420 nm
cutoff filter, respectively. Again, the slits were set at 5 nm for
both excitation and emission. All reported concentrations represent
the final concentrations of components after mixing. The rate for
each fluorescent phase was determined by fitting a stopped-flow fluorescence
trace using the KinTek Explorer global fitting software. The software was set to fit each trace using
a single- or double-exponential equation depending on the number of
observed FRET phases. Reported rates and the associated errors are
reported as averages and standard deviations determined from fits
to traces acquired in multiple repeat stopped-flow mixing experiments.

Results
Construction of an Interdomain FRET System
To monitor
changes in distance between two domains, Dpo4 mutants containing a
single-tryptophan FRET donor fluorophore and a single Cys for labeling
with the acceptor fluorophore CPM were generated (Figure  and Table ). Because wt
Dpo4 contains no native Trp residues, single Trp residues were introduced
separately into the Palm (Y108W) or LF (Y274W) domain via site-directed
mutagenesis. To avoid ambiguity in CPM labeling, the single native
Cys (C31) of Dpo4 was mutated to Ser. Using the expression DNA plasmid
encoding a Dpo4 mutant containing a single Trp and no Cys, single
Cys residues were introduced into various positions throughout Dpo4
for labeling with CPM (Figure  and ). For the sake of simplicity,
triple Dpo4 mutants in this study will be cited by the single Trp
mutation and the introduced Cys only, e.g., Y274W-S96C. Enzymatic
activities of CPM-labeled, e.g., Y274W-S96CCPM, and unlabeled
Dpo4 mutants, e.g., Y274W-S96C, were measured under single-turnover
conditions using 32P-based kinetic assays (). The observed rates of nucleotide incorporation
(kobs) for the unlabeled and CPM-labeled
Dpo4 mutants were similar to that measured for the wt enzyme (Table ), indicating that neither the mutations nor the
labeling had a significant effect on the polymerase activity of Dpo4.
Furthermore, the circular dichroism spectra of the unlabeled mutants
confirmed that the mutations did not alter the secondary structure
of Dpo4 (Figure S1 of the ).

Distances between the Trp
Donor and Residues with an Attached CPM Acceptor
Estimated from Crystal Structures
Distances between Y274W on the LF Domain and Residues
on the Individual Domains of Dpo4	
 	distance (Å)	
 	Palm	Thumb	
protein form	S112C	S96C	N200C	S207C	
apo	28.4	28.4	20.2	22.8	
binary	38.1	31.0	44.7	49.5	
ternary	38.6	31.3	45.8	51.8	
Distances between Y108W on the Palm Domain and
Residues on the Individual Domains of Dpo4	
 	distance (Å)	
 	LF	Finger	Thumb	
protein form	K329C	S307C	N70C	K26C	N200C	S207C	
apo	44.7	28.8	38.4	32.7	29.4	31.9	
binary	42.6	35.2	38.3	31.6	28.4	32.5	
ternary	42.6	35.4	38.2	31.7	28.5	32.5	
Estimated distances do not account
for the flexible carbon linker used to attach the CPM fluorophore
to the introduced Cys residues.

Calculated distance between the
Cα atom of Dpo4 residues in the apo structure of
Dpo4 (PDB entry 2RDI).

Calculated distance
between the
Cα atom of Dpo4 residues based on the crystal structure
of the Dpo4·DNA binary complex (PDB entry 2RDJ).

Calculated distance between the
Cα atom of Dpo4 residues based on the crystal structure
of the Dpo4·dideoxy-DNA·matched dATP ternary complex (PDB
entry 2AGQ).

Observed Rates (kobs) of Incorporation of dTTP into DNAOH Catalyzed
by Dpo4 or Each of Its CPM-Labeled Mutants at 20 °C under Single-Turnover
Reaction Conditions
enzyme	kobs (s–1)	
wt Dpo4	0.8 ± 0.1	
Y274W-S96CCPM	0.8 ± 0.1	
Y274W-S112CCPM	0.54 ± 0.04	
Y108W-N70CCPM	0.33 ± 0.03	
Y108W-K26CCPM	0.39 ± 0.03	
Y108W-K329CCPM	0.47 ± 0.04	
Y108W-S307CCPM	0.35 ± 0.03	
Y108W-S207CCPM	0.39 ± 0.03	
Y108W-N200CCPM	0.36 ± 0.02	
Obtained from single-turnover
kinetic
assays in which a preincubated solution of a Dpo4 mutant (180 nM)
and 5′-32P-labeled DNAOH (30 nM) was
rapidly mixed with dTTP (1 mM) and subsequently quenched at various
time intervals with 0.37 M EDTA and the plot of product concentration
vs time was fit to the single-exponential equation [product] = A[1 – exp(−kobst)] to yield an observed rate kobs and a reaction amplitude (A).

Steady-State Fluorescence of Dpo4 Mutants
Y108W and Y274W
To gain insight into the local environment
of the engineered Trp
residues, fluorescence emission spectra for unlabeled Dpo4 mutants
Y108W and Y274W were recorded (Figure A).
The emission maximum for Y108W was approximately 320 nm, characteristic
of a buried Trp residue, while the red-shifted emission maximum (354
nm) of Y274W is consistent with a higher degree of solvent exposure., When a normal DNA substrate 21/30-mer was bound [DNAOH ()], a significant
reduction in Trp fluorescence was observed for both Y108W (30.3%)
and Y274W (21.6%). Following DNA binding, dTTP incorporation into
the E·DNA complex resulted in a further decrease in Trp fluorescence.
As both DNA and dTTP absorb at 290 nm, the observed decreases in Trp
fluorescence upon their additions may be primarily due to inner filter
effects resulting from their absorbance of the excitation light. However, the difference in fluorescence attenuation
for the two mutants upon the addition of DNA (30.3 and 21.6% for Y108W
and Y274W, respectively) suggests that protein conformational changes
or interaction with the DNA substrate could also contribute to the
changes in Trp fluorescence, as inner filter effects would be expected
to decrease the Trp fluorescence of the two mutants to the same extent.

Steady-state
fluorescence spectra of Dpo4 mutants. The emission
spectra of Dpo4 mutants (200 nM) were recorded at 20 °C with
an excitation wavelength of 290 nm. (A) Emission spectra of mutants
Y108W-N70C (dotted) and Y274W-N70C (solid) with either the mutants
alone (black) or after sequential additions of 300 nM DNAOH (red) and 1 mM dTTP (green). (B and C) Emission spectra of CPM-labeled
mutants Y274W-N70CCPM and Y108W-K329CCPM, respectively,
with either the mutants alone (black) or after sequential additions
of 300 nM DNAOH (red) and 1 mM dTTP (green). The emission
spectra for the mutants prior to labeling with CPM are colored blue.

Steady-state fluorescence spectra
of mutants Y274W-S96CCPM and Y108W-K329CCPM (panels
B and C of Figure , respectively, black traces)
show that the attachment
of CPM to a unique cysteine residue had a significant quenching effect
on the Trp fluorescence of both Y274W and Y108W, upon excitation at
290 nm, the peak excitation wavelength of Trp. Concomitantly, an intense
acceptor peak centered at 472 nm was observed, which was a strong
indicator of the efficient transfer of energy from Trp to CPM. The
addition of the substrate DNAOH resulted in a very slight
increase in the acceptor CPM fluorescence for mutant Y274W-K96CCPM and a dramatic increase for mutant Y108W-K329CCPM (∼30%) (Figure B,C, green traces).
These results suggest that the Y108W-K329CCPM FRET pair
is better suited for dynamically investigating the conformational
change in the LF domain relative to the polymerase core. Addition
of dTTP to the binary complexes of the Dpo4 mutants with DNAOH resulted in a dramatic decrease in CPM fluorescence for both Y274W-S96CCPM (38%) and Y108W-K329CCPM (28%), which is predominantly
due to inner filter effects from the absorbance of the excitation
light by dTTP with a high concentration (1 mM), rather than resulting
only from a change in FRET efficiency as both CPM and Trp fluorescence
intensities were reduced (Figure B,C). However,
as described above, the differences observed for the two mutants in
panels B and C of Figure  suggest that conformational
changes may also contribute to the changes in fluorescence. All other
Dpo4 mutants listed in Table  exhibited similar
trends consistent with the distance variation based upon the crystal
structure analysis of apo and binary complexes (data not shown).

Conformational Change upon Binding of Dpo4 to DNA
To
further investigate the observed conformational change in the LF domain
relative to the polymerase core during DNA binding, rapid mixing experiments
were performed using the Y108W or Y108W-K329CCPM mutant
in a stopped-flow apparatus upon excitation of Trp at 290 nm. Notably,
all stopped-flow experiments in this study were performed at 20 °C
to be consistent with published stopped-flow FRET studies with Dpo4
that showed that some FRET changes are not easily observed at higher
temperatures., Mixing of Dpo4 mutant Y108W with
DNA in the absence of the CPM acceptor did not result in a detectable
time-dependent change in fluorescence (Figure S2A of the ), indicating that the
quenching of Trp fluorescence observed in the steady-state assay (Figure A) occurred within the dead time (∼1 ms)
of the stopped-flow apparatus, as would be expected for quenching
due to inner filter effects. However, mixing of Y108W-K329CCPM with DNA resulted in a measurable rapid increase in CPM fluorescence
(Figure A), consistent with steady-state FRET
measurements (Figure C). Interestingly, the
rate of this fluorescence change (∼16 s–1) did not increase as the concentration of DNA was increased from
2 to 100 nM while the enzyme concentration was held constant at 100
nM (Figure B). Notably, at concentrations
of &lt;2 nM, the amplitude of the fluorescence change was too low
to be easily detected in the stopped-flow apparatus. The observation
of a constant rate over a nearly 2 order of magnitude increase in
DNA concentration suggests that the change in fluorescence may correspond
to a conformational change that occurs at a step distinct from the
formation of the Dpo4·DNA binary complex as the later step is
expected to be a second-order process with an observed rate that increases
linearly with DNA concentration. Several assays were also performed
to investigate the reverse conformational change upon dissociation
of the Dpo4·DNA complex. The mixing of a preincubated solution
of the Y108W mutant and DNA with a 20-fold excess of tryptophan-free
wt Dpo4 to sequester any DNA that dissociates from the labeled enzyme
resulted in a time-dependent increase in Trp fluorescence (Figure C). This result is consistent with the steady-state
spectra that show that the fluorescence of Y108W was decreased by
30.3% upon addition of DNA (Figure A). Moreover,
the decrease is ∼10% more with the Y108W mutant than with the
Y274W mutant, suggesting that a conformational change upon DNA binding
is partially responsible for the observed decrease in Trp fluorescence
(Figure A). When the experiment was performed
by mixing the preincubated, labeled Y108W-K329CCPM·DNA
complex with excess unlabeled wt Dpo4, a large decrease in CPM fluorescence
was observed (Figure D). Notably, the rate
of the CPM fluorescence change for the labeled Y108W-K329CCPM (3.3 ± 0.2 s–1) was &lt;2-fold slower than
the observed rate for the Y108W mutant (6 ± 1 s–1) (Figure C,D). The latter rate may be less
accurate because of the low signal-to-noise ratio (Figure C). Using an alternative approach, a preincubated
solution of unlabeled Dpo4 and DNA was mixed with an excess of the
labeled Y108W-K329CCPM mutant, which resulted in a biphasic
increase in CPM fluorescence (Figure E). The
faster phase rate (15.1 ± 0.6 s–1) was similar
to the rate measured for the forward conformational change rate (Figure B) and likely results from an initial binding of
the small fraction of DNA that was not bound to the unlabeled Dpo4
during the preincubation prior to mixing. The slower phase likely
results from the binding of DNA to the labeled Dpo4 after it has dissociated
from unlabeled Dpo4 with the observed rate (1.7 ± 0.2 s–1), which is a function of the rates of both the forward (∼16
s–1) and reverse (3.3 s–1) conformational
changes. Together, these results suggest that Dpo4 utilizes a DNA
binding mechanism with a conformational change occurring at a step
different from the formation and dissociation of the Dpo4·DNA
binary complex.

Conformational changes upon DNA binding. (A) Dpo4 mutant
Y108W-K329CCPM (100 nM) was rapidly mixed with 2 nM (blue),
5 nM (red),
20 nM (gray), or 100 nM (black) DNAOH, and the CPM fluorescence
was measured upon excitation of Trp at 290 nm. Data from each trace
were fit to a single-exponential equation, A[1 –
exp(kt)] (A, black lines), and the observed rates
(k) were plotted vs DNA concentration (B). Trp fluorescence
of mutant Y108W (C) or the CPM fluorescence of mutant Y108W-K329CCPM (D) upon mixing of a solution of 100 nM Dpo4 mutant and
100 nM DNAOH with 2 μM unlabeled wt Dpo4. (E) CPM
fluorescence upon mixing of a preincubated solution of 100 nM wt Dpo4
and 100 nM DNAOH with 2 μM Y108W-K329CCPM.

Conformational Dynamics
during Correct Nucleotide Incorporation
To characterize the
dynamics of conformational transitions employed
by Dpo4 during correct nucleotide insertion, a solution containing
a CPM-labeled Dpo4 mutant preincubated with DNAOH was rapidly
mixed with the correct dTTP, and the CPM fluorescence was monitored
upon excitation at 290 nm. Only the acceptor CPM fluorescence was
monitored, as the Trp fluorescence was too weak to be accurately measured
in the presence of the CPM acceptor. Notably, no time-dependent change
in fluorescence was observed upon mixing of dTTP with labeled Dpo4
in the absence of the DNA (Figure S2B of the ), suggesting that the fluorescence changes resulting
from inner filter effects observed in the steady-state experiments
(Figure ) occurred within the mixing dead
time (∼1 ms) of the stopped-flow instrument. Additionally,
no change in Trp fluorescence was observed in control experiments
in the absence of the CPM acceptor (Figure S2C of the ), indicating that any
observed changes in CPM fluorescence would be primarily due to changes
in FRET efficiency rather than changes in the local environment of
the Trp probe.

In a previously published study, the conformational
changes of the Finger domain (N70C and K26C) relative to the LF domain
(Y274W) were investigated through two labeled mutants, Y274W-N70CCPM and Y274W-K26CCPM. Here, similar assays were performed to investigate the conformational
changes of the Palm domain at the residues of S96C and S112C relative
to the LF domain. The distances between potential labeling residues
in the Thumb domain, e.g., S207C and N200C, and the Y274W residue
in the LF domain in the binary and ternary structures are greater
than R0 ± 0.5R0, where R0 is the Förster
distance of 30 Å for a Trp–CPM FRET pair (Table ). Therefore, changes in distances between these
two domains during nucleotide binding and incorporation could not
be accurately measured using this FRET system. When a preincubated
solution of the labeled mutant Y274W-S112CCPM and DNA was
mixed with the correct dTTP, a biphasic fluorescence change was observed,
consisting of a rapid [17 s–1 (Table )] decrease phase (P1) followed by a slow [0.3
s–1 (Table )] fluorescence
increase phase (P2) (Figure A,
black trace). Notably, similar results were observed previously for
the motion of the Finger domain relative to the LF domain. The signal-to-noise ratio for the Y274W-S96CCPM mutant was significantly lower than for the Y274W-S112CCPM mutant, and consequently, a second P2 phase
could not be clearly distinguished (Figure B), indicating that this FRET pair was not as well suited for measuring
conformational changes. These results, along with those from previous
studies, indicate that the LF domain
moved away from both the Finger and Palm domains and then closed back
in toward the polymerase core to complete one catalytic cycle.

Conformational
motion of the Palm domain relative to the LF domain
during nucleotide binding and incorporation. Changes in CPM fluorescence
upon excitation of Trp at 290 nm are shown after mixing of 1 mM dTTP
with a preincubated solution of a Dpo4 mutant (200 nM) and either
DNAOH (300 nM, black) or DNAH (300 nM, red)
at 20 °C: (A) Y274W-S112CCPM and (B) Y274W-S96CCPM.

Rates of
Stopped-Flow Fluorescence
Changes at 20 °C
 	 	 	rate (s–1)	
domain	CPM-labeled
residue	phase	with DNAOH	with DNAH	
Relative to the Trp Donor
(Y274W) in the LF Domain	
Palm	S112C	P1	17 ± 4	19 ± 1	
 	 	P2	0.3 ± 0.1	–	
 	S96C	P1	11.4 ± 1.7	12.2 ± 1.5	
 	 	P2	–	–	
Relative to the Trp Donor (Y108W) in the Palm Domain	
Finger	N70C	P1	23 ± 6	20 ± 4	
 	 	P2	0.57 ± 0.2	–	
 	K26C	P1	5.2 ± 0.6	3.7 ± 0.6	
 	 	P2	–	–	
LF	K329C	P1	18 ± 4	17 ± 2	
 	 	P2	0.42 ± 0.07	–	
 	S307C	P1	20 ± 4	20 ± 5	
 	 	P2	0.27 ± 0.07	0.27 ± 0.06	
Thumb	N200C	P1	17 ± 4	17 ± 3	
 	 	P2	–	–	
 	S207C	P1	16 ± 7	17 ± 5	
 	 	P2	0.16 ± 0.03	–	
Next, the conformational transitions
of the LF, Finger, and Thumb
domains relative to the Trp donor (Y108W) in the Palm domain were
investigated. The fluorescence changes observed for this system were
much more varied than those obtained with the Trp donor (Y274W) located
in the LF domain. Finger domain residue N70C (Figure A and Table ) showed a biphasic trace
similar to that observed for the same residue relative to the LF domain
in published studies. Notably, the amplitude
of the fluorescence change for the Finger mutant Y108W-K26CCPM was significantly lower than that observed for the other site (N70C)
on the Finger domain, and the P2 phase was less obvious
(Figure B). The Thumb domain mutant Y108W-S207CCPM produced changes in fluorescence in the opposite direction
versus those of the Finger domain mutants, with a rapid increase phase
(P1) and a second, slow decrease phase (P2)
(Figure C). In contrast, the other Thumb domain
mutant, Y108W-N200CCPM, displayed only a fast fluorescence
decrease phase (P1) while a P2 phase could not
be distinguished. Surprisingly, relative to Y108W in the Palm domain,
the two LF domain residues (S307C and K329C) also appeared to move
in opposite directions (Figure E,F). As with
residue S207C, residue K329C yielded a rapid increase P1 phase followed by a slow decrease P2 phase (Figure E). In contrast, residue S307C displayed a rapid
decrease P1 phase followed by a slow increase P2 phase (Figure F), which was consistent with
the result obtained with Trp in the LF domain (Y274W) and the labeled
Cys residue in the Palm domain (S112C) (Figure A). Thus, LF residues S307C and Y274W appear to move in the opposite
direction compared to the other LF residue, K329C, relative to the
Palm domain. Notably, the rates of each phase were similar for all
mutants except K26C (Table ).

Conformational motions
of the Finger, Thumb, and LF domains relative
to the Palm domain during nucleotide binding and incorporation. Changes
in CPM fluorescence upon excitation of Trp at 290 nm are shown after
mixing of 1 mM dTTP with a preincubated solution of a Dpo4 mutant
(200 nM) and either DNAOH (300 nM, black) or DNAH (300 nM, red) at 20 °C: (A) Y108W-N70CCPM, (B) Y108W-K26CCPM, (C) Y108W-S207CCPM, (D) Y108W-N200CCPM, (E) Y108W-K329C, and (F) Y108W-S307CCPM.

Conformational Dynamics during Correct dNTP
Binding with a Dideoxy-Terminated
DNA Substrate
To explore the origins of the observed biphasic
kinetics, a nonextendible substrate 21/30-mer DNAH () was employed to distinguish
between events occurring before and after phosphodiester bond formation.
When nucleotide incorporation was prevented, the P2 phase
for all but one of the mutants was not observed upon mixing with dTTP
while the rapid P1 phase remained unchanged at an average
rate of approximately 20 s–1 (Table  and Figures  and ). This suggests that, for these mutants, P1 represents
a precatalytic conformational change while P2 corresponds
to a transition taking place after nucleotide incorporation. Additionally,
the rate of P2 is similar to the rate for the rate-limiting
step in nucleotide incorporation under single-turnover conditions
for each mutant [average kobs of 0.5 s–1 (Table )]. The one exception
was mutant Y108W-S307CCPM (Figure F), for which the P2 phase was essentially identical for
both DNAOH and DNAH substrates. These results
indicate that Dpo4 may undergo an additional transition after the
initial fast conformational change that is independent of phosphodiester
bond formation. However, this conclusion needs to be verified by further
studies.

Discussion
The FRET-based methodology
is a very instructive approach for investigating
enzyme dynamics. It not only allows for identification and rate determination
of conformational changes but also can provide insights into the directional
and rotational nature of those motions. Despite the fact that X-ray
crystallography has not revealed large conformational shifts in Dpo4
upon nucleotide binding or incorporation, previous FRET studies have
characterized pre- and postcatalytic conformational changes in all
four domains of Dpo4 by monitoring the changes in distance between
the protein and the DNA substrate., The results
of this investigation uncovered additional details of these conformational
changes as well as conformational changes involved in DNA binding
by monitoring changes in distance between pairs of locations on the
protein itself.

Published crystallographic studies revealed
that Dpo4 undergoes
a significant conformational change from the apo state to the DNA-bound
state with a 131° rotation of the LF domain relative to the polymerase
core. The results here show that this
conformational change in the LF domain occurs at a rate of ∼16
s–1 and is independent of DNA concentration over
nearly 2 orders of magnitude (Figure A,B).
In contrast, in a previous study that monitored FRET between labeled
DNA and a labeled DNA polymerases to directly monitor formation of
the E·DNA binary complex, the observed rate of change in fluorescence
upon mixing of the polymerase with the DNA was found to increase linearly
with an increasing protein concentration, as would be expected for a second-order binding process. Thus, the
results of this study are consistent with a multistep binding mode
in which this conformational change occurs in a step distinct from
formation of the Dpo4·DNA complex. Two potential models for the
binding of Dpo4 to DNA are possible: either the conformational change
occurs after the initial binding of Dpo4 to DNA (Figure A), or Dpo4 is in equilibrium between two conformations, only
one of which is capable of binding to DNA (Figure B). The crystal structure of apo Dpo4 shows that the LF domain
actually occupies the DNA binding cleft of the polymerase core, which would support the model shown in Figure B, as the LF domain would need to change its conformation
to allow DNA to bind to Dpo4.

Possible models for the mechanism of binding
of Dpo4 to DNA and
subsequent nucleotide incorporation. Two alternative DNA binding models
are shown (A and B) along with a full catalytic mechanism (C). E·DNA*
and E·DNA represent nonproductive and productive binary complexes,
respectively. Eapo, E, E′, and E″ represent
four different conformations of Dpo4. PPi denotes pyrophosphate.
P1 and P2 are the two fluorescent phases observed
in Figures  and .

Previous kinetic studies have indicated
that the rate-limiting step in steady-state catalysis is the slow
dissociation of the DNA from Dpo4 (0.02 s–1 at 37
°C), several orders of magnitude lower than the rates of the
conformational change measured here at 20 °C by Trp fluorescence
[6 s–1 (Figure C)] or by
FRET monitoring of CPM fluorescence [3.3 s–1 (Figure D)]. In the 32P-based kinetic assay,
the loss of product formation was measured upon mixing with dNTP for
a fixed time interval after a preincubated solution of Dpo4 and radiolabeled
DNA had been mixed with an excess of unlabeled trap DNA for varying
time intervals. This difference in rates
obtained from the two techniques lends further support to a model
in which the conformational change and DNA binding represent distinct
steps. Notably, from these results, the possibility of a more complex
binding process with additional steps in which Dpo4 adopts conformations
intermediate between those observed in the apo and DNA-bound crystal
structures cannot be ruled out.

To account for the results from
fluorescence assays in this study,
along with those from previous kinetic and structural studies, an
expanded three-step model for DNA binding has been added to the previously
proposed catalytic mechanism of Dpo4 (Figure C). In this model, it is proposed that,
in the absence of DNA, the LF domain of Dpo4 is in equilibrium between
two conformations (step 1, Figure C), only
one of which (E) allows for DNA binding, and that after an initial
rapid binding to DNA (step 2, Figure C), the
binary complex is also in equilibrium between a nonproductive state
and a productive state (step 3, Figure C),
only one of which (E·DNA) is active for subsequent dNTP binding
and incorporation. The inclusion of step 3 in the proposed mechanism
is consistent with the binary crystal structure in which the terminal
base pair occupies the dNTP binding site (E·DNA*) and must be
repositioned to allow nucleotide binding in a productive conformation
(E·DNA).

In previous stopped-flow
FRET studies, a very rapid step occurring
prior to the P1 phase was attributed to a translocation
of the DNA relative to Dpo4, corresponding
to a shift in equilibrium from the nonproductive state to the productive
state. In a recent single-molecule FRET investigation, Dpo4 was observed
to alternate between these two conformations in the binary complex,
with the binding of an incoming dNTP stabilizing the post-translocated
(E·DNA) productive state, lending
further support to the inclusion of step 3 in the proposed model (Figure C). This rapid conformational rearrangement was
also proposed for the Y-family DNA polymerases from Sulfolobus
acidocaldarius (Dbh)-based stopped-flow fluorescence measurements
with a DNA substrate containing a 2-aminopurine fluorescent base analogue.

The observed rate of 0.02 s–1 in 32P-based kinetic assays corresponds to the loss of
only the catalytically
competent E·DNA complex (k–3) rather than much faster steps (k–1 and k–2), as the assay relies
on observation of a decreasing amount of nucleotide incorporation
product following the increased incubation time with the trap DNA. In our stopped-flow assays, the observed increase
in fluorescence upon mixing Dpo4 with DNA (Figure A) would result from a shift in the equilibrium from the Eapo state to the E state [k1 (Figure C)] followed by steps 2 and 3 that do not lead to
a change in fluorescence. Similarly, the decrease in fluorescence
upon mixing the Trp-containing or labeled Dpo4 mutant·DNA complex
with unlabeled wt Dpo4 (Figure C,D) results
from the shift in equilibrium back toward the Eapo state
[k–1 (Figure C)] following a more rapid dissociation of the E·DNA* complex
in step 2. Notably, without step 3 in the proposed model in Figure C (i.e., the model in Figure B), one would expect the rate measured in panels C and D of Figure  to be much slower as observed in the previously
described 32P-based kinetic trap assay, as k–3 (step 3, Figure C) would
likely be lower at 20 °C than the value of 0.02 s–1 measured at 37 °C.

Clearly,
the binding of Dpo4 to DNA is a complex process, and while
the FRET data described here provide new insight into an early conformational
change in the binding pathway, further investigation is necessary
to fully elucidate the binding mechanism. To this end, additional
stopped-flow as well as single-molecule fluorescence studies to further
probe the complex mechanism of binding of DNA to Dpo4 are currently
underway.

The conformational change in the orientation of the
LF domain upon
DNA binding may be a phenomenon common to all Y-family DNA polymerases.
As with Dpo4, crystal structures of human DNA polymerases κ
(hPolκ) also show a change of up to 50 Å in the position
of the LF domain relative to the polymerase core between the apo and
DNA-bound states., Furthermore, yeast DNA polymerase
η (yPolη) also undergoes a structural change upon DNA
binding, although it is much more modest, consisting of an 8°
rotation of the LF domain.,, Interestingly, the LF domain of hPolκ was observed in two
different conformations in the apo state, both of which are distinct
from the conformation observed in the DNA-bound state., While only one conformation of the LF domain has been observed for
Dpo4 in the apo state, the crystal structure of Dpo4 in complex with
the sliding clamp replication factor shows that the LF domain adopts
a conformation different from that observed in the apo or DNA-bound
form. This suggests that a certain degree
of conformational flexibility exists in the position of the LF domain
even in the absence of a DNA substrate for these Y-family DNA polymerases,
which is consistent with the inclusion of step 1 in the proposed model
(Figure C). However, further structural and
kinetic investigations are necessary to determine whether the kinetic
mechanism proposed here will apply to other Y-family DNA polymerases.

In structural studies with both Dpo4 and the bacterial Y-family enzyme Escherichia coli DNA polymerase IV, it was suggested
each of the DNA polymerases primarily binds to a sliding clamp through
its interactions with the LF domain in an inactive conformation that
cannot bind to DNA, and thus, a conformational change would be required
to allow for DNA binding by the Y-family DNA polymerase. To this end,
it is possible that the conformational change in the LF domain prior
to DNA binding (step 1, Figure C) may serve
as a point of regulation during polymerase switching to prevent the
low-fidelity Y-family DNA polymerases from accessing the replication
fork prior to stalling of the replicative polymerases at DNA lesion
sites.

Differences in DNA dissociation rates as measured by
fluorescence
versus 32P-based kinetic assays have also been reported
for A-family− and B-family, DNA polymerases as
well, suggesting that these DNA polymerase families may utilize a
multistep DNA binding mechanism similar to that of Dpo4. For example,
crystal structures of the large fragment of Thermus aquaticus DNA polymerase I (Klentaq1) show that, in the E·DNA binary
complex, the template base of the DNA substrate stacks with a conserved
Tyr residue, and thus, a conformational rearrangement is required
for dNTP binding. Subsequently, stopped-flow
FRET investigations with Klentaq1 and
the Klenow fragment of E. coli DNA polymerase I have revealed evidence of a pre-equilibrium
step prior to nucleotide binding similar to step 3 in the proposed
Dpo4 mechanism (Figure C). However, because
other DNA polymerase families do not possess a domain analogous to
the LF domain, it is unclear whether a transition analogous to step
1 in the proposed mechanism (Figure C) might
be a general feature for DNA polymerases beyond those in the Y-family.

The interdomain FRET changes observed upon mixing a preformed Dpo4·DNA
binary complex with dNTP (Figures  and ) are consistent with the previously proposed nucleotide
incorporation mechanism involving pre- and postcatalytic conformational
change steps (steps 4–10, Figure C). The biphasic traces observed with the Trp donor
in the LF domain and the CPM acceptor in the Palm domain here (Figure ) or in the Finger domain in a previous study suggested that the LF domain moved away from
the polymerase core before catalysis [P1 (Figure C)] and returned toward it after catalysis [P2 (Figure C)]. Similar results were
obtained using mutant Y108W-S307CCPM (Figure F), which also allowed us to monitor the change in distance
between the Palm and LF domains. These observations are consistent
with previous studies that showed that the LF domain also moves in
a similar fashion relative to the DNA substrate and is further supported by computational predictions.

Despite the similarity in the results
obtained for the motion of
LF residue Y274W relative to the Finger or Palm domain residues, the
motion of the LF domain cannot be considered as a simple whole domain
translational movement outward from the polymerase core and DNA substrate
prior to catalysis, as revealed by mutant Y108W-K329C (Figure E). Mutant Y108W-K329CCPM exhibited FRET
changes in the opposite direction of those of all other FRET pairs
between the LF and Palm domains. Inspection of the LF’s crystal
structure revealed that residues K329C and S307C are located on the
loops on either side of α-helix M and that Y274W is located
on α-helix L, near S307C (Figure ). A possible interpretation of the results of this
study is that the LF domain rotates or bends about an axis perpendicular
to helices M and L, where both residues S307C and Y274W are located
on the one side of the axis and K329C is positioned on the other side
of the axis. The possibility of a rotational axis is supported by
molecular simulation, which suggests that the LF domain pivots around
the DNA major groove by approximately 12°, as measured by the
rotation of α helices L and M. In
previous FRET studies, similar rotational components were observed
for the motion of the Finger and Palm domains relative to DNA during
DNA lesion bypass.

While most mutants
exhibited two clear FRET phases, a clear P2 phase was not
apparent for mutants Y274W-S96CCPM (black trace, Figure B) and Y108W-N200CCPM (black trace, Figure D). It is
possible that a change in distance between the FRET pairs in these
mutants occurs during P2 but that the amplitude of this
change is too small to be detected given the inherent noise in the
stopped-flow data. Conversely, the possibility that additional conformational
change steps may be occurring during incorporation of the nucleotide
by Dpo4 that complicate the data analysis for these particular FRET
pairs cannot be ruled out. The observation of a second fluorescence
phase for mutant Y108W-S307CCPM even with the dideoxy-terminated
primer (red trace, Figure F) may result from
an additional conformational change step that occurs at a rate similar
to the steps that give rise to P2 for the other mutants
but is independent of covalent nucleotide incorporation. If such a
step also affects the motions of the FRET pairs in mutants Y274W-S96CCPM and Y108W-N200CCPM, it may obscure the P2 phase for these mutants. However, the results of this study
are not sufficient to determine whether this additional step or some
other mechanistic phenomenon is responsible for the observed fluorescence
changes in these three mutants.

It is clear from these FRET
studies that the conformational dynamics
of Dpo4 are complicated, and while the use of multiple FRET pairs
allows us to provide some insight into the structural details of these
conformational changes, further solution-state structure studies are
necessary to gain a clear picture of how each domain moves throughout
the entire reaction pathway. Recent chemical shift assignments of
the backbone nitrogens, α and β carbons, and amide protons
of the polymerase core and the LF domain of Dpo4 will likely facilitate future investigations
of this nature at atomic resolution.

This work provides fresh
insight into the importance of domain
motions of Dpo4 to both DNA binding and catalysis and creates a global,
complex dynamic picture of domain motions during the catalytic cycle.
It would be very interesting to determine whether Dpo4 employs different
conformational motions while incorporating correct or incorrect dNTP
into undamaged DNA or encountering and bypassing a variety of lesions.
Future research to answer these questions will provide us the basis
for understanding the mechanism of the reactions that Y-family DNA
polymerases were evolved to catalyze.

Supporting Information Available
Figures showing the CD spectra
of wt Dpo4 and several representative mutants and stopped-flow control
experiments. This material is available free of charge via the Internet
at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bi5000146_si_001.pdf

The authors declare
no
competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
We thank Dr. Shanen M. Sherrer for assistance in performing
circular dichroism spectroscopy.

Abbreviations
CPM7-(diethylamino)-3-(4′-maleimidylphenyl)-4-methylcoumarin

Dpo4S. solfataricus DNA polymerase IV

FRETFörster resonance energy transfer

LFLittle Finger

DNAHDNA substrate 21/30-mer
containing a 3′-dideoxy-terminated 21-mer

DNAOHnormal DNA substrate
21/30-mer

wtwild-type

PDBProtein Data Bank.

