Over a period of a few decades,
quinolones have transformed from a small and unimportant class of
drugs used primarily to treat urinary tract infections to some of
the most commonly prescribed antibacterials in the world.− Today, they are used to treat a wide variety of Gram-negative and
Gram-positive bacterial infections. Unfortunately, quinolone usage
is threatened by the rising occurrence of resistance, which has been
observed in every species that is treated by this drug class.−

The cellular targets for quinolones are the bacterial type
II topoisomerases,
gyrase and topoisomerase IV.,− Recent work has helped to define how quinolones interact with these
enzymes and how mutations in gyrase or topoisomerase IV can lead to
resistance.− Furthermore, additional resistance mechanisms caused
by altered protein interactions, drug metabolism, and uptake and/or
efflux have been described.,,,, This review will discuss our current knowledge of quinolone mechanism
and resistance and how that information may be used to design drugs
that are capable of overcoming the most common forms of resistance.

Quinolones
The founding member of the quinolone drug class, nalidixic acid,
is a naphthyridine that was first isolated by George Lesher and colleagues
in 1962 as a byproduct of chloroquine synthesis (Figure ). Nalidixic acid was introduced
into the clinic in the 1960s for the treatment of uncomplicated urinary
tract infections caused by enteric bacteria. By the 1970s, several first-generation quinolones, oxolinic acid
being the most notable, had been synthesized and introduced into the
clinic (Figure ).,,,

Quinolone structures.
Nalidixic acid and oxolinic acid were the
first-generation quinolones that were used most often in the clinic.
Norfloxacin, ciprofloxacin, and ofloxacin are the most relevant second-generation
quinolones. Levofloxacin (the levorotary isomer of ofloxacin), sparfloxacin,
and moxifloxacin are newer-generation quinolones.

The quinolones were a little-used drug class until the early
1980s,
when a second generation of compounds was developed (Figure ).,,, These newer drugs, highlighted by norfloxacin,
ciprofloxacin, and ofloxacin, displayed considerably improved activity
against gyrase, greater penetration into Gram-positive organisms,
and enhanced pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics. The most critical
changes to the quinolone skeleton were the introduction of a fluorine
at position C6 and a major ring substituent (piperazine or methyl-piperazine)
at C7.,,, Because of the inclusion of the fluorine, quinolones
are often termed “fluoroquinolones”.

Norfloxacin
is considered to be the first broad-spectrum quinolone
and was utilized to a far greater extent than nalidixic acid.,,, Unfortunately,
because of low serum levels and poor tissue penetration, norfloxacin
was still confined to use for the treatment of urinary tract infections
and sexually transmitted diseases. Ciprofloxacin was the first quinolone
that displayed significant activity outside of the urinary tract.,,, After
more than 20 years in clinical use, ciprofloxacin remains one of the
most commonly prescribed antibacterial drugs and is used to treat
a variety of Gram-negative and, to a lesser extent, Gram-positive
infections.,,

The clinical
success of ciprofloxacin spawned an array of newer-generation
quinolones that displayed an even broader spectrum of activity, especially
against Gram-positive species.,,, Levofloxacin, moxifloxacin, and
sparfloxacin (Figure ) have enjoyed the most
success and display good activity against Gram-positive respiratory
tract infections. Furthermore, the pharmacokinetics of levofloxacin
are advantageous compared to those of other members of the drug class,
and treatment requires only a single pill per day.,

A number of diseases currently are treated with quinolones,
including
urinary tract infections and pyelonephritis, sexually transmitted
diseases, prostatitis, skin and tissue infections, chronic bronchitis,
community-acquired and nosocomial pneumonia, and intra-abdominal and
pelvic infections. Quinolones also are
used to treat tuberculosis, the deadliest infectious disease on the
planet, which has an annual death toll that exceeds 1 million.

Bacterial Type II Topoisomerases
Most bacterial species encode two distinct, but homologous, type
II topoisomerases, gyrase and topoisomerase IV.,− These enzymes play essential roles in most nucleic acid processes,
help control levels of DNA under- and overwinding, and remove knots
and tangles from the bacterial chromosome. Gyrase and topoisomerase
IV modulate the topological state of DNA by passing an intact double
helix through a transient double-stranded break that they generate
in a separate segment of DNA. Progression through the catalytic cycle
is driven by ATP binding and hydrolysis.,−

The DNA cleavage and ligation reactions, which constitute
the core
of enzyme function, utilize a noncanonical two-metal ion mechanism.− Gyrase and topoisomerase IV generate staggered cuts in the DNA backbone
that are 4 bp apart and on opposite strands (leaving a 5′-overhang).
To maintain genomic integrity during this process, the enzymes form
covalent bonds between active site tyrosine residues and the newly
generated 5′-DNA termini.,,, These covalent enzyme-cleaved
DNA complexes are known as “cleavage complexes”.

Despite their mechanistic and structural similarities, gyrase and
topoisomerase IV have separate physiological functions.,,, Gyrase is the only type II topoisomerase that can actively introduce
negative supercoils into DNA. The enzyme works in conjunction with
the ω protein (a type I topoisomerase) to set the superhelical
density of the bacterial chromosome. In addition, gyrase is primarily
responsible for removing the torsional stress that accumulates in
front of replication forks and transcription complexes.,,,

Topoisomerase IV appears to play a lesser role than gyrase
in maintaining
chromosomal superhelical density and alleviating torsional stress.
Its major function is removing knots that accumulate in the bacterial
chromosome as a result of fundamental cellular processes and decatenating
daughter chromosomes following replication.,,,,

Gyrase and topoisomerase IV both are comprised
of two distinct
functional subunits and function as A2B2 heterotetramers
(Figure ).,,, The subunits in gyrase
are GyrA and GyrB. The homologous subunits in topoisomerase IV are
ParC and ParE in Gram-negative species and GrlA and GrlB in Gram-positive
species. GyrA (and the equivalent topoisomerase IV subunit) contains
the active site tyrosine residue. GyrB (and the equivalent topoisomerase
IV subunit) contains the ATPase domain as well as the TOPRIM domain,
which binds the divalent metal ions involved in DNA cleavage and ligation.
Despite the strong sequence similarity between gyrase and topoisomerase
IV, the C-termini of the A subunits are not well conserved. This portion
of the protein is involved in topology recognition and allows gyrase,
but not topoisomerase IV, to generate supercoils in DNA.,,,−

Domain structures of type II topoisomerases. Gyrase and
topoisomerase
IV are heterotetrameric enzymes consisting of two A subunits and two
B subunits. The A subunits (blue and red; GyrA in gyrase and ParC
and GrlA in Gram-negative and Gram-positive topoisomerase IV, respectively)
contain the active site tyrosine residue that covalently attaches
to the newly generated 5′-termini of DNA during the cleavage
reaction. The C-terminal domains (CTDs; red) of the A subunits are
variable and allow gyrase to introduce negative supercoils into DNA.
The B subunits (green; GyrB in gyrase and ParE and GrlB in Gram-negative
and Gram-positive topoisomerase IV, respectively) contain the ATPase
and TOPRIM domains, the latter of which binds the catalytic divalent
metal ions essential for enzyme activity. Human topoisomerase IIα
is homologous to the bacterial type II enzymes. However, during the
course of evolution, the A and B subunits fused into a single polypeptide
chain. Therefore, eukaryotic type II topoisomerases function as homodimers.
A representation of the three-dimensional structure of type II topoisomerases
is shown at the bottom.

It is notable that humans also express two type II enzymes,
topoisomerase
IIα and topoisomerase IIβ.,,,, Both share significant amino acid sequence similarity with the bacterial
enzymes. However, during the course of evolution, the genes encoding
the A and B subunits have fused, resulting in a single polypeptide
chain (Figure ). Consequently, the human type
II enzymes function as homodimers.,, As discussed later, specific amino acid differences
provide the basis for clinically relevant quinolones to discriminate
between the human and bacterial type II topoisomerases. However, the
similarity of these enzymes presents a confounding issue for designing
quinolone-like drugs that overcome bacterial drug resistance.

Quinolone
Action
In order to carry out their critical physiological
functions, gyrase
and topoisomerase IV generate double-stranded breaks in the bacterial
chromosome. Thus, while essential for cell survival, these enzymes
have the potential to fragment the genome.,,,,, Quinolones take advantage
of this latter, and potentially lethal, characteristic and kill cells
by increasing the concentration of enzyme–DNA cleavage complexes.,,−, Thus, these drugs are termed “topoisomerase poisons”
because they convert gyrase and topoisomerase IV into cellular toxins. In contrast, “catalytic inhibitors”
block the overall catalytic functions of these enzymes without increasing
levels of DNA strand breaks.

Quinolones bind in a noncovalent
manner at the enzyme–DNA
interface in the cleavage–ligation active site.,− Drugs interact with the protein and intercalate into
the DNA at both cleaved scissile bonds (Figure ). Because the scissile bonds on each strand are staggered, two drug
molecules are required to increase levels of double-stranded DNA breaks.
As a result of their intercalation, quinolones increase the steady-state
concentration of cleavage complexes by acting as physical blocks to
ligation.,,−

Crystal
structure of a moxifloxacin-stabilized Acinetobacter
baumannii topoisomerase IV–DNA cleavage complex. The
catalytic core of the enzyme is shown. Moxifloxacin is colored red;
the topoisomerase IV A and B subunits are colored blue and green,
respectively, and DNA is colored yellow. The top panel is a top view
of the cleavage complex showing two quinolone molecules intercalating
4 bp apart at the sites of DNA cleavage. The bottom panel is a front
view (rotated by 90° from the top view) of the cleavage complex.
Protein Data Bank accession 2XKK was visualized using Discovery Studio 3.5 Visualizer
(Accelrys Software Inc.). Adapted from ref ().

When replication forks, transcription complexes, or other
DNA tracking
systems collide with drug-stabilized gyrase– or topoisomerase
IV–DNA cleavage complexes, these complexes are converted to
permanent chromosomal breaks. In turn, the generation of these DNA
breaks triggers the SOS response and other DNA repair pathways. If
the strand breaks overwhelm these processes, they can lead to cell
death. This is the primary mechanism that quinolones use to kill bacterial
cells (Figure ).,,−

Bacterial type II topoisomerases are essential but potentially
toxic enzymes. The balance between enzyme-mediated DNA cleavage and
religation is critical for cell survival. If the level of gyrase-mediated
DNA cleavage decreases, rates of DNA replication slow and impair cell
growth (left). If the level of topoisomerase IV-mediated DNA cleavage
decreases, cells are not able to untangle daughter chromosomes and
ultimately die of mitotic failure (left). If the level of gyrase-
or topoisomerase IV-mediated DNA cleavage becomes too high (right),
the actions of DNA tracking systems can convert these transient complexes
to permanent double-stranded breaks. The resulting DNA breaks initiate
the SOS response and other DNA repair pathways and can lead to cell
death.

Because quinolones stabilize cleavage
complexes by inhibiting DNA
ligation, they also impair the overall catalytic functions of gyrase
and topoisomerase IV. Thus, in addition to acting as poisons, quinolones
act as catalytic inhibitors. This accompanying loss of enzyme activity
affects a number of nucleic acid processes and likely contributes
to the overall toxicity of these drugs (Figure ).,,−

Quinolone Targeting
Gyrase was first identified as the cellular
target for quinolones
in 1977., The later discovery of topoisomerase IV raised the question of whether this enzyme also
was a target for quinolones. Based on an analysis of Escherichia
coli strains carrying drug resistance mutations in one, the
other, or both enzymes, it was concluded that gyrase is the primary
toxic target for quinolones and that topoisomerase IV is a secondary
drug target. Consistent with this conclusion,
quinolones are more potent against E. coli gyrase
than topoisomerase IV and induce higher
levels of gyrase–DNA cleavage complexes in cells.

Surprisingly, genetic studies in Streptococcus pneumoniae found that topoisomerase IV, rather
than gyrase, was the primary
cellular target for ciprofloxacin. This
led to the concept that gyrase was the primary target for quinolones
in Gram-negative bacteria but that the opposite was true in Gram-positive
species. However, subsequent studies found that this paradigm did
not hold in many cases. There are examples of Gram-positive bacteria
in which gyrase is the primary target for quinolones. Furthermore,
in a given bacterial species, different quinolones have been shown
to have different primary targets.− Ultimately, the issue
of quinolone targeting is still a matter of debate, and the relative
contributions of gyrase versus topoisomerase IV to quinolone action
need to be evaluated on a species-by-species and drug-by-drug basis.

Quinolone–Topoisomerase
Interactions
The fact that specific mutations in gyrase or
topoisomerase IV
cause quinolone resistance strongly suggests that drug–protein
interactions play an important role in stabilizing cleavage complexes.
As discussed below, the amino acids that most frequently are associated
with quinolone resistance are Ser83 (based on E. coli GyrA numbering) and an acidic residue four amino acids downstream
(Figure ).,−,,, Thus, it has been assumed that these two
amino acid residues play an integral role in mediating quinolone–enzyme
interactions.

Quinolone–topoisomerase binding is facilitated
through a
water–metal ion bridge. The top panel shows the crystal structure
of a moxifloxacin-stabilized A. baumannii topoisomerase
IV–DNA cleavage complex. Moxifloxacin is colored black, and
the noncatalytic Mg2+ ion that is chelated by the C3/C4
keto acid of the quinolone and participates in the bridge interaction
is colored green. The four water molecules that fill out the coordination
sphere of the Mg2+ ion are colored blue. The backbone of
selected portions of the protein amino acid chain is colored yellow.
The side chains of the serine and acidic residues that form hydrogen
bonds with the water molecules in the water–metal ion bridge
are colored red. In A. baumannii topoisomerase IV,
these residues are Ser84 and Glu88, respectively. For clarity, DNA
has been omitted from the picture. Protein Data Bank accession 2XKK was visualized using
Discovery Studio 3.5 Visualizer (Accelrys Software Inc.). Adapted
from ref (). The
middle panel shows a simplified diagram of the water–metal
ion bridge. Only interactions with the protein (and not DNA) are shown.
Ciprofloxacin (a representative quinolone) is colored black, and the
noncatalytic Mg2+, water molecules, and coordinating serine
and acidic residues are colored as described above. Blue dashed lines
indicate the octahedral coordination sphere of the divalent metal
ion interacting with four water molecules and the C3/C4 keto acid
of the quinolone. The red dashed lines represent hydrogen bonds between
the serine side chain hydroxyl group or the acidic residue side chain
carboxyl group and the water molecules. Adapted from ref (). The bottom panel shows
a sequence alignment of the A subunits highlighting the conserved
serine and acidic residues (red) that coordinate the water–metal
ion bridge. Sequences of A. baumannii (Ab), Bacillus anthracis (Ba), E. coli (Ec), Staphylococcus aureus (Sa), and S. pneumoniae (Sp) gyrase (GyrA) and topoisomerase IV (ParC/GrlA) are shown.
The homologous regions of human topoisomerase IIα (hTIIα)
and IIβ (hTIIβ), which lack the residues necessary to
coordinate the water–metal ion bridge interaction, are shown
for comparison.

A series of crystallographic
studies with gyrase and topoisomerase
IV have shed considerable light on quinolone–enzyme interactions.
Initial structures placed the drug near the serine and acidic resides,
but the amino acids were not sufficiently close in space to mediate
drug binding directly.− In contrast, a later structure captured a quinolone
complex that contained a noncatalytic Mg2+ ion that was
chelated by the C3/C4 keto acid of the drug (Figure ). The metal ion was coordinated
to four water molecules, and two of these water molecules were situated
close enough to the serine and acidic residues to form hydrogen bonds.
On the basis of this structure and an earlier study that suggested
a role for metal ions in quinolone action, the authors suggested that this water–metal ion interaction
“bridged” the drug to the enzyme.

Recent functional studies have characterized the
role of the proposed
water–metal ion bridge in mediating quinolone–enzyme
interactions., Findings indicate that mutation
of either the serine or acidic residue restricts the variety of metal
ions that can be used to support drug activity and decreases the affinity
of the quinolone–enzyme complex for the noncatalytic Mg2+ ion. Furthermore, mutation of either residue significantly
decreases the affinity of gyrase or topoisomerase IV for quinolones,
and mutation of both residues abolishes the ability of clinically
relevant quinolones to stabilize cleavage complexes., Taken together, these results confirm the existence of the water–metal
ion bridge and provide evidence that the serine and acidic residues
act as the anchor points that coordinate the bridge to the enzyme.
Moreover, they demonstrate that the water–metal ion bridge
is the primary interaction between quinolones and the bacterial type
II enzymes. A significant ramification of the above is that the most
important interactions between clinically relevant quinolones and
their enzyme targets are mediated through the C3/C4 keto acid of the
drug skeleton (Figure ). This may explain
the tolerance for the structural diversity of substituents at positions
N1, C7, and C8 of this drug class.

It is notable that the human type II topoisomerases lack the serine
and acidic residues that anchor the water–metal ion bridge
(Figure ) and are unable to utilize this critical
mechanism to interact with quinolones. This difference provides the basis by which quinolones discriminate
between the bacterial and human enzymes and accounts, in part, for
the therapeutic window of this drug class.

Quinolone Resistance
As discussed earlier, quinolone resistance is becoming a prevalent
clinical issue that is threatening the use of these drugs. Resistance
mechanisms are grouped into three distinct categories that are discussed
below (Figure ). The cellular alterations
associated with each mechanism are not mutually exclusive and can
accumulate to create strains that exhibit very high levels of quinolone
resistance.

Mechanisms of quinolone resistance. (1) Target-mediated resistance.
Mutations in gyrase and topoisomerase IV weaken quinolone–enzyme
interactions. (2) Plasmid-mediated resistance. (2a) Qnr proteins (yellow)
decrease topoisomerase–DNA binding and protect enzyme–DNA
complexes from quinolones. (2b) Aac(6′)-Ib-cr is an aminoglycoside
acetyltransferase that acetylates the free nitrogen on the C7 ring
of ciprofloxacin and norfloxacin, decreasing their effectiveness.
(2c) Plasmid-encoded efflux pumps decrease the concentration of quinolones
in the cell. (3) Chromosome-mediated resistance. (3a) Underexpression
of porins in Gram-negative species decreases drug uptake. (3b) Overexpression
of chromosome-encoded efflux pumps decreases drug retention in the
cell.

Target-Mediated Quinolone Resistance
Quinolone resistance
is most often associated with specific mutations in gyrase and/or
topoisomerase IV (Figure ). Generally, mutation
of one type II enzyme confers ≤10-fold drug resistance. Selection
for higher levels of resistance (∼10–100-fold) usually
yields strains with mutations in both enzymes.,−,,

Although mutations have been mapped throughout the A and B
subunits of gyrase and topoisomerase IV in quinolone-resistant strains,
the most commonly mutated amino acids are the serine and acidic residues
that anchor the water–metal ion bridge (Figure ).,,, Presumably, disruption of the water–metal
ion bridge causes the observed quinolone resistance.

Typically,
in both laboratory and clinical isolates, alterations
at the serine comprise &gt;90% of the mutant pool, with changes at
the
acidic residue comprising the bulk of the other mutations., In general, mutant gyrase and topoisomerase IV maintain wild-type
DNA cleavage activity in the absence of drugs.,, However, quinolones display little ability
to increase levels of enzyme-mediated DNA cleavage at clinically relevant
concentrations.,,− Furthermore, drug–enzyme binding is significantly reduced,
and quinolones lose much of their ability to inhibit DNA ligation
or to form stable ternary enzyme–DNA–drug complexes.,,,−

Resistance mutations at the serine residue in gyrase and topoisomerase
IV do not appear to adversely affect catalytic activity in the absence
of drug.,, In contrast,
mutations at the acidic residue decrease overall catalytic activity
∼5–10-fold., This may explain, at
least in part, why the serine mutation is found much more frequently.

The serine residue is highly conserved across bacterial species
(Figure ). This raises the question of why
an amino acid residue in gyrase and topoisomerase IV that has no apparent
function other than to provide sensitivity to a class of synthetic
antibacterials is maintained so consistently throughout the bacterial
kingdom. An intriguing possibility comes from a study on nybomycin,
an antibiotic produced by Streptomyces spp. This
compound displays little activity against S. aureus strains that express wild-type gyrase. However, nybomycin is active
against strains that express a Ser → Leu quinolone-resistant
GyrA. Thus, the conserved serine residue
may represent a “resistance mutation” that provides
protection against naturally occurring antibiotics.

Plasmid-Mediated
Quinolone Resistance
Recently, plasmids
that carry quinolone resistance genes have been identified as an emerging
clinical problem that generally cause low-level (≤10-fold)
resistance (Figure ).,,− However, resistance as high as ∼250-fold has been reported.,, Unlike target-mediated resistance,
which is transmitted vertically from generation to generation, plasmid-mediated
quinolone resistance can be transmitted horizontally (through bacterial
conjugation) as well as vertically. Plasmids that confer quinolone
resistance typically carry additional genes that cause resistance
to other drug classes.,,, However, this review will focus on those
that affect quinolone sensitivity.

Three families of genes are
associated with plasmid-mediated quinolone resistance. The first are
the Qnr genes, which encode proteins (∼200 amino acids in length)
that are part of the pentapeptide repeat protein family.,,, Approximately 100 Qnr variants have been identified to date and
have been classified into at least five distinct subfamilies.,,, These proteins share homology with McbG and MfpA, which are DNA
mimics.,, The Qnr proteins
appear to confer quinolone resistance by two different mechanisms.
Like McbG and MfpA, they decrease the binding of gyrase and topoisomerase
IV to DNA. Thus, they protect cells from quinolones by lowering the
number of available enzyme targets on the chromosome. They also bind
to gyrase and topoisomerase IV and inhibit quinolones from entering
cleavage complexes formed by the enzymes.,,,

The
second plasmid-encoded protein associated with quinolone resistance
is aac(6′)-Ib-cr., This protein is a variant
of an aminoglycoside acetyltransferase that contains two specific
point mutations, W102R and D179Y. The enzyme acetylates the unsubstituted
nitrogen of the C7 piperazine ring that is found in norfloxacin and
ciprofloxacin, which decreases drug activity. Although the wild-type
and mutant aminoglycoside acetyltransferases are capable of acetylating
other drugs, only the mutant enzyme is active against quinolones.,

The third group of plasmid-encoded quinolone resistance proteins
is comprised of efflux pumps. Thus far, three have been identified:
OqxAB, QepA1, and QepA2.,, Whereas the latter two proteins have been found in human bacterial
infections, OqxAB is seen almost exclusively in animal infections.,,

Chromosome-Mediated Quinolone
Resistance
The cellular
concentration of quinolones is regulated by the opposing actions of
diffusion-mediated drug uptake and pump-mediated efflux. In contrast
to Gram-positive species, the outer membrane of Gram-negative bacteria
poses an additional barrier that drugs must cross to enter the cell.
Therefore, drug influx in Gram-negative species is facilitated by
protein channels called porins. If the expression of porins is downregulated,
it can lead to low-level resistance to quinolones (Figure ).,,,,

In addition
to the introduction of plasmid-encoded efflux pumps, enhanced expression
of chromosome-encoded efflux pumps also can lead to quinolone resistance
(Figure ). Most commonly, the upregulation
of these pumps is caused by mutations in regulatory proteins.,, In general, changes in quinolone
uptake and retention cause low-level resistance and, in the absence
of additional resistance mechanisms, do not appear to be a major clinical
issue. However, lowering the cellular
concentration of quinolones creates a favorable background for other
forms of resistance to develop and propagate.,,,

Overcoming
Quinolone Resistance
As discussed above, mutations in gyrase
and topoisomerase IV are
the most common cause of high-level quinolone resistance. Therefore,
the development of novel quinolones that retain activity against these
mutated enzymes has the potential to greatly extend the clinical efficacy
of this drug class. Unfortunately, no such drugs have appeared in
the clinic.

The initial hurdle to the development of drugs against
resistant
gyrase and topoisomerase IV was the concept that it would be impractical
to design quinolones against every common mutation. This concept was
based on the assumption that different mutations caused resistance
by different mechanisms. Recent studies have demonstrated that this
is not the case. As discussed above, the vast majority of clinically
relevant mutations cause quinolone resistance through a common mechanism,
namely by disrupting the water–metal ion bridge.− Therefore, at least in theory, it should be possible to overcome
most instances of target-mediated resistance by designing a quinolone-like
drug that no longer depends on the water–metal ion bridge for
its primary interaction with gyrase or topoisomerase IV.

Recent
studies that examined quinazolinediones have provided insight
into how this might be possible.,,,,,− Quinazolinediones
are structurally similar to quinolones (Figure ); however, they lack the keto acid that chelates the bridging metal
ion. In contrast to clinically relevant quinolones, some quinazolinediones
retain (or actually display higher) activity against gyrase and topoisomerase
IV that carry mutations in the anchoring serine or acidic residue.
This observation has been reported using purified enzymes as well
as cultured resistant bacterial strains.,,,,,− Structural studies indicate that quinolones and quinazolinediones
interact with topoisomerase IV in the same drug-binding pocket. Thus, it was believed that the quinazolinedione
skeleton was able to mediate drug–enzyme binding directly and
did not require a divalent metal ion. To this point, the C2 carbonyl
of quinazolinediones likely forms a hydrogen bond with a conserved
arginine residue (Arg121 based on E. coli GyrA numbering)., However, this interaction is expected to be weaker than the water–metal
ion bridge interaction utilized by quinolones. Indeed, in the absence
of additional substituents that form strong interactions in the cleavage
complex, quinazolinediones have poorer activity than their structurally
cognate quinolones.,, Recent studies demonstrated that interactions between highly active
quinazolinediones and bacterial type II topoisomerases are mediated
primarily through novel contacts made by the 3′-(aminomethyl)pyrrolidinyl
(and related) C7 substituent., These C7 groups are
not represented in any clinically relevant quinolone.

Roles of substituents
and core elements of quinolones and quinazolinediones
that mediate drug activity against bacterial and human type II topoisomerases.
Results are based on studies with B. anthracis topoisomerase
IV and human topoisomerase IIα. For quinolones, the binding of clinically relevant drugs to topoisomerase
IV is mediated primarily through the water–metal ion bridge.
The binding of quinolones that overcome resistance is mediated primarily
by the substituent at C7. Binding of quinolones to human topoisomerase
IIα also is mediated by the C7 substituent. The group at C8
affects the ability of quinolones to act against the human type II
enzyme but is not required for drug binding. For quinazolinediones,
interactions between drugs and topoisomerase IV (wild-type and resistant)
are mediated through the C7 substituent. The effects of the C7 and
C8 substituents on quinazolinedione activity against topoisomerase
IIα are the same as described for the quinolones. The N3 amino
group plays a role in the binding of quinazolinediones to the human
enzyme. Adapted from ref ().

Unfortunately, the 3′-(aminomethyl)pyrrolidinyl
group also
appears to mediate novel contacts with topoisomerase IIα and
results in a drug that poisons the human enzyme. Thus, one of the major challenges in overcoming quinolone
resistance will be the identification of C7 (and potentially other)
substituents that can differentiate between the bacterial and human
type II enzymes. Initial studies have dissected the roles of quinolone
and quinazolinedione substituents in mediating drug binding and function
against topoisomerase IIα (Figure ). They indicate that it is possible to generate
drugs that retain activity against quinolone-resistant bacterial enzymes
without cross-reacting with the human enzyme. Thus, a “mechanistic” approach to drug discovery holds
potential.

Summary
Quinolones are one of the most important classes
of antibacterials
available for the treatment of infectious diseases in humans. However,
the clinical utility of these drugs is being impacted by the growing
number of resistant bacterial strains. Although several resistance
mechanisms have been described, the most common and significant form
of resistance is caused by specific mutations in gyrase and topoisomerase
IV that disrupt the water–metal ion bridge interaction.

Quinolones have been in the clinics since the 1960s, but the molecular
details of how these drugs interact with their topoisomerase targets
and how mutations cause resistance have only recently been described.
Hopefully, this new information can be used to direct the discovery
of a new generation of quinolones with improved activity against wild-type
and mutant gyrase and topoisomerase IV to extend the clinical use
of these drugs well into the future.

K.J.A. was a
trainee under Grant T32 CA09582 from the National Institutes of Health.
This work was supported by National Institutes of Health Grants AI87671
(to R.J.K.) and GM033944 (to N.O.).

The authors declare no
competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
We are grateful
to MaryJean Pendleton, Rachel E. Ashley, and
Kendra R. Vann for critical reading of the manuscript.

