Biological
timekeeping allows
a system to enact complex temporal programs of development and behavior.
On a human scale, the most pervasive of rhythms is the circadian oscillation,
which drives our sleep/wake cycle as well as a host of other metabolic
and behavioral cycles. Recent evidence indicates that redox homeostasis,
how an organism deals with excess oxidative potential or a deficiency
thereof, displays an endogenous circadian rhythm., Here
we discuss the interplay of the circadian clock with oxidation–reduction
cycles within the cell and how this might hint at a central role for
nontranscriptional control of the circadian clock.

A circadian
clock was defined as one with a near 24 h rhythm in
a constant environment that can be entrained by stimuli and is resistant
to changes in temperature (i.e., it is temperature-compensated). This rhythm exists at multiple levels of organization,
from the wheel running behavior of mice to the rhythmic addition and
removal of phosphate groups in the cyanobacterial KaiABC protein complex.

Canonical Circadian Clock: A Gene Expression
Feedback Loop
The molecular underpinnings of the circadian
clock have been the
subject of intense scrutiny over the years, ranging from hypothesis-free
genetic screens that identified the first circadian “clock”
genes to targeted studies focused on deciphering the precise mechanisms
of timekeeping. These studies have allowed the field to converge on
the current paradigm of the gene expression feedback loop (GEFL).
The principle of a GEFL is that a negative feedback loop in gene expression,
i.e., a gene that suppresses its own transcription, will not reach
a steady state if a delay is incorporated into the production of the
repressive element. Instead, given the correct parameters of delay
and instability in the repressive signal, the pathway will oscillate. In the literature, the term “transcription–translation
feedback loop” is often favored; we propose to use the more
accurate GEFL as it incorporates the substantial contribution of post-translational
and epigenetic regulation of the circadian clockwork.

A genetic
screen in Drosophila for
mutants with short, long, or abrogated periodicity first highlighted
the Period (Per) locus involved
in GEFL timekeeping. Subsequent cloning
of Per demonstrated that the protein could repress
its own transcript, closing the prototypical circadian GEFL. Since
these initial discoveries, a host of GEFLs have been discovered in
plants, animals, bacteria, and fungi.

Mammals have a multiple-component GEFL, the parts of which are
often termed the “canonical” clock components (Figure  and reviewed in ref ()). Briefly, circadian locomotor output cycles
kaput (CLOCK) and BMAL1 co-activate transcription at E-box-containing
gene promoters, including the period (Per) and cryptochrome
(Cry) genes. Their protein products accumulate throughout
the day and translocate into the nucleus to repress their own transcription
by direct interaction with the BMAL1:CLOCK complex. Throughout the
night, PER and CRY are degraded, allowing the reactivation of their
gene loci at dawn. A second GEFL exists in antiphase to the “peak-at-dusk”
PER:CRY oscillator. Here the transcription of retinoic acid orphan
receptor-α (ROR-α) and the nuclear receptor REV-ERBα
is activated by the BMAL1:CLOCK complex. Their protein products activate
and repress transcription of the Bmal1 locus. Gene
promoters that are reactive to the core clock component rhythms translate
this rhythm into the circadian gene expression program, which in turn
plays a large part in generating the outputs of the circadian clock.

Canonical circadian clock in mammals. BMAL1 and CLOCK
proteins
co-activate E-box-containing promoters to transcribe clock-controlled
genes that include the repressive PER and CRY proteins. PER and CRY
form a complex that is imported into the nucleus and inhibits transcription
of E-box proteins. PER activity is modulated by casein kinase 1, which
promotes nuclear import and degradation. The clock-controlled genes
REV-ERBα (REV-ERB) and RORα (ROR) generate additional
circadian control by modulating the expression of BMAL1.

While the general principle of the GEFL is conserved,
the componentry
may not be.− Phylogenetic analyses of clock genes suggest that
circadian GEFLs evolved at least twice, once in cyanobacteria and
once (or more) in eukaryotes (transcriptional components are highly
dissimilar among plants, fungi, and metazoans). An alternative proposal is that an evolutionarily ancient
oscillator exists, one which has been elaborated by the various GEFLs. Because this oscillator does not necessarily
incorporate oscillating gene expression, it has been proposed that
it could be entirely post-transcriptional in a manner akin to the
KaiABC autophosphorylation–dephosphorylation paradigm already
defined in cyanobacteria, and discussed below.

Recent studies of mammalian nontranscriptional oscillators
center
on peroxiredoxin oxidation cycles detected across multiple genera., Whether peroxiredoxin oxidation cycles constitute a core mechanism
generating oscillation or if they simply report another, cryptic,
oscillation, it behooves us to first introduce this fascinating family
of antioxidant proteins.

Peroxiredoxins
Peroxiredoxins make
up a phylogenetically ancient family of proteins,
whose primary role is associated with H2O2 detoxification. Peroxiredoxin enzymes work by reducing H2O2 to water. During the subsequent catalytic cycle,
oxidized peroxiredoxin is normally rereduced in a fashion that ultimately
consumes a reducing equivalent supplied by nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide
phosphate (NADPH) (Figure A). Overlying the
cycle of peroxiredoxin oxidation and reduction is a circadian rhythm
in the redox state, which has been detected in archaea, bacteria,
and eukaryotes.,,, Strikingly, this rhythm persists (albeit
perturbed) in systems in which the canonical circadian clock is either
endogenously absent or pharmacologically abrogated.,,

Peroxiredoxin structure and function. (A) Two-Cys
peroxiredoxins
(PRDX) exist in dimers that can form intramolecular disulfide bridges
between the peroxidatic (CysP) and resolving (CysR) cysteines. Disulfides
are reduced by thioredoxin (TRX), which is in turn reduced by thioredoxin
reductase (TRXR) utilizing NADPH as source of reducing power. CysR
in the short-lived sulfenic form can become hyperoxidized to form
sulfinic PRDX, which is recycled by sulfiredoxin (SRX). Hyperoxidized
sulfonic PRDX can also form by further oxidation of PRDX, a reaction
that is likely irreversible. The redox scheme of a single peroxidatic
and resolving cysteine pair in each dimer is highlighted; the other
pair is functionally equivalent but shown here as a disulfide and
grayed out for the sake of clarity. (B) Reduced PRDX can exist as
decamers or dodecamers that dynamically exchange subunits with a cellular
pool of oxidized and reduced dimers. Hyperoxidation of PRDX interferes
with subunit exchange and “locks” the molecules in a
hyperoxidized decameric form. Hyperoxidation of decameric peroxiredoxins
can induce higher-order multimerization that is associated with increased
chaperone activity, although chaperone activity can also be independently
modulated by post-translational modification of the protein. The cell
signaling functions of peroxiredoxins are not restricted to any redox
state or multimeric form.

Structurally, peroxiredoxin enzymes belong to one of two
groups,
the one-Cys and two-Cys peroxiredoxin enzymes, named after the number
of conserved redox-active catalytic cysteine residues in their sequences. The mechanism of peroxiredoxin activity is conserved
across the two classes, but the mechanism of recycling into the reduced
state differs. In mammals, there are five two-Cys peroxiredoxins (PRDX1–5)
and a single one-Cys peroxiredoxin (PRDX6). Peroxiredoxins are further classified by their ability to form inter-
or intramolecular disulfide bonds within dimers, denoted typical (PRDX1–4)
or atypical, respectively (PRDX5).

One-Cys peroxiredoxins (such as the mammalian PRDX6) are oxidized
at the catalytic cysteine residue to form a sulfenic acid cysteine
(Cys-SOH). Glutathione S-transferase-π or ascorbic
acid provides the reducing power to recycle the sulfenic acid residue.
PRDX6 was the first peroxiredoxin to be identified as having a circadian
post-translational modification.

In two-Cys peroxiredoxins, the relatively short-lived sulfenic
cysteine reacts with a second, “resolving”, cysteine
to form a disulfide bridge, which is intermolecular in typical peroxiredoxins
and intramolecular in atypical variants. The recycling step involves
the reduction of the disulfide bridge by the thioredoxin system, utilizing
NADPH as a source of reducing power. A second redox cycle can act
upon the sulfenic intermediate of two-Cys peroxiredoxins. Here, the
sulfenic cysteine can be further oxidized (hyperoxidized) by H2O2 to form a more stable sulfinic cysteine (Cys-SO2H), which can be recycled into the sulfenic form by the action
of the ATP-dependent reductase, sulfiredoxin. The relatively slow
rate of sulfinic cysteine peroxiredoxin reduction (kcat = 0.1–0.1 min–1) by sulfiredoxin
allows sufficient amounts to accumulate to allow detection by Western
blotting.− Irreversible further oxidation of sulfinic cysteine
can occur by reaction with H2O2 to form sulfonic
cysteine (Cys-SO3H). This reaction is likely irreversible
and effectively removes peroxiredoxin from the redox cycle.In vivo, sulfonic peroxiredoxins
(i.e., peroxiredoxins containing a sulfonic catalytic cysteine) have
been detected under acute oxidative stress in HeLa cells (75–150
μM tert-butyl hydroperoxide), in aged rat liver and yeast
exposed to H2O2. During normative cell function the sulfonic and sulfinic peroxiredoxins
are present as minor species.

The
quaternary structure of peroxiredoxins is dynamic within the
cell, and each conformational state may have associated functionality.
Oxidized peroxiredoxin tends to favor a dimeric state, whereas reduced,
hyperoxidized, and disulfide-linked peroxiredoxins can also adopt
a decameric or dodecameric structure depending on context. Human red
blood cell (RBC) PRDX2, for example, adopts a decameric ring structure
composed of repeating dimer units, whereas bovine PRDX3 adopts an
interlocking dodecameric structure; the significance of this difference
is unclear. Reduced peroxiredoxin can
also exist as a dimer, but the decameric structure is thought be strongly
favored under physiological conditions (Figure B).

The (do)decamer is rapidly
turned over, releasing oxidized dimers
that are rapidly reduced before re-entering the oligomeric state.
Hyperoxidation into the sulfinic form may freeze the dynamic cycle
in the oligomeric state, promoting the formation of even larger peroxiredoxin
complexes.

Higher-order complexes,
including a dodecahedral structure (12
decamers in a three-dimensional arrangement), have been detected in vitro and proposed in RBCs., Human and yeast PRDX2 have been shown to have chaperone activity
when they are in the higher-order complexes., Interestingly, the human PRDX1 oligomeric state is modulated by
phosphorylation of Thr90. A phospho-mimetic T90D variant of PRDX1
has increased propensity to form a higher-order complex with a concomitant
rise in chaperone function and drop in peroxidase function. However, mutants that variously mimic sulfinic
hyperoxidation, oxidation, or reduction of the catalytic cysteine
and prevent decamer formation have indicated that the chaperone and
peroxidase functions of two-Cys peroxiredoxin in plants do not exclusively
depend upon the dimeric or decameric form or on the redox state. The joint antioxidant and chaperone function
of peroxiredoxins may represent a concerted response to oxidative
stress.

Circadian Rhythms of Peroxiredoxins
It is the hyperoxidized
(sulfinic and sulfonic) forms of peroxiredoxin
that have been demonstrated to oscillate by Western blotting with
an antibody specific to hyperoxidized peroxiredoxin species.,, Because of the remarkable conservation
of the peroxiredoxin active site, the same antibody is able to detect
rhythms in mice, flies, fungi, plants, archaea, and bacteria.,,

This suggests that the
redox rhythm reported by peroxiredoxin hyperoxidation
is very ancient, more so than sequence conservation of GEFL components
would suggest the canonical clock is (Figure ). Furthermore, the rhythm in peroxiredoxin oxidation state persists
in mice, bacteria, and fungi where their GEFL components have been
mutated, although the oxidation rhythm is clearly altered in comparison
with wild-type controls.,

Evolution of circadian
clock components. Mechanisms for mitigating
oxidative stress (ROS pathways) can be dated to the great oxidation
event approximately 3 billion years ago. Whereas the KaiABC oscillator
and cAMP signaling pathways are of similarly ancient origin, the circadian
GEFL pathways (plant TOC1-CCA1 oscillator, fungal FRQ oscillator,
and metazoan PER oscillator) evolved separately and more recently.
Oscillations in ROS pathway components such as peroxiredoxins may
indicate that an ancient clock underlies contemporary eukaryotic canonical
circadian pathways. Adapted from ref ().

Oxidized peroxiredoxins accumulate in isolated mammalian
RBCs with
circadian rhythmicity, the most recent demonstration of eukaryotic
circadian rhythms in the native absence of transcription,, following from older observations, made with isolated platelets and enucleated Acetabularia, for example.

The fluctuation
in peroxiredoxin oxidation in RBCs has been independently
observed by at least two research groups utilizing different organisms
(humans and mice) and different lysis conditions. A criticism of the
older study by O’Neill and Reddy was the decision to lyse RBCs
under nonreducing conditions without blocking reduced cysteines, using
alkylating agents such as N-ethylmaleimide (NEM).
This methodology produced a variety of multimeric species on a nonreducing
sodium dodecyl sulfate–polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis gel
presumably because of additional disulfide formation occurring postlysis,
because when the same samples were run under reducing conditions only
a rhythmically hyperoxidized peroxiredoxin monomer was detected (Supporting
Information of ref ()). The authors chose to concentrate on this readily observable rhythm
in hyperoxidized dimeric peroxiredoxin (the antibody not distinguishing
between sulfinic and sulfonic forms), because it was the very existence
of a rhythm in isolated human RBCs, rather than the mechanism underlying
the post-translational peroxiredoxin modification, that was the focus
of their investigation. The more biochemically rigorous recent study
by Cho and colleagues, using NEM-treated lysates separated under nonreducing
conditions, did not detect significant dimers in mouse RBCs. This
means that the hyperoxidized PRX band observed previously at the molecular
weight of a PRX dimer likely comprises one monomer with a hyperoxidized
peroxidatic cysteine, with its reducing cysteine partaking in an intermolecular
disulfide with the peroxidatic cysteine of the opposing monomer. On
the basis of findings of Cho et al., it is plausible that this single
intermolecular disulfide forms rapidly postlysis if NEM or sufficient
reductant is not present. Despite the possibility that dimers detected
in the earlier work may not have been significantly present prior
to lysis, however, the rhythm in peroxiredoxin hyperoxidation is preserved,
meaning that subsequent disulfide bond formation between opposing
cysteines in noncovalently linked peroxiredoxin dimers in no way precludes
the possibility that the other peroxidatic cysteine in the dimer was
sulfinic prior to lysis.

An additional circadian rhythm in nuclear
localization of PRDX2
has also been demonstrated in human keratinocytes, indicating that
subcellular localization of redox factors may also be a factor in
determining the character of the circadian clock. In addition, Kil et al. reported circadian rhythms in (mitochondrially
localized) sulfinic peroxiredoxin 3 in mouse adrenal cortex, suggesting
that these protein oxidation rhythms may extend to other cellular
organelles.

At present, the observation
of circadian redox states in peroxiredoxins
is largely phenomenological. A proteasome-mediated mechanism has been
proposed in RBCs but is unlikely to be universally applicable because
of the peculiarities of the system (discussed in detail below). No
mechanism has been demonstrated to explain why peroxiredoxin oxidation
states oscillate in such a wide range of nucleated and anucleated
systems, nor has this oscillation been observed in cell-free preparations.
Similarly, no causal relationship with canonical circadian clock componentry
has been demonstrated. Moreover, it remains entirely plausible that
circadian rhythms have evolved multiple times and have converged upon
rhythmic regulation of redox and metabolism because of the advantages
inherent to temporal partitioning of mutually antagonistic metabolic
processes. In this case, redox rhythms result in cyclic oxidation
of peroxiredoxins as a simple consequence of this protein family’s
biochemistry, abundance, and ubiquity.

More intriguing perhaps
is the case of nontranscriptional RBC rhythms., The
RBC is in some ways an excellent model for studying the circadian
clock. Mature RBCs lack organelles, including the nucleus, from which
canonical circadian signals emanate. Given that RBCs are competent
(1) to entrain to temperature cycles and (2) to maintain a circadian
rhythm, with such a minimal set of components we can assume that all
the elements of a nontranscriptional clock are contained within.

In the RBC, some strides that enhance our
understanding of the
mechanism by which peroxiredoxins cycle have been taken. First, it was observed that ∼1% of total
PRDX2 is subject to hyperoxidation into the sulfinic form over the
course of this daily cycle. Second, it was found that the levels of
sulfiredoxin were insufficient to allow reduction of sulfinic peroxiredoxin
during the circadian cycle. Accordingly, a mutant in which sulfiredoxin
was not present retained sulfinic peroxiredoxin cycles. Surprisingly,
given that RBCs cannot translate new protein, sulfinic peroxiredoxin
is degraded by the 20S proteasome. This leads to an age-dependent
loss of PRDX2 as sulfinic protein is progressively degraded with each
circadian cycle.

It should be noted
that the RBC is a highly specialized system,
and anything we learn from its study must be seen with this caveat
in mind. Specifically, the concentration of sulfiredoxin is lower
in RBCs than in other cell types, which favors the destructive cycle
of oxidation and degradation proposed by Cho and colleagues. It is not inconceivable that the clock apparent
in RBCs simply does not function in the very different cellular environment
of a more mundane nucleated cell. It was suggested that the rhythm
in RBCs might be driven by autoxidation of heme. Autoxidation of hemoglobin
occurs at a higher rate if the protein is in a dimeric state rather
than in a cooperative tetrameric state. Oxidized hemoglobin is reduced primarily by NADH methemoglobin reductase,
but also by NADPH methemoglobin reductase, ascorbic acid, and glutathione. Because hemoglobin is at high concentration
in RBCs, an underlying rhythm in the cytosol that drives a subtle
change in the dimer–tetramer equilibrium would be translated,
by the accompanying change in the autoxidation rate, into a rhythm
in the redox status of the major cellular antioxidants. An observed
rhythm in NAD(P)H levels (measured by enzymatic assay) and hemoglobin
oxidation (measured indirectly by front-face fluorescence) supports
this hypothesis. Also, the level of rhythmic
oxidation of PRDX2 is greatly reduced by treating the cells with carbon
monoxide. This treatment effectively prevents heme oxidation and suggests
that the observed rhythm in PRDX2 oxidation is dependent upon it. However, at the high concentrations of hemoglobin
present in RBCs, the dimer will be very much a minority species and
therefore would be expected to make only a very modest contribution
to the overall rate of Hb autoxidation, unless the intracellular rate
of heme dissociation and autoxidation is dramatically different from
that measured in vitro.

Peroxiredoxins not only may be an excellent marker for cellular
rhythms but also may hint at a primordial redox oscillation that underlies
contemporary circadian clocks. Irrespective
of a basis on peroxiredoxin biochemistry, we do not know how such
an oscillator might generate rhythms, why mechanistically the period
should be around 24 h, or how this oscillation might be temperature-compensated.
Fortunately, nature has already provided a well-characterized nontranscriptional
oscillator from from which we can draw inspiration in trying to understand
nontranscriptional rhythms in eukaryotic cells.

Cyanobacterial KaiABC Oscillator:
A Model for Nontranscriptional
Rhythms
A precedent exists for a self-sustaining nontranscriptional
oscillator
in the form of the cyanobacterial KaiABC oscillator. This paradigmatic
example of nontranscriptional circadian oscillation was first demonstrated
by Tomita et al. and was recapitulated in vitro by
Nakajima et al., Here the KaiABC complex from
the cyanobacterium Synechococcus elongatus was shown
to undergo rhythmic autophosphorylation and dephosphorylation with
circadian kinetics when the components were mixed in vitro with ATP as an energy source. Crucially, the oscillation persists
without rhythmic environmental stimuli and is temperature-compensated.

The KaiC protein forms a hexamer in the
presence of ATP and is
autophosphorylated at the monomer interfaces. KaiA acts as a cofactor
in the phosphorylation reaction, while KaiB antagonizes this reaction.
The assembly of the KaiABC complex is thought to be integral to its
circadian regulation and is reviewed in depth by Johnson et al.

Because KaiC is a broad-spectrum transcription
factor that can
suppress transcription from its own gene cluster, in vivo the KaiABC oscillator exists within a GEFL loop. The transcriptional
activity of the KaiABC complex also works to generate the rhythmic
program of gene expression essential to a circadian lifestyle. The
synergistic action of two feedback loops is thought to increase robustness,
although attempts to reconstitute the GEFL alone (without the post-translational
feedback loop) failed to exhibit circadian rhythms.,

It was proposed that the catalytic cycle of peroxiredoxin
hyperoxidation
and recycling by sulfiredoxin may form the basis of a transcription-independent
circadian clock. Both the oxidation of
sulfenic peroxiredoxin and the converse reduction of sulfinic acid
are thought to be inefficient in vivo., This mirrors slow rates of catalytic cycling observed in the KaiABC
oscillator and may be instrumental in setting up the near 24 h period
essential in circadian oscillators. This
hypothesis must be updated in light of the recent observation that
peroxiredoxin cycling is driven by rhythmic degradation in the mouse
RBC, as is it unclear that the rate of peroxiredoxin degradation would
be slow enough to allow such a long period of oscillation. Interestingly, both the KaiABC complex and peroxiredoxin
proteins assemble into multimeric complexes in vivo, and their multimeric state is linked to their function., All currently described cellular oscillators incorporate some element
of negative feedback control with delay however; for example, in the KaiABC oscillator, this is manifested
by the inhibition of KaiC autophosphorylation by serine-only phosphorylated
KaiC. A similar feedback system has yet
to be described in peroxiredoxin redox cycles, and moreover, genetic
and pharmacological manipulation of peroxiredoxin activity has only
modest effects on cellular timekeeping. Post-translational modification
of peroxiredoxin function has been demonstrated, however, so in vivo negative feedback is at least plausible. It is apparent that we currently lack a clear
mechanistic hypothesis of how peroxiredoxins might generate self-sustaining
rhythms from which circadian signals emanate. This does not prevent
us from considering how the canonical circadian clock might be coupled
to the cyclic redox state of peroxiredoxins in particular and, more
generally, the cellular redox state

Coupling Cellular Rhythms
to the Canonical Circadian Clock
Critical to the in vivo function of the KaiABC
oscillator is its coupling of a nontranscriptional oscillation to
a GEFL., This aspect is clearly missing from current
data on mammalian nontranscriptional oscillators, although there is
a wealth of data about how cellular redox status feeds into the canonical
circadian clock and vice versa.− The paradigm of post-translational control of the
canonical clock is well-established and
provides a conceptual framework within which redox signaling might
couple to GEFL function.

The core clock GEFL incorporates oscillation
across the entire
gene expression pathway. Rhythmic marks are placed on histones,− which lead to rhythmic transcription, translation of the mRNA, and
functionalization of the protein. There
is evidence that each stage of the gene expression cycle is regulated
to achieve a correct circadian output. There also is evidence that
GEFL need not incorporate the root of the gene expression pathway
and that oscillation can occur at multiple levels. For instance, in
the mouse liver, de novo transcription drives rhythms
in only 22% of oscillating transcripts. Furthermore, approximately 20% of the oscillating proteome components
have no detectable oscillation in the transcript. In many cases in which rhythmic transcription is described,
the protein level does not oscillate appreciably.

PER proteins provide a good example of circadian
rhythmicity in
protein activity, implemented by post-translational modification.
The tau mutation in the gene encoding casein kinase
Iε (CKIε) dramatically shortens the circadian period in
Syrian hamsters. CKI is a kinase with
multiple isoforms implicated in Wnt signaling, nucleo-cytoplasmic
shuttling, DNA replication, and DNA repair pathways. In the context of the circadian GEFL, CKIε and CKIδ
phosphorylate PER proteins and license their import into the nucleus
where they repress transcription (Figure ).− Phosphorylation of PER proteins also promotes their proteasomal
degradation. More recently, it has been
shown that the related casein kinase 2 also acts upon PER protein
to regulate circadian rhythms. The tau mutation decreases the general kinase activity of CKIε
but increases its specific activity against PER protein, thereby accelerating
both the import and degradation of the PER:CRY complex. Conversely, interfering with degradation of
the PER:CRY complex function by pharmacological means causes a lengthening
of period, indicating that stability of the PER/CRY complex is critical
in determining cycle length.

Post-translational
regulation of the clock and enzymes such as
the casein kinases, like the rhythms in peroxiredoxin oxidation, exhibits
greater conservation than the canonical clock components., Accordingly, drugs that act upon post-translational control mechanisms
tend to have similar effects on the circadian clock across different
taxa.

Many of these post-translational
modifications are themselves circadian,
creating “accessory” oscillators that cooperate in cellular
timekeeping (Figure ). In mammals, these accessory
oscillators are components of cellular metabolic pathways, linking
the daily rhythm to the rhythmic metabolic demands it places upon
an organism. For instance, adenosine
monophosphate-regulated kinase (AMPK) senses cellular energy levels
generally but is also rhythmically regulated
by threonine phosphorylation., Activated AMPK in turn
can phosphorylate CKIε and CRY proteins and regulate the circadian
clock., A similar accessory oscillation of cAMP/Ca2+ has also been described, which is of particular importance
in a neuronal context (reviewed in ref ()).

Accessory circadian oscillators. Modulation
of the canonical PER:CRY–BMAL:CLOCK
oscillator occurs by post-translational modification of clock components.
As these pathways are affected by the clock themselves, they form
“accessory oscillators”. Green arrows designate control
of the canonical clock, and red arrows indicate circadian control
of accessory oscillators. cAMP/Ca2+ signaling oscillates in vivo and controls transcriptional output of clock-controlled
genes that incorporate cAMP response elements in their promoters.
AMPK senses the cellular ATP/ADP ratio, which is an output of circadian
metabolism. AMPK signals to casein kinase Iε to control degradation
of PER2 protein and also phosphorylates CRY proteins. The NAD+/NADH ratio is controlled by circadian transcription of the
biosynthetic enzyme NAMPT. SIRT1, an NAD+-dependent histone
deacetylase, controls the activity of the BMAL:CLOCK complex and can
induce degradation of PER2. Peroxiredoxin (PRDX) oscillations have
been detected in a variety of systems, but the extent with which and
mechanism by which they interact with the circadian clock are not
yet known.

Redox Control of the Circadian Clock
Cellular redox status is under the pervasive influence of the circadian
clock but can also signal back to control it via a general influence
upon cellular metabolism.−, If circadian peroxiredoxin
oxidation oscillation, or the cryptic oscillator it reports, is coupled
to the clock, this might be mediated through established redox signaling
mechanisms. Additionally, the peroxiredoxins themselves might mediate
coupling between the canonical circadian clock and redox oscillations.

Nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NAD+) is a cellular
electron carrier that can also function as an enzyme substrate during
the post-translational modification of proteins. NADP+ is
a closely related compound functioning in biosynthetic pathways as
well as redox homeostasis. Both compounds are reduced by the addition
of a hydride ion (H–) to form NADH or NADPH; the
phosphate group of NADPH is not thought to affect its electron transfer
properties but confers substrate specificity. In general, the NAD+/NADH cellular ratio (&gt;1) is higher
than the NADP+/NADPH cellular ratio (&lt;0.01), and in
the cytosol, these two redox couples are not in equilibrium, allowing
the cell to segregate antioxidant and biosynthetic reducing equivalents
(NADPH) from those destined for mitochondrial ATP generation (NADH).
Flavin adenine dinucleotide (FAD) is a redox cofactor that acts as
an electron acceptor in mitochondrial oxidative phosphorylation to
form FADH2, which then donates its electrons to the electron
transport chain.

Circadian oscillations
in the redox state have been described in ex vivo culture, in which the ratio of oxidized FAD to reduced
NADH was determined fluorometrically in oscillating suprachiasmatic
nucleus slices. The redox rhythm was
abrogated in bmal1–/– mutant mice and shown to correlate to the excitability of
the neurons within the pacemaker circuitry by modulation of potassium
channels. Regulation of the NAD+ synthetic enzyme NAMPT by the CLOCK:BMAL complex has suggested a
mechanism for circadian control of redox homeostasis in mice., As previously discussed, NADH and NADPH rhythms have since been
described in isolated human RBCs that cannot be explained by circadian
expression of redox proteins.

The
level of NAD+ feeds back into clock component regulation
and has global effects on the proteome (Figure ). The class III histone deacetylase
SIRT1 is NAD+-dependent and acts to generate rhythmic patterns
in circadian gene histone H3 acetylation and acetylation of BMAL1. BMAL1 acetylation coincides with downregulation
of clock-controlled genes, mediated through an increased level of
recruitment of CRY1 to the BMAL1:CLOCK complex. Furthermore, PER2 is deacetylated by SIRT1, leading to
its degradation. Through multiple mechanisms,
SIRT1 seems to ensure high-magnitude rhythms in the circadian clock.
The subtle circadian phenotype of the homozygous clock and sirt1 null mice, however, suggests that the
reality must be more complex.−

Further interplay between
the cellular redox state and the circadian
clock was suggested by the observation that the affinity of BMAL1
in a complex with CLOCK (or a related protein, NPAS2) for DNA was
modulated in vitro by the ratio of NAD+ to NADH or NADP+ to NADPH. REV-ERBβ, a heme binding protein implicated in the regulation
of metabolism and the circadian clock, has also been shown to have
redox sensitive cysteine residues that control the expression of target
genes. This illustrates a mechanism by
which redox balance can influence circadian clock function. The crystal structure of the mouse PER2:CRY1
complex may suggest a further mechanism of redox regulation of the
core clock. The close interaction of
PER2 and CRY1 is stabilized by the coordination of a zinc ion, which
facilitates the reduction of a nearby disulfide bond. The likely candidates
for disulfide bridge formation were identified as Cys412 and Cys363
of CRY1. Accordingly, CRY1 was found to exist in both oxidized and
reduced forms when expressed in HEK293 cells. In vitro experiments indicate that nonreducing conditions do not promote
the release of zinc from the complex, but this does not preclude in vivo redox sensitive zinc binding. Alternatively, as
the dissociation constant of the PER2:CRY1 complex is close to native
free zinc ion concentrations (in the nanomolar range), this may allow
a fluctuating zinc concentration to control the function of the PER2:CRY1
complex. Zinc release has been demonstrated to support CRY1 oxidation,
which would render the circadian clock zinc sensitive.

Interestingly, in mice in which Cys414
of CRY1 has been substituted
for alanine, a long period (28 h) is evident. It has been suggested that this mutation promotes PER1 interaction
and thus has a phenotype similar to that of mutants in the BMAL:CLOCK
arm of the circadian clock.

The
metabolic processes of aerobic cells produce reactive oxidative
species (ROS) as an inevitable byproduct, particularly superoxide.
The role of ROS in cellular signaling is under intense scrutiny at
present and is thought to influence processes as diverse as stem cell
proliferation and cell migration., Superoxide
is rapidly converted to hydrogen peroxide (H2O2) by superoxide dismutases. Intracellular H2O2 can act as a classic second messenger within the cell by covalent
modification of key molecules. Reduced
redox sensitive cysteine residues oxidized by H2O2 cause changes to protein activity, such as in the case of phosphotyrosine
phosphatases, which are inactivated by cysteine oxidation, which in
turn signal to other cellular components. Higher concentrations of H2O2 cause glutathione
oxidation, which in turn activates oxidative stress response pathways. Responses to oxidative stress can be mediated
through gene expression, for instance via the redox sensitive cysteine-containing
FOXO4 transcription factor. More immediately,
oxidative stress can act directly to reroute metabolic flux and thereby
restore redox homeostasis.

Peroxiredoxins
can facilitate signaling through a variety of mechanisms. There are many examples of peroxiredoxin-mediated
ROS signaling pathways, many of which are mediated by protein interaction. While none so far described explicitly speak
to modulation of the circadian GEFL, an abundance of precedents for
such a mode of action does exist.

It has been proposed that
an increase in the level of H2O2 of sufficient
magnitude can cause sulfinic peroxiredoxin
to form in vivo, deactivating a major cellular antioxidant,
leading to a further increase in H2O2 levels
that can act as a second messenger in signal transduction. The floodgate hypothesis of peroxide signaling,
proposed by Wood et al., has been reviewed
elsewhere., Sulfonic peroxiredoxin, if it
accumulates in vivo, is likely also to contribute
to the floodgate effect, because it is irreversibly redox inactivated.
Similarly, a study in yeast has also revealed an unexpected role of
peroxiredoxin hyperoxidation (Tpx-SO2H) in cell survival.
Here, thioredoxin, the major substrate for oxidized peroxiredoxin,
is discharged by inactivated (sulfinic and sulfonic) peroxiredoxin,
allowing it to reduce other substrates critical to cell survival.

A further mechanism might involve the
chaperone function of peroxiredoxins.
As previously discussed, hyperoxidation of peroxiredoxin can induce
a chaperone function in higher-order complexes. The hyperoxidation-induced
chaperone function or signal transduction properties of peroxiredoxin,
acting directly or via H2O2, would provide a
straightforward means of propagating the circadian signal into the
wider cellular system by potentiating gene expression either globally
or specifically.

Conclusion
In this review, we have
discussed how the canonical clock utilizes
post-translational modifications in its normal function and that these
modifications are closely linked to metabolism, including cellular
redox homeostasis. Recent findings have demonstrated that not only
is redox status linked to the canonical circadian clock, but that
it may also be a conserved reporter of a noncanonical, transcription-independent
circadian clock. At present, we do not know the mechanism of the nontranscriptional
circadian clock in eukaryotes. It may be that a system similar to
the KaiABC autophosphorylation–dephosphorylation cycles is
waiting to be discovered. Alternatively, peroxiredoxin hyperoxidation
cycles may be key to understanding the clockwork of this noncanonical
oscillation. Our growing knowledge of ROS signaling certainly indicates
that gene expression programs can be controlled by the cellular redox
state at multiple levels. However, if history has taught us anything,
it is likely that an entirely unexpected mechanism underlies nontranscriptional
rhythms in eukaryotes.

We are supported
by the Medical Research Council (MC_UP_1201/4) and the Wellcome Trust
(093734/Z/10/Z).

The authors declare no
competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
Thanks to members
of the O’Neill lab for helpful discussion.

Abbreviations
AMPKadenosine monophosphate-regulated
protein kinase

BMAL1brain and muscle Arnt-like protein-1

CKIcasein kinase 1

CLOCKcircadian locomotor output cycles kaput

CRYcryptochrome

FADflavin adenine
dinucleotide

GEFLgene expression feedback loop

LUCAlatest universal common ancestor

NAD+nicotinamide
adenine dinucleotide

NADP+nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate

PERperiod

PRDXperoxiredoxin

SRXsulfiredoxin

TRXthioredoxin

TTFLtranscription–translation
feedback loop.

