Bacterial Motility and Flagella
Many bacteria require motility for their growth and survival. Motility
is also essential for the infectivity of many prokaryotic pathogens.
Although other types of motility exist (e.g., gliding motility), flagellum-mediated
translational motion is the most common mechanism in bacteria. Flagellar rotation is driven by the proton- or
sodium-motive force across the cytoplasmic membrane. In most externally
flagellated bacteria, counterclockwise rotation (CCW, as viewed from
the distal end of the flagellum to where it inserts into the membrane)
of the flagella results in bundling of the helical flagella and propulsion
of the cell through liquid or viscous environments (“running”).
The flagellar motor can reverse directions, as well, and when rotating
clockwise (CW), the flagellar filaments separate, resulting in random
motion of the cell with little translational movement (“tumbling”).
A sophisticated chemotaxis signaling system allows the cell to sense
chemical stimuli and transmit this information through a signal transduction
cascade that regulates the direction of flagellar rotation., Cells migrate in chemical gradients by biasing the three-dimensional
(3D) random walk that is generated by the combination of run and tumble
behaviors.

Spirochete and Periplasmic
Flagella
Spirochetes represent one of the major bacterial
phyla and are
unusual in both morphology and motility. They are well-known for causing several diseases in both humans
and animals, including Lyme disease (Borrelia burgdorferi and related organisms), relapsing fever (several Borrelia species), syphilis (Treponema pallidum), leptospirosis
(Leptospira species), and swine dysentery (Brachyspira species). Lyme disease
is the most common vector-borne infection in the United States. Syphilis
is a prevalent sexually transmitted disease in many areas of the world,
while leptospirosis is the most common worldwide waterborne zoonosis.

B. burgdorferi is one of the best studied spirochetes
in terms of motility., In contrast to the external flagellar
filaments found in most motile bacteria, spirochetes possess periplasmic
flagella (PFs) that are enclosed between the outer membrane and the
peptidoglycan layer within the periplasmic space (Figure ). In B. burgdorferi, 7–11
PFs are inserted subterminally at both cell poles (Figure B). The PF bundles wind around a flexible protoplasmic
cylinder and overlap in the middle of the cell. The PFs are essential for the distinct morphology, motility,
and infectious life cycle of B. burgdorferi.− The flagella at each end of the cell are coordinated to rotate in
opposite directions during translational motion and in the same direction
(i.e., either CW or CCW) during the spirochete equivalent of tumbling,
called “flexing”., Rotation of the flagella
causes a serpentine movement of the entire cell body, allowing the
organism to efficiently bore its way through viscous media or tissue.

Schematic
models of the external flagellum of E. coli (A and
C) and periplasmic flagella of B. burgdorferi (B
and D). Periplasmic flagella are distinct from the external flagella,
as they are enclosed within the outer membrane and their flagellar
motors are considerably larger and more complex. However, the core
architecture of the two flagellar types is comparable. Shared structures
include the MS ring, the C ring, the rod, the hook, the filament,
the stator, and the export apparatus.

Bacterial Flagellar Motor
The structure and function of
bacterial flagella have been extensively
studied in model systems Salmonella enterica and Escherichia coli, as summarized in several recent comprehensive
reviews.,− Of approximately 50 genes involved
in the expression and assembly of the flagellum, ∼20 produce
integral flagellar components. The flagellum consists of the motor,
the hook, and the helically shaped flagellar filament (Figure A,B). The flagellar motor can be divided into several
morphological domains (Figure C,D): the MS
ring (FliF, the base for the flagellar motor), the C ring (FliG, FliM,
and FliN, the switch complex regulating motor rotation), the export
apparatus (a large complex exporting flagellar substrates), the rod
(connecting the MS ring and the hook), the L and P rings on the rod
(thought to serve as bushings at the outer membrane and at the peptidoglycan
layer, respectively), and the stator, which is the motor force generator
embedded in the cytoplasmic membrane.

The stator complex is
composed of two transmembrane proteins, MotA
and MotB, in E. coli and S. enterica. MotA has a large cytoplasmic domain, which contains conserved charged
residues that are critical for the interaction with the rotor-associated
protein FliG., MotB has a large periplasmic
domain that is believed to bind to the peptidoglycan layer., The arrangements of MotA and MotB within the complex have been studied
extensively by mutational analysis and systematic disulfide cross-linking
studies., Four MotA subunits and two MotB subunits
form an ion-conducting complex (MotA4MotB2)
that couples the proton flux to rotation of the rotor–flagellar
filament assembly. A conserved aspartic
acid residue in the transmembrane segment of MotB (Asp32 in E. coli) is the predicted proton-binding site. The proton binding or dissociation at this residue
triggers conformational changes of the cytoplasmic domain of MotA
in the stator, which are believed to drive the flagellar rotation
through interactions between MotA and FliG.

The flagellar export apparatus is responsible for the secretion
of flagellar type III protein substrates, which include the polypeptide
subunits of the flagellar rod, the hook, and the filament. The export
apparatus uses both the ion-motive force, and the energy of ATP hydrolysis− to complete the export
process. It is structurally and functionally homologous to the pathogenic
type III secretion system (T3SS) that directly injects virulence factors
into host cells. The export apparatus
is located at the bottom of the MS ring (Figure C,D) and is composed of six membrane proteins (FlhA, FlhB, FliP,
FliQ, FliR, and FliO) and three soluble proteins (FliI, FliH, and
FliJ) in the cytoplasm. The membrane
components are thought to form an export gate for secretion of the
substrates, while the three soluble proteins form a FliH/FliI/FliJ
complex that promotes the export process by binding and delivering
export substrates to the export gate. It has been suggested that the
FliH/FliI/FliJ complex has an architecture similar to that of F- and
V-type ATPases.,

The structures of many
flagellar proteins have been determined
at atomic resolution, including components of the flagellar filament
(FliC), the C ring (FliM, FliG,− FliN, and the FliG/FliM complex,), and the stator (MotB,). Cryo-electron microscopy (cryo-EM) studies have provided the most
detailed structures of the purified basal body, which contains the
MS ring, the C ring, the rod, and the P and L rings. However, these structures do not contain components of
the stator and the export apparatus. In early electron microscopy
studies, the stator and the export apparatus were visualized in freeze-fracture
preparations of cytoplasmic membranes.− The first examination
of the intact flagellar motor by cryo-electron tomography (cryo-ET)
was reported in 2006. This technique
has been utilized to reveal the structural features of the stator
and export apparatus in relation to the rotor elements.− The combination of high-throughput cryo-ET and genetic analysis
has been particularly useful for dissecting flagellar motor structure
and assembly at 3.5 nm resolution.,, Therefore, this review is intended to provide an
overview of this advanced imaging technique and its promising role
in understanding the structure and function of intact flagellar motors.

3D
Visualization of Intact Flagellar Motors by Cryo-Electron
Tomography and Subtomogram Averaging
Cryo-ET is a 3D imaging
technique that in principle is comparable
to computerized axial tomography (CAT) by which a 3D structure is
reconstructed from its two-dimensional (2D) projections (Figure ). The unique strength
of cryo-ET lies in its potential for visualizing large macromolecular
assemblies in their native environment without fixation, dehydration,
or staining artifacts. The preparation of frozen hydrated specimens
is a critical step in this technique. Suspensions of freshly prepared,
viable bacteria are deposited onto EM holey carbon grids and then
rapidly frozen in liquid ethane at approximately −180 °C.
Frozen hydrated specimens (Figure A) are then
imaged at −170 °C using a cryo-electron microscope (Figure B). A low-dose tilt series of images (Figure C), which typically cover an angular range of −64°
to +64° in 1.5° increments, is collected and aligned to
generate a 3D tomographic reconstruction (Figure D). The flagellar motors are
readily visible in the reconstruction (Figure D). However, the resolution and contrast of one subtomogram from
one flagellar motor are poor for fully understanding their molecular
details (Figure E).

Workflow for determination
of the in situ flagellar
motor structure by cryo-electron tomography and subtomogram averaging.
(A) Frozen hydrated specimen of a freshly prepared bacterial culture.
(B) Cryo-EM images are collected by tilting the specimen from −64°
to +64° in an electron microscope. (C) Low-dose tilt series of
2D projection images from a cell tip. (D) 3D reconstruction from a
cell generated by backprojection. (E) Subtomograms containing the
flagellar motor are extracted from tomographic reconstructions. (F)
Thousands of the subtomograms are thoroughly aligned and averaged
to determine the 3D structure at higher resolution. (G) 3D visualization
of the intact flagellar motor embedded in the cytoplasmic membrane.
(H) 3D visualization of a bacterial cell. Averaged motor structures
are mapped back into the cellular context.

Subtomogram averaging and classification are the methods
of choice
for improving the signal-to-noise ratio and resolution of macromolecular
assemblies., Multiple copies of the flagellar
motors are visually identified in the cell tomograms, and the 3D density
map of each flagellar motor (Figure E) is
extracted from its cellular context. Thousands of subtomograms are
aligned and averaged to obtain a higher-resolution structure with
an improved signal-to-noise ratio (Figure F,G). To minimize potential reference bias and also identify conformational
heterogeneity, multivariate statistical analysis (MSA) is a key method
utilized for the classification of subtomograms., The resulting higher-resolution structures can be mapped back into
their cellular context (Figure H), revealing
the macromolecular organization at an unprecedented level.

Cryo-ET
is a continuously evolving technique., Many recent
developments significantly enhance the resolution and
throughput, including automation, new
methods for image processing, phase-plate
techniques,, and new generation direct electron
detectors., It is expected that employment
of new technologies will greatly enhance the ability to determine
higher-resolution structures of intact flagellar motors in a broader
range of bacterial species.

To fully understand the density
maps derived from cryo-ET and subtomogram
averaging, it is critical to fit (“dock”) available
atomic structures from individual components into 3D maps. Together
with other structural and biochemical methods, cryo-ET is able to
bridge the information gap from cells to molecules, which is essential
for understanding the flagellar motor in its cellular context.

Differences
between the Purified Basal Body and Intact Flagellar
Motor in Cells
Cryo-EM studies have provided a detailed structure
of the purified
basal body of S. enterica. However, many membrane-associated
features are absent (Figure A), as demonstrated by comparing basal body reconstruction
with the low-resolution map derived from cryo-ET of S. enterica cells (Figure B). Both membranes and the export apparatus are visible in the intact S. enterica motor, whereas little structural detail can
be discerned in the stator region. In contrast, intact motor structures
from relatively thin spirochetes, as exemplified by B. burgdorferi (Figure E,F), can be derived at higher resolution
and reveal significantly more detail., The intact B. burgdorferi motor structure is considerably more complex
than its purified basal body (Figure D,E,
basal body outlined). Many periplasmic and cytoplasmic components
within the intact motor are dissociated during PF purification, including
the unique periplasmic “collar”, the stator, the P ring,
the C ring, and the export apparatus. However, the remaining B. burgdorferi basal body is structurally comparable to
the S. enterica basal body (minus the C ring), suggesting
that it is composed of the MS ring and the rod.

Comparative analysis
of the intact motor and the purified basal
body. (A) Purified S. enterica basal body structure
determined by cryo-EM. (B) In
situ S. enterica motor structure reconstructed by cryo-ET. (C) Cartoon model of the S. enterica flagellar motor. (D) The purified B. burgdorferi basal body structure determined by cryo-ET is comparable to the MS ring and rod complex of the S. enterica basal body. (E) Intact motor structure of B. burgdorferi. The basal body portion is outlined
in the intact motor. (F) Cartoon model of the B. burgdorferi flagellar motor. (G) Slice from a cryotomogram of a ΔfliE mutant showing two flagellar motors lacking the filament
and hook. (H) Averaged motor structure
of the ΔfliE mutant. The red arrow indicates
that the central channel in the MS ring is closed. (I) Cartoon model
of a rodless motor in the ΔfliE mutant. The
architecture of the MS ring in the B. burgdorferi motor is similar to that of the MS ring in S. enterica.

The boundary between the rod and the MS ring has been defined
by
using cryo-ET reconstructions of a rodless B. burgdorferi ΔfliE mutant (Figure G). In the absence of the rod, a socketlike
domain of the MS ring is clearly revealed in the ΔfliE mutant (Figure H). As expected, the MS ring
from B. burgdorferi shares a configuration similar
to that in S. enterica (Figure I)., Notably, the central channel of the MS ring
is closed in the ΔfliE motor (Figure H,I). In contrast, the channel is open in the intact
motor, suggesting that the rod proteins form an integrated complex
with the MS ring and thereby promote the opening of the channel (Figure E,F).

Comparative analysis of the S. enterica and B. burgdorferi motor structures
allows definition of the
conserved components in flagellar motor: the MS ring, the rod, the
P ring, and the C ring (Figure C,F,I). It
also provides guidance for the dissection of other components, which
are not readily resolved by other approaches. Specifically, the combination
of a large membrane-integrated domain and two cytoplasmic structures
at the bottom of the MS ring is thought to be the export apparatus
(Figure C,F,I, outlined in purple). In the B. burgdorferi motor, there is also a periplasmic structure,
termed the collar (Figure F,I, outlined in
cyan) that surrounds the MS ring, the P ring, and the rod. This is
a spirochete-specific structure, and the encoding genes have not been
identified at the time of this review. Other peripheral densities
that span the membrane are thought to represent the stators (Figure F,I, outlined in blue). In spirochetes, both the
collar and the putative stators exhibit an evident 16-fold symmetry.
Interestingly, the stator is embedded in a curved cytoplasmic membrane
and reflects the same curvature; the intrinsic flexibility of the
rotor–stator interaction is likely an important factor during
flagellar rotation.

Intact Motor Structures
in Different Bacterial Species
Molecular architectures of
intact flagellar motor from several
phyla have been determined at 3–8 nm resolution by using cryo-ET
and subtomogram averaging.,,, To illustrate the degree of conservation,
six representative motor structures derived from several bacteria
with external or periplasmic flagella are compared in Figure . The E. coli, Campylobacter
jejuni, Hylemonela gracilis, and Treponema primitia motor structures were obtained in a comprehensive
study by Chen et al. Whereas the overall
architectures vary between species, the
MS ring, the C ring, the rod, and the export apparatus have the same
overall configuration as those determined in S. enterica() and B. burgdorferi,,, suggesting
that the core components of the flagellar motors and their interactions
are conserved (Figure ). In general, the MS
ring forms the base of each motor. The socket and central channel
of the MS ring are visible in all species, suggesting that it provides
an evolutionarily conserved platform for rod assembly. The C ring
is consistently attached to the cytoplasmic edge of the MS ring, but
the C ring diameter varies considerably in different species. The
export apparatus is located at the bottom of the MS ring. A doughnut-shaped
torus is well conserved among different species and is located ∼6
nm below the inner membrane. Additional cytoplasmic densities likely
correspond to the FliH/FliI/FliJ complex (Figure ). Notably, the motor structures from B. burgdorferi(,) and Leptospira interrogans() reveal significantly more detail in the export
apparatus and other components, which is thought to be due in part
to the higher resolution that can be achieved with thin bacterial
cells in combination with the use of a large number of individual
motor structures for subtomogram averaging.

In situ flagellar motor structures from different
organisms determined by cryo-ET and subtomogram averaging. (A–C)
External flagella: E. coli (EMDB-5311), C.
jejuni (EMDB-5300), and H. gracilis (EMDB-5309)
flagellar motors. (D–F) Periplasmic flagella: B. burgdorferi (EMDB-5627), T. primitia (EMDB-1235), and L. interrogans (EMDB-5912–5914) flagellar motors. The bottom panels show the corresponding cartoon
models. The color scheme is the same as that in Figure . Noticeably, the densities of putative stator and export
apparatus are clearly revealed in some bacterial species.

The rod functions as both the secretion channel
and the drive shaft
that transmits torque. Five proteins (FliE, FlgB, FlgC, FlgF, and
FlgG) are involved in assembly of the rod. When the rod proteins are effectively expressed, the central channel
of the MS ring adopts an open conformation that serves as a template
for rod assembly. The proximal rod proteins
assemble on top of the open channel of the MS ring in the following
order: FliE, FlgB, FlgC, and FlgF.,− The distal rod of external flagella is estimated to consist of four
turns containing 26 FlgG subunits (∼15 nm in S. enterica). In contrast, the distal rod (∼4
nm) in spirochetes is too short to penetrate the outer membrane (Figure E), contributing to the periplasmic localization
of the flagella. It is likely that FlgG polymerizes in only one turn
in B. burgdorferi, which appears to be the case for
the other rod proteins (FlgB, FlgC, and FlhO, a FlgF homologue). The variable rod length in species with external
flagella is likely controlled by the degree of polymerization of the
distal rod protein FlgG.

The P and L rings that are located
around the rod of Gram-negative
organisms are composed of FlgI and FlgH, respectively, and are thought
to function as bushings in the cell envelope., The
densities on the external surface of the rod differ considerably in
external flagella and periplasmic flagella (Figure ), consistent with the variable presence of encoding genes flgI and flgH. For example, Treponema species do not have identifiable flgI and flgH genes (Figure D) and lack both P and L rings.,B.
burgdorferi has flgI but does not have flgH, consistent with the presence of the P ring, but not
an L ring. Inactivation of flgI resulted in the loss
of the P ring structure.L. interrogans has both genes and has a large, contiguous density on the outer
surface of the rod. The exact functions
of the rod-associated rings in spirochetes are not known.

The
stator complexes (MotA/MotB) assemble around the MS ring in
the cytoplasmic membrane. In S. enterica and E. coli, they are anchored to the peptidoglycan layer through
the periplasmic domain of MotB. Strikingly, many bacterial species
evolve the periplasmic features (Figure B–F,
colored cyan), in comparison with the E. coli motor
(Figure A). Some external flagella contain
a disklike structure (Figure B,C). In spirochetes, a periplasmic collar assembles
around the MS ring, and these structures appear to be quite heterogeneous
in the different spirochetal genera (Figure D–F). The function(s) and protein composition of the collar
structures are currently unknown. Interestingly, these periplasmic
features are closely associated with the stator, suggesting that the
stator interacts with the collar. In contrast, the motor structure
derived from E. coli or S. enterica cells does not contain any apparent periplasmic features other than
the rod and P and L rings (Figure A). The
stator complexes in these organisms are known to have variable occupancy
and a dynamic nature in their flagellar motors, which may contribute to the lack of a clearly defined stator
structure in cryo-ET images.

Overall,
cryo-ET images of the core structures (MS ring, rod, and
C ring) of spirochetal flagella are similar to those of other bacteria.
However, spirochetes also have a clearly discernible stator structure,
a spirochete-specific collar, and variable P and L rings. The small
cell diameter (0.1–0.3 μm) and orderly arrangement of
flagellar motors near the cell ends in spirochetes also facilitate in situ cryo-ET analysis of these structures at 3.5 nm resolution, indicating the benefits of these cells in cryo-ET
analysis. The intact flagellar motor structure of E. coli recently determined by cryo-ET has a relatively low resolution (5.9
nm). It is likely that further improvement
of the cryo-ET resolution can be achieved through the use of minicells,− high-efficiency electron detectors,, and high-throughput
techniques., Nevertheless, spirochetes (B. burgdorferi in particular) represent a valuable model
system for elucidating key questions in flagellar structure and function.

Sequential
Assembly of Bacterial Flagella
Flagellar assembly is a finely
orchestrated biochemical process
involving both highly regulated motility gene expression and ordered
protein assembly.,, The morphogenetic pathway for flagellar synthesis has been well-established
in S. enterica.− Recently, the combination
of cryo-ET and genetic analysis in B. burgdorferi has permitted determination of the location of specific flagellar
proteins,, and the visualization
of the process of flagellar assembly in cells. As an example, key
intermediates in the flagellar assembly of B. burgdorferi can be genetically trapped by systematically targeting individual
flagellar genes (encoding the rod, hook, and filament proteins) (Figure ). Interestingly,
the MS ring channel appeared to be closed in a ΔfliE mutant, and no rod-associated density was visualized; thus, assembly
of the rod in B. burgdorferi is FliE-dependent, consistent
with studies conducted with S. enterica. Cryo-ET analysis of each rod mutant (ΔfliE, ΔflgB, ΔflgC, ΔflhO, and ΔflgG)
permitted assessment of the contribution of each rod protein to rod
assembly. Similarly, analysis of hook
mutant ΔflgE revealed a structure thought to
represent a hook cap attached to the end of distal rod. Examination
of a flaB filament deletion mutant also exhibited
a filament cap structure, which is likely related to the cap protein
FliD. In this study, high-throughput cryo-ET procedures permitted
the comparative analysis of seven flagellar mutants and more than
20000 gigabytes of data and thereby provide a large set of 3D flagellar
structures, which may represent key intermediates during flagellar
assembly (Figure ).

Sequential
flagellar assembly process revealed in B. burgdorferi. In the pre-T3S assembly state, most
flagellar motor components except for the flagellar rod have been
assembled, which includes the MS ring, the C ring, the stators, the
export apparatus, and the unique periplasmic structure collar. The
secretion channel in the MS ring is closed (first panel). The exportation
of rod substrates opens the channel, and proximal rod substrates [FliE,
FlgB, FlgC, and FlhO (FlgF homologue)] cooperatively assemble into
a stable proximal rod structure (second panel). The distal rod protein
FlgG adds onto the proximal rod and polymerizes until it reaches a
determined length. With the completion of rod assembly, the hook cap
is exported and the P ring is assembled around the rod (third panel).
The hook assembly is promoted by a hook cap. With the completion of hook assembly, the hook–filament junction
and filament cap are exported (fourth panel). The filament assembly
is promoted by the filament cap (fifth panel).

Asymmetric Reconstruction Reveals Novel Architectural
Elements
of the Export Apparatus
The flagellar motor is composed of
many different components, and
each component has its own symmetries. In spirochetes, the periplasmic collar has 16-fold symmetry, while
the export apparatus is expected to possess different symmetries., To better understand the structure of the export apparatus, we chose
the L. interrogans motor as an example for further
image analysis, because of its striking structural details as shown
in Figure F. A novel procedure in which specific
substructures of interest are classified and aligned without applying
rotational symmetry was utilized recently to delineate asymmetric
structural assemblies in bacteriophage T7. This approach, which avoids introducing potential artifactual periodicities
and thus obscuring “true” symmetries, was used to determine
the structure of the Leptospira motor in greater
detail (Figure ). Specifically, classification
focusing on the export apparatus revealed significant details in its
overall structure and interaction with the C ring (Figure A,B). The cytoplasmic portion of the export apparatus
complex shows evident features in 6-fold symmetry or 12-fold symmetry,
while the periplasmic collar and stator complexes maintain 16-fold
symmetry (Figure A,B).

Asymmetric reconstruction
of the L. interrogans flagellar motor. A central
section of the asymmetric reconstruction
is shown in panel A. Panels 1–4 are horizontal cross sections.
The locations of the sections are indicated in panel A. Panels 1 and
2 are the putative collar and stator units with 16-fold symmetry.
Panels 3 and 4 are the export apparatus with 12- and 6-fold symmetry,
respectively. (B) 3D surface rendering of the intact motor displayed
in three different views. (C) Segmentation of the motor according
to the previous density outline. The complex structures inside the
C ring are ascribed to be the export apparatus. The major components
(FliI and FlhAC) of the export apparatus in C.
jejuni have been identified by fliI deletion
and flhA cytoplasmic domain truncation mutants, as shown in the insets at the bottom right of
panel C. The protein densities are colored black, and the lacking
densities of FliI and FlhAC are indicated by black arrows.

According to the structural comparison
among different species
of flagellar motors, the motor structure of L. interrogans can be segmented into several substructures (Figure C). The collar is a large and complex periplasmic structure
that is anchored on the cytoplasmic membrane and the MS ring. Underneath
the membrane, 16 ringlike particles are localized around the MS ring
(Figure A, panel 2) and likely correspond
to the stator complexes; further genetic
mutation of the stator is required to define the exact structure and
location of the stator. The C ring of L. interrogans exhibits an interesting feature of an extra structure attached to
the bottom of the C ring (Figure C).

The large cytoplasmic structures inside the C ring are recognized
as the export apparatus. Genome sequencing of phylogenetically diverse
organisms has shown the eight proteins (FliH, FliI, FliJ, FliP, FliQ,
FliR, FlhA, and FlhB) that make up of the flagellar export apparatus
and are considerably conserved. FlhA
is the largest export apparatus protein, which is predicted to have
eight transmembrane helices followed by a large cytoplasmic domain.
The cytoplasmic domains of nine copies of FlhA likely form this doughnut-shaped
ring below the membrane (Figures  and C). Underneath the
FlhAC ring, a spherical density with a diameter of ∼10
nm is observed in most intact motors (Figure ). This structure has been hypothesized to be the ATPase FliI, as
further substantiated in studies of a ΔfliI mutant constructed in C. jejuni. FliI is a member of the ATPase family and is thought to
form a spherical hexamer for protein export.− The structures
of FlhA and FliI not only are conserved in flagellar motors but also
have structural homologues in type III injectisomes, as recently revealed
by in situ analysis., Conserved
structures of the FlhAC ring and FliI ATPase are observed
in the flagellar motor of L. interrogans (Figure C). Importantly, there are novel “linkerlike”
structures with six copies in the inner part and 12 copies in the
outer part that extend radially to the bottom of the C ring. The overall
architecture of the export apparatus is similar to that in F- and
V-type ATPase., It is also consistent with the
biochemical data that show that the FliH/FliI/FliJ complex interacts
with both the FlhA ring and the C ring in a comprehensive manner., Clearly, the detailed structure of the export apparatus and its
secretion mechanisms will be a fascinating topic in the future.

Architecture
of the Switch Complex
The C ring is known as the switch complex,
which plays a crucial
role in flagellar switch, assembly, and rotation. FliG is directly
involved in the rotor–stator interaction, while FliM and FliN interact with the signaling protein
phosphorylated CheY (CheY-P) to regulate switching between CCW and
CW rotation.− Atomic structural information is now available for
all components of the switch complex, including the full-length or
fragmented FliG,− FliM, FliN fragments, and the complex of FliG/FliM fragments., Together with intact C ring structures determined by cryo-EM and
more recently by cryo-ET, these high-resolution structures become
the building blocks for achieving a pseudoatomic model of the C ring.

A consensus about the relative positions and orientation of FliM
and FliN has been reached, while the difference among models of the
C ring is the location of the N- and C-terminal domains of FliG.,,,, FliN is organized in doughnut-shaped tetramers, which fit well into the bulge density at the
bottom of the C ring. A recent crystal structure of the FliMM–FliGMC complex from Thermotoga maritima (PDB-4FHR)
fits well into the upper density above FliN with the charged helix
on FliGC facing upward (Figure B). Importantly, the structures of individual
domain structures within the complex are similar to those seen in
other crystal structures. The FliGM–FliMM interface within the crystal structure
is consistent with the well-defined hydrophobic interaction between
residues of the EHPQR motif in FliGM and the GGXG motif
in FliMM., The globular N-terminal domain
of FliG from Aquifex aeolicus() can also be fit to the inner lobe density of the C ring.
This model is consistent with the biochemical data that show that
the C-terminal domain of FliG (FliGC) interacts with the
stator protein MotA while the N-terminal domain of FliG interacts
with the C-terminal domain of FliF.−

Molecular architecture
of the switching complex. (A) Domain organization
of the switching complex in S. enterica: FliG, FliM,
and FliN. (B) Atomic models of FliGN (PDB-3hjl), the FliGMC–FliMM complex (PDB-4fhr), and FliN (PDB-1yab) were fit in the
EM density map of S. enterica as described previously. (C) Domain organization of the switching complex
in L. interrogans: FliG, FliM, FliN, and FliY. The
FliY middle domain is homologous to the middle domain of FliM. The
C-terminal domain of FliY resembles FliN. (D) The atomic models of
FliN, the FliMM–FliGMC complex, and FliGN were docked into the C ring map of L. interrogans as a rigid body. The atomic model of FliYM (PDB-4hyn) was fit into the
extra density on the C ring.

The C ring in many different species is in a conformation
similar
to that in S. enterica (Figure ). However, the C ring in Leptospira appears to
be strikingly different from others (Figure ). Apart from the apparent extra density at the bottom of the C ring,
the orientation of the upper portion is also different. Similar to
those of Bacillus subtilis and T. maritima, the genome of L. interrogans contains two independent
genes, fliY and fliN, while there
is no fliY in S. enterica or B. burgdorferi. FliY is a flagellar protein in the CheC
phosphatase family. The recent crystal
structure of the FliY middle domain fits
well into the extra density (Figure D), suggesting
that FliY is closely associated with the C ring. FliY binding likely
plays a critical role in the conformational changes of the switch
complex that ultimately lead to the reversal of the direction of rotation.
Clearly, further study is needed to understand FliY and its impact
on the switch complex and flagellar switch.

Concluding Remarks
The bacterial flagellum is one of the most thoroughly studied prokaryotic
motility organelles. Our understanding of this molecular machine has
advanced dramatically over the past several decades. More atomic structures
of flagellar components are emerging. However, the structure and function
of the intact flagellar motor are far from fully understood at the
molecular level. Many novel flagellar proteins and other motility-related
proteins (YcgR, CheY-P, etc.) are often associated with the conserved
core components,,, increasing the complexity of the flagellar structure and function.
The emergence of cryo-ET and subtomogram averaging provide new avenues
for studying intact flagellar motors in cells with unprecedented detail.
It is expected that significant advances in cryo-ET, in combination
with subtomogram averaging and molecular tools, will provide novel
structural insights into many important processes of bacterial flagella:
the stator–rotor interaction, protein secretion and assembly,
and switching and rotation.

The authors’
work in this area has been supported by Grant R01 AI087946 from the
National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases and AU-1714
from the Welch Foundation.

The authors
declare no competing financial interest.

