Enzymes are
efficient biological
catalysts of remarkable specificity. Details of the exact means by
which enzymes function, however, are still not thoroughly understood.
Historically, proposals have included the lock-and-key, induced fit, and
conformational selection models.

The Trypanosoma cruzi trans-sialidase (TcTS) enzyme
is a member of the sialidase family (EC 3.2.1.18), members of which
catalyze the hydrolysis of terminal sialic acid residues. TcTS is crucial to the development and proliferation
of the T. cruzi parasite.− It has thus
emerged as a potential drug target for the treatment of Chagas disease,
which is estimated to affect 10–12 million Latin Americans. Of the infected patients who go on to develop
clinical manifestations, more than 15000 die each year, most commonly
because of cardiac complications.

Because T. cruzi is unable to synthesize its own
sialic acids, it instead employs TcTS
to scavenge these residues from the glycoconjugate host onto its own
surface mucins. Thus surface sialylation
is essential for evasion from the host immune system. Unlike most sialidases, TcTS is uniquely efficient at preferentially
transferring sialic acids from the terminus of donor glycoconjugates
rather than hydrolyzing them.,− For example, with a sialyllactose donor substrate, the transfer
of a sialyl group to the lactose acceptor to yield the sialyllactose
as the product is ∼5 times more efficient than hydrolysis to
liberate sialic acid (Table ).

Donor Substrates, Aglycon Leaving
Groups, and Rates of Hydrolysis and Transfer to Lactose (in nanomoles
of sialic acid per minute per milligram) Catalyzed by TcTS
A growing body of evidence suggests that, for some
enzymes, there
is an interplay between catalysis and protein conformational flexibility,
with the involvement of dynamical processes and atomic motions in
the precise alignment of the substrate with the enzyme (as reviewed
by Benkovic). The sialidase family of
enzymes is no exception to this notion, with a growing body of studies
implying active site flexibility in their mode of action.−

The currently accepted mechanism of action of TcTS is depicted
in Scheme , in which sialyllactose is shown
as the representative donor substrate. The enzyme follows a ping-pong
bi-bi kinetic mechanism with formation of a sialyl-enzyme intermediate
(Scheme a). Evidence
suggests that Asp59 functions as the acid–base catalyst in
this glycosidase and that the active site nucleophile, Tyr342, covalently
binds the donated sialic acid to form the sialyl-enzyme intermediate.,, The resulting asialyl glycoconjugate,
which is lactose for the sialyllactose donor substrate, is liberated
from the active site [leaving group (Table )], while the covalent intermediate persists until a suitable acceptor
molecule is found. The sialic acid moiety is then transferred onto
the bound acceptor molecule by the reverse mechanism, shown in Scheme b as another molecule of lactose. Alternatively,
when the covalent intermediate is preferentially attacked by water,
hydrolysis occurs with release of sialic acid (Scheme c).

Putative Mechanism of TcTS
(a) Using either sialyllactose
or 4-methylumbelliferyl α-d-acetylneuraminide (MuNANA)
as a donor substrate (red), formation of the TcTS–sialyl covalent
intermediate occurs, also producing lactose or Mu (ROH), respectively.
The two TcTS–sialyl/ligand systems on the right-hand side of
panel a are the principle focus of our MD studies here (marked in
bold) and provide the branch point for subsequent (b) transfer of
a sialyl group from TcTS to lactose as the acceptor R′OH(note
that the left-hand side of panel b is identical to the right-hand
side of panel a when ROH = lactose), or (c) hydrolysis to release
sialic acid, preferred to a greater extent when the substrate is MuNANA
than when it is sialyllactose (i.e., when the righthand side of panel
a has ROH = Mu).

The overall catalytic reaction
of TcTS proceeds with retention
of the anomeric configuration at C2 of the sialyl residue. Only α-(2,3)-linked
sialic acids are transferred to terminal β-galactosyl acceptors,,, or alternatively, only α-sialic
acid (and β-sialic acid by subsequent mutarotation) is generated
in the event of a hydrolysis reaction, in which water is the acceptor
(Scheme c)., Interestingly,
TcTS is also capable of transferring sialic acid from non-natural
donors such as p-nitrophenyl and 4-methylumbelliferyl
α-sialosides, and the fluorogenic substrate 4-methylumbelliferyl
α-d-acetylneuraminide (MuNANA) is widely used in sialidase
assays., However, the rate of transfer is slower
for these artificial substrates than for the natural ligands. Enzymatic
studies suggest that the rate of transfer of the sialyl group from
MuNANA to lactose is only ∼0.6 compared to that for a sialyllactose
donor (Table ), while the rate of hydrolysis of MuNANA by TcTS is ∼2 higher
than that of sialyllactose (Table ).,

The molecular basis of these differences in the reaction of
MuNANA
and sialyllactose as substrates for TcTS is currently unclear, and
an understanding of them is important not only in mechanistic terms
but also for the design of TcTS inhibitors− and engineering
of TcTS mutants with altered specificity., One
proposal for the enhanced hydrolysis of MuNANA suggests occlusion
of the acceptor site by the Mu leaving group, preventing the correct
orientation of an acceptor molecule as required for successful transfer. Another possibility may be the increased level
of solvent exposure of the covalent intermediate during the reaction
of TcTS with MuNANA as compared to sialyllactose. Indeed, crystallography and previous molecular dynamics simulations
(MD) by us and others indicate that the acceptor site of TcTS can be flexible.
The acceptor site principally consists of Tyr119 and Trp312, which
form π-CH and π-OH interactions with incoming acceptor
β-galactoside glycoconjugates (Figure a). Potential differences in acceptor site flexibility for the enzyme
as it reacts with MuNANA as compared to sialyllactose might dictate
enhanced solvent accessibility and therefore also influence the preference
for hydrolysis relative to transfer.

(a) Lactose bound in the acceptor site
of TcTS. (b) Conformations
of Tyr119 from MD simulations. (c) Interaction of Tyr119 with Trp120.
MD average distance is given in Ångstroms.

The observed variations of the rates of hydrolysis and transfer
with different substrates (Table ) imply changes
in the activation energies of the rate-determining steps of less than
∼3 kcal/mol. The prediction of such small energy differences
for the large and complex systems investigated here would require
the determination of the full potential energy surface for the different
reactions, including conformational averaging, to identify the molecular
details of the rate-determining steps, probably by an appropriate
quantum mechanics/molecular mechanics procedure., As a modest initial start to this extensive computational challenge,
we here use MD simulations to probe the relative flexibility of TcTS
at a key point in its reaction mechanism, namely immediately after
sialylation by MuNANA or sialyllactose, to produce the ROH leaving
group (on the right-hand side of Scheme a).
To this end, we perform triplicate 40 ns MD simulations of the sialylated
TcTS covalent intermediate with Mu or lactose present in its acceptor
binding site (Figure a). It is at this point
that the reaction path can follow either hydrolysis to sialic acid
or transfer to an acceptor substrate (Scheme b,c). For these two systems, we characterize the protein interactions
of the leaving group, the degree of ordering in the active site solvent,
and the extent of opening of the TcTS acceptor site and quantify the
various contributions to the computed binding free energy for interaction
of lactose or Mu with sialyl-TcTS. For comparison, we also perform
MD simulations of apo TcTS and sialylated TcTS with their acceptor
sites unoccupied.

Methods
The biomolecular simulation
package AMBER 9 was used to perform MD
simulations of apo TcTS and sialylated
TcTS, with and without the acceptor site occupied by either Mu or
lactose.

Model Building
Multiple crystallographic structures
of TcTS are available from the Protein Data Bank (PDB); some of them
were modified using MOE and SYBYL to generate the systems studied in this work.
These proteins, were based on a common construct
that involved seven surface mutations to improve crystallization but
had no effect on transferase and hydrolase activities relative to
those of the wild type. The PDB crystallographic structure of the
covalent TcTS intermediate (PDB entry 2AH2) was used
in the preparation of the sialylated and complexed enzyme systems.
Both catalytic and lectin TcTS domains were included in the simulations,
and crystallographic water molecules were retained. The fluorine atom
at position C3 of the difluorosialic acid, which was required experimentally
to trap the covalent intermediate, was replaced in silico with a hydrogen atom, and an unresolved flexible loop (residues
399–408) was modeled in and energy minimized. Crystal structures
of TcTS indicate active site flexibility,, in particular that Tyr119 of the acceptor binding site adopts two
different orientations: an orientation of Tyr119 that allows it to
stack with the acceptor ligand, described by a χ1 value of approximately −60° (Figure b), and a downward-pointing orientation of Tyr119, essentially
blocking the sialic acid binding site, with a χ1 value
of 180°. These conformations, labeled outward and inward, respectively
(Figure b), are
modeled as alternate starting structures for the TcTS systems of this
work (Table S1 of the ). The conformation of Tyr119 was then manipulated into the inward
position when necessary, and the relevant ligand (either lactose from
the crystal structure of PDB entry 1MS0() or 4-methylumbelliferone
from the crystal structure of PDB entry 1S0J) was transposed
into the TcTS acceptor site in silico as appropriate.
Hydrogen atoms were added and optimized using WhatIf. However, at the covalent intermediate stage in the reaction
mechanism, the involvement of Asp59 and Glu230 in the acid–base
catalysis of the enzyme results in deprotonation of the former and
protonation of the latter (Scheme ); therefore,
these particular residues were modified accordingly (Table S1 of the ). The protonation state
of each of the histidine residues present in the TcTS protein was
determined according to the surrounding environment, and a disulfide
bond was added between cysteine residues 396 and 410. The leap module of AMBER was used to solvate the system with
a truncated octahedron of &gt;24000 TIP3P explicit water molecules.

The AMBER ff03() and Glycam06 parameter
sets were used for protein and sugar, respectively. For the nonstandard
4-methylumbelliferone residue, the antechamber module
of AMBER was used to perform restrained electrostatic potential (RESP)
charge fitting to the HF/6-31G* electrostatic
potential and to obtain the appropriate parameters via the general
AMBER force field (gaff). Initial structures for the apoenzyme systems were prepared from
the crystal structure of PDB entry 1MS3() (with Tyr119
in the outward position) or 1MS4() (with Tyr119 in an inward
pose) in a similar manner. However, in the apoprotein, the protonation
states of Asp59 and Glu230 differ from these, the former being neutral
and the latter being anionic, as shown in the reaction mechanism (Scheme ).

Molecular Dynamics Simulations
The sander module of AMBER was then used to relax the system
prior to running
production dynamics. Following two stages of heating with weak restraints
on the solute(s) of 10 kcal mol–1 Å–1, the system was equilibrated in the isothermal–isobaric ensemble
for a further 280 ps, gradually removing restraints. All dynamics
employed periodic boundary conditions. The particle mesh Ewald method
was used for handling long-range electrostatic interactions, and a cutoff of 8 Å was employed for calculation
of nonbonded interactions. The Langevin thermostat was used for temperature
control and the Berendsen barostat for
pressure control. SHAKE was used to constrain covalent hydrogen bond lengths and
allowed a time step of 2 fs. Production dynamics for each system were
run for 40 ns. Two additional replicate simulations with a duration
of 40 ns were also performed for each of the systems studied, with
differing initial velocities. The trajectories acquired are summarized
in Table S1 of the  and amount to ∼0.6 μs of aggregate MD simulation.

Analysis
Analyses of the generated trajectories were
conducted using the ptraj module of AMBER, including
generation of average water molecule number densities in the TcTS
active site. This approach performs a root-mean-square fit of all
atoms of the protein to the first frame, followed by construction
of a grid around the protein, and, at 20 ps intervals, counts whether
the center of the atom of interest is within a particular volume element
(0.5 Å3 each). The water number densities were viewed
using Chimera and contoured at a number
density of 60 hits per element.

Binding free energies were estimated
using the MM/PBSA method. The single-trajectory
approach was employed, such that the snapshot coordinates for both
the bound and unbound states were obtained at 80 ps intervals from
a single MD simulation. Poisson–Boltzmann solvation contributions
were calculated using an εin of 4 and an εout of 80. The nonpolar contributions to the solvation energy
were calculated using the σ decomposition scheme of Tan et al. Solute entropy contributions were neglected
in these calculations, as accurate computation of relative solute
entropies is known to be problematic. Consequently, we consider the binding affinities computed here to
be only semiquantitative, but they can provide valuable insights into
those factors governing association of Mu and lactose with enzyme.

Results
Using MD simulation, we have examined the behavior
of the TcTS
covalent intermediate with either Mu or lactose present in the acceptor
site (right-hand side of Scheme a). In total,
18 MD simulations of TcTS were performed as 40 ns triplicates, for
apo presialylated TcTS, for the TcTS covalent intermediate with the
acceptor site unoccupied, and for TcTs with the acceptor site occupied
by Mu or lactose (Table S1 of the ). When the acceptor site is unoccupied, initial outward and inward
orientations of Tyr119 in that site were modeled (see ). The 18 MD simulations equilibrate with converged
backbone root-mean-square deviations of ∼1–3 Å
(Figure S1 of the ).

Control Simulations of TcTS and Sialyl-TcTS
Prior to
analysis of the simulations of the covalent intermediate with Mu or
lactose, we briefly consider reference simulations of presialylated
and sialylated TcTS with an unoccupied acceptor site. Specifically,
we consider the acceptor site flexibility and degree of solvent ordering.

An important aspect of TcTS acceptor site flexibility is the movement
of Tyr119, which can adopt inward or outward orientations. Both inward
and outward orientations of Tyr119 are found in apo TcTS crystal structures
(see ) and are modeled as initial structures
here, for both apo and sialylated TcTS simulations. For simulations
of apo and sialylated TcTS initiated from an outward Tyr119 orientation,
as required for binding acceptor β-galactoside glycoconjugates,
we find sampling of both inward and outward orientations of Tyr119
(Figure a,c). We also observe the population
of a third minor orientation, with a χ1 value of
60° (Figure a,c) that corresponds to
a rotated, stacking pose for Tyr119, which we label outward′
(Figure b). Outward and outward′ conformations
appear to interact with lactose to a similar, favorable degree (Figure
S2 of the ).

Conformations
of the Tyr119 side chain during three replicate MD
simulations (black, light gray, and dark gray): (a) apo TcTS outward,
(b) apo TcTS inward, (c) sialyl-TcTS outward, (d) sialyl-TcTS inward,
(e) sialyl-TcTS–lactose conjugate, and (f) sialyl-TcTS–Mu
conjugate.

It is clear, however, that in
the later stages of the apo and sialylated
TcTS trajectories, an inward orientation of Tyr119 is preferred, with
only periodic excursions into an outward or outward′ orientation
(Figure S3a,c of the ). The stability of this Tyr119 inward pose is underlined by the
simulations of apo and siaylated TcTS initiated in the inward orientation,
which remain entirely in that orientation over the course of the trajectories
(Figure b,d and Figure S3b,d of the ). In this inward conformation,
Trp120 makes a T-shaped CH−π interaction with Tyr119
(Figure c), having an average centroid–CH
distance of ∼2.85 Å (Figure S4 of the ), each such interaction resulting in
a stabilizing dispersive interaction of
2–3 kcal/mol. Rotation of Tyr119 to the outward position results
in an increased distance between the aromatic rings of these residues,
resulting in a loss of this stabilization. Simulations of the catalytic N-terminal domain of the sialyl-TcTS
system initiated in the inward conformation of Tyr119 also revealed
that this inward conformation was maintained (initiation from the
outward pose was not considered for the apo form).

An indicator
of the openness of the acceptor site of TcTS, governed
mainly by the Trp312 loop, is indicated by the Tyr119–Trp312
intercentroid distance. For apo TcTS simulations, the intercentroid
distances vary between 6 and 20 Å (Figure a,b). For sialylated TcTS, the opening of the active site cleft is
more muted, with a range of 5–15 Å for the intercentroid
distance (Figure c,d). We note in broad terms
that the Tyr119–Trp312 ring intercentroid distance is greater
when the Tyr119 orientation is inward (compare, for example, Figure
S3c of the  and Figure c, before and after 10 ns, for the replicate in
black). This reduced flexibility was also observed previously from
simulations of the truncated sialyl-TcTS system and was linked to a stabilizing hydrogen bond with Arg314,
which is similarly observed here (data not shown).

Time series of intercentroid
distances in Ångstroms between
the rings of Tyr119 and Trp312 during three replicate MD simulations
(black, light gray, and dark gray): (a) apo TcTS outward, (b) apo
TcTS inward, (c) sialyl-TcTS outward, (d) sialyl-TcTS inward, (e)
sialyl-TcTS–lactose conjugate, and (f) sialyl-TcTS–Mu
conjugate.

Finally, we consider the degree
to which water is ordered in the
TcTS active site from these explicit solvent MD simulations. In the
apo TcTS trajectories, as indicated by contoured water number density,
we observe some localization of water at two main sites: site WAT_1
is adjacent to residues Leu36, Tyr342, and Glu357 (Figure a,b; plots for replicate simulations are reported
in Figure S5 of the ); there is also partial population of a second water site, WAT_2,
which sits between Glu357 and Ala341 (Figure a and Figure S5 of the ). However, upon sialylation of TcTS, the WAT_1 site is physically
obstructed by the sialyl residue and is absent (Figure c and Figure S5 of the ). The carboxylate side chain of the Glu357 residue is now free to
participate in hydrogen bonding interactions with the occupant of
water site WAT_2, which is seen to reside in this position for lifetimes
between 10 and 40 ns (Figure c). Therefore,
only after sialylation of TcTS is a water molecule consistently found
in position WAT_2, over all six replicate simulations of this system
(Figure c and Figure S6 of the ). For sialylated TcTS,
two other conserved regions of water occupancy, sites WAT_4 and WAT_5,
are found (Figure d and Figure S7 of the ). WAT_5 interacts directly
with the C4 hydroxyl of the sialyl residue. Evidently, a more extensive
hydrogen bond network that involves water molecules is found in the
sialylated system. This is a function of the polar nature of this
residue and is potentially a contributor to the reduced flexibility
in the sialylated form of the active site.

(a) Water sites WAT_1–WAT_5
identified from molecular dynamics
simulations. Contoured average water molecule densities (red) for
(b) apo TcTS sites WAT_1 and WAT_2, (c) sialylated TcTS site WAT_2,
and (d) sialylated TcTS sites WAT_4 and WAT_5.

Sialyl-TcTS with Lactose
We now consider the three
replicate MD simulations of sialyl-TcTS with lactose in the acceptor
site. During the majority of the simulations, lactose remains close
to the sialyl residue, with a short distance between the center of
mass of the TcTS-bound sialyl moiety and the lactose of ∼4
Å (Figure a). This proximity corresponds,
from inspection, to a well-defined bound pose in the acceptor site,
where lactose stacks against Tyr119 and Trp312 (Figure ). By virtue of this stacking interaction, Tyr119 remains
mainly in an outward conformation, with a χ1 value
of −60° (Figure S3e of the ). The cohesion of the Trp312–lactose–Tyr119
motif is also illustrated by a low degree of fluctuation in the Trp312–Tyr119
intercentroid distance, which remains at ∼9 Å (Figure e). This short distance suggests that a significant
opening of the Tyr119/Trp312 acceptor site, which could have allowed
greater solvent exposure of the active site, does not occur.

Distances (in
Ångstroms) between the centers of mass of sialyl
residues of sialylated TcTS and (a) lactose or (b) 4-methylumbelliferone
during three replicate MD simulations (black, light gray, and dark
gray).

Space-filling representation of the acceptor
site of sialylated
TcTS (green) occupied by (a) 4-methylumbelliferone (cyan) and (b)
lactose (red).

Using the MM/PBSA method,
we obtain an indication of the strength
and nature of the interaction energetics between lactose and TcTS
(Table S2 of the ). In this analysis, only configurations with an occupied acceptor
site were used. The computed total binding free energy for lactose,
averaged over the three replicate simulations, is −60.1 kcal/mol.
The steric complementarity between lactose and Trp312 or Tyr119 is
highlighted by the significant van der Waals component of this interaction,
with a ΔEvdw contribution to binding
of −27.5 kcal/mol (Table S2 of the ). The remaining binding affinity is principally
caused by a significant nonpolar solvation term of −33.3 kcal/mol;
this sizable term reflects the relative benefit of desolvation of
Tyr312 and Tyr119 compared to the (mainly) polar lactose, according
to the model of Tan et al. Indeed, the
electrostatic contributions to binding are rather small [&lt;10 kcal/mol
in magnitude (Table S2 of the )] and reflect the mainly nonpolar nature of the association.

For one of the three trajectories, lactose is seen to depart from
the protein active site. This event occurs at ∼31.5 ns, as
indicated by the distance between the center of mass of the lactose
and the sialyl residue of the TcTS covalent intermediate (Figure a). This was observed in a replicate of our previous
simulation of the sialyl-TcTS–lactose complex. Interestingly, in these new simulations, at the same time
as this lactose dissociation event, we observe rotation of Tyr119
from outward to outward′ (Figure S3e of the  and Figure ). Although an outward to outward′ transition is observed,
only a slight opening of the acceptor site occurs, to ∼10–12
Å (Figure e).

Selected steps from along
the MD trajectory of the sialyl-TcTS–lactose
complex. Initially, Tyr119 is outward and the Trp312 loop is closed
(see Figure a). (a) At 22 ns, Tyr119 rotates
away into an outward′ pose, followed by a Trp312 motion to
shift the Trp312–lactose portion of the stack. (b) Full opening
of the Trp312 loop allows lactose to vacate the active site by 32
ns.

As with the sialylated protein
in the absence of lactose, multiple
distinct sites of water occupancy are observed here. Indeed, the same
WAT_2 site (Figure ) and WAT_4 and WAT_5 sites
are occupied. Notably, however, additional water is found to localize
at a new site, WAT_3, in all three replicate simulations (Figure ). Water at this site is within hydrogen bonding
distance of Tyr364, which hydrogen bonds to Glu362, which in turn
interacts with lactose (Figure a).

Contoured average
water molecule number densities (red) for three
replicate simulations of sialylated TcTS systems complexed with 4-methylumbelliferone
(a–c) and lactose (d–f).

Sialyl-TcTS with Mu
Interestingly, the simulated behavior
of Mu in the acceptor site of sialylated TcTS is quite different from
that of lactose. In one of the replicate simulations, departure of
Mu is observed; this occurs considerably earlier in the simulation
[at ∼13 ns (Figure b)] than with lactose
[at ∼31.5 ns (Figure a)]. Weaker interactions
between Mu and the acceptor site are suggested by inspection of these
trajectories that indicate that Mu adopts a multiplicity of transient
poses in the active site of TcTS, for example, making bimolecular
contacts with residues Tyr119, Trp312, and Ser122 (Figure S8 of the ). Indeed, the dimensions
of Mu do not seem to be capable of spanning the distance required
to satisfactorily stack with Tyr119 and Trp312 simultaneously (Figure ). Even when Mu does depart, it remains nonspecifically
associated with the protein surface, via residues Arg311 (Figure S8d
of the ) and Phe58
(Figure S9 of the ).

With regard to acceptor site openness, the Trp312–Tyr119
intercentroid distance ranges from 6 to 15 Å (Figure f). This range is similar to that found for MD of
sialylated TcTS without a leaving group present (Figure c,d) and points to considerable opening, and solvent exposure,
of the acceptor site. We also observe sampling of inward, outward,
and outward′ Tyr119 poses during the trajectories (Figure f and Figure S3f of the ). We note that the inward conformations are sampled
only after the departure of Mu from the acceptor site.

The lower
affinity of Mu–acceptor site interactions is reflected
by MM/PBSA interaction energetics (Table S2 of the ). For bound configurations of Mu, the
computed total binding free energy for lactose is −31.4 kcal/mol,
approximately half that of lactose. This is a result of a combination
of a weaker van der Waals interaction with the protein (−15.1
kcal/mol) and a less favorable nonpolar desolvation energy. The latter
is most likely a result of a less occluded nonpolar acceptor site,
arising from the reduced steric complementarity and size of Mu. Here,
association of the nonpolar substrate with the nonpolar active site
is reflected by even smaller electrostatic contributions to the binding
than is predicted for lactose [&lt;4 kcal/mol in magnitude (Table
S2 of the )].

Finally, we consider the extent of water localization in the active
site of the sialyl-TcTS–Mu complex. Concomitant with the ill-defined
poses of Mu, water similarly is disordered. Thus, there is little
population of the WAT_2 site adjacent to Glu357 and Ala341 and no
population of the WAT_3 site next to WAT_2 and Tyr364 (Figure a–c). The greater mobility of Mu in the active
site and larger opening of the active site appear to disrupt water
localization and promote its mobility. The smaller spatial extent
of Mu also leaves a greater volume in the active site for water to
occupy. The well-defined occupation of the acceptor site by lactose
near Tyr342 and in particular sialyl C2 contrasts with the larger
ligand-free volume in the Mu-occupied TcTS acceptor site (Figure ).

Discussion and Conclusions
In this
work, we have sought to probe the effect of protein conformational
flexibility on the observed stronger preference for hydrolysis when
the substrate is MuNANA rather than sialyllactose (Table ). From our MD simulations, we observe markedly
different behavior for sialylated TcTS depending on whether the lactose
or Mu moiety occupies the acceptor site.

When lactose occupies
the acceptor site, a well-defined noncovalently
bound complex is observed. Computed binding energetics suggest good
steric lactose–acceptor site packing and a significant hydrophobic
driving force as lactose forges CH−π and OH−π
interactions with nonpolar Trp312 and Tyr119 residues. The MD simulations
predict that the acceptor site remains in a closed and less solvent
accessible conformation relative to unliganded apo and sialylated
TcTS. The distinct water sites localized in the covalent intermediate
active site in the absence of lactose are also observed with lactose
present; when lactose binds, an additional site also forms [WAT_3
(Figure c)], which indirectly is involved
in interactions with lactose (Figure a). We
note that sites WAT_2 and WAT_3 do not reside near Asp59 or sialyl
C2 and therefore would not be potential candidates as the water of
hydrolysis for attack at that carbon. Instead, these water sites are
part of a hydrogen bonding network that contributes to the stable,
well-defined pose adopted by lactose in the TcTS acceptor site. Lactose
is thus predicted to persist in a ternary stacking orientation with
two aromatic active site residues, maintaining a hydrophobic environment
and apparently protecting the covalent intermediate from hydrolysis
at a point when solvent exposure of the catalytic cleft would be expected
to be at its most sensitive.

When Mu rather than lactose is
present in the acceptor site, the
MD simulations suggest a rather different behavior. First, Mu does
not adopt a single, stable pose in the acceptor site but explores
a range of binding orientations. This appears at least in part to
be a consequence of its inability, in contrast to lactose, to fully
span the Tyr119–Trp312 recognition motif (Figure ). Indeed, energetic analysis via MM/PBSA suggests that Mu
is bound to approximately half of the extent of lactose and makes
weaker van der Waals contacts with the protein. For both lactose and
Mu, the product leaves the acceptor site for one of the three replicate
MD simulations, although this occurs considerably earlier in the trajectory
for Mu (Figure ).

One suggested hypothesis
for the more favorable hydrolysis of MuNANA
is that the occlusion of the acceptor site by the Mu moiety inhibits
the correct orientation of an inbound acceptor molecule and/or Tyr119,
required for the successful transfer of the sialyl group to an acceptor
molecule. From our simulations, however,
it does not appear that Mu unduly inhibits the flexibility of Tyr119.
Although disordered in pose, Mu still may interfere with acceptor
binding; however, Mu is found to fully depart from the protein active
site quite readily, as observed in one of the replicate trajectories.

A second observation from our sialyl-TcTS–Mu simulations
is that there is greater degree of opening of the acceptor site compared
to that of the sialyl-TcTS–lactose system. An opening with
a Tyr119–Trp312 intercentroid distance up to 15 Å is found
in the former, similar to that of simulated TcTS without the acceptor
site ligand (up to 20 Å). A wider opening of the acceptor site,
which sits at the mouth of the active site, leads to a greater level
of solvent exposure. Interestingly, the active site water seems more
disordered in the presence of Mu, with only partial occupation of
the WAT_2 site and the absence of the WAT_3 site, which formed part
of the network that binds lactose. The weaker interaction with Mu
and the resulting greater flexibility of the covalent intermediate
appear to arise from the lower acceptor site complementarity to the
dimensions of the flatter, shorter Mu molecule (Figure ). Greater access is available for water, which is less structured
(Figure a–c), to attack at C2 on the
TcTS-bound sialyl residue (Scheme c); this
would seem to be conducive to hydrolysis relative to the more ordered,
less open active site when lactose is bound. In a vein similar to
that of our simulations of sialyl-TcTS with Mu and lactose, recent
MD simulations pointed to greater active site opening for the hydrolyzing
enzyme Trypanosoma rangeli sialidase (TrSA) relative
to that of TcTS. This was a proposed
contributor to its hydrolyzing activity. In TrSA, the substitution
of Tyr119 with Ser is key to preferential hydrolysis.

Experimental
studies with TcTS find that transfer efficiency depends
on the identity of the asialyl donor aglycon. These studies suggest that, in general, transferase activity is
poorer when the donor aglycon is not a carbohydrate: in a surface
plasmon resonance study of the transfer rates of various sialyl donors
and asialyl acceptors with Trypanosoma brucei and Trypanosoma congolensetrans-sialidases,
greater transfer ability was found with a sialyllactose donor rather
than MuNANA., In these systems, as predicted
here for TcTS, there may again be weaker ordering and greater solvent
accessibility of the protein by a noncarbohydrate algycon, leading
to less efficient transfer. While we propose that protein flexibility
can contribute to the relative preference of a substrate for hydrolysis
versus transfer, future work is required to explore the full potential
energy surface using quantum chemical techniques to model the energetics
of these competing reactions.

In conclusion, on the basis of
this study, we concur with Paris
et al., who, in their crystallographic
and protein engineering study to convert T. rangeli sialidase into a trans-sialidase, commented that
“the presence of a sugar acceptor binding site, the fine tuning
of protein-substrate interactions and the flexibility of crucial active
site residues are all important to achieve trans-glycosidase
activity”. A deeper understanding of the molecular recognition
and dynamics of TcTS afforded by this study provides information that
could be useful in the challenging pursuit of therapeutics effective
against Chagas disease, for example, targeting specific protein conformational
substates and/or leveraging preferential water binding locations.

Supporting Information Available
Tables
S1 and S2 and Figures
S1–S9 include simulation details, computed binding energies,
MD time series of backbone root-mean-square deviations, key interaction
distances and amino acid dihedrals involving TcTS, and TcTS active
site water maps. This material is available free of charge via the
Internet at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bi301112p_si_001.pdf

Author Present Address
§ Global
Health Institute, École Polytechnique Fédérale
de Lausanne, CH-1015 Lausanne, Switzerland.

We thank EPSRC
and Johnson &amp; Johnson, Pharmaceutical Research and Development,
a division of Janssen Pharmaceutica N.V., for funding.

The authors
declare no
competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
We acknowledge the use of the UK National
Grid Service and
the National Service for Computational Chemistry Software in conducting
this work.

Abbreviations
TcTST.
cruzitrans-sialidase

TrSAT. rangeli sialidase

MDmolecular dynamics

MuNANA4-methylumbelliferyl
α-d-acetylneuraminide.

