The stability
of water-soluble
proteins and protein oligomers is tuned to match their biological
function, the physiological environment, and the regulation mechanism.− Usually, a protein is only marginally stable. This modest stability
is thought to be critical for protein function, which usually requires
a certain degree of structural flexibility and involves conformational
changes. While steady progress has been made in recent years, our
understanding of the stability–activity relationship still
lags behind in the area of membrane protein research. Over the past 2 decades, much insight has been obtained
on the causes and consequences of membrane protein oligomerization,, yet a systematic study investigating the correlation between oligomer
stability and in vivo activity of a multispan and
multidomain helical membrane protein is still missing. Here, we used Escherichia coli AcrB as a model protein to investigate
the relationship between its trimer stability and drug efflux activity.

AcrB belongs to the resistance-nodulation-cell-division (RND) family
of efflux pumps, which are conserved in all Gram-negative bacteria.− RND family efflux pumps play a major role in multidrug resistance
in Gram-negative bacteria. AcrB is an obligate trimer that exists
and functions exclusively in the trimeric form (Figure A). Trimeric AcrB associates
with membrane fusion protein AcrA and outer membrane protein TolC
to form a complex that spans the inner membrane, periplasmic space,
and outer membrane.− AcrB conducts the inward flow of protons across the inner membrane
to drive conformational changes that facilitate substrate efflux.
The structure of AcrB was first solved by X-ray crystallography in
the asymmetric trimer form in 2006, which supports a conformational
cycling model for drug transport., To date, more
than 30 structures of AcrB have been deposited into the Protein Data
Bank. However, crystal structures cannot provide insight into how
its trimer affinity affects its drug efflux activity.

AcrB structure and sequence
alignment. (A) Structure of AcrB trimer
with the subunit at the back removed for clarity. Positions of the
domains discussed in the text are labeled for the side view. Residues
lining the interface between TH1 and TH8 are highlighted by ball-and-stick
models. L886, E893, W895, and W13 are labeled. (B) Sequence alignment
of residues in TH8. Residues at the interface are shown with white
font in a black box. Numbers indicate the position of the starting
and ending residues in the sequence of E. coli AcrB. Asterisks, colons, and periods indicate identical, conserved,
and semiconserved residues, respectively. The sequences are as follows:
EC, AcrB from E. coli; PA, MexB from Pseudomonas aeruginosa; NM, MtrD from Neisseria meningitidis; HC, HcanM9_00968 from Helicobacter canadensis; SE, acridine efflux pump
from Salmonella enterica; LL, AcrB
from Legionella longbeachae; SM, HAE1
from Tenotrophomonas maltophilia; and
MC, AcrB from Moraxella catarrhalis RH4.

We have previously created several
AcrB mutants with modifications
on the periplasmic intersubunit interface that displayed different
levels of drug efflux activity., These sites of mutation
are located on a protruding loop critical for trimerization. A single
amino acid substitution has been shown to almost completely dissociate
the trimer structure (AcrBP223G). In this work, we introduced
mutations at three sites on the transmembrane intersubunit interface,
including both single, double, and triple replacements (Figure A), aiming at disrupting trimer association without
affecting the structure of individual monomers. Structural characterization
and stability measurement indicated that these mutations had little
impact on monomer structure and stability, whereas they affected the
trimer association affinity. We determined their relative trimer affinities
and biologically relevant substrate efflux activities. When the efflux
activity of the AcrB variants was plotted against their relative trimer
stabilities, the requirement of a threshold stability for function
was observed.

Materials and Methods
Protein Cloning, Expression,
and Purification
Plasmid
pQE70-AcrB was created during a previous study. Mutations were introduced into the acrB gene in plasmid pQE70-AcrB using the QuikChange site-directed mutagenesis
kit following the manufacturer’s instructions (Agilent Technologies)
and confirmed through DNA sequencing. The plasmid containing the acrB gene or its mutants was then transformed into E. coli strain BW25113ΔacrB for protein expression under basal conditions without induction.
Briefly, a single colony from a freshly transformed plate was used
to inoculate 3 mL of LB media supplemented with ampicillin and kanamycin
and cultured overnight. The overnight culture was used to inoculate
600 mL of fresh LB media supplemented with ampicillin and kanamycin.
The culture was incubated with shaking at 37 °C overnight. Cells
were harvested the next morning by centrifugation. Protein was purified
immediately without freezing the cell pellet.

Protein purification
was conducted as described. Briefly,
the cell pellet was suspended in a lysis buffer (30 mM NaPO4, 0.5 M NaCl, 0.5 mM phenylmethanesulfonylfluoride (PMSF), pH 7.5)
and sonicated to break the cells. The cell lysate was centrifuged,
and the pellet was suspended in an extraction buffer containing 30
mM NaPO4, 0.5 M NaCl, 1.5% (w/v) Triton, and 0.5 mM PMSF
(pH 7.5). The supernatant, containing detergent-solubilized AcrB,
was collected and subjected to metal-affinity chromatography. After
elution, purified AcrB samples were dialyzed against a dialysis buffer
(30 mM NaPO4, 0.1 M NaCl, 0.03% (w/v) DDM, 0.5 mM PMSF,
pH 7.5). The expression level of each protein was determined using
western blots as described previously. Band intensities were quantified using ImageJ.

Structural Characterization Using Circular
Dichroism (CD) and
Fluorescence Spectroscopy
CD spectra of purified wild-type
AcrB and its mutants were collected as described previously. SDS-induced unfolding was monitored using fluorescence
spectroscopy as described previously. Briefly, unfolding of AcrB was initiated by titrating with a 0.25%
(w/v) SDS solution. A fluorescence emission spectrum ranging from
300 to 400 nm was recorded at each titration point on a LS-55 fluorescence
spectrometer (PerkinElmer, Inc., Waltham, MA) with an excitation wavelength
of 280 nm. The maximum fluorescence intensity of each spectrum was
normalized and plotted as a function of the SDS/DDM molar ratio.A titration curve
was fitted with a linear
free energy equation to calculate the transition point of unfolding.

Drug Susceptibility Measurement and Ethidium Bromide (EtBr)
Accumulation Assay
Drug susceptibility of different AcrB
constructs was determined by measuring the minimum inhibitory concentration
(MIC) of BW25113ΔacrB containing plasmid encoding
each protein as described previously. The EtBr accumulation assay was performed following a published
protocol. The slope of a plot of fluorescence
intensity versus time in seconds was obtained as the accumulation
rate in seconds–1. In both assays, BW25113ΔacrB containing plasmid pQE70-AcrB and empty vector
pQE70 were used as positive and negative controls, respectively.

To compare data from different measurements, MIC values for the four
substrates and EtBr accumulation rates were normalized against the
controls to convert into residual percent activities. For example,
the MIC of erythromycin (Ery) obtained for the strain containing wild-type
AcrB (positive control) was 32-fold of the MIC obtained for the strain
without AcrB (negative control). For a mutant (for example, AcrBL886G/E893G/W895G) with a MIC of 20 μg/mL, which is 8-fold
of the MIC of the negative control, the residual activity is 25%.
The EtBr accumulation rate was normalized similarly. For instance,
the EtBr accumulation rate of BW25113ΔacrB was
reduced by 14.7-fold with the expression of wild-type AcrB. The expression
of AcrBL886G/E893G/W895G reduced the accumulation rate
of BW25113ΔacrB by 1.6-fold, so the residual
activity was calculated by the ratio of 1.6 and 14.7, which yielded
10.9%.

Method to Calculate Apparent Trimer Affinity of AcrB in Detergent
Micelles
Freshly purified samples were analyzed using BN-PAGE
as described previously. ImageJ was used
to quantify the trimer and monomer bands, which was used to calculate
the percentages of monomer and trimer in the sample. The concentration of AcrB was determined using Pierce BCA
protein assay kit (Thermo Scientific Inc., TX).

Labeling with
AlexaFluor350-Maleimide (AF350-MLM) and Fluorescence
Resonance Energy Transfer (FRET) Measurement
Freshly purified
CLAcrBW13C or CLAcrBW13C/P223G samples were
incubated in a dialysis buffer in the presence of a 20-fold molar
excess of AF350-MLM. The reaction mixture was incubated on ice for
1 h, and then Tris-Cl (pH 8.0) was added to a final concentration
of 10 mM. Free dye was removed through dialysis. The molar ratio of
labeling was estimated from the UV absorbance of the protein (extinction
coefficient of 90 000 cm–1 M–1 at 280 nm) and AF350 (extinction coefficient of 19 000 cm–1 M–1 at 346 nm). For FRET measurement,
the excitation wavelength was 280 nm. To correct for direct excitation
of AF350 at 280 nm, emission spectra of a solution containing 1 μM
of AF350-MLM and 1 mM DDT in the dialysis buffer were measured when
excited at 280 and 346 nm, respectively. When excited at 346 nm, the
emission peak intensity at 440 nm was measured to be 6.6-fold of the
peak intensity when excited at 280 nm. For AF350-MLM-labeled AcrB
samples, emission spectra were collected at excitation wavelengths
of 280 and 346 nm. The peak intensity observed at 440 nm, when excited
at 346 nm, was used to back calculate the contribution from the direct
excitation at 280 nm. This reference trace was subtracted from the
FRET spectra.

Results
AcrB Variants with Mutations
at the Transmembrane Intersubunit
Interface
Because the goal of this study is to investigate
how trimer affinity correlates with AcrB efflux activity, we introduced
mutations to disrupt protein–protein interactions at the intersubunit
interface. To identify sites for mutation, we analyzed the intersubunit
interface using the online server ProtorP and AcrB crystal structure 2DHH. When two AcrB subunits
associate, approximately 47% of the overall accessible surface area
(ASA) is contributed by the periplasmic loop-and-tunnel contacting
site, and around 12% is contributed by interactions between transmembrane
helices (TH). The interaction between the protruding loop from one
subunit and residues that collectively form a tunnel around the loop
from the other subunit is the major contributor to the binding interface
in AcrB. Mutations in the loop or the tunnel that lead to changes
of efflux activity have been shown to affect the stability of individual
monomers. Here, we introduced mutations
into the THs at the subunit interface to identify mutations that disrupted
the intersubunit interactions between the THs to diminish AcrB trimer
association without affecting the structure of individual monomers.

Although each AcrB subunit contains 12 THs, only a few residues
from TH1 and TH8 are involved in intersubunit interaction in the crystal
structure (Figure ). On the basis of the analysis
of the crystal structure as well as sequence alignment results (Figure B), we chose to mutate three invariable residues,
Leu886, Glu893, and Trp895, in TH8 into Gly. To create partially active
mutants with defects in TH1–TH8 packing, we trimmed the side
chains of these three residues by replacing them with Gly. We have
constructed single as well as double and triple mutants involving
these residues.

AcrB Variants Displayed Various Residual
Activities
To determine the effect of mutations on protein
activity, we measured
the activity of AcrB constructs using both drug susceptibility and
EtBr accumulation assays. The drug susceptibility assay was performed
as described previously. Briefly, E. coli strain BW25113ΔacrB was transformed with plasmids encoding the indicated AcrB constructs.
The same strain containing plasmids encoding wild-type AcrB or the
empty cloning vector pQE70 was used as positive and negative controls,
respectively. MIC was measured under basal expression conditions.
Four well-established AcrB substrates, Ery, novobiocin (Nov), rhodamine-6G
(R6G), and tetraphenylphosphonium (TPP), were chosen to represent
the diversity of AcrB substrates of different polarity, structure,
and charged state. In addition, the presence or absence of AcrB causes
a large MIC change for these drugs (ranging from 32- to 128-fold),
which provides a large dynamic range to reveal differences between
the residual levels of activity of different mutants (Table ). We found that none of the single mutations had
an observable effect on the MIC value of any substrate tested, whereas
the maximum detrimental effect was observed for the triple mutant,
which led to a 32-fold reduction of MIC for Nov and TPP.

Monomer Stability of Purified AcrB
Constructs and Their Activities in the BW25113ΔacrB Strain
 	MIC
(μg/mL)	 	 	
protein	Ery	Nov	R6G	TPP	EtBr accumulation rate (s–1)	transition point ([SDS]/[DDM])	
no AcrB	2.5	5	5	5	(1.4 ± 0.4) × 10–1	 	
AcrB	80	160	320	640	(8.9 ± 5.0) × 10–3	1.6 ± 0.1	
AcrBL886G	80	160	320	640	(1.1 ± 0.4) × 10–2	1.5 ± 0.1	
AcrBE893G	80	160	320	640	(7.6 ± 3.0) × 10–3	1.5 ± 0.1	
AcrBW895G	80	160	320	640	(1.0 ± 0.5) × 10–2	1.5 ± 0.1	
AcrBL886G/E893G	40	40	320	40	(4.9 ± 0.6) × 10–2	1.4 ± 0.1	
AcrBE893G/W895G	40	40	320	40	(2.3 ± 0.3) × 10–2	1.5 ± 0.1	
AcrBL886G/E893G/W895G	20	10	160	20	(8.3 ± 0.8) × 10–2	1.5 ± 0.1	
AcrBC493A/C887A	80	160	320	640	 	 	
AcrBW13C/C493A/C887A	80	160	320	640	 	 	
BW25113ΔacrB transformed
with the empty vector pQE70 was used as the negative
control for the activity assay.

Furthermore, we examined the substrate efflux rate of various AcrB
constructs using an EtBr accumulation assay. Accumulation of EtBr
by live E. coli cells was monitored
by following the increase of fluorescence of EtBr. The accumulation rate was inversely correlated with the
capacity of the efflux pumps to transport EtBr out of bacterial cells.
EtBr is a substrate of AcrB, and the EtBr accumulation assay has been
used in several studies to reveal the activity of AcrB.,, We measured the accumulation
rate of BW25113ΔacrB containing a plasmid encoding
the indicated AcrB constructs. The same strain containing a plasmid
encoding wild-type AcrB or the empty cloning vector pQE70 was used
as positive and negative controls, respectively. As shown in Table , removal of AcrB led to an approximately 15-fold
increase in the accumulation rate. Overall, cells expressing a single
mutant displayed a similar efflux rate as cells expressing wild-type
AcrB, whereas cells expressing the double and triple mutants displayed
significantly increased rates of accumulation.

Neither the MIC
nor the EtBr accumulation assay directly measures
the drug efflux rate. They reflect the combined effects of the drug
entering the cell, mainly via diffusion, and exiting via active efflux
and passive diffusion. We have also attempted to measure AcrB activity
directly using the recently developed Nile Red efflux assay. We found that the difference between the positive
and negative controls, BW25113ΔacrB containing
wild-type AcrB or no AcrB, was not large enough and that the resolution
was not high enough to resolve the differences in efflux activity
among different mutants (data not shown).

Expression Levels of AcrB
Mutants
We measured the relative
expression level of all mutants used in this study. Plasmids encoding
different AcrB constructs were transformed into BW25113ΔacrB for protein expression under basal conditions. Detergent-solubilized
cell membrane samples obtained from freshly prepared log-phase cells
were analyzed using SDS-PAGE and western blot analysis. The expression
levels of all mutants were similar to the expression level of wild-type
AcrB except for AcrBE893G, which appeared to have a significantly
higher expression level (Figure A). Although
it was not clear why the expression level of AcrBE893G was
higher, these results indicate that the decrease in the observed drug
efflux activity of AcrB mutants was not a result of decreased AcrB
expression.

Characterization of AcrB mutants. (A) Western blot analysis of
the expression levels of AcrB constructs. Expression levels of AcrB
mutants were normalized to the expression level of wild-type AcrB.
Experiments were performed three times. The average value and standard
deviation from three repeats are shown. A representative blot is shown.
(B) CD spectra of wild-type AcrB (black) and AcrBL886G/E893G/W895G (gray).

Structure Characterization
of AcrB Mutants
To examine
if the decrease in activity was a result of variation on structures
or stabilities of individual monomers, we purified all mutants and
collected their far-ultraviolet (UV) circular dichroism (CD) spectra
and fluorescence emission spectra. The CD spectra of all variants
were similar to the spectrum of wild-type AcrB, indicating that these
mutations had little effect on the overall protein structure. The
spectra of the triple mutant and wild-type AcrB are shown in Figure B as examples. The spectra of the other five mutants
are in the . Furthermore,
we monitored SDS-induced denaturation by following the intrinsic fluorescence.
We have previously shown that the unfolding of AcrB upon SDS titration
can be followed by monitoring the decrease of the intrinsic fluorescence., Both trimer dissociation and monomer unfolding could potentially
lead to a change of the intrinsic fluorescence emission. However,
we have previously found that the presence of intersubunit disulfide
bonds, which strengthen AcrB trimer stability by covalently linking
the three subunits, has little effect on the transition point of AcrB
unfolding monitored using fluorescence intensity. The fluorescence intensity change indicates the exposure
of previously hidden aromatic residues, which results from the disruption
of the hydrophobic core or dissociation of subunits. There are two
potential reasons that may lead to this observation. First, trimer
dissociation could be spectroscopically silent. Second, trimer dissociation
could have occurred together with the global unfolding of individual
subunits. We also found that the change of the fluorescence signal
is largely contributed by aromatic residues in the soluble domain. The unfolding of the transmembrane domain may
not generate a detectable fluorescence signal change, as the change
of microenvironment for Trp residues in the transmembrane domain upon
unfolding is not likely to be as dramatic as for Trp residues in the
soluble domain.

Here, we used this method to probe the stability
of each AcrB construct. The fluorescence intensity at 345 nm was normalizing
as described in the .
The denaturation profiles of all mutants tested were very similar
to the profile of the wide-type AcrB, with similar transition points.
Figure A shows the unfolding profiles of wild-type
AcrB and the triple mutant, AcrBL886G/E893G/W895G, as an
example. The unfolding profiles of the other five mutants can be found
in the . The transition
point was determined by fitting the curve with a linear free energy
equation (Table ). There was no drastic difference
among the transition points for all mutants tested, suggesting that
the mutations that we introduced did not significantly disrupt the
stability of AcrB tertiary structure or, more precisely, the unfolding
of the periplasmic domain.

Unfolding and dissociation of AcrB mutants.
(A) Representative
SDS-induced unfolding profile of wild-type AcrB (black squares) and
AcrBL886G/E893G/W895G (gray squares) monitored by fluorescence
emission. The curves show the fitting using a single-exponential equation.
(B) BN-PAGE analysis of purified AcrB constructs. Positions of monomer
and trimer bands are marked by M and T, respectively. Each measurement
was repeated at least three times. The average value and standard
deviations are shown.

Determination of the Trimer Association Constant of Purified
AcrB Variants
In the equilibration between AcrB monomer (M),
dimer (D), and trimer (T)The apparent trimer association constant, Kapp, isin which MT, MD, and MM are the
molar concentrations of trimer, dimer, and monomer, respectively.
For membrane proteins, the actual volume that a protein can occupy
is limited by the volume defined by detergent micelles., Therefore, a mole fraction concentration of protein versus detergent
is a more proper expression of the association constant of AcrB trimer
in detergent micellesin which nT, nM, and ndet are
moles of trimer, monomer, and detergent, respectively. Using this equation, we estimated and compared
the relative trimer stability of AcrB mutants.

BN-PAGE was used
to estimate the trimer to monomer ratio and thus their concentrations
in the sample. BN-PAGE is a well-established method that has been
used broadly in the characterization of membrane protein oligomers., All AcrB constructs migrated as a mixture of trimer and monomer.
The positions of AcrB monomer and trimer in BN-PAGE have been previously
established., No dimer band was observed in
any AcrB construct, indicating that the portion of dimer was negligible
and therefore neglected during calculation. The concentrations of
AcrB monomer and trimer were obtained by multiplying the total AcrB
concentration in the sample by the percent of AcrB existing as monomer
or trimer, respectively. The trimer association constant, KX, was calculated using eq  from the concentrations of detergent and AcrB monomer and trimer
(Table ). Representative BN-PAGE gel images
are shown in Figure B.

Trimer Stability of AcrB Constructs
protein	KX	Kr	ΔΔGX (kcal/mol)	
AcrB	(1.6 ± 0.8) × 109	1	 	
AcrBE893G	(3.2 ± 1.4) × 109	1.9	–0.4	
AcrBW895G	(2.2 ± 1.3) × 107	1.3 × 10–2	2.5	
AcrBL886G	(1.4 ± 0.5) × 107	8.9 × 10–3	2.8	
AcrBL886G/E893G	(1.0 ± 0.2) × 107	6.2 × 10–3	3.0	
AcrBE893G/W895G	(8.6 ± 1.6) × 106	5.3 × 10–3	3.1	
AcrBL886G/E893G/W895G	(1.0 ± 0.2) × 107	6.3 × 10–3	3.0	
Correlation between AcrB Trimer Stability
and Activity
To quantitatively review the relation between
the relative trimer
stability of a mutant and its biological activity, we plotted the
relative trimer affinity (Kr) of each
mutant in detergent micelles versus the MIC (Figure A) and EtBr accumulation rate (Figure B) of wild-type AcrB and its variants. Relative trimer affinity, Kr, was obtained by designating the affinity
of wild-type AcrB as 1 (Table ). Data for
all substrates showed the same trend. The correlation between the
trimer stability and drug efflux activity was clearly not linear.

Correlation
between AcrB trimer affinity and substrate efflux activity.
(A) MIC of four different AcrB substrates determined for BW25113ΔacrB containing a plasmid encoded wild-type AcrB or AcrB
mutants plotted against their relative affinity. Substrates tested
were Ery (triangles), TPP (crosses), R6G (circles), and Nov (squares).
(B) EtBr accumulation rate of BW25113ΔacrB containing
a plasmid encoded wild-type AcrB or AcrB mutants plotted against their
relative affinity. Each measurement was repeated at least three times.
The average value and standard deviations are shown. (C) Normalized
MIC values and EtBr accumulation rate (diamonds) plotted against the
relative trimer affinity. The same symbols were used for Ery, TPP,
R6G, and Nov as those used in panel A.

To compare efflux activity measured using the MIC and EtBr
accumulation
assays, we normalized MIC values for four substrates and EtBr accumulation
rates to obtain the residual percent activity. Various substrates
are intrinsically different in their binding affinities and interactions
with AcrB; therefore, it was not surprising that the fold change of
the MIC and accumulation rate caused by the same mutation was not
always the same. However, an overall trend could be observed in which
a mutant with lower activity transported all substrates with lower
efficiency (Table ). These residual activities
were plotted against the relative trimer stability for the seven AcrB
constructs examined in this study (Figure C). The switch from no function to full function occurred in a very
narrow stability range. A threshold trimer stability was required
for efflux activity. This threshold value, in terms of relative affinity,
is approximately 0.01, or 2 orders of magnitude lower than the affinity
of the wild-type trimer.

Monitoring AcrB Trimer Dissociation/Unfolding
Using FRET
FRET is one of the few techniques that are compatible
with measurement
in both detergent micelles and reconstituted lipid bilayers.− To investigate the usefulness of such a method in the study of AcrB
trimer stability, we chose to take advantage of the W13–W895
pair because these amino acids are close to each other at the intersubunit
interface (Figure A). Trp could serve as a
fluorescence donor to form a FRET pair with AF350., To enable site-specific labeling, we first replaced the two intrinsic
Cys in AcrB by Ala to create a Cys-less AcrB (CLAcrB), and we then
introduced a unique Cys to replace W13. We have confirmed that these
mutations have no observable effect on AcrB activity, indicating that
the structure of the AcrB trimer was not disrupted (Table ). We have also constructed a quadruple mutation
by introducing an additional P223G mutation. This mutation has been
shown to drastically decrease trimer affinity and protein activity. The CLAcrBW13C and CLAcrBW13C/P223G pair was used to evaluate if the FRET method could reveal information
about AcrB trimer stability, as the trimer association in CLAcrBW13C/P223G is expected to be weaker.

Freshly purified
CLAcrBW13C and CLAcrBW13C/P223G were labeled
under the same experimental conditions using AF350-MLM. We found that
CLAcrBW13C/P223G was consistently labeled to a much higher
level than CLAcrBW13C in all trials that we performed.
The AF350 to AcrB molar ratios of labeled CLAcrBW13C and
CLAcrBW13C/P223G were approximately 0.2 and 0.7, respectively.
We speculate that this difference in labeling efficiency reflects
the intrinsic accessibility of C13, as C13 in CLAcrBW13C should be less assessable because of the higher trimer affinity
of the protein. To promote AcrB dissociation/unfolding, we titrated
small aliquots of concentrated SDS into the samples (Figure A). The traces are color-coded to shift from red
to blue with the increase in the SDS concentration. As discussed above,
the intrinsic fluorescence of AcrB decreased drastically with the
increase in the SDS concentration, presumably due to protein denaturation,
and the observed change of fluorescence was mainly contributed by
Trp residues in the soluble domain. Monitoring the change of intrinsic
fluorescence could reflect the process of AcrB gradually losing the
folded periplasmic domain, which could be coupled with trimer dissociation.
The unfolding profile was very similar as the one we collected for
wild-type AcrB, further confirming that the W13C mutation and the
labeling did not have a large impact on the overall structure (Figure B).

(A) Fluorescence emission of AF350–labeled CLAcrBW13C (top) and CLAcrBW13C/P223G (bottom) excited
at 280 nm.
The traces are color-coded to shift from red to blue with the increase
in the SDS concentration. The two peaks at 345 and 430 nm correspond
to the intrinsic fluorescence emission of AcrB and emission from AF350,
respectively. Both decrease with the increase in the SDS concentration.
(B) Normalized fluorescence intensity of CLAcrBW13C at
345 nm (filled triangles) and 430 nm (open triangles) as well as CLAcrBW13C/P223G at 345 nm (filled squares) and 430 nm (open squares).
Although the structure of CLAcrBW13C/P223G began to unfold
at a slightly lower SDS concentration than the structure of CLAcrBW13C, the decrease of the FRET efficiency occurred at a much
lower SDS concentration for CLAcrBW13C/P223G. The lines
are used to illustrate the trend of the data.

Using the change of the intrinsic fluorescence as a beacon
of the
process of AcrB dissociation/unfolding, we could evaluate the change
in the FRET efficiency during the process (Figure B). Because CLAcrBW13C and CLAcrBW13C/P223G were intrinsically labeled to different levels, we normalized the
AF350 signal changes using eq , with the peak
intensity in the absence of SDS designated as Ymax and the peak intensity at the highest SDS concentration
designated as Ymin. Although the complexity
of the system ruled out a numerical interpretation of the trimer affinity,
it was clear that the FRET efficiency decreased more dramatically
with the increase in the SDS concentration for CLAcrBW13C/P223G.

Discussion
In this study, we obtained one of the first
sets of data describing
a direct correlation between oligomer association affinity and the
activity of a multiple spanning helical membrane protein. First, we
have to acknowledge the limitations of the method used in this study.
Because the activity was measure in live cells, there are potentially
factors that may interfere with the measurement. For example, the
AcrAB–TolC complex is not the only drug efflux system in E. coli. However, it is the major one for the compounds
used in this study, as revealed by the large difference in their efflux
between the positive and negative controls. Furthermore, direct measurement
of the oligomer stability of proteins in the cell membrane remains
a challenging task. Therefore, we measured the trimer affinity of
freshly purified samples in a mild detergent. It is generally believed
that the oligomer affinities of membrane proteins are much higher
in phospholipid bilayers than in detergent micelles. For example,
in two studies, the association constants of model transmembrane helices
were found to be 100-fold stronger in lipid bilayers than in detergent
micelles., The relative trimer and monomer content
in each mutant was estimated using BN-PAGE. BN-PAGE is a non-equilibrium
method. During electrophoresis, the trimeric species and monomeric
species are physically separated, which may cause more trimers to
dissociate during the process and lead to a negative bias in the measured
association constants.

The first important observation of this
study is that the stability–activity
correlation is not linear. The trimer stability of an AcrB mutant
needs to reach a threshold value for the protein to display activity.
A drastic increase in activity occurred in a narrow range of trimer
stability. To discuss the affinity in thermodynamic energy terms,
we calculated the free energy difference of trimer association (ΔΔGX) from the difference in the association constant
(Kr) (Table ).
The association energy of the wild-type trimer, −11.9 kcal/mol,
was approximately −3.0 kcal/mol higher than the threshold value.

Association energies have been determined for a few model membrane
proteins and peptides in detergent micelles and phospholipids (Table ). Glycophorin A transmembrane fragment (GpATM)
was used as the model protein in three such studies, whereas fibroblast
growth factor receptor 3 (FGFR3) and the transmembrane fragment of
the M2 protein from influenza A virus were used in the other two studies.
All model proteins form single transmembrane helices. Both GpATM and
FGFR3 dimerize, whereas the M2 protein fragment forms a tetramer.
The dimerization energy of GpATM in detergent micelles is 7 kcal/mol.
The association constant for the tetrameric M2 protein fragment is
2 × 106 in detergent micelles, corresponding to an
association free energy of 8.6 kcal/mol. The association free energy
of the wild-type AcrB trimer was approximately 11.9 kcal/mol. This
larger association energy could arise from the larger intersubunit
interface in AcrB, as it is a much larger protein than the other model
proteins.

Oligomer Association Constant and
Energy Reported in the Literature
system	method	KX	ΔGX	ref	
glycophorin A transmembrane fragment (GpATM) in
detergent micelles	analytical ultracentrifugation	 	–7 kcal/mol	(), 	
transmembrane fragment of the M2 protein
from influenza A virus
in detergent micelles and phospholipid bilayer	thiol-disulfide
equilibrium	2 × 106 in detergent
micelles 2 × 108 in
lipid bilayer	 	()	
fibroblast growth factor
receptor 3 (FGFR3) in phospholipid
bilayer	FRET	 	–3 kcal/mol	()	
GpATM in vesicles derived from mammalian cell membranes	quantitative imaging FRET	 	–3.9 ± 0.2 kcal/mol	()	
GpATM in detergent micelles and phospholipid
bilayer	steric trap	 	–7 kcal/mol in detergent
micelles –12 kcal/mol in bilayer	()	
Standard state was defined as KD =
1/nm2.

On a final
note, it is interesting that the oligomer association
energies of soluble proteins are in a similar range. In a review of
soluble protein quaternary structure stability, the free energy gain
per subunit upon oligomerization was reported to be in the range of
2.1 to 6.3 kcal/mol. We are not attempting
to directly compare the association free energy of membrane proteins
with that of the soluble proteins. The experimental systems for soluble
and membrane proteins are completely different: while soluble proteins
can occupy the entire solution, membrane proteins can exist only in
detergent micelles or lipid bilayers. Therefore, although the concentration
of soluble protein is represented in units of moles per liter, the
concentration of membrane protein needs to be discussed as mole fractions
to detergents in the system. However, it is worth mentioning that
for both soluble and membrane proteins the oligomerization free energy
per subunit is quite modest, which might be necessary to maintain
the flexibility of the protein structure and association/dissociation
state to suit the functional need. As a matter of fact, a change in
the quaternary state often affects a protein’s biological function
or activity. Therefore, the stability of protein–protein interaction
in such complexes is an important regulator of biological functions.,,−

Supporting Information Available
CD spectra of AcrB mutants
and SDS denaturation profiles of AcrB mutants. This material is available
free of charge via the Internet at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bi5000838_si_001.pdf

This work was
supported by the National Science Foundation (MCB 1158036, Y.W.) and
National Institutes of Health (1R21AI103717).

The authors declare no
competing financial interest.

Abbreviations Used
RNDresistance-nodulation-cell-division

CDcircular dichroism

SDSsodium dodecyl
sulfate

MICminimum
inhibitory concentration

EtBrethidium bromide

DDMn-dodecyl β-d-maltoside

ASAaccessible surface
area

THtransmembrane
helix

Eryerythromycin

Novnovobiocin

R6Grhodamine 6G

TPPtetraphenylphosphonium

SDS-PAGEsodium dodecyl
sulfate polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis

BN-PAGEblue native polyacrylamide gel
electrophoresis

AF350-MLMAlexa Fluor 350-maleimide

FRETfluorescence resonance energy transfer

