Insulin is
a 51-amino acids
polypeptide hormone that is a primary regulator of carbohydrate homeostasis,
and insufficient or defective insulin secretion, or impaired insulin
signaling, leads to a metabolic disorder, known as diabetes mellitus.
Insulin is the post-translational product of a single-chain precursor
proinsulin, and its conversion to two-chain insulin, and the subsequent
storage of the mature hormone, occurs in pancreatic β-cells.

Processed human insulin (HI) consists of
the 21-amino acid A-chain
and 30-amino acid B-chain that are interconnected by two (A7–B7
and A20–B19) disulfide bridges and stabilized further by one
intrachain (A6–A11) disulfide bridge. Insulin is stored as
a Zn2+-stabilized hexamer, which dissociates in portal
circulation to the functional Zn2+-free monomer that binds
to the insulin receptor (IR). Extensive
mutagenesis and functional studies of this hormone have revealed side
chains responsible for insulin–IR interactions.− High-affinity binding of insulin to so-called site 1 of the IR involves
mainly GlyA1, IleA2, ValA3, GlnA5, TyrA19, and AsnA21 on the A-chain
and GlyB8, LeuB11, ValB12, LeuB15, and the B23–B26 segment
on the B-chain., The importance of some of these
residues in the formation of the insulin–IR interface was confirmed
by the first crystal structures of insulin complexes with two different
constructs of the IR ectodomain. The
formation of the insulin–IR complex is accompanied by extensive
conformational changes in the hormone, particularly in the N- and
C-termini of its B-chain, that constitute the most flexible and accessible
parts of the molecule. The C-terminus of the B-chain must be detached
from its central B9–B19 β-helix− upon IR binding to expose hidden
A1–A3 and A19 residues, which are some of the hot spots of
IR interactions., The importance of the B-chain
C-terminal residues in IR binding has also been demonstrated by their
critical role in the negative cooperativity character of this interaction.

However, the continuing ambiguity with
regard to the conformational
behavior of the B22–B30 segment at the hormone–IR interface
is paralleled by the lack of clarity about the physiological (i.e.,
in hexamer/storage hormone form and in its IR complex) fold of the
B-chain N-terminal B1–B8 residues. The observed large, spatially
diverged (nearly 30 Å) structural changes at the N-terminus of
the B-chain span two alternative insulin conformational forms designated
as the T- and R-states., In the T-state, residues
B1–B8 are in an extended conformation, which is followed by
the central, structurally conserved α-helix of residues B9–B19.
In contrast, this helix if further fully extended by residues B1–B8
in the R-state of the hormone. Extensive structural and spectroscopic
studies indicated that the T- and R-states can lead to three main
allosteric insulin oligomers designated as T6, T3R3/T3Rf3, and R6.− Whereas the conformations of the two independent monomers in three
dimers forming the T6 or R6 hexamers are nearly
identical, the dimeric unit in the T3Rf3 hexamer consists of one T-state and one Rf-state,, insulin, in which B1–B3
segments of the Rf3 molecules are “frayed”
into a nonhelical and extended conformation. These hexamer structural states are related in solution by dynamic
equilibria (T6 ↔ T3Rf3 ↔ R6), with
the T6 state being dominant. Spectroscopic and structural studies of the allosteric behavior
of insulin revealed that anions from the Hofmeister lyotropic series,
such as Cl– or SCN–, can induce
only the T6 → T3Rf3 conformational change,, and that the full R6 hexamer in HI requires the presence of phenol derivatives
or other cyclic alcohols (e.g., phenol, cresol, resorcinol, etc.).,,, Moreover, the full R-state has never been observed in any dimeric
or monomeric forms of insulin. The physiological relevance of the
T- and R-states is still unclear, but the importance of the T-state
for proper proinsulin and/or insulin folding has been suggested., Although the R-state was linked with insulin biological activity,, a high activity of an insulin analogue that cannot adopt an R-like
fold might indicate that the R-state
is not involved in IR binding. Therefore, an unambiguous assignment
of the biological relevance of T- and R-states is still required.
This not only is necessary for a full understanding of the insulin–IR
interaction and the nature of the insulin storage oligomers but also
may have a positive impact on the rational design of the new, more
effective insulin analogues.

The GlyB8 site is known to be the
key, pivotlike, structural residue
implicated in the interconversion of the T- and R-states. Even if
B8 substitutions are accompanied by a loss of binding affinity,, the study of the structure–function relationship of B8-modified
analogues in a rationally stabilized T- or R-state may shed some light
on the physiological relevance of these conformations. In the T-state,
GlyB8 lies at the right half of the Ramachandran plot that is typical
for d-amino acids with positive φ angles [approximately
59°, as in Protein Data Bank (PDB) entry 1mso]. In contrast, GlyB8
in the R-state has negative φ angles (approximately −67°,
as in PDB entry 1znj) and occupies the left half-segment of the Ramachandran plot characteristic
of a right-handed α-helix (Figure S1 of the ).

Here, we present the synthesis
and detailed characterization of
analogues that were rationally designed to be structurally locked
in “a predicted” R- or T-state. The allowed and disallowed
dihedral φ and ψ main-chain angles of the specific, non-natural
amino acids have been considered in this process (Figure S1 of the ). Three amino acids [α-aminoisobutyric
acid (Aib), d-proline, and N-methylalanine
(NMeAla)] with the desired conformational properties
have been systematically introduced into positions B3, B5, and B8
at the N-terminus of the B-chain, as they are known to affect its
conformation.,, Aib was selected for the rational induction of the R-like helical
conformation of the B1–B8 segment, as the amino acid with a
high helical propensity that often facilitates folding into the right-
or left-handed α-helices., The enforcement of
the T-state was designed by the use of d-Pro and NMeAla as these amino acids cannot adopt the right-handed
α-helix φ and ψ angles. The structure–function
relationship of these insulin analogues is discussed on the basis
of their functional and structural [X-ray, nuclear magnetic resonance
(NMR), and circular dichroism (CD)] properties.

Experimental Procedures
Solid-Phase
Peptide Synthesis of Insulin and Analogue Chains
The individual
wild-type A-chain and modified B-chains (AibB3;
AibB5; AibB8; AibB8, LysB28, ProB29; and d-ProB8 or NMeAlaB8) were synthesized by stepwise coupling of the corresponding
Fmoc amino acid on Fmoc-Asn(Trt)-Wang LL resin and Fmoc-Thr(OtBu)-Wang
LL resin (Nova Biochem, San Diego, CA), respectively, using an automatic
solid-phase synthesizer (ABI 433A, Applied Biosystems, Foster City,
CA). HBTU/HOBt in DMF was used as a coupling reagent. Fully protected
peptides were cleaved from the resins by a TFA/H2O/TIS/EDT/phenol/thioanisol
mixture (90:3:1:1:2:3) and were precipitated with cold diethyl ether.
The LysB28 ↔ ProB29 swap was introduced into [AibB8,LysB28,ProB29]-insulin
to promote its monomeric behavior for
solution NMR studies.

Sulfitolysis
Insulin crude A- or
B-chains (100 μmol)
in reduced (SH) forms were dissolved and stirred in 25 mL of freshly
prepared sulfiltolysis buffer [100 mM Tris, 250 mM Na2SO3, 80 mM Na2S4O6, and 7 M
GuaHCl (pH 8.6)] for 3 h at room temperature to convert SH groups
to S-sulfonates. The chains were then desalted on a Sephadex G10 column
(4 cm × 85 cm) in 50 mM NH4HCO3 and purified
using reversed-phase high-performance liquid chromatography (RP-HPLC)
(Nucleosil C18 column, 250 mm × 21 mm, 5 μm).

Disulfide Bridge
Combination
Insulin A-chain (30 mg)
and B-chain (15 mg) S-sulfonate derivatives were dissolved in 2 and
1 mL of degassed 0.1 M Gly/NaOH buffer (pH 10.5), respectively. The
exact molar concentrations of individual chains were determined by
UV spectrophotometry at 280 nm using molar extinction coefficients
of 3480 and 3230 M–1 cm–1 for
the A-chain and the B-chain, respectively. The solutions of chains
were combined, and dithiothreitol (DTT, aliquoted from Pierce catalog
no. 20291) in a minimal volume of a degassed 0.1 M Gly/NaOH buffer
(pH 10.5) was rapidly added to the peptide solution to give a SH:SSO3– molar ratio of 1.2. This solution was
stirred for 30 min in a capped vessel at room temperature. After the
reduction of SSO3– to SH, 3 mL of aerated
0.1 M Gly/NaOH buffer (pH 10.5) was added, and the resulting solution
was stirred for 48 h at 4 °C in an open vessel to permit air
oxidation. Glacial acetic acid (3 mL) was added to the mixture to
terminate the reaction. The resulting mixture was applied to a low-pressure
column (Sephadex G-50 in 1 M acetic acid, 2 cm × 75 cm). The
fractions containing the respective analogues were purified using
RP-HPLC (Nucleosil C18 column, 250 mm × 8 mm, 5 μm). The
molecular weight of resulted analogues was confirmed by HR mass spectroscopy
(LTQ Orbitrap XL, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA),, and the purity of analogues was controlled by RP-HPLC (Nucleosil
C18 column, 250 mm × 4 mm, 5 μm).

IR Isoform A Binding Affinity
Assays
The binding affinity
for isoform A of the human IR (IR-A) was determined using the method
of Morcavallo et al. using IM-9 lymphocytes
(ATCC), which are rich in IR-A expression. The IM-9 cell line was
cultured in RPMI 1640 containing 10% fetal bovine serum. For the assay,
2.0 × 106 cells per milliliter were incubated with
increasing concentrations of insulin or an analogue and human [125I]monoiodotyrosyl-A14-insulin (PerkinElmer Life Sciences,
2200 Ci/mmol, 20000 cpm, ∼0.01 nM) for 2.5 h at 15 °C
in HEPES binding buffer [100 mM HEPES, 100 mM NaCl, 5 mM KCl, 1.3
mM MgSO4, 1 mM EDTA, 10 mM glucose, 15 mM NaOAc, and 1%
BSA (w/v) (pH 7.6)] (500 μL). After incubation, 2 × 200
μL was centrifuged at 13000g for 10 min. Radioactive
pellets were counted using a Wizard 1470 Automatic γ Counter
(PerkinElmer Life Sciences). Binding data were analyzed with Excel
using a one-site fitting program developed in the laboratory of P.
De Meyts (A. V. Groth and R. M. Shymko, Hagedorn Research Institute,
Gentofte, Denmark, a kind gift of P. De Meyts) and GraphPad Prism
5, which take the potential ligand depletion into account using equations
developed by Swillens. The dissociation
constant of human [125I]insulin was set to 0.3 nM.

IR Isoform
B and IGF-1 Receptor Binding Affinity Assays
The methodology
for the determination of receptor binding affinities
for isoform B of the IR (IR-B) and for the receptor of IGF-1 (IGF-1R)
is described in the .

Circular Dichroism
The CD spectra were recorded in
a quartz cuvette with an optical path length of 1 cm or 0.5 mm (Starna
Cells) using a J-815 spectropolarimeter (Jasco) at room temperature.
The far- and near-UV CD spectra were used to measure changes in protein
secondary and tertiary structures. The spectral regions were 200–260
and 245–300 nm, with a scanning speed of 10 nm/min, a response
time of 8 s, a resolution of 0.5 nm, a bandwidth of 1 nm, and a sensitivity
of 100 mdeg. The final spectrum was obtained as an average of five
accumulations. The spectra were corrected for the baseline by subtracting
the spectra of the corresponding polypeptide-free solution. Analogues
or HI (0.25 mg/mL, 43 μM) were measured in 25 mM Tris-HCl buffer
(pH 7.8) with 0.33 mol of Zn2+ (zinc acetate) per mole
of analogue or HI with or without 25 mol of phenol per mole of analogue
or HI.

NMR Spectroscopy and Structure Calculations
NMR spectra
were acquired from a 0.35 mL sample of 0.5 mM [AibB8,LysB28,ProB29]-insulin
in 20% d4-acetic acid (pH 1.9). All the
NMR data were collected at 25 °C on a 600 MHz Bruker Avance spectrometer
equipped with a triple-resonance (15N, 13C, 1H) cryoprobe. A series of homonuclear spectra were recorded
to determine sequence-specific resonance assignments for [AibB8,LysB28,ProB29]-insulin,
in particular, two-dimensional (2D) TOCSY spectra with a mixing time
of 55 ms and 2D DQF-COSY and 2D NOESY spectra, which were acquired
with a nuclear Overhauser effect (NOE) mixing time of 200 ms. Residues
involved in forming stable backbone hydrogen bonds were identified
by monitoring the rate of backbone amide exchange in 2D TOCSY spectra
of [AibB8,LysB28,ProB29]-insulin dissolved in a 20% d4-acetic acid/80% D2O mixture. The family of
converged structures for [AibB8]-insulin was initially calculated
using Cyana version 2.1. The combined
automated NOE assignment and structure determination protocol was
used to automatically assign the NOE cross-peaks identified in 2D
NOESY spectrum and to produce preliminary structures. Subsequently,
five cycles of simulated annealing combined with redundant dihedral
angle constraints (Redac) were used to
produce a set of converged structures with no significant restraint
violations (distance and van der Waals violations of &lt;0.2 Å),
which were further refined in explicit solvent using the YASARA software
with the YASARA force field. The 35 structures
with the lowest total energy were selected. Analysis of the family
of structures obtained was conducted using Molmol, iCING,, and PyMol (http://www.pymol.org).

X-ray Studies
Crystallizations of all insulin analogues
were performed with the in-house insulin crystallization screens that
cover most of the parameters of the reported insulin crystallogenesis.
Crystallization conditions, data collection, refinement and models
statistics, and PDB entries are listed in Table S1 of the . X-ray data were processed
with xia2, and model
building and refinement were performed with the CCP4 suite of programs and COOT. Crystal
structures were determined with Molrep with B1–B6 and B23–B30 truncated hexamer-derived insulin
monomers as a model (PDB entry 1mso) and refined
with Refmac version 5.8. Figures were
made with CCP4mg. For structural comparisons,
the relevant structures were superimposed on the Cα atoms of
residues B9–B19 with the LSQ fit option in COOT.

Results
Synthesis of the Analogues
Six new insulin analogues
modified at the N-terminus of the B-chain have been prepared by the
total synthesis and chain combination. The yields of chain recombination
reactions were different depending on the amino acid substitution
(the average yield from several recombination reactions was calculated
to a starting amount of B-chain S-sulfonate as a limiting factor of
the reaction). Aib-containing analogues gave generally low yields.
AibB5-insulin was obtained with the lowest (0.5%) yield of all the
analogues prepared here. The average yields of [AibB3]-insulin, [AibB8]-insulin,
and [AibB8,LysB28,ProB29]-insulin were 1.7, 5, and 2%, respectively.
In contrast, the analogues with the expected T-state conformation
were produced with increased yields; [NMeAlaB8]-insulin
and [d-ProB8]-insulin gave yields of 10 and 25%, respectively.
For comparison, the average recombination yields of HI in our laboratory
are typically in the range of 8–12% (data not shown).

IR Binding
Affinities of the Analogues
IR binding affinities
for IR-A in membranes of human IM-9 lymphocytes of all the prepared
analogues are listed in Table , with the corresponding
binding curves provided in Figure S2 of the . Both [AibB8]-insulin and [AibB8,LysB28,ProB29]-insulin
exhibit very low receptor binding affinities of 0.6 and 0.25%, respectively.
The substitution of the B8 site with d-ProB8 and NMeAlaB8 amino acids (adopting mostly dihedral angles from
the right half of the Ramachandran plot) also had a deleterious effect
on the binding potencies of the resulting analogues. [d-ProB8]-insulin
retained only 0.08% of the affinity of HI, and the binding affinity
of [NMeAlaB8]-insulin was under the range of our
measurement (&lt;0.01%). [AibB5]-insulin had a binding affinity that
was 4.4% of that of HI. The α-Aib substitution at position B3
has the least impact on IR affinity as [AibB3]-insulin retained 28.4%
of the binding potency of HI.

Values of Kd and Relative Binding Affinities of Human Insulin
and Insulin Analogues
for IR-A in Membranes of Human IM-9 Lymphocytes
analogue	Kd (nM)	potency (%)	
human
insulin	0.27 ± 0.04 (5)	100 ± 15	
[AibB3]-insulin	0.94 ± 0.02 (3)	28.4 ± 0.6	
[AibB5]-insulin	6.09 ± 1.04 (3)	4.4 ± 0.8	
[AibB8]-insulin	48.4 ± 0.54 (4)	0.6 ± 0.007	
[AibB8,LysB28,ProB29]-insulin	106 ± 22.0 (4)	0.25 ± 0.05	
[d-ProB8]-insulin	345 ± 20.5 (3)	0.08 ± 0.005	
[NMeAlaB8]-insulin	&gt;1500 (3)	&lt;0.01	
Each value represents
the mean ±
the standard deviation of multiple determinations (n).

Relative receptor binding
affinity
(potency) defined as [(Kd of human insulin)/(Kd of analogue)] × 100.

Additionally, two analogues, [AibB8]-insulin
and [NMe-AlaB8]-insulin, were tested for their binding
affinities for IR-B
and the IGF-1 receptor (IGF-1R) in membranes of mouse embryonal fibroblasts.
The binding curves are shown in Figure S3 of the , and the data are listed in Table S2
of the . Like those
for IR-A, both analogues displayed low binding affinities for IR-B
(0.27% for [AibB8]-insulin and &lt;0.05% for [NMeAlaB8]-insulin),
and their binding affinities for IGF-1R were below the measurable
range (&lt;0.01%).

Circular Dichroism
The T →
R transition abilities
of HI and studied analogues were inferred from the CD spectra. The
far-UV (200–260 nm) and near-UV (245–300 nm) CD spectra
were acquired in the presence and absence of phenol, an inducer of
the T → R transition (Figure  and Figure
S4 of the ). Typically,
the addition of phenol results in an increase in the magnitude of
the CD signals at 208 and 222 nm, characteristic of the helix-associated
mean residue, and in an increase in the magnitude of the negative
CD signal around 250 nm., The presence of individual
secondary structure elements within the molecule (Table S3 of the ) was calculated from far-UV
spectra using CD Spectra Deconvolution version 2.11 developed in 2001
by G. Böhm (Institut für Biotechnologie Martin-Luther-Universität
Halle-Wittenberg, Halle-Wittenberg, Germany).

Far-UV CD spectra of
insulin analogues in the absence (—)
and presence (---) of phenol: (A) human insulin, (B) [AibB3]-insulin,
(C) [AibB8]-insulin, (D) [d-ProB8]-insulin, and (E) [NMeAlaB8]-insulin.

Representative curves for the T- and R-states of HI (Figure A) demonstrate that the presence of phenol increases
the negative ellipticity in insulin spectra at 208 and 222 nm. In
contrast to those of HI, the spectra of [AibB3]-insulin and [AibB8]-insulin
analogues exhibit only small differences in the absence or presence
of phenol (Figure B,C), which may be indicative
of a much smaller increase in the α-helical content (Table S3
of the ). The low
yield of the [AibB5]-insulin analogue prevented its spectroscopic
analysis. The [d-ProB8]-insulin analogue showed a significant
increase in the magnitude of the negative CD signal in the presence
of phenol, especially at 208 nm (Figure D),
indicating a possible, and unexpected, T → R transition ability
of this analogue. In contrast, the spectra of [NMeAlaB8]-insulin
showed only a minimal change after addition of phenol in the near-
and far-UV regions, confirming the conservation of the T-state conformation
regardless of the presence or absence of phenol (Figure E and Figure S4D of the ).

Solution Structure of the [AibB8,LysB28,ProB29]-Insulin Analogue
The NMR structure of [AibB8,LysB28,ProB29]-insulin has been determined
as none of the Aib analogues yielded any suitable crystals. This analogue
provided good-quality NMR spectra under acidic conditions [20% d4-acetic acid (pH 1.9)], which is indicative
of the expected monomeric behavior for this modified insulin. However,
the apparent line broadening of amide proton signals, in comparison
with that of the previously studied insulin analogues, may suggest
some degree of chemical exchange between two, or more, similar conformational
states. Essentially complete sequence-specific assignment of 1H NMR resonances has been achieved using the combination of
homonuclear 2D TOCSY, NOESY, and DQF-COSY experiments. In particular,
96.8% of all proton resonances were assigned with the exception of
the poorly resolved Hξ signals of all three phenylalanine
side chains (PheB1, PheB24, and PheB25), Hα and Hβ of CysA11, Hα of CysB7, and HN and Hβ3 of LeuB11. The 1H resonance
assignments were used for automated assignment of the NOEs identified
in the 2D NOESY spectrum using the CANDID protocol implemented in
Cyana. This yielded unique assignments
for 94.1% (606 of 644) of the NOE peaks observed, providing 488 nonredundant 1H–1H distance constraints. The 35 satisfactorily
converged [AibB8,LysB28,ProB29]-insulin structures [obtained from
100 random starting conformations using 570 NMR-derived structural
constraints, including distance restraints for hydrogen and disulfide
bonds (&gt;11 constraints per residue)] were further refined in explicit
water using YASARA. The numbers of observed
NOE peaks, distance constraints, and structural statistics for obtained
structures are listed in Table S4 of the .

The solution structure calculated from the
NMR data for [AibB8,LysB28,ProB29]-insulin is shown in Figure . The GlyB8Aib mutation did not have a significant
impact on the conformation of the B8 site of this analogue or on the
conformation of the B1–B8 segment. Unexpectedly, the N-terminus
of the B-chain of the analogue adopts a conformation similar to that
of the T-state of HI (Figure B). The main
difference between the structures of this analogue and HI is at the
C-termini of their B-chains. The C-terminus of the B-chain of the
analogue is disordered from PheB24 upward, likely because of the LysB28
↔ ProB29 swap, as we observed the same phenomenon in the NMR
structure of [LysB28,ProB29]-insulin under the same experimental conditions
(data not shown).

Solution structure of the [AibB8,LysB28,ProB29]-insulin
analogue.
(A) Best-fit superposition of the protein backbone for 35 converged
structures. The A-chain is colored red, AibB8 blue, and the B-chain
gray. (B) Overlay of the representative (closest to mean) structure
of the ensemble and HI (light yellow). The side chain of AibB8 is
colored blue.

Crystal Structure of [d-ProB8]-Insulin
[d-ProB8]-insulin crystallized
as a dimer with one molecule in
the asymmetric unit. The overall conformation of each single molecule
of this analogue is similar to the T-like state. However, the structure
of the B1–B3 region is different. PheB1 is relocated by ∼7.5
Å from its T-state position, and the hydrogen-bonded (2.8 Å)
side-chain GluB4OE and main-chain COPheB1 are engaged in the B1–B4
pseudo-β-turn. This is different from the previously observed
“open” state, i.e., O-state, or an I-state (intermediate state), and it is here termed the Ic-state (I-compact state).
The compactness of the Ic-state is a consequence of the
tethering of the B1 phenyl ring into a hydrophobic cavity lined by
LeuB17, ValB2, ValB18, AlaB14, and LeuA16 (Figure A).

(A) Conformation of the N-terminus of the B-chain of [d-ProB8]-insulin (backbone colored green) and [NMeAlaB8]-insulinII (backbone colored coral). The wild-type T-state insulin
(PDB entry 1mso) backbone is colored white; all nitrogen atoms are colored blue
and oxygen atoms red. Hydrogen bonds are shown as dashed lines (see
the text for distances). Only the relevant side chains discussed in
the text are shown. (B) Impact of B8 site substitutions on the hydrogen
bond network in the B9–B19 helix in [d-ProB8]-insulin
and [NMeAlaB8]-insulinII. The coloring
scheme in analogues is the same as in panel A. The R-state insulin
(PDB entry 1g7a) backbone is colored gold. The NMe group is marked
with a red asterisk, and labels of positions of B-helix hydrogen bond
donor and acceptor groups are colored black (see the text for distances).

The GlyB8 → d-Pro
mutation did not significantly
impact the conformation of the B8 site that is overall similar to
that found in O- and I-state insulins. It is characterized by the
occurrence of the B8GlyCO–HNB12Val hydrogen bond (3.1 Å)
that is also present in the R-state, which is broken in the “typical”
T-state insulins. Additionally, the second feature of this analogue
is the preservation of the T-state typical B7CysCO–NHHisB10
hydrogen bond-like contact (∼3 Å, with imperfect helical
hydrogen bond geometry), which switches to a B7CysCO–NHLeuB11
hydrogen bond pattern in the R-state B-helix (Figure B).

Crystal Structure of [NMeAlaB8]-Insulin
This analogue crystallized in two crystal forms. Crystal form I
([NMeAlaB8]-insulinI) was isomorphous
with the
[d-ProB8]-insulin; hence, the [NMeAlaB8]-insulinI structure is identical to that of the d-ProB8Gly
mutant. The N-methylated amide in [NMeAlaB8]-insulinI mimics the N–Cδ bond of d-ProB8 (Figure B). Interestingly,
this analogue yielded another crystal form (crystal form II, [NMeAlaB8]-insulinII) that contains two molecules
in the asymmetric unit, which are engaged in two typical insulin dimers
by crystallographic 2-fold symmetry. The dimeric nature of [NMeAlaB8]-insulinII may be surprising as it was
crystallized under “typical” monomeric conditions.

The [NMeAlaB8]-insulinII structure follows
the typical I-state insulin conformation in which the B1–B4
region moves even farther from the core of the insulin, resulting
in an ∼16 Å distance between B1 Cα atoms
in this analogue and in T-state insulin molecules (∼12.6 Å
between B1 Cα atoms in the I- and Ic-states)
(Figure A). Also, the Ic-like B1CO–B4
side-chain pseudo-β-turn is replaced by a typical I-state B3
side-chain–B5 main-chain pseudo-β-turn stabilized by
AsnB3OD1–HNHisB5 (2.8 Å) and AsnB3OD1–ND1HisB5
(3.2 Å) hydrogen bonds. Further “opening” of the
N-terminus of B1–B4 in [NMeAlaB8]-insulinII does not impact the other part of the N-terminus of B5–B8;
hence, the conformation of the B8 site, and its surrounding regions
(i.e., its hydrogen bond pattern), is identical in both [NMeAlaB8]-insulin crystal forms and [d-ProB8]-insulin. All
ψ and φ angles for d-Pro-/NMeAla-
and AibB8-substituted insulins occupy the −/+ quarter of the
Ramachandran plot.

Structural Context of Crystal Packing
The crystallographic
dimers in [d-ProB8]- and [NMeAlaB8]-insulinI form a trimer of dimers around the crystallographic 3-fold
axis. This brings three B1 side chains within 3.8 Å of each other
and locates them over a hydrophobic surface formed by these three
dimers. From the relevant residues of the N-termini, only the OD1
atom of AsnB3 forms an intermolecular hydrogen bond to OE2 of GlnB13.

The crystal packing in [NMeAlaB8]-insulinII is different. PheB1 is in the proximity of the hydrophobic
B19–A20 disulfide bond from a neighboring molecule, and its
phenyl ring may also be involved in a π-cation interaction with
the guanidinium group of symmetry-related ArgB22. The B-chain N-terminal
ValB2NH forms a hydrogen bond with symmetry-related OE2GluA17, and
OE1 of GlnB4 interacts also via crystal symmetry with ND2 of AsnA18.

Despite all these interactions, N-termini of [d-ProB8]-
and [NMeAlaB8]-insulinI/II are not especially
prohibited from other conformations as they are exposed to relatively
open voids of the crystal space.

The [AibB8]-insulin and [AibB3]-insulin
analogues have not been
crystallized despite the use of a wide range of crystallization conditions.

Discussion
The significance of the T → R transition
at the N-terminus
of the B-chain of insulin, and the relevance of individual states,
has been a subject of vigorous debate. This study of analogues with
modifications at the N-terminus of the B-chain, designed to selectively
stabilize the conformation of the T/R-related structural states, aimed
to provide further insight into this rather complex issue. Here, we
modified HI at three N-terminal positions: B3, B5, and B8. The reasons
behind the selection of each of these positions were different. Site
B8 is a crucial structural pivot for the T → R interconversion
of the N-terminus of the B-chain. Sites B3 and B5 also seem to affect
the T → R transition; however, their substitutions are not
deleterious with respect to insulin–IR binding affinity.,,− To probe the
role of enforced B1–B8 R-state-like helix formation, α-aminoisobutyric
acid (Aib), was incorporated at positions
B3, B5, and B8. In contrast, the assurance of the T-state of insulin
was intended by the introduction of a d-Pro or NMeAla amino acids at position B8, as they cannot adopt ψ and
φ angles that are typical for the right-handed α-helices
(Figure S1 of the ).

Structural and Functional Features of Site B3
The lack
of a detrimental effect of the deletion of the B1–B4 segment
on insulin activity indicates that AsnB3 is not essential for IR binding. However, the loss of the AsnB3 side chain caused
by its deamidation can affect the physicochemical properties of the
hormone.,

[AibB3]-insulin retained nearly 30%
of HI binding affinity, being the most potent analogue of the series
reported here. The lack of a detrimental effect of the Asn →
AibB3 replacement on the IR binding affinity is not surprising because
of the general, relatively high tolerance for substitutions at the
B3 site, which has been documented for [SerB3]-insulin (97% binding
affinity), [ProB3]-insulin (54%), [AlaB3]-insulin
(134%), and the [LysB3,GluB29]-insulin
analogue (insulin glulisine) with a wild-type-like affinity (see Table S5 of the ). Changes in the structure and reduced flexibility
of [AibB3]-insulin were observed also in the CD spectra of this analogue,
although the low yield of chain combination (only 1.7%) did not allow
measurements of the near-UV CD spectra (245–300 nm), where
the structural effect of phenol would be more evident. Also, the far-UV
spectra (200–260 nm) showed a small phenol-related effect on
the structure of [AibB3]-insulin, likely an indication of a decreased
rate of the T → R transition (Figure B) and small differences in the helical content of [AibB3]-insulin
in the absence or presence of phenol (Table S3 of the ). Moreover, AsnB3 in HI
is not involved in any significant interaction in the T/R hexamers.
Therefore, the rigidity of the local main chain due to the presence
of two methyl groups at B3 Cα atoms in [AibB3]-insulin
may be responsible for its reduced affinity and decreased T →
R transition ability as the one-methyl side-chain [AlaB3]-insulin
analogue has an affinity of 134%.

Structural and Functional
Features of Site B5
HisB5
is conserved among eutherian mammals and plays an important role in
insulin aggregation, binding of phenolic ligands, folding, structure,
and stability but, like the B3 site, does not seem to be crucial for
the biological activity of this hormone.,− However, HisB5 seems to be co-responsible for the
low binding affinity of insulin for IGF-1R. Some importance of HisB5 is also reflected in its ability to coordinate
zinc ions,, its contribution to the stability
of the R6 insulin hexamers by bonding to phenol ligand, and the impact of insulin folding.

The
hexamer-stabilizing role of HisB5 is highlighted by the retention
of 40% of the affinity by a naturally occurring ArgB5 mutation (hystricomorph
mammals, fish, and birds) that inhibits hexamer formation and the
T → R transition., Many B5 site analogues,
e.g., [AlaB5]-insulin,, [ThrB5]-insulin, or [AlaB5]-DKP insulin (and
[ArgB5]-insulin as well), were obtained
only in very low yields, and the synthesis of [MetB5]-insulin was
unsuccessful. Such detrimental effects
of the HisB5 substitutions on (pro)insulin self-assembly are also
confirmed in vivo(,,) by the naturally occurring HisB5Asp mutation (H29D),
which causes permanent neonatal diabetes mellitus due to the disruption
of proinsulin folding., Therefore, the infinitesimal
yield (0.5%) of our [AibB5]-insulin analogue reflects this trend;
the amount of this analogue was sufficient only for binding assays
and did not allow structural studies.

Interestingly, the decrease
in the number of methyl side-chain
groups at the B5 site increases the analogue’s IR affinity
from 4.4% in [AibB5]-insulin to 31% in [AlaB5]-insulin. It seems that the IR affinity of the B5 analogues
is quite tolerant to mutations [affinities in the range of 20–50%
(see Table S5 of the )], with an exception of acidic amino acids (e.g., [AspB5]-insulin
with 0.4% binding affinity). Thus, the
low affinity of the [AibB5]-insulin may result mainly from the increased
rigidity of the α-AibB5 main chain. The already reported structures
of [ArgB5]- and [TyrB5]-insulin confirmed the importance of the B5
site for the T → R transition., [ArgB5]-insulin
crystallized only in the T-state, confirming the blocked T →
R transition for this naturally occurring insulin. In contrast, [TyrB5]-insulin formed T3Rf3 hexamer even without an excess of chloride ions
or cyclic alcohols. Therefore, it seems
that the replacement of HisB5 with an appropriate or specific amino
acid can indeed significantly affect the conformation of the N-terminus
of the B-chain.

Structural and Functional Features of Site
B8
In contrast
to the substitutions of sites B3 and B5, mutations of GlyB8 usually
have a detrimental effect on IR binding. GlyB8 is evolutionarily strictly
conserved in all insulins and in other
members of the insulin superfamily, such as IGFs, relaxin, or bombyxin. Glycine has the largest allowed chiral angle
space, reflected in its large area in the Ramachandran plot (Figure
S1 of the ). To narrow
the B8 conformational spectrum, we prepared [AibB8]- and [AibB8,LysB28,ProB29]-insulin
with the aim of “locking” them in the R-state. Subsequently,
[d-ProB8]- and [NMeAlaB8]-insulin were prepared
to yield the opposite, structurally “stabilized” T-state
hormones. Interestingly, all these analogues exhibited &lt;1% binding
affinity for IR-A (Table ), with the affinity
of [NMeAlaB8]-insulin being below the detection limit
of the measurements (see Figure S2C of the ). We also determined similar low, or nondetectable,
binding affinities of [AibB8]- and [NMeAlaB8]-insulin
for IR-B and IGF-1R (Table S2 of the ). These low binding affinities are in agreement
with the weak affinities of all (except SerB8, with 23% of the affinity
of HI) the B8 analogues published to date (Table S5 of the ).

The crucial role
of GlyB8 is also underlined by the two naturally occurring (pro)insulin
gene mutations, GlyB8Ser (G32S) and GlyB8Arg (G32R), that cause permanent
neonatal diabetes mellitus.,,, Also, the in vitro data for the GlyB8Arg (G32R) mutant suggest that the negative effect
of this mutation results from the disruptive disulfide pairing during
proinsulin folding in the endoplasmic reticulum. Impaired folding of [AibB8,LysB28,ProB29]-insulin and [AibB8]-insulin
was also observed in this work, although the yields were not as negligible
as previously reported for l-amino acid B8 analogues
(or the analogues’ precursors).,,,,,,

The d-amino acids substitutions of site B8 had more
deleterious
effects on analogues’ affinities than substitutions with l-amino acids (Table S5 of the ).,,, However, d-amino acid substitutions
at site B8 were usually associated with an increase in the efficiency
of chain combination,,,, also confirmed here by good synthetic yields
of [d-ProB8]-insulin and [NMeAlaB8]-insulin
analogues. While the [NMeAlaB8]-insulin analogue
had a yield comparable to that of HI, the yield of the [d-ProB8]-insulin analogue was nearly 3-fold higher than the yield
of native insulin. It indicates that the conformational space of the d-Pro φ angle at the B8 site has a positive impact on
insulin folding. These high synthetic yields of the R-state “prohibited”
([d-ProB8]- and [NMeAlaB8]-insulin) analogues
support previous hypotheses about the importance of the T-state (or
T-like state) of insulin for an efficient folding of the hormone and
its precursors, and indicate T-like solution
states of these analogues.

Higher yields of the B8 analogues
allowed their extensive structural
characterization by CD, NMR, and X-ray crystallography. The solution
properties of the B1–B8 N-termini of these analogues, especially
their response and interactions with R-state-stabilizing phenol, were
monitored by CD spectroscopy. The far- and near-UV CD spectra of [AibB8]-insulin
showed a small effect of addition of phenol compared to those of HI
(Figure C and Figure S4B of the ), and [NMeAlaB8]-insulin responded with a negligible change in the CD spectra
to the presence of this ligand (Figure E and
Figure S4D of the ). The structural resilience of [NMeAlaB8]-insulin,
its locked T-state and lack of any R-like structure in the presence
of phenol, likely resulted from the inability of this analogue to
contribute to the α-helix hydrogen bond pattern due to replacement
of the B8 amide hydrogen with a methyl group.

Surprisingly,
the CD spectra of the T-state locked [d-ProB8]-insulin
showed some phenol-induced changes (Figure D and Figure S4C of the ). However, it is possible that these spectral variations may result
from certain subtle changes in local interactions or structural arrangements
in this analogue, and not from spectral effects accompanying typical
T → R conformational changes. However, their exact nature cannot
be explained by its crystal structure.

Although crystallization
screening is not an ultimate proof of
a protein’s solution behavior, it is symptomatic that [d-ProB8]- and [NMeAlaB8]-insulin crystallized
only in the Ic- and I-states, even despite the presence
of phenol and zinc in some crystallization media. This, together with
the superior folding abilities of these analogues, indicates their
strong preference for the T-state-like conformation. Moreover, [d-ProB8]- and [NMeAlaB8]-insulin also showed
a predisposition to dimerization as all their crystal structures are
exclusively dimeric. Interestingly, all differently packed [d-ProB8]- and [NMeAlaB8]-insulinII crystal
structures, and the solution structure of [AibB8,LysB28,ProB29]-insulin,
adopted a range of I-state-like conformations. The variations of these
I-state-type conformers (intermediates between the T- and R-states)
have already been observed in crystal structures of the highly active
insulin analogues, [GluB9]-insulin, despenta- and deshepta-insulins, and an extensively engineered insulin monomer. The Ic-state of [d-ProB8]-
and [NMeAlaB8]-insulinI resembles the
T-like state, but with B1–B8 packed more closely against the
insulin core, i.e., toward a conformation observed in [Cys(B4–B10),desB30]-insulin, in which B1–B8 formed a tight β-sheet
with the adjacent A-chain. However, the N-terminal β-sheet-like
fold in these B8 site analogues is loosened up because of the lack
of a B1CO–HNA13 hydrogen bond.

Although the T-like conformations
of the N-termini in [d-ProB8]- and [NMeAlaB8]-insulin
were expected, the
T-like state in the NMR structure of [AibB8,LysB28,ProB29]-insulin
was surprising. The presence of the helix-inducing Aib amino acid
at site B8 was not sufficient to force B1–B8 into R-like, or
Rf-like, states. Interestingly, all N-termini in [d-ProB8]-, [NMeAlaB8]-, and [AibB8,LysB28,ProB29]-insulin
(and some other T-like-state analogues) feature a B7CO–NHB10
hydrogen bond at the beginning of the B9–B19 helix (Figure ). In the R-state, the register of this hydrogen
bond must change into a B7CO–NHB11 contact to follow the proper
B1(B3)–B19 α-helix hydrogen bond pattern. Interestingly,
this R-state NHB10 → NHB11 intrahelical shift of a hydrogen
bond acceptor combines B1(B3)–B19 helix formation with the
observed isomerization of the B7–A7, and closely associated
A6–A11, disulfide bonds. The isomerization of B7–A7
and A6–A11 disulfide bridges is frequently observed in T →
R transitions but cannot be easily quantified because of different
crystal packing, mutations, allosteric ligands, etc., found in these
structures. However, it is plausible that these two structural rearrangements,
a switch of the NHB10 → NHB11 B-helix hydrogen bond pattern
and combined B7–A7 and A6–A11 disulfide isomerization,
present substantial T-state conformational locks. Hence, the conformational
freedom of the glycine at site B8 not only is required for efficient
insulin folding but also provides minimal steric hindrance and maximal
chiral flexibility, if these site B8-associated conformational changes
are indeed involved in effective insulin–IR complex formation.

The higher (130%) affinity of [Cys(B4–B10),desB30]-insulin, with an N-terminal β-sheet that follows
the “tight” T-state-like fold restrained by an additional
SS link, is not surprising in the context of this study and previous
studies, and the emergence of a wide
spectrum of active and inactive T-like (e.g., I to Ic)
states. Moreover, an additional B4–B10 disulfide bond in [Cys(B4–B10),desB30]-insulin
does not exclude the possibility of a modification of this structure
toward, for example, I-like states. This could be facilitated, for
example, by B4–B10 disulfide bond isomerization, synchronized
with similar structural responses in B7–A7 and A6–A11
disulfides. Interestingly, the active, compact conformation of [Cys(B4–B10),desB30]-insulin
is observed only in its hexamer crystal structure; therefore, its
alternative conformation may occur in monomeric and dimeric forms
of this analogue.

As the R- and Rf-states were never
observed in insulin
monomers and dimers, it seems that the full T → R/Rf transition requires substantial cooperative, entropic contributions
from zinc coordination, including various ligands (e.g., halogens,
SCN–, phenols, etc.) and cannot be achieved by a
single, helix-preferring, even non-natural, amino acid substitution.
However, B1–B8 structural rearrangements toward the R-state
involving a significant chaperone-like contribution from IR cannot
be excluded.

In conclusion, this study (i) provided further
proof of the importance
of the T-like state for the folding efficiency of (pro)insulin, (ii)
underlined the incompatibility of the R-state with an active form
of insulin, (iii) indicated the complex character of the T →
R transition that cannot be induced or stabilized by a single substitution
at site B8, and (iv) provided structural evidence of the ability of
the B1–B8 segment to form a variety of structurally T- or I-like
states, correlated with low hormone affinities. Moreover, this study
revealed that the substantial flexibility of the B1–B8 segment,
especially site B8, is necessary for the effective binding to IR.
Undoubtedly, further cocrystallization and structural studies of insulin
with site 2-containing IR constructs will be necessary to shed light
on the insulin B-chain N-terminal “active” conformation
and to delineate the physiological roles of individual components
of the B1–B8 segment.

Supporting Information Available
Ramachandran plots for selected
amino acids (Figure S1), data collection and refinement statistics
for crystal structures of insulin analogues (Table S1), IR-A assay
binding curves for human insulin and analogues (Figure S2), methodology
for the determination of binding affinities for IR-B and IGF-1R, binding
curves of analogues for IR-B and IGF-1R (Figure S3), values of Kd of analogues for IR-B and IGF-R (Table S2),
near-UV (245–305 nm) CD spectra for insulin and analogues (Figure
S4), secondary structure content of HI or insulin analogues with or
without phenol calculated from CD spectra (Table S3), NMR constraints
and structural statistics for the NMR structure of [AibB8,LysB28,ProB29]-insulin
(Table S4), literature values of insulin receptor binding affinities
of previously published insulin analogues (Table S5), and supplemental
references. This material is available free of charge via the Internet
at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bi500073z_si_002.pdf

This work was
supported by Grant Agency of the Czech Republic Grant P207/11/P430
(to L.Ž.) and Grant P208/11/0105 (to M.U.), the Ministry of
Education of the Czech Republic (Program “NAVRAT” LK11205,
to V.V.), the Medical Research Council (Grant MR/K000179/1, to A.M.B.),
the Specific University Research (MSMT No. 20/2013, A1_FCHI_2014_003),
and Research Project RVO:61388963 of the Academy of Sciences of the
Czech Republic (to the Institute of Organic Chemistry and Biochemistry,
Academy of Sciences of the Czech Republic).

The authors declare
no
competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
We
thank Prof. Axel Wollmer for helpful discussions and advice
in planning the CD experiments, Dr. John P. Mayer for useful advice
about the recombination of insulin chains, and Miroslava Blechová
(Institute of Organic Chemistry and Biochemistry, Academy of Sciences
of the Czech Republic) for the synthesis of peptide chains.

Abbreviations
DIPEAN,N-diisopropylethylamine

DQF-COSYdouble-quantum-filtered correlation spectroscopy

EDT1,2-ethanedithiol

HEPESN-(2-hydroxyethyl)piperazine-N′-2-ethanesulfonic acid

HIhuman insulin

IRinsulin receptor

NOESYnuclear Overhauser effect spectroscopy

TIStriisopropylsilane

TOCSYtotal correlation
spectroscopy.

