The development of biosensor technology
in recent years has been motivated
by a growing need to detect, quantify, and monitor biomolecule levels
in biological, industrial, and medical fields. Although a number of
successful technologies have been introduced, for example, surface
plasmon resonance and continuous blood glucose monitors, the development
of simpler and more general designs remains a pressing need.

Most biosensors are composed of a biological recognition module
(input) and a transducing element with which to convert binding to
a visible signal (output). Binding domains of proteins and Förster
resonance energy transfer (FRET) have emerged as one of the most potent
and widely used combinations of input and output, respectively. Protein
interaction domains excel in the former role because they bind their
cognate ligands with high affinity and specificity, and some can be
engineered to recognize new targets. FRET is powerful because the
output response is typically ratiometric and donor/acceptor groups
can be genetically encoded in the form of fluorescent proteins. The
general approach is to attach donor and acceptor fluorophores to locations
on the protein where they report on a distance change induced by ligand
binding.

There are two interrelated challenges with constructing
biosensors
based on the design described above. The first is to develop general
mechanisms for introducing ligand-dependent conformational changes
into ordinary binding proteins, because the great majority of proteins
do not exhibit these changes naturally. Several strategies have been
developed for this purpose. One is to take advantage of the natural
coupling between binding and folding using proteins that are either
intrinsically disordered in the absence of ligand or mutated to be so. Another
is to engineer a binding-dependent fold shift
from the native structure to a circularly permuted fold (alternate
frame folding).− A third approach is to tether binding domains together
such that
interaction with ligand triggers open-to-closed rigid body movement,
as in SNAP-tag-based semisynthetic fluorescent sensor, and affinity clamp technologies. All
of these examples are single-component sensors in which distance-
or environment-sensitive fluorescent groups are attached to the same
molecule.

Although single-component sensors offer numerous advantages,
their
weakness is exposed by the second challenge of designing a FRET biosensor.
For maximal output, the change in donor–acceptor distance should
not only be substantial but also span the Förster
radius (R0, the distance at which energy
transfer is 50% efficient). For the purpose of illustration, for the
FRET efficiency
to increase from 10 to 90% the donor–acceptor distance must
decrease from 1.44R0 to
0.68R0, or from 72 to 34 Å for a
typical R0 value of 50 Å. It is difficult
to achieve this condition by placing the groups
on the same molecule and relying on conformational change (e.g., hinge
movement) in the native protein. Even the process of folding,
which is arguably the most dramatic transformation that a protein
can undergo, results in surprisingly small distance changes. The radius
of gyration of an unfolded protein increases roughly linearly from
30 to 70 Å for molecules 100–400 amino acids in length.,, It is therefore possible to attain large FRET changes upon folding
but only for larger (or elongated) proteins and with ideal arrangement
of fluorophores in native and unfolded states. For most proteins,
the donor–acceptor distance is expected to be less than the R0 in both conformations. Perhaps for this reason,
sensors based
on binding-induced folding and alternate frame folding have employed
short-range,
nonratiometric means of detection (e.g., fluorescence quenching or
excimer formation) rather than FRET. With
their largerscale domain movements, affinity clamp and SNAP-tag sensors
produce ratiometric FRET changes of up to 4.9-fold.−,

Here, we develop the protein fragment exchange
(FREX) switching
mechanism to address both challenges. FREX can in principle be applied
to many binding proteins to generate a consistent ligand-dependent
conformational change. FREX speaks to the FRET distance problem by
placing donor and acceptor groups on separate components that interact
only in the presence of the target. The first component is the full-length
native protein, and the second component is one of any number of fragments
duplicated from that protein. The system is controlled by introducing
two point mutations into the full-length protein: one to abolish its
ability to bind ligand (binding mutation) and one to decrease its
thermodynamic stability (packing mutation). Wild-type (WT) residues
are retained in the equivalent positions of the duplicated fragment.
In the ligand-free state, the full-length protein is of sufficient
stability to assume its native conformation. Addition of a target
induces a conformational change in which the duplicated fragment exchanges
position with its counterpart peptide on the full-length protein.
Ternary complex formation is thus driven by gains in binding energy
and stability afforded by the restoration of WT side chain interactions
at the remodeled binding and packing interfaces, respectively. This
mechanism is analogous to that of alternate frame folding except fragment
exchange in FREX occurs in trans and the resulting structure is not
circularly permuted. The improvement in the signal-to-noise ratio
versus those of single-component sensors is attained by reducing the
background level of FRET of the unbound state.

As a proof of
principle, we designed a FREX sensor for the detection
of biologically
relevant targets in vitro and in vivo. For the binding protein, we chose the 10th human
fibronectin type III domain (FN3; 100 amino acids), a minimal Ig-like
binding scaffold. Also known as a monobody, FN3 has been adapted to
recognize the c-Abl SH2 domain (resulting in the FN3-HA4 variant used
in this study) as well as more than two
dozen other targets, including tumor necrosis factor α, hSUMO4,
and epidermal growth
factor receptor.− FN3 is a versatile platform with which to build sensors because
binding
variants can be readily generated by modifying its three substrate
interacting loops using high-throughput screening. Like Ig domains,
FN3 does not undergo a change in conformation upon binding its target.
Our purpose is to introduce the core FREX switching mechanism into
FN3-HA4.

Experimental Procedures
Gene Construction and Protein Purification
FN3-HA4
and c-Abl SH2 plasmids were gifts from S. Koide (University of Chicago,
Chicago, IL). We deleted all purification tags from the original genes
and changed the first four residues of FN3-HA4 from GSSV to YGGG as
described in the text. For the FN3 variants used in Alexa fluorescence
experiments, we either introduced a Cys codon after the codon for
Met1 or mutated the Ser48 codon to a Cys codon. P48, P60, and P69
were constructed by ligating the coding sequences of residues 48–100,
60–100, and 69–100, respectively, to the 5′-end
of the maltose binding protein
(MBP) gene using a linker that translates to GGCGG. The genetically
encoded P48 sensor was created by fusing the CyPet gene
to the 5′-end of the FN3BN+I75A gene using a linker
that translates to GGSGG. For the peptide construct, the YPet gene
was inserted between the 3′- and 5′-ends of the MBP
and P48 genes, respectively.

A modified pCMV bicistronic vector
was constructed for co-expression of mCherry-P48 and EGFP-FN3BN+I75A in mammalian cell
cultures. EGFP-FN3BN+I75A and mCherry-P48 genes were constructed
as described above. The mCherry-P48 and EGFP-FN3BN+I75A genes were then inserted upstream and downstream of the internal
ribosome entry sequence, respectively.

Escherichia coli BL21(DE3) cells were transformed
with the plasmids described above, and cultures were grown in Luria-Bertani
medium at 37 °C. After induction, cells were allowed to express
for 18 h at 20 °C and then centrifuged. FN3BN was
purified from lysis supernatants, under native conditions (pH 7.0),
using a Q-Sepharose column. FN3BN packing mutants were
expressed mostly in lysis pellets. Pellets were solubilized in 6 M
urea, and the proteins were purified as described above except in
the presence of 6 M urea. Proteins were then refolded by extensive
dialysis against 10 mM sodium phosphate (pH 7.0). SH2 was purified
by the same native-condition protocol described above, except an SP-Sepharose
column was used. We purified P48, P60, and P69 by passing the lysis
supernatants (pH 7.5) through an amylose column and eluting with 10
mM maltose. The proteins were then passed through a Superdex-75 size
exclusion column. Samples were dialyzed against 10 mM Tris (pH 7.5).
All proteins were judged to be &gt;95% pure by sodium dodecyl sulfate–polyacrylamide
gel electrophoresis.

Size Exclusion Chromatography
Samples
were prepared
in 20 mM sodium phosphate (pH 7.0), 0.15 M NaCl, 2 mM ethylenediaminetetraacetic
acid, and 10 mM β-mercaptoethanol using final concentrations
of 5 μM FN3 variants, 5 μM P48, P60, or P69, and 20 μM
SH2. Samples were incubated for &gt;16 h at 4 °C to ensure that
equilibrium had been reached and then injected
onto a Zenix SEC-300 7.8 mm × 300 mm column Sepax Technologies using a Bio-Rad DuoFlow
chromatography system.

Alexa Labeling
Samples were reduced
with 1 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine
(TCEP). TCEP was then removed when the sample was passed through a
10 DG desalting column. A 2-fold excess of Alexa488 C5-maleimide
or Alexa594 C5-maleimide was immediately added, and the
reaction was allowed to proceed for 3 h (pH 7.0). Excess dye was removed
by desalting as described above. Final protein concentrations and
labeling efficiencies were calculated on the basis of the molar absorptivities
and correction factors (CFs) of Alexa488 (ε488 =
72000 M–1 cm–1; CF280 = 0.11) and Alexa594 (ε594 = 96000 M–1 cm–1; CF280 = 0.56).

In
Vitro FRET Experiments
All fluorescence
data were recorded at 20 °C. Experiments conducted in buffer
included 20 mM sodium phosphate (pH 7.0), and those performed with
serum included 10% (by volume) fetal bovine serum. For cell lysate
experiments, cultures
were grown as described above, lysed by sonication, and centrifuged
to obtain the soluble fraction. Equilibrium binding studies were performed
by adding various amounts of SH2 to a fixed final concentration of
FN3 and P48, P60, or P69 (2 μM each, except for cell lysate
experiments). Samples were incubated for 3 h prior to data collection.
Fluorescence data were recorded on a Horiba Fluoromax-4 fluorometer
with excitation at 488 nm (1.5 and 2 nm excitation and emission bandpasses,
respectively) for Alexa samples and excitation at 414 nm (1 and 2
nm excitation and emission bandpasses, respectively) for CyPet and
YPet samples. The FRET ratio is reported as donor emission divided
by acceptor emission (519 and 617 nm for Alexa samples and 468 and
527 nm for CyPet and YPet samples).

In-Cell FRET Experiments
Cos-7 cells were cultured
in Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s medium supplemented with
10%
fetal calf serum and an antibiotic/antimycotic solution; 105 cells were plated into a 35 mm glass bottom dish at 37 °C with
5%
CO2 the day before transfection. Transient transfections
were performed using JetPEI transfection reagent with 3 μg of
total sensor DNA and 6 μL of JetPEI in each dish. Positive control
dishes were cotransfected with 1 μg of FLAG epitope-tagged SH2,
while negative control
dishes were transfected with sensor DNA only. After 18–20 h,
cells were fixed in a 4% paraformaldehyde/phosphate-buffered saline
(PBS) mixture at room
temperature for 15 min.

Cells were imaged in PBS using a PerkinElmer
UltraView VoX spinning
disk confocal system mounted on a Nikon Eclipse Ti microscope equipped
with a 60×, 1.49 NA APO TIRF objective, a Hamamatsu C9100-50
EMCCD camera, and an environmental chamber to maintain cells at
37 °C. Five images from EGFP (488 nm laser excitation line, 527/55W
emission filter) and mCherry (561 nm laser excitation line, EM445/60W-615/70W
emission filter) channels were captured before and after mCherry had
been photobleached using 25 passes of the 561 nm laser at full power.
EGFP images acquired before and after photobleaching were merged to
ensure that all pixels were aligned in each image prior to proceeding
to subsequent FRET calculations. Following background subtraction,
the FRET efficiency for individual pixels was calculated using ImageJ
(National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD) essentially following
the protocol of Deakin et al. using the
following formula to calculate FRET efficiency: FRETeff = 1 – Dpre/Dpost, where Dpre is the donor
intensity before bleaching and Dpost the
donor intensity after bleaching. Processed FRET efficiency images
were smoothed using the ImageJ smooth function, which replaces each
pixel with the average intensity value for the surrounding 3 ×
3 pixel region, and displayed on the color intensity scale shown in
Figure . The fold change in FRET efficiency
was
calculated by measuring the mean EGFP intensity within the bleached
rectangle and then dividing that figure by the mean EGFP intensity
in the same size rectangle placed in three to five locations in the
cell that were unbleached.

Results
FREX Mechanism
and Simulations
FREX, illustrated schematically
in Figure A, can be modeled by the following
coupled
equilibria:where N is an arbitrary binding protein, U
is the unfolded form of that protein, L is its cognate ligand, and
P is a peptide duplicated from either terminus of N. FRET donor and
acceptor groups are placed on N and P. N*P is the binary complex in
which P has displaced the corresponding segment from N, causing it
to extend as a tail (Figure A). N* indicates
that the structure of the
protein is identical to that of N except at the point of exchange.
L can bind to only N*P, not to N, because N contains a binding knockout
mutation that is replaced in N*P by the WT binding residue (which
came from P). The binding mutation thus guarantees that ligand binding
will exclusively produce the high-FRET ternary complex.

Schematic of
FREX and X-ray structure of the FN3-HA4/SH2 complex.
(A) An N- or C-terminal segment (blue) of an arbitrary binding protein
N (gray) is chosen such that it contains at least one critical ligand
binding residue. The blue segment is duplicated to generate peptide
P (red). FRET donor and acceptor groups (stars) are attached to N
and P at either terminus. The ligand binding residue is mutated in
the blue sequence, along with a residue at the packing interface between
the blue and gray regions. The resulting protein (N) is destabilized
but still folded; consequently, the binary complex of N and P (N*P)
does not form to a significant extent. Only in the presence of a ligand
(L) do the blue and red segments exchange to generate the ternary
complex (N*PL). Formation of N*PL is driven by the restoration of
binding and packing interactions, supplied by the WT residues at those
positions in P. (B) FN3-HA4 is shown with the starting positions of
P48, P60, and P69 indicated by red spheres. Blue/gray color coding
is the same as that in panel A; blue denotes the P60 segment. Side
chains of binding (Tyr87) and packing (Ile75/Val77) residues are represented
by blue spheres. SH2 is colored light green.

A protein need not globally unfold to undergo
fragment exchange. U is included to link the thermodynamic stability
of N to the probability
of forming N*P and N*PL. To illustrate, mixing a protein with a fragment
of itself will typically not result in formation of the binary complex,
even if the affinity of the protein for the peptide is high. The local
concentration of the covalently
attached fragment (that would be displaced from N by binding
of P) will almost always be greater than the bulk concentration of
P. In addition, an entropic cost must be paid for intermolecular folding
if the equivalent structure can be produced by intramolecular folding.
If these penalties are sufficiently high, then ligand binding energy
alone cannot generate the ternary complex necessary for FRET detection.
Accordingly, we allow fragment exchange by preferentially destabilizing
N relative to N*P and N*PL. Destabilization can be achieved by introducing
a packing mutation into the hydrophobic core of N. The role of the
packing mutation, which is selected to be distant from the binding
site, is to decrease the stability of N (i.e., lower Kunf) without compromising the
intrinsic affinity (Ka) or specificity
for the ligand. Formation
of N*PL is thus driven by the restoration of WT binding and packing
interactions provided by the respective WT side chains in the fragment.

The key result of the design described above is that exchange is
controlled by the severity of the packing mutation. Adjusting the
extent of destabilization allows one to populate the high-FRET N*PL
complex in the presence of ligand while minimizing the false-positive
N*P state in the absence of ligand. As a demonstration, we simulated
FREX in three representative stability regimes of FN3: that of the
WT protein (Kunf = 5 × 10–5), a destabilized yet folded mutant (Kunf = 0.02), and an unfolded variant (Kunf = 10). We fixed Kex to 105 M–1, Ka to the value
measured for the interaction
between WT FN3 and SH2 (108 M–1), and protein concentrations to those used in
our experiments
([N] = [P] = 2 μM). Panels A and B of Figure S1 of the  plot the fractions of
N*PL and N*P as a function
of ligand concentration. SH2 does not bind appreciably to WT FN3 (Figure
S1A of the ) because
the energy cost to unfold is too great. The unfolded FN3 mutant lacks
this barrier and therefore binds SH2 most tightly; the apparent association
constant (Ka,app, obtained by fitting
the data to the one-site binding equation) is 9.7 × 105 M–1. The trade-off is that a significant fraction
of FN3 (14%) exists as the binary complex in the absence of SH2 (Figure
S1B of the ). The
destabilized-yet-folded mutant offers the best combination of high
affinity [Ka,app = 2.2 × 105 M–1 (Figure S1A of the )] and
a small population of N*P [0.39% (Figure S1B of the )].
Assuming that FRET efficiencies of N*PL and N*P are identical, the
theoretical maximal signal-to-noise ratio of the sensor can be calculated
by dividing [N*PL] at saturating [L] by [N*P] in the absence of ligand.
These values are 257 and 7.4 for the destabilized and unfolded mutants
of FN3, respectively.

FN3 Structure and Choice of Mutants
For the binding
mutation, we focused on the largest of the three surface loops (residues
79–90
in FN3-HA4) with which FN3 monobodies contact their targets. Tyr87
of FN3-HA4 makes cation−π and polar interactions with
SH2 (Figure B). The same study reported that the Y87A mutant abolishes
detectable ligand binding. As insurance, we also changed the adjacent
amino acid Met88, which also contacts SH2, to Ala to create the Y87A/M88A
binding-null mutant (FN3BN).

The main choice to be
made in the FREX methodology involves the identity of the fragment:
whether to start at the N- or C-terminus of the parent protein and
at what position to end. The fragment must encompass Tyr87 and Met88
and should terminate at a surface loop. We elected to generate three
peptides, beginning at residues 48 (P48), 60 (P60), and 69 (P69) and
ending at the C-terminus (Figure B). To aid
in purification, we expressed
the peptides with an N-terminal MBP tag.

For the packing sites,
we selected the hydrophobic core residues
Ile75 and Val77 of FN3BN (Figure B). We introduced underpacking mutations
in which aliphatic side chains were progressively truncated (I75V,
I75A, I75G, V77A, and V77G). All variants unfold cooperatively when
they are denatured by guanidine hydrochloride (GdnHCl) (Figure S2
of the ), with
the exception of I75G, which failed to express. Fitting the data to
the two-state equation ΔG = ΔGH2O – m[GdnHCl]
finds that all of the mutations destabilize
FN3BN as judged by both ΔGH2O and Cm, the midpoint of
denaturation (Table S1 of the ). Comparison of Cm values yields a rank
order of stability commensurate
with the number of carbons removed. We singled out the I75A
mutant (FN3BN+I75A) for further study because it is the
least stable by the Cm criterion and because
its Kunf value of 0.021 is close to the
value found to be reasonable in the simulations.

For labeling
FN3BN with Alexa dyes, we created two mutants
in which Cys was inserted at the N-terminus or in place of Ser48 in
a surface loop. These Cys variants were used in FRET studies only;
the Cys-free version was employed in all other experiments. Peptide
constructs contain Cys in the middle of the five-amino acid peptide
used to link MBP to P48, P60, and P69. The genetically encoded version
of the P48 sensor was constructed
by placing the CyPet and YPet fluorescent proteins at positions equivalent to those of the Cys residues, i.e.,
at the N-terminus of FN3BN+I75A and between MBP and P48,
respectively.

Of note, we found that WT FN3 dimerizes extensively
in solution.
Size exclusion chromatography (SEC) showed approximately 50% dimer
formation at a protein concentration of ∼30 μM
(Figure S3 of the ). The
X-ray structure suggests a possible dimer interface in which the first
four residues (GSSV) of one FN3 form a short β-strand that then
adds to the β-sheet of the second molecule in a reciprocal fashion.
We changed GSSV to YGGG to disrupt this putative interaction. The
YGGG mutant eluted exclusively as a monomer in SEC experiments (Figure
S3 of the ) and
was significantly more stable than WT FN3 (not shown). We therefore
incorporated the YGGG mutation into all constructs used in this study.

Binding Tests Conducted via SEC
We first performed
negative controls in which SEC was used to determine whether binary
complexes form in the absence of the third species. FN3BN+I75A, peptide, and SH2 were mixed pairwise at concentrations of 5, 5,
and 20 μM, respectively. Figure A confirms
that FN3BN+I75A does not form a binary complex with P48,
P60, P69, or SH2. FN3BN+I75A (11.0 kDa) and SH2 (13.7 kDa)
elute close to the same volume, and the two peaks are not resolved;
the peptides (∼46 kDa) are the largest species present because
of their MBP purification tags. Likewise, P48, P60, and P69 do not
bind SH2 (Figure B).

Binding tests conducted
via SEC. (A) The first set of binary complex
controls consisted of mixing FN3BN+I75A (5 μM) with
P48 (blue), P60 (red), P69 (black), and SH2 (green). Peptide and SH2
concentrations are 5 and 20 μM, respectively. (B) The second
set of binary complex controls consisted of mixing SH2 with P48 (blue),
P60 (red), and P69 (black). (C) Ternary complex formation was tested
by mixing FN3BN+I75A, SH2, and P48 (blue), P60 (red), or
P69 (black). (D) Components of the N*PL complexes were identified
by repeating the experiment in panel C using FN3BN+I75A labeled with Alexa594 and P48/P60 labeled with Alexa488. The chromatogram
of the P48-containing sample is shown with absorbance detection at
488 nm (dark blue) and 594 nm (cyan). The chromatogram of the P60-containing
sample is shown with absorbance detection at 488 nm (red) and 594
nm (orange).

We next tested for formation
of the ternary complex.
Mixing FN3BN+I75A, P48, and SH2 results in a higher-molecular
mass species (estimated to be 78–88 kDa) consistent with N*PL
(Figure C). Binding appears to be almost saturated
as evidenced by the near disappearance of the free P48 peak (the free
SH2 peak remains because it is present in 4-fold excess over P48).
To determine whether the new peak is the expected N*PL complex or
a nonspecific aggregate, we identified the components in that peak
by labeling FN3BN+I75A with Alexa594 and P48 with Alexa488,
the same dyes used in the FRET studies described below. The SEC experiment
was then repeated using absorbance at 594 and 488 nm to detect FN3BN+I75A and P48,
respectively. Figure D confirms that the N*PL
peak contains both Alexa594 and Alexa488 whereas the P48 peak contains
only Alexa488. Mixing P60 with FN3BN+I75A and SH2 also
generates the ternary complex (Figure C).
The decreased peak ratio of N*PL to free
P60 suggests that the P60 sensor binds SH2 less tightly than the P48
sensor does. These conclusions are supported by SEC chromatograms
of the Alexa-labeled proteins (Figure D).
In contrast to P60 and P48, P69 does
not form a ternary complex (Figure C).

The FREX mechanism stipulates that ligand binding is controlled
by adjusting the severity of the packing mutation (eq ). To test that hypothesis, we repeated the
SEC experiments using P48, SH2, and FN3BN (Kunf = 4.6 × 10–5) or FN3BN+I75V (Kunf = 8.6 × 10–4) (Table S1 of the ). N*PL is not detected in either case (Figure S4 of the ), suggesting
that binding is too weak to be detected by SEC.

FREX Biosensors
FREX biosensors were created by attaching
the Alexa488 donor to the N-terminus of FN3BN+I75A and
the Alexa594 acceptor to the N-termini of P48, P60, and P69. Using
P48, we observed a ratiometric change in fluorescence intensity, with
Alexa488 emission decreasing at 519 nm and Alexa594 emission increasing
at 617 nm (Figure A). All spectra converge
at an isosbestic
wavelength of 584 nm. The binding data fit well to the one-site binding
equation with a Ka,app of (2.52 ±
0.2) × 105 M–1 and a 3.0-fold change
in the FRET ratio (Figure B and Table ). In
agreement with SEC data, the SH2 affinity of the P60 sensor [Ka,app = (7.20 ± 1) × 104 M–1] is lower than that of the P48 sensor, but
the FRET response
of the P60 sensor (8.4-fold change) is substantially larger (Figure
S5 of the  and
Table ). It is likely that poor labeling efficiency
negatively affected the signal change of both sensors: despite repeated
trials, we were able to achieve only 26–27% donor labeling
(Table ). Very little SH2 binding is observed
for P69 as presaged
by the SEC results.

SH2 binding to FREX sensors monitored by FRET. FN3BN+I75A is labeled with the donor at the N-terminus in panels
A–C
and F. FN3BN+I75A is labeled with the donor at Cys48 in
panels D and E. (A) Unprocessed spectra of donor-labeled FN3BN+I75A (2 μM) and acceptor-labeled P48 (2 μM) are overlaid
to show ratiometric changes in fluorescence intensity as a function
of increasing SH2 concentration, from 0 (black) to 50 μM SH2
(dark red). (B) Dependence of FRET ratio on SH2 concentration plotted
for the P48 (blue circles), P60 (red squares), and P69 (black triangles)
sensors. Lines are best fits of the data to the one-site binding equation.
Error bars are standard deviations of triplicate experiments. (C)
Donor emission at 519 nm (filled green squares) and acceptor emission
at 617 nm (filled purple circles), obtained from spectra in panel
A, plotted as a function of SH2 concentration. When acceptor-labeled
P48 is mixed with unlabeled FN3BN+I75A, the acceptor fluorescence
does not increase with SH2 concentration (empty purple circles). Similarly,
when donor-labeled FN3BN+I75A is mixed with unlabeled P48,
the donor emission does not decrease with SH2 concentration (empty
green squares). (D) Unprocessed spectra of donor-labeled FN3BN+I75A and acceptor-labeled P48 are superimposed to show the increase in
FRET efficiency resulting from moving the donor to position 48 of
FN3BN+I75A from the N-terminus (cf. panel A). SH2 concentrations
are identical to those in panel A. (E) The ratiometric output of the
P48 sensor (calculated from spectra in panel D) improves when the
donor is moved to position 48 of FN3BN+I75A from the N-terminus
(cf. panel B). (F) The performance of the P48 sensor in 10% (v/v)
fetal bovine serum (●) is comparable to that in buffer (○).
Error bars are standard deviations of triplicate measurements.

Binding Parameters
of FREX Sensors
sensor variant	donor/acceptor
type, location	donor, acceptor
labeling efficiency (%)	Ka,app (M–1)	ratiometric
response (x-fold change)	
P48	Alexa488/Alexa594	26, 109	(2.41 ± 0.3) × 105	3.0 ± 0.2	
P60	Alexa488/Alexa594	27, 106	(7.30 ± 1) × 104	8.4 ± 0.9	
P69	Alexa488/Alexa594	26, 106	not detected	not detected	
P48	Alexa488
(Cys48)/Alexa594
(N-terminus)	83,
107	(3.15 ± 0.4) × 105	8.5 ± 0.9	
P60	Alexa488
(Cys48)/Alexa594
(N-terminus)	83,
106	(5.62 ± 0.7) × 104	5.9 ± 0.3	
P48 (10% fetal bovine
serum)	Alexa488/Alexa594	26, 109	(1.22 ± 0.1) × 105	2.8 ± 0.1	
P48 (2:1 lysate ratio)	CyPet/YPet	not applicable	1.7 × 105	1.3	
P48 (1:1 lysate ratio)	CyPet/YPet	not applicable	2.8 × 105	1.6	
P48 (1:2 lysate ratio)	CyPet/YPet	not applicable	2.6 × 105	1.8	
Errors are standard
deviations
of three independent experiments.

The donor and acceptor are at N-termini.

Ratios reflect approximate molar
ratios of CyPet-FN3BN+I75A to YPet-P48. Cell lysate volume
ratios (CyPet-FN3BN+I75A:YPet-P48) are 1:1, 1:2, and 1:4
for the 2:1, 1:1, and 1:2 molar ratio samples, respectively.

We next considered the possibility
that
the ratiometric fluorescence changes in panels A and B of Figure  might be caused by quenching
or another artifact rather than FRET. We repeated the binding assay
in Figure B except in one experiment we added
SH2 to
unlabeled P48 (and donor-labeled FN3BN+I75A) and in the
other we added SH2 to unlabeled FN3BN+I75A (and acceptor-labeled
P48). The donor and acceptor fluorescence values do not change (Figure C). By contrast, when both FN3BN+I75A and P48 are labeled, the donor fluorescence decreases and the acceptor
fluorescence increases in an SH2-dependent manner. These results signify
that the ratiometric changes observed in Figure  arise from resonant energy transfer.

To test the effect of
fluorophore placement on FRET response, we
shifted the position of the donor from the N-terminus of FN3BN+I75A to position 48. Because P48 is labeled with the acceptor at almost
the same position, this arrangement might bring the fluorophores closer
in the bound state of the P48 sensor. The signal change of the P48
sensor improves to 8.5-fold, but this appears to be due to a higher
donor labeling efficiency (83%), as evidenced by the increase in the
donor:acceptor emission ratio
of the free sensor (Figure E and Table ). The
FRET response of the P60 sensor decreases from 8.4- to 5.9-fold despite
the improvement in donor labeling efficiency. This result suggests
that the donor–acceptor distance is longer when the donor is
at position 48 of FN3BN+I75A compared to the N-terminus.
As expected, donor placement does not
significantly change the affinity of the sensor for SH2 (Table ).

Kinetics of Switching
To assess
the temporal response
of the sensors, test for reversibility, and gain insight into the
mechanism of switching, we measured on and off rates by monitoring
time-dependent changes in FRET. For P48, association and dissociation
data fit adequately to single-exponential functions with a kon of (5.68 ± 0.6) × 10–4 s–1 and a koff of
(3.58 ± 0.7) × 10–5 s–1 (Figure S6A of the ). The
FRET ratio returns to the theoretical limit (90% of the original value),
signifying that the switch is fully reversible.
For the P60 sensor, its kon [(5.38 ±
0.7) × 10–4 s–1] is identical
within error to that of the P48 sensor (Figure S6B of the ). The
off rate of P60 [(6.62 ± 0.4) × 10–5 s–1] is 1.8-fold faster, in agreement with the lower
affinity
of the P60 switch. The FRET ratio of the P60 switch returns to only
∼2/3 of its original value. One explanation
may be that the ternary complex exhibits a slightly greater affinity
for donor-labeled FN3BN+I75A than it does for unlabeled
FN3BN+I75A.

Association rates were found to be independent
of SH2 concentration (Figure S6C of the ). Equation , equation , or a combination of both is therefore rate-limiting.
This result is not surprising because the pseudo-first-order association
rate for eq  (∼500 s–1 at 50 μM SH2, calculated using a diffusion-limited on
rate of 107 M–1 s–1) is orders of magnitude faster than the observed kon values. Observed on rates do not change
significantly when the concentrations of FN3BN+I75A and
P48 are lowered from 2 μM (Figure S6A of the ) to
0.5 μM (Figure S6C of the ), suggesting
that the overall rate-limiting step for formation of the ternary complex
is at least partial unfolding
of FN3BN+I75A.

Sensor Performance under Real-World Conditions
and Genetic Encoding
A major challenge facing any new biosensor
design is that it must
work in dirty environments rife with off-target binding decoys, proteases,
quenchers, and other contaminants. To test the FREX performance under
such conditions, we repeated the FRET binding experiment using FN3BN+I75A, P48, and SH2 in the presence of 10% fetal bovine serum.
The resulting binding curve is very similar
to that obtained in buffer (Figure F and Table ). Thus,
the response of the FN3 FREX sensor appears to be robust and resistant
to large amounts of contaminants.

We created a genetically
encoded variant of the P48 sensor by fusing the CyPet
and YPet genes to the 5′-ends of the FN3BN+I75A and
P48 genes, respectively. To assess sensor performance in unpurified
cell lysates and to delineate the effect of differential expression
of the components, two E. coli cultures were transformed
separately, grown, and lysed, and the lysates were combined in several
ratios. The level of expression of YPet-P48 was roughly twice that
of CyPet-FN3BN+I75A as judged by the fluorescence emission
of the lysates (not shown). We mixed CyPet-FN3BN+I75A and
YPet-P48 lysates at volume ratios of 1:1, 2:1, and 4:1 to simulate
up to 2-fold excesses of donor or acceptor that might be encountered
upon co-expression of the components in vivo. Purified
SH2 was then
added to each mixture. Figure  shows fluorescence
scans and fitted binding curves. Ka,app values are similar for the three samples (Table ) and are in good agreement with those of the Alexa-labeled
sensor obtained in buffer and in 10% serum, indicating that CyPet
and YPet do not interfere with ligand
binding. The FRET output improves slightly with an increasing acceptor:donor
ratio, presumably because the response is optimal when every donor
sees an acceptor. The ratiometric response of the genetically
encoded P48 sensor in the crude lysate is weaker than
that of its purified Alexa-labeled counterpart in buffer (Table ). The reason is not clear, although it may be due
to incomplete maturation of CyPet and YPet chromophores [∼50%
(data not shown)]. The 1.3–1.8-fold FRET changes shown in Figure  are comparable to those of affinity-tag
and SNAP-tag, sensors.

Performance of the genetically encoded P48 sensor in unpurified E. coli lysate. (A) Spectra of CyPet-FN3BN+I75A and YPet-P48 as a function of SH2 concentration. Approximate
molar ratios of CyPet-FN3BN+I75A to YPet-P48 are indicated
in each figure. Colors and SH2 concentrations are the same as in Figure A. Spectra are normalized to the donor emission
peak for the sake of clarity. (B) Binding curves are shown below each
figure in panel A. Lines are the best fits of the data to the one-site
binding equation; fitted parameters are listed in Table .

We next tested sensor performance
in mammalian
cell cultures. We replaced CyPet and YPet with EGFP and mCherry, respectively,
to be compatible with the optics of our fluorescence microscope. To
help ensure that both sensor components were present in every transfected
cell, the mCherry-P48 and EGFP-FN3BN+I75A genes were cloned,
in that order, into the coding region of a bicistronic expression
plasmid. The SH2 gene was placed on a second plasmid for cotransfection.
In-cell FRET experiments were performed by first acquiring fluorescent
images of transfected and fixed Cos-7 cells in EGFP and mCherry channels
(Figure , top row
of images).
The lone criterion for choosing a cell for FRET imaging was that it
exhibit moderate fluorescence in each channel at this stage, prior
to the acceptor bleaching step by which FRET efficiency was determined.
This selection method was intended to eliminate untransfected cells
as well as those that expressed very high levels of one or both fluorescent
proteins, which are known to produce FRET artifacts. Once a cell was judged to meet this criterion, it was
bleached and imaged; no data were discarded thereafter. The FRET efficiency
was estimated by bleaching the mCherry signal in a rectangular area
within each cell (Figure , middle row of cells)
and measuring the
extent to which EGFP-FN3BN+I75A emission in that rectangular
area increased after the bleach (Figure ,
bottom row of cells). Bleaching a defined
region allows us to directly compare the EGFP intensity change inside
and outside the rectangle in the same cell, thereby reducing false
FRET caused by stage movement, pixel misalignment, etc.

Performance
of the P48 FREX sensor in mammalian cell cultures.
Representative raw images of Cos-7 cells transfected with (A) EGFP-FN3BN+I75A and mCherry-P48 and (B) EGFP-FN3BN+I75A,
mCherry-P48, and SH2. The top and middle rows show fluorescence before
and after, respectively, the mCherry signal in the boxed area had
been bleached. The FRET efficiency is plotted in the bottom row. The
scale bar is 10 μm.

Figure S7 of the  shows images of 12 representative cells transfected with EGFP-FN3BN+I75A/mCherry-P48 alone (panel A; n = 20)
and in combination
with SH2 (panel B; n = 28). For cells that were not
transfected with SH2, EGFP intensities inside and outside the bleached
rectangle are similar, indicating low FRET efficiency (Figure S7A
of the ). The
fold change in FRET efficiency inside versus outside the rectangle
is relatively constant at 1.6 ± 0.3. This background FRET signal
may result from random collisions between
the donor and the acceptor fluorescent proteins. By contrast, most
cells cotransfected with SH2 display noticeably brighter EGFP fluorescence
inside the
rectangle (Figure S7B of the ). Of
the 28 imaged cells, 25% show high FRET efficiency (&gt;3-fold change;
red border around images), 39% show moderate FRET efficiency (2–3-fold
change; blue border), and 36% show background levels of FRET (&lt;2-fold
change; purple border).
Control transfections with the SH2 plasmid alone revealed that the
transfection efficiency was ∼70%. It is therefore possible
that the 36% population of low-FRET cells represents those that were
not successfully
transfected with SH2.

Discussion
To the best of our knowledge,
FREX is the first example of a biosensor
based on a variation of protein fragment complementation. FREX may
appear to resemble protein–fragment complementation assays
(PCAs) such as split GFP, split luciferase, split ubiquitin, and split DHFR; however, the two technologies
are fundamentally different
as are their intended applications. In PCA, the split protein serves
as a reporter only. One piece is fused to a “bait” protein
and the other to a “prey” protein, and fragment complementation
reports on whether the bait
and prey interact. In FREX, the fragment exchange reaction itself
serves as the basis for molecular recognition.

It is noteworthy
that the FREX methodology employs fragment exchange
rather than fragment complementation. It is theoretically possible
to build a sensor based on simple complementation by bisecting a binding
protein and labeling each piece with a fluorescent reporter. The problem
is that it would be difficult to tune the thermodynamics of this system
to make the switch respond to the ligand. When proteins are bisected,
some fragments exhibit tight binding (always on) while others fail
to complement altogether (always off). What would be needed is a pair
of fragments that associate with just the right Kd such that they do not interact unless driven
to do so by reasonable concentrations of ligand. Tuning in this case
would consist of experimentally finding such fragments, because complementation
affinity cannot currently be predicted from cleavage sites.

By contrast, FREX employs two copies of the same fragment. Tuning
can therefore be achieved by rationally mutating one copy and not
the other, using structural and thermodynamic principles that are
both well-established and readily quantifiable. As a result, target
affinity can be modulated gradually and predictably to match the needs
of the application (Figure S1 of the ). Although Ka,app depends
on both Kex and Kunf, in practice it is
usually advisable to choose the fragments with the largest Kex (because our data suggest that even fragments
with very
high affinity for each other will not exchange in the absence of ligand)
and adjust Ka,app by varying the severity
of the destabilizing mutation. Importantly, target specificity is
not likely to change because the packing position is chosen to be
distant from the active site. A secondary advantage of FREX compared to simple
complementation is that only one of the components of FREX is a
fragment, with the other being a full-length, native protein. This
is expected to reduce the extent of potential aggregation and degradation
problems associated with fragments and unfolded proteins.

Nonetheless,
FREX combines aspects of the binding-induced folding
and fragment complementation mechanisms, and as such, it is subject
to some of the same limitations. Chief among them are reduced target
affinity compared to that of the parent binding protein and the inability
to predict Kex, respectively. Ligand interaction
energy is used to drive folding in binding-induced folding and to
facilitate fragment exchange in FREX. Some reduction in target affinity
is therefore inevitable with both mechanisms. For example, the Ka,app values of Kohn and Plaxco’s unfolded
SH3 sensor and our FREX sensors are both
≈100-fold lower than the Ka values
of WT SH3 and WT FN3, respectively.
In the case of FREX, it is possible to increase Ka,app by further destabilizing the full-length protein
(Figure S1 of the ). Koide
and colleagues addressed the inability to predict complementation
affinity by bisecting a related FN3 (FNfn10) at six sites corresponding
to positions 16, 28, 48, 58, 69, and 91 in FN3-HA4. Cleavage at position 48 resulted in the tightest fragment
complementation, although the fragments lacked residual structure
in isolation and aggregation was prominent. Complementation was strong
at positions 28 and 58, moderate at position 69, and too weak to be
detected at positions 16 and 91. Perhaps not surprisingly, the rank
order of complementation strength correlates with Ka,app of our sensors. PCA screening methods such as the
yeast two-hybrid system have been employed to identify fragments that
complement with high affinity. It may
be useful to apply these techniques to generate
viable fragments for FREX, although structural inspection proved to
be sufficient in this case.

It should be noted that the FN3
sensors respond to changes in target
concentration more slowly than do some other existing designs. The
reason is that the rate-limiting step in FN3 switching appears to
be an unfolding–dissociation event (displacement of the duplicate
segment in FN3BN) rather than a binding or folding reaction
as in most cases. The response time may be shortened by accelerating
the rate of unfolding (e.g., by increasing the temperature or by employing
a more destabilizing
packing mutation). Nevertheless, the kon half-time of ∼30 min is sufficient
for many in vitro applications and for monitoring
cellular processes that occur on a time scale of minutes to hours,
and especially when one needs to detect a scarce analyte, in which
case a slow off rate is desirable for signal integration.

FRET biosensors are expected to perform
best when the levels of
donor and acceptor are approximately equal. FREX can easily achieve
this condition when the application is to detect targets outside of
the cell. For in vivo uses, single-component sensors
are convenient because the FRET pair can be encoded in the same gene.
Two-component sensors like FREX can increase the dynamic range by
reducing the background level of FRET in the off state. In this study,
we co-expressed the two FREX components from a single promoter using
an internal
ribosome entry sequence. It is known that the level of expression
of the downstream gene (EGFP-FN3BN+I75A in this case) is
typically much lower than that of the upstream gene (mCherry-P48). In qualitative agreement, we found mCherry fluorescence
to be greater than EGFP fluorescence for all cells examined (not shown).
It may be feasible to improve FRET output by equalizing donor and
acceptor expression, e.g., by placing the components on separate plasmids
(we avoided this strategy here because of the need to introduce the
target ligand using a second plasmid).

Conclusions
We
have introduced the FREX switching mechanism into the FN3-HA4
binding scaffold. When FN3 monobodies are modified to recognize different
targets, their cores are conserved, with structural differences largely
limited to the three substrate recognition loops., Single mutations have been shown to disrupt binding of other engineered
FN3s
to their ligands, and these residues lie in the same loop that harbors
the Tyr87 and Met88 binding mutations in FN3-HA4. Thus, it is reasonable
to speculate that the FREX mechanism can be transferred to other FN3
monobodies by using the same peptides and packing mutations employed
in this study, with minimal additional optimization. Future studies
will reveal whether the FREX methodology can be applied to unrelated
binding proteins to convert them into ligand-driven molecular switches.

Supporting Information Available
One table and seven figures
characterizing the stability,
binding, and in vitro and in-cell FRET of sensor
variants. This material is available free of charge via the Internet
at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bi500758u_si_001.pdf

This work was supported by National Institutes of
Health Grant GM069755 to S.N.L.

The authors declare
no competing
financial interest.

Acknowledgments
We thank S. Koide (University of Chicago)
for the FN3-HA4
and SH2 genes, P. Daugherty (University of California, Santa Barbara,
CA) for the CyPet and YPet genes, B. Knox for the EGFP and mCherry
genes, P. Calvert for the modified pCMV IRES bicistronic vector, N.
Walker-Kopp for assistance with gene construction of WT FN3, c-Abl
SH2, CyPet-FN3BN+I75A, and YPet-P48, N. Deakin and P. Calvert
for advice on in-cell FRET, V. Sirotkin for technical assistance with
confocal microscopy, and J.-H. Ha, D. Mitrea, and M. Stratton for
review of the manuscript.

