Cytochrome bc1 (mitochondrial complex III) is an integral component
of many biological energy conversion systems. It operates according
to the principles of Q-cycle in which the turnover of the enzyme leads
to the net oxidation of quinol in the membrane and the reduction of
cytochrome c outside the membrane with a vectorial
transportation of protons across the membrane. The enzyme assembles
as a homodimer. Each monomer contains three catalytic subunits—cytochrome c1, the iron–sulfur subunit, and cytochrome b—which together embed heme and iron–sulfur
cofactors that assemble into two chains. Those chains integrate with
the operation of two quinone oxidation/reduction sites, each on one
side of the membrane. In addition, a two-heme bridge exists between
the monomers in the core of the dimer. Overall, this makes up a rather
complicated H-shaped system that displays high structural and spectroscopic
symmetry. As depicted schematically in Figure A, each branch of H corresponds to one cofactor chain, whereas each
upright of H (one lower and one upper branch) corresponds to one monomer
of the dimer. Because of this complexity, the molecular mechanism
of operation of cytochrome bc1 is under
constant debate (for recent reviews see refs (−)).

Asymmetric mutation patterns in cytochrome bc1-like complexes containing fused cytochrome b subunit (B–B). The two halves of the fusion protein, each
corresponding to one cytochrome b, are shown as white
and gray rounded rectangles, respectively. Crosses indicate position
of knockout mutations N and W, which refer to H212N and G158W point
mutations in cytochrome b, respectively. Black arrows
indicate functional branches. Black double arrow indicates electron
entry point at the Q0 site.

One potent approach to address the mechanistic
problems related
with a symmetry of cytochrome bc1 has
recently been described in experiments designed to test conditions
when this symmetry was broken.− Our own studies used a model system
based on a fusion protein that replaced two cytochromes b in the dimer in purple bacterium, Rhodobacter (Rb.) capsulatus. With this system we introduced mutations that inactivated individual
branches in various combinations to expose all major electron transfer
paths within a dimer for kinetic testing (Figure ). This revealed that upon inactivation of one or two branches
in one-half of the fusion protein (corresponding to partial or full
inactivation of one monomer) (Figure B–D)
the enzyme was still active and supported catalytically relevant electron
transfer. This was consistent with studies that, with a help of a
two-tag system in Paracoccus denitrificans, reported
the enzymatic activity of the asymmetric form in which only one catalytic
site was inhibited by mutation.

In addition, our studies demonstrated that upon cross-inactivation
of the lower branch in one half and the upper branch in the another
half of the fusion protein (Figure E) electron
transfer through the two-heme bridge between the two halves takes
place on a catalytically relevant time scale. This indicated that the H-shaped structural arrangement of cytochrome bc1 should in fact be considered as a functional
H-shaped electron transfer system that connects all four quinone oxidation/reduction
sites. An independent proposal for the existence of the intermonomer
electron transfer in cytochrome bc1 has
been presented based on other studies on Rb. capsulatus which used a two-tag system to introduce asymmetric mutations and
generate the heterodimeric cross-inactivated form.

While the experiments using asymmetric forms of cytochrome bc1 mark a major step forward toward understanding
of the engineering of the dimer, it is clear that further progress
in this area will call for systematic analysis of various asymmetric
electron transfer paths under a broad range of experimental conditions.
Toward this goal, here we report on isolation, spectroscopic, and
enzymatic characterization of isolated complexes containing fused
cytochrome b with asymmetrically introduced mutations.
The number of successfully isolated asymmetric variants was sufficient
to present comparison of the maximum turnover rates of the forms that
examined all the electron transfer paths of the dimer. This provided
new mechanistic insights regarding operation of the dimer.

Materials and Methods
Isolation and Preparation of Proteins and Electrophoresis
The chromatophore membranes of WT (native form of cytochrome bc1) and the B–B derivatives (B–B
denotes cytochrome bc1-like complexes
in which two cytochromes b were fused into one subunit
cytochrome bb) were prepared from semiaerobically grown cultures of Rb. capsulatus as described., Membranes,
containing a mixture of inhibitors PMSF (phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride),
benzamidine, and 6-aminocaproic acid, were diluted to a final protein
concentration 10 mg/mL and solubilized with DDM (n-dodecyl-β-d-maltoside) (1 mg protein:1.3 mg detergent)
for 30 min at 4 °C. The mixture was ultracentrifuged (45 min,
45000g), and the supernatant was loaded onto a Strep-tag
column (IBA-Biotechnology). All purification steps were performed
at 4 °C.

The affinity chromatography was performed according
to the protocol for Strep-tag purification supplied by the manufacturer
(IBA), with the following modifications. Typically 3–5 mL of DDM-solubilized membranes was loaded
onto the 1 mL Strep-tag sepharose column (IBA) pre-equilibrated with
a washing buffer (100 mM Tris-Cl, pH 8.0, 150 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA)
containing additionally 20% glycerol and 0.01% DDM (Buffer WG). The
column was washed with 2–3 column volumes of Buffer WG. The
absorbed proteins were eluted with 3 column volumes of Buffer WG containing
2.5 mM desthiobiotin. The samples were taken directly for enzymatic
activity assays (performed immediately after each isolation) or concentrated
using Amicon Ultra 100 K centrifugal units for EPR measurements.

Sodium dodecyl sulfate–polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis
(SDS-PAGE) was performed as described. The gels were stained with Coomassie blue.

CW-EPR Measurements
Continuous wave (CW) spectra at
X-band of the FeS cluster in purified cytochrome bc1 and various B–B complexes were measured as described
in ref (). The samples
of protein (concentrated to approximately 15–20 μM cytochrome c1) were in elution buffer from the Strep-tag
column (100 mM Tris buffer, pH 8, 150 mM NaCl, 0.01% DDM, 20% glycerol,
1 mM EDTA, 2.5 mM desthiobiotin), to which sodium ascorbate (at 1
mM final concentration) and stigmatellin (at 100 μM final concentration)
were added. The samples were incubated for 5 min before freezing in
liquid nitrogen. All spectra were recorded using the same parameters.

Measurements of Enzymatic Activity
Steady-state enzymatic
activity of cytochrome bc1 and various
B–B complexes was assayed by measuring the DBH2 (2,3-dimethoxy-5-methyl-6-decyl-1,4-benzohydroquinone)-dependent
reduction of mitochondrial cytochrome c, as described
in ref (). All measurements
were performed using freshly isolated protein complexes at room temperature
in 50 mM Tris, pH 8.0 containing 0.01% DDM. The course of each assay
was as follows. A cuvette containing appropriate concentration of
cytochrome c in total volume 0.74 mL was inserted
into spectrophotometer equipped with magnetic mixer, and the degree
of reduction of cytochrome c was followed by monitoring
absorbance at 550 nm. The background of nonenzymatic reduction of
cytochrome c was measured for 20 s after injection
of 5 μL of 3 mM DBH2 in DMSO to obtain final concentration
20 μM. Afterward, 5 μL of 1 μM of appropriate form
of cytochrome bc1 or B–B complexes
(the concentration was determined from the amount of reduced cytochrome c1) was injected into cuvete to obtain final
concentration 6.7 nM. The turnover rate for each concentration of
cytochrome c was estimated from the slope of initial
absorbance increase immediately after addition of the enzyme, and
the background rate was subtracted. Each data point represents the
average turnover rate determined from 3–4 repetitions for independent
cell harvests and isolations of enzyme. The maximum turnover rates
(Vmax) for 20 μM DBH2 were determined from fitting the Michaelis–Menten equation
to averaged experimental data points.

Results and Discussion
Spectral Properties and Subunit Composition of Isolated Asymmetric
B–B Complexes
In this study, we used the family of
asymmetric B–B complexes originally described in ref (). Those complexes contained
point mutation corresponding to G158W or H212N in cytochrome b (denoted as W or N, respectively). G158W (W) prevented
the substrate binding at the Q0 site inactivating the lower branch of the H-shaped electron
transfer system (Figure B), while H212N (N)
prevented heme bH assembly inactivating the upper branch of this system (Figure C). Figure  shows that permutations
of these two mutations expose all possible electron-transfer paths
within the H-shaped electron transfer system for kinetic testing.

Figure  compares the electrophoretic profiles
of B–B complexes that were isolated from the membranes using
Strep-tag affinity chromatography and were subsequently used in the
enzymatic activity assays (summarized in Figure  and Table ). It is clear that highly pure
samples were obtained, and in all cases the fused cytochrome bb replaced
cytochrome b subunits present in the native cytochrome bc1 dimer. As expected, this cytochrome is 2
times larger and is accompanied by the two remaining catalytic subunits
of cytochrome bc1: cytochrome c1 and the FeS subunit.

SDS-page analysis of
B–B complexes containing mutations
W and N in various asymmetric combinations. Samples of cytochrome bc1 (WT) and various B–B complexes were
isolated by Strep-tag affinity chromatography. M, marker (from IBA
Biotechnology).

Maximum Turnover Rates for Isolated
Cytochrome bc1 and Various B–B
Complexes
name	Vmax[s–1]	name	Vmax[s–1]	
WT	333 ± 8	WNB–B	173 ± 4	
B–B	408 ± 12	WB–BN	69.8 ± 1.4	
WB–B	267 ± 10	H212N	20.7 ± 0.6	
NB–B	223 ± 8	G158W	5.0 ± 0.07	
Letter code corresponds to schemes
of Figure . WT, wild type cytochrome bc1.

Vmax for 20 μM DBH2.

Figure  summarizes spectroscopic
properties
of those B–B complexes in the isolated forms. The optical spectra
in the α region (Figure A,B) were recorded
to check for the presence of reduced hemes b (560
nm) (Figure A) and high potential hemes c1 (552 nm) (Figure B).
From the shape of the spectra (relative amplitudes of 552 and 560
nm) it is clear that B–B and WB–B retain
the native amounts of hemes in the preparations, while NB–B, WNB–B, and WB–BN show reduced amounts of heme B, as expected for the loss
of one heme imposed by the presence of one N mutation in the complex.
This represents a spectroscopic signature implying the structural
asymmetry of the isolated complexes with one N. We note slight variations
in the amount of hemes B between the preparations shown in Figure . These variations are observed when complexes (especially
the mutated complexes that in isolated form tend to be less stable
than the native complex) are purified using Strep-tag column and relate
to the possibility of partial dissociation of subunits not-containing
Strep-tag during the purification procedure.

Spectroscopic
proof of structural asymmetry imposed by mutations
N and W in isolated B–B complexes. A–C compare spectra
of pure B–B complexes isolated using Strep-tag affinity chromatography.
A and B, optical spectra of hemes in isolated complexes reduced by
dithionite (A) or ascorbate (B). Bottom spectra show the reference
for cytochrome bc1 containing H212N in
cytochrome b (isolated by Strep-tag). C, X-band continuous
wave EPR spectra of the FeS cluster in isolated complexes. All samples
were treated with stigmatellin. B–B+G158W represents the sum
of the normalized to gy amplitude spectra of B–B and G158W. G158W is the reference
spectrum for cytochrome bc1 with G158W
in cytochrome b (isolated by Strep-tag). Vertical
dashed line shows the g = 1.909, which corresponds
to the first inflection point of microwave absorption of gy transition of the cluster for G158W
mutant, while solid line shows g = 1.877, which corresponds
to the second inflection point of absorption of gy transition of the cluster of B–B
form (as well the native cytochrome bc1). Forms WB–B, WNB–B,
and WB–BN have the first and second inflections
at g = 1.909 and g = 1.877, which
confirms their asymmetry with respect to the mutation W. Form NB–B has the inflection points at the same g values as B–B. The dotted line approximates position of gx transition (g = 1.775).

The structural asymmetry imposed by the presence
of one W per complex
was verified by the EPR spectra of the FeS cluster (Figure C). To avoid complications arising from the fact
that the quinone content may vary in isolated cytochrome bc1 preparations, which consequently will affect the shape
of the EPR spectrum,, we have compared the spectra
of the samples treated with stigmatellin. Binding of this inhibitor
results in a specific change in the spectrum that does not depend
on the quinone content or whether the enzyme is purified in detergent
solution containing glycerol or in membranes., Furthermore, the spectrum of the G158W mutant treated with stigmatellin
differs significantly from the corresponding spectrum of the wild
type (Figure C) (manuscript in preparation).
We used this feature in our comparative analysis, which revealed that
the shape of the EPR spectra of stigmatellin-treated B–B complexes
containing only one W represents a sum of two different spectral components
corresponding to the stigmatellin spectra of wild type and symmetric
mutant G158W with equal contributions (Figure C and Figure S1 of the ). Because the EPR spectrum of the FeS cluster in cytochrome bc1 is in general considered to be a sensor of
the interaction of this subunit with cytochrome b subunit which also reflects the status of the Q0 site,
the spectra presented in Figure C provide
strong evidence of the proper asymmetric assembly of the complexes
in isolated form. This type of clear spectroscopic evidence has not
been provided for any other so far reported isolation of asymmetric
cytochrome bc1 constructs.,

Enzymatic Activities of Isolated Asymmetric B–B Complexes
Figure  presents the
results of the enzymatic activity assays preformed with the isolated
B–B forms that inactivated various branches of the H-shaped
electron transfer system. All those forms refer to the samples that
display electrophoretic profiles and exhibit spectroscopic properties
as described in Figures  and . Fitting of a Michaelis–Menten equation to a dependence
of the measured enzymatic turnover rate on the concentration of substrate
cytochrome c (lines in Figure ) yielded the values of Vmax that were
summarized in Table .

Comparison of enzymatic
activities of cytochrome bc1 and various
B–B complexes. Plots show dependence
of the turnover rate vs concentration of cytochrome c (Cyt c) in 50 mM Tris, pH 8, 0.01% DDM, 20 μM
DBH2. Fitting of the measured data points to the Michaelis–Menten
kinetics yielded the values of Vmax listed
in Table . Broken line shows the estimated
level of activity of WB–BN in which heme bL–bL electron
transfer is assumed not to occur on a catalytic time scale. It was
calculated as 0.5 × (VWmax + VNmax), where VWmax and VNmax denote the values of Vmax determined
for the isolated cytochromes bc1 containing
mutations G158W and H212N, respectively.

We found that B–B without any additional
mutation, as in
Figure A (all four branches are available
for electron transfer), displays a high enzymatic activity (highest Vmax) which is in the same range, if not exceeding
that, measured for the native enzyme. However, when one lower or one
upper branch is inactivated (WB–B, NB–B)
as in Figure B,C, the Vmax drops to about 60% that of the Vmax of B–B. A slightly larger drop (to about 40%) is observed
when both the upper and the lower branch on the same side are inactivated
(WNB–B) (as in Figure D) and the complex is forced to use only one half, corresponding
to just one monomer of dimeric cytochrome bc1. An even larger drop in Vmax is
observed when the upper and the lower branches across are inactivated
(WB–BN) (Figure E), in which case the complex is forced to use the heme bL–bL connection between
the two halves. The level of activity is however still significantly
higher than a level of activity estimated for a theoretical case for WB–BN in which heme bL–bL electron transfer would
not to occur on a catalytic time scale (Figure , broken line). It is also higher than the level of activity observed
in the symmetrically inactivated mutants G158W or H212N (Table ).

From the comparison shown in Figure  and
Table , it is clear that all the B–B
forms corresponding to the cytochrome bc1 with partial or full inactivation of one monomer (i.e., WB–B, NB–B, WNB–B),
despite the 40–60% drop in Vmax vs B–B, retain high enzymatic activity. This convincingly
implicates that the native dimer of cytochrome bc1 remains operational even with one monomer inactive.
Furthermore, the decrease in Vmax by an
approximately factor of 2 is consistent with a general prediction
valid for the kinetic model assuming independent operation of two
monomers.

From the comparison of Figure  and Table , it is also clear that the cross-inactivated
B–B
form corresponding to cytochrome bc1 with
disabled complementary parts of each monomer (WB–BN) is enzymatically active. This first report documenting enzymatic
activity of cross-inactivated form purified to homogeneity from membranes
implicates that the path relying on heme bL to bL electron transfer as the only
route connecting the Q0 site with the Qi site
can efficiently sustain the catalytic steady state turnover of cytochrome bc1.

The Vmax of WB–BN is however lower than those
obtained for WB–B, NB–B, and WNB–B. At this
stage, deciding what causes the maximum turnover rate to be low is
difficult. Because the B–B construct should only be treated
as a model (not an exact replica of the native dimer), some distortions
from the native structure comprise one group of possibilities, particularly when dealing with the isolated forms.
Such distortions could, for example, modify a distance between two
hemes bL and/or their electrochemical
properties. Besides structural effects, mechanistic reasons can also
be envisaged. For example, the “pressure” of reverse
reaction,,, which may
be more pronounced in WB–BN when electrons
have to travel through two hemes bL before
reaching heme bH and the Qi site, might influence the measured overall rate.

Because the
measured rate in WB–BN is significantly
lower than the level in the native (and B–B)
protein, one should weigh up a possibility that the overall rate is
affected by a small fraction of enzymatically active forms that are
not WB–BN but contaminate isolated preparations
used for enzymatic activities assays. The potential risk of such contamination
is associated with recombination processes intrinsic to systems based
on coexpression of two copies of the same gene. However, our calculations
indicate that those types of contaminations would have to be at the
level of at least 14% to obscure kinetics (see ). In light of the results presented
in ref () and estimated
frequency of reversions, this is very unlikely. In addition, we should
emphasize that the measured enzymatic activities of isolated complexes
fully corroborate with the results of flash-induced electron transfer
measurements in membranes, which by definition
are much less sensitive to the presence of small amounts of any types
of contaminants. In this case, unlike in enzymatic steady state turnover
measurements, the amplitude of signal is directly proportional to
the concentration of protein in the sample, and the accumulation of
signal that would originate from small fractions of highly active
variants is not possible. If we were to continue considering the case
discussed above, the assumed enzymatic activity solely due to presence
of 14% of active contaminants would correspond to the flash-activated
kinetics in which the amplitude reaches only 14% of signal of B–B
protein. This clearly was not the case.

Relation to Other Systems
Studies based on kinetic
analysis of isolated complexes of asymmetric forms of cytochrome bc1 allow us now to advance to the new level
of understanding of the dimeric function of this enzyme. Necessary
for this is a coherent picture derived from comprehensive analyses
of all the major electron transfer paths of the dimer using pure complexes
isolated with protocols that by themselves do not affect the enzymatic
properties of the enzyme. A recently described alternative approach
to introduce asymmetric mutations in cytochrome bc1 is based on a two-tag system that is intrinsically heterogenic
and cannot guarantee with any certainty that the lengthy isolation
protocols yield preparations retaining functionally relevant properties.
Of particular concern in this regard is the finding that of the two
isolations of asymmetric cytochrome bc1 with the two tags system reported to date, only one yielded complexes
that were enzymatically active. In another
instance, the complexes at the final stage of preparation were inactive
and consequently all kinetic analysis must have relied on data that
derived from the mixture comprising both the homo- and heterodimeric
forms.

With our one-step purification
of the fusion protein described here we have demonstrated that the
isolated asymmetric B–B forms can be purified to homogeneity
and, moreover, are pure and enzymatically active fractions that bear
spectroscopic signatures confirming their structural asymmetry. Importantly,
the number of B–B variants meeting these criteria was sufficient
to test all the electron transfer paths of the dimer. This level of
experimental clarity which opens the door to cytochrome bc1 mechanism, physiology, and its regulation to-date remains
in the experimental domain of the singular fusion system.

Mechanistic Implications
At this stage, the enzymatic
analysis of isolated complexes of B–B variants we have presented
here complements our previous kinetic analysis on B–B complexes
in membranes. We demonstrated now that
the B–B forms corresponding to the cytochrome bc1 with partial or full inactivation of one monomer (WB–B, NB–B, WNB–B) or cross-inactivation of complementary parts of each
monomer (WB–BN) all retained enzymatic
activity when isolated from membranes and purified to homogeneity.
This result fully supports the concept that electrons freely distribute
between the four quinone catalytic sites of a dimer and that any path
connecting the sites of the opposite sides of the membrane (i.e.,
Q0 with Qi) is enzymatically competent. We believe that this not only holds true for
the uncoupled conditions tested here (and in other asymmetric work
done so far) but also extends to the physiological conditions when
the enzyme operates under the membrane potential. However, the examination
of the behavior of the asymmetric enzymes that would include the coupled
conditions is certainly needed.

On the other hand, our result
and the model that accommodates them are inconsistent with models
that include a high level of allosteric cooperativity between the
monomers intrinsic to mechanism.− To provide an illustration
of such inconsistency, consider a heterodimeric modified Q cycle model which postulates a number of obligatory events
that force a specific electron transfer sequence involving dismutation
of partial products formed sequentially in every monomer. According
to this model, the complexes in which one monomer is partially or
fully inactivated should lose the postulated multiturnover enzymatic
competence. Furthermore, the cross-inactivated complexes relying just
on a cross-dimer electron transfer should not be active either. In
fact, it seems that this electron transfer sequence needs to be forbidden
upon the multiple turnovers for the model to work. However, as the
authors of this model propose, this sequence alone is sufficient to
sustain the cytochrome bc1-dependent photosynthetic
growth of bacterial cells.

If indeed
the cross-dimer electron transfer alone is capable of
supporting the cytochrome bc1-dependent
growth of the cells, it would further strengthen the concept, central
to our model, of free distribution of electrons between the catalytic
sites, as it would provide an ultimate proof of a built in redundancy
which allows physiological function of the protein even after the
operational damage of its parts. The only requirement that needs to
be met is a preservation of the electronic communication between the
sites supporting the Q cycle. While this flexibility is a clear advantage
to redundancy (and possibly to suppression of ROS generation), there
is evidence of further robustness of cytochrome bc1 as shown recently in plant chloroplasts.

Supporting Information Available
Additional Figure S1 and analysis
of Vmax. This material is available free
of charge via the Internet at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bi2016316_si_001.pdf

Conflict of Interest Statement
The authors declare
no competing financial interest.

Abbreviations
Rb.Rhodobacter

DDMn-dodecyl-β-d-maltoside

FeS cluster; 2 iron2 sulfur Rieske cluster

DBH22,3-dimethoxy-5-decyl-6-methyl-1,4-benzohydroquinone

B–B complexcytochrome bc1-like complex with two
cytochromes b fused into one subunit

Vmaxmaximum turnover rate.

