NADH:ubiquinone oxidoreductase (complex I) is
the largest and most
complicated enzyme of the respiratory chains of mammalian mitochondria
and many other aerobic organisms.− It catalyzes the oxidation
of NADH by a noncovalently bound flavin mononucleotide, the reduction
of ubiquinone to ubiquinol, and couples the redox reaction to proton
translocation across the mitochondrial inner membrane in eukaryotes,
or the cytoplasmic membrane in prokaryotes. NADH oxidation, to generate
the fully reduced flavin, most likely occurs by direct hydride transfer
from the nicotinamide ring of the bound nucleotide to the flavin, with the nicotinamide ring juxtaposed above the
isoalloxazine ring system. During catalysis,
the reduced flavin is reoxidized by electron transfer to the chain
of iron–sulfur clusters leading to the ubiquinone-binding site,, but it can also undergo side reactions to produce reactive oxygen
species− that are implicated in the pathologies of many diseases.,

The flavin site in complex I is mechanistically versatile:
it uses
at least three different mechanisms to catalyze NADH oxidation coupled
to the reduction of numerous different electron acceptors., The simplest mechanism is for NADH:ubiquinone oxidoreduction: the
flavin is reduced by NADH and then reoxidized by the Fe–S clusters,
and the flavin can be reoxidized regardless of whether a nucleotide
is bound. Alternatively, a number of electron acceptors, including
molecular O2, hydrophilic quinones, hexacyanoferrate {FeCN, ferricyanide, [Fe(CN)6]3–},, and oxidized nucleotides
such as NAD+ and APAD+, react directly with the reduced flavin only when no nucleotide is
bound. A second class of electron acceptors, including hexaammineruthenium
III {HAR, [Ru(NH3)6]3+} and paraquat,
are positively charged and react only when a nucleotide is bound,
most likely by interacting with the negatively charged nucleotide
phosphates. Both classes include molecules
that can be reoxidized by molecular O2 in redox-cycling
reactions that stimulate significantly the rate of production of reactive
oxygen species.,, The
mechanisms are summarized in Scheme .

Mechanisms of NADH Oxidation by the Flavin in Complex I
The oxidation states of the
flavin are denoted FMN for the oxidized flavin and FMNH– for the reduced flavin, the NADH-bound states by FMN.NADH and FMNH–.NADH, the NAD+-bound states by FMN.NAD+ and FMNH–.NAD+, and the inhibitor-bound
states by FMN.I and FMNH–.I (where I is a nucleotide
that inhibits NADH or NAD+ binding). The blue arrow on
the left (FMNH– to FMN) shows the oxidation of the
flavin by electron acceptors that react when no nucleotide is bound.
The green, red, and black arrows on the right show the oxidation of
the flavin by electron acceptors that react with the nucleotide-bound
state. The reduced flavin can be oxidized by the Fe–S clusters,
to transfer the electrons to bound ubiquinone, regardless of whether
a nucleotide is bound.

Several studies have
investigated how rates of NADH oxidation by
complex I depend on NADH, electron acceptor, and flavin-site inhibitor
concentrations, to improve our understanding of the thermodynamics
and kinetics of catalysis.,,,− However, knowledge
of the dissociation constants for NADH and NAD+ bound to
the oxidized and reduced flavin states remains very limited. Values
of KMNADH and KINAD+ have been measured during NADH oxidation
and values of KMNAD+ and KINADH during NAD+ reduction
by coupled submitochondrial particles,− but these values are
not thermodynamic constants; they comprise many different contributions
and can be particularly misleading when the rate of the reaction is
not limited by the substrate being titrated. The NADH-dependent steps
in catalysis are most accessible when NADH oxidation is coupled to
reduction of an “artificial” electron acceptor, because
flavin reoxidation is faster than when the reaction is limited by
ubiquinone reduction. Previously, we modeled data from the NADH:FeCN,
APAD+, O2, and HAR reactions, using realistic
reaction mechanisms and common parameters for steps that are common
to each reaction, to try to define values for the nucleotide dissociation
constants; however, the complexity of the mechanisms endows them with
considerable flexibility, and only the dissociation constant for NADH
bound to the reduced flavin state could be defined with any accuracy. In contrast, the dissociation constant of ADP-ribose
(see Figure ), a competitive inhibitor of
NADH oxidation, could be determined to
be 24–30 μM when the flavin is oxidized and ∼10-fold
higher when it is reduced., However, ADP-ribose
lacks the nicotinamide moiety that interacts most directly with the
flavin, so the reason for the selectivity is not clear. ADP and ATP,
but not adenosine or nicotinamide mononucleotide [NMN+ (see
Figure )], have been reported to inhibit the
FeCN reaction, and ADP and ATP were reported
to bind to the reduced flavin site and to stimulate the reduction
of HAR, suggesting that the nucleotide
binding affinities are conferred by specific parts of the nucleotide
molecules. Here, we use a comprehensive set of nucleotide analogues
(see Figure ) to elucidate how different parts
of the NAD+ and NADH molecules determine their binding
affinities. Our results contribute to our understanding of the mechanism
of catalysis by complex I, to our understanding of how the metabolic
status of the mitochondrion affects oxidative stress, and to the future
design of molecules that bind specifically to the reduced flavin site
to block superoxide production.

Molecular structures of the nucleotides
and nucleotide fragments
used in this study. The structure of NADH is shown in the center,
indicating the S and R protons that
were substituted with deuterium to form [4S-2H]NADH (S-NADD) and [4R-2H]NADH (R-NADD), respectively. The different
nicotinamide groups of APADH and NAD+ are shown at the
left, and the bars at the right indicate the compositions of the nucleotides
and fragments used.

At saturating NADH concentrations
(where increasing the NADH concentration
further does not increase the rate), NADH binding does not limit the
rate of NADH oxidation, so hydride transfer or NAD+ dissociation
may do so. NAD+ could be added as an inhibitor to probe
whether its dissociation from the reduced flavin is rate-limiting,
but it reacts with the reduced flavin precluding a clear interpretation
of the data. Alternatively, the possibility that hydride transfer
is rate-limiting can be probed by substituting the hydrogen with deuterium,
to determine whether a primary kinetic isotope effect (KIE, the ratio
of rates for the protonated and deuterated forms) is observed. The magnitude of the observed KIE will depend
on the kinetic complexity of the reaction (the extent to which hydride
transfer and other steps limit the rate) as well as on the intrinsic
KIE of the hydride transfer reaction itself (which reflects the contributions
of quantum tunneling and protein dynamics to the reaction mechanism).− Here, we reveal the KIEs exhibited for NADH oxidation by complex
I, by studying the oxidation of deuterated forms of NADH coupled to
the reduction of artificial electron acceptors by known mechanisms.
Thus, we confirm the stereospecificity of NADH oxidation, and elucidate the role of hydride transfer in controlling its rate.
Finally, we discuss which steps are rate-limiting during NADH oxidation
by complex I and describe how nucleotide concentrations, both in vitro and in vivo, control the rates
of catalytic NADH:ubiquinone oxidoreduction and reactive oxygen species
production.

Materials and Methods
All chemicals were from Sigma-Aldrich
Ltd. All nucleotides were
of the highest purity available (at least 95%). AMP, ADP, ATP, NMN+, and NAD+ were prepared at stock concentrations
of 50 mM in 20 mM Tris-HCl buffer and corrected to pH 7.5 with concentrated
Tris base. Adenosine was prepared at a stock concentration of 16 mM
in 20 mM Tris-HCl buffer.

Preparation of Complex I from Bovine Heart
Mitochondria
Complex I was prepared as described previously,, concentrated to approximately 10 mg/mL (determined by the Pierce
bicinchoninic acid assay), snap-frozen in liquid nitrogen, and stored
at −80 °C.

Preparation of Modified Nicotinamide Nucleotides
[4R-2H]NADH, [4S-2H]NADH,
[4R-2H]APADH, and [4S-2H]APADH (see Figure ) were produced
from NAD+ and APAD+ using the stereospecific
NAD+-linked dehydrogenase enzymes horse liver alcohol dehydrogenase
(4R stereoisomers) and
glucose dehydrogenase from Bacillus megaterium (4S stereoisomers). Ten units
of enzyme per milliliter were added to a solution of 10 mM NAD+ or APAD+ in 0.1 M Tris-HCl (pH 8) containing either
100 mM d-glucose-d1 or 6% (v/v)
2-propanol-d8 and the mixture incubated
at room temperature until the absorbance at 340 nm stopped increasing
(approximately 30 min). Then, the mixture was applied to a Q-Sepharose
column pre-equilibrated in 20 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.7) and the deuterated
nucleotide eluted with 20 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.7) containing 0.5 M KCl. The nucleotide product was then desalted, using
a Sephadex G-10 column with water as the eluent, lyophilized, and
stored at −20 °C. Nondeuterated NADH and APADH were prepared
using glucose dehydrogenase and nondeuterated glucose and purified
using the same method. The nucleotide chemical purity was confirmed
by high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) (see Figures S1 and
S2 of the ); typically,
the products are 85–90% pure, and the small levels of contaminants
present were shown, by comparing in-house and commercially supplied
samples, to have a negligible effect on the kinetic measurements.
Nucleotide isotopic purity (stereospecific labeling) was confirmed
by nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopy (see Figures S3 and
S4 of the ); typically,
the products are 85–95% pure, and the level of contamination
with nondeuterated NADH/APADH may lead to a small underestimate of
the KIE. NMNH was prepared by chemical reduction of NMN+. NMN+ (25 mg, 75 μmol)
was dissolved in 4 mL of an aqueous solution of 1.3% sodium hydrogen
carbonate, and 25 mg of sodium hydrosulfite was added. The mixture
was transferred to an anaerobic glovebox and incubated for 2 h at
25 °C and then bubbled with air for 15 min to remove excess hydrosulfite.
As a control for the formation of alternative reduced nicotinamides,
and for the presence of the products of hydrosulfite oxidation, NADH
was prepared using the same protocol and confirmed to be oxidized
by complex I.

Kinetic Measurements
Kinetic activity
measurements
were conducted at 32 °C, in 20 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.5), in 96-well
plates in a Molecular Devices microtiter plate reader. The concentration
of complex I was varied to give an appropriate rate for each reaction.
NADH and other nucleotides, potassium hexacyanoferrate(III) (ferricyanide,
FeCN), and hexaammineruthenium(III) chloride (HAR) were added from
concentrated stock solutions in the assay buffer, and all reactions
were initiated with complex I. Initial rates were calculated using
linear regression (typically over 15 s), and background rates (without
complex I) were subtracted. NADH:APAD+ transhydrogenation
(“the APAD+ reaction”) was monitored at 400–450
nm (ε = 3.16 mM–1 cm–1), NADH:FeCN oxidoreduction (“the FeCN reaction”)
at 420–500 nm (ε = 1.02 mM–1 cm–1), and NADH:HAR oxidoreduction
(“the HAR reaction”) at 340–380 nm (ε =
4.81 mM–1 cm–1). Superoxide was detected by the reduction of acetylated
cytochrome c at 550–541 nm (ε = 18.0
mM–1 cm–1). Each data point is the mean average of at least three independent
measurements; standard errors were calculated for each data point
and were always equal to &lt;10% of the average value.

Results
Inhibition
of Flavin-Site Reactions by NADH Analogues and Fragments
Adenosine shows weak inhibition of the APAD+ (Figure A) and HAR (Figure C) reactions,
with IC50 values of 10 and 7 mM, respectively (Table ), under the conditions investigated, and no discernible
inhibition of the FeCN reaction (Figure B).
It shows a weak stimulatory effect on superoxide production, measured
by the reduction of acetylated cytochrome c (Figure D). Although adenosine probably competes with NADH
for the oxidized flavin site, Figure  shows
that the dominant effect is from it competing with NADH for the reduced
flavin site. In the APAD+ reaction, adenosine inhibits by competing with APAD+ for
the reduced flavin (adenosine and APAD+ cannot bind together,
and APAD+ reduction is much slower than NADH oxidation).
Like APAD+, both FeCN and O2 react with the
nucleotide-free reduced flavin (see Scheme ), but because adenosine lacks the nicotinamide
riboside moiety and both of the phosphates (see Figure ), it may bind without occluding the flavin site from them
(adenosine and FeCN or O2 can bind together) (see Figure ). Adenosine actually increases the rate of the
O2 reaction (Figure D), and it
increases the rate of the FeCN reaction at high NADH concentrations
also, because it relieves the inhibition by high NADH concentrations
that results when NADH occludes the reduced flavin. Finally, HAR requires a nucleotide with negatively charged
phosphates to be bound to the reduced flavin site before it can react; therefore, the adenosine-bound reduced flavin
is unreactive, and the observed rate of the HAR reaction represents
the fraction of the enzyme with either NADH or NAD+ bound.

Inhibition
of the APAD+, FeCN, HAR, and O2 reactions by
NAD(H) fragments. The rates of (A) NADH:APAD+ oxidoreduction
(the APAD+ reaction), (B) NADH:FeCN oxidoreduction
(the FeCN reaction), (C) NADH:HAR oxidoreduction (the HAR reaction),
and (D) NADH:O2 oxidoreduction (superoxide production)
are presented as a function of the concentration of an added nucleotide.
The added nucleotides are adenosine (●), AMP (○), ADP
(◆), ADP-ribose (◇), NAD+ (■), and
NMN+ (□). Conditions: pH 7.5, 32 °C, atmospheric
O2, and 0.1 mM NADH for panels A–C and 0.03 mM NADH
for panel D; 1 mM APAD+ for panel A; 1 mM FeCN for panel
B; and 3.5 mM HAR for panel C.

Occlusion of the flavin by the binding of adenosine, AMP, ADP,
ADP-ribose, and NAD(H). (A) NAD(H)-bound active site in complex I
from Thermus thermophilus (Protein Data Bank entry 3IAM()) in surface representation. The bound NAD(H) molecule is
colored with the adenosine moiety (including the second ribose) in
red, the two phosphates in cyan and purple, the first ribose in green,
and the nicotinamide in pink. The flavin is colored blue, and the
protein is colored gray. (B) The flavin and bound nucleotide are shown
as sticks from the same viewpoint, using the same color scheme. Amino
acids that interact with the bound nucleotide are colored yellow,
with hydrogen bonding interactions shown by dashed black lines, hydrophobic
stacking interactions by dashed gray lines, and the hydride transfer
between C4 of the nicotinamide ring and N5 of the flavin isoalloxazine
ring by a dashed red line.

IC50 Values for the Inhibition
of the APAD+, FeCN, HAR, and O2 Reactions by
NAD(H) Fragments
 	adenosine	AMP	ADP	ADP-ribose	NAD+	NMN+	
APAD+	10	7	7	0.5	0.7	no inhibition	
FeCN	no inhibition	12	7	0.6	4	no inhibition	
HAR	7	7	stimulated	0.2	4	no inhibition	
O2	stimulated	7	7	0.05	–	–	
All
values are reported in millimolar
and are derived from the data presented in Figure . The inhibition of the O2 reaction by NAD+ and NMN+ is not reported because these data are
confounded by effects on the reduction potential of the nucleotide
pool.

Stimulated under some
conditions.

AMP and ADP
both inhibit the APAD+ reaction (Figure A) with IC50 values of 7 mM (Table ); therefore, they bind slightly more tightly than
adenosine, and the phosphate groups make only a small contribution
to the nucleotide binding affinity. AMP and ADP inhibit the FeCN reaction
(Figure B) with IC50 values of
12 and 7 mM, respectively, and they both inhibit superoxide production
also, with IC50 values of 7 mM (Table ). In order of adenosine, AMP, ADP, the increased level of
inhibition represents a combination of increased binding affinity,
increased negative charge from the phosphates (repelling the negative
FeCN), and increased size [increased occlusion of the reduced flavin
(see Figure )]. Figure C shows that the HAR reaction is stimulated significantly by intermediate
concentrations of ADP (∼6 mM) and inhibited at high concentrations,
consistent with ADP binding to the reduced flavin promoting interaction
of the positively charged HAR molecule by increasing the local negative
charge, and by ADP inhibiting NADH oxidation at high concentrations. AMP behaves in a similar way, but the activation
is less marked because AMP has only one negatively charged phosphate.

ADP-ribose, as shown previously,, is a strong
inhibitor of the APAD+ (Figure A), FeCN (Figure B), and superoxide (Figure D) reactions, with IC50 values of 0.5,
0.2, and 0.05 mM, respectively (Table ). Thus,
it has a stronger binding affinity than adenosine, AMP, or ADP. It
is a similarly effective inhibitor of the HAR reaction [IC50 = 0.6 mM (Figure C)] through the inhibition
of NADH oxidation, with a slight “lag” in the onset
of the inhibition indicating the reactivity of the inhibitor-bound
state toward HAR reduction. Detailed kinetic
analyses have shown previously that ADP-ribose binds more strongly
when the flavin is oxidized than when it is reduced,, consistent with the observed strong inhibition of all four reactions
discussed.

Finally, the influence of the nicotinamide ring on
nucleotide binding
is revealed through the effects of NAD+ and NMN+ (see Figure ). NAD+ inhibits
the APAD+ reaction (Figure A) with
an IC50 value of 0.7 mM (similar to ADP-ribose), but it
inhibits the FeCN (Figure B) and HAR (Figure C) reactions more weakly than ADP-ribose, with IC50 values of 4 mM for both. Thus, the nicotinamide headgroup
appears either to have little effect on binding affinity or even to
weaken the binding of NAD+, relative to that of ADP-ribose.
However, NAD+ is a competitive substrate as well as an
inhibitor, complicating the interpretation of our observations. Interestingly,
NMN+ does not inhibit any of the flavin-coupled NADH oxidation
reactions (Figure ); therefore, the adenosine
moiety is crucial for nucleotide binding, and very little binding
affinity is afforded by the nicotinamide, ribose, or phosphates alone.
It is unlikely that binding of the adenosine moiety alters the conformation
of the flavin site, to enhance the affinity for NMN+, because
including 10 mM adenosine with the NMN+ did not enhance
its inhibition. The lack of binding affinity of NMN+ is
not specific to the oxidized nicotinamide, because (as observed previously and further tested here) NMNH is not oxidized
by complex I in the presence of either APAD+ or FeCN.

Kinetic Isotope Effect (KIE) in NADH Oxidation by Complex I
Panels A–C of Figure  show the NADH/NADD
concentration dependencies of the FeCN, HAR, and APAD+ reactions
using NADH, [4R-2H]NADH (R-NADD), and [4S-2H]NADH (S-NADD) (see Figure ). In both the FeCN and
HAR reactions, the rates with R-NADD are, within
error, the same as those with NADH, suggesting that there is no KIE
for R-NADD. In contrast, both rates with S-NADD are significantly decreased, providing clear evidence
of a primary KIE that both confirms the stereochemistry of NADH oxidation
(hydride transfer of the 4S proton to the flavin,) and indicates that hydride transfer contributes to determining
the overall rate of the two reactions. The primary KIE of S-NADD in the HAR reaction is ∼2 (Figure B); it is similar at lower concentrations of NADH(D)
in the FeCN reaction (up to ∼50 μM NADH/S-NADD) and then decreases to 1 (no KIE) at higher NADH concentrations.
At higher concentrations, the reaction is inhibited by the binding
of NADH to the reduced flavin site, so
the rate of reaction becomes less dependent on hydride transfer and
more dependent on the FeCN half-reaction. Similarly, only a small
KIE is observed with S-NADD in the APAD+ reaction, because the rate of the reaction is limited by APAD+ binding and reduction., Finally, Figure D shows how the KIE for the HAR reaction increases
at higher pH values, because the rate with NADH increases more than
the rate with S-NADD. This suggests that a different
step, probably dissociation of NAD+ from the oxidized flavin
site, becomes faster at high pH and so restricts the rate less. For S-NADD, hydride transfer is comparatively slow, and the
effects of accelerating NAD+ dissociation are less evident.
The maximal observed KIE of 2.6 for NADH oxidation puts a lower limit
on the intrinsic value of the KIE of the hydride transfer step alone
but does not reveal its true value (which may be much higher).

KIEs in the
NAD(H/D):FeCN, NAD(H/D):HAR, NAD(H/D):APAD+, APAD(H/D):FeCN,
and APAD(H/D):HAR oxidoreduction reactions. The
rates of NAD(H/D) oxidation (A–C) are shown as a function of
the concentration of NADH (●), R-NADD (○),
or S-NADD (◆) for (A) the FeCN reaction, (B)
the HAR reaction, and (C) the APAD+ reaction. (D) Dependence
of the rates for NADH (●) and S-NADD (○)
in the HAR reaction [0.1 mM NAD(H/D) concentration] on pH. (E and
F) The rates of APAD(H/D) oxidation are shown as a function of the
concentration of APADH (●) and S-APADD (○)
for (E) the FeCN reaction and (F) the HAR reaction. Conditions: pH
7.5 (except for panel D), 32 °C, and 1 mM FeCN for panels A and
E, 1 mM APAD+ for panel C, and 3.5 mM HAR for panels B,
D, and F.

Panels E and F of Figure  show the APADH
and APADD concentration dependencies of the FeCN and HAR reactions
using APADH and [4S-2H]APADH (S-APADD) as substrates. [4R-2H]APADH (R-APADD) could not be prepared with high
stereospecific purity. The KIE from S-APADD reaches
∼6.5 in the FeCN reaction and ∼3.5 in the HAR reaction,
suggesting that the hydride transfer step is more strongly rate-limiting
in the APADH oxidation reactions than in the NADH oxidation reactions.
The fact that APADH:FeCN and APADH:HAR oxidoreductions are already
10-fold slower than NADH:FeCN and NADH:HAR oxidoreductions suggests
that the hydride transfer step with APADH is more than 10 times slower
than with NADH. Finally, comparison of panels A and E of Figure  shows that, in contrast to the NADH:FeCN reaction,
the APADH:FeCN reaction is not inhibited significantly by the highest
APADH concentrations tested. This may be because the binding affinity
of APADH for the reduced flavin is weaker than that of NADH or because
highly rate-limiting hydride transfer obscures the inhibition (as
observed for S-NADD in Figure A).

Discussion
It is clear that the adenosine moiety contributes
significantly
to the binding affinity of NADH (and other nucleotides) for the active
site of complex I. The NAD(H)-bound structure of the hydrophilic domain
of complex I from Thermus thermophilus (Figure ) showed that its aromatic
adenine ring stacks among three conserved phenylalanines (F70, F78,
and F205 in the Nqo1 subunit of T. thermophilus)
and that its ribose moiety forms hydrogen bonds with a conserved glutamate
(E185) and a conserved lysine (K75). It is possible that the three
phenylalanine residues assist in “trapping” the nucleotide
to form an encounter complex and facilitate progression to the fully
bound state via a multistep binding process.

The data described here (summarized in Table ) suggest that AMP and ADP do not bind more strongly than
adenosine,
but the structure revealed interactions between the “AMP”
phosphate and a conserved lysine (K202) and between the “ADP”
phosphate and the flavin. As AMP and ADP are both highly charged (predominantly
AMP2– and ADP3– ), it is possible that these interactions are
offset by electrostatic effects or by entropic contributions from
nucleotide binding or solvent ordering around the highly solvated
phosphates; in the future, these effects may be distinguished by nucleotide
analogues with the negative phosphates replaced with neutral sulfonamides. Furthermore, (unlike adenosine) AMP and ADP
(and ATP) are large enough to obstruct the access of O2 to the reduced flavin; as they are present at high concentrations
in the mitochondrial matrix (the concentration of the total adenosine
nucleotide pool has been estimated to be 10 mM), they compete with nicotinamide nucleotides for the flavin
site of complex I and may contribute to determining the rate of superoxide
production.

The data presented here show clearly that ADP-ribose
has a much
stronger binding affinity than adenosine, AMP, and ADP, yet only one
extra hydrogen bond, from the ribose to the backbone carbonyl of G67,
is apparent in the T. thermophilus structure. ADP-ribose is predominantly ADP-ribose2–, so it has the same charge as AMP but forms two additional hydrogen
bonds. The balance between charge and hydrogen bonding may thus explain
the sharply increased binding affinity of ADP-ribose. In comparison,
the weaker inhibition by NAD+ (and lack of inhibition by
NMN+) suggests that the oxidized nicotinamide group is
detrimental to nucleotide binding; although the structure revealed
interactions between the nicotinamide and the backbone carbonyls of
G66 and E97, the oxidation states of both
flavin and nicotinamide to which these pertain are unclear. Alternatively,
the apparently detrimental effect of the oxidized nicotinamide group
may be a false indication if the ADP-ribose molecule binds in a conformation
different from that of the ADP-ribose moiety of a bound nucleotide.

It is difficult to extrapolate from NAD+ binding to
the oxidized flavin to NADH binding. The nicotinamide ring in NADH
is uncharged and puckered, whereas in
NAD+, it is positively charged, aromatic, and planar (more
suited to stacking against the flavin isoalloxazine). Although the
constants for binding of ADP-ribose and NADH to the reduced flavin
are similar, and ADP-ribose binds ∼10-fold more strongly when
the flavin is oxidized than reduced,, whether the
oxidation state selectivity and similarity extend to NADH binding
to the oxidized flavin (suggesting a binding constant of 25 μM)
is unclear. Previously, we modeled data from the FeCN, HAR, APAD+, and O2 reactions together, using a realistic
mechanism for each reaction, and found that all our kinetic data could
be modeled accurately with any NADH binding constant of &lt;140 μM. Thus, we infer that NADH binds only weakly to
the oxidized (and reduced) flavin site. Indeed, the only strong-binding
nucleotide inhibitor known for the flavin site is “NADH-OH”, but both NADH-OH binding and dissociation are
very slow (rate constant for dissociation of ∼0.001 s–1, more than 6 orders of magnitude slower
than that for NAD+ dissociation), suggesting a different
mode of binding, perhaps even covalent bond formation. Finally, it
is known that binding of NADH to the oxidized flavin is both fast
and reversible, because the rate of NADH oxidation approaches NADH-diffusion
control at low NADH concentrations, and
because oxidation of NADH by the complex I flavin is thermodynamically
efficient. Thus, we conclude that nucleotide
binding by complex I is fast but weak. These properties minimize product
inhibition, even in the mitochondrial matrix where the NAD+ concentration is high (the total NADH and NAD+ concentration
is ∼3 mM, of which ∼10% is present as NADH−). Furthermore, weak NADH binding is unlikely to limit the rate of
catalysis in vivo, because the maximal rate of ubiquinone
reduction by complex I is slower than the maximal rate of NADH oxidation,
and because the NADH concentration in the mitochondrial matrix is
high. Low NADH concentrations limit the rate of NADH oxidation in vitro because the flavin site is only partially occupied,
a thermodynamic, rather than kinetic, limitation.

Binding of
NADH to the oxidized flavin is usually considered the
first step in the NADH oxidation reaction. Once the oxidized flavin–NADH
complex has formed, oxidation of NADH by the flavin occurs by transfer
of hydride from nicotinamide C4 to flavin N5. The primary KIE observed
here agrees with previous conclusions that NADH oxidation is stereospecific,
transferring the hydride from the B-face (pro-S position)
of its nicotinamide ring., However, while the
primary KIE suggests that the hydride transfer step is rate-limiting
in NADH oxidation, the relatively low values observed (∼2 for S-NADD oxidation coupled to FeCN or HAR, increasing to 2.6
at high pH) indicate that hydride transfer− is not the only rate-limiting step. Larger KIEs were
observed for the oxidation of APADH (up to ∼6.5), suggesting
that the transfer of hydride from APADH to the flavin is slower, and
more rate-limiting. In both cases, however, the observed KIEs represent
only the lower limit of the intrinsic isotope effect; the actual value
may be much higher. By extension, the intrinsic rate of hydride transfer
may also be much higher than the observed rates of reaction; previously,
we estimated that hydride transfer and NAD+ dissociation
both occur at &gt;5000 s–1 in complex I. Notably, in mitochondrial transhydrogenase,
the rate of transfer of hydride from NADH to NADP+ is ∼21000
s–1, and the KIE is 2–3, similar to that
observed here. Thus, our data suggest
that hydride transfer and NAD+ dissociation are both partially
rate-limiting for oxidation of NADH by complex I; the enzyme balances
out the transition state energies, flattening the free energy profile
of the reaction so that no single step is fully rate-limiting.

Finally, because nucleotide binding by complex I is fast and reversible,
the flavin site exists in a distribution of empty and occupied states,
as defined by the nucleotide concentrations, and in a distribution
of oxidized and reduced states, as defined primarily by the NADH and
NAD+ ratio and influenced by the rate of ubiquinone reduction.
A high occupancy of the reduced flavin site is advantageous for the
minimization of superoxide production, because bound nucleotides block
the access of O2, and it is promoted by the high nucleotide
concentrations present in the matrix. Furthermore, during catalysis,
the pathway taken for NADH oxidation (the order of the hydride transfer,
NAD+ dissociation, flavin oxidation, and NADH binding steps,
which varies with the nucleotide concentration and rate of ubiquinone
reduction) is relevant to determining the rate of superoxide production.
Ideally, NAD+ would be exchanged for NADH with the flavin
in the oxidized state, so that the reduced flavin is not exposed to
O2. Alternatively, the lifetime of the solvent-exposed
reduced flavin can be minimized by fast nucleotide exchange. Through
balancing weak nucleotide binding constants with high nucleotide concentrations,
and through fast nucleotide exchange, the complex I flavin site thus
combines fast and energy-conserving NADH oxidation with only minimal
superoxide production.

Supporting Information Available
HPLC and NMR analyses
of the
deuterated nucleotides prepared for this study are reported in Figures
S1–S4. This material is available free of charge via the Internet
at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bi3016873_si_001.pdf

The authors declare
no
competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
We thank Drs.
Ji-Chun Yang and David Neuhaus (MRC Laboratory
of Molecular Biology) and Drs. Masaru Kato and Erwin Reisner (University
of Cambridge, Cambridge, U.K.) for NMR analyses of deuterated nucleotides.

Abbreviations
APAD and APADHreduced and oxidized
forms of 3-acetylpyridine adenine dinucleotide, respectively

FeCNferricyanide or hexacyanoferrate(III)

HARhexaammineruthenium(III)

KIEkinetic isotope
effect

NMN+ and NMNHreduced and oxidized forms of nicotinamide mononucleotide,
respectively

R-APADD and S-APADD[4R-2H]APADH and [4S-2H]APADH,
respectively

R-NADD and S-NADD[4R-2H]NADH and [4S-2H]NADH,
respectively.

