The enzyme
soluble guanylate
cyclase (sGC) plays a key role in the cardiovascular system and is
a validated drug target for the treatment of cardiovascular diseases.− It catalyzes the formation of the cardioprotective signaling molecule
cyclic guanosine monophosphate (cGMP) from guanosine triphosphate
(GTP). Nitric oxide (NO) binds to the
N-terminal regulatory domain, thereby inducing the transition from
basal to activated sGC, resulting in an increased level of cGMP production.
Under conditions of oxidative stress, decreased NO bioavailability, and increased levels of oxidation of sGC both lead to impaired sGC
activation and decreased levels of cGMP production. Additional physiological regulators of sGC are being discovered,
such as the thrombospondin-1/CD47 signaling pathway, that are capable of further decreasing sGC activity., Restoring healthy levels of cGMP in the diseased state thus requires
alternative ways to activate sGC. Understanding the molecular events
controlling sGC activity may lead to additional classes of cGMP-modulating
therapeutics. However, despite great progress in the field, sGC regulation
is largely enigmatic. With this goal in mind, we aim to characterize
structural changes that occur at the catalytic center during the activation
process.

The sGC enzyme is a heterodimer of α and β
subunits sharing a similar modular organization:
an HNOX
regulatory domain, an HNOXA domain and a coiled-coil (CC) domain involved
in dimerization, and a catalytic guanylate cyclase (GC) domain, from
the N- to C-terminus. Crystal structures of independent sGC domains
and homologues have been determined,− and recent low-resolution electron microscopy data suggest how these
domains might assemble in the full-length enzyme. However, the high-resolution three-dimensional structure
of full-length sGC is still missing. Both long-range domain–domain
interactions and local short-range conformational changes were proposed
to account for sGC activation. Several studies point to the inhibitory
interaction of the βHNOX domain with the cyclase domain.− Furthermore, the αHNOX and αHNOXA domains were shown
to be located near the βHNOX domain to keep it in an inhibited
conformation that is released upon NO or YC-1 binding., From these results, a collective model in which the N-terminal regulatory
domains autoinhibit sGC activity was developed. If this model is correct,
then isolated cyclase domains should display high levels of activity.

Here we combined X-ray crystallography, activity measurements,
and native mass spectrometry analysis of the wild-type human heterodimeric
catalytic domains of sGC (hereafter termed αβGC) to characterize
the structural features that modulate the orientation of the catalytic
subunits leading to sGC activity and to propose a novel model for
sGC regulation.

Experimental Procedures
Materials
All
chemicals were obtained from Sigma-Aldrich
and purification columns from GE Healthcare unless otherwise indicated.

Mutagenesis, Expression, and Purification of the αβGC
Heterodimer, αGC, and βGC
Entry clones for human
α3GC GUCY1A3 (amino acids 466–690, GenBank
accession number JX420281) with an N-terminally His-tagged thioredoxin tag
in a pNH-TrxT vector and mutant β1GC GUCY1B3 (amino
acids 407–619, GenBank accession number JX420282) with
a C-terminally His-tagged Flag tag in a pNIC-CTHF vector were kind
gifts of Dr. Allerston (Structural Genomics Consortium). The βGC
G476C/C541S double mutant was changed back to the wild type using
standard site-directed mutagenesis (Stratagene) with the following
primer pairs: forward primer (5′-cgttactgcctgttcggc-3′)
and reverse primer (5′-gccgaacaggcagtaacg-3′)
for C476G and forward primer (5′-cgaaactgttggcgataagtatatga-3′)
and reverse primer (5′-tcatatacttatcgccaacagtttcg-3′)
for S541C.

We also designed a shorter construct for αGC,
named αGC661 (residues 466–661) by inserting a stop codon
at position 662 by site-directed mutagenesis with the following primer
pairs: forward primer (5′-gatgcgtatcagtagtgaaccaactcaaaa-3′)
and reverse primer (5′-ttttgagttggttcactactgatacgcatc-3′).
All mutations were confirmed by DNA sequencing (Genewiz).

Each
catalytic subunit was independently co-expressed with the
GroEL-ES chaperone system from a pACYC-derived plasmid (Takara Inc.)
in Escherichia coli BL21(DE3) cells (Life Technologies).
Cells were cultured overnight at 37 °C. Protein expression was
induced with 1 mM IPTG and l-arabinose (2 g/L) when OD600 reached 1. Cells were grown for 20 h at 15 °C, pelleted,
and frozen at −80 °C until they were used. To purify the
αβGC heterodimer, cell pellets from each subunit were
mixed and lysed in buffer A [50 mM sodium phosphate (pH 7.4), 0.5
M NaCl, 30 mM imidazole, 0.1% (v/v) Tween 20, 0.1 mg/mL DNaseI, 0.5
mg/mL lysozyme, and protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche)] via sonication.
The first chromatography step was a nickel HisTrap affinity column,
and αGC and βGC co-eluted with a 15 to 100% gradient of
buffer B [50 mM sodium phosphate (pH 7.4), 0.5 M NaCl, and 0.3 M imidazole].
Both proteins were cleaved overnight [in 20 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.0),
0.15 M NaCl, and 5% glycerol] using a His-tagged tobacco etch virus
(TEV) protease yielding αGC(466–690) and βGC(407–626).
For βGC, the seven extra C-terminal amino acids are part of
the linker for TEV cleavage of the C-terminal His-Flag tag. A second
Ni affinity step was performed to remove the cleaved tags and the
TEV protease. The proteins were further purified using a HiTrap Q
HP anion exchange column and Superdex 200 or Superdex 75 gel filtration
in a final buffer consisting of 20 mM Hepes (pH 7.5) and 0.15 M NaCl.
The protein was aliquoted, flash-frozen in liquid nitrogen, and stored
at −80 °C. The same protocol was used to purify all catalytic
constructs. The final yields are 3.5 mg of αGC, 0.75 mg of βGC,
0.25–1 mg of copurified αβGC, 0.8 mg of αGC661,
and 0.5–0.8 mg of copurified αGC661βGC per liter
of cell culture.

Crystallization, Data Collection, and Refinement
Crystals
of wild-type αβGC catalytic domains were grown at 20 °C
using a vapor diffusion sitting drop setup containing 0.2 μL
of 14 mg/mL αβGC with 0.2 μL of a reservoir solution
composed of 20% (w/v) PEG3350, 50 mM HEPES (pH 7.0), and 1% Tryptone.
The drops were set up using an ArtRobbins Phoenix crystallization
robot. Before data collection, the crystal was cryo-protected in mother
liquor supplemented with 20% (v/v) ethylene glycol and flash-frozen
in the nitrogen cryo-stream. X-ray diffraction data were collected
on beamline 8.3.1 at the Advanced Light Source at Lawrence Berkeley
National Laboratory. Data processing and reduction were conducted
with MOSFLM. Phasing by molecular replacement
was conducted with PHASER using the mutant
αβGC structure [Protein Data Bank (PDB) entry 3UVJ] as a starting model.
The final model was obtained with iterative cycles of refinement with
PHENIX and rebuilding with COOT. The final model and structure factors were deposited
in the PDB (entry 4NI2).

Activity Assay
The cyclase activity reaction was performed
using ∼5 μM full-length sGC (based on the absorbance
at 431 nm) and ∼10 μM catalytic constructs (based on
the absorbance at 280 nm). The reaction assay was conducted in 40
mM HEPES (pH 7.4), 0.5 mM dithiothreitol, 0.3 mM 3-isobutyl-1-methylxanthine,
1 mM GTP, and 3 mM MgCl2 or MnCl2. The reaction
mixture was incubated at 15 °C for 20 min and the reaction stopped
with the addition of EDTA (final concentration of 10 mM). The reaction
mixture was stored at −80 °C until cGMP was quantified
using a cGMP enzyme immunoassay kit (R&amp;D) following the manufacturer’s
protocol. Activity was measured in duplicate, and the experiments
were repeated three times to ensure reproducibility.

Multiangle
Light Scattering
The KW 403 gel filtration
column was equilibrated with buffer A [50 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.0), 0.15
M NaCl, 5% glycerol, 1 mM MgCl2, and 1 mM TCEP]. Bovine
serum albumin was used as a reference. We injected 50 μL of
αβGC at 30 μM.

Mass Spectrometry (MS)
The protein samples were buffer
exchanged into 0.1 M ammonium acetate (AA) buffer (pH 7.4) using either
size-exclusion chromatography spin columns (Bio-Rad) or Amicon Ultra-4
centrifugal filter units (EMD Millipore). Subsequently, the concentrations
of the buffer-exchanged proteins were calculated by measuring the A280, and a solution of 0.1 M triethylammonium
acetate (TEAA) was added to the protein samples in a 1:4 (TEAA:AA)
ratio to produce charge-reduced catalytic dimers, unless otherwise
stated. In the KD analysis of the catalytic
dimers, various protein concentrations were obtained by serial dilution
starting from the stock solution of the buffer-exchanged protein sample.
For all other mass spectrometry analyses, the concentration of catalytic
dimers used was 10 μM, unless otherwise stated.

Nano-electrospray
ionization mass spectrometry (nano-ESI/MS) analysis was conducted
by utilizing a modified Quadrupole Ion Mobility Time of Flight (Q-IM-TOF)
instrument (Synapt G2, Waters Corp., Manchester, U.K.) with a customized
surface-induced dissociation (SID) device installed before the IM
chamber as previously described. All
experiments were conducted using a nanoelectrospray source, using
a capillary voltage of 1.0–1.5 kV and a cone voltage of 50–75
V. No heating was applied to the cone. Nano-ESI glass capillary and
surface preparation procedures can be found elsewhere. The following instrumental conditions were used:
5 mbar for the source/backing pressure, 2 mbar for the nitrogen gas
pressure in the IM cell, rate of 120 mL/min for the flow of gas into
the helium cell, ∼6 × 10–7 mbar in the
TOF analyzer, and a wave velocity and a height of 300 ms–1 and 20 V, respectively, for IM experiments. Nano-ESI/MS is a gentle
method of ionization in which salts and solvent are often retained,
giving m/z values higher than those
calculated from sequence, especially for oligomers. This problem is
sometimes eliminated in nano-ESI–MS/MS measurements of fragments,
if the MS/MS approach unfolds the monomers causing a loss of salts,
solvents, and ligands.

Results
Overall Structure of Wild-Type
Human Heterodimeric αβGC
and Comparison with Mutant Heterodimeric αβGC
To identify the structural determinants for sGC catalytic activity,
we determined the X-ray structure of the wild-type heterodimeric αβGC
catalytic domains of human sGC in the apo form at 1.9 Å resolution
(Figure ). The final model shows good statistics
with Rwork and Rfree values of 0.159 and 0.198, respectively, and 98.2% of
the residues in the allowed regions of the Ramachandran plot (Table ). The model comprises one heterodimer per asymmetric
unit and contains αGC residues 471–662, βGC residues
411–608, 342 water molecules, and six ethylene glycol molecules.
Residues at the N- and C-termini of αGC (466–470 and
663–690, respectively) and βGC (407–410 and 609–626,
respectively) were not visible in the electron density and were not
included in the final model. To rule out the possibility that these
proteins may be proteolyzed or degraded and to unambiguously determine
the masses of the purified proteins, we performed nano-ESI/MS analysis
on the αGC and βGC proteins purified individually or copurified
(Table , , and Figure S1 of the ). We confirmed that we crystallized heterodimeric αβGC
with a truncated αGC(466–662) subunit.

Overall structure of
heterodimeric wild-type αβGC catalytic
domains that resembles the Chinese yin-yang symbol with both subunits
arranged in a head-to-tail conformation. (A and B) Ventral face of
the heterodimer as a cartoon (A) and a solvent accessible surface
representation (B). The deep extended substrate groove (shown by the
oval in panel B) bisects the ventral face, which contains the C-termini
of both subunits (denoted with C). The αGC subunit is colored
blue, and the βGC subunit is colored orange. The substrate binding
regions of αGC (residues 523–534) and βGC (residues
470–480) adopt an extended conformation in the absence of substrate
and metals (arrows). (C and D) The dorsal face of the heterodimer
as a cartoon (C) and a solvent accessible surface representation (D)
is flatter than the ventral face and contains the N-termini of both
subunits (denoted with N).

X-ray Data Collection and Refinement
Statistics
Data Collection	
space group	P212121	
wavelength (Å)	1.116	
resolution (Å)	69.7–1.9 (2.0–1.9)	
unit cell parameters (Å)	a = 49.5, b = 55.8, c = 139.4	
no. of measurements	240390 (31623)	
no. of unique reflections	31270 (4438)	
redundancy	7.7 (7.1)	
completeness (%)	99.8 (98.7)	
⟨I/σ(I)⟩	14.2 (2.6)	
Rmerge (%)	8.6 (68)	
Refinement	
resolution range (Å)	69.7–1.9 (1.96–1.90)	
no. of protein atoms	2964	
no. of water atoms	342	
no. of heteroatoms	30	
rmsd of bond lengths (Å)	0.012	
rmsd of bond angles (deg)	1.3	
Rwork (%)	15.9 (23.8)	
Rfree (%)	19.8 (26.8)	
Ramachandran plot (%)	 	
favored	98.2	
allowed	0.8	
generous	0.0	
disallowed	0.0	
Rmerge = ∑h∑i|I(h,i)
— ⟨I(h)⟩|/∑h∑iI(h,i), where I(h,i) is the intensity
of the ith observation of reflection h and ⟨I(h)⟩ is the
average intensity of redundant measurements of reflection h.

Rwork = ∑h||Fobs| – |Fcalc||/∑h|Fobs|.

Rfree = ∑h||Fobs| – |Fcalc||/∑h|Fobs| for 5%
of the reserved reflections.

Values in parentheses apply to the
highest-resolution shell.

Comparison of Calculated and Experimental
Molecular Masses for the Different sGC Constructs Determined by Nano-ESI/MS
and Nano-ESI/MS/MS
construct	calculated mass (Da)	calculated mass (Da)	experimental mass (Da)	
αGC(466–690) (monomer)	24671.2	24687.5	24740.8 ± 17.9 (10 μM)	
αGC(466–661) (monomer)	21621.7	21636.1	21642.9 ± 18.3 (10 μM)	
αGC(466–690) (dimer)	49342.4	49375	49489 ± 20.3 (10 μM)	
αGC(466–662) (dimer)	43499.6	43528.6	43500.1 ± 55.4 (10 μM)	
αGC(466–661) (dimer)	43243.4	43272.2	43403.1 ± 5.5 (10 μM)	
βGC(407–626) (monomer)	24769.2	24785.2	24820.5 ± 47.8 (10 μM)	
βGC(407–626) (dimer)	49538.4	49570.4	49636.7 ± 36.6 (10 μM)	
βGC(407–626) (tetramer)	99076.8	99140.8	99929.9 ± 68.7 (10 μM)	
αβGC 
 (heterodimer)	49440.4	49472.7	49660.2 ± 38.7 (10 μM)	
αGC661βGC (heterodimer)	46390.9	46421.3	46449.5 ± 20.2 (10 μM)	
Monoisotopic masses
were calculated
from amino acid sequences with PeptideMass from the Expasy Web site.

Average masses were calculated from
amino acid sequences with PeptideMass from the Expasy Web site.

Species obtained by introducing
a stop codon at position 662 in the αGC(466–690) construct.

Species obtained by cleavage
of
αGC(466–690) at the N- and C-terminal TEV cleavage sites.

Measured mass obtained from
nano-ESI/MS/MS
at a SID voltage of 100 V.

The structure of heterodimeric αβGC resembles the Chinese
yin-yang symbol with the two subunits arranged in a head-to-tail conformation
(Figures A,C). The catalytic domains were
crystallized without metal or substrate. Accordingly, the structure
reveals an inactive heterodimer conformation compared to that of active
adenylate cyclase. This is evidenced
both by the relative orientation of the two subunits leading to an
open active site and by the extended loop conformation of the core
regions containing the catalytic residues (Figure A).

We superimposed our structure on that of the mutant
heterodimeric
human αβGC containing an engineered disulfide bridge (αGC
C595–C476 βGC) at the dimer interface. Aside from the mutations (G476C and C541A), the two structures
are very similar, with an rmsd of 0.52 Å for 397 amino acids,
but present subtle differences at the dimer interface (Movie S1 of
the ) and in surface-exposed
regions (a detailed description of similarities and differences is
presented in the ). As a result, the αGC subunit and the βGC subunit present
a slightly different orientation relative to each other in our structure.
Overall, the αGC and βGC subunits are rotated by ∼3°
in the structure of the wild-type catalytic domains compared to the
mutant structure. While these differences may seem subtle, similar
conformational changes are observed in related adenylate cyclase between
the inactive and active structures, in which one of the subunit rotates
by 7° and secondary structure elements shift by 1–2 Å. This example illustrates how small structural
changes at the dimer interface in this protein family have profound
effects on catalytic activity. In comparison to the structure of the
mutant catalytic domains of sGC, our structure reveals an αGC−βGC
interface with high plasticity that is necessary for sGC activity.
Regardless, our structure is the closest to that of the catalytic
domains in full-length sGC, as it is heterodimeric and devoid of mutations.
As such, it represents an excellent starting model for the docking
of small molecules that either inhibit or activate sGC.

Amino Acid
Sequence Conservation Suggests Docking Sites for
Other sGC Domains and Key Interfaces for Activation of sGC
To identify conserved regions in the catalytic heterodimer, we performed
multiple-sequence alignments for both the αGC and βGC
subunits () and mapped
the sequence identity percentage of each residue onto the αβGC
structure (Figure ). The regions with the
highest degrees of sequence conservation are located in three regions
of the heterodimer: (i) the substrate channel on the ventral face
of the αβGC heterodimer (94% identical sequence), (ii)
the C-terminal subdomain of αGC present on the ventral face
of the heterodimer (78% identical sequence), and (iii) the dorsal
face of the heterodimer (94% identical sequence). While the substrate
channel is expected to be mainly invariant, the high level of sequence
conservation of the αGC C-terminal domain (residues 616–662)
is surprising and suggests that this domain may play an important
role in the assembly and/or regulation of sGC. This hypothesis is
supported by recent studies showing that the βHNOX–HNOXA
domains directly interact with the C-terminal domain of αGC, and could modulate the conformation of the active site. Interestingly,
mutation of solvent-exposed residue αGC Arg624 in that domain
to Ala leads to a dramatic increase in full-length sGC activity. It is tempting to speculate that this residue
plays a key role in domain–domain interaction with the N-terminal
regulatory domains. Importantly, this region of the catalytic subunit
could be targeted for the rational design of small molecules or protein
therapeutics disrupting the inhibitory interactions between the regulatory
and catalytic domains.

Map of the high levels of sequence conservation on the
ventral
face substrate channel and the αGC C-terminal domain and the
heterodimer cleft on the dorsal face of the αβGC structure.
We aligned &gt;20 sequences of eukaryotic αGC and βGC
domains
() and mapped the
level of amino acid sequence conservation onto the αβGC
crystal structure, colored from blue (0% identical) to red (100% identical).
C-Termini of both subunits are marked with C, and N-termini are marked
with N. (A) The highly conserved substrate channel on the ventral
face is marked with an arrow. The C-terminal subdomain of αGC
is moderately to strongly conserved (orange to red) as indicated by
an oval. (B) The dimer interface region close to the N-termini of
both subunits on the dorsal face is largely invariant.

Second, the highly conserved region of the dorsal
face of αβGC
serves as the point of contact with the preceding αβCC
dimerization domain, where it could modulate the interface between
the αGC and βGC subunits. There is no crystal structure
for heterodimeric αβCC, but recent studies unambiguously
demonstrated a parallel orientation of the CC domains in sGC., In this arrangement, both C-termini of αβCC would be
able to connect with the N-termini of the αβGC heterodimer
separated by ∼28 Å on the dorsal face of the heterodimer
and located in the region with the highest level of sequence conservation.
This position of αβCC is consistent with recent mass spectrometry and FRET data. This
model is also coherent with the CC domain acting as a platform on
which all the sGC domains assemble in full-length sGC. The fact that the entire region surrounding
the N-termini of the αβGC heterodimer is highly conserved
in the sGC family points to more than simply an anchoring area for
the preceding CC domain. Instead, we propose that the interface between
the cyclase and the CC domains is essential for catalysis and that
the CC promotes an optimal conformation of the catalytic subunits
for activity.

Structural Determinants for Heterodimerization
of the Catalytic
Subunits
Our crystallization trials with copurified wild-type
αβGC protein yielded mostly homodimeric β1β2GC crystals (98%) and some heterodimeric αβGC
crystals (2%). Others also noted difficulties in obtaining heterodimer
crystals of the wild-type catalytic domains and engineered a non-natural
disulfide bridge at the interface to favor heterodimerization. This suggests that β1β2GC has a stronger propensity to crystallize and/or that the
β1β2GC interface is stronger. To
address the first point, we performed native mass spectrometry and
crystal packing analysis () and showed that, in our case, TEV cleavage at the N-terminal and
C-terminal sites in αGC yielded a minor population of αGC662βGC
heterodimers that were subsequently crystallized, thus explaining
our low success in crystallizing αβGC heterodimers (). Second, to identify
the structural determinants promoting heterodimerization of the catalytic
subunits, we compared the heterodimeric αβGC structure
with the homodimeric β1β2GC structure
(PDB entry 2WZ1) and analyzed both dimeric interfaces (). The structural superposition shows that the β2GC subunit of the homodimer and the βGC subunit of the
heterodimer overlay closely, while the β1GC subunit
of the homodimer and the αGC subunit of the heterodimer present
distinct orientations (Figure A). In the heterodimer,
αGC is rotated ∼13° compared to β1GC in the homodimer, resulting in a different dimer interface. Both
the heterodimeric and homodimeric interfaces contain a large number
of hydrophobic interactions stabilizing the dimer core formed by both
subunits and lining the substrate-binding site (Table S1 of the  and Figure C,D). In addition, both interfaces contain several polar interactions
between surface flexible structural elements (Figure E,F).

Structural determinants of catalytic domain dimerization.
(A and
B) Homodimeric β1β2GC (PDB entry 2WZ1) is colored light
green (β1GC) and dark green (β2GC).
The αβGC heterodimer is colored blue (αGC) and orange
(βGC). The ventral view (A) shows that βGC and β2GC subunits superimpose well, while αGC adopts a conformation
different from that of β1GC in the heterodimer and
homodimer, respectively. The dorsal view (B) shows the double flap-wrap
conformation of the homodimer flaps (light and dark green cartoon).
In the heterodimer depicted as a semitransparent solvent accessible
surface, only the βGC flap (orange cartoon) wraps on the αGC
subunit while the αGC flap (blue cartoon) is flipped out. (C
and D) The core of the heterodimeric interface is formed by numerous
hydrophobic interactions between residues from the βGC subunit
(orange) and the αGC subunit (blue), depicted as sticks. (E
and F) Polar interactions (hydrogen bonds and salt bridges) also contribute
to the heterodimeric interface. Residues from βGC (orange) and
αGC (blue) participating in these interactions are shown as
sticks.

Despite the resemblance between
the two dimeric interfaces, one
major difference between the two structures is the conformation of
the β-hairpins of residues 532–539 in β1GC and 587–593 in αGC. We will herein refer to these
hairpins as “flaps”. In the symmetrical homodimer, both
flaps—one contributed by each βGC subunit—participate
in the dimer interface by wrapping securely onto the α2 helix
on the partner subunit, in a “double flap-wrap” conformation
(Figure B). Residues from both flaps contribute
one salt bridge and ten of the thirteen polar interactions that stabilize
the homodimer. In the heterodimer, residues from the β1GC flap contribute three of the nine hydrogen bonds that stabilize
the dimer (Table S1 of the ), while the α1GC flap is swung away and makes no
interaction with the βGC subunit (Figure B). This suggests a different role of the flaps in the homodimer
and the heterodimer. We further performed a structural comparison
of all guanylate cyclase and adenylate cyclase catalytic domain structures
() and proposed that
these surface-exposed structural flaps not only are involved in regulating
the relative orientations of the subunits in various dimers but also
may be important in modulating interactions with other domains or
proteins. For sGC, our results indicate a key role of the interfacial
flaps in stabilizing different dimer interfaces and suggest that the
flaps may also be important for the proper orientation of the catalytic
subunits in full-length sGC (see below).

Residues in the Interfacial
Flap and Hydrogen Bond Network Play
Key Roles in Modulating the Dimer Interface
To begin to understand
the mechanisms involved in modulating sGC activity, we mapped sGC
residues that have been shown to significantly impact activity and
activation on our structure of the inactive heterodimer (Figures A,B) and our model for the active heterodimer (Figures C,D). These residues fall in two areas of the dimer
interface. (a) The first includes residues located in the flap or
in the region interacting with the flap on the partner subunit. In
full-length sGC, the Met537Asn mutation in βGC leads to increased
constitutive activity and a very strong response to NO and/or YC-1
activators. Met537 is located on the
βGC flap, and its position is not expected to change drastically
between the inactive and active conformation. However, reorientation
of αGC in the active heterodimer leads to movement of its α2
helix and β3 strand closer to the βGC flap and places
Met537 closer to hydrogen-bonding residues αGC Lys524 and Thr527
located on the β3 strand (Figures B,D).
Thus, the Met537Asn mutation would enhance interactions between the
βGC flap and αGC by providing extra hydrogen bond contacts
between the two subunits. This hypothesis is strongly supported by
mutagenesis studies showing that two mutations abolishing hydrogen
bonds between αGC and the βGC flap (αGC Lys524Ala
and αGC Asp514Ala) in full-length sGC impair dimerization and
activity. Similar mutations introduced
into adenylate cyclase yielded similar phenotypes. The C2a Lys1014Asn
mutation (analogous to the βGC Met537Asn mutation) increased
activity and affinity between the two subunits in the absence of forskolin
or Gsα. In addition,
the C1a Asp424Ala mutation (analogous to the αGC Asp514Ala mutation)
severely impaired activity and activation. (b) Other residues modulating sGC activity are located in the core
of the heterodimer at the interface between both subunits. The αGC
residues Glu526 and Cys595 are located in interfacial regions that
would undergo major conformational changes in the active form (Figure B). On the basis of the structure of active AC, we hypothesize that αGC Glu526, αGC
Cys595, and βGC Thr474 form an interfacial hydrogen bond network
(equivalent to the C1a Lys436–C1a Asp505–C2a Thr939
adenylate cyclase triad), as these residues are also in the proximity
of each other in the modeled catalytic domain active structure (within
3.5 Å of each other). This is strongly supported by studies showing
that mutations that abrogate the ability to form hydrogen bonds at
this interface severely impair sGC activity (αGC Cys595Tyr,
αGC Cys595Asp, αGC Glu526Ala, and αGC Cys595Asp/Glu526Lys), and adenylate cyclase activity (C1a Lys436Ala and C1a Asp505Ala)., In contrast, the αGC Cys595Ser mutation dramatically increases
sGC basal activity. The Cys to Ser substitution
is often described as “silent”. However, the two amino
acids have distinct properties because of differences in size and
polarity between oxygen and sulfur. Thus, it is possible that the
Cys595Ser mutation would enhance the ability of this residue to form
hydrogen bonds. While we cannot rule
out the possibility that the Cys595Ser mutation may prevent Cys595
oxidation and subsequent enzyme inhibition, it is more likely that
Cys595 plays a key role in the communication between the two subunits.
Previous studies proposed that Cys595 may participate in binding of
the sGC stimulator YC-1 and modulate YC-1/NO activation. However, several groups have unambiguously ruled
out the possibility of binding of YC-1 to the catalytic domains.,− Instead, we propose that both the interfacial flap and the hydrogen
bond network enhance interactions between the two catalytic subunits
and guide an optimal conformation of the active center necessary for
activity.

Interfacial mutations in adenylate cyclase and sGC that modulate
enzyme activity underscore the key role of the heterodimeric interface
for catalysis. We mapped AC and sGC mutations on the structures of
the inactive αβGC heterodimer (A and B; PDB entry 4NI2) and the modeled
active structure of αβGC (C and D). The model for the
active conformation was generated with SWISSMODEL by using active adenylate cyclase (PDB entry 1CJU) as a template.
Residues that affect sGC or AC activity map to two regions of the
αβGC heterodimer: (i) the interfacial hydrogen bond network
among sGC residues αGC Cys595, αGC Glu526, and βGC
Thr 474 (indicated by dashed green lines) and (ii) the sGC flap region
(βGC Met537) or the region interacting with the flap in the
partner subunit (αGC Asp514). Panels B and D are close-up views
of panels A and C, respectively.

Copurified αβGC Catalytic Domains Assemble as a
Mixture of Monomers, Homodimers, and Heterodimers
To confirm
our structural prediction that the homodimeric β1β2GC interface is stronger than the heterodimeric
αβGC interface and the ααGC interface, we
used size-exclusion chromatography coupled to multiangle light scattering
(SEC-MALS) and nano-ESI/MS (Figure S1 of the ). Both the SEC (Figure S2A of the ) and SEC-MALS profiles (Figure S2C
of the ) showed subtle
deviations from perfectly symmetric peaks at higher elution volumes,
suggesting slight heterogeneity in the sample composition. The molecular
weight determined by SEC-MALS ranged from 96 to 106% of the theoretical
molecular weight for the αβGC heterodimer. The subtle
tail of the elution peak at high elution volumes contained more αGC
than βGC as determined by sodium dodecyl sulfate–polyacrylamide
gel electrophoresis (SDS–PAGE). This suggested that the αβGC
sample is a mixture of different oligomeric species in solution. However,
we were unable to distinguish the different species in solution by
SEC, MALS, or even mass spectrometry. Our result is not surprising
given our overwhelming success in crystallizing ββGC homodimers
over αβGC heterodimers and has important implications
when working with truncated sGC domains (see below).

Design of the
Shorter αGC661βGC Protein Allows Precise
Quantification of Heterodimers in Solution
We showed above
that the copurified αβGC protein is heterogeneous both
in the length of the αGC subunit and in oligomer composition
and that we were unable to quantify the different species in solution.
This result is problematic for two reasons. First, structural mechanistic
studies of the αβGC catalytic domains in the presence
of metals, GTP, or GTP analogues require a reproducible homogeneous
heterodimeric sample, and second, specific activity calculations require
precise quantification of the αβGC heterodimers in solution,
as only heterodimers are catalytically active.

Mass spectrometry
and crystal packing analysis suggested that we had crystallized the
heterodimeric αβGC catalytic domains with a truncated
αGC(466–662) subunit (). To increase the likelihood of obtaining high-quality
crystals of heterodimeric αβGC, we designed a shorter
αGC construct. The XtalPred and DISOPRED2 web servers predicted the region of residues 662–690
of αGC to be disordered. Therefore, we designed the shorter
αGC661 construct that encompasses residues 466–661 after
TEV cleavage of the N-terminal tag. The size-exclusion profile of
copurified αGC661βGC showed two overlapping peaks (Figure
S2B of the ) identified
as homodimers and heterodimers by SDS–PAGE.

The calculated
molecular masses for αGC661 and βGC
differ by ∼3 kDa (Table ), allowing
us to discriminate all species present in the αGC661βGC
sample using mass spectrometry. First, we performed nano-ESI/MS for
each subunit purified independently. Like that of αGC (Figure
S1A of the ), the
spectrum for αGC661 showed that the protein was predominantly
monomeric (mass of 21642.9 ± 18.3 Da) with a small amount of
homodimers (mass of 43403.1 ± 5.5 Da) in a ratio of 79:21, as
determined by AUC analysis (Figure A). As
seen previously, the spectrum for βGC and AUC analysis showed
that the monomer:dimer:tetramer ratio was 8:75:17 (Figure B). These results confirmed our prediction based
on the crystal structure and modeling, and our size-exclusion experiments,
and showed that the KD for homodimerization
of αGC661 was higher than that of βGC.

Nano-ESI/MS and nano-ESI/MS/MS
(SID) reveal different oligomeric
species present in αGC661, βGC, and αGC661βGC
samples. (A–C) Nano-ESI/MS spectra were obtained by spraying
a 10 μM protein sample in 0.1 M NH4OAc (pH 7.4).
(A) αGC661 exists mostly as a monomer. (B) βGC exists
predominantly as a dimer, with a small proportion of monomers and
tetramers also present. (C) αGC661βGC is present in approximately
equal amounts of monomer and dimer. The inset represents the spectrum
for αGC661βGC (10 μM) in 80 mM NH4OAc
and 20 mM TEAA (pH 7.4). The major species present was the αGC661βGC
heterodimer. αGC661 and βGC monomers and ααGC661
and ββGC homodimers were also present. (D–F) Samples
(10 μM) in 80 mM NH4OAc and 20 mM TEAA were sprayed,
and the +11 precursor ion was chosen for MS/MS analysis at an SID
voltage of 100 V. (D) αGC661 and (E) βGC dimers dissociate
to give αGC661 and βGC monomers, respectively. (F) Dissociation
of αGC661βGC results in an equal population of αGC661
and βGC monomers.

Second, we performed nano-ESI/MS for copurified αGC661βGC
(Figure C). The complex spectrum showed a
mixture of αGC661 monomers, βGC monomers, and αGC661βGC
heterodimers, with an experimental mass for the heterodimer of 46449.5
± 20.2 Da, which is close to the calculated value. After the
addition of TEAA to reduce the overall charge of the complex and better
separate the different charged species (Figure C, inset), the spectrum showed a mixture of αGC661 monomers,
βGC monomers, ααGC661 homodimers, ββGC
homodimers, and αGC661βGC heterodimers. We further used
SID to confirm the identity of the different peaks (Figure D–F). These results unambiguously confirmed
that the copurified αGC661βGC protein is a complex mixture
of different oligomeric species.

To estimate the relative abundance
of each species, we measured
nano-ESI/MS spectra for αGC661, βGC, and αGC661βGC
proteins at various protein concentrations. For αGC661, we observed
only monomers and dimers. Thus, the KD for αGC661 homodimerization was defined as the concentration
at which the concentrations of the ααGC661 dimer and the
αGC661 monomer are equal and was determined to be 30 μM
(Figure S3A of the ). For βGC, we observed several species in solution, including
monomers, dimers, and tetramers, complicating the determination of KD. Furthermore, the ionization efficiency of
the βGC protein was significantly reduced at low concentrations.
As a result, we can only estimate that the KD for the ββGC dimer is &lt;2 μM (Figure
S3B of the ). We
repeated this analysis for various concentrations of αGC661βGC
(Figure ). First, we noted that at high concentrations,
the relative abundance of all αGC species is almost equal to
that of all βGC species. However, at low concentrations, the
fraction of αGC is much higher than that of βGC. This
may be due to the decreased ionization efficiency of βGC at
low concentrations, as mentioned above. Therefore, we postulated that
the KD for the αGC661βGC heterodimer
can be determined from the point at which the relative abundances
of αGC and αGC661βGC are equal, which corresponds
to a KD of ∼6.9 μM. Finally,
mass spectrometry analysis showed that mixing independently purified
αGC661 and βGC subunits yielded less αGC661βGC
heterodimer than purifying them together (data not shown).

Determination
of KD for αGC661βGC
heterodimers by nano-ESI/MS. Spectra for αGC661βGC were
obtained by spraying the protein sample in 80 mM NH4OAc
and 20 mM TEAA (pH 7.4). The concentration of αGC661βGC
was varied by performing serial dilutions from an initial 50 μM
stock solution over a range of 0.6–20 μM. The main panel
shows the changes in the relative abundance of αGC661βGC,
total αGC661, and total βGC as a function of protein concentration.
The insets show the relative abundance of the minor species in the
αGC661βGC sample as the concentration changes. For all
experiments, the abundance of a particular species was determined
by extracting its intensity from the ion mobility mobilogram that
is produced with the mass spectrum, and the area under the curve (AUC)
was determined using Origin.

Overall, the use of the truncated αGC661 construct
allowed
us to determine the KD for the αGC661βGC
heterodimer and quantify the amount of heterodimers present in solution
at any given concentration to calculate the true specific activity
normalized per mole of heterodimer. We firmly established that the
monomer–dimer dissociation constants for the catalytic domains
increase as follows: ββGC &lt; αβGC ≪
ααGC. This is in contrast to earlier studies suggesting
that the KD of ββGC or ααGC
homodimers was much higher than the KD of the αβGC heterodimer. These conflicting results may be due to distinct techniques used
to characterize oligomeric assemblies. As opposed to low-resolution
size-exclusion chromatography used previously, we used native mass spectrometry coupled to SID, which
affords high accuracy in the stoichiometry of noncovalent complexes
while preserving a nativelike quaternary structure. Importantly, our results support and extend a recent study
showing that homodimers and heterodimers of the catalytic domains
are both present in solution.

Our
results have important implications for activity assay measurements
with truncated sGC constructs commonly used by various laboratories.
(i) A protein concentration well above the KD should be chosen to ensure adequate heterodimer formation
in the reaction mixture, and (ii) the true specific activity should
be calculated on the basis of the heterodimer concentration only,
as monomers and homodimers display no activity but contribute to the
total protein concentration. While these requirements may not apply
to wild-type full-length sGC, which mostly forms heterodimers in vitro, these results are critical for accurate activity
assay measurements with mutant full-length sGC that show impaired
dimerization.,,−

Finally, our mass spectrometry approach to
determine dimerization
dissociation constants can be applied to truncated sGC constructs,
encompassing various domains to precisely determine the contribution
of each domain to heterodimerization of full-length sGC. Dimerization
determinants were shown to be predominantly contained in the HNOXA
and coiled-coil (CC) domains,,,− with some contribution from the catalytic domains., However, X-ray structures of homodimers were determined for HNOXA
and CC domains,, suggesting that, under these
conditions, both domains can also homodimerize with KD values that were estimated to be in the micromolar range., While a major role for the CC domain was proposed, the precise determinants favoring sGC heterodimerization
remain ambiguous and warrant further studies.

Isolated Catalytic Domains
Display Low Activity Despite Forming
Heterodimers
Because we crystallized the apo αβGC
heterodimer, we wanted to confirm that the isolated catalytic domains
were nonetheless active. Others have shown that the regulatory N-terminal
βHNOX–HNOXA domains inhibit the activity of the catalytic
domains., Thus, in the absence of the regulatory domains,
the isolated αβGC domains should be as active as activated
full-length sGC. We measured cGMP formation with our purified αβGC
and αGC661βGC proteins, and human full-length sGC that
was overexpressed in baculovirus (kind gift from E. Martin, The University
of Texas Health Science Center at Houston, Houston, TX). We used αGC
protein purified independently as a negative control.

The results
presented above show that the copurified αβGC protein
is a heterogeneous mixture of monomers, homodimers, and heterodimers.
Because heterodimeric αβGC is the only catalytically active
species, the true specific activity should be calculated by normalizing
to the heterodimer concentration. This has proven to be difficult
with wild-type αβGC protein (see above). The design of
the truncated αGC661βGC construct has allowed us to calculate
the ratio of heterodimers at different total protein concentrations.
First, we showed that αGC661βGC [1.2 + 0.4 or –
0.3 fmol of cGMP min–1 (pmol of enzyme)−1] and untruncated αβGC catalytic domains [1.8 + 0.7 or
– 0.5 fmol of cGMP min–1 (pmol of enzyme)−1] display comparable activity. Thus, the remainder
of the analysis is based on αGC661βGC for which we can
calculate the true specific activity by normalizing to heterodimer
concentration based on mass spectrometry data. For full-length sGC,
mass spectrometry analysis showed that the protein is 100% heterodimeric
at the concentration used for the cGMP reaction (data not shown).
Importantly, copurified αGC661βGC displayed only a fraction
(0.01%) of the specific activity of basal full-length sGC in the presence
of Mg2+ (Table ). In the presence
of Mn2+, the activities of αGC661βGC and full-length
sGC increased (779- and 2-fold, respectively), but αGC661βGC
still displayed &lt;6% of the activity of full-length sGC. These results
suggest that the isolated catalytic domains are not catalytically
competent compared to basal full-length sGC, despite their ability
to heterodimerize. Our structural studies of αβGC catalytic
domains corroborate this result, as we crystallized the heterodimer
in an inactive conformation. In the related adenylate cyclase, binding
of Gsα, forskolin, and ATP induces conformational
changes leading to a closed and active catalytic center. A similar mechanism is likely for sGC, whereby
the catalytic center alternates between inactive and active conformations
via structural rearrangements.

Guanylate Cyclase
Activity
 	αGC661βGC	basal
full-length sGC	αGC	
 	Mg2+	Mn2+	Mg2+	Mn2+	Mg2+	
specific activity
[fmol of cGMP min–1 (pmol
of enzyme)−1]	1.2	899.9	10075.5	20578.5	0.5	
upper bound error	0.4	259.8	3163.7	5819.0	0.3	
lower bound error	0.3	200.7	2300.2	4433.3	0.2	
relative
abundance of the heterodimer (%)	82.5	82.5	100	100	NA	
adjusted
specific activity [fmol of cGMP min–1 (pmol of heterodimer)−1]	1.4	1090.8	10075.5	20578.5	NA	
upper bound error	0.5	314.9	3163.7	5819.0	NA	
lower bound error	0.4	243.2	2300.2	4433.3	NA	
activity
normalized to full-length sGC (%)	0.01	5.3	100	100	NA	
x-fold
increase in specific activity with
Mn2+	1	779	1	2	NA	
The reaction was performed as described
in .

Error boundaries describe the 95%
confidence interval.

Determined
by mass spectrometry.

Not
applicable.

We propose that
other sGC domains (including the coiled coil) will
guide conformational changes leading to an optimal alignment of the
active site residues. This model is supported by recent data showing
that an αβHNOXA-CC-GC construct displays activity comparable
to that of full-length sGC, and by our
results showing that substitution of Mg2+ with Mn2+ increases the basal activity of full-length sGC and αGC661βGC
(Table ). We propose that Mn2+ ions
allow catalysis in both proteins without the need for the catalytic
domains to undergo the transition to an optimal conformation. While
Mg2+ requires a very specific coordination geometry, Mn2+ has been shown to be less stringent. In DNA polymerases, Mn2+ easily replaces
Mg2+ but it also allows reactions to occur with mutated
catalytic residues and decreased substrate specificity because of
its higher tolerance for suboptimal metal coordination. Similarly, for full-length sGC and isolated
αβGC catalytic domains, Mn2+ may favor a suboptimal
conformation of the catalytic domains. This hypothesis is supported
by studies showing that NO and/or YC-1 fails to fully activate sGC
in the presence of Mn2+,,,, suggesting that the
enzyme is locked in an intermediate catalytic state. In conclusion,
our activity measurements strongly support a role for other sGC domains
in promoting a competent conformation of the active center.

Discussion
The combined structural, biophysical, and mass spectrometry analyses
presented here clarify widely accepted ideas regarding heterodimerization
and activity of the isolated catalytic subunits of sGC and further
provide the basis for understanding the regulation of sGC catalytic
activity. We propose a novel role for interfacial structural elements
in modulating the conformation of the active site for optimal activity.
Finally, our results allow us to propose a comprehensive regulatory
model in which distinct domain–domain interactions in sGC prevent
or guide an optimal conformation of the sGC catalytic center associated
with high activity.

Overall Structure of αβGC Catalytic
Domains and
Comparison with the Mutant Structure
To determine whether
conformational changes are required for catalytic activity, we determined
the X-ray structure of the αβGC catalytic domains from
human sGC. We successfully obtained crystals of the wild-type catalytic
domains, without the need for an engineered disulfide. In our case, cleavage of the 28 C-terminal amino
acids of αGC yielded a small amount of truncated αGC662βGC
catalytic domains that formed favorable crystal contacts, unlike the
untruncated catalytic domains. The structural comparison of the mutant
and wild-type αβGC catalytic domains reveals that the
two structures are very similar but exhibit subtle differences at
the dimer interface. Both our structure and that of the mutant αβGC
catalytic domains were obtained in the absence of metal and nucleotide
and show inactive conformations of the active center. This is evidenced
by the extended loop conformation of the substrate binding regions
at the core of the dimer interface, and the drastically different
orientation of the αGC subunit relative to the βGC subunit,
compared to the structure of active adenylate cyclase catalytic domains. Potent sGC inhibitors have recently been described. These nucleotide analogues show Ki values in the low nanomolar range and were predicted
by docking to bind to an active conformation of the catalytic domains.
We are currently exploring the use of these molecules to favor the
crystallization of the active heterodimeric catalytic domains of sGC.

Residues at the Heterodimeric Interface Guide an Optimal Conformation
of the Active Center
Our structure allowed us to propose
a key role for structural elements of the catalytic domains in guiding
an optimal conformation of the active center for activity. Our mass
spectrometry studies, yielding a relatively weak heterodimerization
affinity, and our structural comparisons strongly suggest that the
dimer interface is flexible for achieving structural transitions from
an inactive open form to an activated closed form, which has been
observed for adenylate cyclase. On the
basis of our structural studies and mutagenesis data,,, we propose that both the interfacial
flap and the hydrogen bond network enhance interactions between the
two catalytic subunits and guide an optimal conformation of the active
center necessary for activity. Studies are now underway to determine
whether these activating mutations can facilitate structural studies
of the sGC catalytic domains in the active state.

The Cyclase
Domains Require Other sGC Domains for Optimal Activity
Our
activity assay results demonstrate that even in the absence
of the regulatory domains, additional sGC domain interactions are
required to guide the appropriate conformation of the catalytic subunits
associated with high activity. We propose that sGC activity is modulated
by domain–domain interactions that allow the catalytic domains
to undergo the transition from an inactive to an active conformation
according to the following model: in the basal state, catalytic domains
are constrained in a suboptimal conformation via inhibitory interactions
with sGC domains, including the N-terminal βHNOX (and HNOXA)
domain,, which is itself maintained in an inhibited
conformation by the αHNOX and αHNOXA domains. Binding of NO and/or activators releases these
inhibitory interactions and induces conformational changes transmitted
to the catalytic domains via the coiled-coil domain to yield the activated state (Figure ). How the conformational transitions of these domains are orchestrated
in sGC is still unknown. However, recent electron microscopy and hydrogen–deuterium
exchange mass spectrometry suggest that full-length sGC presents multiple
conformations with several interdomain pivot points allowing conformational
changes to be transmitted from the regulatory domains to the catalytic
domains., The observed “closing” of
the catalytic interface upon NO binding corroborates our proposal that other sGC domains, including the
coiled coil, will guide conformational changes in the catalytic domains,
leading to an optimal alignment of the active site residues for full
sGC activity.

Model for domain–domain interactions that influence
the
conformation of the heterodimeric GC interface to modulate the activity
of sGC. In state 1 (“basal”), competing domain–domain
interactions yield sGC with low activity. While some sGC domains (including
the coiled coil) promote conformational changes of the catalytic subunits,
the regulatory βHNOX domain (and possibly the HNOXA domain)
inhibits activity via direct binding to αGC. Mutations in the
αGC subunit (Cys595Asp and Cys595Tyr) also prevent conformational
changes in the active site. In state 2 (“activated”),
binding of NO to βHNOX removes the inhibition and allows further
conformational changes of the catalytic domains to yield fully active
sGC. Mutations in catalytic subunits (βGC Met537Asn and αGC
Cys595Ser) also yield an “activated” phenotype. In state
3 (“intermediate”), Mn2+ allows catalysis
with a nonoptimal conformation of the catalytic domains. However,
the enzyme is now locked in an intermediate state and cannot be further
activated by NO and/or activators. The catalytic domains (represented
as a blue and orange yin-yang) are in an inactive conformation (poor
alignment) in states 1 and 3, and an active conformation in state
2 (perfect alignment of yin and yang).

Conclusions
Our results allow us to propose that novel
structural elements,
the interfacial β-flap and hydrogen bond network, play a key
role in sGC catalytic activity by enhancing interactions between the
two catalytic subunits and guiding the active center to an optimal
conformation.

This is the first study demonstrating that the
catalytic αβGC
domains require additional sGC domains for activity, despite their
ability to heterodimerize. Overall, collective results provide evidence
that other sGC domains modulate the relative orientation of the catalytic
subunits and control the proper orientation of key residues in the
catalytic domain for full enzyme activity. The fine balance between
inhibitory and activating domain–domain interactions is modulated
by NO and/or activators. As such, small molecules that influence the
orientation of the catalytic subunits have a strong potential to shift
this equilibrium. This work provides the basis for a novel model for
sGC activation and opens additional drug discovery routes for targeting
the NO–cGMP pathway.

Supporting Information Available
Movie
showing the superimposition
of the wild-type and mutant (PDB entry 3UVJ) heterodimeric structures of the sGC
catalytic domains (Movie S1), additional results, Table S1, sequence
alignment, and Figures S1–S3. This material is available free
of charge via the Internet at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bi500129k_si_001.pdf

bi500129k_si_003.mov

The authors
declare no
competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
We thank
Susan E. Tsutakawa, Robert P. Rambo, Scott Classen,
Thomas Miller, and James Fishbein for critical reading of the manuscript,
technical support, and insightful discussions. Part of this work was
conducted at the Advanced Light Source (ALS), a national user facility
operated by Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory on behalf of the
Department of Energy (DOE), Office of Basic Energy Sciences, through
the Integrated Diffraction Analysis Technologies (IDAT) program, supported
by the DOE Office of Biological and Environmental Research. Additional
support comes from the National Institute of Health project MINOS
(R01GM105404).

Abbreviations
sGCfull-length soluble guanylyl cyclase
or soluble guanylate cyclase

CCcoiled coil

H-NOX or HNOXheme-nitric oxide oxygen binding

HNOXAHNOX-associated

GCguanylate cyclase catalytic domain

SEC-MALSsize-exclusion chromatography
coupled to multiangle light scattering

SIDsurface-induced dissociation

αβGCconstruct
containing only the α and β catalytic domains of sGC

rmsdroot-mean-square
deviation.

