The cystic fibrosis transmembrane
conductance regulator (CFTR, ABCC7) is an ATP-binding cassette (ABC)
protein that acts as a cAMP-regulated chloride channel. It is a single
polypeptide with five distinct domains: two nucleotide-binding domains
(NBDs), two transmembrane domains (TMDs), and a regulatory (R) domain.
CFTR located on the apical surface of epithelial cells that line lung
airways and ducts of various glands (reviewed in ()).

Cystic fibrosis (CF) is a genetic disease caused
by mutations in
the CFTR gene that affect function or synthesis. The most common defect is deletion of Phe508 (ΔF508
CFTR) in the first nucleotide-binding domain (NBD1). ΔF508 is
a processing mutation that inhibits folding in the endoplasmic reticulum
and trafficking to the cell surface. In
addition, many of the rare CF mutants also contain processing mutations
that inhibit maturation and trafficking to the cell surface., The lack of chloride channel activity in CF patients due to defects
in CFTR leads to recurrent lung infections and eventual lung failure.

Processing mutants of CFTR’s sister
protein, the P-glycoprotein
(P-gp) drug pump, can be specifically repaired by a drug rescue approach. The mechanism of P-gp drug rescue is one in which
binding of drug substrates to the TMDs promotes packing of the TM
segments. Because CFTR and P-gp are predicted
to be structurally similar, it may be
possible to specifically repair CFTR processing mutants by a direct
drug rescue approach using small molecules. Evidence that CFTR processing
mutants could be repaired by a direct rescue approach is the observation
that many second-site suppressors can rescue ΔF508 CFTR, and other CFTR processing mutants. Potential
advantages of a direct rescue approach are that expression of proteins
involved in other metabolic pathways would not be altered and rescue
would be less affected by differences in cellular folding environments
in different tissues or in different disease states. Intensive efforts
have been made to screen chemical libraries for compounds (called
correctors) that could rescue ΔF508 CFTR. Unfortunately, rescue
by correctors identified to date appears to be too weak for effective
therapy.,

VX-809 and bithiazoles such as 4a are the
most promising specific correctors identified
to date. VX-809 and 4a appeared to be specific because they did not promote maturation
of the hERG K+ channel or dopamine receptor processing
mutants. Most other correctors appeared to be nonspecific as they
promoted maturation of P-gp processing mutants.

Because VX-809 was the most effective corrector identified
to date,
it was tested in a clinical trial as a therapy for CF. Unfortunately,
it was found that VX-809 caused only a small increase in sweat conductance,
and no increases in the levels of mature ΔF508 CFTR were observed
in rectal biopsies. Therefore, a priority
in the development of a CF therapy is to increase the maturation efficiency
of CFTR processing mutants. To increase the maturation efficiency
of CFTR processing mutants, it will be necessary to determine the
mechanism of rescue of VX-809 and bithiazole-type correctors.

VX-809 appears to rescue CFTR processing mutants through direct
interactions with TMD1., Bithiazoles, however,
appear to rescue CFTR processing mutants by a different mechanism
because bithiazoles have an additive effect on maturation when used
in combination with VX-809. Identification
of the bithiazole rescue site in CFTR is controversial as there is
evidence that these compounds bind to NBD2 or to the TMDs.

Evidence that
bithiazoles interact with the TMDs was that 4a inhibited
cross-linking between cysteines introduced into TMD1 and TMD2 and that 4a appears to stabilize TMD2. In addition, it was found that bithiazoles enhanced
core glycosylation of a truncation mutant that contained only the
TMDs. By contrast, it was recently reported
that bithiazoles must interact with NBD2 because ΔF508 CFTR
missing NBD2 was not rescued with bithiazoles and in silico docking predicted the presence of a bithiazole-binding site in NBD2.

To test whether rescue of other CFTR processing
mutants with bithiazoles
(see Figure  for structures) was mediated
by the TMDs or NBD2, we tested if bithiazoles could rescue full-length
or ΔNBD2 CFTR mutants that had processing mutations in the TMDs
such as G126D in TM2, V232D in TM4, F337R in TM6, and
S1141R in TM12 (see Figure A). Mutants G126D
and V232D are naturally occurring CF mutants, whereas F337R and S1141R
mutants were constructed to map the orientation of the TM segments. The mutants were expressed for 18 h with or
without VX-809 or the 4a, 4d, or 15Jf bithiazole correctors.

Structures
of correctors.

Whole cell extracts were
subjected to immunoblot analysis. Figure B
shows that full-length and ΔNBD2 forms of
G126D, V232D, and S1141R could be efficiently rescued with all the
correctors such that the mature protein was the major product (Figure C,D). By contrast, only VX-809 promoted maturation
of mutant F337R (Figure B). The bithiazoles
did not promote maturation of the F337R ΔNBD2 or full-length
F337R CFTR (Figure C,D).

The results
suggest that bithiazoles rescue CFTR processing mutants
by at least two different mechanisms. One mechanism involves binding
of bithiazoles to a predicted bithiazole-binding site in NBD2. For example, it was observed that removal of
NBD2 from ΔF508 CFTR abolished rescue with a bithiazole (4a)
but not VX-809.

(A) Location of processing mutations in CFTR. (B) Effect
of correctors
on maturation of full-length and ΔNBD2 processing mutants. The
positions of mature (M) and immature (I) CFTR and GAPDH (G) are shown.
(C and D) Amounts of mature protein in ΔNBD2 and full-length
CFTR processing mutants. An asterisk indicates a significant increase
in the amount of mature protein compared to that without (DMSO) corrector.

It should be noted, however, that
the ΔNBD2 CFTR used in
this study was different from that used by Okiyoneda et al. The ΔNBD2 CFTR constructs in our study
did not contain the G550E, R553Q, R555K, and F494N mutations or the
three hemagglutinin tags in the fourth extracellular loop that could
influence CFTR corrector interactions.

The second bithiazole
rescue mechanism appears to involve the TMDs
because removal of NBD2 had little effect on bithiazole rescue of
mutants G126D, V232D, and S1141R and mutation F337R in TM6 inhibited
rescue of full-length CFTR with bithiazoles. Other pieces of evidence
suggesting the bithiazoles affect folding of the TMDs were the observations
that 4a blocked cross-linking between cysteines introduced into TM
segments 6 and 12 and 15Jf promoted core
glycosylation of a CFTR truncation mutant consisting of TMD1 and TMD2. In addition, it was reported that 4a appeared
to stabilize TMD2.

VX-809 and bithiazoles
appear to interact at different sites in
the TMDs as the F337R mutant only prevented rescue with bithiazoles.
These results could explain why VX-809 and bithiazoles have an additive
effect on CFTR maturation.

In summary,
it appears that bithiazole correctors conduct rescues
by at least two different mechanisms. One mechanism was proposed to
target NBD2 misassembly. We propose that
the second mechanism is to promote packing of the TM segments. We
predict that the CFTR TMDs are attractive targets for correctors because
there is evidence that both bithiazoles and VX-809 can promote maturation through interactions with the TMDs.
Determining the mechanisms and targets of CFTR correctors might provide
important insight into strategies for rescuing other misfolded proteins.
It was recently shown that some CFTR correctors could also rescue
trafficking mutants of arginine vasopressin receptor 2, hERG and SUR1.

Supporting Information Available
Details of experimental procedures.
This material is available free of charge via the Internet at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bi4008758_si_001.pdf

This work was
supported by grants from Cystic Fibrosis Canada and the Canadian Institutes
of Health Research (25043). D.M.C. is the recipient of the Canada
Research Chair in Membrane Biology.

The authors declare no
competing financial interest.

