Mammalian
telomeres consist
of 5–15 kilobase pairs (kbp) of TTAGGG repeats that terminate
in a 50–500-nucleotide (nt) single-stranded DNA (ssDNA) 3′
tail. The telomere repeats and the single-stranded–double-stranded
DNA (ss–dsDNA) junction provide a binding site for telomere-specific
proteins that shelter telomeres from being recognized as DNA damage.
While these shelterin proteins may directly inhibit DNA damage signaling,, the presence of a DNA loop at the end of the telomeres (t-loop)
may also mediate telomere protection. One shelterin component, telomere
repeat binding factor 2 (TRF2), is required for t-loop formation in vivo() and can promote t-loop
formation in vitro() by
facilitating a strand invasion reaction between the ssDNA tail and
upstream dsDNA in a telomere. However, telomere protection also requires
components of the homologous recombination/repair (HR) pathway, which
may facilitate telomere replication or promote t-loop formation.

In vitro, telomeric replication forks are prone
to slipping, and replication of telomeric
DNA is inefficient and prone to defects
consistent with fork stalling.In vivo fork stalling can be mitigated by proteins involved
in the HR pathway. Accordingly, replication
of telomeric DNA in vivo is sensitive to disruption
of that pathway. The BRCA2 tumor suppressor recruits the Rad51 recombinase
to telomeres during replication, and disrupting the expression of
either of these proteins results in telomere shortening and fragility.
These phenotypes are attenuated in cells possessing short telomeres
and are exacerbated by chemical inhibition of DNA replication. As such, it is likely that these defects are
due in part to a telomere replication defect.

Disrupting the
HR pathway in nondividing cells results in aberrant
telomere repair. Therefore, it is likely that the HR pathway also
contributes to telomere protection in a replication-independent manner, possibly by promoting t-loop formation. Concordantly,
both TRF2 and Rad51 are required for cell extracts to promote telomeric
D-loop formation, a requisite step in
t-loop formation. Interestingly, this relationship appears to be bidirectional.
Overexpression of TRF2 promotes HR in vivo, while
TRF2 knockdown inhibits HR in vivo. While these observations suggest that TRF2 and HR cooperate
functionally in vivo, this hypothesis contradicts
these proteins’ established in vitro activities.
TRF2 induces positive supercoiling within telomeric dsDNA upon binding, but Rad51 most efficiently promotes D-loop formation
when acting upon negatively supercoiled dsDNA templates.

To investigate functional interactions
between shelterin proteins
and the HR pathway, we undertook an in vitro characterization
of the combined activities of purified proteins from these pathways.
While the use of purified proteins permits an examination of their
isolated functional interactions in vitro, such interactions
may be affected by other proteins in vivo. The absence
of such other proteins likely explains why the results of our assay
contradict previous cell extract-based characterizations. We report that TRF2 inhibits the ability of
Rad51 to promote telomeric D-loop formation, suggesting that Rad51
does not promote t-loop formation and elucidating a novel mechanism
by which TRF2 inhibits aberrant DNA repair at the telomeres. In contrast,
we report that TRF1 promotes Rad51-mediated telomeric D-loop formation,
possibly explaining why TRF1 is required for efficient telomere replication.
Finally, we report that a TRF2 mutant lacking the dsDNA binding domain
was able to promote Rad51-mediated D-loop formation, suggesting that
one or more TRF2 domains can positively modulate Rad51 activity and
possibly explaining how TRF2 can facilitate HR.

Experimental Procedures
DNA Substrates,
Templates, and Competitors
A pBluescript-derived
plasmid containing a 103 bp telomeric tract [pBB, (TTAGGG)17T] was generated by conventional cloning via insertion of the BsmBI/BbsI
fragment of pRST15 into BsmBI-cut pRST15.
A pBluescript-derived plasmid containing a nontelomeric insert (pGL
GAP) was generated as previously described. All plasmids were cultured in DH10B Escherichia coli and purified using Qiagen Maxiprep kits. High-performance liquid
chromatography-purified 5′ Cy3-labeled G-rich telomeric 90-mer
oligonucleotide [T90, [Cy3](GGTTAG)15], D1 oligonucleotide
([Cy3]AAATCAATCTAAAGTATATATGAGTAAACTTGGTCTGACAGTTACCAATGCTTAATCAGTGAGGCACCTATCTCAGCGATCTGTCTATTT),
and T3 promoter primer ([Cy3]ATTAACCCTCACTAAAGGA)
and HPSF-purified unlabeled T7 promoter primer (TAATACGACTCACTATAGGG)
were ordered from Eurofins MWG Operon. A 255 bp Cy3-labeled PCR product
was amplified from pBB using the 5′ Cy3-labeled T3 and unlabeled
T7 promoter primers and Q5 High Fidelity Polymerase (New England BioLabs)
following the manufacturer’s instructions and purified using
a DNA Clean &amp; Concentrator-25 column (Zymo Research).

Proteins
Untagged Rad51 was expressed and purified
as previously described from a pET-24-derived
plasmid (EMD Millipore), which was generously provided by R. Fishel
(The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH). N-Terminally hexahistidine-tagged
TRF2, TRF2ΔB, TRF2ΔM, and TRF1 were purified from pTRC-HIS-derived
plasmids (Invitrogen) adapted from vectors generously provided by
the laboratory of E. Gilson (University
of Nice, Nice, France) or modified from vectors previously described. All TRF2 cDNAs were modified to include the
Ala434 codon that is absent in HeLa-derived TRF2 clones. Briefly, a pTRC-HIS plasmid was transformed
into BL21(DE3)PlysS E. coli and serially passaged
to inoculate 1 L of Terrific Broth (Sigma-Aldrich) containing 50 μg/mL
ampicillin. The culture was grown to an OD of 0.6 at 595 nm, and protein
expression was then induced via addition of 1 mM isopropyl β-d-1-thiogalactopyranoside (Promega) for 4 h at 37 °C. The
cells were then recovered via centrifugation, washed with phosphate-buffered
saline, resuspended in 100 mL of buffer containing 20 mM HEPES (pH
7.5), 300 mM NaCl, 10% glycerol, 0.5 mM DTT, and 50 mM imidazole supplemented
with protease inhibitors (Roche), and then flash-frozen in liquid
nitrogen. The cells were then thawed and lysed via sonication following
addition of 1 mg/mL egg white lysozyme and 20 μL of RQ1 DNase
(Promega) and 20 μL of RNase A (Sigma). The crude lysate was
then centrifuged in an SW-41 Ti rotor at 41000 rpm for 1.5 h. The
supernatant was collected and serially purified over 1 mL HisTrap
HP, HiTrap Heparin HP, and HiTrap Q FF columns using an ÄKTApurifier
FPLC (GE Bioscience). Rad51, TRF2, TRF2ΔB, and TRF2ΔM
protein were recovered in 20 mM HEPES (pH 7.5), 150 mM NaCl, 10% glycerol,
and 0.5 mM DTT, while TRF1 was recovered in 20 mM HEPES (pH 7.5),
300 mM NaCl, 10% glycerol, and 0.5 mM DTT. These proteins were aliquoted,
flash-frozen with liquid nitrogen, and stored at −80 °C
until they were used. The protein concentration was determined using
a Bio-Rad Protein Assay calibrated against a Bovine Gamma Globulin
standard set (Bio-Rad). For all proteins, homogeneity was assessed
as being &gt;90% by Coomassie staining of sodium dodecyl sulfate–polyacrylamide
gel electrophoresis gels. Immediately prior to being used in experiments,
TRF2, TRF2ΔB, TRF2ΔM, and TRF1 were diluted to a final
concentration of 4.25 μM in buffer containing 19 mM HEPES-KOH,
203.8 mM NaCl, 1 mM CaCl, 1 mM ATP, 7% glycerol, and 0.7 mM DTT. All
protein concentrations are reported as monomeric protein. Rad51 was
purified to a concentration of 27.5 μM and was used undiluted
in all experiments. Fraction V bovine serum albumin (Fisher) was diluted
to 10 mg/mL in 20 mM potassium phosphate (pH 7.0), 50 mM NaCl, 5%
glycerol, and 0.1 mM EDTA.

Displacement Loop Assay
For the
displacement loop assay,
the 5′ Cy3-labeled telomeric 90-mer [2.4 μM in nucleotides
(nt), 26.67 nM oligo] was incubated with no protein or 1000–1500
nM Rad51 at 37 °C for 10 min in a reaction buffer containing
5 mM HEPES-KOH (pH 7.5), 1 mM CaCl, 1 mM ATP, 0.8 mM DTT, and 100
μg/mL BSA. Simultaneously, the pBB plasmid, 35 μM in base
pairs, or 10 nM plasmid was incubated with no protein or 100–500
nM TRF2, TRF2ΔB, TRF2ΔM, or TRF1 at 37 °C for 10
min in reaction buffer and 100 μg/mL BSA. Equal volumes of these
reaction mixtures were then combined to give final Rad51 concentrations
of 0 or 500–750 nM and a final concentration of 0–250
nM TRF2, TRF2ΔB, TRF2ΔM, or TRF1. These reaction mixtures
were incubated at 37 °C for 1 h and then deproteinized via addition
of 0.5% sodium dodecyl sulfate and 1 mg/mL proteinase K (Ambion) and
incubated at 37 °C for 15 min. Glycerol loading buffer (5% glycerol,
1.67 mM Tris, 0.17 mM EDTA, and 0.017% SDS) was then added to a concentration
of 1×, and the samples were separated for 30 min in a small-format
1% 1/2× TBE agarose gel at 100 V (6.67
V/cm) in a light-protected box in a 4 °C cold room. All figures
are labeled with the final respective protein concentrations.

Electrophoretic
Mobility Shift and Binding Competition Assay
To demonstrate
binding via an electrophoretic mobility shift assay,
Cy3-labeled PCR product (2.55 μM in bp, 10 nM product) was incubated
with no protein or 100–500 nM TRF2, TRF2ΔB, TRF2ΔM,
or TRF1 at 37 °C for 10 min in reaction buffer supplemented with
100 μg/mL BSA. To demonstrate binding specificity via a competition
assay, an additional set of 500 nM reactions were performed in a buffer
containing no competitor or between a 1:1 (2.55 μM in base pairs)
and 200:1 (510 μM in base pairs) excess of pGL GAP and then
incubated at 37 °C for 25 min. To demonstrate that the induced
supershifts were protein-mediated, a 500 nM reaction mixture containing
no competitor was incubated for 10 min and then deproteinized with
SDS and proteinase K for 15 min. Glycerol loading buffer containing
no SDS was then added to a concentration of 1×, and the samples
were separated for 30 min in a small-format 1/2× TBE agarose gel at 100 V (6.67 V/cm) in a light-protected
box in a 4 °C cold room. All figures are labeled with the final
respective protein concentrations.

Imaging
All Cy3-labeled
gel products were imaged using
a General Electric Typhoon 9400 Scanner equipped with a 532 nM green
laser module and a 580 nM bypass filter. Gels were imaged with a photomultiplier
setting of 600 and a pixel size of 100 μm. All gels were imaged
with a +3 mm focal plane setting. The gel image intensity was then
adjusted using ImageQuant (GE Life Sciences) and quantified using
ImageJ (National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD).

Results
A Fluorescent
TRF2 and Rad51-Mediated Displacement Loop Assay
To investigate
functional interactions between Rad51 and TRF2,
we developed a fluorescent displacement loop (D-loop) assay (Figure A) adapted from previous TRF2 and Rad51 characterizations., Untagged Rad51 and N-terminally hexahistidine-tagged TRF1, TRF2,
and TRF2 mutant proteins lacking either the N-terminal basic domain
of TRF2 (TRF2ΔB) or the C-terminal Myb domain of TRF2 (TRF2ΔM)
were purified from E. coli to &gt;90% homogeneity
(Figure
S1 of the ). In this
assay, co-incubation of a Cy3-labeled telomeric ssDNA substrate (T90)
with a dsDNA telomeric plasmid template (pBB) in the absence of any
proteins resulted in low to undetectable levels (&lt;0.5%) of spontaneous
D-loop formation (Figure B,C, lane 1). In
contrast, preincubation of the substrate with purified Rad51 protein
prior to its addition to the template promoted D-loop formation in
a Rad51 concentration-dependent manner (Figure A,B). Likewise, preincubation of the template with full length TRF2
protein prior to its addition to the substrate could promote D-loop
formation across a discrete range of TRF2 concentrations (Figure B). TRF2ΔB exhibited only 47% of the activity
of full length TRF2 (Table ), but this residual
activity was similarly optimal across a narrow range of concentrations
(Figure B). In contrast, TRF2ΔM and
TRF1 exhibited only 31 and 27%, respectively, of the activity of full
length TRF2 (Table ) and were maximally active
only at higher concentrations (Figure C).

TRF-mediated
telomeric D-loop formation. (A) Diagram of the D-loop
assay. (B) TRF2 and TRF2ΔB promote telomeric D-loop formation
with an activity peak when included at a final protein concentration
between 100 nM (lane 3) and 150 nM (lane 4). (C) TRF2ΔM and
TRF1 promote telomeric D-loop formation only at higher concentrations.

TRF2 inhibits Rad51-mediated telomeric but not
nontelomeric D-loop
formation. (A) Rad51 promotes telomeric D-loop formation in a concentration-dependent
manner that is inhibited by TRF2. (B) Quantification of data in panel
A. (C) Rad51 promotes nontelomeric D-loop formation in a concentration-dependent
manner that is not affected by TRF2. (D) Quantification of the data
depicted in panel C. (E) Diagram of the DNA binding and competition
assay using a Cy3-labeled PCR product containing the 103 bp telomere
tract from pBB. (F) TRF2 binding supershifts the template into the
wells. This binding is specific, persists in the presence of high
concentrations of nontelomeric competitor, and is protein-mediated.
Error bars show the 95% confidence interval; asterisks denote the
significant difference between +Buffer and +TRF2, via the paired sample t test α = 0.05 from three independent experiments.

Properties of TRF2,
TRF2ΔB,
TRF2ΔM, and TRF1
 	% of TRF2	% change from buffer	 	 	 	
protein	TRF-induced
telomeric D-loop formation (AUC at 0–250 nM)	Rad51-mediated
telomeric D-loop formation (AUC at 500–750 nM)	Rad51-mediated
nontelomeric D-loop formation (AUC
at 500–750 nM)	telomeric
DNA binding, C1/2 (nM)	telomeric
binding specificity	migration
in agarose gels	
buffer	N/A	30.3 ± 0.4	4.7 ± 0.4	N/A	+	–	
 	 	0 ± 0.7%	0 ± 7.6%	 	 	 	
TRF2	6.0 ± 0.15	13.3 ± 0.8	4.7 ± 0.0	111 ± 8	+	–	
 	100 ± 2.4%	–52 ± 5.1%	+4 ± 2.2%	 	 	 	
TRF2ΔB	2.8	22.1 ± 0.7	5.1 ±
0.7	257	+	–	
 	47%	–31 ± 5.5%	+5 ± 7.2%	 	 	 	
TRF2ΔM	1.8	29.0 ± 1.4	9.6 ± 0.4	319	–	+/–	
 	31%	+4 ± 4.0%	+112 ± 13.0%	 	 	 	
TRF1	1.6	38.5 ± 1.9	5.4 ± 0.9	152	+	+	
 	27%	+25 ± 1.0%	+9 ± 5.2%	 	 	 	
Buffer data are averaged. Proteins
are statistically compared against matched buffer controls. TRF-induced
D-loop formation calculated as the area under the curve (AUC, % complex
× [TRF] in nanomolar) from Figure . Rad51-mediated
D-loop formation calculated as AUC (% complex × [Rad51] in nanomolar)
from Figures –. AUC calculation examples in Figure S5 of the . C1/2 represents
the concentration of TRF protein required to supershift 50% of the
template in EMSAs. Errors shown are 95% confidence intervals from
three independent experiments.

Significant difference (p &lt; 0.05) from buffer
via a two-tailed paired sample t test.

Rad51-mediated D-loop formation
was observed to be homology-driven.
Rad51 could promote D-loop formation between telomeric substrates
and templates, and nontelomeric substrates and templates, but not
between a telomeric substrate and a nontelomeric template (Figure
S2A,B of the ). Under
identical conditions, the extent of Rad51-mediated telomeric D-loop
formation was 6.4-fold higher (Table ) than
the extent of nontelomeric D-loop formation (Figure S2 of the ). This is consistent with
previous characterizations showing that the activity of Rad51 is enhanced
on repetitive and GT-rich substrates., In contrast
to Rad51, TRF2-mediated D-loop formation was observed to be critically
dependent upon telomeric homology. TRF2 could promote D-loop formation
only between telomeric substrates and templates (Figure S2C,D of the ).

TRF2 Inhibits Rad51-Mediated
Telomeric but Not Nontelomeric
D-Loop Formation
To test for functional interactions between
TRF2 and Rad51, D-loop assay reaction mixtures in which the template
was preincubated with either a fixed concentration of TRF2 or no protein
were prepared, while the substrate was preincubated with one of several
concentrations of Rad51 or no protein prior to the combination of
the substrate and template reaction mixtures. Preincubation of a telomeric
template with TRF2 weakened the ability of Rad51 to promote D-loop
formation between the template and a homologous telomeric substrate
by 52 ± 5.1% (Table  and Figure A,B). In contrast, TRF2 did not significantly inhibit
Rad51-mediated nontelomeric D-loop formation (Table  and Figure C,D). Taken together,
these data suggested that TRF2 differentially modulates Rad51-mediated
telomeric and nontelomeric D-loop formation.

Rad51-mediated
D-loop formation is a multistep process initiated by binding of Rad51
to ssDNA to form a nucleoprotein filament, which subsequently interrogates
dsDNA for matching antisense sequence in a process known as “homology
search”. In this process, a Rad51-coated substrate initially
forms a protein-mediated complex with a homologous template. Subsequently,
Rad51 promotes D-loop formation between the substrate and template. To determine what step or steps of this process
might be inhibited by TRF2, we performed several order of addition
experiments.

We observed that the ability of TRF2 to inhibit
Rad51-mediated
telomeric D-loop formation was dependent upon addition of TRF2 early
in the D-loop reaction (Figure S3 of the ). TRF2 could inhibit Rad51-mediated telomeric D-loop
formation upon being preincubated with the telomeric template (T0)
or upon being added to a combined reaction prior to D-loop formation
(time zero + 10 min). However, TRF2 could not inhibit Rad51-mediated
D-loop formation if it were added after D-loop formation had already
occurred (time zero + 3 h). These observations suggested that TRF2
modulates Rad51-mediated D-loop formation via a passive mechanism,
possibly by interfering with Rad51 filament formation, inhibiting
homology search, or preventing subsequent D-loop formation.

We also observed that TRF2 could inhibit telomeric D-loop formation
regardless of whether TRF2 was preincubated with the telomeric template
or with the Rad51-coated substrate (Figure S4 of the ). However, the degree of this inhibition
was reduced when TRF2 was incubated with the substrate compared with
when it was incubated with the template. This suggests that TRF2 does
not inhibit Rad51 at the level of filament formation. Instead, it
appears that the ability of TRF2 to inhibit Rad51-mediated telomeric
D-loop formation is dependent upon the ability of TRF2 to bind to
or modify the template.

To investigate whether the DNA binding
activities of TRF2 mediate
its ability to inhibit Rad51-mediated telomeric D-loop formation,
we characterized the binding affinity and specificity of TRF2 using
an electrophoretic mobility shift assay (EMSA) and a binding competition
assay (Figure E). Incubating a Cy3-labeled
PCR product containing a 103 bp telomere track with increasing concentrations
of TRF2 resulted in a supershift of that template, consistent with
stable TRF2 binding (Figure F). The binding
of TRF2 to the template was observed to be specific and persisted
even in the presence of high concentrations of nontelomeric competitor
(Figure F, lanes 8–11). Nearly all
low-mobility species generated by TRF2 binding became trapped in the
wells. This supershift was protein-mediated and could be disrupted
by incubation with SDS and proteinase K (Figure F, lane 12).

To further investigate the possible mechanism
by which TRF2 may
inhibit Rad51-mediated telomeric D-loop formation, we characterized
the binding activity and telomeric and nontelomeric Rad51-modulating
activities of a variety of TRF2 mutant proteins and TRF1, a close
homologue of TRF2.

TRF2ΔM Promotes Rad51-Mediated Telomeric
but Not Nontelomeric
D-Loop Formation
The dsDNA binding activity of TRF2 is primarily
directed by its C-terminal Myb domain. Deletion of this Myb domain
reduces telomeric dsDNA binding affinity by a factor of 2.9 (Table ), eliminates telomeric binding specificity, and
grossly alters DNA binding properties compared to those of full length
TRF2 (Figure E). Interestingly and in contrast to TRF2, TRF2ΔM was found to
promote Rad51-mediated nontelomeric D-loop formation by 112 ±
13.0% (Table  and Figure C,D), despite the impaired DNA binding. TRF2ΔM
was observed to promote Rad51-mediated telomeric D-loop formation,
albeit only at the lowest concentration tested (Table  and Figure A,B). However, TRF2ΔM
did not promote Rad51-mediated telomeric D-loop formation across the
entire concentration range tested, possibly because of the already
high efficiency of the reactions. Taken together, these observations
suggest that the Myb domain of TRF2 both contributes to the ability
of TRF2 to inhibit Rad51-mediated telomeric D-loop formation and suppresses
the ability of TRF2 to promote Rad51-mediated nontelomeric D-loop
formation.

TRF2ΔM promotes Rad51-mediated nontelomeric but not telomeric
D-loop formation. (A) Rad51 promotes telomeric D-loop formation in
a concentration-dependent manner that is not affected by TRF2ΔM.
(B) Quantification of the data depicted in panel A. (C) Rad51 promotes
nontelomeric D-loop formation in a concentration-dependent manner
that is promoted by TRF2ΔM. (D) Quantification of the data depicted
in panel C. (E) TRF2ΔM binding supershifts the template into
a lower-mobility species and into the wells. This binding is nonspecific
and is disrupted by low concentrations of nontelomeric competitor
and is protein-mediated. Error bars show the 95% confidence interval;
asterisks denote significant differences between +Buffer and +TRF2ΔM,
via the paired sample t test α = 0.05 from
three independent experiments.

TRF2ΔB Inhibits Telomeric but Not Nontelomeric Rad51-Mediated
D-Loop Formation
In addition to its Myb domain, TRF2 possesses
an N-terminal domain rich in basic residues that has been implicated
in directing the binding of TRF2 to ss–dsDNA junctions and
unusual DNA structures., This domain also promotes the
annealing and migration of DNA joints in a manner not unlike that
required during D-loop formation. To
investigate whether the basic domain of TRF2 contributes to the ability
of TRF2 to inhibit Rad51-mediated telomeric D-loop formation or the
ability of TRF2ΔM to promote Rad51-mediated nontelomeric D-loop
formation, we characterized the DNA binding affinity and specificity
and Rad51-modulating activity of a TRF2 mutant protein lacking the
basic domain of TRF2 (TRF2ΔB).

Like TRF2 and in contrast
to TRF2ΔM, TRF2ΔB was found to inhibit Rad51-mediated
telomeric D-loop formation by 31 ± 5.5% (Table  and Figure A,B), suggesting that
the joint binding activity of TRF2 is not required for TRF2 to inhibit
Rad51-mediated telomeric D-loop formation. In contrast, TRF2ΔB
was not observed to affect Rad51-mediated nontelomeric D-loop formation
(Table  and Figure C,D). Deletion of the basic domain resulted in an approximately 2.3-fold
reduction in template binding affinity (Table ) but did not reduce binding specificity (Figure E, lanes 8–11) compared to that of full length TRF2.
Like TRF2, TRF2ΔB binding resulted in the template becoming
trapped in the wells.

TRF2ΔB promotes Rad51-mediated telomeric but not
nontelomeric
D-loop formation. (A) Rad51 promotes telomeric D-loop formation in
a concentration-dependent manner that is promoted by TRF2ΔB.
(B) Quantification of the data depicted in panel A. (C) Rad51 promotes
nontelomeric D-loop formation in a concentration-dependent manner
that is not affected by TRF2ΔB. (D) Quantification of the data
depicted in panel C. (E) TRF2ΔB binding supershifts the template
into the wells. This binding is specific, persists in the presence
of high concentrations of nontelomeric competitor, and is protein-mediated.
Error bars show the 95% confidence interval; asterisks denote the
significant difference between +Buffer and +TRF2ΔB, via the
paired sample t test α = 0.05 from three independent
experiments.

TRF1 Promotes Rad51-Mediated
Telomeric but Not Nontelomeric
D-Loop Formation
Our observation that TRF2 and TRF2ΔB
but not TRF2ΔM could inhibit Rad51-mediated telomeric D-loop
formation suggested that this inhibition could simply be due to Myb
domain-directed dsDNA binding. To test this hypothesis, we characterized
the DNA binding and Rad51 modulating activity of TRF1, a TRF2 homologue
with a highly similar Myb domain (Figure S1A of the ). Interestingly
and in contrast to TRF2, TRF1 was found to promote Rad51-mediated
telomeric D-loop formation by 25 ± 1.0% (Table  and Figure A,B), suggesting that the ability of TRF2 to inhibit this process
is not simply due to Myb domain binding. In contrast, TRF1 was found
not to affect Rad51-mediated nontelomeric D-loop formation (Figure C,D). Comparisons between TRF1 and TRF2 must be
made with caution, as despite the comparable DNA binding affinities
and telomeric sequence specificities (Table ) their binding behavior is otherwise grossly different upon examination
via an EMSA. Whereas TRF2 binding shifts a telomeric template into
the wells (Figure F), TRF1 binding shifts
the species into increasingly larger complexes as the TRF1 concentration
is increased (Figure E). This behavior is
perhaps consistent with previous observations that while TRF2 binds
to telomeric dsDNA as a large oligomeric structure, TRF1 binds as
a smaller complex., Likewise, this property may be
consistent with observations that TRF2 can promote the formation of
unusual DNA structures and induce topological changes within telomeric
DNA to a greater degree than TRF1.,

TRF1 promotes
Rad51-mediated telomeric but not nontelomeric D-loop
formation. (A) Rad51 promotes telomeric D-loop formation in a concentration-dependent
manner that is promoted by TRF1. (B) Quantification of the data depicted
in panel A. (C) Rad51 promotes nontelomeric D-loop formation in a
concentration-dependent manner that is not affected by TRF1. (D) Quantification
of the data depicted in panel C. (E) TRF1 binding supershifts the
template into several low-mobility species. This binding is specific,
persists in the presence of high concentrations of nontelomeric competitor,
and is protein-mediated. Error bars show the 95% confidence interval;
asterisks denote the significant difference between +Buffer and +TRF1,
via the paired sample t test α = 0.05 from three
independent experiments.

Discussion
The results of this study suggest a model
in which TRF1 and TRF2
differentially regulate Rad51-mediated telomeric and nontelomeric
D-loop formation. This may promote efficient telomeric DNA replication
and nontelomeric HR while inhibiting aberrant HR at the telomeres.
TRF1 promotes Rad51-mediated telomeric D-loop formation, which may
facilitate replication fork restart and explain why TRF1 is required
for efficient telomere replication in vivo. In contrast,
TRF2 inhibits Rad51-mediated telomeric D-loop formation, demonstrating
a novel mechanism by which TRF2 may inhibit telomeric DNA repair.
Finally, TRF2ΔM promotes Rad51-mediated D-loop formation, providing
insight into how TRF2 may contribute to HR. Our findings are generally
in good agreement with previous in vitro characterizations,
and what contradictions exist are likely due to methodological differences.

Our D-loop assay is adapted from previous assays used to characterize
purified Rad51 and TRF2., The use of purified
proteins permits direct interrogation of their functional interaction
under controlled conditions across wide concentration ranges using
defined orders of addition. However, data from in vitro characterizations should be compared with data from in vivo and genetic characterizations with caution. The activities of TRF1,
TRF2, and Rad51 are modulated in vivo by other shelterin
and HR proteins, which are absent in our assays. Additionally, the
templates and substrates used in our assay differ from their in vivo analogues. Telomeres contain ss–dsDNA junctions,
which were absent from the substrates used in this work. Furthermore,
telomeres are several kilobase pairs in length, whereas our telomeric
template possessed only a 103 bp telomeric tract to permit comparison
of telomeric and nontelomeric D-loop formation. Finally, while the
topology of telomeric DNA in vivo is unknown, the
templates used in our assay were negatively supercoiled.

While
we observed that TRF2 inhibits Rad51, it has previously been
reported that TRF2 and Rad51 cooperate functionally. Immunodepletion
of TRF2 or Rad51 from nuclear extracts ablates the ability of those
extracts to promote telomeric D-loop formation, and supplementation of the immunodepleted extracts with
Rad51 or TRF2 restores telomeric D-loop formation., However, these nuclear extract data appear to be at odds with recent
findings that expression of TRF2 inhibits HR-mediated telomeric plasmid
integration and excision in yeast strains with humanized telomeres. These discrepancies may reflect the presence
of different factors in mammalian and yeast nuclei, which were absent
from our in vitro assays. Moreover, discrepancies
between the D-loop assays may stem from differences in incubation
times, order of addition, and the structure, concentrations, and stoichiometry
of the template and substrate.

The fact that TRF2 and TRF2ΔB
but not TRF2ΔM inhibit
Rad51-mediated telomeric D-loop formation may seem to suggest that
this inhibition is due to Myb domain-directed telomeric dsDNA binding.
However, TRF1 promotes Rad51-mediated telomeric D-loop formation despite
having a homologous Myb domain. These data suggest that Myb domain
binding is necessary but not sufficient for inhibition of Rad51-mediated
D-loop formation. The Myb domain may be required to recruit additional
domains that inhibit Rad51 via other processes. Differential modulation
of Rad51-mediated D-loop formation by TRF1 and TRF2 may stem from
differences in their oligomerization or their ability to promote supercoiling
within telomeric dsDNA. Unfortunately, mechanisms of TRF1 and TRF2
oligomerization and supercoiling induction are not fully understood
and are mediated by overlapping sets of protein domains.

TRF2
promotes positive supercoiling within telomeric dsDNA upon
binding, whereas TRF1 does not. This
is of note, as Rad51-mediated D-loop formation is most efficient when
acting on negatively supercoiled templates. In contrast to the N-terminal basic domain of TRF2, the N-terminus
of TRF1 is rich in acidic residues and appears to inhibit the ability
of TRF1 to induce supercoiling, as deletion of the acidic domain (TRF1ΔA)
enhances the ability of TRF1 to promote supercoiling. Likewise, replacement
of the basic domain of TRF2 with the acidic domain of TRF1 (TRF2hAΔB)
weakens the ability of TRF2 to promote supercoiling. The ability of TRF-derived proteins to modulate Rad51-mediated
telomeric D-loop formation is negatively correlated with their own
ability to directly promote telomeric D-loop formation (see Table ). Likewise, the ability of TRF-derived proteins
to directly promote telomeric D-loop formation correlates with their
ability to induce positive supercoiling within telomeric dsDNA., This supercoiling may inhibit Rad51-mediated D-loop formation. The
fact that TRF1 does not inhibit Rad51-mediated D-loop formation is
consistent with this hypothesis.

Previous characterizations
of TRF1 and TRF2 binding properties
have also revealed that whereas TRF2 binds to telomeric dsDNA as a
large oligomeric structure, TRF1 does not oligomerize to the same
degree., The dimerization domain and linker domain
of TRF2 have both been implicated in its oligomerization.−, The N-terminal domains of TRF1
and TRF2 may also affect oligomerization. The presence of the acidic
domain on either TRF1 or TRF2hAΔB or the absence of the basic
domain from TRF2ΔB reduces the average size of the complexes
these proteins form upon binding to telomeric dsDNA. The lower-order binding characteristics of TRF1 combined
with its inability to induce supercoiling may permit it to promote
Rad51-mediated telomeric D-loop formation via an unknown mechanism.

Although TRF1 and TRF2 are found at telomeres throughout the cell
cycle and TRF1 promotes efficient telomeric replication in
vivo, TRF1 and TRF2 inhibit DNA
replication in vitro. However, TRF1 binding and TRF2 binding are inhibited by post-translational
modifications (PTMs) in vivo, some of which are conferred
by replication complex-associated proteins.− Interestingly, PTMs that reduce the level of TRF1 binding are inhibited in vivo by another shelterin protein, TIN2, and by FANCD2, a component of the Fanconi anemia pathway. Comparable PTMs of TRF2 are not likewise inhibited.
As TRF1 promotes and TRF2 inhibits Rad51-mediated telomeric D-loop
formation, depletion of TRF2 but not TRF1 from DNA near the replication
fork may facilitate HR-mediated fork restart within the telomeres
(Figure A). However, these TRF2 PTMs likely
disrupt TRF2 dimerization, which may abrogate Myb domain binding but
permit basic domain binding. Replication fork restart may also be
facilitated by basic domain-mediated recruitment of TRF2 to regressed
forks, where it can both protect the nascent Holliday junction (HJ)
from HJ resolvases, and recruit RecQ helicases that
can promote fork migration.− Likewise, the presence of TRF2
on telomeric dsDNA away from the fork may prevent HR-mediated strand
invasion reactions and protect the telomeres from aberrant repair
(Figure B).

TRF1 and TRF2 differentially modulate
Rad51-mediated telomeric
and nontelomeric D-loop formation. (A) Post-translational modifications
may deplete TRF2 but not TRF1 from telomeric DNA near a replication
fork, possibly by inhibiting TRF2 Myb domain binding. Following fork
collapse, basic domain-directed TRF2 binding can protect regressed
forks
from cleavage and recruit
factors that promote fork migration. Finally, TRF1 can promote D-loop
formation away from the fork and thereby promote HR-mediated fork
restart. (B) TRF2 inhibits Rad51-mediated telomeric D-loop formation,
which may prevent aberrant repair processes at the telomeres. (C)
TRF2 is recruited to DSBs, where it may promote recruitment of enzymes
that promote end resection. Afterward, the basic domain of TRF2 may
promote Rad51-mediated D-loop formation and thereby promote HR.

We observed that TRF2ΔM
promoted Rad51-mediated nontelomeric
D-loop formation, despite the ability of TRF2 to inhibit Rad51-mediated
telomeric D-loop formation. This suggests that TRF2 possesses domains
that both positively and negatively modulate Rad51-mediated D-loop
formation. While TRF2ΔM did not promote Rad51-mediated telomeric
D-loop formation across the entire Rad51 concentration range tested,
TRF2ΔM did significantly promote Rad51-mediated telomeric D-loop
formation at the lowest Rad51 concentration tested (Figure A). We speculate that the high efficiency of telomeric
D-loop formation in reactions with high Rad51 concentrations may mask
the ability of TRF2ΔM to promote this activity. TRF2ΔM
binds telomeric DNA with low affinity and specificity, likely via
the basic domain, which has been shown to direct binding in a sequence-independent
manner to unusual DNA structures. Interestingly,
the basic domain and TRF2ΔM can create or stabilize open dsDNA
structures and promote DNA junction mobility similar to that required
for D-loop formation. These processes
are similar to the activities of Rad54, a Rad51 accessory protein.
Rad54 binds to dsDNA and promotes its unwinding in vitro and promotes Rad51-mediated D-loop formation. In the absence of Myb domain-directed binding, the basic
domain of TRF2 may promote this process in a similar manner.

The role of TRF2 in the HR pathway is not well-understood. TRF2
is recruited to dsDNA breaks (DSBs) in a basic domain-dependent but
not Myb domain-dependent manner and can
occur in an ATM deficient background. TRF2 is phosphorylated by ATM in response to DNA damage, and mutations that disrupt TRF2 phosphorylation inhibit
DNA repair. While it has been suggested
that this DNA repair defect may be due to impaired nonhomologous end
joining (NHEJ), the defect may also be
due to impaired HR. Overexpression of TRF2 and TRF2ΔM promotes
HR in vivo. Likewise,
knockdown of TRF2 inhibits HR but not NHEJ in vivo. Our finding that TRF2ΔM can
promote Rad51-mediated D-loop formation suggests a novel mechanism
by which TRF2 can promote HR (Figure C). Upon
induction of a DSB, TRF2 may undergo basic domain-mediated recruitment
to the site of damage. TRF2 may then help recruit proteins such as
the Mre11/Rad50/Nbs1 (MRN) complex, which
promotes end resection in preparation for HR. Following end resection,
Rad51 binding, and a homology search, the basic domain of TRF2 may
facilitate Rad51-mediated D-loop formation by promoting the opening
of the template dsDNA in a manner similar to that of Rad54,or by promoting DNA joint migration.

This model of functional interactions
among TRF1, TRF2, and Rad51
provides insight into both telomere biology and the HR pathway. Previous
characterizations suggested that TRF2 and Rad51 cooperate to promote
telomeric D-loop and possibly t-loop formation in vivo, despite apparent incompatibilities in the in vitro activities of these proteins. Our finding that TRF2 inhibits Rad51-mediated
telomeric D-loop formation suggests that Rad51 does not contribute
to t-loop formation or that this inhibition must be alleviated by
additional factors in vivo. While it has previously
been reported that TRF1 is required for efficient telomere replication in vivo, this requirement seems at odds with other reports
that TRF1 can inhibit telomere replication in vitro. Our finding that TRF1 promotes Rad51-mediated telomeric D-loop
formation suggests that TRF1 may facilitate telomere replication by
promoting HR-mediated replication fork restart. Finally, our observation
that TRF2ΔM can promote Rad51-mediated nontelomeric D-loop formation
may explain how TRF2 can promote HR in vivo.

Supporting Information Available
Figures S1–S5. This material
is available free of charge
via the Internet at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bi5006249_si_001.pdf

The authors
declare no
competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
We thank Dr. Richard Fishel for providing the
Rad51 expression
vector and Dr. Ravindra Amunugama for providing technical advice about
optimizing our fluorescent D-loop assay. We thank Dr. Eric Gilson
for providing a TRF2 expression vector that was modified for use in
this project. We appreciate Dr. Sezgin Özgür’s
advice and assistance with protein purifications.

Abbreviations
AUCarea under the curve

ATMataxia telangiectasia
mutated

BSAbovine
serum albumin

cDNAcoding DNA

Cy3cyanine 3

D-loopdisplacement loop

DTTdithiothreitol

dsDNAdouble-stranded DNA

EMSAelectrophoretic mobility shift assay

FANCD2Fanconia anemia group D2 protein

HJHolliday junction

HRhomologous recombination/repair

kbpkilobase pair

MRNMre11/Rad50/Nbs1
complex

NHEJnonhomologous
end joining

ntnucleotide

PCRpolymerase chain
reaction

PTMpost-translational
modification

ssDNAsingle-stranded DNA

ss–dsDNAsingle-stranded–double-stranded DNA

SDSsodium dodecyl sulfate

t-looptelomere loop

TRF1telomere repeat binding
factor 1

TRF2telomere
repeat binding factor 2

TIN2TRF1 interacting nuclear protein 2.

