

   
BiochemistryBiochemistrybibichawBiochemistry0006-29601520-4995American
Chemical Society 10.1021/bi501049bArticleThe DNA-Binding Domain of Yeast Rap1 Interacts with
Double-Stranded DNA in Multiple Binding Modes Feldmann Erik A. †Galletto Roberto *Department of Biochemistry
and Molecular Biophysics, Washington University
School of Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri 63110, United States* Department of Biochemistry and
Molecular Biophysics, Washington University School of Medicine, 660
S. Euclid Ave., Box 8231, St. Louis, MO 63110. E-mail: galletto@biochem.wustl.edu. Phone: (314) 362-4368. Fax: (314) 362-7183.09 11 2015 09 11 2014 09 12 2014 53 48 7471 7483 20 08 2014 06 11 2014 Copyright © 2014 American
Chemical Society2014American
Chemical SocietyThis is an open access article published under an ACS AuthorChoice License, which permits copying and redistribution of the article or any adaptations for non-commercial purposes.

Saccharomyces cerevisiae repressor-activator protein
1 (Rap1) is an essential protein involved in multiple steps of DNA
regulation, as an activator in transcription, as a repressor at silencer
elements, and as a major component of the shelterin-like complex at
telomeres. All the known functions of Rap1 require the known high-affinity
and specific interaction of the DNA-binding domain with its recognition
sequences. In this work, we focus on the interaction of the DNA-binding
domain of Rap1 (Rap1DBD) with double-stranded DNA substrates.
Unexpectedly, we found that while Rap1DBD forms a high-affinity
1:1 complex with its DNA recognition site, it can also form lower-affinity
complexes with higher stoichiometries on DNA. These lower-affinity
interactions are independent of the presence of the recognition sequence,
and we propose they originate from the ability of Rap1DBD to bind to DNA in two different binding modes. In one high-affinity
binding mode, Rap1DBD likely binds in the conformation
observed in the available crystal structures. In the other alternative
lower-affinity binding mode, we propose that a single Myb-like domain
of the Rap1DBD makes interactions with DNA, allowing for
more than one protein molecule to bind to the DNA substrates. Our
findings suggest that the Rap1DBD does not simply target
the protein to its recognition sequence but rather it might be a possible
point of regulation.

National Institutes of Health, United Statesdocument-id-old-9bi501049bdocument-id-new-14bi-2014-01049bccc-price

   
Repressor-activator
protein
1 (Rap1) from budding yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae is an essential regulator of transcription and telomere integrity.1 Rap1 was first identified as a gene repressor
at HML and HMR silent mating-type
loci in a process termed gene silencing.2 Remarkably, Rap1 also acts as an activator of transcription for
many glycolytic enzymes and ribosomal proteins, and it has been proposed
to bind to ∼5% of genes in yeast accounting for ∼40%
of total downstream mRNA transcripts.3 Rap1
also interacts directly with the Taf4, Taf5, and Taf12 subunits of
TFIID, leading to Rap1-controlled transcription of ribosomal protein
genes.4−6 In fact, transcription of ∼50% of RNA polymerase
II genes is devoted to ribosomal proteins (RP), and Rap1 is estimated
to bind ∼90% of yeast RP promoters.3,7,8 Rap1 also facilitates recruitment of Fhl1
and Ifh1 to RP gene promoters and in addition recruits a Gcr1–Gcr2
complex to regulate glycolytic enzyme genes.3,9−11 At telomeres, Rap1 is involved in telomere-length
homeostasis through a combination of inhibiting telomere end resection,
protecting chromosome ends from telomere fusion, and locally inhibiting
the DNA damage response.12 Rap1 is recruited
to the highly repetitive TG-rich DNA repeats of telomeres where it
forms the core of the shelterin-like complex together with the Rap1-interacting
factors, Rif1 and Rif2.13−15 It has been proposed that the
cell responds to the number of telomeric Rap1–Rif complexes
in a mechanism termed “counting” as a method of monitoring
the proper elongation of telomeres through inhibition of telomerase.16,17 Furthermore, Rap1 also interacts with the silencing proteins Sir3
and Sir4, proteins required for telomere positioning and integrity,
thus also linking Rap1 to the establishment of the telomere position
effect (TPE).18−20

Genetic and biochemical studies show that Rap1
has a modular domain
organization21 (Figure 1a). Deletion of the N-terminal region containing a single
BRCT domain does not have evident phenotypes.22 Also, it has been shown that this region does not display any detectable
interaction with the rest of the protein23 but is required for interaction with Gcr1;24 however, the precise role of the BRCT is still not fully understood.
Intriguingly, overexpression of Rap1 is toxic, and part of this putative
“Tox” domain comprises residues 598–616, overlapping
with the C-terminus of the DNA-binding domain.25 Deletion of the Tox domain in vivo rescues
the toxic phenotype upon overexpression.25 The DNA-binding domain (DBD) of yeast Rap1 is centrally positioned
within the full-length protein sequence, spanning residues 358–601
based on electron density provided from the most recent crystal structure
of the DBD–DNA complex.23 The region
comprising residues 591–597, the end of the C-terminal tail
of the DNA-binding domain, appears to be important for viability,
although it does not dramatically affect DNA binding.23 Finally, the C-terminal region of the protein (RCT) is
where most of the functional interactions are believed to occur,15,18,26,27 yet little is known of the linkage between Rap1 DNA binding and
interaction of the RCT with interacting factors.

Figure 1 Monomers of DBD601 bind DNA with a higher than expected
stoichiometry. (a) Modular organization of the full-length Rap1 protein
sequence with selected domains highlighted: BRCT, BRCA1 C-terminal
domain; DBD, DNA-binding domain; Tox, toxicity region; Act, activation
region; RCT, Rap1 C-terminal domain. (b) Sodium dodecyl sulfate–polyacrylamide
gel electrophoresis of purified DBD601 stained with Coomassie
Blue. (c) Distribution of sedimentation coefficients for 20 μM
DBD601 in buffer HN50 showing a single species
of 2.4 S. (d) Sedimentation equilibrium profiles of 20 μM DBD601 in buffer HN50 at rotor speeds of 16000, 20000,
and 24000 rpm. The solid gray lines are the global analyses of the
data fit with a single-species model with an observed Mw of 29.8 kDa, consistent with the Mw of a monomer. (e) Gel electrophoretic mobility shift assays
performed at the indicated excesses of DBD601 with either
30 nM (left) or 300 nM (middle) TeloA and RND labeled at the 5′-end
of the top strand with FAM. The right panel shows an EMSA performed
at 2 μM unlabeled TeloA and RND, stained postelectrophoresis.

When bound to double-stranded
DNA (dsDNA) containing a Rap1 recognition
sequence, the Rap1DBD structure adopts two Myb-type α-helical
bundles separated by a disordered linker region and flanked by the
unstructured C-terminal tail.28 From available
crystal structures of various Rap1DBD–DNA complexes,
it has been shown that the DBD orients in such a way that both Myb
motifs and the C-terminal tail make contact with the DNA double helix
interacting directly with nucleotide bases and the phosphate backbone.29 This structural arrangement is preserved on
complexes containing either telomeric or nontelomeric recognition
sequences. A typical Rap1 recognition sequence is composed of a 13
bp sequence with two 5 bp hemisites separated by a 3 bp spacer.30,31 Interestingly, previous work has shown that Rap1 can also bind with
a lower affinity to a single hemisite.32

All the activities of Rap1 appear to occur through its DNA-bound
state, and the available data provide a model for binding of Rap1
to DNA with high affinity, in a simple 1:1 complex with its recognition
site.4,23,29,33 The current molecular picture of how Rap1 interacts
with its recognition sequences is largely based on the available crystal
structures of the DNA-binding domain,23,28,29 and this provides a great model for understanding
the role of this essential domain of the protein. In this study, we
examined the interaction with model DNA substrates of a Rap1DBD construct that comprises residues 358–601 (DBD601) observed in the most recent crystal structure.23 Unexpectedly, we found that this DBD601 construct,
in addition to forming a 1:1 high-affinity complex, can form complexes
with higher than anticipated stoichiometries. We propose that the
Rap1DBD is able to bind dsDNA minimally in two binding
modes. In one mode, both Myb-like domains bind to the recognition
sequence as shown in the crystal structures;23,28,29 in the alternative lower-affinity mode,
only one Myb-like domain binds to the DNA.

Materials and Methods
Reagents
and Buffers
All chemicals used were reagent
grade. All solutions were prepared with distilled and deionized Milli-Q
water (18 MΩ at 25 °C). All oligonucleotides were purchased
from Integrated DNA Technologies (IDT, Coralville, IA). The oligonucleotides
used for cloning purposes were purified by standard desalting, whereas
oligonucleotides used for binding experiments were all purified via
high-performance liquid chromatography, suspended in TE buffer [10
mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.3) and 0.1 mM EDTA]; the concentration was determined
spectrophotometrically using the extinction coefficients provided.
The sequence composition of the “top” strand of the
oligonucleotides used is shown in Table 1,
and the position of the FAM or Cy3 fluorescent labels is indicated
in the text. All annealed duplex dsDNAs were prepared by mixing equimolar
concentrations of each oligonucleotide strand in 20 mM (HEPES) (pH
7.4), 50 mM NaCl, 10% (v/v) glycerol, and 2 mM MgCl2 and
incubated in a preheated 95 °C water bath, followed by slow cooling
to room temperature.

Table 1 Sequences of the
dsDNA Substrates
Used in This Work
Cloning, Overexpression,
and Purification of Rap1 Constructs
Full-length Rap1 was
initially cloned from S. cerevisiae strain W303 and
provided in pET30a (Recombinant DNA Laboratory,
University of Texas Medical Branch, Galveston, TX). The gene encoding
Rap1 (residues 1–827) was recloned into pGEX-6p-1 with a PreScission
HRV 3C-cleavable N-terminal GST tag. This plasmid was used as a template
to amplify the DNA-binding domain of Rap1 (residues 358–601,
DBD601), which was subsequently cloned into pGEX-6p-1 at
EcoRI and XhoI restriction sites, leaving six amino acids after digestion
with 3C protease. The resulting plasmid was transformed into Escherichia coli Rosetta2(DE3)pLysS cells (EMD Chemicals,
Novagen, Gibbstown, NJ) for overexpression in LB-Miller broth. Cells
were allowed to grow at 37 °C until the OD600 measured
0.6–0.8, quickly chilled, and induced with 0.7 mM IPTG at 16
°C for overnight expression. Harvested cell pellets were stored
at −80 °C for later use.

Cell pellets were thawed
on ice, suspended at a density of 20 mL/g of cell paste in lysis buffer
[20 mM sodium phosphate (pH 7.3), 400 mM NaCl, 10% (v/v) glycerol,
1 mM DTT, 0.5 mM EDTA, and 0.1 mM phenylmethanesulfonyl fluoride (PMSF)],
lysed by sonication, and centrifuged at 25000g for
60 min at 4 °C. Clarified cell lysates were incubated with 0.3%
(v/v) polyethylenimine while being gently stirred at 4 °C followed
by centrifugation at 25000g for 60 min. The resulting
clarified supernatant was diluted 2-fold in lysis buffer and then
incubated with Glutathione Sepharose 4 Fast Flow GST-affinity resin
(GE Healthcare Bio Sciences, Piscataway, NJ) for overnight binding
at 4 °C with gentle stirring. Unbound proteins were removed by
first washing with lysis buffer, followed by a high-salt wash of lysis
buffer spiked to 1 M NaCl, and then finally equilibrated with buffer
D [20 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.3 at 4 °C), 150 mM NaCl, 10% (v/v) glycerol,
1 mM DTT, 0.5 mM EDTA, and 0.1 mM PMSF]. The glutathione resin was
then suspended in 10 column volumes of buffer D and incubated with
PreScission HRV-3C protease (kind gift of P. M. Burgers) overnight
at 4 °C with gentle stirring. Cleaved DBD601 was collected
as the flow-through fraction and then loaded on a Poros 50 HE Heparin
column (Life Technologies, Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA) equilibrated
with buffer D, followed by washing with buffer D containing 300 mM
NaCl and then elution in buffer D containing 600 mM NaCl. Purified
DBD601 was dialyzed against storage buffer [20 mM HEPES
(pH 7.4), 400 mM NaCl, 40% (v/v) glycerol, 1 mM DTT, and 0.5 mM EDTA]
and then stored at −80 °C. Before the experiments, DBD601 was dialyzed against buffer HN50 [20 mM HEPES
(pH 7.4), 50 mM NaCl, 2 mM MgCl2, and 10% (v/v) glycerol]
and the concentration determined using an extinction coefficient of
24870 M–1 cm–1.60,61

Analytical Ultracentrifugation
All sedimentation experiments
were conducted on an Optima XL-A analytical ultracentrifuge using
an An60Ti rotor (Beckman Coulter, Brea, CA). Sedimentation velocity
experiments were performed using Epon charcoal-filled double-sector
centerpieces at 55000 rpm with 0.03 cm spacing and recording scans
every 8 min. For sedimentation velocity experiments with DBD601 alone, absorbance scans were recorded at 280 nm, whereas in experiments
with Cy3-labeled DNA, scans were recorded at 545 nm where protein
does not contribute to the signal. Velocity profiles were processed
and analyzed with SedFit (P. Schuck, National Institute of Biomedical
Imaging and Bioengineering, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda,
MD),34−37 and the apparent sedimentation coefficient was corrected for temperature
and buffer composition using SEDNTERP.38

Sedimentation equilibrium experiments were performed using
Epon charcoal-filled six-sector centerpieces at the appropriate revolutions
per minute with 0.001 cm spacing, scanned every 4 h, and averaged
from 10 replicates. Equilibrium experiments of DBD601 alone
were once again conducted at 280 nm and experiments with Cy3-labeled
DNA at 545 nm. Achievement of equilibrium was determined by the overlap
of scans at 4 h separation and checked with SedFit. Sedimentation
equilibrium profiles were processed and analyzed with SedFit/SedPhat
(P. Schuck). The apparent molecular weights were determined using
the partial specific volume calculated from the amino acid composition
of DBD601 (0.726 mL/g at 20 °C) and a partial specific
volume for DNA of 0.527 mL/g at 20 °C, determined experimentally
by fitting for the partial specific volume given the known Mw of the DNA. The partial specific volume of
the protein in complex with DNA was calculated from39  where n is the number of
DBD601 molecules in the complex, MP and MD are the molecular weights
of DBD601 and the DNA, respectively, vP is the partial specific volume of DBD601,
and vD is the partial specific volume
of the labeled DNA.

Equilibrium Fluorescence Titrations
All fluorescence
titrations were performed with an L-format PC1 spectrofluorimeter
(ISS, Champaign, IL) equipped with Glan-Thompson polarizers. Measurements
of the anisotropy and total fluorescence intensity of FAM-labeled
dsDNA were recorded using excitation and emission wavelengths of 480
and 530 nm, respectively, using  where ITOT = IVV + 2GIVH and G is the G factor.40 The change in total fluorescence intensity relative
to the value
of dsDNA only is reported. Titrations were performed with a 1 cm ×
1 cm quartz cuvette, stirring for 2 min between additions. The total
volume of added protein was maintained within 4–7% of the initial
volume and corrected accordingly.41 All
titrations were conducted at 20 °C in buffer HN50 or
the same buffer but with different NaCl concentrations where indicated.
Comparison of four independent DBD601 preparations using
two separate batches of synthesized oligonucleotides for a reference
dsDNA substrate shows that the standard deviation of the measured
fluorescence anisotropy is less than 3–5%, smaller than the
size point used in the figures.

Electrophoretic Mobility
Shift Assays
Samples of FAM-labeled
dsDNAs and DBD601 were incubated for 10 min at room temperature
in buffer HN50 and then loaded on 8% acrylamide/bisacrylamide
1× TBE mini gels with running buffer prechilled at 4 °C.
Electrophoretic migration was conducted at a constant voltage of 80
V for 70 min at 4 °C. Gels were scanned using a Typhoon 9400
Variable Mode Imager (Amersham BioSciences, GE Healthcare Bio Sciences)
after excitation of the fluorophore with the blue laser (488 nm) setting.
EMSAs involving unlabeled DNA were subjected to identical incubation
and electrophoresis treatments, stained in 1× TBE buffer with
GelRed (Phenix Research, Candler, NC) for 15 min, and scanned on an
Alpha Imager HP imager (Protein Simple, Santa Clara, CA).

Isothermal
Titration Calorimetry
The experiments were
performed using a VP-ITC calorimeter (Microcal, GE Healthcare Bio
Sciences) after extensive dialysis of both DBD601 and the
DNA in buffer HN50 or HN150 (the subscript stands
for 150 mM NaCl). Titrations were conducted with 27 injections (10
μL each, 2 μL initial injection) of 20 μM titrant
into 2 μM samples containing either DBD601 or duplex
DNA, at 20 °C with 300 s between injections. Reference titrations
to account for the heat of dilution of each titrant were performed
by titrating into sample cells loaded with the appropriate reaction
buffer and equilibrated at the appropriate temperature.

Results
The DNA-Binding
Domain of Rap1 Binds dsDNA with a Higher Than
Expected Stoichiometry
We generated a construct of the DNA-binding
domain of S. cerevisiae Rap1 that comprises residues
358–601 (DBD601) (Figure 1a), as observed in the most recent X-ray crystal structure in complex
with DNA.23 The DBD601 was overexpressed
and purified as a soluble protein after cleavage of a N-terminal GST
fusion tag (Figure 1b). This avoids the need
for any refolding steps,28,29,42 as already shown in previous work.4 At
the maximal DBD601 concentrations used in the binding studies
(15–20 μM), sedimentation velocity and equilibrium analytical
ultracentrifugation show that DBD601 is a monomer in solution
(Figure 1c,d). The model dsDNA substrates used
in this work are 21 bp long and contain a Rap1 recognition sequence
flanked by constant 4 bp “handles” (Table 1). Following previous studies of binding of Rap1 to DNA, we
designed substrates with three different recognition sequences that
are found at telomeres (TeloA),23,29 ribosomal protein genes
(RPG),1 and silencer elements (HMRE),1,29 and a control DNA in which the 13 bp recognition sequence was replaced
with a random one (RND) (Table 1).

Figure 1e shows a gel electrophoretic mobility shift assay
(EMSA) of either a TeloA or a RND dsDNA substrate labeled with 6-carboxyfluorescein
(FAM) at the 5′-end of the top strand (Table 1). At a dsDNA concentration of 30 nM, DBD601 binds
to TeloA but little to RND, consistent with previous reports of high
affinity for its recognition sequence.29 Increasing the DNA concentration should not have any effect other
than to populate the 1:1 complex of DBD601 for the lower-affinity
RND substrate. Indeed, at 300 nM dsDNA, DBD601 binds also
to the RND substrate (Figure 1e, middle panel).
Surprisingly, at these higher DNA concentrations, we also observe
the appearance of a supershift for both the TeloA and RND substrates,
suggesting that more than one DBD601 molecule can bind
at saturation. Such a supershift is absent in EMSAs performed at 30
nM with TeloA. This would suggest that on this substrate formation
of the higher-stoichiometry complexes of DBD601 is weak
(see below).

To test whether the appearance of this supershift
is simply due
to the presence of the fluorescent label at the 5′-end of the
substrates, we next performed EMSAs with 2 μM unlabeled TeloA
and stained the nucleic acid postelectrophoresis (Figure 1e, right panel). At this higher concentration of
TeloA, the formation of supershifted bands becomes evident even at
a 4-fold excess of protein over DNA. For the RND substrate, the supershifted
bands appear at an even lower DBD601 ratio, suggesting
that when the recognition sequence is absent it is easier to populate
these higher-order complexes. Similar data are also observed with
DNA sequences containing either the RPG or HMRE recognition sequence
(data not shown).

DBD601–DNA Complexes with
High Stoichiometry
Are Clearly Observed by Analytical Ultracentrifugation
While
the EMSAs show evidence of the formation of higher-order DBD601–DNA complexes, the data also show that at the higher DBD601 concentrations there is a distribution of multiply ligated
species (Figure 1e, right panel). To test whether
this distribution is also present in solution, we performed analytical
sedimentation velocity experiments using TeloA labeled at the 5′-end
of the top strand with Cy3, monitoring Cy3 absorbance at 545 nm where
there is no contribution from protein to the signal. Figure 2a shows the distribution of sedimentation coefficients
[c(s)] obtained at different DBD601 loading concentrations in buffer HN50 [20 mM
HEPES (pH 7.4), 50 mM NaCl, 2 mM MgCl2, and 10% (v/v) glycerol].
At substoichiometric concentrations of DBD601, the peak
corresponding to free dsDNA is clearly observable and, within error,
migrates at the same position as free DNA. At stoichiometric concentrations,
only a slight population of free TeloA can be observed, while the
majority of the DNA is bound in a singly ligated complex with an s20,w of 3.6 S. At a 2:1 DBD601:DNA
loading ratio, only subtle changes in the s20,w value are detectable, whereas at a 10-fold excess of DBD601, the DNA-bound species shows a single peak that sediments with a
high s20,w value (5.6 S). The molecular
weight of this species estimated from the s20,w (∼99.7 kDa; P/Dcalc ∼ 2.9) suggests that approximately three DBD601 molecules bind at saturation. In Figure 2a, we also show the distribution of c(s) obtained for unlabeled TeloA in the presence of an 8-fold excess
of DBD601 while monitoring the absorbance at 260 nm, where
the protein signal is minimal at this DNA concentration. Consistent
with the data for Cy3-labeled TeloA, the protein–DNA complex
sediments with a high s20,w value (5.55
S). Together with the EMSA in Figure 1e, these
data indicate that even if the label were to affect the detailed energetics
of the interaction, formation of the larger DBD601–TeloA
complexes is label-independent. Finally, the appearance of a single
peak in the c(s) distribution observed
at this high DBD601 loading ratio strongly suggests a relatively
homogeneous distribution of bound species. Therefore, the apparent
distribution of multiply ligated species that are observed by EMSA
most likely results from the dissociation of the higher-stoichiometry
complexes during electrophoresis.

Figure 2 DBD601–DNA complexes
of higher strochiometry
monitored by analytical ultracentrifugation. (a) Sedimentation coefficient
distributions from velocity experiments with 2 μM Cy3-labeled
TeloA in buffer HN50 at different DBD601:DNA
ratios: 0.5 (···), 1 (---), 2 (thin solid line), and
10 (thick solid line). The data for Cy3-labeled TeloA alone are shown,
as well. The distribution of sedimentation coefficients with unlabeled
TeloA and an 8-fold excess of DBD601 is included, as well
(diamonds). (b) Same experiments as in panel a but with Cy3-labeled
RND. (c) Sedimentation equilibrium profile of 1.5 μM Cy3-labeled
TeloA in the presence of an 8-fold excess of DBD601 in
buffer HN50 at rotor speeds of 14000, 16000, and 18000
rpm. The solid gray lines are the global analyses of the data fit
with a single-species model (see Table 2).
(d) EMSA of protein–DNA complexes formed at a 1:1 ratio with
different 21 bp substrates at 300 nM.

Table 2 Molecular Weights of DBD601–DNA
Complexes Determined by Equilibrium Analytical Sedimentation
at Different NaCl Concentrations
 	5′-Cy3-TeloA	5′-Cy3-RND	5′-Cy3-HMRE	
[NaCl] (mM)	Mwobsa (kDa)	P/Db	Mwobs (kDa)	P/D	Mwobs (kDa)	P/D	
50	91.4 ± 0.2	2.61 ± 0.02	93.9 ± 0.2	2.69 ± 0.02	96.1 ± 0.5	2.77 ± 0.03	
100	87.8 ± 0.1	2.49 ± 0.02	89.6 ± 0.3	2.55 ± 0.01	90.2 ± 0.1	2.57 ± 0.02	
150	57.4 ± 0.1 (68.8 ± 0.3)c	1.47 ± 0.02 (1.85 ± 0.02)c	68.5 ± 0.3	1.84 ± 0.02	63.8 ± 0.2	1.68 ± 0.02	
a νP3D = 0.7 mL/g,
w-avg using νP = 0.726 mL/g, and νD = 0.527 mL/g determined for Cy3-TeloA.

b Based on MwdsDNA = 13.6
kDa and MwDBD = 29.8 ± 0.15 kDa.

c Determined for a 20-fold molar excess.

Results of identical experiments
performed on the 5′-Cy3-labeled
RND substrate are shown in Figure 2b. Similar
to TeloA, on the RND substrate at a 10-fold excess of DBD601, the c(s) distribution shows a
large increase in s20,w. Once again, these
data show that formation of these larger protein–DNA complexes
is independent of the presence of a Rap1 recognition sequence in the
substrate. We also note that at substoichiometric protein concentrations,
the apparent fraction of the singly ligated species from the c(s) distribution is similar for TeloA
and RND. This suggests that some dissociation of the bound DBD601 occurs during electrophoresis, especially for the lower-affinity
complexes formed on RND (Figure 1e). Interestingly,
at a 2-fold excess of DBD601 on the RND substrate, the s20,w (4.6 S) is greater than that observed with
TeloA (3.9 S), suggesting that on this substrate DBD601 might be either more prone to accessing higher-stoichiometry complexes
or in a different conformation. Also, at 10-fold excess of protein,
the s20,w is larger on RND (6.2 S) than
on TeloA (5.6 S) and the molecular weight estimated for this complex
(∼124.5 kDa, P/Dcalc ∼ 3.7) would suggest that more than three DBD601 molecules could bind at saturation. However, this is surprising
because the length of the DNA is the same for both TeloA and RND substrates
and the same maximal stoichiometry might be expected. Alternatively,
the observed differences in the s20,w may
reflect different conformations and/or large conformational changes
of the DBD601 complexes formed on these two substrates
(see below).

To determine the stoichiometry of the DBD–DNA
complexes,
we performed analytical sedimentation equilibrium experiments with
complexes of Cy3-labeled TeloA or RND substrates formed at a 8-fold
loading ratio of DBD601 to DNA. Figure 2c shows the equilibrium absorbance profile at three different
rotor speeds for Cy3-labeled TeloA (RND data set not shown). Consistent
with the presence of a single peak in the c(s) distribution (Figure 2a), a single-species
model is sufficient to fit the data (residuals in Figure 2c). The molecular weights determined from global
fitting of the three-speed equilibrium data sets for TeloA and RND
in complex with an 8-fold excess of DBD601 are listed in
Table 2. The stoichiometry of the DBD601–DNA complexes calculated from the observed molecular weights
is consistent with three DBD601 molecules binding to either
dsDNA substrate at saturation. This indicates that the larger s20,w observed for the complex formed on the
RND substrate (Figure 2b) originates from different
conformations and/or large conformational changes rather than from
the ability to bind one additional molecule.

In this regard,
we also note that although small, there are differences
in the sedimentation coefficient of complexes formed at equimolar
concentrations on either TeloA (3.6 S) or RND (3.85 S) (Figure 2a,b), suggesting that even the singly ligated species
might be in a different conformation. This is further supported by
differences in the electrophoretic mobility of the singly ligated
species. Figure 2d shows an EMSA for complexes
of DBD601 formed at a 1:1 ratio with 300 nM DNAs labeled
with FAM at the 5′-end of the top strand. Despite the fact
that these substrates are identical in length (21 bp), on RND we observe
a slower migrating band, suggesting this complex is different from
those formed on either TeloA, RPG, or HMRE, each of which contains
a recognition sequence.

Equilibrium Fluorescence Titrations Confirm
the Formation of
High-Stoichiometry Complexes and Suggest Different Conformations of
the Singly Ligated Species
Next we examined the binding of
DBD601 in solution using fluorescence spectroscopy while
monitoring the signals from fluorescently labeled DNA substrates.
Figure 3a shows the change in fluorescence
anisotropy of 255 nM dsDNA substrates [TeloA, HMRE, RPG, and RND labeled
at the 5′-end of the top strand with FAM (see Table 1)] as a function of the ratio of the total protein
to DNA concentration in buffer HN50 [20 mM HEPES (pH 7.4),
50 mM NaCl, 2 mM MgCl2, and 10% (v/v) glycerol]. Binding
of DBD601 to these 5′-labeled dsDNAs is accompanied
by a large increase in fluorescence anisotropy, providing a large
signal change to monitor the reaction. Although tight binding conditions
for the higher-stoichiometry complexes cannot be fully achieved, these
data strongly suggest that at saturation approximately three DBD601 molecules bind to the DNA, regardless of the presence or
absence of a Rap1 recognition sequence. This provides further support
to the conclusions from analytical ultracentrifugation experiments
performed at higher DNA concentrations (Table 2).

Figure 3 DBD601 binding to FAM-labeled dsDNA substrates monitored
by fluorescence anisotropy confirms the formation of high-stoichiometry
complexes. (a) Change in the fluorescence anisotropy and relative
total intensity (inset) of 255 nM dsDNAs labeled at the 5′-end
of the top strand in buffer HN50 as a function of protein
to DNA total concentration ratio for TeloA (black), RND (gray), HMRE
(blue), and RPG (red). (b) Change in the fluorescence anisotropy of
FAM-labeled TeloA where the fluorophore is positioned at various ends
of the dsDNA duplex: circles for the 5′-end (black) or 3′-end
(gray) of the top strand and triangles for the 5′-end (black)
or 3′-end (gray) of the bottom strand. (c) Change in the relative
total intensity in buffer HN50 as a function of DBD601:DNA ratio for 255 nM dsDNA labeled with FAM at the 3′-end
of the top strand: TeloA (black), RND (gray), and HMRE (blue). (d)
Change in the fluorescence anisotropy in buffer HN50 as
a function of DBD601 concentration for 10 nM dsDNA labeled
with FAM at the 5′-end of the top strand: TeloA (black), RPG
(red), and HMRE (blue).

We also note the interesting behavior of the fluorescence
anisotropy
at low protein saturation, where the singly ligated species is populated.
While for the RND substrate the fluorescence anisotropy increases
linearly, binding of the first DBD601 molecule to the dsDNA
substrates containing any of the Rap1 recognition sequences is accompanied
by a small ∼15% change in anisotropy (from 0.078 to ∼0.09).
This is unexpected given that DBD601 clearly binds these
dsDNA substrates, and presumably with higher affinity than for RND
(Figure 1e). One simple origin of this behavior
might be the presence of large changes in the fluorescence quantum
yield of the fluorophore that would contribute to distortions of the
observed anisotropy.41,43,44 However, this does not appear to be the case. The inset in Figure 3a shows the change in total fluorescence intensity
observed for these substrates. No more than a 10–12% fluorescence
increase is observed at saturation. Rather, at low protein saturation,
the total fluorescence intensity shows a behavior qualitatively similar
to that of fluorescence anisotropy. Independent of the recognition
sequence, when a high-affinity site is present in the substrate, the
signal is dominated by the binding of the second and third protein
molecules. This peculiar dependence of the fluorescence anisotropy
at low DBD601 saturation is also observed at higher pH,
strongly suggesting that this behavior is not due to a possible effect
on the quantum yield of the different protonation states of 6-carboxyfluorescein
(not shown).45 Preliminary experiments
monitoring the effect of DBD601 on the lifetime and fluorescence
correlation times of 5′-end FAM-labeled TeloA show no change
in either parameter, consistent with the observed lack of anisotropy
and fluorescence change (not shown). Moreover, qualitatively similar
behavior on TeloA is also observed when monitoring the fluorescence
change of Cy3 instead of FAM (not shown). Finally, Figure 3b shows the change in fluorescence anisotropy of
TeloA in which the fluorescent label was placed at any of the four
end positions of the substrate. Within error, the data show that independent
of the position of the fluorophore, binding of the first molecule
of DBD601 makes a small contribution to the change in anisotropy
while the signal is dominated by the binding of the second and third
molecules.

Interestingly, when the label is at the 3′-end
position
of the dsDNAs, binding of DBD601 is accompanied by very
different changes in fluorescence intensity as compared to the 5′-end
position. Figure 3c shows the relative change
in total fluorescence intensity at different ratios of total protein
to DNA concentration for TeloA, HMRE, and RND substrates with the
label placed at the 3′-end of the top strand. In this case,
binding of the first molecule of DBD601 to either TeloA
or HMRE now leads to fluorescence quenching (∼7–8%),
followed by a large fluorescence increase (∼57%) when the second
and third molecules bind. However, on the RND substrate, binding of
the first molecule leads to an immediate fluorescence increase (∼7%),
though at saturation the maximal change is smaller than that for TeloA
or HMRE. Once again, even when the fluorescent label is placed at
the 3′-end, binding of DBD601 to substrates containing
the recognition sequence reveals a signal signature different from
that of a DNA of random composition. Regardless of the location of
the fluorescent label, the data strongly suggest that these signatures
in signal for the singly ligated species must be an intrinsic property
of the system.

The equilibrium fluorescence experiments were
performed at DNA
concentrations where by an EMSA a supershift starts to be detected
at the higher DBD601 concentrations. However, EMSAs with
30 nM TeloA show only a single shifted band even at 10-fold excess
of protein, suggesting that at this lower DNA concentration the higher-stoichiometry
complexes do not form (i.e., weak). Moreover, the data in Figure 3a show that formation of the 1:1 complex with DNAs
containing a Rap1 recognition sequence is accompanied by a small change
in anisotropy. Therefore, for experiments performed at &lt;30 nM DNA
only a 1:1 complex should be populated, and on these substrates, little
change in anisotropy should be detected. This is clearly not the case.
Figure 3d shows the change in fluorescence
anisotropy of 10 nM TeloA, HMRE, and RPG (labeled at the 5′-end
of the top strand with FAM) as a function of DBD601 concentration
in buffer HN50. Even at this low DNA concentration, binding
of DBD601 is accompanied by a large change in the anisotropy
of the DNA, suggesting that in solution the signal is sensitive to
formation of the higher-stoichiometry complexes. Indeed, even if we
were to assume that the signal change now should report on the formation
of a singly ligated species, the data cannot be fit with a simple
1:1 binding model (solid line). This strongly suggests that at low
DNA concentrations the higher-stoichiometry complexes are not being
detected by EMSAs and that their affinity must be higher than what
would be inferred from the electrophoretic assays in Figure 1e.

Higher Concentrations of NaCl Abolish Binding
of the Third DBD
Molecule but Allow Formation of 2:1 DBD601–DNA Complexes
The data presented in the previous sections were determined in
the presence of a relatively low concentration of NaCl (50 mM) to
amplify the presence of all possible bound states of DBD601. Next, we explored the effect of increasing NaCl concentrations
on the ability of DBD601 to access higher stoichiometries.
The top panel of Figure 4a shows the change
in fluorescence anisotropy of the TeloA substrate (labeled at the
3′-end of the top strand with FAM) as a function of the ratio
of the total protein to DNA concentrations in buffer H with 50, 100,
and 150 mM NaCl. It is evident that as the concentration of NaCl increases,
there is a strong effect on the anisotropy corresponding to binding
of the second and third DBD601 molecules. At the same time,
binding of the first DBD601 molecule, as monitored by the
initial phase of the anisotropy, is little affected by a 3-fold increase
in NaCl concentration. Similar behavior is also observed when the
relative total fluorescence intensity is monitored (Figure 4a, bottom panel). Increasing the NaCl concentration
affects the binding of only the second and third DBD601 molecules (loss of the large fluorescence increase). Taken at face
value, these data would suggest that higher salt concentrations inhibit
formation of the higher-stoichiometry complexes. However, Figure 4b shows the change in the relative total fluorescence
intensity for both TeloA and the lower-affinity HMRE, determined at
150 mM NaCl. At the same concentration of DNA for both substrates,
DBD601 induces an initial quenching of the fluorophore
followed by a small yet detectable fluorescence increase. This second
phase of fluorescence enhancement becomes more evident when the concentration
of HMRE is increased 3-fold, suggesting that this signal originates
from a low-affinity binding phase. The simple observation of a change
from quenching to an enhancement of the relative fluorescence intensity
indicates that at least one additional molecule of DBD601 must bind even at this higher NaCl concentration. This conclusion
is further reinforced by analytical equilibrium ultracentrifugation
experiments with DBD601–DNA complexes formed in
buffer H at different NaCl concentrations (Table 2). While at 100 mM NaCl DBD601 is still able to
access a stoichiometry of 3:1 on any of the substrates used, at 150
mM NaCl it is clear that only two molecules of DBD601 can
bind at saturation. Interestingly, for the TeloA substrate, a 2:1
stoichiometry becomes more evident with a larger protein excess, suggesting
that at this NaCl concentration it is more difficult to populate the
doubly ligated species with this high-affinity Rap1 recognition sequence.
Indeed, the doubly ligated species for the lower-affinity HMRE sequence
is more easily detectable at a smaller excess of DBD601. These data clearly show that higher NaCl concentrations prevent
binding of a third DBD601 molecule but still allow for
formation of at least a 2:1 complex even when a Rap1 recognition sequence
is present in the substrate.

Figure 4 Higher salt concentration abolishes binding
of the third DBD601 molecule. (a) Change in fluorescence
anisotropy (top) and
relative total intensity (bottom) as a function of DBD601:DNA ratio for 255 nM TeloA FAM-labeled at the 3′-end of the
top strand in buffer H at 50, 100, and 150 mM NaCl. (b) Change in
relative total intensity as a function of DBD601:DNA ratio
in buffer HN150 of 255 nM (black square) and 760 nM (gray
square) HMRE FAM-labeled at the 3′-end of the top strand. The
titration for 255 nM TeloA is shown as a reference (triangles).

Isothermal Titration Calorimetry
Shows Complex Behavior Consistent
with More Than One Molecule of DBD601 Binding to a TeloA
Substrate
The data in the previous sections clearly show
that depending on the solution conditions, more than one molecule
of DBD601 can bind to the model TeloA substrate. We also
note that all the experiments presented thus far were performed in
a way that enriches the population of the higher-stoichiometry complexes
(e.g., increasing protein concentration). We have not yet found spectroscopic
signal changes that would allow us to reliably monitor the interaction
in the other direction (e.g., increasing DNA concentration to favor
formation of the singly ligated species). However, for full-length
Rap1, it has been shown that interaction with DNA can be monitored
by isothermal titration calorimetry (ITC), at least in the direction
that favors formation of a 1:1 complex (e.g., dsDNA as the titrant).23,46 Therefore, we used ITC to study the binding of DBD601 to the TeloA substrate and performed titrations to access different
end states in the reaction. Figure 5a shows
the raw heats of injection for a selected direction (the reference
titration is shown offset). Figure 5b shows
the change in normalized heat as a function of molar ratio for titrations
performed in either direction, DBD601 titrated into DNA
(gray) or DNA titrated into DBD601 (black). It is clear
that the titrations are not symmetric, as would be expected for a
simple 1:1 interaction. Consistent with all the data presented in
the previous sections, these data are indicative of a complex system
in which different bound states can be achieved depending on the direction
in which the experiment is performed. At a low molar ratio (i.e.,
excess protein to DNA) when TeloA is titrated into DBD601, the reaction is accompanied by an initial phase with a large negative
heat (approximately −40 kcal/mol). On the basis of the experiments
presented so far, formation of a 3:1 complex of protein to DNA is
expected to be favored in this concentration regime. Further increases
in the total DNA concentration will then favor dissociation of the
third DBD molecule and allow transition to lower-stoichiometry complexes.
Indeed, the normalized heat decreases linearly to a ratio of ∼0.5
and then is followed by a steep drop in signal with a midpoint of ∼0.75
DNA/protein. In this direction of the titration, it would be expected
that the reaction should reach a final stoichiometry of 1:1. It is,
however, possible that the observed lower than expected midpoint of
this second phase is affected by the large differences in affinity,
and possibly the ΔH between the doubly and
singly ligated species. The situation is very different when DBD601 is used as the titrant. In this direction, at a lower molar
ratio (i.e., excess DNA to protein), formation of the singly ligated
species is favored and likewise accompanied by an initial relatively
constant ΔH value that is approximately half
of that observed in the titrations performed in the opposite direction.
The observed value in this direction (approximately −20 kcal/mol)
provides an estimate of the ΔH for the singly
ligated species. As the protein concentration increases, the molar
heat decreases with a midpoint of ∼1.3 stoichiometry. Once
again, this is a bit surprising on the basis of the data presented
in the previous sections, because in this direction of the titration
the 3:1 protein–DNA complex should become enriched. The lower
than expected stoichiometry suggests that formation of the high-affinity,
singly ligated complex dominates the signal of the reaction, the net
result being that any subsequent lower-affinity binding event remains
undetectable under the conditions tested.

Figure 5 ITC shows a complex behavior
consistent with formation of higher-order
complexes, even at higher salt concentrations. (a) Raw heats of binding
for a representative titration of DBD601 into TeloA in
buffer HN50. Also included (offset) is the contribution
for the heat of dilution from a reference titration of DBD601. (b) Change in normalized heat as a function of molar ratio for
20 μM TeloA titrated into 2 μM DBD601 (black)
and 20 μM DBD601 titrated into 2 μM TeloA (gray)
in buffer HN50 at 20 °C. (c) Change in normalized
heat as a function of molar ratio for the same experiments as in panel
b but performed in buffer HN150 at 20 °C.

We showed that higher NaCl concentrations suppress
binding of the
third DBD601 molecule to DNA. Therefore, we next performed
the same ITC experiments with TeloA in buffer HN150. Figure 5c shows the isotherms obtained at this higher NaCl
concentration with titrations performed in either direction. The asymmetry
of the data obtained in both directions persists, again consistent
with the data from fluorescence titrations and analytical equilibrium
sedimentation showing that even at 150 mM, DBD601 binds
to TeloA with a stoichiometry of &gt;1:1. At 150 mM NaCl when DNA
is
titrated into the protein, the initial decay phase observed at 50
mM is now abolished and the data show a constant initial value of
approximately −17 kcal/mol with a midpoint of transition at
∼0.8. Moreover, at low molar ratios, the observed ΔH in this direction is higher than that determined by titrating
DBD601 into DNA (approximately −17 vs −9
kcal/mol), suggesting there is an extra phase contributing to the
signal. Once again, even at 150 mM NaCl when DBD601 is
titrated into TeloA, the observed midpoint of transition is lower
than would be expected for a 2:1 binding process. We also note that
at 150 mM, the observed ΔH in this direction
is approximately half of that determined at 50 mM, suggesting that
increasing the NaCl concentration affects formation of the singly
ligated complex. Initial attempts to fit the ITC data with simple
models did not provide reliable estimates of the equilibrium constants
and stoichiometries; therefore, we did not pursue further analysis
and present the data as supporting evidence for the complex mode of
interaction of DBD601 with the TeloA substrate.

Discussion
In this work, we show a novel and unexpected DNA binding property
of the DNA-binding domain of S. cerevisiae Rap1.
Data from gel electrophoretic mobility shift assays, analytical ultracentrifugation,
and equilibrium fluorescence titrations showed that in addition to
forming a high-affinity 1:1 complex with its recognition sequence,4,23,28,29,33,46,47 DBD601 can also form higher-stoichiometry
complexes. Also, the ITC data show that different isotherms are observed
depending on the direction of the experiment (i.e., DNA titrated into
protein or vice versa), strongly suggesting that different end states
can be populated and further supporting the conclusion that the system
is more complex than a simple 1:1 system. These higher-stoichiometry
complexes occur on dsDNA containing either telomeric (TeloA), ribosomal
protein gene (RPG), silencer element (HMRE), or even random sequences.
This indicates that binding of additional DBD601 molecules
is not strictly sequence dependent, although the data suggest that
it might be easier to populate the higher-stoichiometry complexes
on random DNA sequences than on DNAs containing a Rap1 recognition
sequence. Also, the data in Figure 3d show
that these complexes can be formed at relatively low DNA concentrations,
strongly suggesting that their affinity is higher than would be inferred
by an EMSA.

Analytical sedimentation equilibrium experiments
and fluorescence
titrations show that at saturation three DBD601 molecules
can bind to model dsDNA substrates. We also showed that in solution
DBD601 behaves as a stable monomer at the highest protein
concentrations used in these experiments (Figure 1c,d). Therefore, the observed higher stoichiometry is not
due to the binding of higher-order oligomers of the protein present
in solution. One possible way such a stoichiometry could be achieved
is via a DNA-induced oligomerization of DBD601.44,48 If this were the case, we would expect formation of higher-order
complexes to be favored on DNA substrates that bind DBD601 with higher affinity (i.e., containing the recognition sequence).
Rather, the data show that a 3:1 complex is formed independent of
the DNA substrate used and even better for one of random sequence,
to which DBD601 binds weaker in the singly ligated state.
Alternatively, on TeloA containing the Rap1 recognition sequence,
the additional DBD molecules could bind to the 4 bp handles of the
substrate. However, if the DBD were to bind nonspecifically to this
region with such a small site size, then it would be expected that
on the 21 bp dsDNA of random composition four or five molecules of
DBD could bind at saturation. This is not the case. In addition, preliminary
data with substrates containing varying lengths of the handle region
strongly suggest that the second and third molecules of DBD601 do not bind to the handle regions (not shown). The question then
becomes how many ways three DBD601 molecules can be arranged
on a 21 bp dsDNA. The known Rap1 recognition sequence motif is at
least 13 bp long.3,28,30,31 The crystal structures of Rap1DBD–DNA complexes show that the DNA-binding site is comprised
of two half-sites of 5 bp that make contact with the two Myb-like
domains, separated by a 3 bp linker.23,28,29 However, in the high-stoichiometry complexes observed
at the lower NaCl concentrations used in this work, the ability of
three DBD601 molecules to bind the 21 bp substrates strongly
suggests that 6–7 bp is sufficient for interaction. From the
crystal structures, it is difficult to reconcile how such a short
length of DNA would be bound by both Myb-like domains. Furthermore,
work from the Negri lab showed that Rap1 can bind to just a single
half-site, albeit with reduced affinity.32 Our data suggest that in the transition from the singly to multiply
ligated species, DBD601 switches modes of interaction,
making contact with a different number of base pairs, from 13 to 6–7
bp. It should be pointed out that the salt dependence of DBD601–DNA binding clearly shows that at 150 mM NaCl only a 2:1
complex can be significantly populated (Figure 4). Rather than a NaCl-dependent change in the apparent site size
of the interaction (i.e., from 13 to ∼10 bp), we interpret
the decreased stoichiometry at a higher salt concentration to be the
result of a decreased affinity for the third DBD molecule.

We
propose that the DNA-binding domain of Rap1 can bind dsDNA in
at least two different binding modes. In one high-affinity mode, both
Myb-like domains make contact with the entire recognition sequence,
whereas in the other lower-affinity mode, only one of the two Myb-like
domains binds DNA. Figure 6a shows a simple
model for a dsDNA substrate containing a Rap1 recognition sequence
depicting a possible pathway from the singly ligated complex to the
higher-stoichiometry complexes. The most recent crystal structure
of the DBD bound to a TeloA sequence shows that the ∼30 amino
acids in the C-terminal region of the DBD (wrapping loop) fold back
onto the N-terminal Myb-like domain to form a closed complex on DNA.23 We propose that in solution, one possible path
leading to the transition between the two binding modes is the transient
opening of the C-terminal wrapping loop (Figure 6a, complex Ia-c). In the presence of excess protein, formation of
complex Ic would then allow a second or third molecule of Rap1DBD to bind. At this stage, we do not know which one of the
two Myb-like domains would be bound in complex Ic. The sequence conservation
of the two half-sites in the Rap1 recognition motif and the crystal
structures29,49−51 suggest that
the N-terminal Myb domain might be a possibility. On the basis of
the model in Figure 6a, we analyzed the anisotropy
binding data for the RND and TeloA substrates with different binding
models (Figure 6b–d and Supporting Information). The estimated equilibrium
dissociation constant of binding of DBD601 to the specific
TeloA site in complex Ia (0.2–0.6 nM) is consistent with the
reported value for this system29 and is
at least one order of magnitude lower than that for formation of complex
Ic. It remains to be determined whether the transition from complex
Ia to Ic is accompanied by and perhaps driven by cooperative binding
of the second and third proteins in complexes II and III. At this
stage, quantitative estimates of the equilibrium constants for complexes
Ic–III are strongly dependent on the choice of model and assumptions
and they will require additional information about the system (see
the Supporting Information).

Figure 6 Rap1DBD binds to dsDNA in multiple DNA binding modes.
(a) Cartoon model of a possible pathway from the singly ligated complex
(PDB entry 3UKG), bound in the high-affinity binding mode where both Myb domains
interact with the recognition sequence, to the higher-stoichiometry
complexes, where now only a single Myb domain binds to the dsDNA.
(b) Partition functions that describe the different models used for
analysis of the data. (c) Anisotropy binding data collected in buffer
HN50 at 10 and 255 nM RND labeled at the 5′-end
of the top strand. Blue lines are the fits with model 1 and red lines
those with model 2. (d) Binding data as in panel c collected for TeloA.
Black, blue, and red lines are the fits with model 3, and the green
line is a fit with model 4. For details of the models, assumptions,
and parameters, see the Supporting Information.

The data presented in this work
show that the transition between
binding modes occurs even on substrates containing a Rap1 recognition
sequence and at a DNA concentration as low as 10 nM. This suggests
that these alternative binding modes can coexist with the high-affinity
mode at protein concentrations lower than those needed to fully populate
them. It remains to be determined whether under normal expression
conditions the Rap1 concentration in vivo is enough
to support the transition between binding modes, even though Rap1
is a highly abundant protein.52 Interestingly,
work from the Shore lab showed that overexpression of Rap1 has a toxic
phenotype leading to growth inhibition and that the presence of an
intact DNA-binding domain is required for toxicity.25 Under these conditions, it is possible that Rap1DBD can access higher stoichiometries (i.e., switch binding modes) even
on the high-affinity Rap1 recognition sequences. We speculate that
our observation that the DBD can switch between binding modes as a
function of protein concentration might, at least in part, provide
a basis for the toxicity of full-length protein overexpression, especially
at Rap1-binding sites involved in transcriptional regulation and repression.

The situation is different, however, on the dsDNA substrate of
random sequence composition. We showed that for the RND substrate
in the singly ligated complex, the anisotropy and fluorescence intensity
have different signatures compared to that of TeloA, RPG, or HMRE
(Figure 3). We interpret these differences
in signal response as an indication that the 1:1 DBD601–DNA complexes are in different conformations. This interpretation
is further supported by the observed differences in both the sedimentation
coefficient and the electrophoretic mobility of the 1:1 complex formed
on the RND substrate (Figure 2). For a DNA
of random sequence composition, we propose that if complex Ia in Figure 6a forms, the lack of a proper, high-affinity recognition
sequence for the two Myb-like domains does not allow for a stable
closure of the C-terminal wrapping loop. Therefore, on a random DNA
sequence, Rap1DBD would be more prone to transition to
the second binding mode (complex Ic). This is also supported by analysis
of the data in Figure 6c where model 1, which
does not include formation of complex Ia, is sufficient to fit the
data. Interestingly, in addition to telomeric sites, Rap1 can be chromatin
immunoprecipitated even at distances from the distal telomeric ends
of 2–4 kbp.53 At these sites, Rap1
must bind through nonspecific DNA interactions, and it has been suggested
that this nonspecific DNA binding could be a means to allow spreading
of Rap1 from telomeric ends.53 It is intriguing
to speculate that if Rap1 binds to these nonspecific sites and spreads,
it might do so using the alternative, lower-affinity binding mode
(i.e., single Myb bound in complex Ic). Also, the analysis in Figure 6c with model 1 (see the Supporting
Information) suggests the presence of positive cooperative
interactions in complex II. This would lead to stabilization of a
Rap1 complex even on DNAs of random composition for which the affinity
of the DBD [∼1 μM (see the Supporting
Information)] is much lower than for its recognition sequence.
Moreover, in this alternative binding mode (complexes Ic–III),
the bound Rap1DBD would be very different from the one
at telomeres, where both Myb-like domains are expected to interact
with high affinity.23,28,29 This might impact the interaction of Rap1 with its interacting proteins
(e.g., Rif1, Rif2, Sir3, and Sir4)14,15,18,53 at telomeres versus
nontelomeric sites and/or help establish the boundary between telomeric
and nontelomeric regions.

In summary, we showed that the DNA-binding
domain of Rap1 can bind
to DNA with stoichiometries higher than previously anticipated, and
we propose that this can be achieved via its ability to transition
between two different DNA binding modes. The transition between binding
modes has been documented for E. coli SSB,54−56 HU,57−60 human and yeast RPA,39,61,62 and mammalian DNA Pol β.63,64 It is clear that in the different binding modes these proteins form
complexes with different properties. The ability of these systems
to bind DNA with different binding modes is proposed to affect their
function in vivo.65 We
currently do not know the functional role in vivo of the presence of different binding modes for the Rap1 DNA-binding
domain. Also, the DBD comprises only approximately one-third of the
full-length protein molecule. It remains to be determined how this
novel DNA binding property is affected in the context of the full-length
protein, where the DBD might not bind to DNA as a truly independent
domain. The findings in this work suggest that the ability of the
DBD to access different binding modes may be a possible point of regulation.
The highly modular domain organization of Rap1 and the observation
that different regions participate in different functions of the protein
(see the introductory section) suggest the possibility that the transition
between binding modes could be regulated either internally by its
other domains or externally through interactions with Rap1 interaction
factors.

Supporting Information Available
Description
and assumptions
of the models in Figure 6b used to fit the
data in panels c and d. This material is available free of charge
via the Internet at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bi501049b_si_001.pdf

 Author Present Address
† E.A.F.:
Department of Molecular and Structural Biochemistry, North
Carolina State University, 128 Polk Hall, Campus Box 7622, Raleigh,
NC 27695.

This work
was
supported by a grant from the National Institutes of Health (GM098509
to R.G.).

The authors
declare no
competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
We thank Prof. T. M. Lohman
and Dr. A. Kozlov for the extensive
use of the isothermal titration calorimeter and helpful comments.
We thank Prof. T. Heyduk for help with lifetime and rotational correlation
time measurements. We thank Prof. P. M. Burgers for access to reagents.

Abbreviations
dsDNAdouble-stranded DNA

DBDDNA-binding domain

EMSAelectrophoretic
mobility shift assay

AUCanalytical ultracentrifugation

ITCisothermal titration calorimetry.



   
References
Shore D. ; Nasmyth K.  (1987 ) Purification and cloning
of a DNA binding protein from
yeast that binds to both silencer and activator elements . Cell 
51 , 721 –732 .3315231 
Kurtz S. ; Shore D.  (1991 ) RAP1 protein activates
and silences transcription of mating-type
genes in yeast . Genes Dev. 
5 , 616 –628 .2010087 
Lieb J. D. ; Liu X. ; Botstein D. ; Brown P. O.  (2001 ) Promoter-specific
binding of Rap1
revealed by genome-wide maps of protein-DNA association . Nat. Genet. 
28 , 327 –334 .11455386 
Garbett K. A. ; Tripathi M. K. ; Cencki B. ; Layer J. H. ; Weil P. A.  (2007 ) Yeast TFIID
serves as a coactivator for Rap1p by direct protein-protein interaction . Mol. Cell. Biol. 
27 , 297 –311 .17074814 
Layer J. H. ; Miller S. G. ; Weil P. A.  (2010 ) Direct Transactivator-Transcription
Factor IID (TFIID) Contacts Drive Yeast Ribosomal Protein Gene Transcription . J. Biol. Chem. 
285 , 15489 –15499 .20189987 
Layer J. H. ; Weil P. A.  (2013 ) Direct TFIIA-TFIID Protein Contacts Drive Budding Yeast
Ribosomal Protein Gene Transcription . J. Biol.
Chem. 
288 , 23273 –23294 .23814059 
Warner J. R.  (1999 ) The economics
of ribosome biosynthesis in yeast . Trends Biochem.
Sci. 
24 , 437 –440 .10542411 
Lascaris R.
F. ; Mager W. H. ; Planta R. J.  (1999 ) DNA-binding requirements of the yeast
protein Rap1p as selected in silico from ribosomal protein gene promoter
sequences . Bioinformatics 
15 , 267 –277 .10320394 
Lee T. I. ; Rinaldi N. J. ; Robert F. ; Odom D. T. ; Bar-Joseph Z. ; Gerber G. K. ; Hannett N. M. ; Harbison C. T. ; Thompson C. M. ; Simon I. ; Zeitlinger J. ; Jennings E. G. ; Murray H. L. ; Gordon D. B. ; Ren B. ; Wyrick J. J. ; Tagne J. B. ; Volkert T. L. ; Fraenkel E. ; Gifford D. K. ; Young R. A.  (2002 ) Transcriptional
regulatory networks in Saccharomyces cerevisiae . Science 
298 , 799 –804 .12399584 
Schawalder S. B. ; Kabani M. ; Howald I. ; Choudhury U. ; Werner M. ; Shore D.  (2004 ) Growth-regulated recruitment of the
essential yeast ribosomal protein gene activator Ifh1 . Nature 
432 , 1058 –1061 .15616569 
Menon B. B. ; Sarma N. J. ; Pasula S. ; Deminoff S. J. ; Willis K. A. ; Barbara K. E. ; Andrews B. ; Santangelo G. M.  (2005 ) Reverse
recruitment: The Nup84 nuclear pore subcomplex mediates Rap1/Gcr1/Gcr2
transcriptional activation . Proc. Natl. Acad.
Sci. U.S.A. 
102 , 5749 –5754 .15817685 
Wellinger R. J. ; Zakian V. A.  (2012 ) Everything
you ever wanted to know about Saccharomyces cerevisiae telomeres: Beginning to
end . Genetics 
191 , 1073 –1105 .22879408 
Longtine M. S. ; Wilson N. M. ; Petracek M. E. ; Berman J.  (1989 ) A yeast telomere binding
activity binds to two related telomere sequence motifs and is indistinguishable
from RAP1 . Curr. Genet. 
16 , 225 –239 .2697465 
Hardy C. F. ; Sussel L. ; Shore D.  (1992 ) A RAP1-interacting
protein involved
in transcriptional silencing and telomere length regulation . Genes Dev. 
6 , 801 –814 .1577274 
Wotton D. ; Shore D.  (1997 ) A novel Rap1p-interacting factor, Rif2p, cooperates with Rif1p to
regulate telomere length in Saccharomyces cerevisiae . Genes Dev. 
11 , 748 –760 .9087429 
Marcand S. ; Gilson E. ; Shore D.  (1997 ) A protein-counting mechanism for
telomere length regulation in yeast . Science 
275 , 986 –990 .9020083 
Levy D. L. ; Blackburn E. H.  (2004 ) Counting
of Rif1p and Rif2p on Saccharomyces
cerevisiae telomeres regulates telomere length . Mol. Cell. Biol. 
24 , 10857 –10867 .15572688 
Moretti P. ; Freeman K. ; Coodly L. ; Shore D.  (1994 ) Evidence that a complex
of SIR proteins interacts with the silencer and telomere-binding protein
RAP1 . Genes Dev. 
8 , 2257 –2269 .7958893 
Palladino F. ; Laroche T. ; Gilson E. ; Axelrod A. ; Pillus L. ; Gasser S. M.  (1993 ) Sir3 and Sir4 Proteins Are Required for the Positioning
and Integrity of Yeast Telomeres . Cell 
75 , 543 –555 .8221893 
Hecht A. ; Laroche T. ; Strahlbolsinger S. ; Gasser S. M. ; Grunstein M.  (1995 ) Histone H3
and H4 N-Termini Interact with Sir3 and Sir4 Proteins: A Molecular-Model
for the Formation of Heterochromatin in Yeast . Cell 
80 , 583 –592 .7867066 
Morse R. H.  (2000 ) RAP, RAP,
open up! New wrinkles for RAP1 in yeast . Trends
Genet. 
16 , 51 –53 .10652526 
Shore D.  (1994 ) RAP1: A protean
regulator in yeast . Trends Genet. 
10 , 408 –412 .7809947 
Matot B. ; Le Bihan Y. V. ; Lescasse R. ; Pérez J. ; Miron S. ; David G. ; Castaing B. ; Weber P. ; Raynal B. ; Zinn-Justin S. ; Gasparini S. ; Le Du M. H.  (2012 ) The orientation of the C-terminal
domain of the Saccharomyces cerevisiae Rap1 protein is determined
by its binding to DNA . Nucleic Acids Res. 
40 , 3197 –3207 .22139930 
Mizuno T. ; Kishimoto T. ; Shinzato T. ; Haw R. ; Chambers A. ; Wood J. ; Sinclair D. ; Uemura H.  (2004 ) Role of the N-terminal
region of RapIp in the transcriptional activation of glycolytic genes
in Saccharomyces cerevisiae . Yeast 
21 , 851 –866 .15300680 
Freeman K. ; Gwadz M. ; Shore D.  (1995 ) Molecular
and Genetic-Analysis of
the Toxic Effect of Rap1 Overexpression in Yeast . Genetics 
141 , 1253 –1262 .8601471 
Kyrion G. ; Boakye K. A. ; Lustig A. J.  (1992 ) C-Terminal
Truncation of Rap1 Results
in the Deregulation of Telomere Size, Stability, and Function in Saccharomyces cerevisiae . Mol.
Cell. Biol. 
12 , 5159 –5173 .1406688 
Hardy C. F.
J. ; Balderes D. ; Shore D.  (1992 ) Dissection of a Carboxy-Terminal
Region of the Yeast Regulatory Protein Rap1 with Effects on Both Transcriptional
Activation and Silencing . Mol. Cell. Biol. 
12 , 1209 –1217 .1545802 
Konig P. ; Giraldo R. ; Chapman L. ; Rhodes D.  (1996 ) The crystal structure
of the DNA-binding domain of yeast RAP1 in complex with telomeric
DNA . Cell 
85 , 125 –136 .8620531 
Taylor H. O. ; O’Reilly M. ; Leslie A. G. ; Rhodes D.  (2000 ) How the multifunctional
yeast Rap1p discriminates between DNA target sites: A crystallographic
analysis . J. Mol. Biol. 
303 , 693 –707 .11061969 
Conrad M. N. ; Wright J. H. ; Wolf A. J. ; Zakian V. A.  (1990 ) RAP1 protein
interacts
with yeast telomeres in vivo: Overproduction alters telomere structure
and decreases chromosome stability . Cell 
63 , 739 –750 .2225074 
Graham I. R. ; Chambers A.  (1994 ) Use of a selection
technique to identify the diversity
of binding sites for the yeast RAP1 transcription factor . Nucleic Acids Res. 
22 , 124 –130 .8121795 
Del
Vescovo V. ; De Sanctis V. ; Bianchi A. ; Shore D. ; Di Mauro E. ; Negri R.  (2004 ) Distinct DNA elements contribute
to Rap1p affinity for its binding sites . J.
Mol. Biol. 
338 , 877 –893 .15111054 
Williams T.
L. ; Levy D. L. ; Maki-Yonekura S. ; Yonekura K. ; Blackburn E. H.  (2010 ) Characterization
of the yeast telomere nucleoprotein core: Rap1 binds independently
to each recognition site . J. Biol. Chem. 
285 , 35814 –35824 .20826803 
Schuck P.  (2003 ) On the analysis
of protein self-association by sedimentation velocity analytical ultracentrifugation . Anal. Biochem. 
320 , 104 –124 .12895474 
Balbo A. , Brown P.
H. , Braswell E. H. , and Schuck P.   (2007 ) Measuring protein-protein interactions by equilibrium sedimentation . In Current Protocols in Immunology , Chapter 18,
Unit 18, 18, Wiley , New York .
Schuck P.  (1998 ) Sedimentation
analysis of noninteracting and self-associating solutes using numerical
solutions to the Lamm equation . Biophys. J. 
75 , 1503 –1512 .9726952 
Dam J. ; Velikovsky C. A. ; Mariuzza R. A. ; Urbanke C. ; Schuck P.  (2005 ) Sedimentation
velocity analysis of heterogeneous protein-protein interactions: Lamm
equation modeling and sedimentation coefficient distributions c(s) . Biophys. J. 
89 , 619 –634 .15863475 
Hayes D. , Laue T. , and Philo J.   (1995 ) Program Sednterp:
sedimentation interpretation program , University
of New Hampshire , Durham, NH .
Kumaran S. ; Kozlov A. G. ; Lohman T. M.  (2006 ) Saccharomyces cerevisiae replication protein A binds to single-stranded DNA in multiple salt-dependent
modes . Biochemistry 
45 , 11958 –11973 .17002295 
Lakowicz J. R.   (1999 ) Principles of Fluorescence Spectroscopy , Plenum Press , New York .
Kozlov A. G. ; Galletto R. ; Lohman T. M.  (2012 ) SSB-DNA
binding monitored by fluorescence
intensity and anisotropy . Methods Mol. Biol. 
922 , 55 –83 .22976177 
Giraldo R. ; Rhodes D.  (1994 ) The yeast telomere-binding
protein RAP1 binds to and
promotes the formation of DNA quadruplexes in telomeric DNA . EMBO J. 
13 , 2411 –2420 .8194531 
Eftink M. R.  (1997 ) Fluorescence
methods for studying equilibrium macromolecule-ligand interactions . Methods Enzymol. 
278 , 221 –257 .9170316 
Barranco-Medina S. ; Galletto R.  (2010 ) DNA binding induces dimerization of Saccharomyces cerevisiae Pif1 . Biochemistry 
49 , 8445 –8454 .20795654 
Sjoback R. ; Nygren J. ; Kubista M.  (1995 ) Absorption
and Fluorescence Properties
of Fluorescein . Spectrochim. Acta, Part A 
51 , L7 –L21 .
Le
Bihan Y. V. ; Matot B. ; Pietrement O. ; Giraud-Panis M. J. ; Gasparini S. ; Le Cam E. ; Gilson E. ; Sclavi B. ; Miron S. ; Le Du M. H.  (2013 ) Effect of Rap1 binding
on DNA distortion and potassium permanganate hypersensitivity . Acta Crystallogr. 
D69 , 409 –419 .
Blackburn E. H.  (2000 ) Telomere
states and cell fates . Nature 
408 , 53 –56 .11081503 
Wong I. ; Chao K. L. ; Bujalowski W. ; Lohman T. M.  (1992 ) DNA-induced dimerization
of the Escherichia coli rep helicase.
Allosteric effects of single-stranded and duplex DNA . J. Biol. Chem. 
267 , 7596 –7610 .1313807 
Vignais M. L. ; Huet J. ; Buhler J. M. ; Sentenac A.  (1990 ) Contacts between the
Factor Tuf and Rpg Sequences . J. Biol. Chem. 
265 , 14669 –14674 .2201690 
Idrissi F. Z. ; Fernandez-Larrea J. B. ; Pina B.  (1998 ) Structural and functional heterogeneity
of Rap1p complexes with telomeric and UASrpg-like DNA sequences . J. Mol. Biol. 
284 , 925 –935 .9837716 
Idrissi F. Z. ; Pina B.  (1999 ) Functional divergence between the half-sites of the DNA-binding sequence
for the yeast transcriptional regulator Rap1p . Biochem. J. 
341 , 477 –482 .10417308 
Buchman A.
R. ; Kimmerly W. J. ; Rine J. ; Kornberg R. D.  (1988 ) Two DNA-binding
factors recognize specific sequences at silencers, upstream activating
sequences, autonomously replicating sequences, and telomeres in Saccharomyces cerevisiae . Mol.
Cell. Biol. 
8 , 210 –225 .3275867 
Moretti P. ; Shore D.  (2001 ) Multiple interactions
in sir protein recruitment by Rap1p at silencers
and telomeres in yeast . Mol. Cell. Biol. 
21 , 8082 –8094 .11689698 
Lohman T. M. ; Overman L. B.  (1985 ) Two binding modes
in Escherichia coli single strand binding
protein-single stranded DNA complexes. Modulation
by NaCl concentration . J. Biol. Chem. 
260 , 3594 –3603 .3882711 
Bujalowski W. ; Lohman T. M.  (1986 ) Escherichia
coli Single-Strand
Binding-Protein Forms Multiple, Distinct Complexes with Single-Stranded-DNA . Biochemistry 
25 , 7799 –7802 .3542037 
Griffith J. D. ; Harris L. D. ; Register J.  (1984 ) Visualization of Ssb-Ssdna Complexes
Active in the Assembly of Stable Reca-DNA Filaments . Cold Spring Harbor Symp. Quant. Biol. 
49 , 553 –559 .6397310 
Koh J. ; Saecker R. M. ; Record M. T.  (2008 ) DNA Binding Mode Transitions of Escherichia coli HU alpha beta: Evidence for Formation
of a Bent DNA-Protein Complex on Intact, Linear Duplex DNA . J. Mol. Biol. 
383 , 324 –346 .18657548 
Koh J. ; Shkel I. ; Saecker R. M. ; Record M. T.  (2011 ) Nonspecific DNA
Binding and Bending by HU alpha beta: Interfaces of the Three Binding
Modes Characterized by Salt-Dependent Thermodynamics . J. Mol. Biol. 
410 , 241 –267 .21513716 
van
Noort J. ; Verbrugge S. ; Goosen N. ; Dekker C. ; Dame R. T.  (2004 ) Dual architectural roles of HU: Formation of flexible
hinges and rigid filaments . Proc. Natl. Acad.
Sci. U.S.A. 
101 , 6969 –6974 .15118104 
Xiao B. T. ; Johnson R. C. ; Marko J. F.  (2010 ) Modulation
of HU-DNA interactions
by salt concentration and applied force . Nucleic
Acids Res. 
38 , 6176 –6185 .20497998 
Blackwell L. J. ; Borowiec J. A.  (1994 ) Human Replication
Protein-a Binds Single-Stranded-DNA
in 2 Distinct Complexes . Mol. Cell. Biol. 
14 , 3993 –4001 .8196638 
Blackwell L. J. ; Borowiec J. A. ; Mastrangelo I. A.  (1996 ) Single-stranded-DNA
binding alters
human replication protein a structure and facilitates interaction
with DNA-dependent protein kinase . Mol. Cell.
Biol. 
16 , 4798 –4807 .8756638 
Jezewska M.
J. ; Rajendran S. ; Bujalowski W.  (1998 ) Transition between different binding
modes in rat DNA polymerase β-ssDNA complexes . J. Mol. Biol. 
284 , 1113 –1131 .9837730 
Rajendran S. ; Jezewska M. J. ; Bujalowski W.  (1998 ) Human DNA polymerase β recognizes
single-stranded DNA using two different binding modes . J. Biol. Chem. 
273 , 31021 –31031 .9813000 
Lohman T. M. ; Ferrari M. E.  (1994 ) Escherichia coli Single-Stranded
DNA-Binding Protein: Multiple DNA-Binding Modes and Cooperativities . Annu. Rev. Biochem. 
63 , 527 –570 .7979247 



