Aminoacyl-tRNA
synthetases (AARSs)
play an important role in the translation of the genetic code. AARSs
catalyze the covalent attachment of amino acids to the 3′-end
of their cognate tRNAs and are responsible for maintaining the fidelity
of the aminoacylation process. The similar sizes and/or chemical structures
of many amino acid side chains make their accurate discrimination
by AARSs challenging. As a result, misactivation of noncognate amino
acids and misacylation of tRNAs sometimes occur. Accuracy in the coupling
of amino acids with their cognate tRNAs is achieved not only through
substrate specificity but also through product editing. Approximately
half of the 20 AARSs employ editing mechanisms for hydrolyzing misactivated
amino acids (pretransfer editing) and misacylated tRNAs (post-transfer
editing).

Prolyl-tRNA synthetases
(ProRSs) are class II synthetases that
catalyze covalent attachment of proline to the 3′-end of tRNAPro. ProRSs from all three kingdoms of life are found to misactivate
noncognate alanine and cysteine and form Ala-tRNAPro and
Cys-tRNAPro., To prevent mistranslation of the
proline codon, bacterial ProRSs have evolved pre- and/or post-transfer
editing mechanisms. Previous studies of Escherichia coli (Ec) ProRS have demonstrated that the aminoacylation domain is the
site of pretransfer editing, whereas an
insertion domain located between the class II synthetase conserved
motifs 2 and 3 (INS, ∼180 amino acids) is the post-transfer
editing active site that hydrolyzes Ala-tRNAPro (Figure )., In contrast, Cys-tRNAPro is deacylated in trans by a free-standing editing
protein known as YbaK.−

Ribbon representation of the three-dimensional structural
model
of the monomeric form of Ec ProRS. The homology model was derived
from the X-ray crystal structure of Ef ProRS (PDB code: 2J3L). The catalytically important residues and the GXXXP motif
of Ec ProRS are shown by licorice representation; the Ef ProRS residues
are shown in parentheses.

Recent efforts have focused on the molecular mechanism of
the post-transfer
editing reaction catalyzed by INS homologues.− Despite several
studies, the role of lysine 279 (K279) of the INS domain, which is
strictly conserved in bacterial ProRSs, has remained poorly understood. This residue is also strongly conserved
among most of the INS-like superfamily of editing domains., Earlier experimental studies revealed that K279 is crucial for the
post-transfer editing reaction. The substitution
of K279 to alanine resulted in a post-transfer editing defective enzyme;
only ∼5% activity was retained compared to the wild-type (WT)
enzyme, suggesting a role in substrate binding and/or catalysis. The
YbaK protein, which is a homologue of the INS domain, possesses a
strictly conserved lysine that is analogous to K279 at position 46.
The conservative change of K46R results in a ∼44-fold reduced
Cys-tRNAPro deacylation activity as compared to WT YbaK. This observation suggested that the conserved
lysine of INS and its homologues may play a role in catalysis. However, subsequent studies did not support the
direct involvement of K279 of ProRS or
K46 of YbaK in deacylation of aminoacyl-tRNAPro. Through extensive computational and experimental analysis,
it was demonstrated that in the case of INS, the 2′-OH of the
A76 ribose of tRNA activates a catalytic water molecule required for
the hydrolysis of Ala-tRNAPro. The proton transfer from
the catalytic water to O3′ of the substrate is facilitated
by the backbone carbonyl of G261. The tetrahedral intermediate formed
during hydrolytic cleavage is stabilized by the backbone amides of
the conserved 331GXXXP335 loop.

YbaK exploits the chemistry of its substrate cysteine
sulfhydryl
in a unique cyclization mechanism but
shares some catalytic features with INS. In particular, YbaK catalysis
also involves hydrogen-bonding interactions between the 2′-OH
of A76 and a conserved GXXXP loop to stabilize reaction intermediates
and products, and protein backbone atoms for proton transfer steps. Therefore, the reduced catalytic activity observed
for the K46R YbaK protein is likely to originate from surface/electrostatic
incompatibility due to delocalization of the positive charge over
a larger area, which in turn affects the binding of misacylated Cys-tRNAPro. Although these studies rule out a direct catalytic involvement
of K279 in the Ala-tRNAPro hydrolysis, the precise role
of K279 in Ala-tRNAPro deacylation remains unanswered.

On the basis of previous experimental, substrate docking, and MD
simulation results,, we hypothesized that the role
of the conserved lysine may be to anchor the phosphate backbone of
the acceptor stem of misacylated tRNAPro and position it
into the editing active site. However, the quantitative contribution
of K279 to binding versus catalysis has been difficult to address
experimentally. It is technically not feasible to prepare mischarged
tRNAPro at high enough concentrations to derive KM by varying the misacylated tRNA concentrations.
Moreover, the main tRNA binding determinant of Ec ProRS is the anticodon
interaction, and therefore any contribution of K279 to binding/positioning
of the 5′-CCA-Ala end of the tRNA is difficult to measure and
quantify. Therefore, in this work, we have attempted to address the
elusive role of K279 of bacterial ProRSs using computational approaches.
In particular, the binding versus catalytic role of K279 was investigated
by calculating its pKa. As previously
observed by Sekimoto et al., if a lysine
is involved in catalysis as a general base that polarizes a catalytic
water molecule, its pKa is expected to
be lower than that of a free lysine (∼10.5). In contrast, a
higher pKa value would stabilize the protonated
state of this residue, which may facilitate substrate binding through
electrostatic interaction. In addition to pKa calculations, charge-neutralization calculations were performed
to evaluate the impact of neighboring polar residues on the protonation
state of K279. We also probed the role of K279 in substrate binding
by computing the Gibbs free energies for the WT and mutant ProRSs.
Complementary experimental studies were also performed. Our results
support the hypothesis that an electrostatic interaction between K279
and the tRNA phosphate backbone is critical for hydrolytic editing
of misacylated tRNAPro.

Materials and Methods
E. coli and Enterococcus faecalis (Ef) ProRSs possess high sequence identity (48%). In particular,
the active site residues within 6 Å of K279 are highly similar
(93% similar and 50% identical) between these two enzymes. Because
the X-ray crystallographic structure of Ec ProRS is not currently
available and the accuracy of the computational methods used in this
study depends on the accuracy of the structure, computational studies
were performed with the X-ray crystallographic structure of Ef ProRS
as a starting structure (PDB code: 2J3L). All experimental
studies were performed with purified WT and mutant Ec ProRS (see below).

Computational
Methods
The pKa of K279 (both
in WT and D299A
Ef ProRS, Figure ) and K306 (as a control, ) were computed
using a single subunit of Ef ProRS (PDB code: 2J3L, chain B) in a substrate-free
state. Separately, the binding affinity of the substrate analogue
5′-CCA-Ala was determined theoretically using the same subunit
of Ef ProRS. A truncated INS editing domain was first generated that
included all residues within 30 Å of K279. Free energy of binding
was calculated using a previously reported model, where the substrate
analogue 5′-CCA-Ala was docked into the isolated INS domain
(residues 242–388) of Ef ProRS. The double mutant (K279D/D299K) was prepared by swapping the position
of the two residues, K279 and D299, located in the INS domain. Combined
quantum mechanical and molecular mechanical (QM/MM) calculations were
used for the pKa calculation, while the binding free energies were computed
using pure molecular mechanical potentials. Visualizations, manipulations,
and analyses of the protein structure were carried out using the Visual
Molecular Dynamics (VMD) program. All
free energy calculations were performed with explicit solvent molecules
using the CHARMM program suite. For all
simulations, the all-atom CHARMM22 force field was used. The density functional theory (DFT) calculations
were performed using the B3LYP functional and 6-31+g(d,p) basis set., All computations were carried out on an in-house server at the University
of Wisconsin-Eau Claire Chemistry Department containing 11 nodes,
each with 8 Intel Xeon E5430 processors.

Stochastic Boundary Setup
of Molecular Systems
The
centers of the simulated systems for the calculations of pKa and binding free energy were taken as the
geometric average of the atoms of K279 and 5′-CCA-Ala, respectively.
In both simulations, the protein segment of interest was submerged
into a water box, and all water molecules beyond 30 Å from the
center were deleted. This spherical, solvated active site was simulated
using the stochastic boundary condition, the details of which have been described earlier., Briefly, atoms within 24 Å were treated with Newtonian dynamics,
while Langevin’s dynamics was applied to the region 24–30
Å, where the frictional forces between the atoms were gradually
increased toward the boundary. Water molecules were treated by the
three-point-charge TIP3P model. All nonbonded
interactions were truncated using a switching function between 12
and 14 Å, and the dielectric constant was kept at unity. The
SHAKE algorithm was used to constrain
the bond lengths and bond angles of the hydrogen atoms. A time step
of 1 fs was used in the leapfrog Verlet algorithm for integration., For conformation sampling, MD simulations were performed using a
constant number of particles, volume, and temperature (NVT) conditions
producing a canonical ensemble. The Helmholtz free energy obtained
using the NVT ensemble has been approximated to be equal to the Gibbs
free energy in the present study. Finally, to keep the reaction zone
intact, a deformable boundary potential corresponding to a 30 Å
solvent sphere was applied to all solvent
atoms in the system.

Calculation of pKa
The
atoms of K279 (or K306, ), located in the center of the solvated enzyme,
were treated quantum mechanically using self-consistent charge density-functional
tight-binding (SCC-DFTB) theory., All other
atoms belonging to the enzyme and the solvent were simulated with
molecular mechanics. The boundary between the QM and MM regions was
treated with the link atom method, where
one link atom was placed between the Cβ and the Cα atoms of the lysine.

The calculation of proton
affinity in the condensed phase was performed using the thermodynamic
diagram shown in Scheme . In the first step,
the electrostatic interaction between the proton and the ε-amino
nitrogen atom of the lysine was gradually reduced by converting the
proton to an uncharged dummy atom (D) following the standard procedure
of Kirkwood’s thermodynamic integration (TI) method, details
of which have been described earlier. This provides the change in
Gibbs free energy for the process (LysNH3+ →
LysNH2···D) in Scheme . The second step is the conversion of the dummy atom to a gas-phase
proton, and the change in Gibbs free energy of this process can be
equated to the gas-phase standard Gibbs free energy of an isolated
proton, ΔG°(g, H+) with a value of −6.28 kcal/mol. In the third step, the gas-phase proton is solvated and
the Gibbs free energy is equal to the solvation free energy of a free
proton, ΔGsolv°(H+), which is −264.0
kcal/mol.

Scheme for the pKa Calculation of Lys279
using Kirkwood’s Thermodynamic Integration Method
The procedures for carrying
out the first step of Scheme , that is, the
computation of ΔGTI°(LysNH3+ →
LysNH2···D),
have been discussed earlier. Briefly,
the proton is converted over sequential steps to a dummy atom with
an effective charge reduction from +1 to 0. To study the response
of the active site to the nonintegral charge on the proton, the enzyme
system was simulated with a hybrid energy function (Uhybrid) derived by linearly combining the potential energies
of the protonated (ULysNH3+) and the deprotonated (ULysNH2···D) states of the enzyme-bound lysine at different
proportions. Mathematically, this is carried out using the coupling
parameter, λ:A total of 11 separate windows were used.
In each window, an ensemble of conformations was generated by carrying
out 500-ps MD simulations, each time perturbing the charge of the
proton by a small amount. The partial derivative of the Gibbs free
energy with respect to the coupling parameter (∂G/∂λ) was calculated from the ensemble-averaged potential
energy difference in each window as described by Rauschnot et al. Finally, the free energy change, ΔGTI°(LysNH3+ → LysNH2···D),
was computed by integrating (∂G/∂λ)
over the coupling parameter (λ) from 0 to 1:

As illustrated in Scheme , the aqueous
free energy of deprotonation of K279, ΔG°(aq), was obtained as the sum of the three quantities as
in eq :

The above free energy
change was corrected by including three correction
terms in eq :

The first
correction term represents Born’s correction to
include the solvation effects beyond 30 Å (ΔGBorn). The second term accounts
for the zero-point energy difference (ΔZPE) of the lysine for
its protonated and deprotonated states. The last term is the high-level
correction (HLC), which accounts for the difference between DFT and
SCC-DFTB-computed energies for the gas-phase proton addition reaction
of an isolated lysine molecule.

The pKa was calculated from the corrected
aqueous free energy change, ΔGcorr°(aq), using the following equation:where R and T are the universal gas constant
(1.987 cal mol–1 K–1) and the
temperature (298 K), respectively.

Charge-Neutralization Calculations
The impact of neighboring
evolutionarily conserved polar residues on the protonation state of
K279 was studied by examining their effects on the proton transfer
equilibrium. To quantify the electrostatic impact of specific charged
residues on the protonated state of the lysine, the change in the
electrostatic component of the QM/MM interaction energy was calculated
using eq :where Eelecδ and Eelec0 are the
interaction energies (between K279 and a specific charged residue)
before and after the charge on the specific residue is abolished.
Therefore, ΔEelec contains the net
effect of the partial charges (indicated by δ) of all atoms
of the specific charged residue on the protonated state of K279.

Relative Binding Free Energy Calculation
The relative
binding free energy calculations were carried out using the molecular
mechanics-based free energy perturbation (FEP) method., The solvated substrate-bound INS domain was equilibrated for 500
ps, after which 500 ps of further simulation was carried out. The
binding free energy of a substrate, ΔGbind° (aq), can be computed by following the thermodynamic diagram in Scheme . The substrate
is annihilated by converting the molecule to a dummy molecule, wherein
atoms have no electrostatic, hydrogen bonding, or van der Waals interactions.
Following Scheme , the free energy of binding
can be written as

A Thermodynamic Diagram for the Calculation
of Gibbs Free Energy
of Binding of the 5′-CCA-Ala Substrate to the INS Domain
The first term, ΔGannih°(S) is the free energy change due
to the annihilation of the substrate and was not calculated as it
cancels out in the calculation of the relative binding free energy
between the WT and the mutant ProRS (represented as MUT, hereafter).
The second term is computed by employing Zwanzig’s FEP formulationwhere the UE...S and UE...D denote
the potential energies for enzyme in the substrate-bound and substrate-annihilated
states, respectively, kB is Boltzmann’s
constant, and the quantity in ⟨ ⟩ indicates the ensemble-average
computed on the enzyme bound state (E···S). The relative
binding free energy of the WT and the mutant ProRS was computed from
the difference between ΔGbind°(MUT, aq) and ΔGbind°(WT, aq) using eq :

Experimental Methods
Materials
Proline and alanine (&gt;99% pure) were obtained
from Sigma. [γ-32P] ATP and [32P]PPi were from Perkin-Elmer, Shelton, CT. Primers for site-directed
mutagenesis and PCR were purchased from Integrated DNA Technologies,
Coralville, IA.

Enzyme Preparation
Overexpression
and purification
of WT and mutant Ec ProRS, tagged with six histidine residues (His6) at the N-terminus, were performed as described previously., Plasmids encoding E303A, E303D, E303K, K279E, and K279E/E303K mutant
variants of Ec ProRS were generated by site-directed mutagenesis of
pCS-M1S using primers listed in Table
S1 (). Results of
the mutagenesis were confirmed by DNA sequencing (University of Wisconsin,
Biotechnology Center-Madison). Protein expression was induced in Ec
SG13009 (pREP4) competent cells with 0.1 mM isopropyl β-d-thiogalactoside for 4 h at 37 °C. Histidine-tagged proteins
were purified using a Talon cobalt affinity resin, and the desired
protein was eluted with 100 mM imidazole. Protein concentrations were
determined initially by the Bio-Rad Protein Assay (Bio-Rad Laboratories)
followed by active-site titration.

RNA Preparation
E. coli tRNAPro was transcribed using T7 RNA polymerase from BstN1-linearized plasmids
as described and purified by denaturing
12% polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis.

ATP-PPi Exchange Assays
The ATP-PPi exchange assay was performed
at 37 °C according to the published method. The concentration of proline was varied between 0.025 and
50 mM, and 10 nM WT and 20 nM mutant enzyme concentrations were used
for proline activation. Kinetic parameters were determined from Lineweaver–Burk
plots and represent the average of at least three determinations.

ATP Hydrolysis Assays
ATP hydrolysis reactions to monitor
pretransfer editing were carried out as described previously. The alanine concentration used was 500 mM and
the reactions were initiated with a final ProRS concentration of 0.5
μM.

Aminoacylation Assays
Aminoacylation
assays were performed
under standard conditions− with 0.5 μM tRNAPro, 3 μM [3H] proline, 20 μM proline, and 100
nM ProRS.

Aminoacylated tRNA
Aminoacylated
tRNA for use in deacylation
assays was prepared at room temperature according to published conditions.E. coli alanyl-tRNA synthetase
(8 μM) was used to acylate G1:C72/U70 tRNAPro (8
μM) in the presence of [14C]Ala (∼250 μM)
in buffer containing 50 mM HEPES (pH 7.5), 4 mM ATP, 25 mM MgCl2, 20 mM β-mercaptoethanol, 20 mM KCl, and 0.1 mg/mL
bovine serum albumin.

Deacylation Assays
Deacylation assays
were carried
out at room temperature according to published conditions with slight modifications. Reactions contained
about 1 μM G1:C72/U70 [14C]-Ala-tRNAPro, 50 mM HEPES (pH 7.5), 5 mM MgCl2, and were initiated
with 0.5 μM ProRS. Background deacylation observed in a reaction
lacking ProRS was subtracted from each reaction.

Results
Computational
Results
Theoretical pKa Calculation for
Lysine
The plot of Gibbs free energy change for the K279
of WT Ef ProRS as a function of the coupling parameter λ is
shown in Figure . The high correlation coefficient
(&gt;0.99) is consistent with the assumption of linear variation of
energy
upon gradual perturbation of the site due to deprotonation. The Gibbs
free energy of the process of converting the lysine proton to a dummy
atom, ΔGTI°(LysNH3+ →
LysNH2···D), was computed using integration
of the linear function from λ = 0 to 1 (eq ). The corrected Gibbs free energy of deprotonation, ΔGcorr°(aq), is obtained using eqs  and . The computed pKa (eq ) of the ε-amino group of
K279 is 14.2 (Table ), which is ∼3
units higher than the pKa of an isolated
lysine (10.53). Thus, the proton on the ε-amino group of K279
in INS is more difficult to deprotonate compared to that of an isolated
lysine. We hypothesize that the elevated pKa of K279 originates from salt-bridge formation with the adjacent
acidic residue, D299. This is supported by the computed pKa of the same lysine in a D299A mutant, which was found
to be 11.0; this value is close to the experimental value of 10.53
for a free lysine. To validate the computational protocol, the pKa of a lysine located on the surface (K306,
Figure ) was also calculated and was
found to be 11.3, which is only slightly above the pKa of a free lysine (Table ).

A plot
of the partial derivative of Gibbs free energy with respect
to the coupling parameter λ, (∂G/∂λ), as a function of the coupling parameter, λ.

Decomposition
of the Components of
the Gibbs Free Energy of Deprotonation of K279 and K306 for Various
Ef ProRS Systems
 	free energy (kcal/mol)	
components	K279 (WT)	K279
(D299A)	K306 (WT)	
ΔGTI°(LysNH3+ → LysNH2···D)	291.1	286.8	287.2	
ΔG°(g, H+)	–6.28	–6.28	–6.28	
ΔGsolv°(H+)	–264.0	–264.0	–264.0	
ΔGBorn	–5.5	–5.5	–5.5	
ΔZPE	–9.4	–9.4	–9.4	
HLC	13.3	13.3	13.3	
ΔGcorr°(aq)	19.3	15.0	15.4	
pKa	14.2	11.0	11.3	
See eqs  and .

ΔGTI°(LysNH3+ → LysNH2···D)
is the Gibbs free energy computed using SCC-DFTB following the formalism
of thermodynamic integration.

ΔG°(g,H+) is the reported value of the standard Gibbs
free energy of a proton the in gas phase.

ΔGsolv°(H+) is the standard Gibbs free energy of solvation of a proton
obtained from the theoretical study by Kelley et al.

ΔGBorn is Born’s correction in the Gibbs
free energy to account
for the solvation effect beyond 30 Å, which is the limit of our
spherical boundary.

ΔZPE
is the difference in
the zero-point vibrational energies of the protonated and deprotonated
state of the lysine calculated using DFT.

HLC is equal to the difference between
SCC-DFTB and DFT computed Born–Oppenheimer energies for the
gas-phase proton addition reaction of an isolated lysine molecule.

The Gibbs free energy of deprotonation
was decomposed into its
various components, and the values are given in Table . It appears that the zero-point correction for the protonated
and deprotonated states accounts for ∼9 kcal/mol of energy.
Also, the high-level correction indicates that the SCC-DFTB-computed
gas-phase Born–Oppenheimer energies for the deprotonation reaction
of the lysine molecule is underestimated by a significant amount (13
kcal/mol) compared to those obtained using DFT.

The charge neutralization
calculations were performed to determine
the effect of neighboring residues on the protonation state of K279.
The results suggest that the polar residues H298 and D299 of Ef ProRS
(Figure a), which correspond to H302 and E303
of Ec ProRS (Figure b), stabilize the protonated
state of K279. D299 forms a salt bridge with K279 (Figure a), and as indicated in Figure  neutralization of this negative charge has the most significant
impact of all the residues tested on the interaction energy (ΔEelec) between K279 and D299. The 15 kcal/mol
higher value of ΔEelec indicates
a significant destabilizing effect of charge neutralization.

(a) The highly
conserved K279 and the surrounding polar residues
are shown in the editing active site of Ef ProRS. (b) Sequence alignment
of the relevant portion of INS domain from Ec and Ef ProRS.

Change in the QM/MM interaction energy due to
charge removal of
neighboring polar residues of K279, averaged over 100 conformations.

Relative Binding Free Energy
Calculation
To examine
if binding of the backbone of the tRNA acceptor stem to INS is favored
by the lysine at position 279, the free energy of binding of 5′-CCA-Ala
to the editing domain was compared between WT INS and the ProRS mutants.
For the charge-swapped double mutant, K279D/D299K, the relative binding
free energy, ΔΔGbind(aq), was computed to be 12.8 kcal/mol (Table ). The positive ΔΔGbind(aq) value indicates less favorable binding of 5′-CCA-Ala
to the editing domain of the double mutant. A severe reduction in
binding affinity was also observed for the K279E variant (ΔΔGbind(aq) = 33.7 kcal/mol).
In contrast, an enhanced binding affinity for the 5′-CCA-Ala
substrate was observed for the D299K variant (ΔΔGbind(aq) = −39.6 kcal/mol).
This observed trend indicates that the presence of lysine at position
279 is essential for the binding of misacylated tRNA to the INS. Visualization
of the substrate-bound structures (Figure ) revealed that the 5′-CCA-Ala substrate is positioned farther
away from the lysine in the charge-swapped double mutant. In particular,
the nonbridging oxygen of the phosphate anion of the terminal A76
of 5′-CCA-Ala is located ∼10.5 Å from the ε-amino
group of K299 in the double mutant, whereas the distance between the
same nonbridging oxygen of the phosphate anion and the ε-amino
group of K279 is ∼5.0 Å in the case of WT INS. In contrast,
a much shorter distance was observed between the nonbridging phosphate
and ε-amino nitrogen of K279 in the case of D299K variant (2.7
Å, figure not shown). The presence of an additional positive
charge at position 299 caused an increased electrostatic interaction
between the phosphate group of the terminal A76 and K279.

Altered conformation
of the 5′-CCA-Ala bound to the INS
double mutant (b) compared to WT Ef ProRS (a). The protein segment
is shown in new cartoon representation, whereas the 5′-CCA-Ala
substrate is represented in licorice.

Relative Gibbs Free Energy of Binding
of 5′-CCA-Ala to the INS Domain of WT and Mutant Ef ProRS,
Obtained Using FEP Calculations
 	energy (kcal/mol)	
Ef ProRS	ΔGFEP°(WT···D → WT···S)	ΔΔGbind° (aq)	
WT	–415.4	 	
K279D/D299K	–402.6	12.8	
K279E	–381.7	33.7	
D299K	–455.0	–39.6	
Experimental Results
To evaluate the computational
findings, we have purified mutants of Ec ProRS proteins wherein K279
and E303 were substituted with other polar or neutral residues. E303
is the equivalent of D299 in Ef ProRS. Kinetic studies were performed
to analyze the enzymatic activities of the WT enzyme and all ProRS
variants (vide infra).

Amino Acid Activation
To examine the impact of mutation
of E303 on the function of Ec ProRS, this residue was substituted
with alanine, aspartic acid, and lysine. Using the ATP-PPi exchange reaction, we found that substitution of
residue 303 with neutral, negatively charged, or positively charged
residues result in only a minor 2–4-fold decrease in proline
activation (Table ). Similarly, only ∼2-fold
reduced activity was observed for the K279E variant and the K279E/E303K
double mutant.

Kinetic Parameters for Proline Activation
by WT and Mutant Ec ProRS
Ec ProRS	kcat (s–1)	KM (mM)	kcat/KM (mM–1 s–1)	relative kcat/KM	fold decrease	
WT	12.6 ± 4.9	0.18 ± 0.03	71	1.0	 	
E303A	5.2 ± 0.6	0.216 ± 0.004	24	0.34	3.0	
E303D	4.6 ± 0.5	0.199 ± 0.005	23	0.32	3.1	
E303K	5.1 ± 1.5	0.30 ± 0.03	17	0.24	4.2	
K279E	5.7 ± 0.9	0.22 ± 0.04	26	0.37	2.7	
K279E/E303K	5.9 ± 0.9	0.19 ± 0.01	31	0.44	2.3	
Results are the average of three
trials with the standard deviation indicated.

Data is from ref ().

Aminoacylation
Activity
We next determined the effect
of mutation of E303 and K279 on aminoacylation activity using conditions
where the initial rate of the reaction was proportional to kcat/KM. A small
decrease in the aminoacylation efficiency for the E303 variants was
observed compared to WT ProRS (Figure a).
The aminoacylation activity of the K279E variant and the K279E/E303K
double mutant was essentially the same as WT ProRS (Figure b).

Initial rates of aminoacylation of tRNAPro with
proline
by WT and the five variants of Ec ProRS. For clarity, the results
are presented in two panels, (a) and (b). The assays were performed
at room temperature with 0.5 μM tRNAPro and 100 nM
Ec ProRS. Linear fits of the data are shown.

Pretransfer Editing Activity
We also investigated the
pretransfer editing activity for all variants by monitoring the hydrolysis
of the misacylated alanyl-adenylate (Ala-AMP). For the five variants
(K279E, E303A, E303D, E303K, and K279E/E303K) of Ec ProRS, an approximately
20–40% reduction in pretransfer editing activity was observed
relative to WT ProRS (Figure ).

Relative pretransfer
editing activity of WT and mutant Ec ProRS.
The assay was performed at 37 °C using 4 μM ProRS and 500
mM alanine. Results are reported as percent activity relative to WT,
which was set to 100%.

Post-Transfer Editing Activity
The impact of mutation
of K279 and E303 on post-transfer editing was investigated by monitoring
hydrolysis of mischarged Ala-tRNAPro. A severe impact on
the post-transfer editing activity (∼25-fold) was observed
for the K279E mutant (Figure ). In addition,
the deacylation activity of the charge-swapped K279E/E303K double
mutant was undetectable (&gt;50-fold decrease). Thus, even though
they
interact via a salt bridge, swapping the positions of the two residues
does not restore activity. These results are consistent with the computational
results showing a significant decrease in the free energy of binding
of 5′-CCA-Ala to the editing domain of the K279D/D299K variant
compared to the WT enzyme (Table ). Interestingly,
the E303K variant was found to be significantly more active in hydrolyzing
Ala-tRNAPro compared to the WT enzyme. Slightly enhanced
post-transfer editing activity was also observed for E303A ProRS.
On the other hand, no significant change in activity was observed
for the conservative E303D substitution variant (Figure ).

Deacylation of Ala-tRNAPro by WT and mutant Ec ProRS.
The assays were performed at room temperature with 1 μM G1:C72/U70
[14C]Ala-tRNAPro and 0.5 μM Ec ProRS.

Discussion
Lysine
279 plays a crucial role in post-transfer editing activity
by the INS domain of Ec ProRS, and analogous lysine residues are found
in the majority of INS-like editing domain homologues. Recent experimental and computational studies
have revealed no direct involvement of this residue in catalysis.,, The docked structure of 5′-CCA-Ala
bound to INS indicates that the role of K279 may be limited to substrate
binding. Indeed, experiments performed
with high concentrations of K279A ProRS (5–50 μM) showed
significant levels of deacylation of Ala-tRNAPro, which
supports a role for K279 in binding (data not shown). However, there
are technical challenges in quantifying the binding versus catalytic
role of K279. Binding studies of WT versus K279E/E303K ProRS were
carried out using a fluorescently labeled semisynthetic two-piece
tRNA, but very similar affinities were measured in each case (data
not shown). This is most likely due to the major role of the anticodon
interaction in tRNAPro binding.,, To overcome these experimental obstructions,
in the present study computational approaches were employed to address
the binding versus catalytic role of the highly conserved K279.

Protein electrostatics is well-known to play an important role
in protein structure and function, and many functionally important
amino acid residues exhibit an altered pKa relative to that of the free amino acid. For example, pKa perturbations have been observed for amino acid residues
that contribute to ligand binding, as well as to protein–protein
interactions., To explore the precise role of
the highly conserved and functionally critical K279 residue present
in the INS domain of bacterial ProRS and free-standing editing domain
homologues, we computed its pKa in various
environments. The high pKa value of 14
calculated for the ε-amino group of K279 in WT ProRS is due
to the presence of neighboring polar residues, especially due to the
salt-bridge with D299. This is evident from the three-unit decrease
in the pKa of K279 in the presence of
the secondary D299A mutation (Table ). Aspartate
299 is moderately conserved in bacterial ProRSs. Analysis of the multiple
sequence alignment of 492 ProRS sequences showed 65% conservation
of D/E at that position. Earlier NMR studies have revealed that the
pKa of a carboxylate side chain of aspartate/glutamate
decreases because of salt bridge interactions involving basic residues
such as arginine and lysine., Similarly, the pKa of lysine is expected to increase in the presence
of a neighboring acidic residue because the positive charge on the
ε-amino nitrogen atom is stabilized by the salt bridge interaction.
A computational charge neutralization study indeed demonstrated that
the protonated state of K279 in Ef ProRS is significantly stabilized
by D299; destabilization of the system was evident upon neutralization
of this closely located (within 4 Å) acidic residue and to a
lesser extent other surrounding polar residues (Figure ). As discussed in Sekimoto et al., the high pKa of K279 suggested its role
in substrate binding by favoring a strong interaction with a phosphate
oxygen of the tRNA backbone.

As expected, kinetic studies show
that site-directed substitution
of E303 and K279 has little impact on enzyme functions that occur
in the aminoacylation active site pocket, that is, amino acid activation,
aminoacylation, and pretransfer editing reactions. In contrast, a
more significant impact was observed in the post-transfer editing
reaction. Earlier, it was shown that K279A ProRS is severely defective
in hydrolyzing Ala-tRNAPro. In addition, the analogous lysine residue in the free-standing YbaK
editing domain (K46) is critical for deacylation of Cys-tRNAPro. Of all the YbaK variants examined,
K46A was the most deleterious but did not result in a complete loss
in activity (∼66-fold). The data were consistent with a role
in positioning of the misaminoacylated tRNAPro substrate
in the active site. In the present study,
we observed that the K279E Ec ProRS variant is also severely defective
in post-transfer editing. The fact that the double mutation K279E/E303K,
which is expected to restore a salt bridge between positions 279 and
303, failed to restore hydrolysis activity supports our claim that
the presence of a positively charged residue at position 279 is essential
for Ala-tRNAPro deacylation. A computational study of the
free energy of binding of 5′-CCA-Ala revealed tighter binding
of the substrate to the WT INS domain relative to the double mutant.
Thus, the combined computational and experimental results support
the conclusion that K279 is involved in binding and positioning the
misacylated tRNAPro into the post-transfer editing active
site. Although a K279R ProRS variant was not tested, a previous study
of Haemophilus influenzae YbaK showed that even a
conservative K46R change resulted in a large decrease in editing activity
(∼44-fold).

Although the
charge neutralization calculations with Ef ProRS revealed
stabilization of K279 by the closely positioned D299 (E303 of Ec ProRS),
enhancement in post-transfer editing efficiency was observed for both
E303K and E303A variants relative to the WT enzyme. This finding suggests
that the presence of a positively charged or neutral residue at position
303 of Ec ProRS enhances the positive charge density at position 279,
which is likely to increase the binding affinity of K279 for the backbone
of the tRNA acceptor stem. These experimental and computational findings
suggest that the role of the neighboring glutamate is not only limited
to stabilizing the protonated K279 residue. E303 also appears to modulate
the positive charge density of the active site that is used to anchor
the phosphate backbone of the substrate during catalysis. The salt
bridge between K279 and E303 helps to maintain an optimum interaction
between the mischarged tRNA and K279. The increase in positive charge
density due to the substitution of E303 with a neutral or basic residue,
which likely results in tighter binding of the misacylated tRNA, may
slow product release.

Conclusions
Previous mutational
studies suggested that K279 is important for
Ala-tRNAPro deacylation by the bacterial ProRS INS domain,
and the analogous lysine is critical for Cys-tRNAPro deacylation
by the homologous single-domain YbaK protein. Recent computational
studies of ProRS and YbaK did not reveal any active participation
of this residue in catalysis. On the basis of both experimental and
computational results, it has been speculated that the role of this
strictly conserved basic residue in prokaryotic-like ProRSs and related
editing domains is to bind the misacylated tRNA substrate and position
it in the editing active site. In the present study, pKa and free energy of binding calculations, as well as
charge-swapping experiments, are consistent with a role for K279 in
binding the phosphate group of misacylated tRNAPro. A general
role for lysine in substrate binding through electrostatic interactions
has been observed in many enzymes. For example, the conserved histidine
residues in the active site of bovine pancreatic ribonuclease are
actively involved in catalytic function, while the active site lysine
serves only to bind the phosphate anion. Taken together, the combined computational and experimental studies
reported here strongly support the role of K279 in substrate binding
but not in catalysis. Interestingly, one member of the INS superfamily
of editing domains, ProXp-z, does not have a conserved lysine in the
analogous position to K279 but instead has a conserved asparagine
residue. Future studies will address
the activity of this editing domain homologue and the role of the
asparagine residue in catalytic function and substrate binding.

Supporting Information Available
A table
containing the list
of primers used in this study and a figure showing the three-dimensional
structure of Ef ProRS (PDB code: 2J3L) are presented
as supporting materials. Figure S1 shows the two lysine residues (K279
and K306) used in the pKa calculations.
This material is available free of charge via the Internet at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bi401279r_si_001.pdf

The authors declare no
competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
We gratefully acknowledge the computational
support from the
Learning and Technology Services, University of Wisconsin-Eau Claire.
We would also like to thank Ms. Irene C. Mueller and Mr. Mathew J.
Tschudy for their contribution in purifying some of the Ec ProRS mutant
proteins.

Abbreviations Used
AARSaminoacyl-tRNA synthetase

EcEscherichia coli

EfEnterococcus
faecium

DFTdensity functional theory

FEPfree energy perturbation

HLChigh-level correction

INSinsertion domain

MDmolecular dynamics

NVTconstant particle, volume and temperature

ProRSprolyl-tRNA synthetase

QM/MMquantum mechanical/molecular
mechanical

SCC-DFTBself-consistent charge density-functional tight-binding

TIthermodynamic integration

WTwild-type

ZPEzero-point energy

