Abnormal metabolism of Aβ
that promotes its aggregation and accumulation in the brain is tightly
linked to the development of Alzheimer’s disease (AD). Aβ is an ∼4 kDa peptide that is
derived
from the amyloid precursor protein (APP) through a series of sequential
enzymatic reactions involving β- and γ-secretase, respectively. The ectodomain of APP is cleaved by β-secretase,
releasing soluble APPβ (sAPPβ) and generating a 99-amino
acid β-carboxyl-terminal membrane fragment (CTFβ or C99).
CTFβ is then sequentially cleaved within the membrane-spanning
domain by γ-secretase to produce the APP intracellular domain
(AICD) and the various Aβ isoforms. Genetic, biochemical, animal
modeling, and pathological studies strongly suggest that Aβx–42 is the pathogenic form of Aβ. The vast
majority of APP and PSEN mutations
linked to early onset familial Alzheimer’s disease (FAD) results
in increased levels
of Aβ42. Aβ1–42 aggregates
faster in vitro than Aβ1–40. In transgenic modeling studies, Aβ42 but
not Aβ40
seeds deposition in vivo. Further, Aβ40 may protect transgenic mice from
amyloid deposition., Moreover, Aβx–42 is typically the earliest
detectable form of Aβ in the AD brain, and
the species that is most consistently detected in AD brain.− Therefore, given that small increases in the levels of long Aβ
isoforms (Aβ42 and possibly Aβ43) appear to be capable
of prompting the aggregation and accumulation of Aβ, triggering
a complex pathological cascade leading to AD, lowering the levels
of these longer forms of Aβ is still considered a potential
prophylactic approach to AD therapy.−

γ-Secretase
modulators (GSMs) are small molecules that lower
Aβ42 levels by altering γ-secretase processivity without
significantly altering the initial ε-cleavage of APP., Two major classes of GSMs have been identified and intensively investigated. Acidic GSMs, which include nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory
drug (NSAID) and NSAID-like compounds, contain
a carboxylic acid group that is anchored to various hydrophilic scaffolds. Nonacidic GSMs have largely been based on a
piperazinyl pyrimidine., Acidic GSMs characteristically
shift γ-secretase cleavage by
decreasing the level of Aβ42 and concomitantly increasing the
level of Aβ38, whereas nonacidic GSMs decrease levels of both
Aβ40 and Aβ42 while increasing
levels of Aβ37 and Aβ38. More recently, a distinct class
of triterpenoid nonacidic GSMs that lower the levels of both Aβ42
and Aβ38 have
been identified, while sparing the levels of Aβ40 and total
Aβ. In addition, other compounds
that selectively increase
the level of Aβ42 and decrease the level of Aβ38 have
been identified and are termed inverse GSMs (iGSMs).

γ-Secretase is a multiunit aspartyl protease
known to cleave multiple type 1 membrane proteins
within their TMDs. Presenilins 1 and
2 (PSEN1 and PSEN2, respectively)
are the catalytic subunits of γ-secretase, and anterior pharynx-defective
1 (APH-1), nicastrin, and presenilin enhancer protein 2 (PEN-2) are
additional subunits required for γ-secretase complex formation
and activity. γ-Secretase exhibits
little cleavage specificity
and appears to preferentially cleave the substrate’s transmembrane
“stubs” that have been generated following sheddase
cleavage that removes the majority of the substrate’s ectodomain.
It is also thought that colocalization of substrate and γ-secretase
within membrane microdomains
may play a critical role in regulating cleavage., γ-Secretase cleavage can play an essential role in transmembrane
signaling or termination of transmembrane
signaling, but for many substrates, it
may play a role
akin to
that of the proteasome by recycling these membrane protein stubs.,

γ-Secretase cleavage of APP and Notch-1 has been studied
more intensively than cleavage of other substrates.− A stepwise cleavage model, originally proposed by
Takami et al., has provided
valuable insights into how a single enzymatic activity generates a
spectrum of Aβ peptides. In this
model, γ-secretase initially cleaves APP
at one of several potential ε-sites within the APP TMD but near
the cytoplasmic face of the membrane. Subsequently, there is successive
stepwise cleavage of the substrate. Depending on the number of stepwise
cleavages, typically three to five, multiple different Aβ peptides
can be produced. For APP, there
is evidence that the initial ε-cleavage can occur at least at
three sites, and that differential ε-cleavage results in preferential
processing along specific product lines. Thus, initial ε-cleavage generating Aβ48
or -51 preferentially leads to Aβ42 production, and ε-cleavage
at Aβ49 preferentially leads to Aβ40 production. Notably,
elegant studies from several groups show that APP and PS1 mutations
linked to AD may have effects on the rate of the initial ε-cleavage.
However, through a combination of decreasing subsequent cleavage processivity,
altering the site of the initial ε-cleavage to favor the Aβ42
product line, or some combination, these effects can increase the
relative level of production of Aβ42.,, Although this is a useful model, it is clear
that the stepwise processing is quite complex. Indeed, more recent
studies suggest
that (i) the product lines are not invariant, (ii) additional cleavages
besides tri- and tetrapeptide removal can occur, and (iii) more physiologic
systems show more heterogeneity with respect to processivity.,

Previous site-directed mutagenesis studies of APP have identified
key amino acid changes within the APP CTFβ that can dramatically
alter the Aβ species produced by γ-secretase cleavage.,,− These data
reveal that mutations of the lysine residue
that delineates the ectodomain of APP from its TMD (K624 based on
the APP695 isoform),, and the GXXXG motifs immediately downstream of that lysine, have dramatic effects on Aβ peptide profiles. Although not
all of these mutations were used for examination of cleavage at the
ε-site, those that did showed no effects on ε-site utilization. This finding suggests that these mutations likely
cause
shifts in Aβ peptides by altering γ-secretase processivity.
As the NSAID-based GSMs require a carboxylic acid for GSM activity and can often be converted to iGSMs by modifications
of the acid group to either neutral or positively charged groups,, we hypothesized that the carboxylic acid of acidic GSMs, some of
which can bind to the substrate in the GXXXG motif,, might interact with and neutralize the charge at K624 and enhance
cleavage processivity, resulting in a decreased level of Aβ42.
Conversely, we predicted that nonacidic GSMs would not interact with
this residue. To test this hypothesis,
we studied the effects of GSMs on previously studied and novel mutations
in APP that altered K624 or modified the charge of adjacent amino
acids. Data generated from these studies show that in a manner independent
of the class of GSM, several of these mutations have dramatic effects
on the sensitivity of the mutant substrate to cleavage modulation.
In contrast, iGSMs are still able to modulate cleavage of most mutant
substrates. Although these data do not support a model in which acidic
and nonacidic GSMs have a differential effect on processivity that
is mediated
by charged residues at the end of the substrate’s ectodomain,
they indicate that both classes of GSMs have highly substrate selective
effects.

Experimental Procedures
Mutagenesis and Expression Plasmid Construction
Point
mutations were generated at or near lysine 624 in pAG3-APP695wt [APP695
K624R, N623K, G625K, G625K/A626K (3xK), K624E, and K624E/G625E/A626E
(3xE)] using polymerase chain reaction mutagenesis; all sequences were verified by DNA sequencing. The Aβ peptides generated from the various
APP
mutants are numbered with respect to the first N-terminal residue
(Asp-1) of the Aβ peptide.

Cell Culture
and Transfection
Chinese hamster ovary
(CHO) cells were grown in Ham’s F-12 medium (Life Technologies)
supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum, 100 units/mL penicillin,
and 100 μg/mL streptomycin. Cells were grown at 37 °C in
a humidified atmosphere containing 5% CO2 in six-well
tissue culture plates (Costar). Cells were transfected with the DNA
plasmids using polyethylenimine reagent as described previously.

Compounds
GSM-1 and Cmpd2 were synthesized
by A. Fauq at the Mayo Clinic
Chemical Core (Jacksonville, FL). Fenofibrate was purchased from Sigma-Aldrich.
All compound stocks were prepared in dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) to
final concentrations of 10–30 mM. Compounds were tested on
CHO cells stably overexpressing the
various APP mutants. For compound testing, the cells were incubated
for 16 h in the presence of the compound prepared in OptiMEM reduced
serum
medium (Life Technologies, Inc., Carlsbad, CA) containing 1% fetal
bovine serum. Unless otherwise specified, DMSO was used as the vehicle
control.

Mass Spectrometry of Aβ
For matrix-assisted laser
desorption ionization time-of-flight (MALDI-TOF) mass spectrometry
analysis of Aβ peptides, a GSM
or inverse GSM compound was added to the CHO cells expressing one
of the APP mutant forms described. Secreted Aβ peptides from
conditioned media were analyzed as previously described, with the following modifications. Briefly, the mutant peptides were
immunoprecipitated using Ab5 recognizing the Aβ1–16 epitope and sheep anti-mouse IgG magnetic Dynabeads
(catalog no. 11201D, Life Technologies) and
eluted with 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid in water. Eluted samples were
mixed in a 2:1 ratio with saturated α-cyano-4-hydroxycinnamic
acid (CHCA) matrix (Sigma) in an acetonitrile/methanol mixture (60:40)
and loaded onto a CHCA-pretreated MSP 96 target plate-polished steel
(part no. 224989, Bruker, Billerica, MA). Samples were analyzed using
a Bruker Microflex LRF-MALDI-TOF mass spectrometer.

Modulation
index calculation
The modulation index (MI)
was calculated as previously described. Briefly, the MI is determined by comparing the ratio
of each peak to the sum of the total peaks and then calculating the
difference between sum of the longer Aβ peptides (e.g., Aβ42) and that of the shorter Aβ
peptides (e.g., Aβ37, Aβ38, and
Aβ39). The result is subsequently normalized to the
vehicle control
which is arbitrarily set at zero. Using this method, a GSM will have
a negative MI and an iGSM will have a positive MI, and compounds that
shift cleavage to a greater extend will show a larger MI.

In Vitro γ-Secretase
Assay for AICD Detection
DNA encoding C100 or C100 containing
mutations was tagged with
Flag, and cloned into pET-21b+ vectors (Life Technologies).
The proteins were overexpressed and purified from Escherichia
coli BL21 using a HiTrap Q-column (GE Life Science, Little
Chalfont, U.K.). The membrane containing γ-secretase was isolated
from the CHO S-1 cell line using sodium carbonate (100 mM, pH 11.0). For the in vitro γ-secretase
assay, each substrate at 25 μM was incubated with the membrane
(100
μg/mL) in 150 mM sodium citrate buffer (pH 6.8) containing complete
protease inhibitor
(Roche, Indianapolis, IN) for 2 h at 37 °C. The AICD fragments
were captured using anti-Flag M2 magnetic beads
(Sigma). The beads were then washed with water and the fragments eluted
using a 10 μM solution of 0.1% TFA (Thermo Scientific) in water.
The eluted fragments
were further processed for mass spectrometry (MS), as described above.

Western Blotting
The WT- and mutant-expressing cells
were harvested and lysed in radio-immunoprecipitation assay (RIPA)
buffer [50 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.4), 150 mM NaCl, 1% Triton X-100, 0.5%
sodium deoxycholate, and 0.1% sodium
dodecyl sulfate]. The lysates were subsequently
used for immunoblotting and detection
of full-length APP and carboxy-terminal fragments (CTFs). Aβ1–16
monoclonal antibody 6E10 (1:1000) (Covance, Gaithersburg, MD) was
used for APP and CTFβ detection, and anti-APP-CT-20 (1:500)
(Calbiochem) was used for CTFα/β detection. The blot was
developed using an Odyssey infrared scanner (LiCor Biosciences, Lincoln,
NE).

Statistical Analysis
In vitro data
were expressed and graphed as means ±
the SEM using GraphPad Prism 5. Analysis was conducted
by one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) followed by Dunnett’s
post
hoc testing for group differences. The level of significance was set
at p &lt; 0.05 in all tests.

Results
Effects of
Point Mutations at or Adjacent to K624 in APP on
Aβ Production
To evaluate the effects of positively
charged residues at the interface of the APP ectodomain and its TMD
on GSM and iGSM activity, we utilized a mutant APP695 construct that
we had generated and characterized previously (APP-K624A) and several newly generated constructs [APP695
K624R, N623K, G625K, G625K/A626K (termed 3xK), K624E, and K624E/G625E/A626E
(termed 3xE)]. These constructs are schematically depicted in Figure A. Expression plasmids encoding these APP cDNAs
were transfected into CHO cells and stable clones obtained for all
except the 3xE construct. These stable lines overexpress APP and are
processed into CTFβ and CTFα; however, the CTFs for K624R,
N623K, G625K, 3xK, and K624E migrate more slowly than those derived
from the WT and K624A APPs (Figure B). We
performed immunoprecipitation followed by mass spectrometry (IP–MS)
to assess Aβ production profiles from these transfected cells.
Representative spectra from these experiments are shown in Figure C with the average percent of total peak height
for each Aβ isoform obtained from multiple experiments graphically
depicted in Figure D. As previously observed,
the K624A mutant dramatically shifted the Aβ profile toward
shorter peptides, with Aβ1–33 and Aβ1–34
being the major species detected. Compared to WT, the K624R and
N623K mutants had a minimal effect on the Aβ profile. G625K
and the 3xK constructs decreased the levels of Aβ1–37
and Aβ1–38 and increased the level of Aβ1–42;
3xK also increased the level of Aβ1–43. K624E produced
shorter Aβ
peptides, primarily Aβ1–33 and Aβ1–37; although
the shift was not as dramatic as that observed with K624A,
it is consistent with previous studies., Although no
changes were observed with respect to ε-cleavage
site utilization in the K624A mutant, we nevertheless examined the initial ε-cleavage
site utilization with the novel mutants that showed the most dramatic
changes. Studies for detecting AICD and evaluating ε-cleavage
site utilization from the stable CHO lines were unsuccessful. However,
using recombinant WT C100Flag, 3xK-C100Flag, and K28E-C100Flag (K28
is equivalent to K624E in the C-100 construct) as substrates in in vitro γ-secretase assays, we were able to detect
AICD and ε-cleavage site utilization. C50–99 and C49–99
were found to be the predominant cleavage products from WT, 3xK,
and K28E substrates, and the relative levels of each AICD were unchanged
(Figure E). Using this assay and recombinant
K28E/G29E/A30E (3xE)-C100Flag substrate, we also explored how this
mutant would influence Aβ and AICD profiles (Figure 1 and Table
1 of the ). Aβ40
and Aβ42 were the major products, and
the AICD fragments of 3xE-C100Flag were similar to that of WT-C100Flag.
Overall, these data confirm our previous observations that reducing
the charge at the interface of the ectodomain and TMD increases γ-secretase
processivity and increasing the positive charge can in some instances
dramatically decrease processivity with a minimal effect on initial
ε-cleavage site utilization. A single negative charge increases
processivity; however, an increased number of negative charges at
the interface appears to decrease processivity.

Effects of point mutations
in APP and CTF on the production of
Aβ and AICD, respectively. (A) The WT APP and mutant APP sequences
examined in this study are highlighted. The 3xE construct has been
tested only in the in vitro assay (marked with an
asterisk). (Attempts to produce a stable cell line of the K624E/G625E/A626E
construct were not successful.) (B) The WT APP and mutant APP were
stably expressed in CHO cells and detected via Western blotting using
a 6E10 monoclonal antibody. (C) Aβ
spectra obtained by MALDI-TOF analysis of conditioned media from CHO
cells overexpressing WT and mutant forms of APP. Aβ isoforms
are identified on the profiles with nonspecific peaks denoted with
an asterisk. (D) Stacked bar graphs indicating the percent of each
Aβ isoform derived from WT and mutant APP. These analyses were
based on two to four experiments with two to five replicates in each
experiment (the maximal SEM = ±2.5). (E) AICD spectra of WT CTFβ
tagged with a Flag peptide (C100Flag), 3xK CTFβ tagged with
Flag (3xK-C100Flag), and K28E CTFβ tagged with Flag (K28E-C100Flag)
after immunoprecipitation and MALDI-TOF analysis. The positions of
the two major products produced by γ-secretase cleavage at the
ε-site, AICD50–99 and AICD49–99, are indicated.
GSI treatment served as a control to select specific AICD peaks (data
not shown).

Effects of GSMs and iGSM
on the Aβ Profiles of the Mutants
To determine whether
the mutant constructs were responsive to GSMs
and iGSMs, GSM-1, a piperidine acetic acid as a potent acidic GSM, Compound 2 (Cmpd2), a piperazinyl pyrimidine
as a potent nonacidic GSM, and fenofibrate,
one of the more potent iGSMs identified, were utilized. These compounds are depicted
in Figure A along with EC50 and
EC90 values (empirically determined) for altering Aβ42
from CHO cells expressing wild-type APP695 (WT). For these studies,
we used the compounds at their approximate EC90 values
and compared the change in the Aβ profile following GSM or iGSM
treatment to vehicle (DMSO) controls using the described IP–MS
methods. Representative spectra from these studies are shown in Figure , with the average percent of total peak height
for each Aβ isoform obtained from multiple experiments graphically
depicted in Figure 2 of the . As previously shown and also demonstrated in this study, for wild-type
APP, GSM-1 treatment decreased the level of Aβ42 and increased
the level of Aβ38., Cmpd2 decreased the
levels of both Aβ40 and Aβ42 and
increased the levels of Aβ37 and Aβ38. Fenofibrate increased the level of Aβ42 and decreased
the level of Aβ38. GSM-1 and fenofibrate
(iGSM) have more selectivity in
terms of the Aβ product line (preferred product line of Aβ48)
than, e.g., Cmpd 2 (nonacidic GSM) that affects both Aβ48 and
Aβ49 product lines (Figure B). The modulatory
effects of the compounds on the
mutants are illustrated in Figure C–H
and Figure 2 of the . Aβ enzyme-linked immunosorbent assays were performed to calculate
the EC50 values of GSM-1 and Cmpd 2 for decreasing the
levels of Aβ40 and Aβ42 on each of the APP mutant constructs
(Tables 2 and 3 of the ). The EC50 values of both GSMs gradually increased as
the number of positive charges increases. In some cases, EC50 values could not be calculated because of the low levels of Aβ40
and Aβ42 produced (K624A and K624E) or substrates were not modulated
by the GSM (G625K and 3xK).

Aβ profiles illustrated by MALDI-TOF analysis
of the mutants
after GSM and iGSM treatments. (A) Chemical structure of the acidic-type
GSM (GSM-1), nonacidic-type GSM (Cmpd 2), and inverse GSM (fenofibrate)
are shown. (B–G) Aβ spectra from each mutant with or
without drug treatments. Each Aβ isoform is identified on the
profile with nonspecific peaks marked with asterisks. DMSO treatment
served as a control for all compounds. For each profile, the m/z range was adjusted to account for the
molecular weight shift in
the detected Aβ. The calculated and observed molecular weights
of Aβ peptides from each mutant are listed in Table 1 of the .

Because of the complexity of statistically assessing
the effect of global changes in Aβ isoforms from each mutant
combined with the drug treatments illustrated in Figure , we utilized a previously established method termed the modulation
index (MI). The MI can statistically
determine whether a treatment
modulates the overall Aβ profile. The MI for each mutant and
drug combination is shown in Figure A–C.
These data show that the K624R mutant remains responsive to both GSMs
(Figure A,B) and the iGSM (Figure C) showing relatively unchanged Aβ profiles
and MIs relative to those of the WT. In contrast, the other mutations
had dramatic effects on compound responsiveness. The K624A mutant
showed the most dramatic effect and was no longer responsive to GSMs
(Figure A,B). The K624A mutant showed a reduced
responsiveness to fenofibrate, but the effect was not quite statistically
significant (p = 0.057) (iGSM) (Figure C). Compared to the WT, the
N623K mutant showed a weakened response to the acidic GSM-1 (Figure A) and the nonacidic Cmpd2 (Figure B), with no notable change
to the fenofibrate treatment (Figure C). The
G625K mutant shows a dramatically weakened response to GSM-1, no response
to Cmpd2, and a preserved response to fenofibrate (Figure ). The 3xK mutant showed essentially no response
to both GSMs but a preserved response to the iGSM (Figure ). The K624E mutant showed significantly weakened
responses to both GSMs and iGSM (Figure ).

Representation
of the substrate responsiveness by GSM and iGSM
treatment of the mutants as determined by the modulation index (MI).
MI reflects the net changes in each Aβ profile after GSM-1,
Cmpd 2, and fenofibrate treatments of the WT and mutant substrates.
A negative value indicates GSM activity, while a positive value indicates
iGSM activity. (A–C) The WT and K624R did not show any significant
change after GSM and iGSM treatment, whereas the mutants with qualitative
or quantitative lysine manipulations (K624A, N623K, G625K, 3xK, and
K624E) all showed significant decreases in their responsiveness to
both classes of GSM relative to the WT. The K624A and 3xK mutants
demonstrated a significant reduction in MI. Fenofibrate treatment
of the mutants showed no significant difference between the WT and
each of the mutants except for K624E. Results were analyzed by one-way
analysis of variance (ANOVA) followed by Dunnett’s post hoc
testing (*p &lt; 0.5, **p &lt; 0.01,
and ***p &lt; 0.001).

Discussion
Although we originally hypothesized that
the activity of acidic
but not nonacidic GSMs would be influenced by single and double amino
acid substitutions
altering positively or negatively charged residues at the interface
of the APP ectodomain and TMD, we find that mutations in this region
can dramatically alter responses to both classes of GSMs. In contrast,
inhibition of processivity by an iGSM was not significantly altered
by mutations other than K624A and K624E. Along with a previous study
from our group showing that first-generation
NSAID-based GSMs showed a high degree of substrate selectivity for
APP relative to modulation of Notch-1 or CD44 cleavage, these data suggest that the effect of a GSM
or an iGSM
requires a permissive substrate. We do note that second-generation
GSMs have been shown to potentially modulate Notch;, however, that effect seems to be much less pronounced
than that shown for APP. Here we extend these studies by showing that
GSM modulation is highly dependent upon the amino acid sequence near
the interface of the ectodomain and TMD. Notably, as we were preparing
these data for publication, Ousson et al. reported similar effects
of the K624E mutation on GSM activity. In their study using a signal peptide CTFβ construct
(SP-C99) containing the K28E mutation, they found a diminished responsiveness
to GSM-1 for decreasing the level of Aβ42 and a shift in activity
for a nonacidic heteroaryl-type GSM (E2012) to an iGSM in the presence
of the mutation.

On the basis of the stepwise cleavage model
initially proposed by Ihara and colleagues along with the data generated in this work and others,,,, we can propose models depicting how GSMs, iGSMs, and various mutations
that alter charge at the interface of the APP ectodomain and TMD modify
γ-secretase processivity (Figure ).
Although for the sake of simplicity we illustrate increased processivity
producing shorter forms of Aβ with an increased number of tri-
or tetrapeptide cleavages, it is possible that increased processivity
could also occur through larger stepwise cleavages. These models assume
that the active site of γ-secretase
is relatively fixed in position and that following the initial ε-site
cleavage the substrate “sinks” into or is “pulled
down” into the active site, resulting in the stepwise cleavages.
Such a model is consistent with the proposed structural
models of γ-secretase that are based on the crystal structure
of signal peptide peptidases. Although
it is formally possible that the active site
of γ-secretase moves relative to the substrate, this would seem
to be highly thermodynamically unfavorable for a structurally constrained
membrane-embedded protease. In contrast,
it is well-established that small transmembrane
peptides can be mobile, both laterally and vertically within the membrane. For the cleavage of wild-type APP, typically
three
or four successive cleavages by γ-secretase occur along
the two major product lines, resulting in the normal profile of Aβ
species (Figure A). In the K624A mutant, loss
of the positively charged lysine residue appears to permit Aβ
to sink further into the active site. One or two additional tri- and
tetrapeptide cleavages would then generate the major species seen
with this construct, Aβ33 and Aβ34 (Figure B). Because our study is based on cell-based assays, we did
not attempt to detect the small peptides sequentially released to
produce the shorter Aβ peptides. However, considering that there
were no alterations in the major AICD fragments, the shorter Aβ isoforms (i.e., Aβ33 or Aβ34)
are almost certainly derived by enhanced stepwise processivity.

Proposed model
of γ-secretase processivity based on charge
manipulation or treatment with a GSM or an iGSM. (A) γ-Secretase
cleavage occurs near the cytoplasmic face of the TMD. The major Aβ
product lines, Aβ48 and Aβ49, are colored blue and red,
respectively. The plus signs indicate positive charge at the JMD–TMD
region, representing the membrane-anchoring residue at the luminal
side. Each cytosolic fragment represents sequential tri- or tetrapeptide
cleavage products. Aβ isoforms secreted and detected from the
conditioned media are denoted with asterisks. Typically, both the
Aβ48 and Aβ49 products undergo up to four rounds of cleavage
in the processivity model. (B) Neutralization of the charge leads
to the release of shorter Aβ isoforms such as Aβ33, Aβ34,
and Aβ37, which would be generated after the fifth or sixth
cleavage. This mutation appears to significantly promote processivity.
(C) Acidic GSMs have selectivity for modulation of the Aβ48
over the Aβ49 product line by promoting its third cycle, resulting
in an increase in the level of Aβ38 formation with minimal effects
on Aβ40 levels. (D) Nonacidic-type GSMs promote processivity
of both the Aβ48 and Aβ49 product lines, with the third
cleavage of Aβ48 and the fourth cleavage of Aβ49 increasing,
respectively. (E) Increased charge is hypothesized to hold the substrate
tight at the luminal site because of the interaction between the positively
charged amino acids and the phosphate group of the phospholipids,
thus preventing the substrate from being pulled down to the cytosolic
side. This results in an increased level of release of longer Aβ
isoforms, i.e., Aβ42 or Aβ43. (F) Similar to the acidic
GSMs, the iGSM showed selectivity for the Aβ48 product line.
It is suggested that by an as yet unknown mechanism, an iGSM perhaps
inhibits the movement of the substrate toward the γ-sites. (G)
The negative charge replacement at the interface of the transmembrane
protein appears to increase processivity. In contrast to the positively
charged mutants, the negatively charged amino acid at the JMD–TMD
region would be predicted not to interact with the phospholipids,
thus allowing more vertical flexibility in the lipid bilayer for the
substrate to further dip into the active site.

Both acidic and nonacidic GSMs also promote processivity
but in distinct fashions. Acidic
GSMs primarily promote single-step processivity on the Aβ48
to Aβ42 product line, resulting in a decreased level of Aβ42
and an increased level of Aβ38 (Figure C). In addition to its primary effect, acidic GSM (GSM-1) not only
affects the cleavage from Aβ42 to Aβ38 but also affects
the shift from either Aβ41 or Aβ43 to Aβ38 by releasing
a different number of amino acids ranging from three to five. Nonacidic GSMs promote an additional cleavage
along both product lines, resulting
in less Aβ40 and Aβ42 and more Aβ38 and Aβ37
(Figure D).

In contrast to these alterations
that promote processivity, increasing
charge decreases processivity along one product line (e.g., G625K)
or both (3xK) (Figure E). In this case, rather
than three or four cleavage steps, these mutant APPs are more typically
processed only two or three times. The positive charge is predicted
to interact with the negatively
charged phosphate group of the phospholipids in the lipid bilayer,
and this interaction perhaps prevents the transmembrane protein from
sinking down to the ε-cleavage site. Finally, iGSMs appear to
preferentially reduce processivity by one cycle along the Aβ42
product line (Figure G). As long as the positive
charge (K624R, N623K, G625K, and 3xK) is preserved, the iGSM is capable
of increasing the level of Aβ42, yet when the positive charge
was replaced with a noncharged or negatively charged amino acid, iGSM
activity was markedly reduced.
Given our observations with regard to iGSM activity, the mechanism
of action for an iGSM is hypothesized to be similar to that of the
acidic-type GSM but in the opposite manner.,

Our study of the effects of negatively charged amino acid
substitutions
at the JMD–TMD region on Aβ production further validates
previous findings., The K624E mutant generates more
of the shorter Aβ species such
as Aβ33 and Aβ37. As explained above for the 3xK mutant,
because the phosphate group has a negative charge, the K624E residue
may sit with the phosphate group driving the Aβ production more
like the noncharged mutant allowing the construct to sink a bit further
down than the
WT (single lysine). Although the K624E mutant allows more flexibility
in the vertical movement of the transmembrane protein, the presence
of charge may still prevent the protein from moving down deeper to
the hydrophobic region of the phospholipids. This could also explain
why our 3xE mutant showed decreased processivity compared to that
of the K624E mutant (Figure G and Figure 1
of the ).

In
this model, the effects of decreasing or increasing the charge
at the interface of the APP ectodomain and TMD on γ-processivity
fit well with the concept that positive charge in this portion of
APP could regulate the extent to which the substrate moves relative
to the active site of γ-secretase. In contrast, the effects
of GSMs are more challenging to explain. On the basis of the observations
that (i) the substrate sequence dramatically alters the action of
a GSM and (ii) photoaffinity labeling and nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) data show that NSAID-based acidic GSMs can bind the GXXXG motif carboxyl
to K624A in APP, and (iii) affinity and labeling studies show that
GSM-1 binds PSEN1, and nonacidic GSMs targeting
either PSEN1 or PEN-2,− we suggest that there is complex interaction among
γ-secretase,
its substrate, and various GSMs. In some cases, there might be a tripartite
interaction among the substrate, GSM, and γ-secretase that directly
influences processivity by influencing the extent to which the substrate
can “dip” into the active site following each successive
cleavage. In other cases, the GSM may have an allosteric effect on
the γ-secretase complex that indirectly influences the interaction
of the substrate with the enzyme. It is also possible that some GSMs
work through a combination of allosteric effects on γ-secretase
and tripartite interactions with the enzyme and substrate. The membrane
lipid may also regulate processivity and GSM action. In any of these scenarios, single-point mutations can
completely block the ability of a GSM to modulate processivity or
as reported by others actually switch the activity of a GSM to that
of an iGSM. Such data suggest an interdependence
of the modulatory
effect of these compounds on substrate sequences, and further reinforce
the novelty of this mechanism of altering proteolytic cleavage.

In conclusion, we find that effectiveness of both major classes
of GSMs identified to date is highly influenced by the presence of
positively charged residues at the interface of the APP ectodomain
and TMD. Replacement of the positive charge in the K624A or K624E
construct or increasing the positive charge in the G625K and 3xK construct
either completely blocks or attenuates the effectiveness of the these
GSMs. Furthermore, both GSMs and mutations that alter the processive
cleavage by γ-secretase do not appear to significantly alter
ε-cleavage. This cleavage and not the subsequent stepwise processivity
is thought to be the key determinant for potential
toxicities related to the inhibition of γ-secretase. Thus, the
collective data suggesting substrate specificity and the lack of effect
on ε-cleavage reinforce the potential intrinsic safety of GSMs
as prophylactic therapeutics for the treatment of AD.,,,,,,,

Supporting Information Available
Supplementary figures.
This material is available free of charge via the Internet at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bi401521t_si_001.pdf

The authors declare no competing
financial interest.

Acknowledgments
We thank Sasha Premraj and Andrew Li for helpful discussions
and scientific assistance.

Abbreviations
Aβamyloid β

ADAlzheimer’s disease

AICDamyloid precursor
protein intracellular domain

APPamyloid precursor protein

CHOChinese hamster ovary

Cmpd2Compound 2

CTFβcarboxyl-terminal fragment β

DMSOdimethyl sulfoxide

GSIγ-secretase
inhibitor

GSMγ-secretase
modulator

iGSMinverse
γ-secretase modulator

IP–MSimmunoprecipitation and mass spectrometry

MALDI-TOFmatrix-assisted laser desorption
ionization time-of-flight

MImodulation
index

NSAIDnonsteroidal
anti-inflammatory drug

PSEN1presenilin 1

PEN2presenilin enhancer 2

SEMstandard error of the mean

EC50half-maximal effective
concentration

WTwild type.

