In eukaryotes, mRNA precursors
(pre-mRNAs) are transcribed by RNA polymerase II (Pol II) from the
genome and must undergo extensive cotranscriptional processing to
become mature mRNAs. The typical progression of pre-mRNA maturation
involves 5′-end capping, splicing, and 3′-end cleavage
and polyadenylation. The integrity and precision of each of these
steps are critical for generating stable, functional mRNAs. Moreover,
recent studies have demonstrated the importance of alternative splicing,
alternative polyadenylation (APA), and RNA editing in producing an
incredibly diverse, often cell-specific mRNA library that contributes
to the biological complexity of higher eukaryotes.

5′-end
capping occurs very early during Pol II transcription,
typically after the synthesis of ∼20 nucleotides of the pre-mRNA.
Capping has been linked to splicing and 3′-end processing of
the pre-mRNA, and the export of the mature mRNA. In addition, the
5′-end cap is directly recognized by the eukaryotic translation
initiation factor eIF-4E, which is essential for mRNA translation
by the ribosome.

A majority of pre-mRNAs acquire a poly(A) tail
after 3′-end
processing, which is important for the export of the mature mRNAs
from the nucleus to the cytoplasm. The poly(A) tail also promotes
the translation of the mRNAs and protects them from degradation. In
comparison, 3′-end processing of replication-dependent histone
pre-mRNAs involves only the cleavage reaction, and these mRNAs do
not carry a poly(A) tail. Instead, a conserved stem–loop structure
at their 3′-end supports many of the functions that are associated
with the poly(A) tail.

This review will focus on recent advances
(within the past ∼5
years) in structural and functional studies of pre-mRNA 3′-end
processing, and the newly reported structures are summarized in Table . There are also many other excellent reviews on
these topics, some of which are listed here.− In addition, a novel quality surveillance mechanism for 5′-end
capping was discovered recently and will be reviewed here, as well.
Other aspects of pre-mRNA processing, such as splicing, APA,− and poly(A) length regulation,, and other
mechanisms of mRNA quality control and decay, such as nonsense-mediated
decay and no-go decay, will not be covered here because of space limitations.

Recently Published Structures of Protein
Factors Involved in Pre-mRNA 3′-End Processing or 5′-End
Capping Quality Surveillance
protein factor	subdomains	Protein
Data Bank entries	refs	
CPSF	 	 	 	
archaeal CPSF-73	metallo-β-lactamase,
β-CASP	2YCB, 2XR1	(), ()	
archaeal CPSF-73–RNA
complex	metallo-β-lactamase, β-CASP	3AF6	()	
CPSF-30–NS1A
complex	CPSF-30: zinc fingers 2 and 3; NS1A: effector	2RHK	()	
CstF	 	 	 	
Rna14–Rna15
complex	Rna14: full length; Rna15: hinge	4EBA, 4E85, 4E6H	()	
Rna14–Rna15
complex	Rna14: monkeytail; Rna15: hinge	2L9B	()	
CstF-50	homodimerization	2XZ2	()	
Rna15	RRM	2X1B	()	
Rna15–RNA complex	RRM	2X1A, 2X1F	()	
Rna15–Hrp1–RNA
complex	Rna15: RRM; Hrp1: RRM	2KM8	()	
CF Im	 	 	 	
CF Im25	full length	3BAP, 2CL3, 3BHO, 2J8Q	(), ()	
CF Im25–RNA
complex	full length	3MDG, 3MDI	()	
CF Im25–CF
Im68 complex	CF Im25: full length;
CF Im68: RRM	3Q2S	()	
CF Im25–CF
Im68–RNA complex	CF Im25:
full length; CF Im68: RRM	3Q2T	()	
CF Im25–CF
Im59 complex	CF Im25: full length;
CF Im59: RRM	3N9U	unpublished (2010)	
PAP	 	 	 	
PAPγ	core	4LT6	()	
PAP–Fip1 complex	PAP: full length; Fip1: NTD fragment	3C66	()	
PAPD1	 	3PQ1	()	
cytoplasmic polyadenylation	 	 	 	
CPE-binding protein
(CPEB)	ZZ domain	2M13	()	
symplekin-Ssu72	 	 	 	
symplekin	NTD	3ODR, 3ODS, 3GS3, 3O2T	(), ()	
Ssu72	full
length	3OMW, 3OMX, 3FDF	()	
Ssu72–Pol II
CTD pSer5 complex	full length	3P9Y	()	
symplekin–Ssu72
complex	Symplekin: NTD; Ssu72: full length	3O2S	()	
symplekin–Ssu72–Pol
II CTD pSer5 complexes	Symplekin: NTD; Ssu72: full length	3O2Q, 4IMJ, 4IMI	(), ()	
symplekin–Ssu72–Pol
II CTD pSer7 complexes	Symplekin: NTD; Ssu72: full length	4H3H, 4H3K	()	
histone mRNA 3′-end processing	 	 	 	
SLBP–RNA complex	RBD
fragment	2KJM	()	
SLBP–3′hExo–RNA
complex	SLBP: RBD; 3′hExo: full length	4L8R	()	
SLBP–SLIP1
complex	SLBP: fragment; SLIP1: full length	4JHK	()	
mRNA 5′-end capping quality surveillance	 	 	 	
DXO–RNA complexes	full length	4J7L, 4J7M	()	
DXO–m7GpppG complex	full length	4J7N	()	
Dxo1	full length	4GPU, 4GPS	()	
Dom3Z (DXO)	full length	3FQI	()	
Dom3Z–GDP complex	full
length	3FQJ	()	
Rai1	full length	3FQG	()	
Rat1–Rai1 complex	 	3FQD	()	
Canonical
Pre-mRNA 3′-End Processing
Key sequence elements in
the 3′-untranslated regions (UTRs)
of pre-mRNAs are recognized for 3′-end processing. In mammals,
the major sequence elements include a hexanucleotide poly(A) signal
(PAS, oftentimes AAUAAA) 10–30 nucleotides upstream of the
cleavage site, the cleavage site itself
(oftentimes after a CA dinucleotide), and a U- or G/U-rich downstream
sequence element (DSE) (Figure ). In addition,
auxiliary sequence elements can be recognized, which may also help
alter the site of 3′-end processing by APA.

Schematic drawing of
the canonical mammalian pre-mRNA 3′-end
processing machinery showing the various protein factors and their
subcomplexes. Many additional protein factors are involved in 3′-end
processing but are not shown.

A large protein machinery is responsible for 3′-end
processing
in mammals, which consists of several subcomplexes such as cleavage
and polyadenylation specificity factor (CPSF), cleavage stimulation
factor (CstF), cleavage factor I (CF Im), CF IIm, and other protein factors such as poly(A) polymerase (PAP), symplekin,
and Ssu72 (Figure ). CPSF-73 (the 73 kDa subunit
of CPSF) is the endoribonuclease for the cleavage reaction. CPSF-160
recognizes the PAS, and CstF-64 recognizes the DSE. This large machinery
ensures the fidelity of 3′-end processing, supports APA in
response to specific molecular and cellular environments, and is also
connected to the DNA damage response. Moreover, many protein factors in the machinery communicate with
other transcription processes, such as Pol II initiation and termination.
A proteomic study identified more than 90 protein factors that may
be associated with the pre-mRNA, although the exact roles of many
of these proteins in 3′-end processing remain to be established.

Similarly, pre-mRNA 3′-end processing
in yeast also involves
a large protein machinery. Many of the protein factors have homologues
in the mammalian machinery, although the subcomplexes in yeast can
have compositions and functions different from those of the subcomplexes
in mammals. For example, yeast CF IA contains Rna14 and Rna15, the
homologues of mammalian CstF-77 and CstF-64, respectively. CF IA also
contains Clp1 and Pcf11, which belong to CF IIm in mammals
(Figure ). CF II in yeast contains Ysh1, Ydh1,
and Yhh1, which are homologues of CPSF-73, CPSF-100, and CPSF-160,
respectively. CF II also contains Pta1, the homologue of symplekin,
while the other two subunits of CPSF, CPSF-30 (Yth1) and hFip1 (Fip1),
belong to polyadenylation factor I (PF I). CF II, PF I, and many other
protein factors comprise the cleavage and polyadenylation factor (CPF)
in yeast.

The machinery for 3′-end processing of most
eukaryotic pre-mRNAs
will be termed the canonical machinery, to distinguish it from the
machinery required for 3′-end processing of replication-dependent
histone pre-mRNAs (see below). We will describe below the various
subcomplexes and protein factors of the mammalian machinery, together
with the equivalent proteins in the yeast machinery.

CPSF
CPSF has five subunits: CPSF-160, CPSF-100, CPSF-73,
CPSF-30, and hFip1. CPSF-160 contains three β-propeller domains.
CPSF-73 and CPSF-100 contain a metallo-β-lactamase and a β-CASP
domain in the N-terminal region. CPSF-30 has five zinc fingers and
one zinc knuckle. hFip1 does not contain any recognizable domains
and is likely disordered on its own.

The structure of human
CPSF-73 showed that its active site is located at the interface of
the metallo-β-lactamase and β-CASP domains. CPSF-73 homologues are found in all three domains
of life, with important functions in RNA processing and/or decay., Recently published structures of CPSF-73 homologues from two different
archaeal species revealed the presence of two type II K homology (KH)
RNA-binding motifs at the N-terminus, as well as the formation of
a homodimer via the C-terminal region of the metallo-β-lactamase
domain (Figure A). The RNA is likely recognized
by the KH domains in one monomer and cleaved by the active site in
the other monomer.− This mechanism may be unique to archaea as mammalian
CPSF-73 and its yeast homologue Ysh1 do not contain KH domains at
the N-terminus.

Recently published structures of CPSF subunits. (A) Structure
of
the Methanosarcina mazei CPSF-73 homologue dimer
[Protein Data Bank (PDB) entry 2XR1]. The bound
position of the RNA analogue is modeled from the structure of the Pyrococcus horikoshii CPSF-73 homologue (PDB entry 3AF6). The 2-fold axis of the dimer is depicted as a black oval.
(B) Structure of yeast PAP in complex with Fip1 (PDB entry 3C66). (C) Structure of human CPSF-30 (second and third zinc fingers)
in complex with the influenza virus NS1A effector domain (PDB entry 2RHK). All the structures were produced with PyMOL (http://www.pymol.org).

Fip1, the yeast homologue of hFip1,
tethers PAP to the processing
machinery, which recognizes an intrinsically unstructured segment
in Fip1 near its N-terminus (Figure B). PAP mutants that retain polymerase activity
but cannot bind Fip1 are nonetheless lethal, indicating that the Fip1–PAP
interaction serves an essential function in yeast. An N-terminal deletion
mutant of Fip1 in which this binding site is disrupted cannot complement
the loss of wild-type Fip1, but the mutant is fully functional if
it is fused directly to PAP.

CPSF-30
is targeted by the C-terminal effector domain of the nonstructural
protein (NS1A) from the influenza A family of viruses,− and the viral polymerase stabilizes this complex. NS1A binding inhibits host antiviral responses such as
production of type I interferon and activation of dendritic cells.
The effector domain of NS1A is recognized by the second and third
zinc fingers of CPSF-30, in a 2:2 heterotetrameric complex (Figure C). Single-site mutations
of NS1A residues in the interface prevent binding to CPSF-30, and
an influenza virus carrying such a mutation in NS1A cannot inhibit
interferon-β pre-mRNA processing and is attenuated in cells.

Arabidopsis thaliana CPSF-30 (AtCPSF-30) binds
the A-rich near upstream element (NUE, which contains the AAUAAA motif)
that is present in a subset of pre-mRNAs, located 10–30 nucleotides
upstream of the cleavage site. Binding
of RNA by AtCPSF-30 is mostly mediated through the first of its three
zinc fingers. AtCPSF-30 also possesses
endonuclease activity, which is mediated by its third zinc finger
and inhibited by the N-terminal region of AtFip1(V), a plant homologue
of Fip1. Loss of AtCPSF-30 results in
an enhanced tolerance to oxidative stress because of the overexpression
of proteins with thioredoxin- and glutaredoxin-like domains. The nuclease activity of AtCPSF-30 itself is
redox-sensitive, as the third zinc finger contains a disulfide bond
that stabilizes the overall structure of the protein. Some of these properties may be unique to AtCPSF-30 as
it is localized in the cytoplasm in the absence of other CPSF subunits.

CstF
CstF contains three subunits:
CstF-50, CstF-64,
and CstF-77. CstF-50 has a WD40 domain in the C-terminal region. CstF-64
has a RNA recognition module (RRM) at the N-terminus, followed by
a hinge region, a Pro/Gly-rich region, and a small C-terminal domain
(CTD). CstF-77 contains a HAT domain in the N-terminal region, followed
by a Pro-rich region.

The crystal structure of the HAT domain
of CstF-77 revealed a dimeric association, providing the first evidence
that CstF may function as a dimer., The recently
published crystal structure of the Kluyveromyces lactis Rna14–Rna15 complex also showed a dimeric association of
this heterodimer into a heterotetramer, mediated by the HAT domain
of Rna14 (Figure A). Mutation of two residues in the HAT domain dimer interface caused
a temperature-sensitive phenotype in yeast, and the cell extract was
defective in cleavage and polyadenylation. The structure of the N-terminal segment of CstF-50 is also a dimer
(Figure B). Overall,
the structures as well as biochemical studies support a stable, dimeric
association of the CstF complex. While Rna14 and Rna15 are dimeric
in the CF IA complex in yeast, Clp1 and Pcf11 may actually be monomeric,
giving an overall 2:2:1:1 stoichiometry for the complex.

Recently published structures of the CstF subunits and
their homologues.
(A) Structure of the K. lactis Rna14–Rna15
dimer (PDB entry 4EBA). Only one copy of the complex between
the Rna14 C-terminal Pro-rich segment (red) and the Rna15 hinge region
(pale green) is ordered (shown as a molecular surface). (B) Structure
of the Drosophila CstF-50 N-terminal domain dimer
(PDB entry 2XZ2). (C) Structure of the heterodimer
of the Pro-rich segment of Rna14 (red) with the hinge region of Rna15
(pale green) (PDB entry 2L9B). (D) Structure of the
yeast Rna15 RRM (blue)–Hrp1 (magenta)–RNA (orange) complex
(PDB entry 2KM8). (E) Structure of the yeast Rna15
RRM–RNA complex (PDB entry 2X1F). The binding
site at the top (RNA labeled GU) mediates specific recognition. The
RNA in front of the β-sheet (labeled G′U′) is
related by crystal symmetry to the GU RNA and is not specifically
recognized.

The interactions between
Rna14 and Rna15 are mediated by the C-terminal
Pro-rich region of Rna14 and the hinge region of Rna15 (Figure C)., The formation of the CstF-64–CstF-77
complex is also important for the nuclear localization of CstF. CstF-77 contains a poly(A) site within its intron
3, and the usage of this site depends on the expression levels of
CstF-77, resulting in a negative feedback mechanism.

The amino acid sequences of the RRMs of CstF-64 and
Rna15 are ∼50%
identical, but the RRMs display distinct sequence preferences for
RNA. CstF-64 recognizes the G/U-rich DSE, while Rna15 recognizes the
A-rich positioning element (PE) in yeast. This distinct preference
for Rna15 may be due to Hrp1, which constitutes CF IB but does not
have a counterpart in the mammalian machinery. A crystal structure
of the Rna15 RRM–Hrp1–RNA complex showed that the A-rich
RNA interacts with the surface of the RRM β-sheet (Figure D), which is the canonical
mode of RNA recognition for RRMs. On the other hand, a crystal structure
of Rna15 RRM in complex with U-rich RNA, in the absence of Hrp1, shows
that the RRM has a second, noncanonical RNA binding surface, which
involves conserved loops above the β-sheet of the RRM (Figure E). The interaction
between Hrp1 and the Rna14–Rna15 dimer has also been studied
by NMR, and a model for the Rna14–Rna15–Hrp1–RNA
complex has been proposed.

The
regulation of the RNA preference of Rna15 by Hrp1 may have
important functional relevance. If there are two copies of Rna15 and
only one copy of Hrp1 in the yeast 3′-end processing machinery,
the two copies of Rna15 may bind to two different sequence elements
in the transcript, one being A-rich and the other U- or G/U-rich.
This may explain why 3′-end processing is enhanced by the addition
of U-rich sequences between the PE and the cleavage site in the absence
of Hrp1. Whether CstF-64 has a binding
partner that is functionally homologous to Hrp1 to facilitate an A-rich
sequence preference has not been determined. Musashi1, a mammalian
homologue of Hrp1, with a similar RNA binding mode, is known to bind to the 3′-UTR of mRNAs but exerts
its control at the translation level rather than the transcription
level. Such regulation of the RNA preference of CstF-64 could also
be important for its function in APA.

A second isoform of CstF-64
in mammals, CstF-64τ, was originally
thought to be restricted to the testis and brain, although recent
studies suggest that it is more widely expressed. CstF-64τ may complement the function of CstF-64.
Moreover, a dimeric CstF complex could include one copy each of CstF-64
and CstF-64τ, which could be another mechanism for regulating
3′-end processing and APA. In addition, a family of splicing
variants of CstF-64 has been identified, known as βCstF-64,
which may have roles in APA in neuronal cells.

CF Im
CF Im is comprised of two
subunits: CF Im25 and CF Im68. CF Im25 has a Nudix nucleotide hydrolase fold but lacks hydrolase activity.
CF Im68 is the most common second subunit, but there are
alternative 59 and 72 kDa subunits. These three proteins contain an
N-terminal RRM, a central Pro/Gly-rich region, and a C-terminal Arg/Ser-,
Arg/Asp-, and Arg/Glu-rich segment. CF Im binds UGUA elements
and is typically positioned 40–50 nucleotides upstream of the
cleavage site.

Several crystal
structures have been reported for this complex over the past few years,
which have greatly enhanced our understanding of its molecular mechanism.− The structures show that CF Im is a heterotetramer, with
a central CF Im25 dimer and two CF Im68 monomers
bound to opposite sides of the CF Im25 dimer (Figure A)., The two Nudix domains in the
CF Im25 dimer are arranged antiparallel to each other,
which would require the two UGUA cis elements of
the pre-mRNA to make a 180° turn to bind to them simultaneously
(Figure ). The two RRMs of CF Im68 enhance RNA binding by ∼3-fold and promote RNA loop formation
but are dispensable.

Structures of CF Im and PAPD1. (A) Structure
of the
human CF Im25 (cyan)–CF Im68 (magenta)–UGUA
RNA (orange) complex dimer (PDB entry 3Q2T). (B) Structure
of the human mitochondrial PAPD1 D325A mutant dimer (PDB entry 3PQ1). The domains are shown in different colors. The catalytic
residues are shown as stick models.

CF Im has a key role in APA,, and in the export of mRNA from the nucleus. Knockdown of the 25 and 68 kDa subunits in HEK293
cells increased the extent of global use of proximal poly(A) sites.
On the other hand, knockdown of CF Im59 has no effect on
poly(A) site choice. Therefore, the CF Im25–CF Im68 complex promotes the selection of distal poly(A) sites,
producing mRNAs with an extended 3′-UTR that may be subject
to specific 3′-UTR-mediated regulation. CF Im68
interacts with the nuclear export machinery through the Thoc5 protein
of the TREX complex and the nuclear export receptor NXF1/TAP and shuttles
between the nucleus and the cytoplasm. Knockdown of Thoc5 also promotes the usage of proximal poly(A) sites.

CF Im68 is recruited by the
capsid protein of HIV and helps the virus
to evade host innate immune
recognition. A C-terminal deletion of
CF Im68 promotes HIV-1 capsid disassembly.

CF IIm
CF IIm comprises two subunits:
hClp1 and hPcf11. hClp1 contains three domains: N-terminal, central,
and C-terminal domains. The central domain contains a Walker A P-loop
motif and can bind ATP. hPcf11 contains a Pol II C-terminal domain
(CTD) interaction domain (CID) at the N-terminus, two zinc fingers,
a short sequence between the two zinc fingers that interacts with
Clp1, and other sequence motifs. Their
homologues in yeast, Clp1 and Pcf11, belong to CF IA and interact
with Rna14 and Rna15. An equivalent interaction between CF IIm and CstF in mammalian cells has not been demonstrated. In
addition to the Clp1–Pcf11 interface identified from earlier
studies, there may be a “distant”
binding site for Pcf11 on Clp1.,

hClp1 exhibits
ATP hydrolase activity and plays an important role in pre-tRNA splicing− as well as pre-mRNA 3′-end processing. Yeast Clp1 does not
have ATP hydrolase activity but still requires ATP binding for its
function. Yeast cells carrying Clp1 mutations in the ATP binding pocket,
which induce a conformational change but do not occlude ATP binding,
are not viable., The correct conformation of Clp1
induced by ATP binding may be essential for interactions with other
protein factors in the machinery, including Ssu72, Ysh1, Pta1, and
Rna14. Clp1 may therefore be an important structural protein in the
machinery, which is supported by the observation that reconstitution
of CF IA from individual components requires Clp1. Clp1 may contribute to gene looping and transcriptional
directionality at bidirectional promoters, possibly through its interaction
with Ssu72.

hClp1 may also compete with the mRNA nuclear export
factor Aly
(Yra1 in yeast) for binding to hPcf11, and yeast Clp1 can displace
Yra1 from Pcf11 in affinity experiments. Recombinant Yra1 inhibits in vitro CF IA-mediated
cleavage and polyadenylation reactions.

PAP
CPSF stimulates the activity of PAP so that it
processively extends the poly(A) tail, the length of which is regulated
by the nuclear poly(A)-binding protein (PABPN1). Once the tail reaches ∼250 nucleotides, PABPN1 interferes
with this stimulation. PABPN1 can also stimulate PAP and cause hyperadenylation,
which can mediate RNA degradation by the exosome.

A recently published structure of the human PAPγ
core, from the γ clade of mammalian
PAPs, confirms the three-domain core structure shared among the canonical
PAPs, with N-terminal, middle, and C-terminal domains (Figure B).

Noncanonical PAPs have very weak conservation
of sequence with
respect to that of canonical PAPs and lack the C-terminal domain in
the core., Some of these enzymes catalyze the oligo-
or polyuridylation of their substrates and are also known as poly(U)
polymerases (PUPs) or terminal uridylate transferases (TUTs or TUTases).
The structure of human mitochondrial PAPD1 reveals a dimer of this
enzyme, involving a RL (RNA-binding domain-like) domain unique to
this enzyme (Figure B), and biochemical studies
suggest that dimerization is required for PAPD1 activity. PAPD1 can use all four nucleotides as substrates in vitro, and how it achieves nucleotide specificity in
the mitochondria is currently not known. Structures of other noncanonical
PAPs (TUTs) have also been reported.

Cytoplasmic Polyadenylation
Cytoplasmic polyadenylation
is important for the post-transcriptional control of gene expression
through the reactivation of deadenylated and dormant but otherwise
intact cytoplasmic mRNAs, which is directed by the presence of a cytoplasmic
polyadenylation element (CPE) in the 3′-UTR of the mRNAs., The CPE is bound by the regulatory cytoplasmic element binding protein
(CPEB), which in turn interacts with many other proteins to regulate
cytoplasmic polyadenylation and mRNA translation. This CPEB complex
contains competing deadenylase (PARN) and PAP (Gld2) enzymes to regulate
the length of the poly(A) tail. CPEB-dependent
protein synthesis plays a key role in synapse formation and long-term
memory persistence in sensory neuron–motor neuron cultures, and CPEB prion-like multimerization is associated
with changes in synapse persistence.

Many protein factors can affect the expression of their target mRNA
by binding to CPEB and freeing the mRNA for polyadenylation and translation. For example, translation of the mRNA for tumor
suppressor p53 is promoted by the interaction between CPEB and noncanonical
PAP Gld4 and inhibited by overexpression
of CPEB in the absence of Gld2. Another
tumor suppressor protein, parafibromin, also exerts control over cell
fate through its interaction with CPEB and affects the translation of multiple genes.

CPEB also recruits
several protein factors of the canonical, nuclear
3′-end processing machinery, including CPSF and symplekin,
for cytoplasmic polyadenylation. A recent solution structure of the
C-terminal zinc-binding domain of CPEB reveals a structural similarity
to ZZ-type zinc fingers, which are known to facilitate protein–protein
interactions with sumoylated proteins. Both symplekin and CPSF are known to be sumoylated, suggesting a
possible mechanism for how CPEB recognizes these factors.

Symplekin–Ssu72–Pol
II CTD Complex
Symplekin
is a scaffold protein and mediates interactions among many proteins
in the 3′-end processing machinery. The yeast homologue, Pta1,
shares very weak sequence conservation with symplekin but has generally
equivalent protein partners. The N-terminal domain (NTD) of symplekin/Pta1
interacts with Ssu72, a central region with CstF-64/Pti1 (a yeast
homologue of Rna15), and a C-terminal domain with CPSF-73/Ysh1.−

Ssu72 is a Pol II CTD phosphatase and has functions in 3′-end
processing as well as gene looping, which
helps to maintain correct transcription directionality and prevents
transcription of certain noncoding RNAs from bidirectional promoters. The Pol II CTD contains heptapeptide repeats
(26 in yeast and 52 in humans) with the Tyr1-Ser2-Pro3-Thr4-Ser5-Pro6-Ser7
consensus sequence, and the phosphorylation state of the CTD regulates
the function of Pol II.− Ssu72 is a well-characterized
pSer5 phosphatase and has recently been reported to have pSer7 phosphatase
activity, as well.,

The recent crystal structure
of the symplekin NTD in complex with
Ssu72 and a Pol II CTD pSer5 peptide defines the detailed interactions
in this ternary complex (Figure A). Although the NTD–Ssu72 interface is ∼25
Å from the active site of Ssu72, the NTD can stimulate the phosphatase
activity of Ssu72, indicating that symplekin is not just a passive
scaffold in the 3′-end processing machinery.

Structures of human symplekin
NTD–Ssu72–Pol II CTD
phosphopeptide complexes. (A) Structure of the human symplekin NTD
(cyan)–Ssu72 (yellow)–Pol II CTD pSer5 phosphopeptide
(green) complex (PDB entry 3O2Q). The seven pairs of
antiparallel helices are labeled. (B) Mode of binding of the Pol II
CTD pSer5 peptide in the active site of Ssu72. (C) Overlay of the
modes of binding of the Pol II CTD pSer7 peptide (green) and the pSer5
peptide (gray) in the active site of Ssu72 (PDB entry 4H3H). The directions of the polypeptide backbones are denoted
by the arrows. The primed numbers indicate residues in the second
CTD repeat.

The structure also reveals
that the pSer5–Pro6 peptide bond
of the Pol II CTD assumes the cis configuration in
the active site of Ssu72 (Figure B), the first
time that a protein phosphatase (or protein kinase) has been shown
to recognize the cis configuration of the substrate.
Subsequent structures of another ternary complex (with pThr4 and pSer5) as well as an Ssu72–phosphopeptide binary
complex confirmed this finding. The peptidyl-prolyl
isomerase Pin1 enhances the dephosphorylation activity of Ssu72. The symplekin NTD can regulate the function
of Ssu72 in transcription-coupled 3′-end processing with the
HeLa cell nuclear extract. Studies in
yeast show that the Pta1 NTD can inhibit 3′-end processing,
and binding of Ssu72 to the NTD relieves this inhibition.

The binding mode of the pSer5 peptide
in the active site of Ssu72
contrasts with its reported pSer7 phosphatase activity, as it could
require that the pSer7–Tyr1 peptide bond be in the cis configuration. The crystal structure of the symplekin
NTD–Ssu72–Pol II CTD pSer7 peptide ternary complex showed
that the peptide, with all its amide bonds in the trans configuration, is bound in the reverse orientation compared to that
of the pSer5 peptide in the active site of Ssu72 (Figure C). The substrate and
the general acid for catalysis are misaligned in this complex. In vitro assays using peptide substrates indicate that the
pSer7 phosphatase activity is ∼4000-fold weaker than the pSer5
phosphatase activity. On the other hand, assays with the entire CTD
as the substrate, using antibodies to monitor dephosphorylation, showed
no differences between the two activities. The reason behind this
discrepancy is currently not known. A CTD peptide phosphorylated at
Ser2, Ser5, and Ser7 is bound exclusively with pSer5 in the active
site, suggesting that Ssu72 has a higher affinity for pSer5 than for
pSer7.

Replication-Dependent
Histone Pre-mRNA 3′-End Processing
Metazoan replication-dependent
(also known as canonical) histone
proteins H1, H2A, H2B, H3, and H4 are involved in de novo chromatin packaging during DNA replication, while variant histones,
notably, H3.3, H2A.Z, CENP-A, macroH2A, and H1.0, are important for
chromatin remodeling, centromere function, and epigenetic silencing.− Variant histone pre-mRNAs carry introns and are cleaved and polyadenylated.
In comparison, the replication-dependent histone pre-mRNAs do not
have introns and are cleaved but not polyadenylated. Their 3′-end
processing is conducted by a different machinery, which will be the
focus of this section.

The 3′-UTRs of replication-dependent
histone pre-mRNAs contain
two signature cis-acting elements: a highly conserved
stem–loop (SL) 25–50 nucleotides downstream of the open
reading frame and a purine-rich segment further downstream (15–20
nucleotides in vertebrates) named the histone downstream element (HDE)
(Figure A). The SL is recognized by the stem–loop-binding
protein (SLBP, also known as the hairpin binding protein, HBP), which
has a central role in replication-dependent histone mRNA processing
and function. The SL is also bound by a 3′–5′
exoribonuclease, known as 3′hExo or Eri-1, which has an important
role in histone mRNA degradation, although Drosophila lacks this nuclease. The HDE recruits the U7 snRNP, another important
component for histone pre-mRNA 3′-end processing. These various
factors will be described in more detail below.

Structural information
about histone pre-mRNA 3′-end processing.
(A) Schematic drawing of the replication-dependent histone pre-mRNA
3′-end processing machinery. (B) Structure of Danio
rerio SLIP1 bound to the SLIP1-binding motif (SBM) of SLBP
(PDB entry 4JHK). (C) Structure of the human SLBP
RNA binding domain (RBD)–3′hExo–stem-loop RNA
complex (PDB entry 4L8R). (D) Specific recognition of the
second guanine in the stem by Arg181 of SLBP.

SL, SLBP, and 3′hExo
The SL has a 6 bp stem
and a four-nucleotide loop (Figure A). A G-C
base pair at the second position of the stem is strictly conserved,
while the loop is generally rich in pyrimidines. Systematic as well as focused studies on the effects of
SL mutations on binding to SLBP are consistent with sequence conservation.,

SLBP is found in all metazoans and is a 31 kDa protein in
humans. A highly conserved 70-residue
RNA-binding domain (RBD) near the center of SLBP binds tightly to
the SL, with a dissociation constant (Kd) of ∼10 nM. Phosphorylation of Thr171 in the RBD enhances
the affinity, reducing the Kd by ∼7-fold.
Immediately C-terminal to the RBD is a 20-residue segment that is
dispensable for RNA binding but is required for efficient 3′-end
processing. The N-terminal region of SLBP binds SLBP interaction protein
1 (SLIP1) (Figure B), which interacts with
eukaryotic translation initiation factor eIF-4G and is essential for
promoting the translation of histone mRNAs., Phosphorylation of several residues in this region is correlated
with polyubiquitination and rapid breakdown of SLBP at the end of
the S phase.,

3′hExo belongs
to the DEDD family of 3′–5′
exonucleases and prefers single-stranded RNA as the substrate. The
activity of 3′hExo requires two Mg2+ cations coordinated
by four invariant acidic residues (DEDD) in its active site. In addition
to the nuclease domain, 3′hExo also contains an N-terminal
SAP domain, previously characterized as a nucleic acid binding motif. 3′hExo trims up to two nucleotides from
the 3′-end of histone mRNAs after cleavage, and it also participates
in the rapid decay of histone mRNAs at the end of the S phase. In addition to its roles in histone mRNA metabolism,
3′hExo is critical for trimming the 3′-end of the 5.8S
rRNAs and regulating microRNA homeostasis.

The recently published crystal structure of the human SLBP RBD–3′hExo–SL
ternary complex provided the first molecular insights into the architecture
of this complex (Figure B). The stem adopts the conformation of A-form RNA, and three
of the four bases of the loop are flipped out. The SLBP RBD interacts
with the 5′-flanking sequence, the 5′-arm of the stem,
and the loop of SL. The SAP domain of 3′hExo interacts with
the loop, and the nuclease domain with the 3′-arm and flanking
sequence. In particular, the last nucleotide of the SL is located
in the active site of the nuclease domain, explaining how 3′hExo
can trim the last two nucleotides of the histone mRNA after cleavage.

The observed binding mode is consistent with most of the mutagenesis
data on this complex. Only the guanine base in the second base pair
of the stem is specifically recognized, by the side chain of Arg181
in SLBP (Figure D), which explains why this
nucleotide is invariant in all metazoans. The structure indicates
that SLBP and 3′hExo primarily recognize the shape, rather
than the sequence, of the SL.

There are no direct contacts between
the SLBP RBD and 3′hExo
in the ternary complex (Figure C). The cooperative
binding between the two proteins observed earlier likely results from
the induced-fit behavior of the SL, as there are large conformational
differences between the SL in the complex versus that free in solution. Therefore, binding of one protein induces a
conformation of the SL that promotes the binding of the other protein.

HDE and U7 snRNP
HDE recruits the U7 snRNP through
base pairing with the 5′-extension of U7 snRNA. The heptameric Sm ring of U7 snRNP contains
Sm proteins B, D3, E, F, and G that are found in spliceosomal snRNPs
as well as two unique subunits, Sm-like proteins Lsm10 and Lsm11.
Lsm11 is a 40 kDa protein in humans, which is substantially larger
than the typical Sm protein (∼13 kDa). It has a unique N-terminal
segment that is mostly unstructured but is essential for histone pre-mRNA
processing via the recruitment of other processing factors, including
the zinc finger protein ZFP100 and FLASH (see below).

Other Processing
Factors
Similar to polyadenylated
mRNAs, CPSF-73 is the endoribonuclease for the cleavage reaction of
replication-dependent histone pre-mRNAs. The cleavage site is also typically located after a CA dinucleotide,
located five (in vertebrates) or four (in fruit fly and sea urchin)
nucleotides downstream of the stem. The
5′-end-capped and 3′-end-cleaved histone mRNA, accompanied
by SLBP and 3′hExo, is then exported into the cytoplasm by
the antigen peptide transporter.

Besides CPSF-73, several other
protein factors in the canonical 3′-end processing machinery
are also important for histone pre-mRNA 3′-end processing,
including CPSF-100, symplekin, CstF-64, and CstF-77., These proteins form the heat labile factor (HLF), discovered in
the 1980s as an essential component of the histone pre-mRNA 3′-end
processing machinery, and are recruited
to the machinery through FLASH.

FLASH (FLICE-associated huge
protein) was initially identified
as a 220 kDa proapoptotic protein that is part of the death-inducing
signaling complex (DISC). Only a small
segment of ∼140 residues at the N-terminus of FLASH, especially
a Leu-Asp-Leu-Tyr motif, is required for recruiting the various protein
factors for histone pre-mRNA processing.− This segment also has tight interactions with Lsm11, which brings
FLASH to the 3′-end of histone pre-mRNAs.

The central
region of FLASH recruits arsenite resistance protein
2 (ARS2). ARS2 directly binds to histone
mRNAs and interacts with the nuclear cap-binding complex (CBC). The CBC–ARS2 complex can stimulate the
3′-end processing of histone mRNAs, presumably through CBC’s
interactions with the negative elongation factor (NELF) and SLBP.−

The 100 kDa zinc finger protein (ZFP100) interacts with both
SLBP
and U7 snRNP and is crucial for efficient 3′-end processing. It contains a poorly conserved N-terminal domain
and a C-terminal domain that is comprised of 18 C2H2-type zinc fingers.
Overexpression of ZFP100 greatly enhances the 3′-end processing
of a reporter RNA that mimics histone pre-mRNAs, while overexpression
of the components of the U7 snRNP alone does not, indicating that
ZFP100 is the limiting factor for histone pre-mRNA processing. The
primary role of ZFP100 is probably to bridge the SLBP–SL complex
with the U7 snRNP–HDE complex, thereby stabilizing the overall
processing machinery.

Phosphorylation of Thr4 in the Pol II
CTD is required for histone
3′-end processing. It is also
required for Pol II transcription elongation. The kinase that phosphorylates Thr4 is CDK9, which also
targets NELF., CDK9 is recruited to histone
genes by the nuclear protein ataxia-telangiectasia locus (NPAT), the
expression of which is negatively regulated by p53. It remains unclear how the Pol II CTD communicates with
the integral components of the histone pre-mRNA 3′-end processing
machinery.

Cell Cycle Regulation of Histone Pre-mRNA
3′-End Processing
The demand for histones during the
S phase of the cell cycle is
enormous, and an estimated 108 molecules of each of the
five histones are synthesized within a period of several hours. Levels of histone mRNA increase by 35-fold
at the beginning of the S phase, through transcription activation
(3.5-fold increase) and enhanced pre-mRNA processing (10-fold increase).
At the conclusion of the S phase, or through inhibition of DNA synthesis
in the S phase, levels of histone mRNA are reduced back to the G1
phase baseline.

SLBP is a key factor in the regulation of histone
mRNA levels, and the level of this protein correlates with those of
histone mRNAs during the cell cycle. In late G1 phase, inhibition
of protein degradation and activation of translation synergistically
increase the level of SLBP. At the end
of the S phase, several residues in the N-terminal segment of SLBP
(including Ser20, Ser23, Thr60, and Thr61) are phosphorylated, which
facilitates its polyubiquitination and rapid clearance by the ubiquitin–proteasome
system., Pin1 may also have a role in facilitating
the phosphorylation of Ser20 and Ser23, and the dephosphorylation
of Thr171.

On the other hand,
artificial inhibition of DNA replication in
the S phase has little effect on the cellular levels of SLBP, indicating
the existence of other mechanism(s) for regulating histone levels.

A Novel Quality Surveillance Mechanism for mRNA 5′-End
Capping
The 5′-end 7-methylguanosine (m7G) cap is a significant
contributor to mRNA splicing, nuclear export, translation, stability,
and other processes., The cap is added cotranscriptionally
and attached to the terminal nucleotide of the RNA by an unusual 5′–5′
triphosphate linkage. Capping proceeds in three steps: conversion
of 5′-end-triphosphorylated RNA (pppRNA, the primary transcript
of Pol II) to diphosphorylated RNA (ppRNA), coupling to GMP to produce
capped RNA (GpppRNA), and methylation to produce m7GpppRNA
(Figure ). A mature, methylated cap is essential
for recognition by the cap-binding complex, CBC and eIF-4E, which
coordinate many of the functions attributed to the cap.,

Reactions
for pre-mRNA 5′-end capping and quality control.
Reactions in the capping pathway are denoted by the green arrows.
The intermediates in the capping pathway are recognized by the DXO
family enzymes (Rai1, Dxo1, and DXO) for degradation (red arrows).
The fate of the ppRNA is currently not known, although it may be possible
that Rai1 and DXO also mediate its degradation. The reaction catalyzed
by the classical decapping enzymes (Dcp2 and Nudt16) is denoted by
the blue arrow. DXO and Dxo1 can also remove the mature cap but generate
a different product (dashed red arrow).

Removal of the cap (decapping) is a regulated process catalyzed
by at least two Nudix hydrolase enzymes, Dcp2 and Nudt16,, which release m7GDP (m7Gpp) and 5′-end-monophosphorylated
RNA (pRNA) (Figure ). Six additional Nudix
proteins possessing decapping activity in vitro have
also been reported, although the functional
role of these putative decapping enzymes in cells remains to be determined.

Until recently, it was generally accepted in the field that capping
always proceeds to completion, and a quality control mechanism was
not known (or deemed necessary). However, if there are defects in
5′-end capping, the intermediates of the capping pathway (pppRNA,
ppRNA, and GpppRNA) could accumulate in cells, because Dcp2 and Nudt16
predominantly function on mature m7GpppRNA and have minimal
activity on these intermediates. They
are also protected against degradation by 5′–3′
exoribonucleases (XRNs), which are only active against pRNA substrates.

A novel family of enzymes that possess RNA 5′-end pyrophosphohydrolase
(PPH, releasing pyrophosphate PPi), decapping, and/or distributive
5′–3′ exoribonuclease activity was recently discovered.
These enzymes include Rai1, and Ydr370C/Dxo1 in yeast and Dom3Z/DXO in mammals. These decapping exonucleases (DXO family of
enzymes) primarily act on incompletely capped mRNAs, converting them
to substrates for degradation by XRNs or their own exonuclease activity
(Figure ). These biochemical activities are
strongly suggestive of a hitherto unrecognized mRNA 5′-end
capping quality surveillance mechanism, helping to clear transcripts
with incompletely capped 5′-ends. Functional studies in yeast
and mammalian cells have confirmed the presence of defects in 5′-end
capping and demonstrated the importance of the DXO family enzymes
in this quality control mechanism.

Biochemical Properties
of the DXO Family Enzymes
The
DXO activities were first identified, unexpectedly, from studies on
yeast Rai1, the protein partner of the nuclear 5′–3′
exoribonuclease Rat1. The crystal structure
of Rai1 revealed a large pocket lined with conserved residues, some
of which coordinate a divalent metal ion at the bottom of the pocket.
This indicated that Rai1 is an enzyme, although no catalytic activities
were known for it at the time. Further studies demonstrated that Rai1
has PPH activity and decapping activity
toward GpppRNA, while it has much weaker activity toward the mature
m7GpppRNA. Moreover, the
product of decapping is GpppN, the entire cap structure, in contrast
to Dcp2 and Nudt16, which release m7GDP (m7Gpp)
(Figure ).

Rai1 has a weak sequence
homologue in yeast, Dxo1 (Ydr370C). Biochemical studies showed that
it has decapping activity (toward both GpppRNA and m7GpppRNA)
as well as a distributive 5′–3′ exoribonuclease
activity, although it lacks PPH activity.

The mammalian homologue of Rai1, DXO (previously known as
Dom3Z),
has all three activities, PPH, decapping (toward both GpppRNA and
m7GpppRNA), and exoribonuclease. These activities would allow DXO to single-handedly detect and degrade
incompletely capped mRNAs. m7GpppRNAs are protected from
DXO degradation by cap-binding proteins in vivo,
indicating that mature mRNAs are insensitive to DXO. Therefore, DXO
is expected to function preferentially on incompletely capped pre-mRNAs.

Structural Basis for the DXO Activities
Biochemical
studies showed that mammalian DXO possesses three, apparently distinct,
catalytic activities: PPH, decapping, and exonuclease. On the other
hand, the RNA body produced by these activities is the same, 5′-end-monophosphorylated
RNA (pRNA). Crystal structures of mouse DXO in complex with 5′-end-monophosphorylated
RNA oligos, 5-mer RNA (pU5) (Figure A), and
6-mer RNA with phosphorothioate linkages to inhibit hydrolysis [pU(S)6]
as well as the m7GpppG cap analogue (Figure B) have defined the binding modes of the RNA substrate/product
and revealed the molecular mechanism for the different activities.

Molecular mechanism for the catalytic activities of DXO
family
enzymes. (A) Structure of mouse DXO in complex with pU5 oligo RNA
(black stick models) (PDB entry 4J7L). The two
Mg2+ ions are shown as orange spheres. (B) Structure of
mouse DXO in complex with the m7GpppG cap analogue (gray
sticks) (PDB entry 4J7N). The expected location of the metal ions is indicated by the red
star. The view is related to that of panel A by an ∼60°
rotation around the vertical axis. (C) Binding mode of the 5′-end
phosphate group of pU5. This RNA is bound in the active site as the
product. Binding of the pyrophosphate (PPi), the cap structure
[(m7)GpppN], or the first nucleotide (N1) on
the other side of the catalytic machinery explains the three catalytic
activities. (D) The active site of DXO is located at the bottom of
a deep pocket, which is large enough to accommodate only ssRNA.

The pU5 oligo is bound in the
DXO active site as a product, with
its 5′-end phosphate group mimicking the scissile phosphate
of the substrate. A second metal ion is bound in the active site in
the presence of this oligo, and a terminal oxygen atom of the 5′-end
phosphate group is a bridging ligand to both metal ions (Figure C). The pU(S)6 oligo is bound in the active site
as a substrate, revealing the recognition pocket for the first nucleotide
(especially its 5′-phosphate) for the 5′–3′
exonuclease activity. However, there are disruptions to the conformation
of this oligo at the scissile bond caused by the incorporation of
the phosphorothioate linkages and the fact that only one metal ion
(Ca2+, to prevent hydrolysis) is present in the active
site.

The structures demonstrate that the same active site machinery
supports the three activities, and it is the distinct binding modes
of the substrates that determine the outcome of the reaction. The
5′-end PPi pyrophosphate, (m7)GpppN cap,
or the first nucleotide is bound on the other side of the catalytic
machinery from the RNA body (Figure C). An
attack on the scissile phosphate group, likely by a water/hydroxide
coordinated to one of the metal ions, then leads to the hydrolysis.

At the same time, different DXO family enzymes have distinct biochemical
activity profiles. For example, Rai1 has PPH and GpppRNA decapping
activities but no exonuclease activity, while DXO has all the activities
(Figure ). Further studies are needed to elucidate
the molecular mechanisms of these differences.

The DXO family
enzymes share four conserved sequence motifs. Motif I is an Arg residue and recognizes the
5′-phosphate group of the pRNA substrate and pppRNA. Motif
II, GΦXΦE (where Φ is an aromatic or hydrophobic
residue and X any residue), provides a ligand to the metal ion [Glu192
in mouse DXO (Figure C)]. Motif III, EhD (where
h is a hydrophobic residue), is ligated to both metal ions in the
pU5 complex [Glu234 and Asp236 (Figure C)].
Motif IV, EhK, provides a ligand to the metal ion (Glu253), and the
Lys residue is likely to stabilize the transition state of the reaction.

The structures of the DXO family enzymes have a remote relationship
to that of D-(D/E)XK nucleases,,, which include some viral and phage nucleases. However,
there is little sequence conservation with these enzymes, and only
the Asp residue of motif III (EhD) and motif IV (EhK) [the D-(D/E)XK
motif] are shared among them. The level of structural conservation
outside of these two motifs is much lower among these enzymes. The
D-(D/E)XK enzymes also include some type II restriction endonucleases,
such as HincII, EcoRV, EcoRI, BamHI, and BglI, but the level of structural conservation with the DXO family
enzymes is much lower. For example, the active site of the DXO family
enzymes is located at the bottom of a deep pocket (Figure D), which is consistent with their exonuclease,
decapping, and PPH activity. In comparison, the active site of the
type II enzymes is much more open, in line with their endonuclease
activity.

Functions of DXO Family Enzymes in 5′-End
Capping Quality
Control
Functional studies in yeast cells harboring a deletion
of Rai1 and/or Dxo1 reveal a role for these proteins in ensuring the
integrity of mRNA 5′-end caps. Incompletely capped mRNAs were
observed in rai1Δ cells following nutritional
stress (glucose or amino acid starvation), suggesting that Rai1 is
necessary for their detection and degradation. Moreover, incompletely capped mRNAs are detected under
normal, nonstress growth conditions in rai1Δdxo1Δ doubly disrupted yeast strains. Collectively, these findings demonstrate that
incompletely capped transcripts are normally generated in yeast cells
(Figure ), providing direct evidence that
the capping process is less efficient than initially envisioned.

DXO family
enzymes function in 5′-end capping quality control.
In eukaryotes, pre-mRNAs are transcribed in the nucleus by Pol II
and processed into mature mRNAs by the addition of a 5′-end
cap, intron splicing, and 3′-end cleavage and polyadenylation.
The mature mRNAs are exported to the cytoplasm for protein translation.
In yeast cells, incompletely capped Pol II RNA transcripts are subjected
to degradation by the Rai1–Rat1 decapping–exonuclease
heterodimer, which detects and degrades 5′-end uncapped RNA
or 5′-end unmethylated capped RNA in the nucleus. Dxo1, which
is predominantly but not exclusively in the cytoplasm, decaps and
degrades unmethylated capped Pol II transcripts. In mammalian cells,
the incompletely capped Pol II RNA transcripts are substrates for
DXO, which decaps and exonucleolytically degrades the defectively
capped pre-mRNA prior to further splicing and 3′-end processing.
Collectively, the DXO enzymes can hydrolyze the 5′-end of incompletely
capped RNAs to expose the 5′-end of the RNA to subsequent exonucleolytic
decay (by Dxo1 and DXO directly or by the Rai1–Rat1 heterodimer)
in a 5′-end capping quality control mechanism to maintain RNA
fidelity. CE is the capping enzyme and CBP the cap-binding protein.

In addition, the fact that a double
disruption of Rai1 and Dxo1, but
not individual disruptions, is required
for the accumulation of incompletely capped mRNAs during nonstress
conditions indicates that the Rai1 and Dxo1 proteins function redundantly
in the surveillance mechanism to detect and degrade incompletely capped
transcripts. On the other hand, Dxo1 cannot complement
the loss of Rai1 under nutritional stress conditions.
It remains to be determined whether the incompletely capped transcripts
are generated as a consequence of intrinsic stochastic inefficiency
of the capping process or an indication that capping is normally a
regulated process in which not all primary transcripts are destined
to acquire a methylated cap.

Functional studies in human embryonic
kidney 293T cells confirm
the importance of DXO in ensuring mRNA 5′-end capping quality. A decrease in the DXO level in these cells
through shRNA knockdown results in a significant accumulation of unprocessed
pre-mRNAs (with splicing and polyadenylation defects) with minimal
changes in mature mRNA levels. These unprocessed pre-mRNAs harbor
incompletely capped 5′-ends, while the mature mRNAs contain
an m7G cap. These data indicate that incompletely capped
pre-mRNAs do not undergo further processing (splicing or polyadenylation),
while the normally capped pre-mRNAs are licensed to undergo processing
(Figure ).

While earlier studies had
demonstrated a link between capping quality
and splicing of the first intron, the accumulated pre-mRNAs in DXO
knockdown cells show retention of all the introns tested, irrespective
of their positions. Therefore, the data
suggest that incompletely capped pre-mRNAs are inefficiently spliced
at all introns. These pre-mRNAs also have compromised 3′-end
processing, consistent with earlier reports that the cleavage step
is facilitated by the 5′-end cap.

The reported findings
demonstrate that incompletely capped transcripts
are generated in mammalian cells and define a novel link between capping
and pre-mRNA processing. They also indicate that the capping process
may function as a critical checkpoint that determines whether a pre-mRNA
should be further processed (Figure ). DXO
serves as a surveillance protein in a 5′-end capping quality
control mechanism to clear incompletely capped pre-mRNAs.

Future Perspectives
Structural, biochemical, and functional
studies over the past few
years have provided great new insights into pre-mRNA 3′-end
processing in eukaryotes, and we are gaining a better understanding
of the molecular mechanisms for the functions of various proteins
in the 3′-end processing machineries in yeast and humans. However,
this is still a burgeoning field of research, and there is much to
learn about the architecture of these machineries and the regulation
of their cellular functions, for example, in APA. It is also important
to understand how the core machineries can acquire post-translational
modifications and additional protein factors in response to specific
cellular conditions or localizations. Further characterizations of
the molecular mechanism and cellular functions of cytoplasmic polyadenylation
will be another important area for research.

The discovery of
the 5′-end capping quality surveillance
mechanism has opened up a new field of research. For the first time,
it is apparent that the capping step does not always proceed to completion.
An important unanswered question is whether this is simply a consequence
of the intrinsic inefficiency of the capping process or a regulated
event to modulate subsequent pre-mRNA processing by controlling cap
addition. If the latter is true, what are the components involved
and how are the decisions about which pre-mRNAs are capped made? Regardless
of how incompletely capped transcripts are generated, important future
studies in this area also include defining the genomewide and cellular
impacts of 5′-end capping quality surveillance, as well as
the molecular mechanism of how the authenticity of the 5′-end
cap influences pre-mRNA splicing and polyadenylation.

The authors declare
no
competing financial interest.

