Cells depend on the actin cytoskeleton
for a variety of cellular functions, including determination of cellular
shape and dynamic changes during motile events, intracellular transport
of molecules, vesicles, and organelles, formation of adhesions to
other cells and the extracellular matrix, and cytokinesis with formation
and closure of the contractile ring. In the quest to understand these
structures and processes in cells and their response to physiological
stimuli in normal and diseased states, a multitude of proteins has
been identified and analyzed. How they function in macromolecular
assemblies remains to be understood in most cases.

In this work,
we focus on class II myosins, the filament-forming
myosins, and their regulation by the actin binding protein, tropomyosin
(Tm). Myosin II is the founding member of the myosin family, being
originally isolated from skeletal muscle. In striated muscle, the primary mechanism of regulation is via troponin–tropomyosin
bound to actin in which Ca2+ binding to troponin (Tn) and
the strong binding of myosin crossbridges together cooperatively activate
the thin filament. Tropomyosin, a coiled-coil
protein that binds along the length of four to seven actin subunits
in the actin filament, depending on the species and isoform, is responsible
for the cooperativity.− Myosin and tropomyosin promote each other’s
affinity for actin in a cooperative manner.

While troponin is found only in cardiac and skeletal muscle
cells,
tropomyosin is ubiquitous. Tropomyosin
is well-established in its cooperative regulation of smooth muscle
myosin. Smooth muscle myosin, together with nonmuscle forms of myosin
II, is primarily regulated by phosphorylation of the regulatory light
chain by myosin light chain kinase and Rho kinase. Studies comparing the Tm-dependent regulation of smooth
and striated muscle myosin II isoforms and their respective tissue-specific
Tm isoforms first showed that both proteins influence the regulatory
state of the actin filament such that Tm can be inhibitory or activating.−

The proposal that regulation of myosin is coordinated with
specific
Tms in a manner that translates to cellular localization and specific
cytoskeletal functions has received support from both biochemical
and cellular studies. Myosin I, localized in regions of the cell where
actin filaments are dynamic and Tm is sparse,− is inhibited by Tm.− In contrast, Tm activates myosin V isoforms isolated from yeast,
the class of myosins that engage in intracellular transport. Yeast
myosin V selectively travels on actin filaments that contain Tm, and
Tm makes the motor more processive.,, However, a vertebrate myosin V that is processive
is unaffected by skeletal muscle Tm.

In mammals, there are three nonmuscle myosin IIs, NMIIA, NMIIB,
and NMIIC, encoded by separate genes. In addition, each of these genes
is subject to alternative splicing giving rise to additional isoforms. Like the smooth muscle myosin II, NMIIs are activated
by phosphorylation of the regulatory light chain. Kinetic analysis of NMII isoforms shows they are distinct
from each other and from their sarcomeric counterparts.,− NMII myosins are much slower than muscle myosin IIs, with higher
affinity for ADP and slower rates of ADP release. Of the three, NMIIA
is the fastest and NMIIB the slowest. All three have duty ratios higher
than those of muscle myosin IIs but fall short of being processive
myosins that typically have duty ratios of ∼50%. The kinetic
profile suits this class of myosins for being involved in processes
that require maintenance of tension, rather than rapid movement, consistent
with their cellular localizations and reported functions.

The nonmuscle filament-forming myosin IIs
are localized to different
populations of stress fibers and regions of the contractile ring,− structures that are involved in force generation required for cell
migration, cell adhesion, and cytokinesis.,, NMIIA and NMIIB may be spatially segregated
in the cells, localized in different populations of stress fibers
that help define cellular polarity, as well as coassembled in heterofilaments
in regions of spatial overlap.,,− Stress fibers containing NMIIA are attached at one
end to focal adhesions. Active myosin II (as defined by the need for
phosphorylation of the regulatory light chain) is required in the
stress fibers that form along adhesions for maturation of focal adhesions
and adhesion-dependent cell migration.,

The
stress fibers that contain myosin II also contain tropomyosin,
as does the contractile ring.− More than 40 Tm isoforms are
encoded by the four mammalian genes as a consequence of alternate
promotors and alternative exon splicing. Tropomyosin isoforms are enriched in the lamellum and in stress
fibers that contain myosin II, but not in the lamellipodium of epithelial
cells., Microinjection of skeletal muscle tropomyosin
into cells resulted in the recruitment of myosin II, decreasing the
extent of the lamellipodium while supporting rapid migration and the
formation of focal adhesions closer to the leading edge of the cell. This study indicated Tm has a role in regulating
regional specializations of the cytoskeleton for cellular migration.

Subsequent studies have studied the role of specific Tm isoforms.
Overexpression of Tm5NM1 (a cytoskeletal Tm isoform) results in an
increased number of stress fibers, increased spreading, and reduced
cell migration velocity, compared to other Tm isoforms not typically
associated with stress fibers., The associated stabilization
of focal adhesions has led to the suggestion that overexpressing Tm5NM1
results in a tension-dependent decrease in focal adhesion turnover
and consequent remodeling of the ECM. NMIIA is recruited to the Tm5NM1-containing stress fibers.

Fission yeast Tm promotes myosin II (Myo2)
activity, but the effect of Tm on mammalian
cytosolic
myosin II is unknown. We postulate that the isoform-specific Tm localization
and the effect of overexpression on NMII isoform localization reflect
the modulation of acto-NMII kinetics and motile function. In this
study, we compared the ability of different Tm isoforms to support
actin filament motility with nonmuscle HMMs IIA, IIB, and IIC and
skeletal myosin. The Tm isoforms have differential effects on filament
velocities depending on the myosin isoform, indicating that the primary
determinant of the isoform-specific effect of Tm on actomyosin regulation
is the myosin isoform. We also measured the steady-state MgATPase
activity of NMIIA, NMIIB, and NMIIC HMMs in the presence of a Tm isoform
(Tm5NM1) that increased the velocity of NMIIA and NMIIC HMMs in the
motility assays. Tm5NM1 increased the ATPase rates of NMIIA and NMIIC,
in support of the motility data, by increasing the Vmax and decreasing the KATPase.

Experimental Procedures
Protein Expression and Purification
The rat AS-Tmstα,
Tm2, Tm5a, and Tm5NM1 and human Tm4 proteins were expressed in Escherichia coli BL21(DE3) cells and purified as previously
described. Actin was purified from acetone
powder of chicken pectoral skeletal muscle actin. Tropomyosin and actin concentrations were determined by
measuring the difference spectrum of tyrosine. Skeletal myosin was prepared from chicken pectoral muscle. Monoclonal antibody 10F12.3 that reacts specifically
with chicken skeletal muscle myosin subfragment 2 was prepared and
characterized as described previously.,

Recombinant
human nonmuscle heavy meromyosin IIA, MYH9 (NMIIA
HMM), and IIB, MYH10 (NMIIB HMM), and mouse IIC, MYH14 (NMIIC HMM), with a C-terminal EGFP and Flag tag were
co-expressed with bovine nonmuscle regulatory light chain (MYL9) and chicken essential (MYL6) light
chains in the baculovirus/Sf9 system (Invitrogen, New York, NY). The infected Sf9 cells were harvested by sedimentation
after they had grown for 24 h and then stored at −80 °C.
The cell pellets were extracted and homogenized in a buffer containing
0.5 M NaCl, 10 mM MOPS (pH 7.3), 10 mM MgCl2, 1 mM EGTA,
3 mM NaN3, 2 mM ATP, 0.1 mM phenylmethanesulfonyl fluoride,
0.1 mM dithiothreitol, and a 5 μg/mL leupeptin/proteinase inhibitor
mixture [2 μg/mL chymostatin (MP Biochemicals, Santa Ana, CA),
1 μg/mL pepstatin (MP Biochemicals), 1 μg/mL Nα-tosyl-Lys-chloromethylketone-HCl (TLCK) (Sigma,
St. Louis, MO), and 1 μg/mL N-p-tosyl-l-phenylalanine chloromethyl ketone (TPCK) (Sigma)].
The HMM fragments were copurified with the light chains by Flag affinity
chromatography using M2 Flag affinity gel (Sigma). The full-length
rabbit smooth muscle myosin light chain kinase (MLCK, NP_001075775) was expressed in the baculovirus/Sf9 system and purified via an
N-terminal Flag tag.

Cosedimentation Assays
Tropomyosin
(0.1–8 μM)
was combined with 5 μM F-actin and cosedimented at 20 °C
in 200 mM NaCl, 10 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.5), 2 mM MgCl2, and
0.5 mM DTT at 60000 rpm in a Beckman model TL-100 ultracentrifuge
in a TLA-100 rotor. The pellets and supernatants
were analyzed by sodium dodecyl sulfate–polyacrylamide gel
electrophoresis, stained with Coomassie blue, and scanned and analyzed
using an ImageScanner III densitometer with Labscan version 6.0 and
ImageQuant TL version 7.0. The free Tm in the supernatants was calculated
from standard curves for each Tm. The binding constant Kapp and the Hill coefficient (αH) were
determined by fitting the experimental data to the Hill equation (eq ) using Kaleidagraph:where ν
is the maximal
fraction of Tm binding to actin, n is the maximal
Tm bound, and [Tm] = [Tm]free. The Tm:actin ratio was normalized
to 1 by dividing the Tm:actin ratio obtained from densitometry by
the Tm:actin ratio observed at saturation.

Circular Dichroism (CD)
Measurements
Thermal stability
measurements were taken by following the ellipticity of 0.1 mg/mL
Tm at 222 nm as a function of temperature in 0.5 M NaCl, 10 mM sodium
phosphate (pH 7.5), 1 mM EDTA, and 1 mM DTT in an Aviv model 400 spectropolarimeter
at the Robert Wood Johnson Medical School CD facility. The observed
melting temperature (TM) is defined as
the temperature at which the ellipticity at 222 nm, normalized to
a scale of 0–1, is equal to 0.5.

In Vitro Motility Assays
The in
vitro motility assays were conducted as described previously., The chicken skeletal myosin and NMII HMMs were flash-frozen, stored
in liquid nitrogen in 25–150 μL aliquots, and thawed
in ice followed by dead head removal. To remove dead heads, the skeletal
myosin and NMII HMMs were combined with F-actin and 5 mM MgATP in
high-salt buffer (HSB) [25 mM imidazole (pH 7.6), 0.3 M KCl, 4 mM
MgCl2, and 5 mM DTT] and pelleted at 90000 rpm for 20 min
at 4 °C in a Beckman TLA 100.2 rotor. This procedure pellets
all of the actin and 5–10% of the total myosin, including inactive
myosin that is no longer dissociated from actin by ATP (dead heads).
The clear myosin supernatant was recovered and used within 0–16
h of dead head removal.

For the assays with skeletal myosin,
nitrocellulose-coated glass coverslips were incubated with 0.15 mg/mL
monoclonal antibody that reacts specifically with chicken pectoral
muscle myosin subfragment 2 (10F12.3), followed by incubation with
1% BSA for blocking. Skeletal myosin was diluted in HSB supplemented
with 1% BSA (HSB/BSA) to a final concentration of 40 μg/mL.
The antibody-coated coverslips were incubated with 40 μg/mL
myosin for ∼2 h in a humidified chamber at 4 °C, followed
by washes with HSB/BSA and then motility buffer [25 mM imidazole (pH
7.6), 25 mM KCl, 4 mM MgCl2, 1 mM MgATP, and 5 mM DTT].

For the assays with nonmuscle HMMs, IIA, IIB, and IIC, nitrocellulose-coated
glass coverslips were incubated with 60 μg/mL HMM, followed
by incubation with 1% BSA for blocking at room temperature. Previous
studies have shown that no antibody is needed to facilitate the attachment
of this myosin fragment. The HMMs were
then phosphorylated by incubating the coverslips with 0.1 μM
calmodulin and 10 nM MLCK in buffer containing 10 mM MOPS (pH 7.3),
50 mM KCl, 5 mM MgCl2, 0.2 mM CaCl2, 0.1 mM
EGTA, 1 mM DTT, and 0.2 mM ATP for 10 min at room temperature, followed
by washes with motility buffer at 4 °C.

The myosin-coated
coverslips were transferred to a 15 μL
drop of 2 nM rhodamine-phalloidin-labeled actin (chicken skeletal
muscle) or actin–Tm (Tm concentration of 1–2 μM
for all motility assays, except where indicated) in a modified motility
buffer [25 mM imidazole (pH 7.6), 25 mM KCl, 4 mM MgCl2, 7.6 mM MgATP, 50 mM DTT, 0.5% methyl cellulose, 0.1 mg/mL glucose
oxidase, 0.018 mg/mL catalase, and 2.3 mg/mL glucose] in a small parafilm
ring fixed on an alumina slide with vacuum grease. This chamber was
observed with an Olympus BH-2 microscope. The movement of actin filaments
from 2 to 5 min of continuous video (Movies S1 and S2 of the ) was recorded from several
fields for each assay condition and analyzed with semiautomated filament
tracking programs as described below.,

Analysis of
Motility Data
The distance versus time
plot for each filament is divided into segments of uniform velocity
by the tracking program, and the filament length and velocity determined
for each segment of every track are saved. The list of all segments
is then sorted in descending order of filament velocity. The minimal
and maximal velocities are determined and divided into 20 bins between
these limits of width = max – min/20. The data from the list
are sorted into these bins, and a mean velocity and a mean count for
each bin are determined. The trajectory of every filament with a lifetime
of at least 10 frames is determined, and the instantaneous velocity
of the filament moving along the trajectory, the filament length,
and the distance of continuous motion are tabulated. When hundreds
of filaments are tracked, a total distance moved by all the filaments
can be determined from the tabulated data list. The question of interest
is the average velocity at which the filaments move over this total
distance. Unfortunately, defects arise in the preparation of surfaces
that result in pinning of actin filaments and slowing and even stopping
of the sliding movement for various periods. To minimize the influence
of these defects in determining the filament velocity, the binned
velocity data are weighted on the basis of the fraction of the total
distance the filaments in each bin have moved. This weighting approach
favors moving filaments over stationary filaments. As a consequence,
the resulting velocity distribution reflects the mean velocity of
smooth movement and is not weighted down by stationary filaments,
thus minimizing the effect of surface defects that slow and pin filaments.
The weighted probability of the filament velocity for hundreds of
events was fit to a Gaussian distribution to determine a mean velocity
± standard deviation (SD) for each experiment (Figure S1 of the ).

ATPase Assays
The HMM fragments at 2.2–3.4 μM
were phosphorylated with MLCK (1–10 nM) for 15 min at room
temperature in a reaction mixture containing 10 mM MOPS (pH 7.3),
50 mM KCl, 5 mM MgCl2, 0.2 mM CaCl2, 0.1 mM
EGTA, 0.1 μM calmodulin, 1 mM DTT, and 0.2 mM ATP. The MgATPase activity was measured using an
NADH-coupled assay at 25 °C in 10 mM MOPS (pH 7.0), 2 mM MgCl2, 1 mM ATP, 50 mM KCl, 0.15 mM EGTA, 40 units/mL l-lactic dehydrogenase, 200 units/mL pyruvate kinase, 200 μM
NADH, and 1 mM phospho(enol)pyruvate. Fifteen micromolar actin (rabbit
skeletal muscle) with varying concentrations of Tm5NM1 (from 0 to
15 μM) and varying concentrations of actin–Tm5NM1 (from
0.5 to 30 μM) combined at a 1:1 actin:Tm molar ratio was used
for the assays shown in Figure . Each HMM
II protein was at a concentration of 0.1 μM.

Results
Tropomyosin
and Myosin Isoforms
The tropomyosins were
purified from E. coli and were unacetylated. The
striated muscle αTm has an Ala-Ser extension (AS-Tmstα)
at the N-terminal end to increase actin affinity. There are four TPM genes (TPM1–TPM4) in vertebrates that express more than 40 isoforms through the use
of alternate promoters (exons 1a/b) and alternative splicing of three
exons: 2a/b, 6a/b, and 9a-d. The difference in the lengths of high-molecular
weight (HMW, 284 a.a.) and low-molecular weight (LMW, 247 a.a.) forms
of Tm arises from the use of alternate promoters for exons 1a and
2 or exon 1b (Figure ). Rat striated αTm (1a-2b-6b-9a) and Tm2 (1a-2b-6b-9d)
are HMW isoforms encoded by TPM1 that differ in the
ninth C-terminal exon. Rat Tm5a (1b-6b-9d), Tm5NM1 (1b-6a-9d), and
human Tm4 (1b-6b-9d) are LMW isoforms encoded by TPM1, TPM3, and TPM4 genes, respectively
(Figure ). Recombinant human nonmuscle heavy
meromyosin IIA, MYH9 (NMIIA HMM), and IIB, MYH10 (NMIIB HMM), and mouse IIC, MYH14 (NMIIC HMM), with a C-terminal EGFP and Flag tag were co-expressed
with bovine nonmuscle regulatory light chain (MYL9) and chicken essential (MYL6) light chains in the
baculovirus/Sf9 system.

Tropomyosin gene structure
in vertebrates. The arrangement of exons
expressed in the Tm isoforms used in this study from TPM1, TPM3, and TPM4 genes is shown.
The names of the Tms in parentheses correspond to the systematic nomenclature
proposed for mammalian tropomyosins by Geeves, Hitchcock-DeGregori,
and Gunning (manuscript submitted for publication). The full forms
of the names in the parentheses are as follows: Tpm1.1st, Tpm1.1st(a.b.b.a);
Tpm1.6cy, Tpm1.6cy(a.b.b.d); Tpm1.8cy, Tpm1.8cy(b.-.b.d.); Tpm3.1cy,
Tpm3.1cy(b.-.a.d); Tpm4.2cy, Tpm4.2cy(b.-.b.d).

In Vitro Motility of Actin–Tropomyosin
The velocity of actin–Tm filaments on skeletal myosin and
nonmuscle IIA, IIB, and IIC HMMs was determined in in vitro motility assays (Figure  and Table ). The motility assays were performed at 27 °C
for skeletal myosin. Because of their slower velocities, the motility
assays for the NMII HMMs were done at a higher temperature (32 °C)
for ease of measurement. Of the NMII isoforms, NMIIC HMM was the slowest
(0.01 μm/s) and NMIIA HMM the fastest (0.16 μm/s), in
agreement with previous studies. The
NMII HMMs were phosphorylated in the presence of Ca2+-calmodulin-MLCK
prior to the motility assays. In the presence of Tm, the velocities
of actin filaments were inhibited, activated, or remained unaffected
depending on the Tm and myosin isoforms. The motility assays for actin–Tm
were done in the presence of 2 μM Tm. Filament velocities were
also determined at a higher Tm concentration, 10 μM, to ensure
that the binding of Tm to actin is saturated with 2 μM Tm. The
velocities of actin–Tm were not significantly different at
2 and 10 μM Tm (Figure ), indicating
that 2 μM Tm is sufficient to saturate the actin in the motility
assays.

Filament Speeds of Actin and Actin–Tm
with Skeletal and NMII Myosins
 	speed (μm/s) (% moving,
total number)	
 	skeletal myosin	NMIIA HMM	NMIIB
HMM	NMIIC HMM	
actin	4.8 ± 0.2, n = 6 (97, 320)	0.16 ± 0.03, n = 6 (55, 110)	0.04 ± 0.01, n = 3 (36, 110)	0.011 ± 0.001, n = 2 (11, 100)	
AS-Tmstα	2.0 ± 0.5,n = 5 (75, 160)	0.20 ± 0.10, n = 4 (56, 75)	0.05, n = 1 (41, 65)	–	
Tm2	4.4 ± 0.6, n = 5 (96, 330)	0.18 ± 0.08, n = 4 (64, 120)	0.05 ± 0.01, n = 2 (31, 90)	0.026 ± 0.002, n = 2 (12, 85)	
Tm5a	7.4 ± 1.0,,n = 5 (99, 320)	0.31 ± 0.04,,n = 3 (87, 130)	0.05 ± 0.01, n = 3 (27, 120)	0.021, n = 1 (10, 100)	
Tm5NM1	7.9 ± 0.8,,n = 5 (99, 390)	0.30 ± 0.04,,n = 5 (67, 150)	0.05 ± 0.01, n = 3 (23, 110)	0.028, n = 1 (24, 120)	
Tm4	5.2 ± 0.7, n = 5 (96, 280)	0.29 ± 0.04,,n = 3 (82, 200)	0.06 ± 0.01, n = 3 (29, 90)	0.032, n = 1 (18, 110)	
Filament speeds ± the standard
deviation (SD) of actin and actin–Tm from in vitro motility assays from two to six experiments. The values with no
SD are from a single experiment. The average values for the percent
moving filaments and total number of filaments are reported in parentheses.

P &lt; 0.01
compared
with actin (unpaired Student’s t test) (Figure ).

P &lt; 0.01 compared
with AS-Tmstα, Tm2, and Tm4 (unpaired Student’s t test) (Figure ).

P &lt; 0.05 compared
with AS-Tmstα and Tm2 (unpaired Student’s t test) (Figure ).

Filament speeds of actin–tropomyosin in in vitro motility assays. Filament speeds were determined for actin and actin–Tm
on skeletal myosin and phosphorylated NMIIA, NMIIB, and NMIIC HMMs.
The assays with actin–Tm were conducted with 2 μM Tm
(black bars). Assays were also conducted with 10 μM Tm for skeletal
myosin (gray bars). The filament speeds are means ± SD from two
to six experiments (Table ). The data with
no error bars are from a single experiment. *P &lt;
0.01 compared with actin. **P &lt; 0.01 compared
with AS-Tmstα, Tm2, and Tm4. ***P &lt; 0.05
compared with AS-Tmstα and Tm2 (unpaired Student’s t test). Assay conditions: 25 mM imidazole (pH 7.6), 25
mM KCl, 4 mM MgCl2, 7.6 mM MgATP, 50 mM DTT, 0.5% methyl
cellulose, and an oxygen scavenger system (0.1 mg/mL glucose oxidase,
0.02 mg/mL catalase, and 2.5 mg/mL glucose). The temperature was 27
°C for skeletal myosin and 32 °C for HMMs IIA, IIB, and
IIC.

With skeletal myosin, filament
velocities were inhibited by AS-Tmstα
(∼60%) but activated by Tm5a and Tm5NM1 (∼60%) relative
to the rate with actin alone (P &lt; 0.01, unpaired
Student’s t test), whereas Tm2 and Tm4 had
no significant effect (Figure  and Table ). In the case of NMIIA HMM, the LMW nonmuscle Tms
(Tm5a, Tm5NM1, and Tm4) activated filament velocities by ∼2-fold
(P &lt; 0.01), whereas AS-Tmstα and Tm2 had
no significant effect, relative to the rate with actin alone. None
of the Tm isoforms significantly affected filament velocity with NMIIB
HMM (P &gt; 0.1). With NMIIC HMM, all nonmuscle Tms
activated the velocities of actin filaments by 2–3-fold compared
to that with actin alone. However, because of the extremely slow velocities
of actin filaments translocated by NMIIC HMM, the velocities for this
isoform were calculated from fewer filaments and the experiments were
not repeated in most cases. The fraction of filaments moving for actin
and actin–Tm ranged from 75 to 99% with skeletal myosin, from
55 to 90% with NMIIA HMM, from 20 to 40% with NMIIB HMM, and from
10 to 25% for NMIIC HMM (Table ). The speed
of individual filaments within each experiment was independent of
filament length except for very short filaments, &lt;1 μm (Figure
S2 of the ).

Actin-Activated MgATPase Rates of
NMII Myosins
 	Vmax (s–1), KATPase (μM) (from steady-state
ATPase)	
 	NMIIA HMM	NMIIB HMM	NMIIC HMM	
actin	0.49 ± 0.03, 7.0 ± 1.2	0.17 ± 0.02, 3.9 ± 1.2	0.23 ± 0.01, 3.9 ± 0.6	
Tm5NM1	0.57 ± 0.03, 1.3 ± 0.3	0.19 ± 0.01, 6.2 ± 1.1	0.33 ± 0.01, 1.3 ± 0.2	
The values of Vmax and KATPase from
steady-state
ATPase assays ± the standard error from three or four experiments
for Tm5NM1 and one experiment for actin (Figure ).

Dependence of Motility
on Surface Myosin Density
We
determined the velocities of actin–AS-Tmstα and actin–Tm5NM1
as a function of skeletal myosin loading concentration (Figure ). The myosin surface density on the coverslips
is directly proportional to the myosin loading concentration, and
the surface is saturated at ∼10–20 μg/mL myosin. The velocity of actin is saturated above 5–10
μg/mL myosin and decreases at myosin concentrations of &lt;5
μg/mL. The velocities of AS-Tmstα and Tm5NM1 have a myosin
concentration dependence similar to that of actin. AS-Tmstα
inhibited actin velocities, whereas Tm5NM1 activated actin velocities
at all myosin concentrations tested (0.1–80 μg/mL). The
fraction of moving filaments was ∼35% for actin and ∼65%
for Tm5NM1 at the lowest myosin concentration (0.1 μg/mL) and
increased to &gt;80% at &gt;1 μg/mL myosin.

Filament speeds as a
function of surface myosin density. Filament
speeds were determined for actin, actin–AS-Tmstα, and
actin–Tm5NM1 as a function of skeletal myosin loading concentration.
The data with error bars show the standard deviation from two or three
experiments, and the data with no error bars are from a single experiment.
Assay conditions are the same as in Figure . The temperature was 27 °C.

ATPase Activity of Nonmuscle Forms of Myosin II with Actin–Tm5NM1
The actin-activated MgATPase activities of NMIIA, NMIIB, and NMIIC
HMMs were measured to determine the mechanism of activation by Tm5NM1,
a nonmuscle Tm that activated NMIIA and NMIIC in the motility assays.
We focused on the Tm5NM1 isoform for further analysis because it is
the most studied cytoskeletal Tm and plays an important role in cellular
functions such as determining cell morphology, formation of stress
fibers and focal adhesions during cell migration, and cytokinesis.−, Tm5NM1 is also a major form in
transformed, metastatic cancer cells and has recently been shown to
be a target for anticancer drugs.

Actin-activated
MgATPase activity of myosins. The steady-state
ATPase activity of phosphorylated NMIIA (A and D), NMIIB (B and E),
and NMIIC (C and F) HMMs was measured in the presence of (A–C)
15 μM actin and varying concentrations of Tm5NM1 (0–15
μM) or (D–F) varying concentrations of actin and actin–Tm5NM1
(0.5–30 μM) combined at a 1:1 molar ratio. The data in
panels D–F were fit to a hyperbolic equation (—) to
obtain the values for Vmax and KATPase. Each HMM II protein was at a concentration
of 0.1 μM. Each data point is shown with the standard deviation
from three or four experiments, and the data without error bars are
from a single experiment. The Vmax and KATPase values are listed in Table . Assay conditions: 10 mM MOPS (pH 7.0), 2 mM MgCl2, 1 mM ATP, 50 mM KCl, 0.15 mM EGTA, 40 units/mL l-lactic
dehydrogenase, 200 units/mL pyruvate kinase, 200 μM NADH, and
1 mM phospho(enol)pyruvate. The temperature was 25 °C.

The ATPase rates of the myosin
isoforms vary, with NMIIA HMM being
the fastest (0.49 s–1) and the NMIIB and NMIIC HMMs
being much slower (0.17 and 0.23 s–1, respectively). The ATPase activity of NMIIA and NMIIC HMMs
increased as a function of Tm concentration and reached saturation
when the Tm:actin molar ratio reached saturation (1:6 Tm5NM1:actin)
(Figure A–C).
The ATPase activity of NMIIA, NMIIB, and NMIIC HMMs was also determined
as a function of actin–Tm concentration. The plots were fit
to the Michaelis–Menten equation to give values for the kinetic
constants, Vmax (maximal rate of ATP hydrolysis
at a saturating actin concentration) and KATPase (concentration of actin required for the half-maximal rate of ATP
hydrolysis) (Figure D–F and Table ). Tm5NM1 increased the Vmax of NMIIA and NMIIC by ∼20–40%,
with a smaller effect on IIB (12%) compared to that with actin alone,
thus supporting the motility data. Tm5NM1 also decreased the KATPase of NMIIA and NMIIC by 3–5-fold
but increased the KATPase of NMIIB by
∼2-fold. Therefore, Tm5NM1 may activate NMIIA and NMIIC by
increasing the rate of the ATPase cycle and reaching the maximal rate
at a lower actin concentration.

Actin Affinity and Thermal
Stability of Tropomyosins
We conducted cosedimentation assays
and thermal stability measurements
of the Tm isoforms to ensure that the effects on actomyosin regulation
are not related to actin affinity or stability. All isoforms bound
to actin but with different affinities (Figure A,B and Table ). AS-Tmstα has the highest
actin affinity with a Kapp of 3.5 ×
106 M–1. Tm2, Tm5a, and Tm5NM1 have ∼2–3-fold
lower affinity, whereas Tm4 has an affinity &gt;10-fold lower than
that
of AS-Tmstα. The differences in actin affinity between Tm isoforms
are suggested to be primarily due to the presence of specific alternate
exons at the N- and C-termini (1a vs 1b and 9a vs 9d) of the molecule
that can affect the end-to-end overlap complex and hence the affinity. However, we did not observe any clear relationship
between alternate exon usage and actin affinity for isoforms. For
example, Tm5a (1b) and Tm2 (1a and 2b) are both expressed from the TPM1 gene with alternate promoters but have similar actin
affinities.

Actin Affinities and Thermal Stabilities
of Tropomyosins
 	Kapp (×106 M–1)	αH	TM (°C)	
AS-Tmstα	3.5 ± 0.4	2.3 ± 0.5	44.0	
Tm2	1.2 ± 0.0	5.8 ± 0.7	40.0	
Tm5a	1.7 ± 0.1	1.8 ± 0.1	36.0	
Tm5NM1	1.8 ± 0.1	2.7 ± 0.5	42.5	
Tm4	0.2 ± 0.0	2.5 ± 0.5	45.5	
The values
for the binding constant
of Tm to actin, Kapp ± the standard
error, and the Hill coefficient, αH ± the standard
error, from two or three experiments (Figure ). The data were fit to the Hill equation, and the Kapp and αH are those reported by Kaleidagraph.

TM is
the temperature at which the ellipticity at 222 nm, normalized to
a scale of 0–1, is equal to 0.5 (Figure ).

Actin affinity and thermal
stability of tropomyosins. (A and B)
Binding of Tm measured by cosedimentation with F-actin. Tropomyosin
(0.1–8 μM) was combined with 5 μM F-actin and sedimented
at 20 °C in 200 mM NaCl, 10 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.5), 2 mM MgCl2, and 0.5 mM DTT. Stoichiometric binding of one Tm per seven
actins is represented by a maximal fraction of binding of 1. The data
for each isoform were obtained from two to four independent experiments.
The Kapp and Hill coefficient (αH) values are listed in Table . (C
and D) Fraction folded as measured by the relative ellipticity at
222 nm as a function of temperature (0–65 °C). The Tm
concentration was 1.5 μM in 0.5 M NaCl, 10 mM sodium phosphate
(pH 7.5), 1 mM EDTA, and 1 mM DTT. The fraction folded is relative
to the mean residue ellipticity at 0 °C, where the proteins were
fully folded. The TM values are listed
in Table .

The thermal stability of the Tm isoforms was determined by
following
the ellipticity at 222 nm as a function of temperature using CD spectroscopy
(Figure C,D). The Tm isoforms had varying
thermal stabilities, and the overall melting temperature, TM, ranged from 36 °C for Tm5a to 45.5 °C
for Tm4 (Table ), consistent with previous
studies. Tropomyosin undergoes multiple
thermal transitions, where the first and minor transition corresponds
to unfolding of the middle of the molecule (residues ∼130–190),
the second and major transition corresponds to unfolding of the rest
of the molecule or the C-terminal region, and the third transition
(when present) corresponds to unfolding of the N-terminal region. The thermal stability of the Tms does not correlate
with actin affinity, allaying concerns that the differences in stability
may produce global conformational changes that can affect actin affinity.
For example, Tm5a and Tm5NM1 have an ∼6 °C difference
in their thermal stabilities but similar actin affinities.

Discussion
Tropomyosins can regulate actomyosin by inhibiting or activating
actomyosin MgATPase activity and motility depending on the myosin
and Tm isoforms.,,,, In this study,
we have compared the regulation of three nonmuscle myosin II isoforms,
IIA, IIB, and IIC, by nonmuscle Tm isoforms Tm2, Tm5a, Tm5NM1, and
Tm4 by determining the velocities of actin filaments in in
vitro motility assays. We also looked at skeletal myosin
and striated αTm (AS-Tmstα) isoforms, in addition to the
nonmuscle isoforms mentioned above. The velocities of actin filaments
were differentially regulated depending on the myosin and Tm isoform.
With skeletal myosin II, filament velocities were inhibited in the
presence of AS-Tmstα, were unaffected in the presence Tm2 and
Tm4, and were activated in the presence Tm5NM1 and Tm5a. AS-Tmstα
(1a-2b-6b-9a) and Tm2 (1a-2b-6b-9d) are HMW Tms encoded by the same
(TPM1) gene and differ only in the sequence of the
ninth exon. Tm5a (1b-6b-9d) is a LMW Tm also encoded by the TPM1 gene that has the same ninth exon as Tm2 but expresses
an alternate first exon (1b) from AS-Tmstα and Tm2 (1a and 2b).
This implies that inhibition is chiefly determined by the presence
of exon 9a (AS-Tmstα), which is primarily a striated muscle-specific
exon, whereas the presence of exon 9d does not cause inhibition (Tm2)
and may cause activation (Tm5a). All three Tms are unacetylated, but
AS-Tmstα has an N-terminal Ala-Ser. The presence of the N-terminal
Ala-Ser may also be a contributing factor to the inhibition of velocity
by AS-Tmsta in contrast to Tm2, which does not inhibit, with skeletal
myosin. With NMIIA HMM, filament velocities in the presence of the
LMW isoforms, Tm5a, Tm5NM1, and Tm4, were activated ∼2-fold
(P &lt; 0.05) compared to the velocities in the presence
of HMW isoforms, AS-Tmstα and Tm2 (Figure  and Table ). On the basis of these results,
the primary determinant of activation of NMIIA is the presence of
exon 1b (LMW Tms) as opposed to exon 1a and exon 2 (HMW Tms) or the
size of the Tms (Figure ). Tm isoforms did
not significantly affect the filament velocity of NMIIB HMM. Inhibition
of filament velocity was observed only for skeletal myosin in the
presence of striated αTm, indicating that the inhibition of
actomyosin activity by Tm is specific to striated muscle isoforms
of Tm and myosin. Striated muscle myosin is regulated by Tm–troponin
in a Ca2+-dependent manner, whereas smooth muscle and nonmuscle
forms of myosins II are primarily regulated by phosphorylation of
their regulatory light chains.,,

The MgATPase activity of NMIIA and NMIIC HMMs was enhanced,
while
that of NMIIB HMM was unaffected in the presence of a nonmuscle Tm
isoform, Tm5NM1, in support of the motility data. The enhancement
of MgATPase rates was due to an ∼20–40% increase in Vmax accompanied by a 3–5-fold decrease
in KATPase. This is similar to the activation
of MgATPase activity of smooth muscle myosin by smooth muscle Tm,
which is accompanied by an increase in Vmax and a decrease in KATPase, and in contrast to the regulation of skeletal
myosin by striated αTm, where activation of the MgATPase is
largely due to a decrease in KATPase with
no effect on Vmax. Thus, nonmuscle II and smooth muscle myosins are regulated
by Tms by a mechanism that infers a direct effect of Tm on myosin
in contrast to skeletal myosin, which is thought to be regulated by
Tm via a predominantly steric effect through the actin filament. Note,
however, that the kinetic step that regulates the rate of in vitro motility is likely to be the release of ADP from
the A·M·ADP complex, whereas the step that regulates actin-activated
MgATPase activity is likely to be the release of Pi from
the A·M·ADP·Pi complex. Thus, there is no
reason that tropomyosin would have the same effect on the two measurements.

A noteworthy outcome of our research is
that various Tm isoforms
have differing affects on the motility and ATPase activities of the
three nonmuscle myosin HMM isoforms. While these isoforms do have
the common property of having comparatively slow actin translocation
rates and ATPase activities, there are significant kinetic differences
among them. For example, NMIIB has a duty ratio significantly higher
than those of NMIIA and NMIIC, and NMIIA is faster enzymatically than
the other two.,, It is not possible to speculate about the structural basis for the
differences in the motility or ATPase activities because there are
no crystal structures available for any of these myosins.

In
striated muscle, regulation of binding of myosin to the thin
filament (actin–Tm–Tn) is described by a three-state
model, in which the three kinetic and structural states are defined
as (1) the blocked state, in which in the absence of Ca2+, Tm blocks the interaction of myosin with actin, (2) the closed
state, in which in the presence of Ca2+, Tm shifts azimuthally
on the actin filament to partially expose the myosin binding site
and allow weak myosin binding, and (3) the open state, in which in
the presence of myosin, Tm azimuthally shifts further on the actin
filament, allowing strong myosin binding and force production.− The binding of myosin to thin filaments shifts the equilibrium from
the closed to open state in which both Tm and myosin bind to actin
with higher affinity., The cooperative activation of
the thin filament by myosin from the closed to open state can be produced
by Tm alone, independent of Tn and Ca2+. In the absence
of Tn and myosin, Tms occupy the blocked or closed positions on the
actin filament, depending on the Tm isoform. The open position is occupied only in the presence of myosin. The
structural transition of Tm from the blocked/closed position to the
open position in the presence of myosin may modulate the regulation
of actomyosin in an isoform-specific manner. Tropomyosins that occupy
average positions closer to the open state may be easier to switch
to the open state, thus producing activation of the actomyosin. However,
the average position of Tm5a, a short Tm isoform that activates filament
velocities with skeletal myosin, was reported to be in the closed
state, similar to Tmstα, which inhibits velocities with skeletal
myosin. In the study presented here,
both Tm5NM1 and Tm5a activated filament velocities with skeletal myosin
and NMIIA and NMIIC HMMs, suggesting that they may occupy similar
positions on the actin filament. Additionally, Tm5NM1 activated the
motility of actin filaments at all myosin concentrations ranging from
0.1 to 80 μg/mL. The differences in the position of Tms on the
actin filament and cooperativity are most likely related to differences
in sequence of the Tm isoforms as well as subtle differences in the
structure of the ends in the overlap complex such as the extent of
overlap and flexibility− and may be responsible for the differential effect
of Tm isoforms on the ATPase rate and motility of actomyosin.

Actomyosin bundles form the contractile component of stress fibers
that are essential for the formation of focal adhesions and cellular
movement during cell migration. Actomyosin
filaments are also a major component of the contractile ring and play
an important role in the constriction of the ring during cell division. The enhancement of ATPase rates as well as the
translocation rates of nonmuscle myosin IIA by specific Tm isoforms
introduces an additional way to modulate the actomyosin interaction,
apart from phosphorylation of the regulatory light chain, while conducting
these cellular functions. In addition to the biochemical regulation
of actomyosin, Tm may also be involved in the mechanical regulation
of actomyosin through an increase in force production. This is of
particular interest in cancer, where tumor cells alter the mechanical
properties of the extracellular matrix using the contractile properties
of focal adhesions and stress fibers to aid cell proliferation and
metastasis. Knowing the localization
of Tm isoforms in relation to myosin isoforms at the level of single
filaments and/or stress fibers would provide insight into the specificity
of regulation.

Supporting Information Available
Velocity probability distributions
for actin, actin–AS-Tmstα, and actin–Tm5NM1 on
skeletal myosin and NMIIA HMM (Figure S1), speeds of individual actin,
actin–AS-Tmstα, and actin–Tm5NM1 filaments as
a function of filament length on skeletal myosin and NMIIA HMM (Figure
S2), and videos showing in vitro motility of actin,
actin–AS-Tmstα, and actin–Tm5NM1 filaments on
skeletal myosin and NMIIA HMM [Movies S1 (parts A–C) and S2
(parts A–C)]. This material is available free of charge via
the Internet at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bi500162z_si_001.pdf

bi500162z_si_002.mov

bi500162z_si_003.mov

bi500162z_si_004.mov

bi500162z_si_005.mov

bi500162z_si_006.mov

bi500162z_si_007.mov

The authors
declare no
competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
We thank Prof. Don Winkelmann
for use of the instrument and
analysis software for in vitro motility assays and
for discussions and help with motility data analysis. We thank Dr.
Fang Zhang for technical assistance.

Abbreviations
Tm and Tpmtropomyosin

Tntroponin

HMMheavy meromyosin

CDcircular dichroism

TMmelting temperature

NMnonmuscle

MLCKmyosin light chain kinase

Tmstα
and Tpm1.1stTpm1.1st(a.b.b.a)

Tm2 and Tpm1.6cyTpm1.6cy(a.b.b.d)

Tm5a and Tpm1.8cyTpm1.8cy(b.-.b.d.)

Tm5NM1 and Tpm3.1cyTpm3.1cy(b.-.a.d)

Tm4 and Tpm4.2cyTpm4.2cy(b.-.b.d).

