The large atypical GTPase dynamin
is perhaps best understood for its role in fission during clathrin-mediated
endocytosis (CME)., Functional catalysis of fission
requires dynamin’s self-assembly on the narrow necks of invaginated
coated pits and coordinated GTP hydrolysis leading to global conformational
changes that destabilize the underlying lipid bilayer., Dynamin consists of five functional domains: an N-terminal GTPase
domain (G domain), largely α-helical middle and GTPase effector
domains (GEDs) that together form the “stalk” of dynamin
required for higher-order assembly, a PtdIns(4,5)P2 targeting pleckstrin
homology (PH) domain, and a C-terminal proline and arginine rich domain
(PRD) that interacts with many SH3 domain-containing proteins. The
N- and C-terminal α-helices of the G domain pack against the
C-terminal α-helix of the GED forming a three-helix bundle signaling
element (BSE) that is critical for structural integrity, self-assembly,
and assembly-stimulated GTPase activity.,

In vitro purified dynamin exists predominantly
as a tetramer; however, dynamin dimers are thought to be the fundamental
assembly unit. Several mutations that disrupt tetramerization and
higher-order self-assembly have been identified,− but monomeric dynamin mutants
have not been identified. A possible explanation for this observation
came from cross-linking studies in which single cysteine residues
were introduced into both the N-terminal helix (R15C) and the C-terminal
helix of the GED (R730C) in an otherwise reactive cysteine-less (DynRCL) dynamin construct. Consistent with the known structure
of the BSE, DynRCL(R15C/R730C)
was efficiently cross-linked by the short (3.6 Å) cysteine reactive
cross-linker MTS-1-MTS. The resulting
product, when subjected to nonreducing sodium dodecyl sulfate–polyacrylamide
gel electrophoresis (SDS–PAGE), migrated as an ∼180
kDa species relative to several commercially available, prestained
molecular mass markers [although there was some variation depending
on the source of the marker proteins (Figure S1 of the )]. On the basis of this
migration, and given that cross-linking a minimal R15C/R730C GTPase–GED
construct resulted in a faster migrating species on SDS–PAGE, we concluded that dynamin existed as a domain-swapped
dimer in which the GED from one polypeptide docked onto the G domain
of a second polypeptide.

Near-coincident publications reporting
the X-ray structures of
ΔPRD dynamin dimers expressed in Escherichia coli failed to reveal evidence of this domain swap., One
possibility for this discrepancy was that the prokaryotic expression
system is likely incapable of facilitating this presumably chaperone-assisted
domain swap. To test this, we expressed
DynRCL(R15C/R730C) in E. coli and performed
cross-linking analyses in comparison to the same construct expressed
in insect cells. Unexpectedly, the E. coli-derived
protein was efficiently cross-linked and migrated in a manner identical
to that of the insect cell-derived protein (Figure ).

Comparison of cross-linking efficiency and SDS–PAGE migration
of insect cell-derived and E. coli-expressed DynRCL(R15C/R730C). Lonza Marker: ProSieve Unstained Protein Marker
II, 10–200 kDa.

(A) Cysteine pairs within cross-linkable distances are indicated
on the structure of Dyn1 (Protein Data Bank entry 3SNH). Mutants E341C/K694C
and E482C/T676C also lay within the oligomerization interface, serving
as positive controls for dimerization. (B) Nonreducing SDS–PAGE
showing migration of cross-linked species obtained using MTS-1-MTS
(3.6 Å) or MTS-11-MTS (∼16 Å).

The regions connecting the stalk to either the BSE or the
PH domain
were disordered and thus not detected in the high-resolution X-ray
structures of dynamin., In particular, the large gap and
flexibility of linkage between the PH domain and the stalk made it
difficult to discern which PH domain linked to which stalk in the
crystal structure. Thus, a second possibility for the discrepancy
between cross-linking studies and structure was that the domain swap
occurred in this region, such that the GED from one polypeptide was
docked along the entire middle domain of the second polypeptide. To test this, we introduced a series of cysteine
pair point mutations along the GED and middle domains, including mutations
that lie within the dimer interface (Figure A), and expressed these proteins in insect cells. Cross-linked species
were subjected to nonreducing SDS–PAGE, and their migration
was compared to that of unstained molecular mass marker proteins.
As expected, each of these species was efficiently cross-linked by
MTS-1-MTS (Figure B). Cross-linking of cysteines
within the G domain (M6C/Q283C) resulted in a more rapidly migrating
species on nonreducing SDS–PAGE. Cross-linking cysteine residues
between the middle domain and the GED (E341C/K694C and E482C/T676C)
resulted in species that migrated more slowly than non-cross-linked
dynamin, but close to the size of a monomer. On the basis of their
migration, we would conclude that these species correspond to intramolecular
cross-links between GED and the middle, and that a domain swap did
not occur between the PH domain and the stalk. Using a longer (∼16
Å) cross-linking reagent, MTS-11-MTS, we were able to generate
intermolecular cross-links in constructs bearing cysteine residues
near the dimer interface (E341C/K694C and E482C/T676C). These presumably
dimeric species migrated at apparent molecular masses well above the
200 kDa marker.

It is well-known that protein tertiary structure
packing and disulfide
bond formation can alter the migration properties during SDS–PAGE
due to altered SDS binding. For instance,
gel shifts and the resulting slowly migrating species have been observed
in tripartite motif (TRIM) protein upon cross-linking. Similarly, the E. coli outer
membrane protein (ompA) shows altered migration depending on the extent
of denaturation of its β-barrel packing and the amount of SDS
bound. In the case of dynamin, the GED
domain packs against the middle domain, forming a helical bundle via
strong hydrophobic interactions, which would be locked in place by
cross-linking. Considering these ambiguities and the fact that the
R15C/R730C cross-linked species migrated significantly slower than
the others, it remained possible, although unlikely given the extended,
M-shaped structure of dynamin dimers,, that a domain
swap occurred between the stalk and BSE.

Matrix-assisted laser
desorption ionization (MALDI) Mega-time of
flight analysis of cross-linked and non-cross-linked dynamin samples.
(A) Cross-linking wild-type Dyn1 with MTS-2-MTS generates a minor
high-molecular mass band (inset) that is readily detected as a dimer
peak via MALDI mass spectrometry (201680 kDa) compared to non-cross-linked
control (blue vs red). (B) Cross-linking DynRCL(R15C/R730C)
does not result in any change in the MALDI spectra (blue) compared
to that of the un-cross-linked sample (red). The inset is a SDS–PAGE
gel showing cross-linked and un-cross-linked proteins used for MALDI
mass spectrometry.

To unambiguously determine
the oligomeric state of the cross-linked
dynamin species, we subjected them to MALDI (matrix-assisted laser
desorption ionization) Mega-time of flight (SCAAC, University of Texas
at Arlington, Arlington, TX), which is compatible with large macromolecules
(10–1500 kDa) and provides accurate mass determination in the
range of our expected products. Proteins were prepared at high concentrations
and desalted to remove buffer/salt interference and obtain a good
signal-to-noise ratio. Most noncovalent interactions are disrupted
under the desalting solvent conditions [70% acetonitrile and 0.1%
trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) at pH ∼2.0] used for sample preparation.
Ionization further disrupts noncovalent associations. As a positive control for the detection of dynamin dimers
by mass spectrometry, we cross-linked wild-type (WT) dynamin, which
contains seven cysteines, with MTS-2-MTS to generate a minor dimeric
population (Figure A, inset). We observed
a clear increase in a 2 × [M + H]+ peak, with an apparent
molecular mass of 201680 (as well as apparent 300 and 400 kDa species
corresponding to trimers and tetramers, respectively), in the cross-linked
WT sample compared to non-cross-linked control, which exhibited the
expected predominant molecular mass of 100111 Da (compare blue and
red traces in Figure A). These data confirm
that Mega-time of flight was indeed capable of detecting and distinguishing
cross-linked dimeric forms of dynamin. In contrast, there was no shift
in the molecular mass of the cross-linked DynRCL(R15C/R730C)
protein (Figure B) relative to that of the
non-cross-linked control, indicating that despite the reduced extent
of migration on SDS–PAGE this species also corresponded to
an intramolecular cross-linked monomer.

These mass spectrometry
data, together with results obtained by
varying the cross-linking sites, unambiguously establish that GED
interacts in cis with the middle and G domains of
the same polypeptide and that dynamin is not domain-swapped. This
resolves the controversy between high-resolution structural studies, and previous conclusions based on cross-linking across the G domain–GED
interface. Importantly, these results
in no way alter the main conclusions regarding the nucleotide-driven
conformational changes in the BSE reported by Chappie et al.

Supporting Information Available
Methods and supplemental Figure
S1. This material is available free of charge via the Internet at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bi500998s_si_001.pdf

Author Contributions
S.S. conducted
all the experiments, prepared the figures, and drafted the manuscript.
J.-P.M. generated the DynRCL double-cysteine constructs.
S.L.S. designed the experiments, helped in interpreting the results,
and wrote the manuscript.

This work was
supported by National Institutes of Health Grant R01GM42455 and Welch
Foundation Grant I-1823 to S.L.S. J-P.M. was supported by a postdoctoral
fellowship from the Academy of Finland.

The authors
declare no competing financial interests.

Acknowledgments
We thank the Shimadzu
Center for Advanced Analytical Chemistry
(University of Texas at Arlington) for MALDI Mega-time of flight access,
Vasyl Lukiyanchuk for the design of dicysteine constructs, and Kim
Reed and Aparna Mohanakrishnan for technical assistance.

