Type II topoisomerases are ubiquitous
enzymes that regulate DNA supercoiling and remove knots and tangles
from the genetic material.− Human cells encode two isoforms, topoisomerase IIα and topoisomerase
IIβ. Both enzymes function by passing an intact double helix
(the transport segment or T-segment) through a transient double-stranded
break that they generate in a separate segment of DNA (the gate segment
or G-segment).,−

Because type II topoisomerases
generate double-stranded DNA breaks
during their catalytic cycle, they can have a profound effect on genomic
stability.,,,− To this point, type II topoisomerases are the targets
for a number of highly successful anticancer drugs that act by increasing
the levels of covalent enzyme-cleaved DNA complexes (cleavage complexes).,,− Drugs that act in this manner
are called topoisomerase II poisons. The conversion of drug-stabilized
cleavage complexes to permanent strand breaks by the movements of
replication and transcription complexes can initiate cell death pathways.,,−

Topoisomerase II poisons
can be grouped into two classes: interfacial
and covalent.,,,− Interfacial poisons
interact with both the protein and the DNA in the active site of the
enzyme. They intercalate into the cleaved scissile bond and physically
block the ability of topoisomerase II to ligate the cleaved DNA strand.,,, In contrast, covalent poisons appear to act distally to the active
site of topoisomerase II and form covalent adducts with the enzyme.,, Although it has not been demonstrated
directly, it has been proposed that covalent poisons increase levels
of cleavage complexes (at least in part) by closing the N-terminal
gate of topoisomerase II.,

Topoisomerase
II functions as a homodimeric protein. On the basis
of homology with DNA gyrase, the enzyme can be divided into three
domains: the N-terminal domain, the catalytic core, and the C-terminal
domain.− The N-terminal domain contains the site of ATP binding and hydrolysis.
ATP binding triggers dimerization of the N-terminal domain, which
helps capture the T-segment and closes the N-terminal protein gate. This action induces the transport of the T-segment
through the open gate in the G-segment.−, The catalytic core of topoisomerase
II contains the active site tyrosine that cleaves and covalently attaches
to the DNA. It also forms a second protein gate that allows the T-segment
to exit the enzyme following strand passage. The C-terminal domain
is the least understood portion of topoisomerase II. It is highly
variable and contains nuclear localization sequences and sites of
phosphorylation.,, Although
it is not necessary for catalytic activity, the C-terminal domain
is involved in the recognition of DNA geometry during strand passage
and provides different type II topoisomerases with unique capabilities.
In human topoisomerase IIα, the C-terminal domain allows the
enzyme to relax positively supercoiled (i.e., overwound) DNA that
accumulates ahead of replication forks 10 times faster than it does
negatively supercoiled (i.e., underwound) molecules., In contrast, topoisomerase IIβ relaxes positive and negative
DNA supercoils at the same rate.,

Although
only topoisomerase IIα is able to recognize the
handedness of DNA supercoils during relaxation, both isoforms are
able to distinguish between positive and negative supercoils during
DNA cleavage. Topoisomerase IIα
and topoisomerase IIβ maintain higher levels of cleavage complexes
with underwound as compared to overwound molecules. In spite of the
important role played by the C-terminal domain in distinguishing DNA
geometry during relaxation, this portion of the enzyme is not involved
in recognizing supercoil handedness during DNA cleavage. It is not obvious which domain of topoisomerase
II is responsible for this recognition. Given the role of the N-terminal
gate in capturing the T-segment and that of the catalytic core in
cleaving the G-segment, both are likely candidates.

Finally,
despite the suggested role of the N-terminal gate in the
actions of covalent poisons,, the portion of topoisomerase
II that mediates the effects of these compounds has not been established.
To further complicate this issue, covalent poisons have been shown
to adduct cysteine residues in both the N-terminal gate and the catalytic
core of topoisomerase IIα.,

To address
the issues described above, we characterized the DNA
cleavage activity of the catalytic core of human topoisomerase IIα.
Results indicate that the catalytic core is sufficient for the enzyme
to recognize DNA supercoil handedness during the cleavage reaction.
However, the catalytic core alone displayed little ability to cleave
DNA substrates that did not intrinsically provide the enzyme with
a transport segment (i.e., substrates that did not contain crossovers).
Finally, the N-terminal gate is necessary for cleavage enhancement
by covalent poisons.

Experimental Procedures
Enzymes and Materials
The truncated hTop2αΔ1175
(containing amino acids 1–1175) was constructed as described
previously. Human topoisomerase IIα
and hTop2αΔ1175 were expressed in Saccharomyces
cerevisiae JEL-1Δtop1 and purified as described by
Kingma et al. The catalytic core of human
topoisomerase IIα (containing residues 431–1193) was expressed in yeast cells and purified using
a Ni2+-nitriloacetic acid agarose column (Qiagen) as described
previously., The enzyme was stored at −80
°C as a 1.5 mg/mL stock in 50 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.8), 0.1 mM ethylenediaminetetraacetic
acid (EDTA), 750 mM KCl, and 5% glycerol. For all of the enzymes examined,
the concentration of dithiothreitol carried over from purification
protocols was &lt;2 μM in final reaction mixtures.

Negatively
supercoiled pBR322 plasmid DNA was prepared using a Plasmid Mega Kit
(Qiagen) as described by the manufacturer. Positively supercoiled
pBR322 DNA was prepared by treating negatively supercoiled molecules
with recombinant Archaeoglobus fulgidus reverse gyrase., The number of positive supercoils was comparable to the number of
negative supercoils in the original pBR322 preparations. For experiments comparing positively and negatively
supercoiled DNA, the negatively supercoiled plasmid was processed
in a manner identical to that of the positively supercoiled molecules
except that reverse gyrase was omitted from reaction mixtures. Relaxed
pBR322 plasmid DNA was generated by treating negatively supercoiled
pBR322 with topoisomerase I and purified as described previously.

Etoposide, benzoquinone, and thymoquinone
were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich.
Etoposide was stored at room temperature as a 20 mM solution in 100%
dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO). Benzoquinone was stored at −20 °C
as a 20 mM solution in water. Thymoquinone was stored at 4 °C
as a 40 mM solution in 100% DMSO. The quinolone CP-115,953 was a gift
from T. D. Gootz and P. R. McGuirk (Pfizer). It was stored at −20
°C as a 40 mM solution in 0.1 N NaOH and diluted 5-fold with
10 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.9) immediately prior to use. Etoposide quinone
was synthesized as described previously− and stored at 4 °C
as a 20 mM solution in 100% DMSO.

Plasmid DNA Cleavage
DNA cleavage reactions were carried
out using the procedure of Fortune and Osheroff. Reaction mixtures contained 10 nM pBR322 and 150 nM wild-type
topoisomerase IIα, 80 nM hTop2αΔ1175, or 430 nM
catalytic core in a total of 20 μL of cleavage buffer [10 mM
Tris-HCl (pH 7.9), 5 mM MgCl2, 100 mM KCl, 0.1 mM EDTA,
and 2.5% (v/v) glycerol]. Reaction mixtures were incubated at 37 °C
for 6 min, and enzyme–DNA cleavage complexes were trapped by
the addition of 2 μL of 5% sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS) followed
by 2 μL of 250 mM EDTA (pH 8.0). Proteinase K (2 μL of
a 0.8 mg/mL solution) was added, and samples were incubated at 45
°C for 30 min to digest the enzyme. Samples were mixed with 2
μL of agarose loading dye [60% sucrose in 10 mM Tris-HCl (pH
7.9), 0.5% bromophenol blue, and 0.5% xylene cyanol FF], heated at
45 °C for 2 min, and subjected to electrophoresis in 1% agarose
gels in 40 mM Tris-acetate (pH 8.3) and 2 mM EDTA containing 0.5 μg/mL
ethidium bromide. DNA bands were visualized by UV light and quantified
using an Alpha Innotech digital imaging system. DNA cleavage was monitored
by the conversion of supercoiled plasmid to linear molecules.

Note that lower levels of hTop2αΔ1175 were used in reaction
mixtures, because in the presence of Mg2+, the protein
displays levels of DNA cleavage ∼2-fold higher than those of
wild-type topoisomerase IIα. Conversely,
higher levels of the catalytic core were used because they display
levels of baseline DNA cleavage that are lower than those of the wild-type
enzyme in reaction mixtures containing Mg2+ (see Figure ).

DNA cleavage reactions were carried out
in the presence of 0–250
μM etoposide, 0–20 μM CP-115,953, or 0–100
μM benzoquinone, thymoquinone, or etoposide quinone. Alternatively,
MgCl2 was omitted from the cleavage buffer, and reaction
mixtures contained 0–5 mM CaCl2.

DNA Cleavage
Site Utilization
DNA cleavage sites were
mapped using a modification of the procedure
of O’Reilly and Kreuzer. A unique
derivative of pUC19 (pMP-bcr6) was used as the substrate for DNA cleavage
site utilization experiments. The substrate was generated by modifying
pUC19 to include a region of PML intron 6 that contains
an established breakpoint associated with therapy-related acute promyelocytic
leukemia. The genomic DNA of human CEM cells was prepared using standard
protocols according to the manufacturer’s instructions for
the DNeasy Blood and Tissue Kit (Qiagen). 5′-GGGGGGATCCTTCTGCAAAGGCCACCTACC-3′
and 5′-AGGGGAAGCTTCACTGTCCCCATTCTCAGC-3′
primers were synthesized for amplifying a 319 bp region of the PML
gene (44157–44475 of GenBank accession number NG029036) with
the CEM genomic DNA as a template. Purified clones containing the
insert were transformed into XL1-Blue cells and sequenced with M13
primers by Vantage (Vanderbilt Technologies for Advanced Sequencing).
pMP-bcr6 was linearized by treatment with Acc651.
Terminal 5′-phosphates were removed by treatment with calf
intestinal alkaline phosphatase and replaced with [32P]phosphate
using T4 polynucleotide kinase and [γ-32P]ATP. The
DNA was treated with EcoRI, and the 2968 bp singly
end-labeled fragment was purified from the small EcoRI–Acc651 fragment by passage through a CHROMA
SPIN+TE-100 column (Clontech).

Reaction mixtures contained 1
nM labeled pMP-bcr6 and 60 nM wild-type human topoisomerase IIα
or 115 nM catalytic core in 50 μL of DNA cleavage buffer (containing
5 mM Ca2+) in the absence or presence of compounds. Reaction
mixtures were incubated at 37 °C for 6 min, and enzyme–DNA
cleavage complexes were trapped by the addition of 5 μL of 5%
SDS followed by 4 μL of 250 mM EDTA (pH 8.0). Proteinase K (5
μL of a 0.8 mg/mL solution) was added, and samples were incubated
at 45 °C for 30 min to digest the enzyme. DNA products were precipitated
with ethanol and resuspended in 5 μL of polyacrylamide gel loading
buffer [10% agarose gel loading buffer, 80% formamide, 100 mM Tris-borate
(pH 8.3), and 2 mM EDTA]. Samples were subjected to electrophoresis
in denaturing 6% polyacrylamide sequencing gels. Gels were dried in vacuo, and DNA cleavage products were visualized with
a Bio-Rad Molecular Imager FX.

Results and Discussion
Recognition
of Supercoil Geometry
Human type II topoisomerases
can distinguish the handedness of DNA supercoils during scission and
maintain levels of cleavage complexes with negatively supercoiled
DNA that are ∼2–4-fold higher than those seen with positively
supercoiled molecules (Figure , left).Several lines
of evidence indicate that the C-terminal domain of topoisomerase II
is not involved in this recognition., Most notably,
deletion of the C-terminal domain of human topoisomerase IIα
does not affect the ability of the enzyme to preferentially cleave
underwound molecules.

The catalytic core of
human topoisomerase IIα preferentially
cleaves negatively supercoiled DNA in the presence of Ca2+. The ability of wild-type topoisomerase IIα (WT, left) and
the catalytic core (CC, right) to cleave negatively [(−)SC,
filled circles] or positively [(+)SC, empty circles] supercoiled plasmid
DNA is shown. Error bars represent the standard deviation of at least
three independent experiments.

It is not clear which portion of topoisomerase IIα
is responsible
for the recognition of DNA geometry during cleavage. Although DNA
cleavage is mediated by the catalytic core of the enzyme, rates of
cleavage can be modulated by changes in the N-terminal gate., Therefore, the ability of the catalytic core of topoisomerase IIα
to cleave negatively and positively supercoiled DNA was assessed.
As shown in Figure  (right), the catalytic
core retained the ability to recognize supercoil handedness and preferentially
cleaved negatively supercoiled plasmid.

The catalytic core of
human topoisomerase IIα preferentially
cleaves negatively supercoiled DNA in the presence of etoposide and
CP-115,953. The ability of wild-type topoisomerase IIα (WT,
black) and the catalytic core (CC, red) to cleave negatively [(−)SC,
filled circles] or positively [(+)SC, empty circles] supercoiled plasmid
DNA in the presence of etoposide (left) or CP-115,953 (right) is shown.
Results for CP-115,953 are not shown at concentrations above 10 μM
with the wild-type enzyme because the drug induced multiple cleavage
events per plasmid. The inset shows cleavage induced by the catalytic
core in the presence of 250 μM etoposide. Error bars represent
the standard deviation of at least three independent experiments.

The experiments described above
substituted Ca2+ for
Mg2+ as the required divalent metal ion to generate levels of DNA cleavage that were high enough
to reliably quantify enzyme-mediated DNA scission under conditions
that did not include anticancer drugs. Previous work demonstrated
that Ca2+ does not affect DNA cleavage site selection by
topoisomerase IIα or the ability of type II enzymes to recognize
DNA supercoil geometry., Although the catalytic
core displayed a preference for negatively supercoiled DNA that was
similar to that of wild-type topoisomerase IIα (Figure ), it exhibited unexpectedly high levels of DNA
cleavage in the presence of Ca2+. The underlying basis
for this high level of Ca2+-supported DNA cleavage is not
known.

To further confirm the ability of the catalytic core
to distinguish
supercoil geometry, DNA cleavage was examined in the presence of Mg2+ and topoisomerase II poisons (Figure ). Etoposide and CP-115,953
are well-characterized interfacial poisons that do not intercalate
into DNA (which would change the apparent topology of the plasmid
substrate)., Similar to results seen with
Ca2+, the catalytic core maintained higher levels of cleavage
complexes with negatively as compared to positively supercoiled DNA
in the presence of Mg2+ and interfacial topoisomerase II
poisons.

These results provide strong evidence that the ability
to distinguish
the geometry of DNA supercoils during cleavage is embedded in the
catalytic core of human topoisomerase IIα.

Role of the
N-Terminal Gate of Topoisomerase IIα in Mediating
Interactions with the T-Segment of DNA
Topoisomerase II binds
negatively supercoiled DNA at sites of helix–helix crossovers,
and it has been proposed that this ability to bind DNA crossovers
allows topoisomerase II to distinguish between relaxed and supercoiled
molecules., Although it has not been rigorously
demonstrated, it is believed that the two DNA helices at the crossover
become the G- and T-segments.

Studies with oligonucleotides
indicate that binding of the T-segment greatly stimulates topoisomerase
II-mediated cleavage of the G-segment., These findings
suggest that the T-segment plays an important role in the ability
of topoisomerase II to identify and relax DNA supercoils. Although
the N-terminal gate of the protein plays a critical role in capturing
the T-segment and passing it through the DNA gate, it is not known
whether the initial interaction with the T-segment is mediated by
this portion of topoisomerase II or by the catalytic core of the enzyme.
Therefore, we examined the ability of the catalytic core of topoisomerase
IIα to cleave DNA that does not contain intrinsic crossovers.

In
the first experiment, a linearized plasmid was used as the DNA substrate.
Etoposide was included in experiments to increase levels of DNA scission.
As seen in Figure , wild-type human topoisomerase
IIα was able to cleave the DNA in the absence or presence of
drug. Cleavage was enhanced when ATP was added to reaction mixtures.
One interpretation of this finding is that in the presence of ATP,
the N-terminal gate is able to capture the T-segment, thereby stimulating
DNA scission. In contrast, the catalytic core of the enzyme was unable
to cleave the linearized plasmid under any of the conditions described
above. Furthermore, no DNA cleavage was seen when the concentration
of the catalytic core was increased 5-fold or when Mg2+ was used in place of Ca2+ in reaction mixtures (not shown).
These findings suggest that the N-terminal gate plays a critical role
in mediating interactions with the T-segment.

Effects of etoposide
on sites of DNA cleavage mediated by wild-type
human topoisomerase IIα and the catalytic core. An autoradiogram
of a polyacrylamide gel depicting DNA sites cleaved by wild-type topoisomerase
IIα (WT) and the catalytic core (CC) is shown. Reaction mixtures
contained no enzyme (DNA), enzyme in the absence of drug (No Drug),
or enzyme in the presence of 20 μM etoposide with or without
1 mM ATP. Lanes shown were taken from different portions of the same
gel. The autoradiogram is representative of three independent experiments.

To further explore this conclusion,
the ability of wild-type topoisomerase
IIα and the catalytic core to cleave relaxed DNA was examined
(Figure ). In contrast to negatively supercoiled
plasmid, which contains numerous inherent DNA crossovers, relaxed
molecules contain few if any intrinsic sites of helix–helix
justaposition. For this reason, topoisomerase II preferentially cleaves
negatively supercoiled over relaxed molecules (compare scission in
Figures  and ).

Effects of ATP on cleavage of relaxed and negatively supercoiled
DNA by wild-type human topoisomerase IIα and the catalytic core.
The ability of wild-type topoisomerase IIα (WT, black) and the
catalytic core (CC, red) to cleave relaxed DNA (left) or negatively
supercoiled DNA (right) in the presence of etoposide is shown. Experiments
were conducted in the absence (filled symbols) or presence (empty
symbols) of 500 μM ATP. Experiments with negatively supercoiled
DNA included 50 μM etoposide. Error bars represent the standard
deviation of at least three independent experiments. The statistically
significant difference is denoted with an asterisk (*p &lt; 0.01).

Wild-type topoisomerase
IIα was able to cleave relaxed plasmid
(Figure , left), suggesting that the full-length
enzyme can capture a transport helix even when there are few intrinsic
crossovers in the DNA substrate. When ATP was added to reaction mixtures,
levels of cleavage increased ∼9-fold (left), consistent with
the conclusion that ATP induces closing of the N-terminal gate, stabilizing
the capture of the T-segment. Although ATP also stimulates the ability
of the intact enzyme to cleave negatively supercoiled plasmid (Figure , right), this enhancement is much smaller (∼2-fold).
The presence of high levels of helix–helix crossovers in the
negatively supercoiled plasmid facilitates interactions between the
intact enzyme and helix–helix crossovers, partially obviating
the need for T-segment capture by the addition of ATP.

In contrast
to topoisomerase IIα that contained its N-terminal
gate, the catalytic core was unable to cleave relaxed plasmid in the
absence or presence of ATP (Figure , left).
Moreover, the addition of ATP did not enhance cleavage of negatively
supercoiled plasmid (right).

These experiments lead to the conclusion
that the catalytic core
of human topoisomerase IIα cannot efficiently capture the T-segment.
More importantly, they also lead to the conclusion that the N-terminal
gate of the enzyme plays a critical role in mediating the initial
interaction with the T-segment. In the absence of this protein domain,
the catalytic core is able to cleave supercoiled plasmid primarily
because the substrate carries intrinsic DNA crossovers. Thus, the
substrate is able to present the T-segment to the enzyme, even in
the absence of the protein domain that normally mediates the interaction
with the second DNA double helix.

Role of the N-Terminal
Gate of Human Topoisomerase IIα
in Mediating the Actions of Covalent Poisons
A number of
environmental, dietary, and medicinal compounds act as covalent topoisomerase
II poisons.−,,− Compared to interfacial poisons, the mechanistic basis for the actions
of covalent poisons is less well understood. These compounds form
adducts with the enzyme.,,, At present, only cysteine adducts
have been characterized. It has been proposed that the ability of
covalent poisons to close the N-terminal gate plays an important role
in mediating their ability to increase levels of topoisomerase II–DNA
cleavage complexes., However, modified residues have
been identified in both the N-terminal gate and the catalytic core.,

To explore the role of the N-terminal gate in the actions
of covalent poisons, the effects of benzoquinone and thymoquinone on DNA cleavage
mediated by wild-type topoisomerase IIα and the catalytic core
were examined. Effects on cleavage mediated by a truncated human enzyme
lacking the C-terminal domain (hTop2αΔ1175) also were
determined as a control. Benzoquinone and thymoquinone displayed similar
abilities to increase the level of cleavage complexes formed with
full-length topoisomerase IIα or hTop2αΔ1175 and
negatively supercoiled plasmid (Figure ).
This finding demonstrates that the C-terminal domain plays no significant
role in mediating the actions of covalent topoisomerase II poisons.
In marked contrast, neither compound displayed any ability to enhance
DNA cleavage mediated by the catalytic core. This result indicates
that the N-terminal gate of topoisomerase IIα is critical for
the actions of covalent poisons. Furthermore, it provides yet another
distinction between interfacial poisons [which do not require the
N-terminal gate to stimulate topoisomerase II-mediated DNA cleavage
(see Figure )] and covalent poisons.

Covalent poisons
do not enhance DNA cleavage mediated by the catalytic
core of human topoisomerase IIα. Effects of benzoquinone (left)
and thymoquinone (right) on DNA cleavage mediated by wild-type human
topoisomerase IIα (black), the catalytic core (red), and hTop2αΔ1175
(blue) are shown. Error bars represent the standard deviation of at
least three independent experiments.

In further contrast to interfacial poisons, covalent topoisomerase
II poisons display the hallmark characteristic of inactivating the
enzyme when the two are incubated prior to the addition of DNA., Even though the inactivation can be explained by the ability of
covalent poisons to close the N-terminal protein gate (thus preventing
DNA from entering the active site of topoisomerase II),, this proposed mechanism is controversial. Indeed, treatment of human
topoisomerase IIα with benzoquinone or PCB quinones blocks the
ability of the enzyme to cleave oligonucleotides that are able to
bind to the protein and diffuse into the active site without entering
through the protein gate. This finding
implies that mechanisms besides the proposed closing of the N-terminal
gate may contribute to enzyme inactivation by covalent poisons.

To address this controversy,
benzoquinone and thymoquinone were
incubated with wild-type topoisomerase IIα, hTop2αΔ1175,
or the catalytic core prior to the addition of negatively supercoiled
plasmid, and the effects on DNA cleavage were assessed. Assays with
the catalytic core were carried out in the presence of Ca2+ to raise baseline levels of DNA cleavage (see Figure ). As seen in Figure , benzoquinone
and thymoquinone inactivated all three enzymes. Thus, while covalent
poisons require the N-terminal gate to stimulate DNA cleavage mediated
by topoisomerase II, they do not require this portion of the protein
to inactivate the enzyme. Although the closing of the N-terminal gate
may contribute to topoisomerase II inactivation, clearly other mechanisms
can produce a similar effect.

Covalent poisons inactivate human topoisomerase
IIα enzymes
when incubated with the protein prior to the addition of DNA. The
DNA cleavage activities of wild-type human topoisomerase IIα
(black), the catalytic core (red), and hTop2αΔ1175 (blue)
were monitored in the presence of 50 μM benzoquinone (left)
or 50 μM thymoquinone (right). DNA cleavage levels were calculated
relative to cleavage levels induced when the drug and the enzyme were
not incubated prior to DNA addition. Error bars represent the standard
deviation of at least three independent experiments.

Mechanism of Action of Etoposide Quinone
Etoposide
has been linked to the generation of treatment-related acute myeloid
leukemias,− and etoposide quinone, a metabolite of etoposide,, has been implicated in this process. These leukemias feature rearrangements of the MLL gene at chromosomal band 11q23 and are believed to be triggered
by drug-induced DNA cleavage events mediated by human type II topoisomerases.− Although etoposide is an interfacial topoisomerase II poison, several
studies indicate that etoposide quinone acts primarily as a covalent
poison.,, However, it
is not known whether the covalent interaction of the quinone with
topoisomerase II masks the fact that the metabolite also can act as
an interfacial poison.

Previous studies indicate that the pendant
E-ring of etoposide is critical to its actions as an interfacial poison
(Figure ).− Substitution of either
the 3′- or 5′-methoxy groups with a hydroxyl moiety
has little effect on drug activity., Thus, the
catechol metabolite of etoposide displays an activity (and mechanism)
similar to that of the parent drug. Removal of the 4′-hydroxyl
moiety or substitution by a methoxy group greatly compromises the
activity of etoposide., However, it is not known whether
substitution by a carbonyl group affects the ability of etoposide
to function as an interfacial poison.

Etoposide quinone enhances DNA cleavage
mediated by the catalytic
core of human topoisomerase IIα. The effects of etoposide quinone
on DNA cleavage mediated by wild-type human topoisomerase IIα
(black), the catalytic core (red), and hTop2αΔ1175 (blue)
are shown. Cleavage reactions with etoposide quinone and the catalytic
core that included 10 μM K3[Fe(CN)6] (empty
circles) also are shown. The structure of etoposide and the E-rings
of etoposide catechol and etoposide quinone are depicted at right.
Error bars represent the standard deviation of at least three independent
experiments.

The experiments shown
in Figure  provide
a method for determining whether etoposide quinone can function as
an interfacial poison in addition to acting as a covalent poison.
If etoposide quinone functions purely as a covalent poison, it should
have no effect on DNA cleavage mediated by the catalytic core. However,
if it retains the ability to act as an interfacial poison (despite
the fact that it can also act as a covalent poison), it should display
at least some activity against the catalytic core. As seen in Figure , etoposide quinone retains partial activity against
the catalytic core of human topoisomerase IIα. It is possible
that this activity reflects the fact that a portion of the etoposide
quinone preparation has been reduced over time to the catechol, which
is an interfacial topoisomerase II poison. To address this possibility,
the effect of 10 μM K3[Fe(CN)6] on the
ability of etoposide quinone to enhance DNA cleavage mediated by the
catalytic core was assessed. The oxidant, which converts the catechol
to the quinone, had little effect on
the actions of etoposide quinone against the catalytic core. Although
etoposide quinone functions primarily as a covalent topoisomerase
II poison, these findings indicate that it still retains a modest
ability to act as an interfacial poison of human topoisomerase IIα.

Conclusions
The N-terminal gate and the catalytic core of
type II topoisomerases
work coordinately to capture, cleave, and transport DNA during the
DNA strand passage reaction. Although this coordination is essential
for proper enzyme function, it has obscured the individual contributions
of these two domains to important aspects of enzyme–DNA interactions
and drug mechanism. Previous studies have shown that the C-terminal
domain of human topoisomerase IIα is responsible for DNA geometry
recognition during relaxation; however, the present results indicate
that the catalytic core is the portion of the enzyme that senses the
handedness of DNA supercoils during the cleavage reaction (Figure ). Conversely, the N-terminal gate plays critical
roles in the capture of the T-segment.

Domains of human topoisomerase
IIα and their involvement
in DNA geometry recognition and drug activity. The enzyme is divided
into three domains: the N-terminal gate (blue, amino acid residues
1–430), which contains the ATPase active site; the catalytic
core (red, residues 431–1193), which contains the TOPRIM domain
(the portion that binds the catalytic divalent metal ions) and the
DNA cleavage/ligation active site tyrosine residue (Y805); and the
C-terminal domain (green, residues 1193–1531).− Functions associated with each domain are indicated. Three cysteine
residues (C) are indicated in the N-terminal gate (C300, C392, and
C405 from left to right). Cys300 has been identified as a site of
attachment of isothiocyanate-based covalent topoisomerase II poisons. However, it has not been established whether
attachment at this residue plays a role in the actions of these agents. Cys392 and Cys405 have been identified as sites
of attachment of quinone-based covalent poisons, and substitution of alanine residues at these positions
results in an ∼2-fold resistance to a variety of covalent poisons.,,

The use of different topoisomerase IIα constructs also
provided
considerable insight into the actions of covalent topoisomerase II
poisons (Figure ). Whereas the N-terminal
gate is necessary for the enhancement of DNA cleavage by these compounds,
residues within the catalytic core may be responsible for the inhibition
of catalytic function that follows the incubation of covalent poisons
with topoisomerase II prior to the addition of DNA. Finally, the ability
of interfacial poisons, but not covalent poisons, to enhance DNA cleavage
mediated by the catalytic core allowed us to further characterize
the mechanism of action of etoposide quinone. Although this important
drug metabolite functions primarily as a covalent poison, it still
retains the ability to act in an interfacial manner.

This
research
was supported by Grant GM033944 (N.O.) from the National Institutes
of Health. M.P. was a trainee under Grant T32 CA09582 from the National
Institutes of Health. R.E.A. was supported by Graduate Research Fellowship
DGE-0909667 from the National Science Foundation. J.E.D. and S.L.M.
were supported by funds from the Lipscomb University College of Pharmacy
and Health Sciences.

The authors
declare no competing financial interest.

Author Status
∇ Deceased.

Acknowledgments
Human topoisomerase IIα
was generously provided by Jo
Ann Byl. We are grateful to Kendra R. Vann and Lorena Infante Lara
for critical reading of the manuscript. R. Hunter Lindsey, Jr., performed
the majority of the experiments reported in this paper and was instrumental
in formulating the overall concept underlying this project. Unfortunately,
he lost his valiant battle against cancer before the manuscript could
be completed.

