Neurotransmitter
release results
from a membrane fusion event that joins the synaptic vesicle membrane
with the presynaptic plasma membrane. This fusion event is driven
by soluble N-ethylmaleimide-sensitive factor attachment
receptor proteins (SNAREs), which form the core of the membrane fusion
machinery. SNAREs assemble into a tight four-helix bundle that is
thought to provide the energy required to overcome the barrier to
fusion,, and in the neuronal system, the SNARE complex
is formed from syntaxin 1a and SNAP-25 on the plasma membrane and
synaptobrevin 2 in the vesicle membrane. The regulation and assembly
of these proteins into the SNARE complex is essential to neuronal
fusion, and a number of critical effector proteins that function to
mediate this process have been identified.− In the case
of syntaxin, Munc18-1 is believed to control the configuration of
syntaxin and thereby regulate its ability to assemble into the SNARE
complex.− Less is known about the state of the vesicle-associated
SNARE protein, synaptobrevin 2, which is generally thought to be unstructured
prior to the SNARE assembly process.

The extravesicular SNARE
domain of synaptobrevin 2 (syb) encompasses
residues 30–85 and is anchored to the membrane of synaptic
vesicles through a single transmembrane helix near its C-terminal
end (residues 95–116). In the absence of the transmembrane
domain, synaptobrevin is reported to be almost completely unstructured
in solution., However, a high-resolution nuclear
magnetic resonance (NMR) study of full-length syb in dodecylphosphocholine
(DPC) micelles indicated that stretches
of the SNARE motif are helical. This micelle structure is shown in
Figure a. The N-terminal half of the SNARE
motif (residues 36–54), the juxtamembrane coupling region (residues
77–88), and the transmembrane domain (residues 93–115)
are α-helical, while the remainder of the protein is unstructured.
The SNARE motif is also observed to be partially helical for syb lacking
the transmembrane anchor in the presence of DPC micelles; however,
helical content is not observed for the soluble fragment in the absence
of DPC micelles, confirming the earlier studies. The work in micelles
indicates that syb has a substantial α-helical structure in
selected regions, which might play a role in protein–protein
recognition and the nucleation of SNARE complex formation. In contrast,
a more recent study of full-length syb in nanodiscs and in phospholipid
bilayers indicates that residues 1 to ∼75 are unstructured
while the transmembrane domain of syb was not resolved. This suggested that the helical content found
in DPC may be induced by the micelle environment, producing helical
structure in the SNARE motif and an interfacial association that may
not occur in more nativelike environments.

(a) Model obtained previously
by solution NMR in DPC micelles for
full-length synaptobrevin (Protein Data Bank entry 2KOG). Three segments of the protein assume a helical structure:
the transmembrane segment (residues 93–115, red), the juxtamembrane
coupling helix (residues 77–88, green), and the N-terminal
half of the SNARE motif (residues 36–54, blue). (b) 15N–1H HSQC NMR spectrum of Syb(1–116) in
DMPC/DHPC (q = 0.33) bicelles at 40 °C (66 mM
DMPC and 200 mM DHPC).

In this work, we examine the structure and configuration
of syb
using both NMR and EPR spectroscopy in bilayer and bicelle environments
and compare the result with that found previously by NMR in DPC micelles.
In agreement with a more recent study, we find that DPC micelles induce helical structure and interfacial
association of the SNARE motif when compared to more native environments
such as bilayers and bicelles. However, NMR spectroscopy demonstrates
that in bicelles, syb is in conformational exchange and that some
residual helical content is present. Moreover, EPR spectroscopy from
21 sites along syb provides strong evidence that even in a lipid bilayer,
the SNARE motif of syb exchanges between aqueous and membrane environments.
Although the SNARE motif is largely disordered, segments of the SNARE
motif transiently associate with lipid bilayers, and this association
is enhanced as one proceeds from bilayer to bicelle and micelle environments.
Thus, the interfacial association and structure that are seen in DPC
micelles persists in lipid bilayers, although to a greatly reduced
extent. Our results suggest that the larger helical content and membrane
association that occurs in micelles versus bilayers are a result of
the sensitivity of amphipathic regions of the SNARE domain to interfacial
defects and the curvature of the interface. The transient interfacial
association and/or helix formation in the SNARE-forming motif of syb
may modulate the availability of synaptobrevin and its ability to
assemble into the SNARE core complex.

Experimental Procedures
Protein
Expression and Bicelle Sample Preparation
Syb(1–116)
from Rattus norvegicus was expressed in BL21(DE3)
cells under the control of the T7 promoter (pET28a) and purified as
described previously., The QuikChange polymerase chain
reaction method (Agilent Technologies, Wilmington, DE) was used to
introduce single-cysteine mutations into syb. Synaptobrevin mutants
for EPR spectroscopy were expressed in lysogeny broth (LB) medium
with 40 mg/L kanamycin. When the cells reached a cell density of 0.8–1.0,
expression was induced with 0.4 mM isopropyl thio-β-galactoside.
The cells were incubated at 20 °C overnight and then harvested
by centrifugation at 3500g. For NMR measurements,
isotope labeling was accomplished in EMBL medium in 100% D2O supplemented with (15NH4)2SO4, 13C-labeled glucose, and 2H-, 13C-, and 15N-labeled 10% Bioexpress. For both EPR
and NMR spectroscopy, syb was purified in the presence of 1% sodium
cholate and exchanged into 0.1% dodecylphosphocholine (DPC) while
bound to a Ni affinity column. The eluted protein from the Ni affinity
column was concentrated and then digested at 4 °C overnight by
thrombin to remove the six-His tag.

To make bicelle samples
for NMR measurements, detergent exchange and buffer exchange were
conducted via size-exclusion chromatography (Superdex200 10/300 column)
with a pH 6.5 buffer containing 1% dihexanoylphosphatidylcholine (DHPC),
20 mM bis-tris, 50 mM NaCl, 5 mM DTT, and 1 mM EDTA. Only the major
peak, but not the trailing shoulder, was collected and then concentrated
to ensure the separation of DPC-bound syb from DHPC-bound syb. DHPC
concentrations usually varied between 150 and 300 mM in the final
concentrated syb/DHPC sample. One-dimensional NMR was employed to
accurately determine the DHPC concentrations in such samples by comparing
the detergent acyl proton signals against corresponding resonances
in a series of standard DHPC samples. On the basis of the measured
DHPC concentrations, amounts of dimyristoylphosphatidylcholine (DMPC)
corresponding to predetermined bicelle q factors
were dispensed from a chloroform stock and dried under vacuum overnight.
After the syb/DHPC sample had been mixed with the dried DMPC lipid
film, homogeneous bicelle sample were achieved by multiple steps of
freezing and thawing. Multiple bicelle
samples with q factors that vary from 0.25 to 0.5
were employed, and they were stable for a few months at a measuring
temperature of 40 °C.

NMR Spectroscopy
TROSY versions of three-dimensional backbone experiments [HNCA, HNCACB, HNCO, and HN(CA)CO] with
[2H,13C,15N]Syb(1–116) in q = 0.33 bicelles (66 mM DMPC and 200 mM DHPC) were conducted
on a Bruker Avance 800 MHz spectrometer equipped with a cryoprobe.
Secondary chemical shifts were evaluated as described previously: (ΔCα – ΔCβ)i was calculated as 1/3(ΔCαi–1 + ΔCαi + ΔCαi+1 – ΔCβi–1 – ΔCβi – ΔCβi+1). NMR dynamics measurements,
including heteronuclear15N NOE, 15N T1, and 15N T2 measurements, were also collected at 800 MHz. A 5 s saturation delay
was used in the heteronuclear NOE experiment. Relaxation delay times
of 10, 30, 70, 150, 300, 600, 1000, and 1500 ms and 0, 17, 51, 68,
119, 170, 238, and 494 ms were employed in the T1 and T2 experiments, respectively.

For CPMG relaxation dispersion experiments, bicelle samples with q values from 0.25 to 0.5 were employed at temperatures
from 15 to 40 °C to determine the optimal conditions for such
measurements. Although the relaxation behavior changes only slightly,
the general trend is consistent throughout the surveyed conditions.
Typically, the TROSY versions of CPMG relaxation dispersion experiments were conducted on a Bruker Avance 600 or 800
MHz spectrometer. R2,eff was calculated
on the basis of the equationwhere I(νCPMG) and I0 are peak intensities measured
with and without the applied 40 ms constant time CPMG element, TCP, respectively. Redundant measurements were
performed to estimate standard deviations. Effective fields, νCPMG, as defined by 1/4τCPMG, ranged from 25 to 1000 Hz, where 2τCPMG was the
time between the centers of two consecutive 180° pulses.

All spectra were processed and analyzed with NMRPipe and Sparky. Indirect
dimensions in the three-dimensional experiments were processed with
forward–backward linear prediction.

Sample Preparation and
EPR Measurements
The spin-labeled
side chain R1 was attached to selected sites on syntaxin by adding
1 mg of 1-oxyl-2,2,5,5-tetramethyl-3-pyrro-line-3-methyl methanethiosulfonate
(MTSL) (Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Dallas, TX) in ethanol to the isolated
cysteine-containing protein and incubating the mixture overnight at
4 °C. The unbound spin-label was then removed using a HiPrep
26/10 desalting column (GE Healthcare, Piscataway, NJ) using a buffer
that consisted of 20 mM MOPS, 139 mM KCl, 12 mM NaCl, and 0.1% (w/v)
DPC (pH 7.3), and the eluted protein was concentrated by ultrafiltration.
These syb samples in DPC were typically at protein concentrations
of 50–200 μM and were used for EPR spectroscopy.

Bicelle samples containing syb for EPR were prepared by first reconstituting
the protein into DMPC (Avanti Polar Lipids, Alabaster, AL). The lipid
in chloroform was dried under vacuum to produce a film of DMPC, and
this sample was rehydrated with 20 mM MOPS, 139 mM KCl, and 12 mM
NaCl (pH 7.3). A specific volume of syb in DPC was then added to the
lipid suspension, and the solution was then incubated overnight at
4 °C and dialyzed twice in 20 mM MOPS, 139 mM KCl, and 12 mM
NaCl (pH 7.3) to remove the detergent. The resulting vesicle suspension
was spun down at 500000g, and the lipid concentration
was evaluated by a phosphate assay. The desired amount of DHPC was
then added to achieve the appropriate detergent:lipid ratio, and the
mixture was subjected to bath sonication for 20 min. The final protein
concentration for EPR was 20–60 μM.

To prepare
synaptobrevin in lipid vesicles, a POPC/POPS (3:1) suspension
was prepared by drying the lipids in chloroform (Avanti Polar Lipids)
into a film followed by hydration in a buffer that consisted of 20
mM MOPS, 139 mM KCl, and 12 mM NaCl (pH 7.3). Appropriate quantities
of synaptobrevin in DPC were then added to the lipid mixture followed
by incubation for 2 h at room temperature and dialysis against 20
mM MOPS, 139 mM KCl, and 12 mM NaCl (pH 7.3). Following removal of
the detergent, the vesicles were pelleted by centrifugation at 500000g for 20 min. The protein:lipid ratio was approximately
1:1000, and the protein concentration was in the range of 40–100
μM.

For the continuous wave measurements, samples were
loaded into
glass capillaries with inner and outer diameters of 0.6 and 0.84 mm,
respectively (VitroCom, Mountain Lakes, NJ). The measurements were
performed on a Bruker EMX spectrometer with a room-temperature ER
4123D dielectric resonator using a 2 mW incident microwave power and
a 1 G modulation amplitude. Amplitudes for the EPR spectra were taken
from spectra normalized by spin number. The power saturation experiments
were performed on Bruker EMX as described elsewhere, except the NiEDDA concentration was kept at 10 mM. All
EPR spectra and data were processed using LabView programs provided
by C. Altenbach (University of California, Los Angeles, CA).

Simulations of EPR spectra to obtain motional rates for the nitroxide,
motional populations, and hyperfine coupling constants were conducted
using a LabView program, MultiComponent, provided by C. Altenbach.
This program implements a program for fitting slow motional EPR spectra
written by Freed and co-workers. The
spectra were adequately fit by assuming the presence of two motional
components having isotropic rates. The initial magnetic parameters
used in the fits were taken from those obtained previously for R1
on aqueous exposed helical sites.

Results
Synaptobrevin
Has a Different Structure in Bicelles and Micelles
To compare
the structure of rat synaptobrevin 2 (syb) in micelle
and bicelle environments, we obtained two-dimensional HN TROSY spectra
of syb in small (q = 0.33) bicelles (Figure b). This bicelle environment
yielded spectra having a resolution and a signal-to-noise ratio similar
to those previously obtained for syb in DPC micelles. The spectra in bicelles were reassigned using 2H-, 13C-, and 15N-labeled samples and similar
strategies as previously described for the DPC samples. The assignments are shown in Figure b. The protein secondary structure was semiquantitatively
assessed by examining the difference between secondary Cα and
Cβ chemical shifts as described previously, and Figure  shows a comparison
between the secondary Cα – Cβ shift differences
for syb in DPC and bicelles. While the chemical shifts in the TM and
coupling helices were similar in micelles and bicelles, shift differences
of ≥2 ppm are observed for syb in DPC in the region of residues
37–53, indicating the presence of an α-helical structure;
however, the same region in bicelles displays secondary Cα –
Cβ differences of ≤1 ppm and is consistent with random
coil structure. This finding is generally consistent with an NMR study
in nanodiscs indicating that syb has a random coil structure in the
SNARE motif, although signals in the coupling and TM helices were
not resolved in this study. Several resonances
in the C-terminal half of the transmembrane helix that are resolved
in DPC are not resolved in bicelles.

Chemical shift index obtained from Cα
and Cβ resonances
for syb in (a) DMPC/DHPC bicelles (q = 0.33) and
(b) DPC micelles.

More quantitative methods
for determining secondary structure from
chemical shifts have been devised,, and they yield
results similar to those shown in Figure .
Here, backbone HN, Cα, CO, and N and side chain Cβ chemical
shifts were used with the delta2D method and are shown in Figure S1 of the . While the method suggests that syb in bicelles
is largely random coil, the analysis indicates that a small (&lt;10%)
amount of helix may be present at and near residue 45 in bicelles,
and that there may be a small (&lt;20%), short stretch (three to five
residues) of helix at and near residue 30 that is not seen in micelles
or in solution. Thus, while the region encompassing residues 37–53
shows a greater propensity for helical structure in DPC micelles than
in low-q bicelles, the delta2D method suggests that
a small helical population may be in equilibrium with a random coil
structure in some regions of synaptobrevin.

15N Spin Relaxation
Reveals Conformational Exchange
in Regions of Bicelle-Bound Synaptobrevin
Nuclear spin relaxation
rates are sensitive to local order and dynamics, and 15N spin–lattice (R1) and spin–spin
(R2) relaxation rates were measured in
bicelles (q = 0.33) to explore the dynamics of syb.
As shown in Figure a, elevated R2/R1 values are observed for
residues 77–116, suggesting that there is a higher degree of
local order and/or a shift in spectral density to lower frequency
compared to those of residues 1–25. This is consistent with
the known random coil structure of residues 1–25 and the α-helical
structure of most residues in the region of residues 77–116,
which are in the proximity of or inserted into the bicelle. Residues
37–54 also exhibit R2/R1 values that are elevated relative to those of residues
1–25 but R2/R1 values smaller than those observed for the transmembrane
α-helix (residues 93–115). In contrast, the rest of SNARE
motif residues 55–76 showed relatively small R2/R1 values, similar to that
of residues 1–25. These R2/R1 values are consistent with a model for the
region of residues 37–54 in which a small population of syb
assumes an α-helical form and/or is interacting with the bicelle.
To test for exchange, the dependence of the 15N R2 on the refocusing pulse repetition rate (relaxation
dispersion) for syb in bicelles was examined and is shown in Figure b. Additional relaxation dispersion data at lower
temperatures are shown in Figure S2 of the . The observed dependence of the 15N
spin–spin relaxation rate on CPMG pulse spacing for several
residues between positions 42 and 52 indicates that these residues
undergo conformational (random coil−α-helical transitions)
and/or environmental exchange (binding on and off the bicelle). The
small difference in R2 values obtained
for the different CPMG frequencies suggests that the exchange process
is relatively fast (about 105 s–1). Unfortunately,
the small amplitude of the relaxation dispersion precluded a more
detailed quantitative analysis of the dynamics.

(a) Ratio of 15N R2/R1 relaxation
rates plotted for syb(1–116)
in small DMPC/DHPC bicelles (q = 0.33) measured at
40 °C and 800 MHz. (b) Change in the spin–spin relaxation
rates at two extreme CMPG pulse frequencies of 25 and 1000 Hz, measured
at 25 °C and 800 MHz, for syb(1–116) in DMPC/DHPC bicelles
(q = 0.5).

EPR Spectra of Synaptobrevin Are a Result of Two Motional Components
That Vary as a Function of the Curvature of the Environment
To examine the configuration and dynamics of synaptobrevin on lipid
bilayers, the native cysteine at position 103 was mutated to alanine,
and 21 sites in the SNARE motif were labeled with the spin-labeled
side chain R1 (see Figure a). Shown in Figure b are representative EPR spectra from synaptobrevin
in which the R1 side chain is placed at the indicated position. These
spectra, which have been normalized by total spin number, are shown
for the protein incorporated into POPC/POPS bilayers and DPC micelles.
A complete set of EPR spectra are provided in Figure S3 of the . To provide a relative
measure of the mobility of the R1 side chain along synaptobrevin,
the peak-to-peak amplitudes are plotted in Figure c for the syb R1 mutants in bilayers and DPC micelles.

(a) Spin-labeled
side chain R1 produced by the reaction of the
MTSL reagent with a cysteine side chain. For this label, there are
in principle five rotatable bonds linking the spin-label to the protein
backbone; however, under most conditions, motion about X1–X3 is limited. (b) Selected normalized X-band
EPR spectra from the spin-labeled sites within the SNARE motif of
rat synaptobrevin 2 reconstituted into either POPC/POPS (3:1) bilayers
(black trace) or docecylphosphocholine micelles (red trace). Spectra
are all 100 G scans. (c) Normalized amplitudes of the EPR spectra
as a function of position along synaptobrevin 2. These amplitudes
provide a relative measure of the motional averaging of the R1 side
chain where the more motionally averaged side chains have the highest
intensities.

Two features are immediately
obvious from the EPR spectra shown
in Figure  (and Figure S3 of the ). First, the normalized
amplitudes in DPC are dramatically different from those in bilayers
and indicate that that motion of the spin-labeled side chain is slowed
in DPC. Second, there is considerable variation in the amplitudes
of the synaptobrevin spectra as a function of position in the POPC/POPS
sample. Sites 42–44 as well as site 49 show intensities significantly
lower than those at other positions on the SNARE motif. At a minimum,
this indicates that the SNARE motif in syb is not uniformly unstructured
in the presence of lipid bilayers. Sites 81–88 also have lower
intensities, and this is likely due to membrane insertion of the region
adjacent to the TM domain.

The
EPR spectra for the SNARE motif in bilayers appear to be highly
mobile and indicative of an unstructured protein segment. This is
at first glance consistent with the recent NMR results for synaptobrevin
in nanodiscs as well as an earlier EPR
study on synaptobrevin in bilayers. However,
a closer examination of the EPR line shapes indicates that they are
composed of at least two motional components. Shown in Figure a are EPR spectra for sites 49 and 85 and fits using
an EPR simulation package based upon the MOMD approach developed by
Freed and co-workers (see ). For these spectra, the simulations required two motional components
to obtain a reasonable fit but were not improved by including an additional
motional component. Shown in Figure b are
the two components required for the fits shown in Figure a. The correlation times and fractions of the two
components that reproduce the spectra are given in the legend. The
fast motional component in these spectra is consistent with that expected
for an unstructured segment that lies in the aqueous phase, and the
slower motional component is similar to spectra obtained from peptides
that are associated with the membrane–solution interface., The variation in the normalized amplitude along the SNARE motif
of synaptobrevin (Figure c) results in part
from differences in these two motional populations, so that the sites
having the largest fraction of the slower-moving component have the
lowest amplitudes. The differences between bilayers and DPC also result
from a greater population of the slow motional component in the micelle
system (see below).

(a) EPR spectra for 49R1 and 85R1 in POPC/POPS bicelles
(black
trace) along with simulations (red dashed lines) that reproduce these
spectra. (b) Spectra corresponding to the fast and slow components
that when added produce the simulations shown in panel a for positions
49 and 85. For 49R1, the fast and slow components have correlation
times of 0.44 and 2.7 ns, respectively, which are at relative spin
populations of 45 and 55%, respectively. For 85R1, the fast and slow
components have correlation times of 0.65 and 3.1 ns, respectively,
which are at relative spin populations of 20 and 80%, respectively.

In addition to bilayer and micelle
environments, spectra for several
of these spin-labeled mutants were obtained in DHPC/DMPC bicelles
to provide a direct comparison with the NMR data shown above. The
normalized EPR spectra in lipid bilayers and in q = 2 and q = 0.4 bicelles are shown in Figure S4
of the . In almost
every case examined, the spectra in lipid have the highest normalized
intensities, followed by the q = 2 and q = 0.4 bicelles. The EPR spectra obtained in bilayers, bicelles,
and micelles were simulated, and the parameters for each component
were averaged across multiple positions in the SNARE motif (legend
of Figure ). The resulting values of the Azz component of the hyperfine tensor, the correlation
time, and the population of each component are shown in Figure . The average correlation times for the more mobile
components were between 0.4 and 0.7 ns, and average Azz values were between 36.2 and 36.9 G; these correlation
times and Azz values, which are sensitive
to polarity, indicate that the protein is unstructured and in an aqueous
environment. The values of Azz obtained for the slower component are consistent
with an interfacial or hydrocarbon location for the R1 side chain;
however, EPR line shapes and correlation times are more difficult
to interpret for hydrocarbon-facing labels,, and the slower component might arise from an unstructured and/or
helical backbone segment.

EPR parameters obtained from two-component fits
such as those shown
in Figure . (a) Values of the hyperfine coupling
constant, Azz, required to fit the fast
(red) and slow (blue) motional components in the EPR spectra in PC/PS
bilayers, q = 2 DMPC/DHPC bicelles, q = 0.33 DMPC/DHPC bicelles, and DPC micelles. (b) Values of the rotational
correlation time, τc, required to fit the fast (red)
and slow (blue) motional components in each environment. (c) Relative
populations of the fast (red) and slow (blue) motional components
required to fit the spectra in each environment. The error bars indicate
the variation in values across all positions for which spectra were
simulated. Parameters for the two-component fit included 15 positions
in bilayers, 14 positions in DPC, and 8 positions in bicelles. Results
were not included for positions 42–44 in bilayers, which appear
to be more strongly associated with the interface.

Remarkably, the correlation times of the two components
do not
significantly change when bilayer, bicelle, and micelle environments
are examined (Figure b), but as indicated
in Figure c, the populations of the two components
change as a function of environment, so that the population of the
slower-moving component is largest in DPC micelles and smallest in
bilayers. These EPR spectra are consistent with exchange of the labeled
syb on and off the interface at a rate that is slower than the EPR
time scale (&lt;108 s–1). It should be
noted that in addition to measurements in bilayers formed by POPC
and POPS, several sites (36, 43, and 53) were also examined in bilayers
formed from POPC, which yields a neutral bilayer interface. These
spectra, which are shown in Figure S5 of the , were not altered by the absence of POPS, indicating
that the membrane surface potential or surface charge density does
not play a strong role in controlling the partitioning of the SNARE
segment of syb.

The syb EPR spectra were power-saturated in
the presence of O2 or Ni(II)EDDA to assess the local environment
of the spin-labeled
Syb in bilayers. Spin-label depth parameter
φ is shown in Figure S6 of the  as a function of label position. The depth parameter
measurement will be dominated by the shorter correlation time component
of the spectra because of the large amplitude and small line width
of this component. Depth parameters for positions between 36 and 83
indicate a high degree of aqueous exposure with little bilayer contact,
and this is consistent with an aqueous localization for the conformer
giving rise to the fast component. The N-terminus of the syb transmembrane
helix is at or near residue 92, and the increase in the depth parameter
that appears to begin near residue 85 or 87 is consistent with the
interfacial or hydrocarbon localization for this end of the SNARE
segment that was seen previously by using EPR spectroscopy.

These data demonstrate that differences
in EPR spectra along the
length of the SNARE motif as well as the differences among bilayer,
bicelle, and micelle environments are a result of a shift in the populations
of fast and slow motional components that are associated with aqueous
and interfacial localization, respectively. The result indicates that
the SNARE motif of synaptobrevin partitions between aqueous and interfacial
locations, and that this partitioning is a function of the membrane
or membrane mimetic system and the interfacial environment. The increase
in the interfacial population as one proceeds from bilayer to bicelle
to micelle phases suggests that the tendency of the SNARE motif to
transiently associate is correlated with the curvature of the interface.

Discussion
Previous work on full-length synaptobrevin indicated
that the SNARE
motif is unstructured in bilayers or bilayer-like environments, and
it has been suggested that the interfacial association and helical
content of this segment that are observed in micelles are artifacts
of the micelle environment. The work presented
here reaches a somewhat different conclusion with regard to the state
of the protein. The combination of NMR and EPR data indicates that
membrane association and partial helical content for the SNARE motif
of syb occur in every environment examined (bilayers to micelles)
but do so to a greatly reduced extent as the interface becomes more
planar. This dependence upon the curvature of the interface explains
the differences observed by NMR among DPC, bicelles, and nanodiscs.

EPR spectroscopy
is a good method for distinguishing conformational
exchange events and populations of conformers,, and a careful examination of the EPR spectra from the SNARE-forming
motif of syb reveals the presence of two motional components in every
environment examined. These two components appear to arise from aqueous
and membrane-associated protein, and the differences in the EPR spectra
of syb in different interfacial environments are largely due to the
populations of fast and slow motional components (Figure c). The slow component dominates the spectra from
DPC micelles; the fast motion component dominates in phospholipid
bilayers, and the two components make comparable contributions in
bicelles. Similarly, the NMR data presented here in bicelles indicate
that several residues, including residue 44 and nearby neighboring
residues, are in exchange (Figure ) and at
least partially helical (Figure S1 of the ), suggesting that the interfacial protein assumes
a partial helical state. The highly resolved resonances in NMR and
the two-component EPR spectra indicate that the rate at which the
SNARE motif exchanges between aqueous and interfacial phases is slow
on the EPR time scale but fast on the NMR time scale. This places
the exchange rate in the range of 105–108 s–1.

A model illustrating the equilibrium
that would explain these data
is shown in Figure . The slow components in
the EPR spectra are best explained by the interfacial states (iii
and iv in Figure a), and the fast component
is due to the aqueous syb states (i and ii in Figure a). When syb is in solution, the unstructured form of syb
is highly favored, as indicated by the fact that little helical content
is detected for the SNARE motif of syb in the absence of an interface.
The fraction of α-helical content found in the syb SNARE domain
in DPC micelles and DHPC/DMPC bicelles by NMR (Figure b) roughly correlates with partitioning of the SNARE domain
into the membrane mimetics observed by EPR, indicating that when the
SNARE motif is associated with the interface, the helical form is
strongly favored. However, this correlation is not always perfect.
For example, when position 45 is examined in small DMPC/DHPC bicelles,
the slow EPR component represents ∼50% of the total spins,
while the population of helix determined by NMR is &lt;10%. This difference
might be a result of the spin-label or an indication that much of
the bound component is not α-helical and that unstructured and
α-helical forms coexist in the bound state.

(a) Model based upon
previous work for the interfacial association
of a helical segment that is in
conformational exchange between folded (helical) and unfolded forms.
In solution, the disordered form (ii) is favored relative to the helical
form (i), while in the membrane, the equilibrium favors the helical
form (iii) over the unfolded form (iv). (b) In the membrane, the equilibrium
favors the unstructured aqueous form of the syb SNARE-forming segment;
however, the SNARE-forming domain of syb samples the membrane and
converts between helical and random forms, increasingly favoring the
helical form in highly curved regions.

An interesting observation revealed in the EPR spectra is
that
the fraction of protein associated with the interface increases as
one moves from a bilayer to a bicelle to a micelle system (Figure c). Clearly, there are differences in the composition
of these interfaces, including the lack of a glycerol backbone in
the DPC micelle and the presence of unsaturated lipids in the bilayer
phase. Conceivably, these differences might contribute to some of
the differences that are observed. However, the differences in partitioning
are correlated with the expected curvature of the interface in these
systems, and this would appear to provide an explanation for the differences
in helical content and partitioning. The SNARE domain has significant
amphipathic character when it is α-helical, and lipid interfaces will stabilize the helical form of
these amphipathic sequences.− In addition, the interfacial insertion of an amphipathic
α-helix will be favored by the presence of defects (exposed
hydrophobic area) at the membrane mimetic interface., The relative level of interfacial surface area containing a defect
should decrease in the following order: DPC micelles &gt; DHPC/DMPC
bicelles
&gt; PC/PS bilayers. The same order is observed for partitioning of
syb
between aqueous and membrane mimetic phases (Figure c).

EPR data for selected sites in synaptobrevin were
presented previously
and are generally in agreement with the data obtained here. The EPR line shapes are dominated by narrow
lines indicative of an unstructured protein segment, and power saturation
indicates that the segment adjacent to the transmembrane helical domain
is buried within the bilayer. However, there are some important differences
in the conclusions reached. As indicated here, a close examination
of EPR line shapes and their variability with environment indicates
that the SNARE motif of synaptobrevin is in equilibrium between the
aqueous phase and the lipid interface. In addition, depth parameters
near the transmembrane segment measured (Figure S6 of the ) do not suggest the helical
pattern observed previously; however, the error in these measurements
is relatively large, and sites placed in this region were limited
and were not the focus of this study.

Membrane fusion is triggered
by interactions of syb with plasma
membrane SNAREs to form a SNARE complex. This interaction will be
facilitated by collisions with the acceptor complex and may be nucleated
by helix formation as suggested previously; as a result, the kinetics of SNARE complex formation is likely to
depend on the equilibria shown in Figure a.
It is easy to imagine how the membrane partitioning of the SNARE motif
and helix–coil transitions within this region might modulate
fusion. Aqueous states i and ii would be more likely to collide with
aqueous acceptor SNAREs, but the membrane-associated syb (states iii
and iv) could function as sites of nucleation for SNARE complex assembly,
both because they tend to be more helical and because t-SNAREs such
as syntaxin may also associate with interfaces. As shown here, the curvature of the interface and the presence
of membrane defects will alter the aqueous–membrane partitioning
of syb and thereby modulate the availability of syb for SNARE complex
formation. As a result, the lipid composition at the focal site of
fusion and the presence of curvature or curvature strain are expected
to influence the kinetics of SNARE complex formation. The calcium
sensor synaptotagmin 1 has been reported to modulate membrane curvature,, and the observations made here indicate how synaptotagmin 1 might
play a role in modulating the SNARE assembly indirectly by changing
the properties of the bilayer.

In summary, we have used a combination
of NMR and EPR spectroscopy
to examine the partitioning and structure of the syb SNARE motif in
different membrane mimetic environments. The syb SNARE domain associates
with the lipid interface when bound to DPC micelles but favors the
aqueous phase in the presence of PC/PS bilayers. When reconstituted
into DHPC/DMPC bicelles, the syb SNARE domain partitions roughly equally
between the solution and the interface. Even in lipid bilayers, a
substantial fraction of the syb SNARE motif is associated with the
interface, indicating that syb is not exclusively unstructured in
the aqueous phase as an isolated SNARE protein. The tendency to associate
with the membrane interface is correlated with the level of exposed
hydrophobic surface area or defects that are expected in this environment.
As a result, the state of syb is likely to be influenced by the specific
lipid composition and curvature at the focal site of fusion.

Supporting Information Available
Five
additional supplemental
figures related to figures presented in the text. This material is
available free of charge via the Internet at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bi401638u_si_001.pdf

Author Contributions
B.L. and
D.D. contributed equally to this work.

This work was
supported by National Institute of General Medical Sciences Grant
GM072694.

The authors declare no
competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
We thank Christian Altenbach (University of California,
Los
Angeles, CA) for providing LabView software for EPR data analysis
and simulations.

Abbreviations
CPMGCarr–Purcell–Meiboom–Gill

DHPCdihexanoylphosphatidylcholine

DMPCdimyristoylphosphatidylcholine

DPCdodecylphosphocholine

EPRelectron paramagnetic
resonance

MOMDmicroscopic
ordering with macroscopic disordering

MOPS3-(N-morpholino)propanesulfonic
acid

MTSLmethanethiosulfonate
spin-label

NiEDDAnickel(II)–ethylenediamine-N,N′-diacetic acid complex

POPCpalmitoyloleoylphosphatidylcholine

POPSpalmitoyloleoylphosphatidylserine

R1spin-labeled side
chain produced by derivatization of a cysteine with MTSL

SDSLsite-directed spin labeling

SNAREssoluble N-ethylmaleimide-sensitive factor attachment receptor proteins

sybsynaptobrevin 2

TROSYtransverse relaxation-optimized
spectroscopy.

