Prokaryotic preproteins with
an N-terminal twin-arginine
(RR) motif-containing leader peptide are translocated in a fully folded
state by the twin-arginine translocation (Tat) system.− Many Tat preproteins are components of multisubunit respiratory
enzymes that acquire cofactors, fold, and associate with partner proteins
in the cytoplasm, prior to the translocation event. A system specific
chaperone, also termed a redox enzyme maturation protein (REMP), is
believed to play a role in assessing the folded and cofactor-loaded
state of the Tat preprotein prior to translocation., While
the details of REMP activity and function are yet to be defined, it
is known that each REMP interacts specifically with its Tat preprotein
substrate prior to translocation and deletion
of the REMP significantly reduces the activity of the final holoenzyme.,

Understanding the specificity and affinity of the interaction
between
each REMP and Tat substrate pair has been the focus of studies over
the past several years.,− Most REMPs bind to only their Tat substrate RR-leader peptide in vitro; however, some cross interaction does occur. Additionally, these chaperones have been shown
to interact with different portions of the Tat preprotein, either
the RR-leader peptide, the mature protein, or the entire preprotein
(composed of the RR-leader peptide and mature protein)., Binding affinities between REMPs and their leader peptides vary
depending on the Tat substrate construct and technique used but consistently
range from nanomolar to micromolar dissociation constants (Kd).,−,

The Escherichia
coli REMP DmsD binds to the DmsA
preprotein, the catalytic subunit of the dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO)
reductase molybdoenzyme (DmsABC), through an interaction with the
DmsA twin-arginine leader peptide (DmsAL) and not the mature portion of the DmsA protein., DmsD
has some cross specificity and was shown to interact with the RR-leader
peptides of DmsA homologues, YnfE and YnfF, as well as pre-TorA (the catalytic subunit of trimethylamine N-oxide reductase). The DmsAL
peptide consists of 45 amino acids and, like other RR-leader peptides,
is composed of four regions: the amino-terminal
N-region (residues 1–14), the twin-arginine -SRRGLVK-
motif (residues 15–21), the hydrophobic H-region (residues
22–39), and the carboxy-terminal C-region (residues 40–45)
with residues 43–45 composing the cleavage recognition site
(Figure ). The interaction between DmsD and
the 43 N-terminal amino acids of the DmsA RR-leader peptide (DmsAL1–43) has been characterized with a variety of in vitro techniques in which the leader peptide was fused
to the N-terminus of either glutathione S-transferase
(GST) or streptavidin binding peptide (SBP).,,,, The Kd values between
DmsD and the GST fusion (DmsAL1–43::GST) and the
SBP fusion (DmsAL1–43::SBP) were found to be in
the same range (0.22 and 0.06 μM, respectively).,

Sequence
comparison of twin-arginine leader peptides capable of
binding DmsD. The amino-terminal N-region (light gray), including
the twin-arginine (RR) motif, the hydrophobic H-region (black), and
the C-region (dark gray) are highlighted. Twin-arginine leader peptide
sequences capable of binding DmsD are aligned, and the consensus is
shown below with identical (asterisks) and similar (colons) residues
indicated.

In this study, the region of the
DmsAL peptide capable of interacting
with the DmsD chaperone is identified, and residues of DmsAL that
allow specificity of binding are highlighted. Toward this end, peptides
composed of various portions of the DmsAL peptide were synthesized
and isothermal titration calorimetry (ITC) was used to characterize
the affinity and thermodynamics of the interaction with DmsD. Circular
dichroism (CD) spectroscopy was used to investigate the secondary
structure of the DmsAL peptides in aqueous solution as well as a more
hydrophobic environment of 50% trifluoroethanol (TFE) to determine
if the propensity to form the helical structure of the peptide plays
a role in binding. Differential scanning calorimetry (DSC) was used
to examine the thermostability of DmsD alone and in complex with each
of the DmsAL peptides to examine if DmsD undergoes a conformational
change upon binding the DmsAL peptide.

Materials and Methods
Protein
and Peptide Preparation for Isothermal Titration Calorimetry
The purification and storage procedures for recombinant E.
coli DmsD (His6T7::DmsD construct) have been described elsewhere. Briefly, the protein was purified with Ni affinity chromatography
and eluted using two imidazole concentrations to separate monomeric
and dimeric DmsD protein populations that were assessed via size exclusion
chromatography and fast performance liquid chromatography. Prior to
ITC experiments, purified monomeric DmsD was thawed and exchanged
into ITC buffer [25 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.0) and 100 mM NaCl] via the
application to a 5 mL HiTrap column and the collection of eluted fractions.
The protein concentration was determined from absorption at 280 nm
[extinction coefficient of 72085 M–1 cm–1, determined using the online ExPASy tool ProtParam (available at http://web.expasy.org/protparam/)]. DmsD protein was diluted to 25 μM with ITC buffer, prepared
in 10 mL batches to allow for triplicate titrations, and stored at
4 °C prior to titration experiments. For each individual titration,
3 mL of DmsD was degassed with a thermovac at 28 °C for 10 min
while being stirred. The ITC sample cell was loaded with 1.5 mL of
degassed DmsD sample, and the sample remaining in the syringe after
fill was used to confirm the protein concentration with a Bradford
assay and absorbance at 280 nm.

DmsAL peptides were chemically
synthesized and purified to &gt;95% purity by GenScript, as determined
by high-performance liquid chromatography. 1H nuclear magnetic
resonance (NMR) spectroscopy of selected peptides, compared to an
internal standard [4,4-dimethyl-4-silapentane-1-sulfonic acid (DSS)],
was used to determine that 70% of the lyophilized peptide mass corresponded
to peptide mass, and this conversion was used to set the final peptide
concentration in solution. Peptides were weighed on an analytical
balance and dissolved in distilled water to a concentration of 1 mM.
All peptides were completely soluble in water, and no precipitate
was visible after centrifugation at 10000 rpm for 10 min. Peptide
samples were then diluted to a concentration of 0.5 mM with 2×
ITC buffer and stored at 4 °C prior to titration. For each titration,
0.5 mL of the DmsAL peptide sample was degassed and equilibrated to
28 °C for 10 min with a thermovac. The ITC syringe was loaded
with degassed and temperature-equilibrated peptide.

Isothermal
Titration Calorimetry
ITC experiments were
conducted with a MicroCal VP-ITC microcalorimeter at 303.15 K (30
°C). Thirty 10 μL injections of 500 μM DmsAL peptide
were added to 25 μM DmsD protein while the mixture was being
stirred at 300 rpm. The reference power applied was 10 (units), and
an initial delay and spacing of 300 s was used. DmsD titration experiments
were performed in triplicate. The heat of dilution was determined
by injection of each peptide ligand into ITC buffer, and the resulting
values were subtracted from the individual heats of reaction to obtain
the observed heat of binding. Origin 7.0 was used for data fitting
with a single-binding site model. The mean and standard error of the
mean of binding constants and corresponding thermodynamics of binding
are reported. Buffer ionization enthalpies were used to determine if protonation or deprotonation occurred
during formation of the complex.

Secondary Structure Prediction
of DmsAL Peptides
Two
algorithms were used to predict the secondary structure of DmsAL peptide
sequences shown in Figure : PSIPRED (version
3.3) available at http://bioinf.cs.ucl.ac.uk/psipred/(,) and AGADIR available at http://agadir.crg.es/agadir.jsp.,

Circular Dichroism Spectroscopy
Circular dichroism
spectroscopy experiments were conducted with a Jasco (J-810) spectrometer
in 0.1 nm path length quartz cells. Peptide solutions (1 mg/mL) were
prepared in water and diluted to 0.1 mg/mL for analysis in water (pH
∼5.0), ITC buffer (pH 8.0), or 50% (v/v) TFE. For each sample,
six scans were collected at a rate of 20 nm/min from 260 to 170 nm
with a 0.1 nm bandwidth and averaged. Peptide samples in water (pH
5) and ITC buffer (pH 8) were identical with the exception of the
higher absorbance below 200 nm for the ITC buffer; therefore, only
the water spectra were included. The DICHROWEB server available at http://dichroweb.cryst.bbk.ac.uk/html/home.shtml(,) was subsequently used to approximate the helical content of each
of the peptides in aqueous and TFE environments. Helical content values
(percent) were reported as the mean ± the standard error of the
mean (SEM) of three different predictive algorithms (SELCON3, CONTIN,
and CDSSTR).

For the CD spectra of DmsD in the presence of each
of the DmsAL peptides, the DmsD concentration was 25 μM and
the peptide concentration was 50 μM. Six scans were collected
at a rate of 20 nm/min from 260 to 180 nm with a 0.5 nm bandwidth
and averaged.

Differential Scanning Calorimetry
The heat of denaturation
of DmsD in the absence and presence of DmsAL peptides was determined
on a VP-DSC microcalorimeter (MicroCal Inc.) at a scan rate of 40
°C/h. Samples were degassed using a thermovac (MicroCal Inc.)
for 10 min at room temperature prior to loading. Buffer [25 mM Tris-HCl
and 100 mM NaCl (pH 8)] scans were performed to generate isotherms
to subtract from protein scans. The isotherms were normalized to the
concentration of protein used as determined by A280. Prior to each protein scan, five buffer scans were run
to equilibrate the system and the fifth scan was used as a reference
to subtract from the protein scan. Typically, by the second or third
scan, the system was equilibrated. Protein samples were scanned only
once because the denaturation was found to be irreversible and a second
scan did not produce a transition peak over the temperature range.
DmsD (25 μM) was mixed with 50 μM DmsA leader peptide
and incubated for 1 h at 4 °C prior to being loaded into the
thermovac.

Results
The Entire Contiguous Hydrophobic
Region of the DmsA Twin-Arginine
Leader Peptide Is Required for DmsD To Bind
To determine
the region of the DmsAL peptide important for binding to DmsD, various
portions of the 45-amino acid DmsAL peptide were synthesized and assayed
for binding to DmsD using ITC (Figure ). Our
previous research demonstrated that the complete DmsAL peptide (DmsAL1–43), which included the twin-arginine motif (15SRRGLVK21) and all three regions (N-terminal,
hydrophobic, and C-terminal), bound to DmsD with a Kd of 0.2 μM when it was fused to the N-terminus
of GST. Here, the ITC results indicate
that DmsD could not bind to the DmsA RR motif alone (DmsAL15–21) or if the entire N-region was also present (DmsAL2–20) (Table ). DmsAL peptides that included
the RR motif in addition to portions of the H-region (DmsAL15–27 and DmsAL15–33) also did not bind DmsD (Table  and Figure ). Only when
the amino acids of the entire H-region were added to the RR motif
(DmsAL15–41) could binding be observed by ITC (Kd = 1.7 μM) (Table  and Figure ). Leaving the H-region intact,
but removing amino acids from the RR motif at the N-terminus of the
peptide, caused binding to DmsD to become progressively weaker. Specifically,
removing the N-terminal serine (S15) and the first arginine (R16)
reduced the affinity [Kd = 2.1 μM
(DmsAL17–41)], and removing the entire RR motif
reduced the affinity further [Kd = 3.9
μM (DmsAL21–41)], corresponding to 1.2- and
2.3-fold reductions in the affinity for DmsAL17–41 and DmsAL21–41, respectively, relative to DmsAL15–41. When the arginines of the tightest binding peptide
(DmsAL15–41) were changed to lysines (DmsAL15–41 KK), the affinity was reduced to 2.9 μM,
a 1.7-fold reduction in affinity from that of the native peptide sequence
(Table ). Overall, these results indicate
that the entire H-region of the DmsAL peptide must be present to allow
DmsD to bind and the RR motif contributes marginal additional affinity.

Representative
ITC thermograms of DmsA leader peptides added to
DmsD. DmsAL peptides containing residues 15–33 (A), 15–41
(B), 17–41 (C), or 21–41 (D) were added to DmsD protein,
and isothermal titration calorimetry thermograms are shown. Experiments
were performed in triplicate; binding was observed, and the results
were tabulated.

Evaluation
of Regions of the DmsA
Twin-Arginine Leader Peptide for Binding to DmsD
DmsAL1–43 fused
to the N-terminus of GST.

NB, no binding could be detected
by ITC under the conditions utilized.

Mixture of two peptides as indicated
to give the DmsAL peptide region for evaluation. H-Region residues
are shown in bold. If the complete and contiguous H-region is present,
the residues are underlined.

To further explore the H-region of DmsAL in the binding of DmsD,
a peptide mixture of DmsAL15–33 and DmsAL34–45 was assayed for binding. Individually, each of these peptides showed
no binding (Table ); however, the peptide
mixture provides all the amino acids of the DmsAL peptide necessary
for binding (residues 15–45), and a single polypeptide composed
of similar amino acids (DmsAL15–41) was able to
bind tightly (Kd = 1.7 μM). However,
this peptide mixture showed no binding to DmsD and provided further
proof that the entire and contiguous H-region of the DmsAL peptide
is necessary to allow binding to DmsD. Only DmsAL peptides containing
the complete and contiguous H-region (residues 22–39) showed
binding to DmsD (Table ).

Interaction
between DmsD and DmsA RR-Leader Peptides Is Promoted
by a Favorable Enthalpy
To understand the nature of the binding
between each of the DmsAL peptides and DmsD, the thermodynamic contributions
were analyzed for all peptides that were capable of binding. All DmsAL
peptides that bound to DmsD had a 1:1 stoichiometry (Table ). Overall, each of the four DmsAL peptides assayed
for binding to DmsD exhibited similar free energies (minimum of −7.4
kcal/mol for DmsAL21–41 and maximum of −8.0
kcal/mol for DmsAL15–41); however, the contributions
from enthalpy and entropy differed substantially (Table  and Figure ). When “entropy”
is discussed, the values refer to the entire “–TΔS” term, so that the equivalent
units of kilocalories per mole may be compared with enthalpy. The
three native DmsA RR-leader peptides, which showed binding to DmsD,
have similar association constants, ranging from 2.6 to 6.0 ×
105 M–1, and as such, there is a difference
of only 0.6 kcal/mol in the overall apparent free energies (ΔG) (Table ). Considering the DmsAL
peptides, the most favorable binding reaction occurred between DmsD
and DmsAL15–41 (ΔG = −8.0
kcal/mol); this reaction showed the largest favorable enthalpy (−11.7
kcal/mol) combined with the most unfavorable entropy (3.7 kcal/mol)
(Table  and Figure ). When the first two amino acids of the RR motif were removed (DmsAL17–41), the entropy became more favorable (difference
of 2.0 kcal/mol) at the cost of enthalpy (2.2 kcal/mol), and the overall
free energy became 0.2 kcal/mol less favorable because of a net loss
of enthalpy (Table  and Figure ). Removal of the entire RR motif, leaving only the H-region
of the DmsAL peptide (DmsAL21–41), caused the enthalpy
to be reduced to only −4.3 kcal/mol (a further loss of 5.2
kcal/mol), while the entropy again became even more favorable (by
4.8 kcal/mol); as a result, more than one-third of the overall free
energy was from entropy (−3.1 kcal/mol). Changing the arginines
to lysines in the RR motif reduced the overall free energy by only
0.4 kcal/mol because of a loss of enthalpy (1.7 kcal/mol), which outweighed
the increase in favorable entropy (1.3 kcal/mol) when compared to
that of the twin-arginine peptide (Table  and
Figure ).

Thermodynamics of binding of DmsD to various
regions of DmsA twin-arginine
leader peptides. Isothermal titration calorimetry experiments were
conducted at 30 °C and pH 8.0. Mean values of free energy (ΔG), enthalpy (ΔH), and entropy (−TΔS) of binding with the corresponding
SEM of triplicate titrations are reported.

Thermodynamics of Binding of the DmsA
Leader Peptide to DmsD
DmsAL peptide	n	ΔG (kcal/mol)	ΔH (kcal/mol)	–TΔS (kcal/mol)	
DmsAL21–41	1.14 ± 0.09	–7.4 ± 0.2	–4.3 ± 0.9	–3.1 ± 1.1	
DmsAL17–41	1.04 ± 0.04	–7.8 ± 0.1	–9.5 ± 0.8	1.7 ± 0.8	
DmsAL15–41	1.04 ± 0.03	–8.0 ± 0.1	–11.7 ± 0.2	3.7 ± 0.2	
DmsAL15–41 KK	1.09 ± 0.04	–7.6 ± 0.1	–10.0 ± 0.2	2.4 ± 0.2	
Thermodynamic parameters
were determined
from ITC experiments in which each peptide was titrated into a DmsD
protein solution at 30 °C and pH 8.0. The mean of triplicate
experiments is presented with the corresponding SEM. Values of the
Gibbs free energy (ΔG), enthalpy (ΔH), entropy (−TΔS), and stoichiometry of binding (n) are listed.

In some cases, buffer ionization
can contribute to the apparent
enthalpy. To determine the buffer-independent enthalpy of binding
(ΔHbind) and the net number of exchanged
protons (between the bulk solution and the complex), ITC experiments
were repeated for the four DmsAL peptides capable of binding to DmsD.
These experiments were performed under the same conditions, except
in phosphate buffer, which has an ionization enthalpy (0.7 kcal/mol)
very different from that of Tris (11.3 kcal/mol) at 30 °C. The free energy and apparent enthalpy determined
in phosphate buffer did not change from that determined in Tris buffer;
therefore, the apparent enthalpy values were considered to be equivalent
to the buffer-independent binding enthalpy. Additionally, by plotting
the apparent enthalpy of binding versus the ionization enthalpy of
each buffer and seeing a slope of approximately zero, we determined
that upon binding the various DmsAL peptides at pH 8.0, the DmsD::DmsAL
complexes do not have a net gain or loss of protons for any of the
peptides (Figure 1 of the ).

DmsA Leader Peptides Able To Bind DmsD Are Unstructured in Aqueous
Solution but Can Acquire Helicity in a Hydrophobic Environment
Having determined the portion of the DmsAL peptide capable of binding
to DmsD, we investigated the potential of each peptide to form secondary
structure. We wanted to determine if the secondary structure of the
DmsAL peptide played a role in binding. Does the sequence of the DmsAL
peptide influence its ability to adopt a helical structure? To answer
these questions, we used two methods. CD spectroscopy was performed
on DmsAL peptides in aqueous solution and in a 50% TFE solution (a
solvent known to influence secondary structure and mimic that of a
hydrophobic environment),, and secondary structure
predictions were performed on DmsAL peptide sequences (Figure ).

Helical content of DmsA
leader peptides. Far-UV circular dichroism
spectra were collected for DmsAL peptides in water (dashed line) and
50% TFE (solid line) for DmsAL2–20 (A), DmsAL15–33 (B), DmsAL15–41 (C), DmsAL17–41 (D), DmsAL21–41 (E), and DmsAL15–41 KK (F). The helical content (percent) of
each
peptide was approximated using Dichroweb analysis and is shown for
each peptide (in water → in 50% TFE) (A–F). (G) Helical
content predictions were determined for DmsAL peptide sequences using
AGADIR and PSIPRED. Regions of the peptide predicted to be helical
by the PSIPRED algorithm are underlined. nd, not determined.

All DmsAL peptides were found
to contain minimal helical content
(3–10%) in aqueous solution (Figure A–F). However, in a 50% TFE solution, the peptides with the
complete H-region adopted increased amounts of helical content (24%
for DmsAL15–41, 21% for DmsAL17–41, and 15% for DmsAL21–41) (Figure C–E). If the H-region was incomplete, no helical content
was found regardless of the environment (DmsAL15–33; 3% in water and 5% in 50% TFE) (Figure B). Two secondary structure prediction algorithms were used for the
DmsAL peptides and showed a range of helical content. AGADIR, predicts the secondary structure of peptides, while PSIPRED, is used to predict the secondary structure within protein sequences.
If the H-region is not intact as in DmsAL15–33,
then no helical structure was predicted to occur by either algorithm
(Figure G). However, if the complete H-region
was present, PSIPRED predicted between 33 and 48% helical content
while AGADIR predicted almost no helical content regardless of the
sequence. The results of the CD experiments with the DmsAL peptides
in TFE supported what was found in the PSIPRED predictions.

Because only DmsAL peptides containing the intact contiguous H-region
were able to bind as well as form helical structure, it is possible
that a portion of the DmsAL peptide adopts a helical structure upon
binding to DmsD. To further investigate this question, we performed
CD spectroscopy on DmsD alone as well as in complex with each of the
peptides that were investigated above. If the peptide was shown to
have helical content in TFE, then there was also an increased helical
content in the complex with DmsD (Figure B–D
and Table ). Importantly, the complex of DmsD
with the DmsAL peptide containing an incomplete H-region (DmsAL15–33) showed almost no increase in helical content
over that of DmsD alone (Figure A and Table ).

DmsA leader peptides shown to bind and form helical structure
in
a hydrophobic environment increase the helicity of the complex with
DmsD. Far-UV CD spectra were collected for 50 μM DmsAL peptide
(dashed line), 25 μM DmsD (dotted line), and 25 μM DmsD
in complex with 50 μM DmsAL peptide with the 50 μM DmsAL
peptide spectra subtracted (solid line): DmsAL15–33 (A), DmsAL15–41 (B), DmsAL17–41 (C), and DmsAL21–41 (D).

Molar Ellipticities of DmsD Alone
and in Complex with DmsAL Peptides
 	θ225 (mdeg)	
DmsAL peptide	DmsD	complex	difference	
DmsAL15–33	–76.7	–76.8	–0.1	
DmsAL15–41	–75.5	–81.5	–6.0	
DmsAL17–41	–76.8	–83.6	–7.2	
DmsAL21–41	–75.4	–78.7	–3.3	
The raw machine
units (θ)
at 225 nm (millidegrees) recorded from circular dichroism experiments
with DmsD alone or in complex with DmsAL peptides are listed.

The Conformational Change of DmsD Is Small
upon Binding of the
DmsA Leader Peptide
E. coli DmsD is a globular
single-domain protein consisting of 11 α-helices., Differential scanning calorimetry was used to investigate the thermal
stability of DmsD in the absence and presence of various DmsAL peptides.
The melting temperature (Tm) of DmsD alone
was determined to be just below 61 °C (Figure A and Table ). When peptides shown
not to bind (DmsAL15–33 and DmsAL34–45) were added, the Tm showed no change
(Table ). However, when DmsAL peptides that
did bind were added to DmsD, the melting temperature increased to
61.5 °C (DmsAL21–41), 61.8 °C (DmsAL17–41), 61.7 °C (DmsAL15–41),
or 61.9 °C (DmsAL15–41 KK). These small
increases
(within 1 °C) in the thermal stability of DmsD in the presence
of bound peptides suggest a very minimal conformational change in
DmsD upon binding of the DmsAL peptide.

Melting temperature of
DmsD that increases in the presence of DmsAL
peptides shown to bind. Differential scanning calorimetry (DSC) of
DmsD alone (A) yielded a melting temperature of 61.0 °C, while
in the presence of DmsAL15–41 (B), the melting temperature
increased to 61.7 °C. The DSC results of DmsD in the presence
of other DmsAL peptides are listed in Table .

Melting Temperatures
of DmsD–DmsAL
Complexes
DmsAL peptide	Tm (°C)	
DmsD alone	60.9 ± 0.2	
DmsD–DmsAL15–41	61.7	
DmsD–DmsAL17–41	61.8	
DmsD–DmsAL21–41	61.5	
DmsD–DmsAL15–33–DmsAL34–45	60.8	
DmsD–DmsAL15–41 KK	61.9	
Differential scanning
calorimetry
was used to determine the temperature of melting (Tm) for DmsD (25 μM), and its mean and standard error
of the mean of triplicate experiments is reported. The Tm values of single trials of 2:1 complexes of DmsAL and
DmsD (50 and 25 μM, respectively) are also reported.

Discussion
We
have determined that the complete and contiguous H-region of
the DmsAL peptide is recognized by DmsD. Previous research has shown
that DmsD can interact with four RR-leader peptides (or preproteins):
DmsA, YnfE, YnfF, and TorA., Aside from the RR motif,
the H-region within these leader peptides is the most similar and
identical (Figure ) and as such is the likely
determinant of specificity. DmsAL21–41 was the smallest
peptide shown to bind DmsD and is almost exclusively composed of the
H-region. Binding of this peptide was driven by favorable entropy
and enthalpy, suggesting that hydrophobic interactions play an important
role. A previous study showed that the kinetics of dissociation (off
rate) had the greatest ability to differentiate binding of DmsD to
the complete DmsA leader peptide (koff = 2.0 ms–1) or the YnfE leader peptide (koff = 127 ms–1), with a 60
fold-greater propensity to dissociate even though the rate of association
(kon) for the YnfE peptide was 6-fold
higher than for the DmsA peptide. The
variance of the residues within the H-region of each of these leader
sequences may cause the subtle differences in the on and off rates
toward DmsD but still allow binding to occur.

The display of
the RR-leader peptide off the parent substrate or
a carrier protein likely plays a role in the determined affinity for
the REMP. Because the substrates of most RR-leader peptides are labile,
likely due to the complex cofactors that must be incorporated, most
studies investigating the interaction employ fusion proteins at the
N- or C-terminus of the leader peptide. When a variety of RR-leader
peptide fusion proteins were used in combination with far-Western
blot assays, it was shown that the fusion partner of the leader peptide
was critical for some interactions between REMPs and their leader
peptide. Identical DmsAL peptide constructs
have been fused to either GST or SBP. When placed at the C-terminus
of GST (GST::DmsAL1–43), no interaction with DmsD
was observed, while at the N-terminus (DmsAL1–43::GST), a tight interaction was observed (Kd = 0.2 μM). Subsequently,
the Kd of a DmsAL1–43::SBP construct with DmsD was determined to be 0.06 μM. The increased affinity of the DmsAL1–43::SBP fusion compared to that of the DmsAL1–43::GST
fusion is likely due to the resulting peptide display. To overcome
the effects of the fusion partner on the determined affinity, we chose
to synthesize various portions of the leader peptide to investigate
the interaction. Our results suggest that some of the peptides may
be behaving slightly differently in isolation and within a fusion
or the larger native construct; however, clear thermodynamic trends
were observed.

DmsD and TorD are often considered to behave
in an almost identical
manner with regard to binding and maturation of their respective substrates
DmsA and TorA. In a study performed with the REMP TorD and various
TorA leader peptides, some results similar to those described here
were found. The TorA leader peptide that included the entire H-region
as well as the RR motif bound to TorD with a Kd of 1.8 μM. The affinity
is almost identical to that shown here for DmsD and DmsAL15–41 (Kd = 1.7 μM). However, the same
study showed that TorD was able to bind to a TorA leader peptide devoid
of half of the H-region, while here, DmsD had no interaction with
the DmsA leader peptide unless the entire H-region was present. Additionally,
TorD is able to bind to the mature portion of the TorA protein, while
DmsD binds pre-DmsA only if the DmsA leader peptide is present., Thus, while the REMPs DmsD and TorD both bind to the H-region of
their RR-leader peptide, the overall recognition and interactions
with their substrates are different.

Recently, green fluorescent
protein (GFP) fusions to chimeras of
various regions of DmsA and TorA leader peptides were used to investigate
the specificity of binding of DmsD and TorD. The H-region of DmsA and TorA determined binding to either DmsD
or TorD; however, how the H-region was defined within that study eludes
to the importance of the 38PFSR41 portion of
the DmsAL for binding to DmsD, as omission of this sequence did not
allow binding to occur. Further evidence that the H-region is important
for REMP binding was seen when three different leucines (L27, L31,
and L32) within the H-region of the TorA leader peptide were changed
to a polar amino acid (glutamine); this abolished binding to TorD in vivo. This same study showed
that when L21 in the TorA leader was changed to glutamine, binding
to TorD was not affected. However, if the equivalent residue within
the DmsA leader (L28) is changed to a valine, binding to DmsD was
abolished (data not shown). This further supports the idea that subtle
differences within the leader peptide sequences are able to distinguish
binding to either TorD or DmsD.

As portions of the twin-arginine
motif were added to the N-terminus
of the H-region of DmsAL peptides, the entropy of binding became more
unfavorable, such that the interaction was driven exclusively by enthalpy
accompanied by an entropic cost. Overall, the presence of the RR motif
was not critical to the interaction between DmsAL and DmsD and contributed
little additional affinity. A similar result was also shown for binding
of TorD to the TorA leader peptide. However,
the nitrate reductase REMP, NarJ, behaves differently in that it is
able to bind to the 15 amino-terminal residues of its substrate NarG
with more than 10-fold tighter affinity (Kd ∼ 0.1 μM) than either DmsD or TorD., The 15 N-terminal residues of NarG contain a remnant RR motif,, and nitrate reductase has been shown to be Tat-dependent; however, the enzyme complex (NarGHI) remains
on the cytoplasmic side of the membrane. It is known that TatC binds
specifically to the RR motif of Tat-dependent substrates. This binding then recruits TatB and TatA, which
allows translocation of the RR-leader substrate protein. It is possible
that each REMP binds specifically to the H-region of its leader peptide
while still allowing TatC to bind to the RR motif. Because NarJ binds
more tightly to the N-region of NarG and remains on the cytoplasmic
side of the membrane, the TatC protein likely plays a different role
with respect to the atypical vestige RR-leader peptide of NarG.

Depending on the region of the twin-arginine leader peptide that
is present, a structural component may also play a role in binding
to the REMP. The effect that the peptide sequence alone may have within
the bound structure is difficult to determine in the absence of a
structure of the complex itself. Two E. coli RR-leader
peptides (HiPIP and SufI) with no known system specific chaperone
(REMP) have been studied, and both peptides were shown to have almost
no secondary structure in aqueous solution., Our results show that DmsAL peptides are also unstructured in aqueous
solution, but the ability to form helical structure was influenced
by the sequence that was present as well as the environment in which
it was placed. The helical tendency of the peptide was dependent on
the portion of the peptide sequence that was present, specifically,
the entire hydrophobic region. Only those DmsAL peptides that contained
a complete and contiguous H-region became helical when they were examined
in a more hydrophobic environment, like that which might be found
at the binding site of DmsD. A putative interaction site in DmsD,
determined through mutagenesis screening, presented a hydrophobic
cleft. The intrinsic propensity of these
peptides to form helical structure correlated with the DmsAL peptides
that were also able to bind to DmsD. It is possible that RR-leader
peptides of Tat protein substrates adopt secondary structure within
a portion of their sequence upon binding, which further defines the
specificity of binding among the REMPs.

A high-resolution structure
of any of the DmsD/TorD/NarJ family
of REMPs bound to their twin-arginine leader peptide has not been
determined. However, the NMR solution structure of NapD, the REMP
for the periplasmic nitrate reductase NapA, which has a fold very
different from that of the DmsD/TorD/NarJ family, has been determined
[Protein Data Bank (PDB) entry 2JSX] along with
a second structure in complex with the NapAL1–35 peptide (PDB entry 2PQR, unpublished observations). In the NapD–NapA complex structure,
NapA residues 5–22, encompassing the twin-arginine motif and
the H-region, form an α-helix and bind within a hydrophobic
pocket of NapD. Additionally, the NapD protein shows very little structural
change upon binding the NapA RR-leader peptide.

Here, DmsD was shown to have a melting temperature
of 61 °C
using DSC. In the presence of DmsAL peptides capable of binding, the Tm of DmsD showed only a minor increase, up to
1 °C, which suggests very little conformational change in DmsD
upon binding. Further, the DmsAL peptide was shown to bind over the
surface of DmsD in a recent study. Overall,
the results suggest that there are very few conformational changes
occurring in DmsD upon binding of the DmsAL peptide.

Conclusions
The redox enzyme maturation protein DmsD binds to the H-region
of the DmsA twin-arginine leader peptide sequence, and this interaction
is promoted by favorable entropy and enthalpy. While the conformation
of DmsD does not appear to change upon binding, a portion of the H-region
of the DmsA RR-leader peptide may form a helix upon binding to a hydrophobic
pocket of DmsD.

Supporting Information Available
Effect
of the enthalpy of ionization
(Figure S1). This material is available free of charge via the Internet
at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bi4009374_si_001.pdf

The authors declare no
competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
We acknowledge Dr. Evan Haney
for technical assistance with
NMR spectroscopy.

Abbreviations
CDcircular dichroism

DmsALDmsA leader

DMSOdimethyl sulfoxide

DSCdifferential scanning
calorimetry

ITCisothermal titration calorimetry

Kddissociation constant

REMPredox enzyme maturation
protein

RRtwin-arginine

Tattwin-arginine translocase

TFEtrifluoroethanol.

