Distinguished members of the
G-protein-coupled receptor (GPCR) superfamily, opioid receptors (ORs)
are the main targets for analgesics and play important roles in drug
addiction. Because of pioneering studies using brain homogenates in
the 1970s,− it has long been known that physiological concentrations
of sodium decrease the level of binding of agonists, but not antagonists,
to the μ-OR. While similar allosteric
effects were confirmed much later for several, albeit not all [e.g.,
the turkey β1-adrenergic receptor (B1AR)], different family A GPCRs (see ref () for a recent review), the possibility that sodium
differentially affects the binding of an agonist to the three major
OR subtypes was also raised, with 65% agonist binding inhibition seen
in μ-OR and δ-OR, but only 20% inhibition observed in
κ-OR. Moreover, a recent comparison
of the effect of sodium, potassium, and lithium on δ-OR agonist
binding suggested a differential modulation of δ-OR ligand binding
parameters and G-protein coupling by monovalent ions, with sodium
decreasing the level of δ-OR agonist binding more than the others. Notably, treatment of membranes with reagents,
particularly those attacking sulfhydryl groups, was shown to enhance
the sodium effect. On the other hand,
divalent cations, and especially manganese ions (at 1 mM), were shown
to almost restore full agonist binding in the presence of sodium at
100 mM in saturation studies, while binding
of antagonists remained unaffected.

At the molecular level,
a possible explanation for the effect of
ions on OR binding and signaling is that, like other molecules targeting
allosteric sites, they affect the equilibrium between active and inactive
states of the receptor, thus modulating the binding of native orthosteric
ligands., Mutagenesis studies in different GPCRs (e.g.,
see refs (−)) suggested a possible allosteric binding site for sodium, which
involved a conserved aspartate in transmembrane helix 2 (TM2), namely
D2.50 (the residue is labeled according to the Ballesteros–Weinstein
generic numbering scheme, which has been
adopted throughout this work). Notably, pioneering molecular dynamics
(MD) simulations of a model of the dopamine D2 receptor predicted
a similar binding site for sodium ions diffusing freely from the extracellular
side. Similar conclusions were reached
by a more recent MD study of the μ-OR, which also suggested
the entry of sodium from the extracellular side, and binding to a
site comprising residue D2.50.

The first direct experimental evidence of binding of sodium to
a GPCR came only very recently with the ultra-high-resolution crystallographic
structure of the adenosine A2A receptor (A2AR; PDB entry 4EIY()), which was followed within just a few months by the very
high (1.8–2.2 Å)-resolution crystallographic structures
of the β1-adrenergic receptor (B1AR; PDB entry 4BVN()), protease-activated receptor 1 (PAR1; PDB entry 3VW7()), and the δ-OR (PDB entry 4N6H()). These
structures revealed the precise location of the sodium ion (herein
termed the “sodium crystallographic site” or “sodium
allosteric site”), and its coordination by a salt bridge to
D2.50, in addition to four polar interactions with receptor side chains
and water molecules (S3.39, N3.35, and two water molecules in the
case of δ-OR).

To provide
mechanistic details about the sodium control of GPCR
binding and signaling, several MD simulations of the A2AR crystal
structure with or without sodium at the allosteric site were recently
conducted, and their results were interpreted in the context of radioligand
binding, and thermostability experiments. These studies further supported the idea that the binding of sodium
and agonists is mutually exclusive by showing that the ion hampers
possible activation-related conformational changes and rather gives
preference to inactive conformations of the receptor. A similar conclusion
was drawn from analysis of the agonist-bound crystallographic active-like
state of the neurotensin receptor, whose
lack of sodium and collapsed sodium binding pocket implied that the
high-affinity agonist binding and the presence of Na+ ions
are mutually exclusive.

Although the lower-resolution crystal
structures of μ-OR
and κ-OR present chemically and conformationally conserved residues
in their putative sodium allosteric sites compared to the ultra-high-resolution
structure of δ-OR, the ion access from the bulk and binding
to these sites may vary dramatically, because of differences in the
number and location of negatively charged residues across the three
receptor structures. Intrigued by the possibility that the mechanism
of sodium control of OR binding and signaling may be different among
the three receptors, we explored here the dynamic nature of sodium
binding diffusing freely from the bulk to the interior of the ligand-free
δ-OR, μ-OR, and κ-OR crystallographic conformations
by means of unbiased, microsecond-scale MD simulations. The results
of these simulations were coupled with those of radioligand binding
assays in stably transfected cell lines to evaluate differences and
similarities in the allosteric modulation of the three major OR subtypes
by sodium ions. Insights from additional unbiased and biased MD simulations
of antagonist-bound and agonist-bound, activated receptors using the
δ-OR ultra-high-resolution crystal structure as a model system further supported the mechanistic implications
of both the ligand-free simulations and the experimental results.

Materials
and Methods
Simulation System Setups and Force Field
The inactive
crystal structures of mouse μ-OR, human κ-OR, and human
δ-OR corresponding to PDB entries 4DKL,4DJH, and 4N6H, respectively, were used as starting
conformations for all-atom MD simulations in an explicit lipid–water
environment. Crystallographic waters were kept if present, whereas
other nonprotein atoms were deleted. Missing loops of μ-OR and
κ-OR were modeled ab initio using ROSETTA, whereas the missing C- and N-terminal segments
were ignored. Missing side chains were inserted with the Swiss-Pdb
Viewer. To simulate the binding of free
sodium to the ligand-free δ-OR crystal structure, the crystallographic
sodium at D2.50 was removed at the start of the simulation. The δ-OR
crystal structure was also simulated with the sodium bound at D2.50,
with or without the antagonist naltrindole bound at the orthosteric
site. Because no active OR crystal structure is available yet, all-atom,
adiabatic biased molecular dynamics (ABMD) simulations (see details in ) were employed to sample the conformational
transition of the δ-OR TM bundle from its inactive crystal structure
in the presence of a docked selective δ-OR agonist, i.e., (+)-4-{(αR)-α-[(2S,5R)-4-allyl-2,5-dimethyl-1-piperazinyl]-3-methoxybenzyl}-N,N-diethylbenzamide [SNC-80 (see the docking
details in the following section)], instead of naltrindole, to the
corresponding atomic coordinates of the TM region of the active β2-adrenergic
receptor (B2AR) crystal structure in complex with the G-protein (PDB
entry 3SN6()).

Each system was embedded into a pre-equilibrated
patch of 1-palmitoyl-2-oleoyl-sn-glycero-3-phosphocholine
(POPC) and 10% cholesterol and solvated with 150 mM NaCl, corresponding
to 0.00009 particle/Å3. All sodium ions were initially
placed at a minimal distance of 3 Å from the protein, and additional
chloride ions were added to neutralize the systems. Each complete
system measured roughly 90 Å × 90 Å × 90 Å,
consisting of the receptor, ∼20 cholesterol molecules, ∼200
POPC lipids, ∼11500 water molecules, ∼30 sodium ions,
and ∼40 chloride ions, totaling close to ∼67000 atoms
on average. The TIP3P water model and the CHARMM27 force field for
the protein, lipids, and ions were used for the MD simulations. The
CHARMM General Force Field parameter
set was used to simulate the ligands naltrindole and SNC-80.

Docking
of SNC-80 to the Ultra-High-Resolution Crystal Structure
of δ-OR
The system for docking of SNC-80 to the orthosteric
binding pocket of the ultra-high-resolution crystal structure of δ-OR
(PDB entry 4N6H()) instead of the crystallographic ligand
naltrindole was prepared using Maestro within Schrödinger Suite
2014-1. The SNC-80 molecule was built
with the two-dimensional chemical sketcher tool and prepared with
LigPrep at physiological pH 7.3, using Epik. The ligand protonation state was assigned as suggested in the literature. The receptor was prepared with the Protein Preparation
Wizard tool to add hydrogens and assign bond orders. A grid box with
dimensions of 26 Å × 26 Å × 30 Å with an
inner box with dimensions of 10 Å × 10 Å × 14
Å centered on the crystallographic ligand naltrindole was used
for flexible ligand docking calculations using Glide XP. Ten poses of SNC-80 were selected for postdocking
minimization, and the one exhibiting the best binding XP GScore (−5.860
kcal/mol), which incidentally overlapped nicely with the crystallographic
ligand naltrindole, was chosen for further studies.

Molecular Dynamics
Simulations
Both biased and unbiased
MD simulations (see Table  for a summary)
were conducted using the GROMACS 4.6 simulation package in the NPT ensemble at 300
K and 1 bar, using a Nose-Hoover thermostat and Parrinello–Rahman pressure coupling, respectively. All bonds were constrained using the LINCS
algorithm, and a 10 Å cutoff was
used for short-range nonbonded interactions. The receptors, lipids,
and water and ions were defined as separate coupling groups to allow
lateral diffusion. Prior to unbiased equilibration and production
MD runs, energy minimizations were conducted using the steepest descent
algorithm for 1000 steps on restrained heavy atoms, followed by 1000
additional steps on restrained Cα atoms. Equilibrations of receptors
consisted of relaxations of 3 ns with decreasing positional restraints
first on all the heavy atoms and crystal water and then on the Cα
atoms only. Restraints were all removed during production runs of
1 μs and ten runs of 100 ns for each system, which used randomized
atomic velocities according to the Maxwell distribution at 300 K.

Summary of the MD Simulations Conducted
on δ-OR, μ-OR, and κ-OR in the Presence of Physiological
Concentrations of Sodium Chloride (150 mM)
system	simulation
type	conformation	sodium at
D2.50 in the starting structure	ligand	runs	simulation
length (ns)	restraints	
δ-OR	MD	inactive	no	none	1	1000	no	
μ-OR	MD	inactive	no	none	1	1000	no	
κ-OR	MD	inactive	no	none	1	1000	no	
δ-OR	MD	inactive	no	none	10	100	no	
μ-OR	MD	inactive	no	none	10	100	no	
κ-OR	MD	inactive	no	none	10	100	no	
δ-OR	MD	inactive	yes	none	1	500	no	
δ-OR	MD	inactive	yes	naltrindole	1	500	no	
δ-OR	ABMD	inactive to active	yes	SNC-80	1	115	no	
δ-OR	MD	active	yes	SNC-80	3	100	no	
δ-OR	MD	active	yes	SNC-80	1	100	on TM Cα	
δ-OR	RAMD	active	yes	SNC-80	159	0.1	no	
Adiabatic
biased MD (ABMD) simulations were performed
using the PLUMED 1.3 plugin within GROMACS
to sample the conformational transition of the TM
bundle of the inactive crystal structure of δ-OR, with the selective
δ-OR agonist SNC-80 replacing naltrindole at the orthosteric
binding pocket, to the corresponding atomic coordinates of the TM
region of the active B2AR crystal structure in complex with the G-protein. After the latter (residues 30–59, 66–96,
103–136, 147–171, 198–225, 266–298, and
306–328 in PDB entry 3SN6()) had been superposed
onto the TM Cα atoms of the δ-OR inactive structure (residues
46–75, 82–112, 118–151, 162–186, 212–239,
254–286, and 298–320 in PDB entry 4N6H()), the TM Cα atoms of δ-OR with the sodium ion
at the allosteric, crystallographic site were biased toward the coordinates
of 3SN6 using
the mean-square deviation (MSD) between these TM Cα atoms as
a reaction coordinate and an increasing elastic constant (1000 kJ/Å2 for 70 ns, 2000 kJ/Å2 for 30 ns, and 10000
kJ/Å2 for 15 ns). The snapshot obtained at the end
of the 115 ns ABMD simulations (MSD value of &lt;0.7 Å) was used
as a representative activated conformation of δ-OR and was further
simulated with or without positional restraints on the TM Cα
atoms.

Random accelerated molecular dynamics (RAMD) implemented in the NAMD simulation package was used to sample possible egress pathways
of the sodium ion from the activated SNC-80-bound δ-OR conformation
produced by ABMD, with random forces acting on the sodium at the allosteric
site. GROMACS format topology/structure was converted to NAMD inputs
using CHARMM. Prior to these unrestrained
RAMD simulations, the system was minimized for 1000 steps and then
equilibrated for 20 ps with decreasing root-mean-square deviation
(RMSD) restraints on the protein heavy atoms (10 kcal mol–1 Å–1 for 10 ps and then 1 kcal mol–1 Å–1 for 10 ps). The RAMD simulations used
a 2 fs time step, and a NPT ensemble maintained at
300 K with Langevin dynamics. RAMD-specific parameters were chosen
on the basis of the results of 192 RAMD trial simulations of 50 ps
each, which used combinations of different accelerations (0.01, 0.02,
0.04, 0.08, 0.16, 0.32, 0.64, and 1.28 kcal mol–1 g–1), RAMD time steps (10, 20, 40, and 80 steps),
and threshold distances (0.001, 0.002, 0.004, 0.008, 0.016, and 0.032
Å). In the end, 159 RAMD production simulations of 100 ps each
were run with a 0.64 kcal mol–1 g–1 acceleration (no egress was observed at lower values of the acceleration
constant), time steps of 10, combinations of 0.001, 0.002, and 0.004
Å threshold distances, and 53 random numbers. Simulations were
terminated as soon as the ion moved more than 30 Å from the center
of mass of the protein.

Analysis of Simulations
The distribution
of sodium
ions during simulations was examined using the Volmap tool of VMD on each individual 1 μs simulation, or
concatenated batch simulations of 100 ns for each system conducted
to verify statistical significance. Snapshots at every 1 ns interval
were extracted and fit onto starting structures for each system, using
Cα atoms.

Distance and dihedral measurements were obtained
using either GROMACS or VMD tools. Figures
were rendered using Pymol. Distance and
angle measurements were plotted using the matplotlib package in python.

RAMD trajectories were clustered
on the basis of both the location
of the ion at the end of each simulation and the putative egress pathway
it follows. Clusters are labeled extracellular (EC), intracellular
(IC), or membrane (M) depending on the location of the ion at the
end of the simulation, with the specific egress pathway, i.e., the
region through which they exit the bundle, specified in parentheses.

Membrane and Ligand Preparation
Chinese hamster ovary
(CHO) cells stably transfected with mouse δ-OR (DOR-1), μ-OR
(MOR-1), or κ-OR (KOR-1) were used for radioligand binding experiments.
The membrane was prepared as follows: (1) rinse each plate with cold
PBS buffer twice, (2) manually remove the cells adhered to the surface
of the plates with cold PBS, (3) centrifuge at 3500 g for 5 min, (4) resuspend and homogenize the pellet for 15 s in tris
buffer (50 mM Tris, 1 mM K+EDTA, and 100 mM NaCl) with
100 μM fresh PMSF (phenylmethanesulfonyl fluoride) at 4 °C,
(5) incubate at 25 °C for 15 min, (6) centrifuge at 30000g for 45 min, (7) resuspend and homogenize the pellet for
15 s in 0.32 M sucrose at 4 °C, and (8) store in aliquots at
−80 °C. Radiolabeled [3H]DAMGO [[3H]-[d-Ala2,NMe-Phe4,Gly-ol5]enkephalin, 46 Ci/mmol (Polypeptide Group, National Institute on
Drug Abuse, Bethesda, MD)], [3H]U69,593 {(+)-(5α,7α,8β)-N-methyl-N-[7-(1-pyrrolidinyl)-1-oxaspiro[4.5]dec-8-yl]-benzeneacetamide,
43.6 Ci/mmol, PerkinElmer}, and [3H]DPDPE ([3H]-[d-Pen2,d-Pen5]rnkephalin,
46 Ci/mmol, Polypeptide Group, National Institute on Drug Abuse) were
used as subtype-selective agonists for μ-OR, κ-OR, and
δ-OR, respectively. Radiolabeled [3H]diprenorphine
[17-(cyclopropylmethyl)-4,5-epoxy-18,19-dihydro-3-hydroxy-6-methoxy-α,α-dimethyl-6,14-ethenomorphinan-7-methanol,
57.4 Ci/mmol, PerkinElmer] was used as a nonselective antagonist for
all receptor subtypes. Prior to ligand binding experiments, protein
concentrations were determined by the Lowry method as previously described, using bovine serum albumin (BSA)
as the standard.

Radioligand Binding Experiments
All binding experiments
were performed for 90 min in 25 mM Tris-HCl buffer, at pH 7.4 and
25 °C. The protein concentration was kept at approximately 150
μg/mL. For specific binding experiments, the specific binding
was assessed by subtracting nonspecific binding from total binding.
Levallorphan at 10 μM was used to measure nonspecific binding.
Six sodium concentrations were examined: 5, 10, 25, 50, 100, and 150
nM. Each assay was repeated three times. For saturation experiments,
six radioligand concentrations were examined for κ-OR and δ-OR:
0.125, 0.25, 0.5, 1, 2, and 4 nM. For μ-OR, 8 nM was also examined.
Assays without sodium were repeated four times, and assays in the
presence of 100 mM sodium were repeated three times. After incubation,
the membranes were filtered through glass fiber filters and washed
three times with ice-cold 5 mM Tris-HCl buffer on a Brandel cell harvester.
Filters were then transferred into vials containing 3 mL of Liquiscent
(National Diagnostics). The radioactivity in vials was determined
using scintillation spectroscopy in a Packard TRI-CARB 2900TR counter. Kd and Bmax were
calculated using nonlinear regression analysis (GraphPad Prism). Error
bars were calculated as the standard error of the mean (SEM) of independent
assays.

Results
The results of all the all-atom
MD simulations we conducted on
ligand-free crystallographic states of δ-OR, μ-OR, and
κ-OR in the presence of physiological concentrations of sodium,
as well as ligand-free or antagonist-bound, inactive δ-OR with
sodium ion at the crystallographic site, and on an agonist-bound,
activated model of δ-OR, are presented below in the various
subsections. A summary of all simulations presented herein is provided
in Table .

Preferred Receptor Locations Visited by Sodium
By revealing
significant differences in the number and location of negatively charged
residues, especially in the extracellular loop (EL) region, visual
inspection of the crystal structures of δ-OR, μ-OR, and κ-OR provided the rationale for studying whether
sodium may follow different binding pathways in these receptors. Thus,
we conducted all-atom, microsecond-scale MD simulations of ligand-free
δ-OR, μ-OR, and κ-OR crystallographic structures
(PDB entries 4N6H,4DKL, and 4DJH, respectively) embedded in a hydrated POPC/10% cholesterol
bilayer, and in the presence of physiological concentrations of sodium.
Volumetric maps of sodium ions calculated using these microsecond
trajectories and plotted onto representative structures from simulations
of δ-OR, μ-OR, and κ-OR (panels A–C of Figure , respectively) show a common, highest sodium density
at the D2.50 crystallographic sodium site. The representative conformations
shown in Figure  correspond to the structures
with the lowest average heavy atom RMSD from all other structures
in the most populated cluster of conformations sampled during dynamics.
Unlike μ-OR simulations, microsecond-scale simulations of the
δ-OR and κ-OR revealed additional significant densities
of the ion near the extracellular side. Specifically, these extra
densities were seen at the nonconserved, negatively charged E6.58
(a W in δ-OR and a K in μ-OR) and EL2 D204 residues in
κ-OR, as well as at the EL3 D293 and D288 residues in δ-OR.
Notably, no significant sodium density was detected at the cytoplasmic
side in any of the simulated ORs.

Vertical views of the representative structures
from the microsecond
simulations of (A) δ-OR (PDB entry 4N6H), (B) μ-OR (PDB entry 4DKL), and (C) κ-OR
(PDB entry 4DJH) in cartoon representation with negatively charged (Asp and Glu)
residues shown as sticks. Generic numbering for TM Asp/Glu residues
and loop labels for other Asp/Glu residues are provided in parentheses.
Sodium occupancy during the microsecond simulations at 0.12 and 0.24
particle/Å3 contour levels is shown in transparent
and solid blue, respectively.

Sodium Binding Pathways
Sodium binding pathways from
the bulk to the interior of the receptor were monitored during the
microsecond simulations of δ-OR, μ-OR, and κ-OR
and are illustrated in Figure A–C by
connecting sodium positions at 1 ns intervals with lines colored by
increasing simulation time using a blue–green–red color
scale. It is indeed evident from this figure that at least one sodium
ion accesses the receptor from the extracellular milieu, passes through
the orthosteric binding pocket, establishing a direct interaction
(distances of ≤2.5 Å) with residue D3.32 at the very beginning
of the simulation (Figure A–C), and
then accesses more or less rapidly [within the first ∼100 ns
of simulation for δ-OR, ∼250 ns for μ-OR, and ∼20
ns for κ-OR (see Figure A–C)]
the allosteric sodium site, forming a direct interaction with D2.50.

Sodium
entry pathways for (A) δ-OR, (B) μ-OR, and (C)
κ-OR microsecond simulations. The pathways are composed by connecting
sodium positions at 1 ns intervals, colored by simulation time (blue
to green to red). They are plotted on representative receptor simulation
structures, i.e., the structures with the lowest average heavy atom
RMSD from all other structures in the most populated cluster of conformations
sampled during dynamics, which are shown in cartoon representation
with negatively charged residues shown as sticks. Generic numbering
for TM Asp/Glu residues and loop naming for non-TM Asp/Glu residues
are included in parentheses.

Sodium coordination at the orthosteric ligand and allosteric sodium
binding sites. Sodium minimum distance to side chain oxygens of D3.32
(at the orthosteric ligand site, gray) or D2.50 (at the allosteric
sodium site, black) for (A) δ-OR, (B) μ-OR, and (C) κ-OR
microsecond simulations. Representative conformational states are
indicated as states 1 (extracted at 40, 145, and 6 ns for δ-OR,
μ-OR, and κ-OR, respectively) and 2 (extracted at 768,
974, and 900 ns for δ-OR, μ-OR, and κ-OR, respectively),
below the distance plots. Protein backbones from simulations are colored
silver. Ion-interacting residues, bound sodium, and water from the
simulation are shown as silver sticks, a blue sphere, and red spheres,
respectively. In comparison, the sodium atom from the δ-OR crystal
(PDB entry 4N6H) is shown as a cyan sphere, while protein and water molecules from
the crystal are colored gray. Ion-interacting residues are labeled
with generic numbering. Sodium coordination is indicated by black
dashed lines.

To verify the statistical
significance of our observation, i.e.,
that sodium ions access the interior of the receptor from the extracellular
side and first stop at the D3.32 orthosteric ligand binding site before
proceeding to the allosteric sodium site, we conducted ten 100 ns
runs for each OR system and monitored the minimal distance of any
sodium ion from both D3.32 and D2.50. As shown in Figure S1 of the , in general, ions access
D3.32 before proceeding to D2.50. Notably, they do so quite rapidly
in the κ-OR, compared to δ-OR and μ-OR. Moreover,
unlike the δ-OR and μ-OR simulations, these relatively
short κ-OR simulations show a few instances of simultaneous
sodium occupancy of D3.32 and D2.50.

Sodium Coordination at
the Orthosteric Ligand and Allosteric
Sodium Binding Sites
The illustrations in Figure A–C show the coordination that sodium acquires
at the orthosteric ligand or allosteric sodium binding sites during
the δ-OR, μ-OR, and κ-OR simulations. Specifically,
these figures depict representative conformational states, herein
termed 1 and 2, extracted at 40 ns, 145 ns, and 6 ns or 768 ns, 974
ns, and 900 ns to show sodium coordination at the orthosteric ligand
or allosteric sodium binding sites of δ-OR, μ-OR, and
κ-OR, respectively. For comparison, these structures are overlapped
onto the ultra-high-resolution crystal structure of δ-OR corresponding
to PDB entry 4N6H. As shown in the illustrations of state 1 for all three simulated
receptors, no receptor residue other than D3.32 coordinates sodium
ions at the orthosteric ligand binding pocket. Indeed, the first coordination
shell is made of a bidentate interaction of D3.32 and interactions
with four different water molecules. As the simulations evolve, the
sodium at D3.32 moves toward the allosteric sodium binding site where
it engages in coordination with D2.50. During the course of the microsecond
simulations, the ion is expected to acquire the coordination seen
in the crystal structure of PDB entry 4N6H, which involves residues D2.50, S3.39,
and N3.35 and two water molecules. Indeed, this occurs for all the
OR systems, as shown by the state 2 illustrations in Figure A–C, as well as the distance plots in Figure
S2 of the . However,
while stable interactions between the ion and residues D2.50, S3.39,
and N3.35 are established by the end of the μ-OR and κ-OR
simulations, the interactions with S3.39 and N3.35 keep fluctuating
during the microsecond simulations of δ-OR, with the exact crystal-like
coordination of the ion at the allosteric sodium site last seen at
around 780 ns (Figure A and Figure S2A of
the ). Figure S3
of the  shows the
residues in the first and second coordination shells of the sodium
ion at the allosteric sodium site for each opioid receptor subtype.
While D2.50 and S3.39 are still coordinating the ion at the end of
the δ-OR microsecond simulation, the N3.35 side chain rotates
away [χ2 changes from ∼50° to −25°
(see Figure S2A of the )] to interact with L2.52 and A2.53. This conformational behavior
of N3.35 is also noticed in the μ-OR simulation (see the χ2 plot in Figure S2B of the ) but is not observed in the microsecond κ-OR
simulations (see the χ2 plot in Figure S2C of the ). Notably, the δ-OR
A2.53 residue with which N3.35 engages in interaction is the same
as in μ-OR but is substituted with V2.53 in κ-OR.

Sodium
Coordination in Antagonist-Bound δ-OR Simulations
To
test the hypothesis that the sodium coordination seen in the
ultra-high-resolution crystal structure of δ-OR is stably maintained
only in the presence of the ligand bound at the orthosteric pocket,
we conducted additional δ-OR simulations with sodium bound at
D2.50, with or without the antagonist naltrindole. The simulations,
500 ns each, show significant differences in the dynamic behavior
of the N3.35 and S3.39 side chains, and consequently the coordination
of the sodium ion, compared to that observed in the ligand-free δ-OR
simulations. In the ligand-free δ-OR simulations with sodium
bound at D2.50 as seen in the ultra-high-resolution crystal structure,
sodium coordination by N3.35 is lost almost immediately (Figure S4A
of the ) as the residue
χ2 dihedral changes from 50° to −25°. In contrast,
in the presence of the antagonist naltrindole, sodium coordination
remains the same as that seen in the ultra-high-resolution crystal
structure for the entire duration of the simulation (Figure S4B of
the ). Notably, the
H-bonding network that was found in the ultra-high-resolution crystal
structure of δ-OR to link naltrindole to sodium is preserved
in these simulations (Figure S5 of the ). Part of this network is the charge interaction
between the naltrindole amine and D3.32, which is also involved in
stabilizing N3.35 through water-mediated hydrogen bonding.

As
expected, in the simulations of δ-OR with sodium at the allosteric
D2.50 site with or without naltrindole at the orthosteric site, the
sodium second-coordination shell residue W6.48, which is also called
the “toggle switch” in GPCR activation, because of its side chain dihedral change hypothesized earlier to
occur upon activation, remains close to the conformation seen in the
inactive crystal structure. The values of the W6.48 χ2 angle monitored during the ligand-free or antagonist-bound simulations,
as well as the ligand-free microsecond simulations of δ-OR,
μ-OR, and κ-OR, are reported in Figure S6 of the . As shown in this figure,
the W6.48 χ2 angle is rather stable throughout all
simulations, in spite of some fluctuations recorded in the κ-OR
system.

Whereabouts of Sodium in a Fully Activated Receptor Conformation
The allosteric sodium pocket has been observed to collapse in a
fully activated conformation of the receptor. We sampled the conformational transition from the δ-OR inactive
crystal structure, in the presence of sodium at the allosteric site
and the δ-OR-selective agonist SNC-80 at the orthosteric ligand
binding site, to an active-like form using the G-protein-bound active
crystal structure of B2AR as a target structure with ABMD (see  for details). At the end of
the ABMD simulation, the MSD of the TM Cα atoms reached a value
of &lt;0.7 Å2 with respect to the target structure,
yet the sodium ion did not leave the allosteric pocket but rather
kept its coordination with residues D2.50, N3.35, and S3.39. Notably,
a bidentate coordination by D2.50 was observed at the end of ABMD
simulation, resulting in the six coordination of the ion (Figure S7A
of the ) compared
to the five coordination seen in the δ-OR ultra-high-resolution
crystal structure (Figure S5 of the ). The hydrogen bond network around sodium is otherwise
similar to that observed in the δ-OR crystal structure and ligand-free
simulations (Figure S5 of the ). The structure obtained at the end of the ABMD simulation was then
subjected to 100 ns standard MD simulations with the TM Cα atoms
restrained to verify that the side chains would not rearrange when
no biasing forces are applied. Indeed, no significant changes were
recorded after 100 ns, as shown in Figure S7B of the . Three additional unrestrained standard
MD simulations of 100 ns each were conducted starting from the structure
obtained at the end of the ABMD simulation to verify possible changes
in the size of the allosteric sodium pocket assessed by monitoring
the Cα distance between residues I3.40 and N7.45. This distance
is 12.0 Å in the ultra-high-resolution inactive crystal structure
of δ-OR but was reduced to 10.2 Å by the end of the ABMD
simulation. During the three independent MD simulations without any
restraint, the I3.40–N7.45 distance gradually returned to around
12 Å in two of the three runs (Figure S8 of the ).

To explore the possible egress
of the ion from the allosteric sodium site at much longer time scales,
we used random accelerated molecular dynamics simulations (RAMD) (see  for details). From clustering
of the RAMD trajectories (see Table S1 of the  for details), three major egress paths
emerged (shown in Figure ). This figure shows
that sodium could exit the receptor TM bundle through either the extracellular
side or the intracellular side. Sodium interacted with N3.35 and D3.32
side chains along one of the most favorable pathways through the extracellular
side (EC [TM3, EL2], 16% of total egress trajectories). When the sodium
ion engaged in interaction with D3.32, the interaction of the ligand
amine with D3.32 momentarily broke to promptly re-form soon after
the ion left the site. The alternative most favorable pathway through
the extracellular side (EC [TM2, EL2], 14% of total egress trajectories)
differs from EC [TM3, EL2] in that the ion is coordinated by N3.35
and S7.46 after it leaves crystal coordination and never interacts
with D3.32. On the other hand, the major sodium egress pathway through
the intracellular side (IC [TM2, TM7], 15% of total egress trajectories)
is characterized by an interaction of sodium with D7.57 at the cytoplasmic
end of TM7. Prior to engaging in this interaction, the ion is mostly
coordinated by backbone oxygen atoms.

Representative main ion egress pathways
derived from RAMD simulations.
Pathways are shown as colored tubes, while charged δ-OR side
chains that interact with the ion along the pathways are shown as
sticks. The bound agonist SNC-80 is shown in ball-and-stick representation.

Radioligand Binding Experiments
Confirm a Similar Effect of
Sodium on Ligand Binding at All Major ORs
Using stable cell
lines expressing KOR-1, DOR-1, and MOR-1, we examined the effects
of sodium ions on agonist binding using [3H]U69,593, [3H]DPDPE, and [3H]DAMGO, respectively, and [3H]diprenorphine to measure antagonist binding (Figure S9 of
the ). Binding of
the radioligand to the cloned receptors was greatly influenced by
sodium ions. Binding of the agonist to all three receptors was sensitive
to sodium ions, with a loss of 50% of specific binding seen at approximately
25 mM NaCl. Of the three, binding of [3H]U69,593 to the
κ-OR was slightly more sensitive. Sodium ions had an opposite
effect on the binding of the antagonist [3H]diprenorphine.
There was a modest increase in the level of binding to the κ-OR
and the δ-OR with increasing sodium concentrations. However,
the level of binding to the μ-OR was increased over 40%.

Saturation studies with [3H]DAMGO were best fit with a
two-site model (Table S2 of the ). When the experiments were performed in the presence of sodium
ions at 100 mM, the high-affinity Bmax was almost 95% lower with little effect on the Bmax of the lower-affinity site, similar to results previously
reported in brain membranes. These observations
are consistent with the ability of sodium ions to shift the conformation
of the receptor from a high-affinity agonist state to a low-affinity
agonist state. Analysis of the saturation results for the κ-OR
and δ-OR also showed decreases in binding levels. Unlike those
of the μ-OR, these data were best fit with a single site. Our
inability to detect a lower-affinity binding site may reflect the
technical difficulties involved upon examination of binding at the
high radioligand concentrations needed to define the low-affinity
binding site.

Discussion
Allosteric effects of
sodium on GPCR agonist binding and activation
have been known for years but were recently revived by new insights
provided by ultra-high-resolution (1.8–2.2 Å) crystallographic
structures of the A2AR (PDB entry 4EIY()), the B1AR
(PDB entry 4BVN()), the PAR1 (PDB entry 3VW7()), and the δ-OR (PDB entry 4N6H()), which
have revealed important details of binding of sodium to GPCRs (recently
reviewed in ref ()). Not only have these structures shown that the ion is coordinated
by chemically and conformationally conserved residues such as D2.50
and S3.39 in the middle of the 7TM bundle, but they have also revealed
an extended network of conserved water molecules forming hydrogen
bonds with a number of highly conserved receptor residues across family
A GPCRs, including L2.46, A2.49, W6.48, N7.45, and N7.49.

The most striking differences in the way
the ion binds were observed
in the PAR1 and δ-OR ultra-high-resolution crystal structures, because
of the involvement of normally nonconserved residues (e.g., D7.49
in PAR1 and N3.35 in δ-OR) in the first coordination shell of
the ion. Notably, the nitrogen atom of the N3.35 side chain linked
the sodium allosteric site to the orthosteric ligand binding site
in the δ-OR crystal structure through a water-mediated hydrogen
bond with the main chain carbonyl atom of D3.32, which is the residue
forming a salt bridge with the ligand nitrogen group. Mutating N3.35
to alanine or valine abrogated or reduced the allosteric effect of
sodium on ligand binding, in addition to abolishing the G-protein
signaling while producing high levels of constitutive activity at
the noncanonical β-arrestin-mediated signaling pathway. Similarly, mutating D2.50, N7.45, and N7.49
to alanine transformed classical δ-OR antagonists into potent
β-arrestin-biased agonists, highlighting
a role for sodium-coordinating residues as efficacy switches between
G-protein- and β-arrestin-mediated signaling pathways within
δ-OR.

Similar to the results of simulations reported in
the literature,, the simulations presented here,
in which sodium ions diffuse freely
from the bulk to the interior of the δ-OR, μ-OR, or κ-OR
bundles, show that sodium always enters the receptor from the extracellular
milieu and reaches the allosteric site seen crystallographically quite
rapidly (nanosecond time scale), following similar pathways. Specifically,
before coordinating D2.50, S3.39, N7.35, and two water molecules at
its allosteric crystallographic site, sodium stops at the orthosteric
site where it is found to coordinate D3.32. However, the ion density
at D3.32 is not found to be as pronounced as at nonconserved E6.58
and EL2 D204 residues in κ-OR, or EL3 D293 and D288 residues
in δ-OR. These molecular determinants appear to be responsible
for the different tendency of a second ion to enter the receptor from
the extracellular side. In the absence of these molecular determinants,
sodium appears to take longer to access the μ-OR orthosteric
site, and we speculate that the possible reduced level of competition
between sodium and the ligand for this site may be responsible for
the differential increased antagonist binding affinity of μ-OR
observed by the specific binding experiments conducted in transfected
cells.

On the other hand, specific ligand binding experiments
using subtype-selective
agonists in cells transfected with the individual ORs showed that,
unlike antagonist binding, binding of agonists to either receptor
is consistently affected by sodium. Decreases in agonist affinity
and in the maximal number of binding sites were recorded for all three
receptor subtypes, although a slightly larger decrease in affinity
was measured for κ-OR than for μ-OR and δ-OR. We
sought a mechanistic explanation for the decrease in agonist affinity
and the maximal number of binding sites by adding to the analysis
of the ligand-free simulations that of additional biased or unbiased
MD simulations of antagonist-bound and agonist-bound, activated receptors
conducted using the δ-OR ultra-high-resolution crystal structure
as a model system. A few differences in the dynamics of the three
OR systems were noted in our simulations, most notably the higher
flexibility of the S3.39 and N3.35 side chains of δ-OR compared
to that of the side chains of μ-OR and κ-OR during the
simulated time scales. The flexibility of these two residues, as well
as that of the so-called rotamer toggle switch (W6.48), which is a
sodium second-coordination shell residue, is impaired in the presence
of an antagonist, implying that an intact network linking the allosteric
sodium binding site to the orthosteric ligand binding site is what
stabilizes the first and second coordination shells of the ion and
perhaps prevents the large-scale movement of TM6 away from TM3 leading
to activation.

Finally, in light of recent suggestions that
the collapse of the
allosteric sodium site accompanying activation (reviewed in ref ()) may be triggering the
departure of the ion from the molecule, we investigated the whereabouts
of the ion following the transition from an inactive to active conformation
of the receptor. In contrast to previous suggestions, that the ion leaves the allosteric binding pocket upon activation
and does so through the cytoplasmic side, we find that undergoing
a transition from an inactive to an active conformation in the presence
of sodium does not produce the spontaneous release of the ion from
the bundle, at least not on the simulated time scales. Reasoning that
the ion may take much longer to leave the receptor, we forced its
departure from the bundle with random accelerated MD and studied its
possible egress pathways. Notably, if the ion ever had to leave the
allosteric binding site in the middle of the bundle, it would do so
through either the extracellular side or the intracellular side. We
do not know what egress pathway is preferable on the basis of the
results of these simulations, but the latter suggests residues along
the pathways (e.g., N3.35, D3.32, S7.46, and D7.57) that may play
a role in the egress of the ion from the bundle, and hence be worthy
of experimental testing. Notably, this group does not include residue
D3.49 of the so-called DRY motif, which had been hypothesized to participate
in the egress of the ion from the bundle.

Supporting Information Available
Tables
S1 and S2 and Figures
S1–S9 provide additional details concerning the results obtained
herein. This material is available free of charge via the Internet
at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bi5006915_si_001.pdf

The authors declare
no
competing financial interest.

Abbreviations
A2ARadenosine A2A receptor

ABMDadiabatic biased molecular
dynamics

B1ARβ1-adrenergic
receptor

B2ARβ2-adrenergic
receptor

BSAbovine
serum albumin

DAMGO[d-Ala2,NMe-Phe4,Gly-ol5]enkephalin

diprenorphine17-(cyclopropylmethyl)-4,5-epoxy-18,19-dihydro-3-hydroxy-6-methoxy-α,α-dimethyl-6,14-ethenomorphinan-7-methanol

DPDPE[d-Pen2,d-Pen5]enkephalin

ECextracellular

ELextracellular loop

GPCRG-protein-coupled receptor

ICintracellular

ILintracellular loop

Mmembrane

MDmolecular dynamics

MSDmean-square deviation

ORopioid receptor

δ-ORδ-opioid
receptor

μ-ORμ-opioid receptor

κ-ORκ-opioid receptor

PAR1protease-activated receptor 1

PDBProtein Data Bank

POPC1-palmitoyl-2-oleoyl-sn-glycero-3-phosphocholine

RAMDrandom accelerated molecular dynamics

RMSDroot-mean-square deviation

SEMstandard error of the
mean

SNC-80(+)-4-{(αR)-α-[(2S,5R)-4-allyl-2,5-dimethyl-1-piperazinyl]-3-methoxybenzyl}-N,N-diethylbenzamide

TMtransmembrane

U69,593(+)-(5α,7α,8β)-N-methyl-N-[7-(1-pyrrolidinyl)-1-oxaspiro[4.5]dec-8-yl]benzeneacetamide.

