Nitroaromatic
compounds, of
which many are mutagens and human carcinogens, are common environmental
pollutants. In 1997, 3-nitrobenzanthrone
(3-NBA), an aromatic nitroketone, was first reported to be present
in diesel exhaust and airborne particulates. 3-NBA is one of the most potent mutagens in the Ames Salmonella
typhimurium assay., It is also highly mutagenic
in mammalian cells. 3-NBA’s genotoxicity in mammalian cells
was shown by induction of micronuclei in mouse peripheral blood reticulocytes,
human B-lymphoblastoid cells, and human hepatoma cell lines.− 3-NBA induces lung tumors in experimental animals and is a suspected
human carcinogen. The carcinogenicity
of 3-NBA is as potent as that of the powerful carcinogen 1,6-dinitropyrene
in F344 rats.

Like many other nitropolycyclic
aromatic hydrocarbons, 3-NBA is
metabolically activated by cellular nitro reduction to form an N-hydroxy arylamine, which can either form a nitrenium ion
or undergo metabolic esterification to generate highly electrophilic
derivatives that form DNA adducts.,− The primary stable metabolite of 3-NBA in mammalian cells is 3-aminobenzanthrone,
which was detected in workers occupationally exposed to diesel exhaust. Three major DNA adducts of 3-NBA detected in
cells and tissues of exposed animals are N-(2′-deoxyguanosin-8-yl)-3-aminobenzanthrone
(C8-dG-ABA), 2-(2′-deoxyguanosin-N2-yl)-3-aminobenzanthrone (N2-dG-ABA),
and 2-(2′-deoxyadenosin-N6-yl)-3-aminobenzanthrone
(N6-dA-ABA) (Scheme ). Both the high initial level of the
DNA adducts and their persistence in target organs such as lung suggest
an association of these lesions with the carcinogenic effect of 3-NBA., Most mutations caused by 3-NBA in experimental animals occur in
guanine residues, inducing primarily GC → TA transversions. Replication of a plasmid treated with N-acetoxy-3-aminobenzanthrone, a major reactive metabolite
of 3-NBA, provided predominantly G → T base substitutions followed
by G → A and A → G mutations.

Chemical Structures of 3-NBA and Its Major DNA Adducts
Bulky DNA adducts such as those
formed by 3-NBA are known to be
strong blocks of replicative DNA polymerases (pols)., When DNA replication stalls, a group of specialized DNA pols takes
over replication across these lesions, and this process is termed
translesion synthesis (TLS).− The TLS pols are structurally better equipped to bypass the DNA
lesions, but they replicate undamaged DNA with a rate of errors higher
than that of replicative pols. The discovery of the TLS pols has triggered
intense research in the past two decades to improve our understanding
of the mechanism of both spontaneous and lesion-induced mutagenesis
as well as their link to the etiology of cancer., Because DNA lesions have a wide variety of structures and shapes,
there is no unified mechanism of TLS; nevertheless, certain patterns
of TLS have been observed for specific DNA lesions. In eukaryotic cells, efficient lesion bypass is achieved
cooperatively by two sequential steps.− In the first step, one of the
TLS pols inserts a nucleotide opposite the DNA lesion. In the subsequent
step, the insertion pol is replaced by another TLS pol to conduct
primer extension past the lesion site. Certain accessory proteins
are also critical for TLS.− However, many questions, including how these TLS pols are selected
and recruited for a particular lesion and how the switch among different
pols is coordinated, remain unanswered at present. In mammalian cells,
TLS is conducted by pol η, pol κ, pol ι, and Rev1
of the Y-family pols and pol ζ of the B-family enzymes.,, Pol η is unique in its
ability to promote proficient and error-free bypass of UV-induced
cyclobutane pyrimidine dimers, although it incorporates wrong nucleotides
at a high rate opposite several other lesions., Pol η also slowly bypasses the C8-dG-2-aminofluorene and its
acetylated analogue predominantly in an error-free manner. It was suggested that the TLS efficiency of
pol η depends on the size of the bulky adduct. In this proposed
model, TLS is accomplished without rotation of the lesion into the anti conformation. In a similar
vein, pol κ bypasses the (+)-trans-BPDE-N2-dG adduct and other N2-dG adducts with efficiency and accuracy reasonably high compared
to those of other TLS pols.− Pol κ and pol ζ together promote error-free
replication through oxidative DNA damage, cis-thymine
glycol. For several other lesions, however,
pol κ was suggested to catalyze the extension step., In contrast to pol η and pol κ, which select the incoming
dNTP based on Watson–Crick base pairs, pol ι utilizes
Hoogsteen base pairs with the template base,, yet in the only reported crystal structure of a bulky C8-dG adduct
of 1-nitropyrene complexed with pol ι at the insertion stage,
the adduct was determined to be in its active site in two distinct
conformations. dCTP forms a Watson–Crick
base pair with the adducted guanine and excludes the pyrene ring from
the helical DNA, which inhibits replication beyond the lesion. In
contrast, the mismatched dATP stacks above the pyrene ring intercalated
in the helix, so that the pyrene mimics a base pair in the active
site and facilitates adenine misincorporation by pol ι.

The roles of various TLS polymerases in bypassing the 3-NBA-DNA
adducts have not yet been studied. A goal of this work is to explore
the functions of various TLS pols in bypassing the C8-dG-ABA adduct
in both an error-free and an error-prone manner. We present here the
results of our investigation of the molecular mechanism of mutagenesis
by C8-dG-ABA in human embryonic kidney 293T (HEK293T) cells, in which
the siRNA knockdown approach was employed to identify the TLS pols
and to determine their roles in replication across this adduct.

Materials
and Methods
Materials
All starting materials, reagents, and solvents
were of commercial grade and used as such unless otherwise specified.
[γ-32P]ATP was from Du Pont New England Nuclear (Boston,
MA). EcoRV restriction endonuclease, T4 DNA ligase,
T4 polynucleotide kinase, uracil DNA glycosylase, and exonuclease
III were obtained from New England Bioloabs (Beverly, MA). Plasmid
pMS2 was a gift from M. Moriya (Stony Brook University, The State
University of New York, Stony Brook, NY). HEK293T/17 and COS-7 cells
were purchased from the American Type Culture Collection (Manassas,
VA).

siRNAs
Synthetic siRNA duplexes against PolH (SI02663619),
PolK (SI04930884), PolI (SI03033310), Rev1 (SI00115311), and AllStars
Negative control siRNA (1027280) were purchased from Qiagen (Valencia,
CA), whereas the same for Rev3 was purchased from Integrated DNA Technologies
(Coralville, IA). Sequences of all the siRNAs are listed in Table
S1 of the .

Methods
Construction
and Characterization of a pMS2 Vector Containing
a Single C8-dG-ABA
We constructed a single adduct-modified
single-stranded vector, pMS2, with neomycin and ampicillin resistance
genes, as follows. The pMS2 DNA (58 pmol,
100 μg) was digested with an excess of EcoRV
(300 pmol, 4.84 μg) for 1 h at 37 °C and then at room temperature
overnight. A 58-mer scaffold oligonucleotide was annealed overnight
at 9 °C to form the gapped DNA template. The 12-mer containing
C8-dG-ABA, 5′-GTGCG*TGTTTGT-3′,
was synthesized as described previously. The adducted 12-mer was purified by reverse-phase high-performance
liquid chromatography followed by denaturing polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis
and was analyzed by mass spectrometry (Figures S1 and S2 of the ). The control and C8-dG-ABA-containing
oligonucleotides were phosphorylated with T4 polynucleotide kinase,
hybridized to the gapped pMS2 DNA, and ligated overnight at 16 °C.
Unligated oligonucleotides were removed by being passed through a
Centricon-100 apparatus, and the DNA was precipitated with ethanol.
The scaffold oligonucleotide was digested by treatment with uracil
DNA glycosylase and exonuclease III; the proteins were extracted with
phenol and chloroform, and the DNA construct was precipitated with
ethanol. The final construct was dissolved in 1 mM Tris-HCl and 0.1
mM EDTA (pH 8), and a portion was subjected to electrophoresis on
a 1% agarose gel to assess the amount of circular DNA, which established
that at least 40% ligation of the 12-mers occurred on both sides of
the gap.

Replication and Analysis in Human Embryonic
Kidney (HEK293T)
Cells
The HEK293T/17 cell line is a derivative of the 293T
cell line (293tsA1609neo). It is a highly
transfectable derivative of the 293 cell line into which the temperature
sensitive gene for simian virus 40 (SV40) T antigen was inserted.
These cells constitutively express the SV40 large T antigen. The 293T/17
cells were maintained in Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s
medium supplemented with 4 mM l-glutamine and adjusted to
contain 1.5 g/L sodium bicarbonate, 4.5 g/L glucose, and 10% fetal
bovine serum. The cells were grown to ∼90% confluency and transfected
with 50 ng of each construct using 6 μL of Lipofectamine cationic
lipid reagent (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA). Following transfection with
modified or unmodified pMS2, the cells were allowed to grow at 37
°C in 5% CO2 for 2 days, and then the plasmid DNA
was collected and purified by the method of Hirt. It was then used to transform Escherichia coli DH10B, and transformants were analyzed by oligonucleotide hybridization.
Oligonucleotide probes containing the complementary 16-mer sequence
were used to analyze progeny plasmids. The 14-mer left and 15-mer
right probes were used to select plasmids containing the correct insert,
and transformants that did not hybridize with both the left and right
probes were omitted. Any transformant that hybridized with the left
and right probes but failed to hybridize with the 16-mer wild-type
probe was subjected to DNA sequence analysis.

Replication
and Analysis in Simian Kidney Cells
COS-7
cells were grown in Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s medium
supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum. The cells were seeded at
a density of 5 × 105 cells per 60 mm plate. Following
overnight incubation, the cells were transfected with 50 ng of single-stranded
DNA by electroporation or using 6 μL of Lipofectamine cationic
lipid reagent (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA). The culture was incubated
for 2 days, and the progeny plasmid was recovered by the method of
Hirt. Subsequent transformation in E. coli DH10B and analysis were performed in a manner similar
to that used with the plasmid from HEK293T cells.

TLS Assay
in Human Cells
The lesion-containing or control
pMS2 construct was mixed with equal amount of a single-stranded pMS2
DNA containing the same DNA sequence as the construct except it contained
a C in place of G two nucleotides 5′ to the lesion site (i.e.,
5′-GTCCGTGTTTGT-3′).
The mixed DNA was used to transfect HEK293T cells and processed as
described above. Oligonucleotide probes for the complementary sequences
for both the wild type and the mutant plasmid were used to analyze
the progeny. The mutant DNA was used as an internal control, and it
gave the same number of progeny as the control construct. Typically,
three independent experiments were performed to determine the extent
of TLS with each pol knockdown.

Mutational Analyses of
TLS Products from Human Cells with Pol
Knockdowns
Prior to transfection of the control and C8-dG-ABA-containing
vectors, synthetic siRNA duplexes were transfected into HEK293T cells
using Lipofectamine. HEK293T cells were plated in six-well plates
at 50% confluence. After being incubated for 24 h, they were transfected
with 100 pmol of the siRNA duplex mixed with Lipofectamine, diluted
in Opti-MEM (Gibco), per well. One day before the transfection of
the plasmid, cells were seeded in 24-well plates at 70% confluence.
Cells were then cotransfected with another aliquot of siRNA and either
the control plasmid or the lesion-containing plasmid at a ratio of
2:1. After being incubated for 24 h, progeny plasmids were isolated
as described above.

Reverse Transcription Polymerase Chain Reaction
(RT-PCR) Analysis
Total RNA was extracted from the cells
72 h after the first transfection
of siRNA duplexes, using the All Prep DNA/RNA/Protein Kit (Qiagen).
One hundred nanograms of total RNA was used for RT-PCR analysis, performed
with the One Step RT-PCR Kit (Qiagen) according to the manufacturer’s
instructions. Primer sequences used for RT-PCR are listed in Table
S2 of the . Using
primers specific to TLS DNA polymerases and control gene GAPDH, the
siRNA knockdown efficiency was determined as previously described. Reverse transcription and the PCR initial activation
step were performed for 30 min at 50 °C and 15 min at 95 °C,
respectively. For PolH, PolK, PolI, and Rev1, amplification was conducted
at 94 °C for 30 s, 55 °C for 45 s, and 72 °C for 60
s for 26 cycles and Rev3 was amplified for 32 cycles. Amplification
of GAPDH was conducted at 94 °C for 30 s, 55 °C for 45 s,
and 72 °C for 45 s for 24 cycles. RT-PCR products were analyzed
on a 2% agarose gel run at 100 V for 3 h in 1× TBE buffer.

Western Blotting
Cells were washed with cold phosphate-buffered
saline and collected into a chilled Eppendorf tube. They were lysed
in ice-cold RIPA buffer (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO) containing
protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche, Indianapolis, IN) and incubated
for 1 h on ice, and the mixture was centrifuged at 10000 rpm for 15
min at 4 °C. The supernatant was used for the determination of
the protein concentration by the Bradford assay and for Western blotting.
The protein extracts (40 μg of each whole cell lysate) were
boiled in loading sample buffer [250 mM Tris (pH 6.8), 5% sodium dodecyl
sulfate, 30% glycerol, 20% β-mercaptoethanol, and bromophenol
blue]. Proteins were separated on either 5 or 7% sodium dodecyl sulfate–polyacrylamide
gel electrophoresis gels by electrophoresis for 2 h and transferred
onto polyvinylidene fluoride membranes (Bio-Rad Laboratories, Hercules,
CA). The membranes were blocked with 5% milk and then incubated with
antibodies that specifically recognize human PolH (Pierce, Rockford,
IL), PolK, PolI, Rev3, or Rev1 (Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Santa Cruz,
CA). The human β-actin antibody (Sigma-Aldrich) was used to
confirm equal gel loading. Horseradish peroxidase-conjugated goat
anti-rabbit (Sigma-Aldrich) and goat anti-mouse (Santa Cruz Biotechnology)
antibodies were used at 1:5000 dilutions. The signals were developed
using Pierce ECL Western Blotting Substrate (Thermo Scientific, Rockford,
IL), and the images were taken using a PhosphorImager.

Results
Contribution
of Pols η, κ, ι, and ζ
and Rev1 in TLS of C8-dG-ABA
To determine the roles of the
TLS polymerases in replicating across C8-dG-ABA, we employed a siRNA
knockdown approach to constrain their expression. The extent of siRNA
knockdown was determined by RT-PCR (Figure A) and by Western blotting analysis (Figure B). For each pol, the knockdown was at least 70% efficient. HEK293T
cells were first transfected with siRNA for 48 h to reduce the level
of expression of the TLS pol. Subsequently, another aliquot of siRNA
and a mixture of the lesion-containing construct and unmodified plasmid
DNA were cotransfected into these cells. The unmodified DNA contained
a C instead of G two nucleotides 5′ to the lesion site, so
that it could be used as an internal control. Cells were incubated
for 24 h to allow for the replication of the plasmids, which were
isolated and used to transform E. coli DH10B cells.
The percentages of the colonies originating from the lesion-containing
plasmid relative to the unmodified mutant plasmid, reflecting the
percentage of TLS, were determined by oligonucleotide hybridization.
In HEK293T cells, in which no pol was knocked down but the cells were
also transfected with negative control (NC) siRNA, the frequency of
TLS was 74% for the C8-dG-ABA-containing plasmid relative to 100%
progeny generated from the undamaged plasmid (Figure ). This is similar to the reported TLS efficiency of dG-N2-AAF and dG-C8-AAF adducts transfected in COS-7
cells, but for knockdown of each of the
pols, there was a reduction in the level of progeny from the C8-dG-ABA
plasmid (Figure ). Knockdown of Rev3 of pol
ζ resulted in the largest reduction (&gt;50%) in TLS efficiency
to give ∼35% progeny, whereas knockdown of pol ι provided
a reduction of ∼20% relative to the same from NC-siRNA-treated
(or untreated) cells (Figure ). Knockdown
of pol η or κ or Rev1 gave intermediate values of TLS
efficiency (Figure ). However, for the two-polymerase
knockdown experiments, involving pol ζ and Rev1, pol η
and pol κ, or pol κ and pol ζ, the TLS efficiency
of the C8-dG-ABA adduct did not change appreciably for the lack of
a second pol (Figure ). These results suggest
that each TLS pol plays a role in bypassing C8-dG-ABA; yet none of
them are essential for TLS of C8-dG-ABA. It also seems likely that
the TLS pols can compensate for the absence of one or two pols to
replicate past the lesion.

(A) Representative gel images of siRNA knockdown
of TLS pols in
HEK293T cells. RT-PCR shows the efficiency of inhibition of TLS pols:
M, DNA size marker; NC, negative control siRNA; H, pol η; K,
pol κ; I, pol ι; R3, Rev3 of pol ζ; R1, Rev1. In
each case, as a negative control of RT-PCR, the effects of siRNA on
glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase (GAPDH) mRNA expression were
also examined. (B) Western blot analysis of the siRNA knockdown of
TLS pols in HEK293T cells 48 h after siRNA transfection. After the
isolation of cellular extracts, target protein expression was analyzed
by Western blotting.

Effects of siRNA knockdowns of TLS pols on the extent of replicative
bypass of C8-dG-ABA. The percent TLS in various pol knockdowns was
measured using an internal control of an unmodified plasmid containing
a mutation two nucleotides 5′ to the lesion site. The data
represent the means and standard deviations of results from three
independent experiments (except in the knockdown experiment with pol
κ and pol ζ that was performed twice). HEK293T cells were
treated with negative control (NC) siRNA, whereas the other single-
or double-pol knockdowns are indicated above the bar. The TLS result
from each knockdown experiment was considered statistically significant
(p &lt; 0.05) compared to that from HEK293T cells
treated with NC siRNA. The p value of TLS efficiency
for each knockdown was calculated by using a two-tailed, unpaired
Student’s t test.

Mutational Specificity of C8-dG-ABA in HEK293T Cells
DNA
sequence analysis of the TLS products showed that 86% bypass
in HEK293T cells, also transfected with NC siRNA, occurred in an error-free
manner, and only 14% were mutants (Figure A). Mutations were analyzed for two independently constructed vectors,
and though mutagenesis data (provided in Table S4 of the ) were consistent in the
two transfections, combined data from the two experiments are presented
in panels A and B of Figure  for ease of analysis.
The fact that the TLS polymerases play critical roles in C8-dG-ABA
mutagenesis is clearly evident from Figure A. MF decreased with pol η, pol ι, or Rev1 knockdown,
whereas it increased with pol κ or pol ζ knockdown. In
the single-pol knockdown experiments, knockdown of pol η caused
a 39% reduction in MF, compared to a 28% reduction in MF with pol
ι knockdown (Figure A). However, the
largest decrease in MF occurred with Rev1 knockdown, when it was reduced
by 61% (Figure A). Rev1 acts as a scaffold
that interacts with the Rev1-interacting region of pol η, κ,
and ι, and our result suggests
a critical role of Rev1 in C8-dG-ABA mutagenesis. In contrast, MF
increased by 60% when pol ζ was knocked down. Because pol ζ
has been reported to be an extender after incorporation of a nucleotide
opposite the lesion, it is conceivable
that pol ζ preferentially extends the G*:C base pair following
the incorporation of the correct dCMP by other TLS pols. Interestingly,
simultaneous knockdown of pol ζ and Rev1 produced the same level
of MF as Rev1 knockdown (Figure A). A modest
15% increase in MF occurred with knockdown of pol κ, which was
also reported to act as an extender for several DNA lesions.,, Remarkably, simultaneous knockdown
of pol η and pol κ resulted in the largest (∼70%)
reduction in MF (Figure A), which suggests
that these two pols play critical functions in the mutagenic TLS of
C8-dG-ABA, but two-pol knockdown of pol κ and pol ι or
of pol η and pol ι showed no synergistic effect and exhibited
MF between the MFs from the single knockdown of each pol (Figure A). The major types of mutations by C8-dG-ABA in
HEK293T cells were G → T mutations followed by G → A
mutations, but a low level of G → C and semitargeted mutations
also occurred (Figure B). The most common
semitargeted mutation at the 5′ base adjacent to C8-dG-ABA
was the C → T mutation, but C → G and C → A mutations
also were detected in some cases (Table S4 of the  and Figure B). It is important to point out that for the control construct,
no mutations were detected within the 12-mer sequence in approximately
300 progeny that were analyzed.

Mutational frequency of C8-dG-ABA in HEK293T
cells also transfected
with NC siRNA (293T) or siRNA for single- or double-pol knockdowns
shown above the bar. The data represent the average of two independent
experiments (shown in Table S4A–K of the ). Panel A shows the total MFs (%) in
various TLS pol knockdowns, whereas panel B shows the types of mutations
in each case.

While this work was in
progress, a research article on the formation
and repair of 3-NBA-treated cells and translesion synthesis past the
3-NBA adducts was published. In this
work, in contrast to our results, the C8-dG-ABA adduct predominantly
caused G → A mutations (15.0%), followed by G → T (8.8%)
and G → C (2.0%) mutations in human skin fibroblast cell line
XP2OS(SV). We were surprised by the change
in mutational specificity between the two different human cell lines,
even though an NER-deficient cell line was used in the published work,
whereas we used NER-proficient HEK293T cells. In addition to the difference
in cell lines, the DNA sequence context beyond the immediate neighbors
of the lesion was dissimilar in this work. Furthermore, the C8-dG-ABA
adduct was located in a bubble opposite TCT in the complementary strand.
We were interested in determining the effect the bubble region might
have on replication of the C8-dG-ABA adduct and constructed a vector
in which the scaffold contained TCT opposite C8-dG-ABA. For the sake
of comparison, we also prepared a construct with a scaffold that contained
C opposite the lesion. Furthermore, we decided to use a different
mammalian cell line and chose simian kidney cell line COS-7. For the
single-stranded C8-dG-ABA-containing vector, MF was 10.9% in COS-7
cells compared to 14% in HEK293T cells (Figure A). However, also in COS-7 cells, the major types of mutations were
G → T mutations (6.8%), followed by G → A (0.7%) and
G → C (0.7%) mutations (Figure B).
Next, we replicated the bubble scaffold-containing plasmid in COS-7
cells, which gave &gt;26% progeny containing the TCT sequence, a likely
result of lesion repair in favor of the unmodified complementary DNA
sequence. When the frameshift progeny containing the TCT sequence
were excluded, the major mutation by C8-dG-ABA was the G →
T mutation (5.8%), but the G → A mutation frequency increased
5-fold to 3.7% (Figure B). However, when the
scaffold contained a C opposite C8-dG-ABA, G → A events were
less than 1% as in the single-stranded vector (Table S4L of the  and Figure B). On the basis of these experiments, we conclude that the
presence of C8-dG-ABA in the bubble region of the duplex plasmid,
in addition to the different sequence context and the type of cells,
has contributed to the array of mutations noted in ref ().

Comparison of MF of C8-dG-ABA
in HEK293T and COS-7 cells in a single-stranded
vector as well as the same in COS-7 cells when the adduct was situated
opposite a C scaffold or a bubble scaffold. The data represent the
average of two independent experiments (shown in Table S4A,L of the ). Panel A shows the total
MF, whereas panel B shows the types of mutations in each case.

Discussion
TLS Polymerases
Active in Bypassing C8-dG-ABA
Our data
suggest that each TLS polymerase examined in this work, including
pol η, pol κ, pol ι, and Rev1 of the Y-family pols
and pol ζ of the B-family, has a role in bypassing C8-dG-ABA,
as reflected by a decrease in the number of colony-forming units shown
in Figure  with knockdown of any of these
pols. However, none of them are essential for TLS. The largest decrease
in TLS efficiency occurred in cells with knockdown of pol ζ
(∼55% reduction), followed by Rev1 or pol κ (&gt;40%
reduction).
Knockdown of pol η (30% reduction in TLS) or pol ι (22%
reduction in TLS) exhibited a less pronounced effect, but simultaneous
knockdown of two pols did not provide a significant additional effect
of the second pol. These results indicate the participation of multiple
pols in TLS of C8-dG-ABA and are consistent with the current model
that suggests TLS in eukaryotic cells involves two or more pols and
multiple pol switches., From an evolutionary point of
view, the TLS data are also in agreement with the multiple strategies
employed by the TLS pols involving Watson–Crick and non-Watson–Crick
hydrogen bonding to efficiently bypass bulky lesions in DNA, such
as C8-dG-ABA, which prefers to remain in a syn conformation.,

Error-Free versus Error-Prone TLS
Analysis of the progeny
showed that replicative bypass of a C8-dG-ABA occurs in a predominantly
error-free manner, as only 14% progeny contained a mutation (Figure ). From the single-siRNA knockdown studies, we conclude
that pol ζ plays a role in error-free replication, because MF
was increased by 60% when pol ζ was knocked down (Figure A) in addition to the largest drop in TLS efficiency
(Figure ). Many studies indicate a role of
pol ζ at the extension step of lesion bypass.− It therefore seems likely that
after insertion of the correct nucleotide dCMP opposite the lesion
by one of the Y-family pols, pol ζ preferentially extends the
G*:C base pair. In Scheme A, we propose a
mechanism of error-free TLS, in which pol ζ performs the critical
extension step. While the insertion by any of the TLS pols is largely
accurate, insertion of a wrong nucleotide also occurs at a substantial
frequency. The insertion of a wrong nucleotide, notably dAMP or dTMP,
is accomplished by pol η or less frequently by pol ι.
Extension of the G*:A or G*:T base pair is most likely conducted by
pol κ, as reflected by the most pronounced reduction in MF (Figure A) when pol η and pol κ were simultaneously
knocked down. A role of Rev1 in mutagenesis is evident from the knockdown
experiments, but it does not serve as a deoxycytidyl transferase, as MF decreased dramatically upon Rev1 knockdown
(Figure A). It may act more effectively as
a template for erroneous DNA synthesis by recruiting pol η and
pol κ, rather than inserting dCMP opposite the lesion., In panels B and C of Scheme , we postulate
that error-prone TLS is conducted primarily by pol η as the
inserter and pol κ as the extender, although pol ι (or
pol κ) and pol η, respectively, can act as an inserter
and extender, as well, albeit less efficiently. An examination of
both the percent TLS and MF, as shown in Figures  and , suggests that when one or more
TLS pols are unavailable, the roles of the remaining pols change so
that they can at least partially compensate for the absent pols.

Postulated Pathways of Error-Free and Error-Prone TLS of C8-dG-ABA
Types of Mutations Induced by C8-dG-ABA
The predominant
mutation in HEK293T cells was G → T transversion followed by
G → A transition. Although there were small differences in
the types of mutations in different pol knockdown cells, the pattern
of mutations remained comparable in most knockdown experiments (Figure B). A noteworthy exception, however, is that in
the double-pol knockdown of pol η and pol κ, pol η
and pol ι, and pol κ and pol ι, G → A mutations
were undetectable. To rationalize this observation, we postulate that
insertion of dTMP opposite C8-dG-ABA is accomplished by either pol
η or pol ι, whereas the subsequent extension of the mispair
is conducted by pol κ (Scheme C). Therefore,
at least two of these three pols are necessary for G → A mutations.
In contrast, dAMP insertion can be conducted by any of the three pols,
namely, pol η, pol κ, or pol ι, more efficiently,
and extension is executed by either pol κ or pol η (Scheme B). Evidently, additional experiments will be needed
to validate these proposed schemes.

The fact that the G →
T mutation was the major type of mutation is in stark contrast to
another recently reported study in which G → A mutation was
the dominant type of mutation. This difference
may originate from the differences in the local DNA sequence contexts
and the types of cells used. In addition, we used a single-stranded
shuttle vector, whereas the reported study was performed in a duplex
vector in which the C8-dG-ABA adduct was located in a bubble region. To determine if the bubble region influenced
the types of mutations, we replicated a construct in which C8-dG-ABA
was placed in a similar bubble. For this experiment, we used COS-7,
a different type of mammalian cell line, because we also wanted to
determine if mutational types might vary in a dissimilar mammalian
cell line. While both the single-stranded and scaffold-containing
vector with C opposite the C8-dG-ABA adduct gave similar proportions
of G → T and G → A mutations, the frequency of the latter
increased dramatically when the adduct was located opposite the bubble
scaffold. The mechanism of the change in the mutational specificity
when the lesion was located within a bubble is not clear, even though
DNA repair may have played a role.

In conclusion, the C8-dG-ABA
adduct formed by 3-NBA was found to
be mutagenic in human (HEK293T) and simian (COS-7) kidney cells. The
major types of mutations were G → T mutations followed by G
→ A mutations, although G → C and semitargeted mutations
also occurred at a low frequency. siRNA knockdown of TLS pols established
that each TLS pol, including pol η, pol κ, pol ι,
pol ζ, and Rev1, played a role in replication across this adduct.
Pol η and pol κ were the major contributors of the mutagenic
TLS, but Rev1 was important, as well, presumably performing a noncatalytic
role by physically interacting with the other two pols. In contrast,
pol ζ was involved in the error-free bypass of the lesion.

Supporting Information Available
Mass
spectra of adducted the
12-mer (Figures S1 and S2), siRNA sequences used for the knockdowns
(Table S1), primer sequences used for RT-PCR (Table S2), TLS efficiencies
(Table S3), and mutation data (Table S4A–L). This material
is available free of charge via the Internet at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bi5007805_si_001.pdf

The authors declare no
competing financial interest.

Abbreviations
3-NBA3-nitrobenzanthrone

C8-dG-ABAN-(2′-deoxyguanosin-8-yl)-3-aminobenzanthrone

N2-dG-ABA2-(2′-deoxyguanosin-N2-yl)-3-aminobenzanthrone

N6-dA-ABA2-(2′-deoxyadenosin-N6-yl)-3-aminobenzanthrone

polDNA polymerase

TLStranslesion synthesis

HEKhuman embryonic
kidney.

