Voltage-gated ion channels are
expressed by nearly all cells and play a crucial role in regulating
membrane potential and a variety of cellular functions. These channels
are comprised of two principle domains: a central pore domain formed
by two segments, S5 and S6, and four surrounding voltage-sensing domains,
each composed of segments S1–S4.− Venomous animals (spiders, scorpions, and
cone snails, among others) produce a broad array of polypeptide toxins,
many of which bind to voltage-gated Na+, K+,
or Ca2+ channels,− and have proven to be valuable pharmacological tools
for evaluating specific channel characteristics.

Although the
origins of the venomous peptide toxins that interact
with voltage-gated ion channels are diverse, their modes of action
fall into two major categories, pore blockade and gating modification,
based on the domain with which they interact and their mechanisms
of action. Pore blockers bind to the external vestibule of the channel
and physically obstruct the movement of ions by occluding the ion-conducting
pore. The three-dimensional structures
of many pore-blocking toxins, including the μ-conotoxins for
the Na+ channel, charybdotoxin for the K+ channel,
and ω-conotoxins for the Ca2+ channel, have all been
determined, allowing investigation of the structure–function
relationships of the pore-forming domains of the channels.− Gating modifiers, on the other hand, bind to the voltage-sensing
domains of voltage-gated ion channels and modify the energetics of
either activation or inactivation.− Established gating modifiers include the α- and β-scorpion
toxins, sea anemone toxins, and δ-conotoxins for Na+ channels;− hanatoxin (HaTx), SGTx1, GxTx-1E, and VSTx for K+ channels;− and ω-agatoxin IVA (ω-Aga IVA) and ω-grammotoxin
SIA (GrTx) for Ca2+ channels.−

Studies of the structure and function
of gating modifiers have
advanced our understanding of the molecular structures and gating
mechanisms of voltage-gated ion channels. Studies employing HaTx,
SGTx1, GxTx-1E, VSTx, GrTx, and ω-Aga IVA have revealed that,
within voltage-gated K+ and Ca2+ channels, these
proteins bind to structurally conserved motifs composed of hydrophobic
and acidic residues within the C-terminal end of S3 and the N-terminal
end of S4.−,− The X-ray structures of voltage-gated K+ channels (i.e.,
KvAP and Kv1.2 channels) show that these regions of S3 and S4 form
a helix–turn–helix motif termed the voltage sensor paddle.,, Gating modifier toxins that partition
into the membrane interact with the voltage sensor paddle at the protein–lipid
interface.,

Cav3 (T-type) voltage-gated Ca2+ channels can be differentiated
from other types of Ca2+ channels on the basis of their
activation at lower voltages, faster inactivation, slower deactivation,
and smaller Ba2+ conductances. Their unique gating properties allow Cav3 (T-type) Ca2+ channels to trigger low-threshold spikes that can lead to burst
firing and oscillatory behavior and can contribute to standing calcium
currents near the resting membrane potential in a variety of cell
types.− Although these characteristics imply Cav3 (T-type) channels could
play important roles in many tissues,, progress in
understanding their subunit composition and physiological functions
has been hindered by a scarcity of ligands that interact with these
channels.,

A gating modifier kurtoxin, isolated
from the venom of the scorpion Parabuthus transvaalicus, is the first peptide ligand known
to act on Cav3 (T-type) voltage-gated Ca2+ channels., Here, we describe the solution structure of kurtoxin determined
using proton two-dimensional (2D) and heteronuclear three-dimensional
(3D) NMR spectroscopy with dynamical simulated annealing
calculations. The structure of kurtoxin closely resembles those of
scorpion α-toxins (Figure ) targeting
Na+ channels and shows the unique structural characteristic
of gating modifiers, electropositive and hydrophobic patches on the
surface of the molecule.,, Detailed inspection of the structure of kurtoxin offers the possibility
of understanding the molecular basis of its Cav3 (T-type) Ca2+ channel selectivity and could facilitate clarification of the gating
mechanism of voltage-gated ion channels.

Amino acid sequences
and alignment of kurtoxin and five scorpion
α-toxins. LqhαIT and Lqq III are highly active in insects.
Lqh III and Bmk M1 are α-like toxins. AaH II is highly active
in mammals. These sequences were aligned using ClustalX. Highly conserved
residues are shaded in black or gray. The secondary structure elements
of kurtoxin are shown as arrows (β-strand), bars (α-helix),
and lines (connecting loops).

Experimental Procedures
Sample Preparation
Functional kurtoxin was obtained
using a bacterial expression system. The
recombinant kurtoxin was expressed as an inclusion body, solubilized
in a denaturing solution, and then refolded in a refolding solution.
The crude folded kurtoxin was purified by preparative RP-HPLC, after
which the purity of the recombinant protein was confirmed by analytical
RP-HPLC and MALDI-TOF MS measurements.

CD Spectral Analysis
CD spectra were recorded on a
JASCO J-750 spectropolarimeter in a solution containing 0.01 M sodium
phosphate in H2O and 0, 10, 15, 20, 25, or 30% CH3CN at pH 7.0. Measurements were taken at 20 °C using a quartz
cell with a 1 mm path length. The spectra were expressed as molecular
ellipticity [θ] in degrees square centimeter per decimole.

NMR Spectroscopy
NMR measurements were taken on a Bruker
AVANCE 600 spectrometer equipped with an xyz gradient triple-resonance
probe. The samples used for proton 2D NMR experiments were 1 mM kurtoxin
dissolved in water containing 25% CD3CN at pH 4.0 (uncorrected
for the isotope effect). All proton 2D NMR spectra were recorded in
a phase-sensitive mode using time-proportional phase incrementation
(TPPI) for quadrature detection in the t1 dimension at 278, 288, and 298 K. TOCSY spectra were recorded using
a MLEV-17 pulse scheme with isotropic
mixing times of 60 and 90 ms. NOESY spectra− were recorded
with mixing times of 60, 100, and 150 ms. Suppression of the solvent
resonance in both the NOESY and TOCSY measurements was achieved using
the WATERGATE scheme. E-COSY spectra were recorded to obtain the constraints
for stereospecific assignments.

The following triple-resonance
3D NMR spectra were recorded using 1 mM 13C- and 15N-labeled or 1 mM 15N-labeled kurtoxin in 25% CD3CN at 278 and 288 K. Uniformly 13C- and 15N-enriched
kurtoxin was used to record 3D HNCACB, CBCA(CO)NH, HNCA, HN(CO)CA,
HNCO, and HN(CA)CO spectra.− Uniformly 15N-enriched kurtoxin was used
to record 2D 1H–15N HSQC and 3D 15N TOCSY-HSQC spectra with 90 ms mixing
times and a 3D 15N NOESY-HSQC spectrum with a 120 ms mixing
time. The 3JHN–Hα values were obtained from the 3D HNHA and 2D DQF-COSY spectra. Slowly exchanging backbone amide protons
were identified by analysis of TOCSY spectra recorded in 75% D2O and 25% CD3CN on time scales of 30 min and 3.5
h and then every 3 h up to 25 h. 1H chemical shifts were
referenced to DSS at 0 ppm, and 13C and 15N
chemical shifts were calculated from the 1H frequency.
All spectra were processed using AZARA version 2.5 (provided by W.
Boucher) or XWIN-NMR and were analyzed using ANSIG version 3.3 on a Silicon Graphics Octane2 workstation or
on a Linux workstation.

NMR Experimental Restraints and Structure Calculations
The backbone NH–CαH coupling constants were
converted to backbone torsion angle ϕ constraints according
to the following rules: for a 3JNH–CαH of &lt;5.5 Hz, the ϕ angle was constrained
in the range of −65 ± 25°; for a 3JNH–CαH of &gt;8.0 Hz,
it
was constrained in the range of −120 ± 40°., Backbone dihedral constraints were not applied to 3JNH–CαH values between
5.5 and 8.0 Hz. The range of the χ1 side chain torsion
angle constraints and the stereospecific assignment of the prochiral
β-methylene protons were obtained using the 3Jαβ coupling constants combined with
the intraresidue NH–CβH NOEs. The 3Jαβ coupling constants were determined from the E-COSY spectrum in D2O. For the t2g3, g2g3, and g2t3 conformations around the
Cα–Cβ bonds, the χ1 side chain torsion angle was constrained in the ranges of
−60 ± 30°, 60 ± 30°, and 180 ± 30°,
respectively.

Quantitative determination
of the cross-peak intensities was based on the counting levels. Observed
NOE data were classified into four distance ranges (1.8–2.7,
1.8–3.5, 1.8–5.0, and 1.8–6.0 Å) that corresponded
to strong, medium, weak, and very weak NOE values, respectively. Pseudoatoms
were used for the methyl protons or the nonstereospecifically assigned
methylene protons. Correcting factors
for the use of pseudoatoms were added to the distance constraints,
and 0.5 Å was added to the distance constraints involving methyl
protons. For each disulfide bond, we
used three distance constraints, S(i)–S(j), S(i)–Cβ(j), and S(j)–Cβ(i), whose target values were set to 2.02 ±
0.02, 2.99 ± 0.5, and 2.99 ± 0.5 Å, respectively. The hydrogen bond acceptors for the slowly exchanged
amide protons were identified by analyzing the preliminarily calculated
structures., The distance restraints on the
hydrogen bonds were added as target values of 1.8–2.3 Å
for NH(i)–O(j) and 2.8–3.3
Å for N(i)–O(j) bonds.

All calculations were conducted on an SGI Octane2 workstation using
the X-PLOR version 3.851. The three-dimensional
structures were calculated on the basis of the experimentally derived
distance and torsion angle constraints using a dynamically simulated
annealing protocol starting from a template structure with randomized
backbone ϕ and ψ torsion angles. The final 20 structures
with the lowest energy and smallest Lennard-Jones van der Waals energy
were chosen. The convergence of the calculated structures was evaluated
in terms of the structural parameters. There were root-mean-square
deviations (rmsds) from the experimental distances and dihedral constraints,
from the energetic statistics (FNOE, Ftor, Frepel, and EL-J), and from the idealized geometry.
The structures were analyzed using the PROCHECK_NMR, PROMOTIF, MOLMOL, and MolProbity., The distributions
of the backbone dihedral angles in the final converged structure were
evaluated by representation of the Ramachandran dihedral pattern,
which indicated the deviations from the allowed ϕ and ψ
angle limits. The degrees of angular variation among the converged
structures were further assessed using an angular order parameter. The solvent-accessible surface areas for the
side chains of the amino acid residues were calculated with a solvent
radius of 1.4 Å. Structural figures were generated using MOLMOL
and INSIGHT II 2000 (Accelrys Inc.).

Results and Discussion
NMR Sample Preparation
Kurtoxin was insoluble in aqueous
solution, even at a concentration of &lt;1 mM. We therefore tested
whether kurtoxin could be solubilized using 0–30% acetonitrile
(CH3CN) without disrupting the protein’s intrinsic
structure. Figure  shows that the CD spectra
for kurtoxin recorded in the absence or presence of 10, 15, 20, 25,
and 30% CH3CN are nearly identical in the far-UV region
(200–250 nm), indicating that the backbone structure of kurtoxin
is affected little by the addition of CH3CN. Moreover,
we obtained high-quality NMR spectra with 1 mM kurtoxin in the presence
of 25% deuterated acetonitrile (CD3CN), strongly suggesting
that the addition of CD3CN effectively prevented the aggregation
of kurtoxin (Figure ). In the 1H–15N HSQC spectra recorded in pure water, several
hydrophobic peaks, including Tyr17, Tyr18, Trp38, Gly39, Trp40, and Leu42, could not be detected, most likely because of the line broadening
in the absence of CD3CN (Figure ). This appeared to be due to the self-aggregation of kurtoxin molecules.
On the other hand, in the 1H–15N HSQC
spectra recorded in the presence of 25% CD3CN, all of the
backbone 1H–15N cross peaks were identifiable,
and the intensities of nearly all the peaks were increased without
large chemical shift variations (Figure S1 of the ).

CD spectra of 0.05 mM kurtoxin in H2O containing 0,
10, 15, 20, 25, or 30% CH3CN [0.01 M sodium phosphate (pH
7.0)] at 20 °C.

1H–15N HSQC spectra of kurtoxin
in
the presence (black) and absence (green) of 25% CD3CN at
288 K. The resonance assignments are indicated by the one-letter amino
acid codes and residue numbers. The dotted circles indicate additional
and unassigned peaks.

Addition of CH3CN can weaken the hydrophobic
interactions
between surface hydrophobic regions without altering the three-dimensional
structure of the proteins. Nonetheless,
CH3CN can influence chemical shift variations by changing
the polarity of the accessible atom environments; of those, the chemical
shifts located in the flexible N- and C-terminal regions (Ala63 of kurtoxin in Figure S1 of the ) and loops are most sensitive. Comparison of the CD and 1H–15N HSQC spectra recorded in the presence and absence of 25% CD3CN indicates that CD3CN prevented the hydrophobic-related
aggregation of kurtoxin without disrupting its overall topology. Linear
kurtoxin was also refolded in a redox solution containing 30% CH3CN, suggesting the nativelike
conformation of kurtoxin is stabilized in an aqueous solution containing
CH3CN.

A small number of additional minor peaks were
observed in NMR spectra,
including 1H–15N HSQC spectra in the
presence and absence of CD3CN (Figure ). The intensity ratio of the minor peaks is &lt;5–10%
compared to that of the major peaks according to relevant NMR signals.
Unfortunately, we failed to assign these minor peaks because the signals
were very weak and it was hard to sequentially connect these minor
peaks. In a recent study, two stable conformations of BmκαTx11,
a kurtoxin-homologous scorpion α-toxin, were identified by using
NMR spectroscopy. We assume that the
minor peaks of kurtoxin also come from a possible minor conformation
similar to BmκαTx11.

NMR Spectroscopy
Sequence-specific assignments for
the backbone atoms of kurtoxin were obtained from an analysis of heteronuclear
3D NMR spectra [HNCACB, CBCA(CO)NNH, HNCA, and HN(CO)CA] recorded
in 25% CD3CN at pH 4.0 and 288 and 278 K using a uniformly 15N- and 13C-labeled protein. All backbone Cα atoms were assigned except those of Cys12, Arg14, Ile15, Asp25, Leu26, Ala32, and Trp40. The backbone and side chain
protons were obtained from 2D NMR spectra (DQF-COSY, TOCSY, and NOESY)
and 3D 15N NOESY-HSQC and 3D 15N TOCSY-HSQC
spectra recorded in 25% CD3CN at pH 4.0 and 288 K. The
assignments of all backbone and side chain protons were complete except
for those of the Hζ atoms of Lys13 and
Lys21, Hδ2 of Asn19 and Asn20, and Hδ and Hε of Tyr22. For all Pro residues (Pro6 and Pro50), strong sequential dα,δ and no dα,α were observed
in the NOESY spectra, indicating the toxin’s proline residues
are all in the trans configuration.

Identification of Secondary Structure Elements
As summarized
in Figure S2 of the , the pattern of observed NOEs and chemical shift index (CSI) values
for Hα was ultimately interpreted in terms of the
secondary structure of the molecule. The weak 3JHNα coupling constants, strong dNN NOE peaks and dαN(i,i+3) and dαβ(i,i+3) NOE
correlations, and the CSI value of −1 all indicate an α-helical
conformation for residues Lys21–Leu30. The extent of the β-strands and their relative orientations
within the β-sheet structure were determined using standard
criteria: large 3JHNα coupling constants (Ile2, Asp3, Try36, Cys37, Tyr45, Cys46, and
Gln47), strong sequential dαN, interstrand NH–NH and NH–CαH connectivities,
and slowly exchanging amide protons (Ile2, Gly4, Gly35, Tyr36, Cys44, Tyr45, Cys46, Gln47, and Leu49). Kurtoxin
contains three β-strands comprised of residues Ile2–Gly4, Ser34–Cys37, and Cys44–Leu49, which are arranged
in an antiparallel fashion with several turns (Figure S3 of the ). Our criteria allowed
discrimination of the peripheral and central strands within the β-sheet.

Structure Calculations
The structure of kurtoxin was
determined from a total of 894 NMR experimental constraints, including
856 experimental distance constraints and 38 dihedral angle constraints,
which correspond to an average of 14.2 constraints per residue. Of
the 861 distance constraints, there were 311 intraresidue and 492
interresidue NOE distance constraints, 42 hydrogen bond constraints
determined from hydrogen–deuterium exchange-out experiments,
and 12 disulfide bond constraints. The 42 distance constraints related
to hydrogen bonds were as follows: I2(HN)–L49(CO), G4(HN)–C46(CO),
D25(HN)–K21(CO), C27(HN)–C23(CO), K28(HN)–N24(CO),
G29(HN)–L26(CO), L30(HN)–C27(CO), K31(HN)–K28(CO),
A32(HN)–C27(CO), G35(HN)–D33(CO), Y36(HN)–Y45(CO),
W38(HN)–S43(CO), C44(HN)–I15(CO), Y45(HN)–Y36(CO),
C46(HN)–G4(CO), Q47(HN)–S34(CO), L49(HN)–I2(CO),
A53(HN)–P50(CO), K56(HN)–Y5(CO), R62(HN)–W10(CO),
and A63(HN)–C61(CO). The disulfide bond pattern of kurtoxin
was determined to be Cys12–Cys61, Cys16–Cys37, Cys23–Cys44, and Cys27–Cys46, based on
sequential cleavage with proteases and MALDI-TOF MS measurements.

We conducted the simulated annealing calculations
starting with 100 random kurtoxin structures. From those, we selected
20 final structures (Figure A) that were in
good agreement with the NMR experimental constraints (NOE distance
and torsion angle violations of &lt;0.2 Å and &lt;2°, respectively).
Statistics for the converged structures were evaluated in terms of
the structural parameters (Table ). The deviations
from the idealized covalent geometry were very small, and the Lennard-Jones
van der Waals energy was large and negative (−212.55 ±
19.40), indicating there were no distortions or nonbonded bad contacts
in the converged structures. The atomic rmsd about the mean coordinate
positions was 0.87 ± 0.14 Å for the backbone atoms (N, Cα, and C) and 1.54 ± 0.19 Å for all heavy atoms.
Ramachandran analysis showed that 98.7% of all residues fell within
allowed regions.

Solution structure of kurtoxin. (A) Stereopairs of backbone
heavy
atoms (N, Cα, and C) for the 20 converged structures
of kurtoxin. These are the results of the best-fit superposition of
the backbone heavy atoms of the molecule. N and C indicate N- and
C-terminal positions, respectively. (B) Ribbon structure of kurtoxin.
Schematic diagram of kurtoxin illustrating the location of the β-strands
(cyan), α-helix (red and yellow), and disulfide bonds (numbered
ball and stick). Long loop I and long loop II correspond to residues
Tyr5–Asn20 and Pro50–Ala63, respectively. (C) Tubular representation of kurtoxin illustrating
its motional properties. The diameter of the tube is proportional
to the atomic rmsds of the backbone atoms: red for residues whose
backbone rmsds are &gt;1.0, cyan for those with β-strands, and
yellow for those with an α-helix. (D) Surface profile of kurtoxin.
The surface hydrophobic patches and charged residues are indicated.
The molecular surface of kurtoxin is shown in color according to the
electrostatic potential: red for negatively charged amino acids, blue
for positively charged amino acids, and white for uncharged or hydrophobic
amino acids. The left and right figures are rotated 180° with
respect to one another about a vertical axis. These figures were generated
using MOLMOL.

Structural Statistics for the 20 Lowest-Energy
Structures of Kurtoxin
rmsd from experimental distance
constraints (Å) (856)	0.0115 ± 0.0012	
rmsd fom experimental
dihedral
constraints (deg) (38)	0.1555 ± 0.0012	
energetic statistics (kcal/mol)	 	
FNOE	5.7261 ± 1.2582	
Ftor	0.9845 ± 0.0964	
Frepel	5.3839 ± 1.3992	
EL-J	–212.55 ± 19.4000	
rmsd from
idealized geometry	 	
bonds (Å)	0.0017 ± 0.0001	
angles (deg)	0.5010 ± 0.0065	
impropers (deg)	0.3391 ± 0.0060	
Ramachandran analysis (%)	 	
most favored regions	56.0	
additionally allowed regions	36.1	
generously allowed regions	6.5	
disallowed regions	1.3	
average rmsd (Å)	 	
backbone (N, Cα, C)	0.87 ± 0.14	
all heavy atoms	1.54 ± 0.19	
MolProbity analysis	 	
Clash score	94.39 ± 9.94	
MolProbity score	4.37 ± 0.08	
None of these 20 structures exhibited
distance violations of &gt;0.2 Å or dihedral angle violations
of
&gt;2°.

The number
of each experimental
constraint used in the calculations is given in parentheses.

FNOE, Ftor, and Frepel are the energies related to the NOE violations, the torsion angle
violations, and the van der Waals repulsion term, respectively. The
values of the force constants used for these terms are the standard
values as depicted in the X-PLOR 3.1 manual. EL-J is the Lennard-Jones van der Waals energy calculated
with the CHARMm empirical energy function.EL-J was not used in the dynamical
simulated annealing calculations.

PROCHECK_NMR was used to assess
the stereochemical quality of the structures.

The MolProbity webserver was used
to evaluate the determined kurtoxin ensemble structures.

Structure Description
The molecular structure of kurtoxin
has a compact core consisting of an α-helix and a triple-stranded
antiparallel β-sheet stabilized by four disulfide bridges. The
2.5-turn α-helix is composed of residues extending from Lys21 to Leu30 and is linked to the central strand
of the β-sheet by two disulfide bridges (Cys23–Cys44 and Cys27–Cys46) (Figure B). The three β-strands are formed by residues
Ile2–Gly4 (β-strand I), Ser34–Cys37 (β-strand II), and Cys44–Leu49 (β-strand III), with residues
Ile2, Gly48, and Leu49 involved in
a β-bulge conformation. The last two residues of β-strand
III (Gly48 and Leu49) form a classical β-bulge
and interact with the first residue of β-strand I (Ile2). As a result, the ϕ angle of Gly48 is positive
(105.6°), which causes a distortion in the β-sheet. Two
long loops (loop I, Tyr5–Asn20; loop
II, Pro50–Ala63) extend from the core
(Figure B). Long loop I includes two type
IV β-turns (Asp8–Asn11 and Asn11–Arg14) and adopts the positive ϕ
angles (58.9° and 89.9°, respectively) of Asn11 and Arg14 in the average structure. Long loop I is connected
to β-strand II by a disulfide bond (Cys16–Cys37) and to the C-terminus by a disulfide bond (Cys12–Cys61) and a hydrogen bond [R62(HN)–W10(CO)].
Long loop II starts with a well-defined type I β-turn structure
(residues 50–53) and extends to the C-terminus. It is stabilized
through hydrogen bonding [N11(HD21)–S58(CO), K56(HN)–Y5(CO),
and R62(HN)–W10(CO)] and formation of a disulfide bridge (Cys12–Cys61) to long loop I. The short loop
regions (Lys13–Ile15 and Trp40–Thr41) and the six C-terminal residues (Ser58–Ala63) are less defined in the final 20
structures than the other regions in kurtoxin (Figure C). This may reflect a lack of medium- and long-range NOE
constraints due to the inherent flexibility of these regions.

Two surface hydrophobic patches were observed in the kurtoxin structure.
The major patch is composed of the solvent-exposed side chains of
Tyr5, Tyr36, Trp38, Trp40, Leu42, and Tyr45 (Figure D), which, except for Tyr5, are located in the
hairpin structure (strands II and III). Their side chains are well
stacked, creating a compact hydrophobic patch on the surface of the
molecule. The minor hydrophobic patch is situated on the opposite
side of the protein and is centered around Trp17, Tyr18, Tyr22, and Leu26 (Figure D). Interestingly, all line-broadened residues (including
Tyr17, Tyr18, Trp38, Gly39, Trp40, and Leu42) in pure water are located
within either the major or minor surface hydrophobic patch in kurtoxin,
strongly suggesting that the aggregation of kurtoxin results from
these hydrophobic surface properties of kurtoxin. All of the charged
residues except Asp8 are highly exposed on the surface
of kurtoxin. Several charged residues, including Asp3,
Lys21, and Lys56, surround the major surface
hydrophobic patch, while Lys13, Arg14, and Asp25 are situated near the minor hydrophobic patch (Figure D).

Structural Comparison of Kurtoxin with Scorpion α-Toxins
The amino acid sequence of kurtoxin is homologous with those of
the scorpion α-toxins targeting Na+ channels (Figure ), which is consistent with the finding that kurtoxin
can also interact with voltage-gated Na+ channels. The three-dimensional structures of the scorpion
α-toxins have been determined by 1H 2D NMR spectroscopy
and X-ray crystallography.− Their overall folds are remarkably similar to that of kurtoxin and
consist of an α-helix and three β-strands stabilized by
four disulfide bridges, which has been termed the CSαβ
(cysteine-stabilized α-helix and β-sheet) motif. In addition, like kurtoxin, the α-helices
of the scorpion α-toxins contain 2.5–3 helical turns
and are connected to the central β-stand by two disulfide bridges.

Figure  shows the geometric average backbone
structure from the 20 NMR kurtoxin models superimposed on the backbones
of AaH II (antimammal α-toxin), LqhαIT (anti-insect α-toxin),
and BmK M1 (α-like toxin). Comparison of the kurtoxin backbone
with those of the scorpion α-toxins clearly highlights three
regions of structural difference: the first long loop region (Asp8–Ile15), the β-hairpin loop (Gly39–Leu42), and the C-terminal segment (Arg57–Ala63). The structural differences among
these regions are strongly correlated with a marked difference in
sequence (Figure ). Among the eight residues
extending from Asp8 to Ile15, only two (Ans11 and Cys12) are conserved in the amino acid sequences
of these toxins. The 9th and 10th residues are variably polar or hydrophobic
in the scorpion α-toxins, with a non-proline cis peptide bond in BMK M1. On the other
hand, they are bulky hydrophobic residues (Tyr9 and Trp10) with a common trans peptide bond in kurtoxin.
In addition, the structurally well-defined hydrophobic residues Val13 and Tyr14 found in LqhαIT and BmK M1 are
replaced with disordered positively charged residues Lys13 and Arg14, respectively, in kurtoxin.

Stereopairs showing the
superposition of the kurtoxin structure
on scorpion α-toxin structures. The backbone (C, Cα, and N) atoms of kurtoxin are superimposed on those of the scorpion
α-toxins. The top panel shows the superposition of the backbone
of kurtoxin on that of the anti-mammal α-toxin AaH II (PDB entry 1PTX). The middle panel
shows the superposition on the backbone of the anti-insect α-toxin
LqhαIT (PDB entry 1LQH). The bottom panel shows the superposition on the
backbone of the α-like toxin Bmk M1 (PDB entry 1DJT). The backbone structures
of kurtoxin and scorpion α-toxins are shown as thick and thin
lines, respectively. N and C indicate the N- and C-terminal positions,
respectively. Labeling shows the kurtoxin residues in regions of structural
difference between the two backbones. The backbone rmsd values are
3.13, 2.98, and 2.62 Å for AaH II, LqhαIT, and Bmk M1,
respectively.

The sequence of the hairpin loop (Gly39–Leu42) also differs between kurtoxin and the scorpion
α-toxins.
The length of the loop in kurtoxin (four residues) is shorter than
in other toxins (approximately seven residues). In addition, whereas
the loop is disordered and involved in the formation of the major
hydrophobic patch in kurtoxin, it protrudes from the CSαβ
core and turns toward the C-terminal segments in the scorpion α-toxins
(Figure ). Because the C-terminal segments
are disordered in both kurtoxin and scorpion α-toxins, it is
difficult to assess structural differences in that region. However,
site-directed mutagenesis studies and functional assays of scorpion
α-toxins have shown that there is a functional site composed
of the five-residue reverse turn (Asp8–Cys12) and the C-terminal segment, and that the conserved hydrophobic
surface may be involved in maintaining the stability of the protein
and its biological activity.− Taken together, these findings indicate that the core region of
kurtoxin (i.e., the CSαβ motif) is well-defined and superimposes
well on those of the scorpion α-toxins, but the Asp8–Ile15, Gly39–Leu42, and C-terminal segments of kurtoxin are structurally different
from those of the scorpion α-toxins, suggesting it is these
regions that are responsible for the functional differences between
kurtoxin and scorpion α-toxins.

Comparison of the Surface Profiles of Kurtoxin and Scorpion
α-Toxins
Kurtoxin contains five negatively charged
and 11 positively charged residues in its amino acid sequence (Figure ), and all of these charged residues except Asp8 are highly exposed on the water-accessible surface of the
molecule. The side chain oxygen of Asp8 in AaH II forms
a hydrogen bond with the amide proton of Val10, and the
side chain of Gln8 in Lqh III forms a hydrogen bond with
the oxygen of Val13. Asp8 of kurtoxin is directed toward Lys13 and Arg14 (Figure A). Although there are no
experimental data for the hydrogen bond interactions between Asp8 and any other residues in kurtoxin, some side chain oxygens
of Asp8 in 20 ensemble structures are close enough to form
hydrogen bonds with Lys13 and/or Arg14 in the
determined kurtoxin structures. Along the α-helix, the positive
and negative charges align toward the solvent-accessible region of
the molecule in both scorpion α-toxins and kurtoxin (Figure ), suggesting that this feature may be involved
in ion channel binding and determining selectivity. Kurtoxin is highly basic, as compared to the α-scorpion
toxins; the net charge of kurtoxin is +6, while the others have net
charges ranging from −2 to +3. As shown in Figure , the two hydrophobic residues (Val13 and Tyr14) conserved in all scorpion α-toxins except AaH II
are replaced with two positively charged residues (Lys13 and Arg14, respectively) in kurtoxin. Figure B shows that the side chains of Val13 and Tyr14 in Lqq III (an anti-insect α-toxin) are
largely buried in the molecular core. By contrast, Lys13 and Arg14 in kurtoxin are exposed to solvent (Figure A) and form a local electropositive surface (Figure D). In addition, a large electropositive patch (surface
area of 660 Å2) is formed by the five positively charged
C-terminal residues (Arg54, Lys56, Arg57, Arg60, and Arg62). This is in contrast to
the C-terminal structure of Lqq III, which contains only two positively
charged residues (Arg58 and Lys62). The water-exposed,
positively charged residues of kurtoxin form a distinctive large electropositive
surface, which is located around the five-residue reverse turn and
C-terminal segment and is the proposed Na+ channel binding
site in scorpion α-toxins.

Ribbon diagrams
and heavy atom side chains of kurtoxin (A) and
Lqq III (B). The surface hydrophobic patches and charged residues
are indicated: red for the negatively charged amino acids are colored,
blue for the positively charged amino acids, purple for the major
surface hydrophobic amino acids, and orange for the minor surface
hydrophobic amino acids. The left and right figures are rotated 180°
relative to one another about a vertical axis.

A surface hydrophobic patch is a conserved feature
of all scorpion
α-toxins and is involved in mediating their interaction with
Na+ channels., The orthogonal arrangement
of the aromatic side chains in the surface hydrophobic patch, termed
a “herringbone” structure, is found in all scorpion
α-toxins and has been identified as the lowest-energy configuration
of solvent-exposed aromatic rings. There
are two hydrophobic patches in scorpion α-toxins, a major patch
commonly composed of five residues (Tyr5, Tyr35, Tyr42, Trp47, and Tyr49) (Figure B) with a surface area of ∼280 Å2 and a minor one with a surface area of ∼210 Å2. Kurtoxin exhibits a larger hydrophobic surface than the
scorpion α-toxins. The major hydrophobic patch of kurtoxin consists
of the six solvent-exposed side chains of Tyr5, Tyr36, Trp38, Trp40, Leu42, and
Tyr45 and has a surface area of 600 Å2 (Figure A). The side chains are well-packed on each other,
creating a compact hydrophobic patch on the protein surface. The minor
hydrophobic patch (surface area of 500 Å2) is centered
on Trp17, Tyr18, and Tyr22 and also
includes the δ-methyls of Leu26 (Figure A). Overall, it appears that kurtoxin shows a distinct surface
profile, composed of both positive and hydrophobic residues, compared
to other scorpion α-toxins.

Kurtoxin Binding Site on Cav3 (T-type) Ca2+ Channels
Voltage-gated ion channels consist of a central ion conduction
pore (segments S5 and S6) surrounded by voltage sensors (segments
S1–S4), which form “voltage sensor paddles” that
move in response to changes in membrane voltage., The
overall structure of the voltage sensor paddles includes hydrophobic,
cationic, and helix–turn–helix structures formed by
the S3b–S4 segment, and it has been suggested that it is the
voltage sensor paddles that are recognized by gating modifier toxins.−,−,, Kurtoxin has been identified
as the first high-affinity (Kd = 15 nM)
gating modifier of Cav3.1 (α1G T-type) Ca2+ channels,
and also the first to show cross-reactivity with voltage-gated Na+ channels. This is similar to
HaTx and GrTx, which exhibit cross-reactivity with the Kv2.1 K+ channel and P/Q-type Ca2+ channel, modifying the
energetics of their gating. It has been
suggested that hydrophobic and negatively charged residues (Ile273, Phe274, and Glu277) in the Kv2.1
channel form the binding site for HaTx and GrTx., Glu1613 in the rat brain IIA Na+ channel is
equivalent to Glu277 in the Kv2.1 channel, and mutation
of Glu1613 has a large effect on the affinity of scorpion
α-toxins for Na+ channels. In addition, Glu1658, situated at the end of S3, within
repeat IV of the P/Q-type Ca2+ channel, contributes to
the binding of ω-Aga IVA. These
findings prompt us to speculate that kurtoxin may bind to the S3b–S4
motif in domain IV of both Cav3 (T-type) Ca2+ channels
and Na+ channels, a region that has some conservation between
the two channels and that corresponds to the HaTx/GrTx binding site
on voltage-gated K+ and Ca2+ channels. The region conserved in Cav3 (T-type) Ca2+ channels contains three glutamate residues [Glu1661, Glu1662, and Glu1664 for Cav3.1 (Figure A)]. Notably, the region in the Cav3 (T-type) Ca2+ channel makes a larger negative patch than in Na+, K+, or other types of Ca2+ channels, and
this negative domain is conserved in all Cav3 (T-type) Ca2+ channel subtypes. As mentioned, kurtoxin is highly electropositive
because of the presence of an electropositive patch formed by Lys13, Arg14, and five positively charged residues
in the C-terminal segment (Arg54, Lys56, Arg57, Arg60, and Arg62). We therefore speculate
that the positively charged surface of kurtoxin is an important determinant
of its binding to the conserved negative domain in Cav3 (T-type) Ca2+ channels. Figure B shows a comparison
of the surface profiles of kurtoxin and three scorpion α-toxins.
Kurtoxin exhibits surface characteristics arising from a surface hydrophobic
patch in combination with a large electropositive patch. By contrast,
scorpion α-toxins show a rather small surface hydrophobic patch
with a mixed charged surface. These distinct surface profiles may
explain why only kurtoxin is able to interact with the binding domain
on Cav3 (T-type) Ca2+ channels, which is composed of electronegative
and hydrophobic residues. We are currently in the process of preparing
alanine mutants of kurtoxin and the Cav3.1 channel to examine the
molecular basis of the interaction between the toxin and channel.

Comparison
of the amino acid sequences of the indicated voltage-gated
ion channels and the surface profiles of kurtoxin and scorpion α-toxins.
(A) Comparison of the amino acid sequences of the domain IV S3–S4
linker in different voltage-gated ion channels (Cav, voltage-gated
calcium channels; Nav, voltage-gated sodium channels; and Kv2.1, voltage-gated
potassium channels). These sequences were aligned using ClustalX.
Highly conserved residues are shaded in black or gray. The red rectangular
boxes highlight the proposed kurtoxin binding site on Cav3 (T-type)
Ca2+ channels. The blue rectangular boxes highlight the
sequence involved in the binding sites of gating modifiers (Ile273, Phe274, and Glu277 in K+ channels; Glu1613 in Na+ channels; and Glu1658 in P/Q-type Ca2+ channels). (B) Surface profiles
of kurtoxin, AaH II, LqqhαIT, and Bmk M1: yellow for hydrophobic
residues (Ala, Cys, Gly, Leu, Ile, Phe, Pro, Trp, Tyr and Val), blue
and red for basic (Arg and Lys) and acidic (Asp and Glu) residues,
respectively, and white for other residues. The surface hydrophobic
patch residues and charged residues are indicated.

Conclusion
We investigated the three-dimensional structure
of the first peptide
toxin known to inhibit Cav3 (T-type) voltage-gated Ca2+ channels and suggest that its unique surface properties are likely
responsible for its binding selectivity. Interestingly, kurtoxin can
interact with high affinity with native neuronal high-threshold L-type,
N-type, and P-type Ca2+ channels in central and peripheral
neurons, producing complex gating modifications specific to each channel
type. When the channels are expressed
in Xenopus oocytes, however, kurtoxin interacts only
with the α-subunit of Cav3.1 (α1G T-type) voltage-gated
Ca2+ channels; it does not interact with any other type
of Ca2+ channel. At present,
the mechanism by which kurtoxin interacts with Ca2+ channels
remains unknown. The structural studies of kurtoxin reported here
provide clues about the molecular mechanism by which Cav3 (T-type)
Ca2+ channel activity is regulated by selective ligands
and could contribute to the development of highly specific Cav3 (T-type)
Ca2+ channel inhibitors.

Supporting Information Available
Figures S1–S3. This
material is available free of charge via the Internet at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bi201633j_si_001.pdf

The authors declare no
competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
We are grateful to Dr. Chul-Seung Park for critical reading
of the manuscript.

Abbreviations
CDcircular
dichroism

DSS4,4-dimethyl-4-silapentane-1-sulfonic
acid

DQF-COSYdouble-quantum-filtered
correlation spectroscopy

E-COSYexclusive COSY

HSQCheteronuclear single-quantum coherence

MALDI-TOF MSmatrix-assisted laser desorption
ionization time-of-flight mass spectrometry

NMRnuclear magnetic resonance

NOEnuclear Overhauser effect

NOESYnuclear Overhauser
effect spectroscopy

PDBProtein Data Bank

RP-HPLCreverse phase high-performance liquid chromatography

TOCSYtotal correlated spectroscopy.

