After 15 issues and almost three years, Bioengineered Bugs is about to metamorphose; we are “de-bugging”—from the current issue onwards BioBugs will be known only as Bioengineered.

This is not a decision to which we have come lightly, and is the result of continued consultation with our major stakeholders: authors, readers, reviewers and editors. Our new name reflects a broader scope, while still focusing on the concepts and applications of genetic engineering; for the development of genetically modified organisms for food, pharmaceutical, medical, industrial, environmental and bio-defense applications.

I am happy to report that our gestation has been a most enjoyable and productive one: our Editorial Board boasts some of the most distinguished and influential figures in the fields of molecular biology and biotechnology. The quality, quantity and variety of submissions continues to increase month on month, as do our manuscript downloads and citations. Accepted for indexing in Medline/PubMed last year, we are currently under review by ISI Thomson and hope to receive our first Impact Factor shortly.

Several innovations have taken place over the last 12 mo; perhaps most noticeable is our new cover format; images—supplied by authors (and readers) appear on the left hand column—our most iconic images to date include JCVI-syn1.0, the first synthetic cell and more recently, the notorious H5N1 virus immortalized in glazed earthenware by London-based artist Natasha Lewer.

In line with changing publication trends, Bioengineered has embraced the open access platform (while still retaining our high quality hard copy format)—for as little as $250, authors can opt for immediate an open access to their published material with no cost to the reader. In addition to our open access platform, Bioengineered has embraced social media—we have a Facebook page (which I encourage you to “Like”), we also allow readers to post comments relating to any of our published articles—allowing real-time evaluation and online “reader-review.”

If this next phase of our evolution is as successful as our last, and I have no doubt but that it will be, then our future is secure, our future is Bioengineered…

Previously published online: www.landesbioscience.com/journals/bioe/article/21230

