Ethics education for bioscientists
This article describes a pilot study in which graduate and professional students from US institutions presented their results on a study in ethics education on policy problems to policymakers, stakeholders, experts and members of the public. According to the authors, this approach may provide a model for educating future bioscientists and bioengineers so that they can meaningfully contribute to the solution of policy problems generated by their work.

Biotech for everyone
The Hudson Alpha Institute for Biotechnology has created a free short-course for the local community named Biotech 101. This innovative program introduces novices to topics in genetics, genomics and biotechnology. Participants reported an overwhelming satisfaction with course content and logistics, noting that the experience had a positive impact on their lives and decision-making, as well as piquing an interest in continued self learning.

GM animals
Given the history of GMO conflict and debate, the future of GM animals is dependent on the response of the regulatory landscape and its associated range of interest groups at regional, national, and international levels. Focusing on the EU and the US, this article examines the likely form of that multi-level response, the increased role of cultural values, the contribution of new and existing interest groups and the consequent implications for the commercialization of both green and red GM animal biotechnology.

Plants and Animal Genome Meeting 2012
The Plant and Animal Genome (PAG, held annually) meeting in January 2012 provided insights into the advances in plant, animal, and microbe genome studies particularly as they impact on our understanding of complex biological systems. The diverse areas of biology covered included the advances in technologies, variation in complex traits, genome change in evolution, and targeting phenotypic changes, across a broad spectrum of life.

Rice made better
Micronutrient malnutrition is widespread, especially in poor populations across the globe where daily caloric intake is confined mainly to staple cereals. In this review, genetic engineering approaches that have been shown to be successful in the nutritional enhancement of rice endosperm are discussed. These advancements have the potential to significantlyimprove crop development and human nutrition. Their practical application, however, also demands visionary changes in regulatory policies and a broader consumer acceptance.

Merck/Lumira BioScience Fund
Merck Canada is partnering with Lumira Capital and other venture capital firms to launch a multimillion-dollar research and development fund. Merck Canada has promised to invest $100 million in R&amp;D collaborations with companies and researchers in Quebec up to 2015. The long-term goal for Merck being to license the startups’ assets.

1000 Genomes Project data available on Amazon Cloud
The world’s largest set of data on human genetic variation produced by the international 1000 Genomes Project is now publicly available on the Amazon Web Services (AWS) cloud.

Initiated in 2008, the 1000 Genomes Project is an international public-private consortium that aims to build the most detailed map of human genetic variation available, ultimately with data from the genomes of more than 2,600 people from 26 populations around the world.

The 1000 Genomes Project welcomes working with other cloud computing providers who are interested in hosting the data. Cloud access to the 1000 Genomes Project data through AWS is at http://s3.amazonaws.com/1000genomes/.

The 1000 Genomes Project data are freely available through the 1000 Genomes website at www.1000genomes.org, from the NCBI at ftp://ftp-trace.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/1000genomes, and the EBI, with support from the Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, at ftp://ftp.1000genomes.ebi.ac.uk.

Amgen and AstraZeneca to collaborate
Amgen Inc. and British drugmaker AstraZeneca Plc. announced on Monday April 2, 2012, a major collaborative deal to jointly develop and sell five biotech drugs currently in Amgen’s developmental pipeline.

Under the terms of the deal, AstraZeneca will make an upfront payment of $50 million to the world’s largest biotechnology company, and the companies will share costs and profits on the drugs for a variety of autoimmune, inflammatory and respiratory diseases.

The collaboration will provide Amgen with additional resources to help advance its product portfolio and give AstraZeneca access to new medicines.

Government, academic and venture tirms fund translational and early-stage development
Burrill and Company identified more than $2.6 billion in expected funding for translational research and early-stage companies through nine initiatives announced since the end of February, particularly with the goal of building life sciences centers in specific locations.

The largest of these efforts, a $760 million partnership between Russia’s Rusnano and the US venture capital firm Domain Associates, will invest in emerging life sciences technology companies, foster the transfer of technology into Russia, and establish manufacturing facilities in Russia for production of advanced therapeutic products. As part of the effort, Rusnano and Domain expect to co-invest in about 20 US-based healthcare technology companies.

Other initiatives include an effort by the Welsh government to create a biotech hub through an $80 million commitment to what is targeted to be a $375 million fund; a $100 million R&amp;D fund backed by Merck Canada, Lumira Capital, and other venture capital firms to attract pharmaceutical companies to Quebec; and a Wellcome Trust project to invest $317 million in emerging healthcare and life sciences businesses and technologies in Europe in early-stage development with significant growth potential.

Previously published online: www.landesbioscience.com/journals/bioe/article/20451

