Vandalism directed against GMO-experiments in Europe
In this article, approximately 80 acts of vandalism against academic or governmental research on GMOs are reported, mainly involving Germany, France, the United Kingdom and Switzerland. According to the author, this number represents a vast under representation of the total number of GMO field destructions that have taken place across the EU, since vandalism of trials implemented by private companies are not listed.

The vast majority of destroyed academic or governmental experiments were field evaluations designed to assess the safety of GMOs. Although GMO opponents often adopt an anti-corporate stance, this article demonstrates that all GMO research is apparently targeted, including experiments dedicated to risk assessment. Furthermore, vandalism was not limited to field experiments, with distruction of some confined experiments also being reported.

The author concludes that field trials of GMOs are now virtually impossible in many European countries. In France for example, a country which has hosted the highest number of trials in Europe (a total of 590), no request for any new trial has been submitted by either academic laboratories or private companies since 2008 ().

Figure 1. Cover of GM Crops and Food Volume 3, Issue 4 (October/November/December 2012).

Current clinical developments for MVA-based vaccines
In this review, the authors provide an overview of therapeutic vaccines and the principal technologies used to generate them.

It illustrates how therapeutic vaccines based on the poxvirus MVA (Modified Virus Ankara) platform are becoming active players in the paradigm shift being witnessed in healthcare treatment of chronic diseases.

Treatment of chronic infectious diseases remains a challenge for a majority of infections either because curative treatments do not exist (e.g., HIV/AIDS), are seldom efficient (e.g., HBV infection) or remain toxic (e.g., IFN-α tolerance in HCV treatment).

While the mode of action underlying clinical efficacy so far reported with therapeutic vaccines in general and MVA-based vaccines in particular are not yet fully characterized, it is expected that contribution of both innate and adaptative responses is key. The next rounds of clinical trials performed in the frame of “combination regimens” with standard-of-care and now reaching phase 2b and 3 will be critical for a full appreciation of the old, yet resource filled, vaccine platform that is MVA ().

Figure 2. Cover of Human Vaccines and Immunotherapeutics Volume 8, Issue 12 (December 2012).

Natural transformation and antibiotic resistance
Horizontal gene transfer (HGT) enables bacteria to utilize genetic variation present in their communities including new genes and traits. Natural transformation is characterized by the uptake, integration and expression of extracellular DNA from the environment into a recipient cell that is naturally competent. In a recent experimental study, the authors showed that natural transformation with DNA isolated from various bacterial sources can result in the successful integration of class 1 integrons, gene cassettes and transposons, independent of the genetic relatedness and hence, degree of DNA sequence similarity with the donor bacteria. The autors conclude that interspecies horizontal gene transfer of chromosomal DNA can lead to multiple genetic changes in the genome of recipient cells with significant impact on the resistance profiles ().

Figure 3. Cover of Mobile Genetic Elements Volume 2, Issue 6 (November/December 2012).

Previously published online: www.landesbioscience.com/journals/bioe/article/23580

