Methanotrophs
are Gram-negative
bacteria that utilize methane as their sole carbon and energy source., As central players in the global carbon cycle and potential vehicles
for new biological gas-to-liquid (GTL) conversion processes, these organisms have been the focus of intense
research efforts. The first step in their metabolic pathway is oxidation
of methane by methane monooxygenases (MMOs). The majority of methanotrophs utilize a membrane-bound or particulate
MMO (pMMO) that is located within extensive
intracytoplasmic membranes. A few methanotroph strains can also express
a soluble MMO (sMMO) under conditions
of copper starvation., The product of the MMO reaction,
methanol, is then converted to formaldehyde by methanol dehydrogenase
(MDH) and either further oxidized to carbon dioxide via formaldehyde
and formate dehydrogenases or assimilated into multicarbon compounds
(Figure ).,

Metabolic pathway of M. capsulatus (Bath).

Most biochemical studies of methanotroph metabolism have
addressed
the most difficult step in the pathway, activation of the strong C–H
bond in methane by MMOs. For pMMO, which is the predominant MMO in
nature, the major focus has been on determining
the location and nature of the catalytic site. The pMMO from the well-studied
methanotroph Methylococcus capsulatus (Bath) is an
∼300 kDa α3β3γ3 trimer,, comprising three copies each
of the pmoB (α), pmoA (β), and pmoC (γ) subunits.
The pmoA and pmoC subunits are composed primarily of transmembrane
helices, and pmoB consists of two periplasmic cupredoxin-like domains
linked by two transmembrane helices. The active site is proposed to
be a dinuclear copper center located in the N-terminal pmoB periplasmic
domain close to the membrane interface., Another important,
but less well studied, aspect of pMMO function is its relationship
with the next enzyme in the pathway, MDH, which is located in the
periplasm. MDHs are typically ∼145 kDa α2β2 dimers containing a pyrroloquinoline quinone (PQQ)/calcium
ion cofactor., This cofactor is located in the
α subunit (64 kDa); the exact function of the β subunit
(8.5 kDa) remains unclear.

Several
lines of evidence suggest that pMMO and MDH interact and
could form a methane-to-formaldehyde oxidizing supercomplex. First,
MDH has been localized not only to the periplasm but also to the intracytoplasmic
membranes in M. capsulatus (Bath) as well as in the methanotrophs Methylomonas sp. strain A4 and Methylomicrobium
album BG8. Second, Dalton and
co-workers reported the isolation, purification, and structural characterization
of a complex containing both pMMO and MDH., This complex, which exhibited molecular masses of ∼440–687
kDa depending on the technique used, was structurally characterized
by cryoelectron microscopy (cryoEM) and single-particle analysis to
16 Å resolution. The resultant structure was interpreted as an
α3β3γ3 trimer of
pMMO capped on the periplasmic side by an α3β3 trimer of MDH. In support of its functional relevance, the
propylene epoxidation activity of this complex was moderately higher
(2–5-fold), than that of pMMO alone. However,
the methane oxidation activity of this complex was not measured; only
propylene epoxidation using duroquinol as a reductant and dye-linked
oxidation of methanol were reported.

The potential existence
of such a supercomplex in vivo is tantalizing because
it would afford a direct route for methanol
product from the pMMO periplasmic dicopper site to the methanol oxidation
site in MDH. Moreover, a supercomplex might also provide insight into
the physiological reductant of pMMO. Its electron donor is generally
thought to be ubiquinol generated by a type 2 NADH:quinone oxidoreductase− but was proposed early on to be electrons recycled from the oxidation
of methanol by MDH via the MDH electron acceptor, cytochrome cL., A pMMO–MDH complex,
with the addition of cytochrome cL, could facilitate electron transfer without the
requirement for NADH.,

Several aspects of the
reported supercomplex have remained questionable,
however. In all available MDH structures, a dimeric structure is observed,,− and no biochemical evidence of the proposed trimeric state is available.
In addition, the structure used in the cryoEM model is that of MDH
from the methylotroph Methylophilus methylotrophus W3A1., The structure of the cognate M.
capsulatus (Bath) MDH has not been determined, hindering
further consideration of the structural model. Moreover, the enhancement
of pMMO propylene epoxidation activity by the presence of MDH could
not be reconstituted by combining purified pMMO and MDH, and formation
of a complex between purified pMMO and MDH has not been reported., Thus, it remains unclear whether the interpretation of the observed
supercomplex is accurate. To begin addressing these issues, we have
isolated and purified native MDH from M. capsulatus (Bath), determined its oligomerization state and crystal structure,
and investigated its interactions with M. capsulatus (Bath) pMMO using biolayer interferometry.

Materials and Methods
Growth
of M. capsulatus (Bath)
M. capsulatus (Bath) was cultivated as described
previously using 12 L of sterile nitrate
mineral salts medium supplemented with a solution of trace metals,
50 μM CuSO4, and 80 μM FeSO4. The
pH of the medium was maintained at 6.8, with adjustments made using
NaOH and H2SO4. Growth was initiated by the
addition of ∼10 g of frozen cell paste stock resuspended in
sterile nitrate mineral salts medium at 45 °C. The fermentation
was conducted at 45 °C with an air:methane gas ratio of 4:1 and
an agitation rate of 300 rpm. Cells were harvested once the OD600 reached 5–7 and centrifuged for 10 min at 8000g. Pelleted cells were washed three times with 25 mM PIPES
(pH 7.0), recentrifuged, flash-frozen in liquid nitrogen, and stored
at −80 °C until they were ready for use.

Purification
of MDH from M. capsulatus (Bath)
M. capsulatus (Bath) cells (∼20 g) were
resuspended in lysis buffer [25 mM PIPES (pH 7.2) and 250 mM NaCl]
and sonicated for 10 min (10 s on and 30 s off at 40% amplitude) on
ice. The cell debris was removed by centrifugation at 24000g for 1 h, and membranes were separated from the soluble
proteins by ultracentrifugation at 160000g for an
additional 1 h. The membranes were then washed to isolate pMMO as
described previously, and the soluble
fraction was used to purify MDH. The supernatant was dialyzed twice
for 2 h into 20 mM Tris (pH 8.0) and then overnight to exchange the
buffer.

The supernatant was loaded onto a DEAE-Sepharose FF
XK 26/20 column (GE Healthcare) and washed with 20 mM Tris (pH 8.0)
until all unbound protein eluted. MDH was eluted at ∼50 mM
NaCl using a gradient from 0 to 1 M NaCl in the same buffer. The fractions
containing MDH were collected and concentrated using a Centriprep
molecular weight cutoff (MWCO) 10 device. After concentration, MDH
was loaded onto a HiLoad Superdex 75 16/600 prep grade column (GE
Healthcare) pre-equilibrated with 20 mM Tris (pH 8.0) and 300 mM NaCl.
MDH eluted in the void volume and was collected, and NH4SO4 powder was added slowly at 4 °C to a final concentration
of 1.5 M. The sample was mixed at 4 °C for 1 h and then centrifuged
at 12000g for 30 min at 4 °C. The resulting
supernatant was loaded onto a HiTrap Butyl FF (GE Healthcare) column
equilibrated with 50 mM Tris (pH 8.0), 150 mM NaCl, and 2 M NH4SO4 and eluted with a 0 to 10% glycerol gradient.
Fractions containing MDH were pooled, concentrated with a Centriprep
MWCO 30 device, and loaded onto a Superdex 200 16/600 column (GE Healthcare)
equilibrated with 20 mM Tris (pH 8.0) and 300 mM NaCl. Initial protein
masses were calculated from a calibration curve of protein standards
analyzed on the Superdex 200 column, including ovalbumin (43 kDa),
conalbumin (75 kDa), adolase (158 kDa), ferritin (440 kDa), and thyroglobin
(669 kDa). The column void volume was determined with blue dextran
to be 61 mL (elution time of 67 min). The protein concentration was
determined using the Bradford assay with bovine serum albumin (BSA)
as a standard. Enzyme activity was measured by the dichlorophenolindophenol
(DCPIP) dye-linked dehydrogenase assay using phenazine methosulfate
(PMS) as the mediator and methanol as the substrate. The molar absorptivity of DCPIP at 600 nm is 1.91 ×
107 M–1 cm–1.

Deriphat-PAGE (D-PAGE) analysis, using 25 μg
of purified M. capsulatus (Bath) pMMO and MDH was
performed on a 4 to 16% Novex Bis-Tris gel (Novagen) using 12.5 mM
Tris and 100 mM glycine (pH 8.3). The cathode buffer contained 0.2%
(w/v) disodium n-lauryl-β-iminodipropionate
(Deriphat) detergent. Gels were run at 100 V and 4 °C to improve
the resolution and stained with Coomassie dye. In-gel activity assays
were performed as described previously., Briefly, the
gel was incubated in a solution containing 50 mM Tris (pH 8.0), 15
mM NH4Cl, 0.5 mM PMS, 1 mM nitroblue tetrazolium chloride
(NBT), and 20 mM MeOH. Activity is detected by the reduction of NBT,
which becomes blue in color. Once blue bands appeared, the reaction
was stopped by the addition of water and the gel was compared with
the Coomassie-stained gel.

Isolation, Solubilization, and Purification
of pMMO from M. capsulatus (Bath)
pMMO was
purified as described
previously with some modifications. The
membranes were isolated as described above, homogenized three times
using a Dounce homogenizer, and resuspended in lysis buffer at a final
concentration of 10–20 mg/mL, after which 1 mL aliquots were
flash-frozen in liquid N2 and stored at −80 °C.
Frozen membranes were thawed on ice and washed three times with 25
mM PIPES (pH 7.2), 0.5 M NaCl, 1 mM benzamidine, and 40 μM CuSO4. Washed membranes were then solubilized with the detergent n-dodecyl β-d-maltoside (DDM) (Anatrace)
by the addition of 1.5 mg of DDM/mg of protein at 4 °C for at
least 1 h while being gently stirred. The sample was concentrated
to 20 mg/mL using a Centriprep MWCO 50 device and loaded onto a Superdex
200 16/600 column (GE Healthcare) pre-equilibrated with 25 mM PIPES
(pH 7.2), 150 mM NaCl, 0.03% DDM, and 1 mM benzamidine. Sample purity
was assessed by sodium dodecyl sulfate–polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis
(SDS–PAGE), and pure fractions were collected and concentrated
with a Centriprep MWCO 50 device to 10–20 mg/mL. Samples were
flash-frozen and stored at −80 °C. The protein concentration
was determined by the Detergent-Compatible Lowry Assay (Bio-Rad) using
BSA as a standard. The recombinant spmoB protein, which corresponds
to the soluble domains of the pMMO pmoB subunit, was prepared as described
previously.,

Size Exclusion Chromatography
with Multi-angle Light Scattering
(SEC-MALS)
The molecular mass of MDH at various protein concentrations
was determined by conducting SEC-MALS experiments. Analyses were performed
using an Agilent Technologies 1100 LC high-performance liquid chromatography
system (Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, CA) equipped with a Dawn
Heleos II 18-angle MALS light scattering detector, an Optilab T-rEX
(refractometer with extended range) refractive index detector, a WyattQELS
quasi-elastic (dynamic) light scattering (QELS) detector, and ASTRA
software for data analysis (all from Wyatt Technology, Santa Barbara,
CA). Varying concentrations of MDH in 25 mM PIPES (pH 7.25), 1 mM
benzamidine, and 0.03% DDM (100 μL sample size) were injected
onto a pre-equilibrated Superdex 200 10/300 GL column (GE Healthcare)
at a flow rate of 0.5 mL/min at room temperature. The ASTRA software
was used to calculate the molecular mass of the α2β2 dimer and higher-order oligomers. This software
also determines the polydispersity of the protein sample across the
elution peaks. The buffer differential index of refraction, dn/dc, was determined to be 0.18 mL/g, and
BSA was used as a control protein. The relative percentages of the
dimer and multimer were determined from the UV–vis elution
profiles using Chemstation software (Agilent).

Biolayer Interferometry
The affinity of purified MDH
for purified pMMO, both from M. capsulatus (Bath),
was determined using a ForteBio BLItz biolayer interferometer in the
Northwestern Keck Biophysics Facility. Amine reactive second-generation
(AR2G) biosensors (ForteBio) were hydrated in 15 mM NaOAc (pH 5.5)
for 10 min prior to each experimental run. A single run is divided
into six steps: (i) buffer baseline, in which the amine reactive sensor
is immersed in 15 mM NaOAc (pH 5.5) for 60 s to establish a zero baseline;
(ii) sensor activation, in which biosensors are activated for 5 min
with a mixture of 20 mg/mL EDC {1-ethyl-3-[3-(dimethylamino)propyl]carbodiimide
hydrochloride} and 5 mg/mL sulfo-NHS (N-hydroxysulfosuccinimide)
in water; (iii) ligand loading, in which MDH diluted to 1 mg/mL with
15 mM NaOAc (pH 5.5) is reacted with the biosensor for 5 min and then
deactivated for 5 min with 1 M ethanolamine (pH 8.5); (iv) baseline,
in which the biosensor is immersed in either pMMO buffer [25 mM PIPES
(pH 7.2), 1 mM benzamidine, and 0.03% DDM] or spmoB buffer [50 mM
Tris (pH 8.0) and 150 mM NaCl] for 2 min to remove any unbound MDH;
(v) association, in which the amine-reacted MDH biosensor tip is immersed
in purified pMMO or refolded spmoB for 5 min; and (vi) dissociation,
in which the MDH–protein complex formed during association
is transferred to the corresponding buffer for 5 min to dissociate.
Runs were performed with pMMO concentrations of 0.5–5 μM.
Sample runs with spmoB were performed at protein concentrations of
0.3–30 μM. Immobilized BSA was used as a negative control
at a concentration of 0.3 mg/mL with 30 μM spmoB. A new biosensor
tip was used for each run. The sensorgrams were corrected against
a buffer only reference and fit with the ForteBio Data Analysis package
assuming a 1:1 Langmuir binding model with the global fitting function.

Determination of the Structure of MDH from M. capsulatus (Bath)
For crystallization, MDH was exchanged into 25 mM
HEPES (pH 7.5), 150 mM NaCl, and 10% glycerol and concentrated to
20 mg/mL. Crystals were obtained by the hanging drop diffusion method
at 4 °C by mixing 2 μL of protein with 1 μL of a
reservoir solution containing 0.1 M NaHEPES (pH 7.5) and 30% PEG 4000.
Rhombic crystals formed overnight. The crystals were cryoprotected
in a reservoir solution containing 40% 2-methyl-2,4-pentanediol (MPD)
and flash-frozen in liquid N2. Data were collected at sector
21 (Life Sciences Collaborative Access Team, LS-CAT) of the Advanced
Photon Source at Argonne National Laboratory. Initial data processing
and integration were conducted using HKL2000, with the resolution limits determined by inspection. After the initial
model was built, the data were reprocessed using the xia2 pipeline to XDS and scaled with AIMLESS. This reprocessing
was conducted to ensure that the high Rmerge values from HKL2000 are not due to an inappropriate resolution limit.
The resolution is determined automatically by xia2, and both programs
gave a resolution cutoff of 2.57 Å. The data collection statistics
are summarized in Table .

M. capsulatus (Bath)
MDH Data Collection and Refinement Statistics
Data Collection	
space group	P212121	
unit cell	 	
a, b, c (Å)	128.49, 210.29, 231.42	
wavelength (Å)	0.97856	
resolution (Å)	105.15–2.57 (2.64–2.57)	
Rmerge	0.193 (0.815)	
mean I/σ(I)	10.5 (2.6)	
completeness
(%)	100 (100)	
multiplicity	7.6 (7.7)	
no. of unique
reflections	199109 (14539)	
CC1/2 (%)	99.0 (81.3)	
Refinement	
Rwork/Rfree	0.1575/0.2081	
average B factor (Å2)	25.0	
no. of atoms	43059	
ligand	192	
solvent	2404	
rmsd	 	
bond lengths (Å)	0.005	
bond angles (deg)	0.933	
Ramachandran plot (%)	 	
favored	94.8	
outliers	0.4	
rotamer
outliers	0.5	
Molprobity Clashscore	4.1	
Values in parentheses are for the
highest-resolution shell.

Rmerge = ∑hkl∑i|Ii(hkl) – ⟨I(hkl)⟩|/∑hkl∑iIi(hkl).

The structure of MDH was determined
by molecular replacement with
Phaser from the CCP4 program suite, using the coordinates of Me. methylotrophus W3A1 MDH (Protein Data Bank entry 2AD7) as a starting model. Initial refinement was conducted with Refmac, followed by several rounds of refinement with
phenix.refine, which fixes rotamer geometry
and water coordination and manually flips His/Asn/Gln residues. COOT
was used for manual building of the structure and structural alignments. Coordinates for the ligand pyrroloquinoline
quinone (PQQ) were obtained from the Me. methylotrophus W3A1 MDH structure, and the library of restraints was generated
using the eLBOW program available in
Phenix. The final structure was validated by Molprobity and the Phenix validation software (Table ). Protein–protein interface analysis was
conducted using the PISA server at the European Bioinformatics Institute
(http://www.ebi.ac.uk/pdbe/prot_int/pistart.html).

Results
Isolation and Purification
of MDH from M. capsulatus (Bath)
Purification
of MDH from M. capsulatus (Bath) has been reported
previously., For this study,
MDH was isolated from the M. capsulatus (Bath) soluble
supernatant during membrane isolation. MDH is present at high levels
in the soluble fraction and could be monitored during purification
by following the PQQ cofactor absorbance at 345 nm. After four column
chromatography steps, a &gt;90% pure sample of MDH was obtained (Figure
S1 of the ) with
a typical yield of ∼30 mg/L. The purified MDH exhibits a specific
activity of 183 ± 32 nmol min–1 mg–1 as measured by the dye-linked DCPIP assay, in close agreement with
previously reported values for M. capsulatus (Bath)
MDH.,

Solution Oligomerization State of M. capsulatus (Bath) MDH
Initial size exclusion
chromatography (SEC)
analysis shows a single peak with a molecular mass of ∼144
kDa, corresponding to the α2β2 dimer.
After the sample is concentrated, stored at −80 °C, and
then thawed, a second peak attributable to a higher-order oligomer
appears (Figure S2 of the ). These results are consistent with the previous observation of
two distinct oligomeric species by single-particle analysis of electron
micrographs. The MDH oligomerization
state was further investigated by SEC coupled to an in-line multi-angle
light scattering detector (SEC-MALS). This technique determines the
molecular mass of a protein independent of its SEC elution profile. Four MDH samples with concentrations of up to
20 mg/mL were analyzed by SEC-MALS. All samples eluted as two peaks,
the first (19.5 mL) corresponding to a molecular mass of ∼460–560
kDa and the second (26 mL) to a molecular mass of 144 kDa, which is
the α2β2 dimer (Figure A). The higher-mass species is much less homogeneous
than the dimer as indicated by the distribution of masses detected
by light scattering (Figure A). Its mass suggests
the presence of three or four α2β2 dimers, assuming a mass of ∼72.5 kDa (http://expasy.org) for the αβ monomer.

Oligomerization states of M. capsulatus (Bath)
MDH in solution. (A) SEC-MALS analysis of MDH at varying protein concentrations.
The signals from the refractive index detector are shown as a function
of elution time (black for 20 mg/mL, blue for 10 mg/mL, cyan for 5
mg/mL, and green for 1 mg/mL). The thick horizontal lines indicate
the calculated molecular masses of the eluting peaks. (B) Comparison
of the multimer and dimer peak areas (as percentages) from the SEC-MALS
experiments displayed as a line graph. An increased protein concentration
results in an increase in multimer percentage concomitant with a decrease
in dimer percentage. The colors of the data points correspond to the
SEC-MALS traces in panel A.

The fraction of MDH present as the oligomer increases with
increasing
protein concentrations (Figure ). At 1 mg/mL,
the protein exists as ∼90% dimer and 10% oligomer, whereas
at 20 mg/mL, the percentages shift to 70% dimer and 30% oligomer (Figure B). Because of saturation of the MALS detector,
concentrations of &gt;20 mg/mL could not be analyzed by this technique,
but analysis of MDH concentrated to &gt;100 mg/mL using the same column
matrix coupled to a UV–vis detector (Figure S3 of the ) indicates the presence
of 10% dimer and 90% oligomer. Reanalysis of either the dimer or oligomer
fraction on the same column indicates the presence of both species.
Thus, the dimer and the oligomer are in equilibrium, and the oligomer
begins to associate more readily at high concentrations (Figure S3
of the ).

The
dimer and higher-order oligomers are also evident on native
D-PAGE gels stained with Coomassie and treated with PMS and NBT to
detect MDH activity (Figure ). Both the dimer
and the oligomer exhibit MDH activity, whereas no activity is detected
for pMMO, which was used as a control. The major species observed
by D-PAGE is the dimer, consistent with the low protein concentration
used for the gel. This result indicates that the oligomeric MDH species
observed by SEC and SEC-MALS represent an active form of MDH.

D-PAGE analysis
of pMMO and MDH from M. capsulatus (Bath). Gels were
either stained with Coomassie dye (left) or reacted
with PMS, NBT, and methanol to detect MDH activity (right). Equal
amounts (25 μg) of pMMO (lane 1) and MDH (lane 2) were loaded
per gel. Molecular mass markers are shown in lane M (kDa). The arrows
indicate the putative MDH dimer and oligomer species.

Interaction between MDH and pMMO from M. capsulatus (Bath)
The possibility of a specific
protein–protein
interaction between MDH and pMMO was investigated by biolayer interferometry.
MDH was immobilized on an amine chip using standard NHS/EDC coupling
at 1 mg/mL, and interactions with pMMO (0.5–5 μM) were
assayed. A concentration-dependent interaction between immobilized
MDH and pMMO was observed (Figure A). Analysis
of the sensorgram data yielded a KD value
of 833 ± 409 nM. To assess whether the interaction could be related
to the proposed complex between MDH and the periplasmic domains of
pMMO, we also conducted experiments with spmoB (0.3–30 μM).
A weaker interaction was observed, yielding a KD value of 9.0 ± 7.7 μM (Figure B). Control experiments performed with BSA showed no interaction
(Figure C). Attempts to isolate a MDH–pMMO
complex by SEC were not successful, however.

Biolayer interferometry
sensorgrams of the protein–protein
interactions of immobilized M. capsulatus (Bath)
MDH. (A) Purified M. capsulatus (Bath) pMMO samples
at concentrations of 0.5, 1, 2.5, and 5 μM were monitored for
binding to immobilized MDH. The data fitting curves are displayed
as blue lines. (B) Refolded spmoB samples at concentrations of 0.3,
3, and 30 μM were reacted with immobilized MDH. (C) Immobilized
BSA was monitored for interaction with 30 μM spmoB. No binding
response is observed. Each experiment was repeated with three independent
biological samples.

Overall Structure of M. capsulatus (Bath) MDH
The M. capsulatus (Bath) MDH X-ray structure was
determined to 2.57 Å resolution. MDH crystallizes with four α2β2 protomers in the asymmetric unit (chains
A/J and E/M, chains B/I and G/O, chains C/K and D/L, and chains F/N
and H/P). The average rmsd between protomers is 0.189 Å, using
chain A (α subunit) and chain J (β subunit) as the reference
protomer. Because of the presence of periplasmic signal sequences,
the model for the α subunit begins at Asn 29, and the model
for the β subunit begins at Tyr 23. There are no gaps within
the chains. The β subunit in protomers I–L is modeled
through Ile 93, whereas the C-terminal residue, Lys 94, is also modeled
in protomers M–P.

The overall fold is the same as those
of other MDH structures, with eight antiparallel four-stranded β
sheets forming a propeller. Each four-stranded
β sheet blade in the propeller has the typical “W”
motif, and the blades are labeled W1–W8 according to nomenclature
from previous structures (Figure A). There are several flanking α helices as
well as an additional β hairpin and a three-stranded sheet insertion
between propeller blades W5 and W6 (Figure A). The PQQ cofactor and Ca2+ ion are located in the center
of the propeller as in other MDH structures. The PQQ is sandwiched
between Trp 271 and a disulfide bond formed by residues Cys 131 and
Cys 132 common to other methanol dehydrogenase enzymes., An extensive hydrogen bonding network stabilizes the PQQ. The Ca2+ ion is coordinated by the PQQ C-7 carboxylate, C-5 carbonyl,
and N-6 quinoline nitrogen moieties as well as residues Glu 205, Asn
289, and Asp 331 (Figure B).

Structure of M. capsulatus (Bath) MDH. (A) αβ
protomer. The eight-bladed β sheet propeller motif is colored
light blue, and the blades are labeled W1–W8. Auxiliary β
strands are colored light pink and α helices blue, including
the long α helix of the β subunit. A PQQ ligand (yellow)
and Ca2+ ion (gray) are located in the cavity of the propeller
core fold. (B) Composite omit map generated in Phenix contoured at
1σ showing the cofactors and hydrogen bonding residues. Ligand
coordination to the Ca2+ ion is shown as solid lines, and
hydrogen bonds are shown as dashed lines. (C) α2β2 dimer structure with chains C and D colored light and dark
green and chains M and N colored light and dark blue.

The β subunit is mainly α helical in
structure and
extends the length of the α subunit between β sheets W2
and W3 of the propeller motif (Figure A).
The N-terminus of the β subunit contains a flexible loop region
from residue Tyr 23 to Asp 55 before the long α helix begins
at residue Pro 56. Each β subunit interacts extensively with
its associated α subunit. These interactions include three salt
bridges. Residue Lys 38 from the β subunit interacts with Glu
295 and Glu 329 from the α subunit; residue Glu 70 from the
β subunit interacts with Arg 225 from the α subunit, and
residues Arg 72 and Arg 76 from the β subunit interact with
Glu 176 from the α subunit.

Secondary structure matching
with COOT between the structures of
the αβ protomers of M. capsulatus (Bath)
MDH (644 residues) and Me. methylotrophus W3A1 MDH
(640 residues) results in a sequence
identity of 65%. This superposition of 631 residues yields an rmsd
of 0.69 Å and reveals several minor gaps and insertions in loop
regions as well as some substitutions at the PQQ binding site. Residues
Met 102 and Ser 162 in Me. methylotrophus W3A1 MDH
both hydrogen bond to PQQ and are replaced with alanines in the M. capsulatus (Bath) MDH structure. In addition, Cys 144
and Cys 167 (Me. methylotrophus W3A1 numbering) are
both serine residues in M. capsulatus (Bath) MDH,
resulting in one fewer intrachain disulfide bond, though this substitution
is common in other MDHs.

Oligomerization State of M. capsulatus (Bath)
MDH in the Crystal Structure
The dimer detected by SEC-MALS
is observed in the structure and corresponds to the previously observed
α2β2 dimer (Figure C). The surface area of the dimer interface is ∼1400
Å2. The dimer is saddle-shaped with the two β
subunits, which are not involved in dimerization, located in the stirrups
position of the saddle. In the dimer, the two α subunits interact
via β strands from propeller blades W7 and W8, forming an extended
β sheet network. There are additional interactions between the
C-terminal loop regions of each chain and the loop region after propeller
blade W1. The interface includes approximately 30 hydrogen bonds.
Among key interacting residues are Arg 112 and Gln 532, which correspond
to Gly 84 and Lys 502, respectively, in Me. methylotrophus W3A1 MDH. Further comparison of the
interfaces reveals 22 hydrogen bonds at the Me. methylotrophus W3A1 MDH dimer interface as compared to 30 in M. capsulatus (Bath) MDH.

Within the crystal lattice, the dimers pack together
in alternating pairs with all the lattice contacts involving the α
subunits. The net result is a bilayer-like structure with the β
subunits on opposite sides pointing toward the solvent channels (Figure ). Interface analysis with PDBePISA indicates that no higher-order stable oligomers are present.
Thus, the ∼460–560 kDa species detected by SEC-MALS
is likely not represented by the arrangement of molecules in the crystal
structure. This is not surprising because the α2β2 dimer fraction was isolated by SEC (Figure S2 of the ), and the dimer is predominant
at the concentration of 20 mg/mL used for crystallization.

Crystal packing
interactions of MDH from M. capsulatus (Bath). Symmetry-related
molecules of MDH reveal a bilayer-like
packing arrangement with the β subunit exposed to the solvent.
The α subunit is colored gray and the β subunit blue.

Discussion
These
data indicate that M. capsulatus (Bath)
MDH is primarily an α2β2 dimer in
solution but can form ∼460–560 kDa oligomers at high
concentrations, which also exhibit MDH activity (Figure ). The oligomeric species is heterogeneous, and there is no
evidence of the existence in solution of an α3β3 trimer, as proposed for the complex characterized by cryoEM. In addition, an interaction between MDH and
pMMO has been detected by biolayer interferometry. This interaction
appears to be specific as demonstrated by control experiments with
spmoB and BSA. Finally, the M. capsulatus (Bath)
MDH crystal structure reveals a dimer that is similar to other MDH
structures. No unusual higher-order oligomers are present in the structure.

Taken together, these findings have several important implications
for the proposed pMMO–MDH supercomplex. First, the biolayer
interferometry data provide evidence of direct interactions between
the two isolated enzymes. Because the α and β subunits
of MDH contain a large number of exposed lysine residues, the immobilization
is nonspecific, preventing identification of the MDH regions involved
in interaction with pMMO. The fact that an interaction is also detected
with spmoB, which includes only the periplasmic domains of pMMO, is
consistent with MDH’s location in the periplasm as well as
with numerous studies indicating that MDH can be associated with the
membranes.− It is not surprising that the interaction of MDH
with pMMO is an order of magnitude stronger than that with spmoB because
spmoB alone does not form trimers and has limited solubility. Despite the biolayer interferometry data, we
were not able to isolate a stable pMMO–MDH complex by SEC,
consistent with previous studies in which the complex and its activity
could not be reconstituted by combining purified proteins., Thus, the association may be dynamic and likely depends on the presence
of the membrane or additional protein components. Affixing MDH to
the biosensor surface may partially mimic such requirements.

The observed oligomerization states of MDH in solution and in the
crystal also suggest that interactions both among MDH dimers and between
MDH and pMMO are transient and/or facilitated by additional components.
The cryoEM model was suggested to represent an α3β3 trimer of MDH capping the periplasmic regions
of the pMMO trimer. One α2β2 dimer was fit into two lobes of density, but
it was not clear whether an αβ protomer from a second
dimer could fit the third lobe or whether a new trimeric α3β3 structure would be required. The SEC-MALS
data indicate that ∼460–560 kDa M. capsulatus (Bath) MDH oligomers can form at high concentrations; such a mass
would be consistent with three or four α2β2 dimers or two or three α3β3 trimers. However, the M. capsulatus (Bath) MDH
structure reveals an α2β2 dimer
similar to other MDH structures with no evidence of a stable higher-order
oligomerization state. Given the absence of a stable assembly in the
∼460–560 kDa range in the structure and the heterogeneity
detected by SEC-MALS, it seems unlikely that a discrete higher-order
oligomerization state interacts with pMMO. Instead, a more transient
association of MDH dimers may occur in the presence of membrane-embedded
pMMO.

The crystal packing arrangement provides some insight
into how
multiple MDH dimers might assemble in vivo. In the
crystal, the dimers are arranged in pairs. The ∼460–560
kDa species observed by SEC-MALS may represent a partial assembly
of MDH dimers into weakly associated pairs. Within the crystal lattice,
all the β subunits are exposed to the solvent (Figure ). The β subunit is lysine-rich (11 of 72
residues), with five lysines at the N-terminus and the remainder protruding
from the C-terminal α helix. The exact function of the β
subunit and these lysine residues is not known. One possibility suggested
previously for methylotrophs is docking with cytochrome cL via electrostatic interactions, although cross-linking data point to interactions with the α
subunit., Alternatively, the positively charged lysine
residues might interact with pMMO or with negatively charged phospholipid
headgroups at the periplasmic membrane surface, analogous to the lysine-mediated
binding of the yeast copper chaperone for superoxide dismutase (CCS)
to lipid bilayers. In that system, interaction with the membrane allows
CCS to find its source of copper, the transporter Ctr1.

Importantly, the intracytoplasmic membranes
in methanotrophs typically
form stacked or bundled structures.,,, It is possible to envision
a “bilayer” of MDH as observed in the crystal lattice
(Figure ) interacting with multiple sections
of the pMMO-containing membranes. The formation of intracytoplasmic
membranes accompanies pMMO expression,, and beyond
housing pMMO, these membranes likely play a role in assembling other
membrane-bound and periplasmic proteins, including respiratory complexes.
Further study of the interplay among pMMO, MDH, intracytoplasmic membranes,
and other metabolic enzymes is an important direction for future work.

Supporting Information Available
SDS–PAGE analysis
of
purified M. capsulatus (Bath) MDH and SEC analysis
of purified M. capsulatus (Bath) MDH. This material
is available free of charge via the Internet at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bi500850j_si_001.pdf

Accession Codes
The coordinates
and structure factors have been deposited as Protein Data Bank entry 4TQO.

The authors declare no
competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
We thank Corey Janczak of the Northwestern
Keck Biophysics
Facility for assistance with instrumentation, data collection, and
data interpretation. In addition, we thank Sarah Sirajuddin for assistance
with M. capsulatus (Bath) fermentation, Eliza Zielazinski
for assistance with initial purification steps, and Thomas Lawton
for assistance with D-PAGE. Use of the Advanced Photon Source, an
Office of Science User Facility operated for the U.S. Department of
Energy (DOE) Office of Science by Argonne National Laboratory, was
supported by the U.S. DOE under Contract DE-AC02-06CH11357. Use of
LS-CAT Sector 21 was supported by the Michigan Economic Development
Corp. and the Michigan Technology Tri-Corridor (Grant 085P1000817).

Abbreviations
MMOmethane monooxygenase

sMMOsoluble methane monooxygenase

pMMOparticulate methane
monooxygenase

MDHmethanol dehydrogenase

PQQpyrroloquinoline quinone

cryoEMcryoelectron microscopy

SEC-MALSsize exclusion chromatography
with multi-angle light scattering

PMSphenazine methosulfate

NBTnitroblue tetrazolium

rmsdroot-mean-square deviation

D-PAGEDeriphat-polyacrylamide
gel electrophoresis.

