Cytochrome c’s are essential metalloproteins in the electron-transfer chain of
most living organisms, including all photosynthetic taxa. Metalloproteins
move electrons around the cell to produce energetic compounds that
drive cellular metabolism. Many of the photosynthetic electron-transfer
proteins of interest belong to the cytochrome c family.
Understanding their structure and function will contribute not only
to understanding photosynthesis, its evolution, and its role in early
Earth history but also to harnessing solar energy.

Cytochrome c’s are electron-transport hemoproteins
that are covalently bound through two thioether bonds between the
vinyl groups of a heme macrocycle and the sulfhydryls of a CXXCH heme-binding
motif. Two heme propionate groups are
exposed and can participate in hydrogen bonding. The main function
is to mediate single-electron-transfer reactions between protein electron
donors and acceptors via reversible oxidation/reduction of Fe2+ and Fe3+. The axial coordination of the heme
iron and its effect on other parts of the larger protein environment
play key roles in determining redox, electron-transfer, and other
properties of cytochrome c.,

Prokaryotic diheme cytochrome c’s, as representatives
of electron-transfer proteins with two iron centers, have been studied
mainly via various spectroscopic methods.− For example,
cytochrome c4 from Pseudomonas
stutzeri, which shares the same origin as DHCC and has a sequence similar to that of DHCC, possesses a strong hydrogen bond involving the heme propionate groups,
and the protein facilitates intramolecular, interheme electron transfer. Both hemes contain hexacoordinated iron involving
histidine and methionine axial ligands. The hydrogen bond in P. stutzeri closes one edge of the heme, allowing it to
act as the donor and the other as the acceptor.

DHCC from Heliobacterium modesticaldum, an early
evolving, Gram-positive phototrophic anaerobic prokaryote, plays a
role as the terminal electron acceptor in the high-potential electron-transfer
chain of the cytochrome bc complex. This complex
participates in the photosynthetic electron-transport cycle by oxidizing
the quinone pool, sending electrons to the reaction center, and pumping
protons to establish an electrochemical gradient that drives ATP production.
DHCC replaces the canonical monoheme cytochrome c1 in the cytochrome bc1 complex
or cytochrome f in the cytochrome b6f complex., DHCC has two c-type hemes that are predicted to reside in similar c-type cytochrome folds. The heme 1 domain is closer to
the N-terminal helix, whereas the heme 2 domain begins approximately
halfway through the sequence. The unusual diheme architecture is an
interesting contrast with those of the more common monoheme cytochromes.
In general, an electron transfer of one metal center induces conformational
changes in the site of the other, and that usually enhances the rates
of subsequent steps. Studying the structure,
function, and redox properties of this protein is crucial to the understanding
of the function of the entire heliobacterial cytochrome bc complex. Furthermore, an understanding of the Heliobacterium electron-transport chain (ETC), which is simpler and smaller than
later evolved organisms, can provide clues about how life and photosynthesis
evolved on Earth and possibly on other planets. Similarly, the simple
nature of the ETC makes it an attractive target for biomimicry in
solar energy production.−

Redox-dependent conformations of cytochrome c’s
have been studied extensively for decades by using various biochemical
and biophysical approaches.− Although some comparative X-ray crystallographic studies of tuna
heart cytochromes c show little or no difference
between the backbone structures, almost
all solution-based studies show a clear conformational change between
the two redox states.− Specifically, in the case of horse heart cytochrome c, the radius of the oxidized state is significantly larger
than that of the reduced state. Despite
the success of these approaches, there is a need for other methods.
For example, many biophysical techniques usually require a large amount
of sample,− which is not always available, and their structural
resolution is relatively low. In contrast,
mass spectrometry (MS) approaches are highly sensitive and exhibit
moderate structural resolution. For studying protein conformations,
hydrogen–deuterium exchange (HDX) coupled with MS is an effective
and now commonly employed approach.− The exchange rates for HDX are good readouts for
hydrogen bonding and solvent accessibility at global, peptide, and
even amino acid levels. It is also possible
to use HDX data to adjudicate protein subunit docking and ligand-binding
structural models.−

In HDX studies, one often compares the exchange
rate of the same
protein regions for two different states that are produced by some
protein perturbation (e.g., change in redox states or formation of a complex). Although each amino acid has different
intrinsic deuterium exchange rate constants, this causes no problem
because the experimental exchange rates between two states of the
protein are compared. Previously, HDX coupled with infrared spectroscopy
was used to study the conformations of reduced and oxidized horse
heart cytochrome c. Viala
and co-workers reported an HDX-MS study
of the same system, indicating a more open structure in the oxidized
state. Thus far, however, there are no HDX-MS studies of the DHCC
system. To test our proposed mechanism of the DHCC subunit of the
heliobacterial cytochrome bc complex, which involves
a more closed conformation upon reduction, we designed an HDX study of both the reduced and oxidized states
of the heliobacterial DHCC in an effort to achieve peptide level resolution
of structural changes.

Homology modeling (HM) is another common
approach to protein structure
and function, especially when data from other structural approaches
[e.g., X-ray crystallography and nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR)]
are not available. Although HM statistics for assigning model quality
do not necessarily reflect the in vivo structure
of the protein, the approach should be more accurate when coupled
with experimental approaches. HDX-MS with HM was used previously to
investigate docking and binding studies in combination with electron
microscopy.− These semiquantitative approaches rely on heavy computational techniques
and assess the quaternary structure of the protein. Here, we are using
HDX-MS results to direct HM to obtain a low-resolution understanding
of protein tertiary structure and to predict a reaction mechanism
for the complex. Our method relies on readily available applets for
modeling and HDX for making a qualitative structural distinction between
a buried or exposed region to adjudicate the models, quite unlike
the previous studies that use HDX to study the docking of ligands
or subunits. Success will provide insight into DHCC and establish
the utility of the combined approach for other protein systems.

Materials
and Methods
Protein Expression and Purification
The diheme cytochrome c subunit from the H. modesticaldum bc complex
was expressed in Escherichia coli with the cytochrome c insertion plasmid and purified as previously described,
yielding only the holoprotein. The N-terminal
transmembrane helix region was truncated to express only the fully
soluble portion of the protein. Postprocessing did not eliminate the
hemes, both being covalently bound to the protein.

Hydrogen–Deuterium
Exchange (HDX) of Reduced and Oxidized
Diheme Cytochrome c Samples
Differential,
solution HDX experiments were performed at 4 °C. DHCC in a 20
mM Tris-HCl buffer (pH 7.5) solution was incubated with either sodium
dithionite (reductant) or potassium ferricyanide (oxidant) at a final
concentration of 25 μM for both the protein and the reductant
or oxidant. The samples were equilibrated for 1 h prior to the initiation
of HDX. Continuous labeling was initiated by incubating 2 μL
of the mixture with 18 μL of D2O for seven predetermined
times (0.17, 0.5, 1, 2, 15, 60, and 240 min). The exchange reaction
was quenched by mixing the D2O solution with 30 μL
of 3 M urea and 1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) at 0 °C. The quenched
solution was then flash-frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at −80
°C for &lt;48 h prior to analysis.

The quenched sample
was then digested by being passed through a custom-packed pepsin column
(2 mm × 2 cm) at a rate of 200 μL/min; the peptides were
captured on a C8 trap column (2 mm × 1 cm, Agilent
Inc., Santa Clara, CA) and desalted with a 3 min flow. Peptides were
then separated by using a C18 column (2.1 mm × 5 cm,
1.9 μm, Hypersil Gold, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA)
with a 5 min linear gradient from 4 to 40% CH3CN in 0.1%
formic acid. Protein digestion and peptide separation were conducted
in an ice–water bath to minimize back exchange. All analyses
were conducted with a hybrid LTQ Orbitrap (Thermo Fisher Scientific,
San Jose, CA) at an ESI capillary temperature of 225 °C. Each
experiment was performed in duplicate.

Peptide Identification
and HDX Data Processing
MS/MS
experiments were performed on the same mass spectrometer. Product-ion spectra were acquired in a data-dependent mode, and the six most
abundant ions were selected for product ion analysis. The data files
were converted using MassMatrix Mass Spectrometric Data File Conversion
Tools (version 3.9) and then submitted to MassMatrix (version 2.4.2)
for peptide identification. Peptides
used for HDX data analysis had a MassMatrix score of ≥10, with
peptide and MS/MS tolerances for m/z of 10 ppm and 0.8 Da, respectively. The MS/MS MassMatrix search
was also performed against a decoy (reverse) sequence, and ambiguous
identifications were ruled out. The product-ion spectra of all peptide
ions from the MassMatrix search were manually inspected, and only
those manually inspected were used in the following steps. The centroid
masses of isotopic envelopes were calculated with HDX WorkBench: deuterium level (%) = {[m(P)
– m(N)]/[m(F) – m(N)]} × 100%, where m(P), m(N), and m(F) are centroid masses of partially
deuterated peptides, undeuterated peptides, and fully deuterated peptides,
respectively. To accommodate the situation in which a fully deuterated
control was not available, m(F) was determined with
the equation m(F) = m(N) + (n – p – 2)/z, where n and p represent the total
number of amino acids and prolines, respectively, and z represents the charge. The first two amino acids that do not retain
deuterium were not taken into consideration (the value “2”
in the equation). No correction was made for back exchange because
all values are used in a relative way (used in a two-state comparison)
and susceptible to the same back exchange processes.

Homology Modeling
and Model Refinement
Homology modeling
of DHCC was conducted with three different modeling platforms. The
first was MODELLER version 9.10 and
version 9.12 using alignment algorithms ClustalW2 and ClustalΩ,
respectively, with both Protein Data Bank (PDB) entries 1ETP() and 3MK7c() generating 100 models from each run.
The best models from each run were selected on the basis of the molpdf,
GA341, and DOPE scores. The best model from each run was then tested
by taking the experimental HDX data for each peptide as a measure
of the secondary and tertiary structure of that portion of the protein.
The amount of exchange in each section was compared to the secondary
and tertiary structure predicted by the model. For regions that disagreed,
the template to DHCC alignment was manually adjusted and another round
of models with the new alignment was generated until the best match
was obtained with the HDX data.

The second approach used models
that were generated using the Phyre2 and
I-TASSER online modeling suites. The
models generated from these two suites were compared to each other
because they do not allow for manual adjustment of the alignments
or parameters or further analysis options. Disorder prediction was
run on the best model in Phyre2. The top resulting model was compared
to the HDX data and to the MODELLER-generated models.

The third
approach was built on previous work in
which a complete model of the cytochrome bc complex
was built using the Phyre2 server to analyze the whole complex
structure and predict the mechanism for electron transfer within the
complex.

Assessment of the Solvent-Accessible Surface Area (SASA) of
Homology Models
The SASA was calculated for all four homology
models using GetArea. The SASA for the
backbone only was chosen as the value to be used in our assessment
because the only HDX that was counted was of the backbone hydrogens,
not the whole residue. The backbone SASA was calculated for each residue
and is reported in square angstroms. For comparison to the HDX data,
the SASA was averaged for all residues in each of the MS peptic peptides.
The percent of deuterium uptake was calculated by taking the average
of the initial and final point.

Results and Discussion
Prior to conducting HDX, we tested whether charge-state distributions
of the intact protein could provide coarse structural data to distinguish
the reduced and oxidized states of DHCC. Experiments revealed that
the conditions of native ESI are sufficiently oxidative to preclude
obtaining mass spectra for the pure reduced species. Expression of
the protein with the covalently bound heme precluded any comparisons
with the apo state. Thus, we turned to HDX footprinting to obtain
structural data for the DHCC protein.

HDX Shows the Oxidized
Form of DHCC Is More Flexible
An online pepsin digestion
of expressed and purified DHCC afforded
hundreds of peptides, of which 69 detected with a high signal/noise
ratio and validated MS/MS information were chosen for the subsequent
peptide mapping. The coverage is 95% (shown in Figure ), allowing us to assess nearly fully the protein in both
of the redox states. As mentioned above, no correction for back exchange
of the protein was made because all data were used in two-state comparisons
of the redox-state samples under identical conditions. All samples
were subjected to back exchange after quenching and processing, and
this converted any side chain deuteriums (e.g., on -NH2) back to hydrogens. Thus, it is the backbone deuteriums that remain
on the polypeptide for the LC–MS analysis. Changes in protein
dynamics, as reflected by HDX, reflect changes to the protein induced
by reduction. The resulting perturbations alter the conformation of
the protein backbone and its H bonding as reflected by changes in
HDX. Therefore, all fluctuations in HDX rates reflect only reduction-induced
changes. For example, we expect that less constrained regions should
exhibit relatively fast HDX, whereas structured and buried regions
exchange slowly.

HDX peptide coverage map for DHCC showing 95% coverage.
The same
peptides with different charge states are also shown.

We plotted the HDX kinetic curves for each of the
peptides from
both the reduced (Figure , solid lines, for
a representative set and Figure S1 of the , solid lines, for the remainder) and oxidized (Figure  and Figure S1 of the , dashed lines) states of the DHCC. When peptides
with different charges covered the same region, we found that the
results were nearly identical, indicating that the HDX results have
good precision. More importantly, we conducted each experiment in
duplicate and show the error bars (average deviations) in each plot.
To show more clearly the precision, we enlarged one of the typical
HDX plots to show the precision of the experiments (Figure S2 of the ). In summary, all the
HDX experiments afforded a 0–3% relative average deviation
for duplicate determinations.

Kinetic curves of selected peptides used for
HDX mapping for reduced
(—) and oxidized (---) states of the DHCC. Numbers in parentheses
with a plus sign are the charge states of the peptides.

The extents of HDX for most regions of the protein
are different
for the two states (oxidized and reduced), indicating that the structural
conformation of DHCC is redox-state-dependent. For those regions that
show differences, the oxidized state always shows a level of deuterium
uptake greater than that of the reduced state, indicating that the
oxidized state is more flexible (less structurally constrained). This
is consistent with other horse heart cytochrome c HDX studies that show that the oxidized state is more dynamic and
flexible than the reduced state.

The largest differences in HDX kinetics occur near the heme-binding
CXXCH motif (i.e., for peptides 1–29 and 109–127) (Figure ). These differences indicate that conformational
opening in the heme-binding region accompanies oxidation. This result
suggests that redox-dependent conformational changes begin at the
metal center. Comparing the changes in HDX for the oxidized and reduced
states at the two heme-binding pockets, we find similar outcomes.
Specifically, the oxidized protein undergoes between 30 and 50% HDX
at the two sites, whereas the reduced protein undergoes between 20
and 40% exchange (Figure ). Our previous reported
potentiometric titration of DHCC shows
a single observable midpoint potential, which is consistent with the
conclusion that the two heme-binding pockets have similar chemical
environments.

HDX Reflects Secondary Structure
Although four regions
display no changes upon reduction [e.g., 45–49, 130–138,
143–149, and 169–172 (Figure  and Figure S1 of the )], they can be viewed as controls because they indicate that regions
insensitive to oxidation do not show differences in HDX. Importantly,
these regions also show no detectable HDX as a function of time, indicating
that these regions are heavily H-bonded and/or buried in the protein.
We identify these four regions as being involved in tertiary structural
helix bundles (category I). We take this result to indicate that the
core structural components of DHCC do not change dramatically upon
reduction, whereas flexible regions are more likely to be affected
and participate in the conformational changes that accompany redox
changes. In contrast, region 173–208 undergoes extensive exchange,
even at short times (Figure ). We categorize
regions of this type to be a part of loops (category II).

Regions
that constitute a third category also show an increasing level of
HDX with time but to a more modest extent (none showed ≥90%
deuterium uptake). This lower level of HDX occurs in part because
the peptides are long and likely cover regions containing both H-bonded
helices and flexible loops, thus reporting an “average”
of these structural elements. For example, the peptides for region
78–108 show a level of deuterium uptake ranging from 20 to
50% for the reduced state and from 30 to 60% for the oxidized state
(Figure ). The helix region undergoes less
HDX, whereas the peptide bonds in the flexible loop exchange more
readily. Similarly, regions 78–91 and 92–108 also comprise
helix and loop structures and, thus, show an intermediate level of
deuterium uptake (∼60%). This intermediate exchange also pertains
to regions 109–127 and 150–168.

We also identified
a fourth category in which the level of HDX
at the shortest times is near zero but increases slowly with time
(Figure  and Figure S1 of the ). We identified these
regions, including 38–44, 50–57, and 128–142,
as being likely helices but not part of buried helix bundles.

Homology
Model Building and Assessment
A series of
homology models were generated with MODELLER and PHYRE2 (Figure  and Table ). To begin,
we chose template 1ETP because it is a bacterial cytochrome c4 protein, and the evolutionary origin of DHCC may be the cytochrome c4 protein family. Likewise, 1ETP undergoes electron transfer from a donor to an acceptor protein. We selected 3MK7c as the second template on the basis
of bioinformatic analysis. A BLAST search of the Protein Data Bank
with DHCC’s sequence returns 3MK7c as the most similar protein by alignment
statistics. Functionally, 3MK7c is a soluble member of a protein complex but resides
in the cytoplasm and accepts electrons from a cytoplasmic donor and
shuttles them into the complex, the opposite direction from which
DHCC should function. Both 1ETP and 3MK7c have hemes with
two different redox potentials. Although the generated homology models
do not incorporate the cofactor heme by nature of the program, the
templates we chose do include the cofactors within the protein. Even
though we did not add the hemes in the HM modeling, the protein structure
should still be representative. Functional considerations of the template
are a way to assess model quality.

Homology models A–D. Regions that
are colored red do not
agree with HDX results.

Homology Modeling Data
model	template	alignment
algorithm	percent similarity	percent identity	modeling
software	Molpdf score	
A	1ETP	Clustal W2	49% (100/205)	15% (32/205)	MODELLER version 9.10	0.24 (0.49, highest)	
B	1ETP	Clustal Omega	45% (92/205)	16% (33/205)	MODELLER version 9.10 and
version 9.12	0.12 (0.28, highest)	
C	3MK7c	Clustal W2	57% (116/205)	28% (68/205)	MODELLER version 9.10	0.46 (highest)	
D	3MK7c	Phyre2	57% (116/205)	28% (58/205)	I-TASSER and PHYRE2	3.2 Å resolution N/A	
Homology modeling (HM) statistics assess model quality in a more
quantitative way. The percent similarity and percent identity examine
the alignment of the template and model sequences. Amino acid residues
that align are examined to see if they are identical or in the same
category. The percent identity increases from model A to model B as
a result of manual alignment changes implemented on the basis of the
HDX data. Further increases in both percent similarity and percent
identity occur for models C and D, which use 3MK7 as a template (Table ). The higher these values, the more similar a model
is to the template and the more faithful the homology model. The 28%
identity achieved for models C and D is just under that preferred
for HM but is sufficient for further consideration. We also view it
as acceptable because there are so few diheme cytochromes with determined
structures in the PDB. After HM is run in MODELLER, score reports are
generated for each model. The molpdf score can be used to compare
models across runs. Model C has the highest molpdf score, indicating
it is the better homology model. Model B may be a better model functionally
as discussed below, but it has a lower molpdf score because manual
alignment changes were made (Table ). Homology
modeling data indicate that models C and D are better models; therefore, 3MK7c is the better
template. This result is based on only alignment and threading algorithms,
however, and does not speak to function or biochemical properties
of the models and templates. Thus, biochemical and/or biophysical
data are needed to assess these models further.

HDX Analysis
of DHCC with Its Homology Model
HDX data
generated by MS can provide biophysical data that, when mapped onto
the four homology models, should be able to test the correctness of
secondary and tertiary structures generated by the models (Figure  and Table ). For model
A, most of the regions that show discrepancies between the HDX results
and the HM outcomes are the helical regions (Figure A and Table ). For example, peptides
in category I show almost no deuterium uptake in either of the states
(Figure  and Figure S1 of the ), suggesting they participate
in the formation of tertiary structure, most likely a helix bundle.
In model A, however, only region 143–149 has the helix bundle
motif. Peptides 45–49 and 130–138 are modeled to be
a loop or a singular helix structure.
After the alignment is manually adjusted on the basis of this observation,
models B and C show better fits for fragments 45–49, 143–149,
and 169–172, as these regions are predicted to be helices in
helix
bundles. Furthermore, model A HM did not identify the second heme-binding
motif, and the alignment and subsequent modeling are poor in this
region, 109–127.

Comparison of HDX
Data and Homology
Models
 	 	 	 	 	 	HDX agreement
on the models	
region	category	model A	model B	model C	model D	A	B	C	D	
1–29	III	h/l	h/l	h/l	h/l	**	**	**	**	
33–37	III	h/l	l	l	l	**	 	 	*	
38–44	IV	h bundle	h/l	h/l	h/l	 	 	 	*	
45–49	I	h	h bundle	h/l	h bundle	 	**	 	**	
50–57	IV	l	l	h bundle	h/l	 	 	 	*	
58–65	II	l	l	l	l	**	**	**	**	
78–91	III	h/l	h/l	h/l	h/l	**	**	**	**	
92–108	III	h/l	h/l	h/l	h/l	**	**	**	**	
109–127	III	l	l	h/l	h/l	 	 	**	**	
128–142	IV	h/l	l	l	l	*	 	 	*	
143–149	I	h bundle	h bundle	h	h bundle	**	**	*	**	
150–168	III	h/l	h/l	h/l	h/l	**	**	**	**	
169–172	I	h	h bundle	h bundle	h bundle	 	**	**	**	
173–208	II	h/l	l	h/l	h/l	**	**	**	**	
Regions determined
by HDX. Most
of the regions are covered by multiple peptides, and they give similar
results.

Different regions
are assigned to
four categories on the basis of their HDX behavior.

Secondary and tertiary structure
elements in each model. h stands for helix, l for loop, h/l for a
mixture of helix and loop, and h bundle for a helix bundle.

Measures of degrees of agreement
between HDX and modeling results. Two asterisks denote agreement.
One asterisk denotes agreement with restrictions (information from
order prediction by Phyre2). Blank cells denote a lack of agreement.

To resolve regions for which
there is a lack of agreement, we generated
model B (Figure B and Table ) by manually adjusting the alignment on the basis of the
results of model A as evaluated by HDX. Model B showed improved agreement
between HDX and the HM structure. The helix bundle and second heme
regions predicted by model B are consistent with the experimental
results, but achieving these improvements sacrificed other regions
that had agreed with model A. For example, region 33–37 shows
as a loop, but it takes up only ∼50% of the possible deuterium.
On the other hand, a mostly loop region, 173–208, does show
∼70% HDX. In addition, residues 173–205 show the poorest
agreement with HDX results compared to other models, as the sequence
does not align with the template. 1ETP is a smaller protein, and in the adjustment
for the heme regions, residues at the end of DHCC were left without
template residues. As a result, this region is unstructured according
to model B. Even though this region shows the highest level of HDX
for the whole protein (∼70%), it still should have some secondary
structure. Despite these areas of disagreement, model B is better
than model A because the active regions of the protein are consistent
with the outcomes of both HDX and HM. Overall, the transition from
model A to model B demonstrates that HDX data can inform the manual
refinement and improve homology models.

Model C (Figure C and Table ) was developed
in the same manner as models A and B but used 3MK7c as a template.
Model C gives better agreement for the second heme-binding region,
109–127, than do models A and B (Table ). It also decreased the number of regions of disagreement. The model
points to a highly open structure, however, and it does not form the
expected two cytochrome c-type folds as seen in the
other models. Thus, model C, although affording better agreement in
the second heme region, is not a good model overall for DHCC.

Model D (Figure D and Table ) was generated from the online suites I-TASSER and Phyre2,
and nearly identical results were obtained after running both I-TASSER
and Phyre2. Both packages identified 3MK7c as the best template and gave highly
similar alignments and consequently identical models. Model D is presented
as that obtained by using Phyre2. It is consistent with the HDX results
in all regions of the subunit except regions 38–44, 50–57,
and 130–138 (Figure D and Table ). These regions are loops in model D; however,
they undergo a lower level of HDX, more typical of a rigid region.
The Phyre2 software includes a disorder prediction, identifying secondary
and tertiary structure (Figure ), and a disorder
prediction analysis was performed on model D. More order is predicted
for all three regions of disagreement, suggesting that, although they
are not α helices, there is more order in the region than can
be explained by a loop. The order in these regions is likely caused
by the interaction of the chains across the domains, as these regions
are in the middle where the two domains interact. Thus, the regions
of disagreement are actually areas of partial agreement. The region
containing residues 130–138 is the only region that is inconsistent
with all four models and across the three software packages, suggesting
that the region is different from that seen in the templates. Taking
all the evidence together, we conclude that model D best agrees with
the HDX data.

Model D with disorder prediction data. A warmer color
and a larger
number indicate a more disordered region. Color codes are shown on
the right.

SASA Calculation Shows
Model D Correlates Best with the HDX
Data
A correlation of SASA at the peptide level (calculated
as an average of the SASA for the individual amino acids comprising
the region) and the average extents of HDX for the corresponding peptide
regions confirmed our assignment of model D as the best homology model
of DHCC (Figure  and Figure S3 of the ). This model gave the
best correlation coefficient in comparison to correlations with models
A–C. In fact, SASA analysis disagreed in only one area with
model D. Model C has the most open structure and, thus, larger SASA
values. Overall, SASA analysis is a more quantitative assessment to
illustrate that model D is the best model presented thus far.

Correlation
of HDX and SASA data for both model A (A) and model
D (B). The Pearson correlation coefficients (R) are
colored red. Similar plots for the other models are given in the .

Mapping of HDX Data onto Model D
To view the two redox
states at the protein level, we mapped the HDX differences between
the two redox states of DHCC taken as an average of the differences
for each time point onto homology model D (Figure ). The most prominent difference occurs for the short helix
in the heme 2 domain (colored blue in Figure ). In agreement with the kinetic traces, most helical and loop regions
around the heme sites have larger differences, indicating that structural
changes accompany the redox chemistry. Adding credibility to this
conclusion is the fact that the cores of the two helix bundles show
no significant changes.

Differences in deuterium uptake between the
oxidized and reduced
states of DHCC are mapped onto model D. Color codes show the differences
(oxidized state subtracted from reduced state).

We also mapped the extent of HDX for all the peptide regions
onto
our best model, model D, with a color scheme indicating the amount
of exchange at each time point (Figure ).
Instead of an overall picture of kinetics information as in Figure , these maps show the dynamics of the protein at
each time point. By comparing the same state at different times, we
see that most of the regions of the oxidized state are dynamic, acquiring
more and more deuterium as seen by the increasingly warmer colors.

Deuterium
uptake levels for all peptides are mapped with color
for each exchange point onto model D. The figures for the oxidized
state are in panel A and those for the reduced state in panel B. Color
codes are shown at the right.

General features of the protein’s secondary structure
are
seen by the different HDX extents. Loop regions achieve either a level
of HDX higher than that of helices or a similar level at an earlier
time. Those loops undergoing less HDX are more ordered and constrained
by interactions within the protein. The core regions within the helix
bundle are always seen as cold colors, indicating they are so inflexible
that the level of HDX is low even after incubation for 4 h. The data
reveal important trends about the impact of changing redox states
as well as the secondary and tertiary structural and solvent accessibility
changes of DHCC.

Proposed Function of DHCC
HDX provides
kinetics and
dynamics information about the peptide level of DHCC in both reduced
and oxidized states, whereas HM provides a potential protein structure
even in the absence of a crystal structure. HM can yield only models
that are as good as the information entered, and they cannot provide
the high-resolution structural information from a crystal structure.
The approach described here takes HM statistics and complements them
with HDX results to assess model agreement. We used HDX data to refine
model A and correct areas of disagreement to generate model B. Likewise,
we used HDX to determine if model B were more informative, and we
found that it is in better agreement with HDX than model A, demonstrating
the utility of HDX data for testing and refining a homology model.
Comparing all four models, we found that model D had the highest HM
statistics and the best agreement with HDX, including a good correlation
with SASA. We subsequently selected it as the best model for the protein
structure.

Functionally, the choice of templates will bias the
predicted model. The DHCCs 1ETP and 3MK7c are the best templates for structural alignments and are both soluble
proteins that contain two c-type hemes. Neither protein
has been chemically oxidized or reduced; thus, the template structure
is probably a mix of both forms. 1ETP, from P. stutzeri, is
a periplasmic diheme cytochrome c4. It
does not belong to a complex but instead shuttles electrons between
complexes in an electron-transport chain. The two hemes are located
in different protein environments, yielding two distinct redox potentials
and allowing for interheme electron transfer. Protein 3MK7c, from P. stutzeri, is a subunit of the cbb3 cytochrome oxidase. Like DHCC, 3MK7c is a soluble subunit with an N-terminal
anchor. The cytochrome cbb3 complex, however,
moves electrons in the opposite direction of the cytochrome bc complex. As for 1ETP, 3MK7c has two distinct redox potentials, but they differ to a greater
extent than do those of 1ETP. Interheme electron transfer is still observed. On
the basis of their biological roles, 3MK7c is closer functionally to DHCC. This
agrees with the observation that model D accommodates better the HM
parameters and the HDX data.

Numerous solution-based spectroscopic
and computational studies
have shown that there is a conformational change between the reduced
and oxidized states of horse heart cytochrome c., These results are in apparent conflict with high-resolution crystallographic
data that show the crystal structures of the two states are similar. One explanation is that the solid-state X-ray
structure does not reflect the solution structure, which is likely
to be dynamic. It was proposed that the oxidized state undergoes lower-frequency
and larger-amplitude motions than the reduced state. Our HDX results for DHCC suggest that there are significant
structural differences between the two different redox states. It
is also possible that both X-ray structures represent the reduced
form of the protein, produced by X-ray irradiation.

Just as
the HDX kinetics suggest a redox-dependent conformational
change for DHCC, they also indicate areas that are likely more solvent-accessible
(less H-bonded). The heme 2 domain particularly exhibits faster exchange.
It follows that the heme 2 domain interacts with the soluble electron
acceptor cytochrome c553. Similarly, in vivo, the heme 1 domain would have an N-terminal helix
anchoring the protein to the b and IV subunits of
the bc complex. Heme 1 would also then interact with
the Rieske subunit. These subunit–subunit interactions would
lower the HDX rates in the heme 1 region, which is observed.

For monoheme cytochromes, electron transfer is a two-step process.
After the electron donor binds with and reduces the cytochrome, the
cytochrome binds the electron acceptor and passes the electron to
it. DHCC, as other diheme cytochrome c’s,
adds one more step, the intramolecular interheme electron transfer.
In DHCCs from other species, the two hemes usually possess two distinct
macroscopic redox potentials (e.g., 240 and 330 mV for cytochrome c4 from P. stutzeri). The values
are consistent with the negative and positive electrostatic charges
of the two domains. The direction of
the electrostatic field within the protein gives rise to the distinct
heme redox potentials and directs the flow of the electron from the
lower- to higher-potential heme. The DHCC from the Heliobacterium cytochrome bc complex, as studied here, however,
has only one redox midpotential, indicating
similar chemical environments around the two heme-binding pockets.
The HDX kinetic data are consistent with this observation. The significant
conformational changes upon reduction, as revealed by HDX, may work
to facilitate an interheme electron transfer despite the observation
of a single midpoint potential in vitro. Our results
point to formation of a closed structure upon reduction of the protein,
providing a shorter distance between the two hemes. In P.
stutzeri, the interheme electron transfer occurs upon hydrogen
bond formation between the heme propionate groups and a surrounding
hydrogen-bond network established by a conformational change to the
reduced state, producing the shorter heme–heme distance and
an altered heme environment. Such alterations change the redox potential
and facilitate interheme electron transfer. It is likely that only
one redox potential is observed in vitro because
the heme environments are sensitive to the truncated N-terminal helix
and subunit interactions that are missing in the expressed DHCC. Thus,
our prediction is consistent with the in vitro data.

On the basis of the evidence discussed above, we can propose a
potential complex mechanism for the H. modesticaldum bc complex (Figure ). As for other bc1 or b6f complexes, menaquinol enters at the Qo site., Two electrons and two protons are removed, one at a time in a bifurcated
electron transfer. The first electron is transferred quickly to the
Rieske iron–sulfur cluster, reducing the Rieske cluster and
causing it to move toward the periplasm, preventing rapid back transfer
of the electron to Qo. The Rieske cluster is then in position
to transfer an electron to heme 1 of DHCC. Docking of the Rieske cluster
is probably the first step in inducing the redox-based conformational
changes of DHCC. On the basis of the mechanism of interheme electron
transfer within other diheme cytochrome c’s,
reducing heme 1 changes the conformation and causes formation of a
hydrogen-bonding network that permits rapid interheme electron transfer.
Heme 2 then donates the electron to soluble cytochrome c553, which departs, allowing the Rieske to return to Qo. The second electron would then travel down the b heme pathway, reducing menaquinone at the Qi site. Another
menaquinol docks, and the process is repeated, completing one turnover
of the bc complex and translocating a net of two
protons to the periplasm.

(A and B) Assumed dimer of the H. modesticaldum cytochrome bc complex: blue for the cytochrome b subunit, purple for the Fe–S subunit, and green
for the cytochrome f subunit. (A) Imagined left half
of dimer shown as homology-modeled subunits of the H. modesticaldum cytochrome bc complex. (B) Right side of the dimer
shown as the determined crystal structure of the cytochrome bc1 complex from Rhodobacter sphaeroides used as the template for Figure A. Heme
cofactors are colored red. (C) Proposed H. modesticaldum cytochrome bc complex bifurcated electron-transfer
steps and mechanism: Q for quinones, Qo for the quinone
oxidation site, Qi for the quinone reduction site, R for
Rieske Fe–S, bL,H for b-type hemes,
H1,2 for DHCC c-type hemes, and c553 for electron acceptor soluble cytochrome c553.

Such a mechanism is efficient for many species with a monoheme
but not with a diheme cytochrome. Dihemes often result from gene duplication
that could be random. However, multiheme
systems in nature serve to transport electrons rapidly or to store
electrons. In the mechanism proposed
here, the diheme is fulfilling both of these functions. The interheme
electron transfer has been observed to be very rapid compared to transfer
to a donor and can be used to prevent back reaction with the Rieske
cluster. Additionally, if cytochrome c553 is scarce or turning over at a rate slower than that of the bc complex, the diheme can store an electron and wait for
cytochrome c553 without significantly
hindering the turnover rate of the bc complex. Further
study, particularly crystallographic information and inhibitor studies,
will clarify these mechanistic proposals.

Conclusions
HDX
data, when used in conjunction with HM and verified by SASA,
improve protein structure models and allow mechanistic predictions.
For DHCC, HDX kinetic analysis reveals that the oxidized state is
more dynamic and open than the reduced state. This is seen in loop
regions that generally undergo more extensive HDX at shorter times.
The bundle core regions do not show significant differences between
the redox states, suggesting that they are stable and undergo little
conformational change during redox cycling. Redox-dependent conformational
change facilitates the formation of potential hydrogen bonds, permitting
interheme electron transfer. The dynamics data reveal faster uptake
on the heme 2 domain, suggesting that it is the site of donation of
electrons to cytochrome c553. This evidence
is used to predict the mechanism for the bc complex
of H. modesticaldum.

The study provides insight
into the relation of conformational
change to the binding of the electron donor Rieske subunit and soluble
electron acceptor, cytochrome c553, and
the function of the DHCC subunit within the bc complex
of the H. modesticaldum photosynthetic electron-transfer
chain. In addition, we believe that the combined approach of modeling
and protein footprinting will be useful for other problems in structural
biology in which protein crystal or NMR structures are lacking. Information
at the amino acid level, such as what can be provided by HDX with
electron capture dissociation or electron-transfer dissociation or
by OH radical footprinting (e.g., FPOP), will improve the ability
to distinguish models.

Supporting Information Available
Figures S1–S3. This material is available free of charge
via the Internet at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bi500420y_si_001.pdf

The authors
declare no
competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
We acknowledge
helpful discussions with and support in our
utilization of HDX WorkBench from Dr. Bruce Pascal at The Scripps
Research Institute (Jupiter, FL). We also acknowledge Dr. Manolo
D. Plasencia for help in the calculation of SASA data.

Abbreviations
HDX-MShydrogen–deuterium exchange
mass spectrometry

HMhomology modeling

DHCCdiheme cytochrome c

TFAtrifluoroacetic acid.

