

   
BiochemistryBiochemistrybibichawBiochemistry0006-29601520-4995American
Chemical Society 10.1021/bi500711xArticleThermodynamics of Binding of Structurally Similar
Ligands to Histone Deacetylase 8 Sheds Light on Challenges in the
Rational Design of Potent and Isozyme-Selective Inhibitors of the
Enzyme Singh Raushan K. *†Suzuki Takayoshi ‡Mandal Tanmay †Balsubramanian Narayanaganesh †Haldar Manas §Mueller Dustin J. †Strode Jerrod A. †Cook Gregory †Mallik Sanku §Srivastava D. K. *†† Department
of Chemistry and Biochemistry, North Dakota
State University, Fargo, North Dakota 58102, United States‡ Graduate
School of Medical Science, Kyoto Prefectural
University of Medicine, Kyoto 603-8334, Japan§ Department
of Pharmaceutical Sciences, North Dakota
State University, Fargo, North Dakota 58102, United States* E-mail: raushan.singh@ndsu.edu.* E-mail: dk.srivastava@ndsu.edu.19 11 2015 19 11 2014 09 12 2014 53 48 7445 7458 07 06 2014 16 11 2014 Copyright © 2014 American
Chemical Society2014American
Chemical SocietyThis is an open access article published under an ACS AuthorChoice License, which permits copying and redistribution of the article or any adaptations for non-commercial purposes.

Among the different histone deacetylase
(HDAC) isozymes, HDAC8
is the most highly malleable enzyme, and it exhibits the potential
to accommodate structurally diverse ligands (albeit with moderate
binding affinities) in its active site pocket. To probe the molecular
basis of this feature, we performed detailed thermodynamic studies
of the binding of structurally similar ligands, which differed with
respect to the “cap”, “linker”, and “metal-binding”
regions of the suberoylanilide hydroxamic acid (SAHA) pharmacophore,
to HDAC8. The experimental data revealed that although the enthalpic
(ΔH°) and entropic (ΔS°) changes for the binding of individual SAHA analogues to HDAC8
were substantially different, their binding free energies (ΔG°) were markedly similar, conforming to a strong enthalpy–entropy
compensation effect. This effect was further observed in the temperature-dependent
thermodynamics of binding of all SAHA analogues to the enzyme. Notably,
in contrast to other metalloenzymes, our isothermal titration calorimetry
experiments (performed in different buffers of varying ionization
enthalpies) suggest that depending on the ligand, its zinc-binding
group may or may not be deprotonated upon the binding to HDAC8. Furthermore,
the heat capacity changes (ΔCp°) associated with the ligand binding
to HDAC8 markedly differed from one SAHA analogue to the other, and
such features could primarily be rationalized in light of the dynamic
flexibility in the enzyme structure in conjunction with the reorganization
of the active site resident water molecules. Arguments are presented
that although the binding thermodynamic features described above would
facilitate identification of weak to moderately tight-binding HDAC8
inhibitors (by a high-throughput and/or virtual screening of libraries
of small molecules), they would pose major challenges for the structure-based
rational design of highly potent and isozyme-selective inhibitors
of human HDAC8.

National Institutes of Health, United Statesdocument-id-old-9bi500711xdocument-id-new-14bi-2014-00711xccc-price

   
Biophysical
and mechanistic
studies of enzyme–ligand interactions are routinely pursued
to gain molecular insights into the structural–functional features
of enzymes.1 The knowledge gained from
such studies is widely utilized in the structure-based rational design
of enzyme inhibitors as novel therapeutics.2 Although the structure-based strategy has been successful with certain
enzymes, its widespread utility is often limited because of the inherent
structural flexibility of enzymes and proteins.3,4 Apparently,
the “static” structural information obtained from the
X-ray crystallographic studies cannot be reliably utilized for the
affinity optimization of lead molecules in a drug discovery program.5,6 Furthermore, the structure-based rational design of the isozyme-selective
inhibitor for an enzyme is even more challenging because of the conserved
active site pocket shared by its isozymes.

In investigating
the structural–functional features of human
histone deacetylases (HDACs), we as well as others have realized that
among the different HDAC isozymes, HDAC8 is the most highly flexible
and/or malleable enzyme, and thereby, it possess the capability of
accommodating a wide range of structurally diverse ligands into its
active site pocket.7−9 Notably, unlike the other HDAC isozymes, HDAC8 exhibits
weaker binding affinities for all the “pan” (nonspecific)
HDAC inhibitors as well as the fluorogenic acetylated peptide substrate.10−12

Histone deacetylases (HDACs) are hydrolytic enzymes that catalyze
the deacetylation of an acetylated lysine moiety of histones as well
as non-histone proteins.13,14 The human HDAC isozymes
are categorized into four major classes based on their phylogeny.
Class I HDACs (HDAC1–3 and -8) and class II HDACs (HDAC4, -6,
-7, -9, and -10) are metal-dependent deacetylases and are inhibited
by canonical HDAC inhibitors such as TSA (trichostatin A) and SAHA
(suberoylanilide hydroxamic acid).13,15 In contrast,
class III HDACs (sirtuins) are metal-independent enzymes that utilize
NAD+ as a cosubstrate.16 Class
IV HDAC (HDAC11) is phylogenetically unrelated to all the other classes
of HDAC.17

An aberrant expression
of several HDAC isozymes (including HDAC8)
has been linked with various pathological conditions, including cancer.18−22 HDAC8 has been found to be overexpressed in neuroblastoma tumor,
which accounts for ∼7% of the total pediatric cancers.19,20 An inhibition of the catalytic activity of HDAC induces growth arrest
and apoptosis in various malignant cells as well as in xenograft mouse
models. HDAC inhibitors, namely, SAHA and Romidepsin, have already
been approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) for the
treatment of T-cell lymphoma.23,24 These inhibitors reportedly
produce side effects in clinical settings primarily due to the lack
of target specificity and/or selectivity. Thus, there has been an
ongoing effort to design and/or discover isozyme-selective inhibitors
of human HDACs.24

X-ray crystallographic
studies of ligand–protein interaction
have unraveled the mode of binding of an HDAC inhibitor to the enzyme
active site pocket.7−9 On the basis of the structural data of the enzyme–ligand
complex, a canonical inhibitor, such as SAHA, has been shown to contain
“cap”, “linker”, and “metal-binding”
regions (Figure 1). Notably, the knowledge
gained from the structural studies of HDAC8–ligand complexes
has been utilized for the structure-based rational design of HDAC8-selective
inhibitors by modifying different regions of the SAHA pharmacophore,
which has largely been unsuccessful. However, a high-throughput screening
of libraries of small molecules has led to the identification of several
HDAC8-selective inhibitors, which bear no structural resemblance to
a canonical enzyme inhibitor.25−27

Figure 1 Crystal structure of HDAC8 bound with
SAHA (Protein Data Bank entry 1T69) showing the “cap”,
“linker”, and “metal-binding” regions
of the ligand. The gray contour represents the inner surface of the
enzyme’s ligand-binding cavity. This figure was generated using
UCSF Chimera (http://www.cgl.ucsf.edu/chimera/).

It has been widely recognized
that the therapeutic efficacy of
enzyme inhibitors (as potential drugs) in clinical settings is directly
related to the thermodynamic (e.g., ΔH°,
ΔS°, and ΔCp°) parameters
of the enzyme–inhibitor complexes.28−31 For instance, the in
vivo efficacy of the drugs, which interfere with the CD4–gp120
interaction (involved in the HIV infection), has been correlated with
the thermodynamic parameters (viz., enthalpy and entropy) of the drug–target
complexes.32 Likewise, the therapeutic
efficacy of the HMG–CoA inhibitors (statins) has been positively
correlated with their enthalpies of binding to the enzyme.30 The drug-induced conformational modulation of
the target protein dictates the cellular efficacy of the drug, presumably
by altering the protein–protein interaction networks associated
with various cellular processes.33

In view of the facts described above, we purported to investigate
the contribution of the different segments of the SAHA pharmacophore
(i.e., “cap”, “linker”, and “metal-binding”
regions) in determining the overall thermodynamics of binding of the
inhibitor to HDAC8. This was achieved by performing the isothermal
titration calorimetry (ITC) studies for the binding of the selected
SAHA analogues (Figure 2) that slightly differed
with respect to the “cap”, “linker”, and
“metal-binding” regions. We conceived that the knowledge
gained from the thermodynamic studies would provide insights into
the structure-based rational design of tight-binding and/or isozyme-selective
inhibitors for HDAC8. Our experimental data revealed that although
the enthalpic and entropic changes for the binding of these SAHA analogues
to the enzyme were different, their binding free energies were markedly
similar. Furthermore, the magnitudes of the proton inventory, intrinsic
enthalpic changes, and heat capacity changes associated with the enzyme–ligand
complexes significantly differed from one SAHA analogue to the other,
and such differences could not be rationalized in light of the structural
differences among the ligands and/or their plausible complexes with
the enzyme. Our experimental outcomes presented herein shed light
on the potential challenges of structure-based rational design of
highly potent and isozyme-selective inhibitors of HDAC8.

Figure 2 Chemical structures
of the SAHA analogues containing different
“cap”, “linker”, and “metal-binding”
groups.

Materials and Methods
The recombinant
form of human HDAC8 was overexpressed and purified
from a heterologous host (Escherichia coli) using
the protocols described previously.34 All
the reagents used in experiments were of analytical grade. Trichostatin
A (TSA) was purchased from Sigma. SAHA (suberoylanilide hydroxamic
acid) was custom synthesized by Enzo Life Sciences (Plymouth Meeting,
PA). Coumarin-SAHA (C6-cSAHA) and thiol-SAHA (t-SAHA) were synthesized
in our laboratory as described previously.34,35

C7-cSAHA and MH-12/4 were synthesized in our laboratory using
the
synthetic protocol described below. The synthetic scheme of C7-cSAHA
was similar to that of C6-cSAHA34 except
for the use of azelaic acid monomethyl ester in the former case as
opposed to suberic acid monomethyl ester in the latter. The physical
characteristics and the nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) data of C7-cSAHA
are as follows: C19H24N2O4; off-white solid; 1H NMR (DMSO-d6, 400 MHz) δ 1.29 (m, 4H), 1.46–1.51 (q, J = 6.7 Hz, 2H), 1.59 (m, 2H), 1.91–1.95 (t, J = 7.2 Hz, 2H), 2.34–2.37 (t, J = 7.4 Hz, 2H), 2.39 (s, 2H), 6.25 (s, 2H), 7.47–7.49 (d, J = 7.1, 2H), 7.69–7.71 (d, J =
8.6, 2H), 7.77 (s, 2H), 10.48 (s, 1H); 13C NMR (DMSO-d6, 100 MHz) δ 7.4,14.3, 14.6, 18.0, 21.7,
26.0, 28.4, 94.9, 101.5, 104.2, 104.5, 115.3, 132.2, 142.6, 143.2,
149.5, 158.5, 161.6.

MH-12/4 was synthesized (Scheme 1) using
a similar method as described previously.36 The detail synthetic protocol and the physical characteristics of
the intermediates are given below.

Scheme 1 Synthetic Scheme of MH-12/4
2-(4-Pyren-1-yl-butyrylamino)-propionic Acid
Methyl Ester (2)
Methyl alanine hydrochloride
(279 mg, 2 mmol)
was added to a solution of 4-pyren-1-yl-butyric acid (1) (576 mg, 2 mmol) prepared in DMF (20 mL). HOAt (272 mg, 2 mmol)
and HATU (761 mg, 2 mmol) were added to the reaction mixture, followed
by DIPEA (774 mg, 6 mmol). The mixture was stirred overnight under
a nitrogen atmosphere at room temperature. The reaction was quenched
with brine, and subsequently, DMF was evaporated under reduced pressure.
The resulting residue was dissolved in dichloromethane, washed with
10% citric acid, 4% NaHCO3, and brine, and then dried using
Na2SO4. The solvent was evaporated, and the
residue was purified by flash chromatography (Rf = 0.6 in a 3:1 ethyl acetate/hexane mixture)
that yielded 521 mg (70% yield) of the pure compound: 1H NMR (DMSO-d6, 400 MHz) δ 1.20
(d, 3H, J = 8 Hz), 2.01–2.04, (m, 2H), 2.30–2.32
(m, 2H), 3.30–3.33 (m, 2H), 3.70 (s, 3H), 4.20–4.41
(m, 1H), 7.89 (d, 1H, J = 10.4 Hz), 7.99–8.01
(m, 1H), 8.08–8.23 (m, 6H), 8.31 (d, 1H, J = 9.2 Hz), 8.43 (m, 1H).

N-(1-Hydroxycarbamoyl-ethyl)-4-pyren-1-yl-butyramide
(3)
Compound 2 was reacted with
NH2OH and KOH in methanol. After the reaction, the pH of
the reaction medium was adjusted to 3–4 using a solution of
2 N HCl. The reaction mixture was further diluted upon the addition
of water, which yielded a white precipitate. The resulting mixture
was cooled to 4 °C, and the precipitate was filtered and dried
under vacuum to produce the final product: 41% yield; 1H NMR (DMSO-d6, 400 MHz) δ 1.15
(d, 3H, J = 8 Hz), 1.95–1.97 (m, 2H), 2.24–2.27
(m, 2H), 3.26–3.28 (m, 2H), 4.2–4.23 (m, 1H), 7.95 (d,
1H, J = 6.4 Hz), 8.05–8.08 (m, 2H), 8.11–8.15
(m, 2H), 8.22 (d, 1H, J = 4 Hz), 8.24 (d, 1H, J = 2.8 Hz), 8.26–8.29 (t, 2H, J = 12, 6 Hz), 8.40 (d, 1H, J = 7.6 Hz); 13C NMR (DMSO-d6, 100.6 MHz) δ 19.11,
28.16, 32.94, 35.41, 46.56, 124.23, 124.82, 124.90, 125.43, 125.59,
126.78, 127.14, 127.87, 128.11, 128.21, 128.82, 129.96, 131.11, 131.55,
137.33, 169.91, 172.28.

Isothermal Titration Calorimetry (ITC) Studies
The
thermodynamic parameters for the binding of inhibitors to HDAC8 were
determined by isothermal titration calorimetry on a VP-ITC instrument
(Microcal Inc., Northampton, MA). All the ITC experiments were performed
in at least duplicate or triplicate, and the mean values of the ITC-derived
thermodynamic parameters along with the standard deviation are reported
in the Results and Discussion. To ensure that the recombinant enzyme expressed and purified in
our experimental settings was fully active, we determined its specific
activity when it was freshly prepared as well as prior to performing
the thermodynamic experiments. For thermodynamic experiments, we used
the enzyme that has &gt;90% of its maximal specific activity. For
every
batch of the enzyme (of highest purity), we performed a control ITC
titration experiment with SAHA. Because SAHA invariably gives a stoichiometry
of 0.9–1, we calculated the “active site” concentration
of the enzyme based on the observed (ITC-derived) stoichiometry of
the enzyme–SAHA complex. In most batches of freshly prepared
enzyme, the specific activity of the enzyme directly correlated with
its “active site” concentration. Hence, we did not have
to normalize the enzyme concentration based on the observed stoichiometry
of the enzyme–SAHA complex.37 The
observed stoichiometry for the binding of all the ligands was close
to 1.

HDAC8 and inhibitor solutions were prepared in a 50 mM
Tris/Hepes/triethanolamine/phosphate mixture (pH 7.5) containing 100
mM NaCl and 1 mM TCEP, and they were thoroughly degassed under vacuum.
The sample cell of the calorimeter was filled with 1.8 mL (effective
volume of 1.4 mL) of 10 μM HDAC8 in a 50 mM Tris/Hepes/triethanolamine/phosphate
mixture (pH 7.5) containing 100 mM NaCl and 1 mM TCEP. The enzyme
was titrated with 45 aliquots (4 μL each) of 200/400 μM
inhibitor (ligand), prepared in the buffers described above. During
the course of the titration, the reaction mixture was continuously
stirred at 300 rpm. The magnitude of heat produced per injection was
calculated by integrating the area under each peak using Origin provided
by Microcal. The experimentally observed heat signals were corrected
for the background heat signals, which were essentially the heats
of dilution of the ligands in the buffer. In most cases, the background
signals were comparable to the heat signals obtained at the end of
the titration. Hence, the analysis of the ITC data produced similar
results whether we subtracted the heat of dilution signals or the
residual heat signal (average of five injections) present at the end
of the titration (when the enzyme was fully saturated by the ligand).
However, to avoid any unforeseen error in the data analysis, we performed
the heat of dilution (control titration) experiment with all the ligands
utilized herein, and those control experimental data along with the
corresponding ITC titration profiles for the binding of different
ligands to HDAC8 are shown in the Supporting Information (see Figures S1–S6). The background-subtracted ITC data are
presented as the amount of heat produced per mole of the injectant
(ligand) as a function of the molar ratio of the ligand to enzyme.
To ensure that the enzyme is fully saturated with the ligand (in view
of their binding affinities in the micromolar range), we maintained
the molar ratio of the ligand to enzyme in the range of 3–5.
The experimental data were analyzed using the single-site binding
model as described previously by Wiseman et al.,38 which yielded the magnitudes of the stoichiometry (n), the association constant (Ka), and the standard enthalpy change (ΔH°) for the binding of ligands to HDAC8.

Proton Inventory
and Intrinsic Enthalpies for the Binding of
Inhibitors to HDAC8
To determine the proton inventory and
the intrinsic enthalpic parameters for the binding of the ligands
to HDAC8, the ITC experiments were performed in four different buffers,
phosphate, Hepes, triethanolamine, and Tris at pH 7.5, which have
different ionization enthalpies (ΔH°ion).39 The
magnitude of ΔH°obs obtained from the ITC titration experiments was plotted
as a function of the ionization enthalpies (ΔH°ion) of the buffers mentioned
above. The data were analyzed by eq 1. 1  where ΔH°ins is the intrinsic
enthalpy for the binding of inhibitor
to the enzyme, ΔH°ion is the ionization enthalpy of the buffer, and p is the moles of proton released upon binding of inhibitor to HDAC8.

Temperature-Dependent Isothermal Titration Calorimetry (ITC)
Studies
To determine the magnitude of heat capacity changes
(ΔCp°) associated with the binding of inhibitors to HDAC8, ITC experiments
were performed in the temperature range of 5–25 °C in
Tris-HCl buffer, whose ΔCp° value for the ionization is the lowest
among all the buffers mentioned above.39 HDAC8 was found to be thermally stable in the temperature range
described above, which is evident from the temperature-dependent catalytic
activity of the enzyme as well as the CD spectra of the protein (data
not shown). The ΔCp° values for the binding of the inhibitors
were calculated as the temperature derivatives of the binding enthalpies.

Calculation of Solvent Accessible Surface Areas
The
solvent accessible polar and nonpolar surface areas (SAS) of apo-HDAC8
and the HDAC8–inhibitor complexes were determined using GETAREA.40 The coordinates of apo-HDAC8 [Protein Data Bank
(PDB) entry 3F07], HDAC8–TSA (PDB entry 1T64), and HDAC8–SAHA (PDB entry 1T69) complexes were
downloaded. The HDAC8 monomers (PDB entry 3F07) containing the bound ligands were separated
from the PDB files. The water molecules were manually deleted prior
to submitting the PDB files to the GETAREA web service (http://curie.utmb.edu/getarea.html). A default value for the probe radius (1.4 Å) was used for
the calculation of solvent water accessible surface areas. The structures
of SAHA and TSA were generated using Chem3D (Cambridge Software),
and they were converted into Mol2 file format. These Mol2 files were
used to determine the solvent accessible surface areas of free inhibitors
using MarvinView version 6.1.2 (ChemAxon Ltd.). The changes in solvent
accessible surface areas (ΔSAS) upon binding of inhibitors to
HADC8 were calculated using the following equation. 2  Such calculation
shows that the binding of
SAHA to HDAC8 leads to the burial of 799 and 216 Å2 of nonpolar and polar solvent accessible surface area (SAS), respectively.
The corresponding values for TSA binding were 951 and 131 Å2, respectively. Hence, the burial of the nonpolar SAS for
TSA binding is 152.38 Å2 higher than that of SAHA.
Taking into account the changes in the polar and nonpolar solvent
accessible surface areas, we estimated the magnitudes of ΔCp° as
described by Murphy and Freire.41 The calculated
values of ΔCp° for the binding of TSA and SAHA to HDAC8 were found
to be −1.64 and −1.2 kcal mol–1 K–1, respectively.

Results
To delineate
the thermodynamic contributions for the binding of
different regions (viz., “cap”, “linker”,
and “metal-binding”) of the SAHA pharmacophore to HDAC8,
we selected the following SAHA analogues (Figure 2): (1) the normal SAHA with an anilino group as the “cap”,
a linear aliphatic C6 as the “linker”, and a hydroxamate
as the “metal-binding” moiety, (2) C6-coumarin-SAHA
(C6-cSAHA), which is similar to SAHA except for the substitution of
the anilino moiety in the “cap” region with 7-methyl
aminocoumarin, (3) C7-coumarin SAHA (C7-cSAHA), which is similar to
C6-cSAHA except for the presence of an additional methylene group
in the “linker” region, (4) thiol-SAHA (t-SAHA), which
is similar to SAHA except for the substitution of the “metal-binding”
hydroxamate group with the thiol moiety, (5) TSA in which the flexible
aliphatic C6 “linker” region is replaced by a relatively
bulky and constrained hepta-2,4-diene moiety, and (6) MH-12/4 in which
the “cap” and the “linker” moieties are
replaced by 1,8-dihydropyrene and N-(1-oxopropan-2-yl)
pentamide moieties, respectively. Using the SAHA analogues mentioned
above, we performed the ITC experiments to characterize their binding
to HDAC8 as described in Materials and Methods. Figure 3 shows the representative ITC profiles
for the binding of SAHA, C6-cSAHA, C7-cSAHA, t-SAHA, TSA, and MH-12/4
to HDAC8 in 50 mM Tris-HCl buffer (pH 7.5) containing 100 mM NaCl
and 1 mM TCEP at 25 °C. The top panels of the ITC profiles in
Figure 3 show the raw calorimetric data obtained
by the titration of 10 μM HDAC8 with 45 injections (4 μL
each) of 200/400 μM individual ligands. We performed the control
(heat of dilution) experiments for these ligands as described in Materials and Methods (Figures S1–S6 of the Supporting Information). The area under each
peak was integrated to obtain the heat signal (kilocalories per mole
of injectant) for the formation of the enzyme–ligand complex,
and it was corrected for the corresponding heat of dilution (control)
signal. The bottom panels of Figure 3 show
the resultant (i.e., the experimental minus the control) heat signal
plotted as a function of the molar ratio of ligand to enzyme. The
experimental data were analyzed using a single-site binding model
to obtain the thermodynamic parameters of individual enzyme–ligand
complexes (Table1).

Table 1 Summary
of the Thermodynamic Parameters
for the Binding of SAHA Analogues to HDAC8 in Tris-HCl Buffer (pH
7.5) at 25 °Ca
ligand	ΔG°obs (kcal/mol)	ΔH°obs (kcal/mol)	TΔS°obs (kcal/mol)	stoichiometry	
SAHA	–8.4 ± 0.3	–10.95 ± 0.5	–2.5 ± 0.2	0.9 ± 0.1	
C6-cSAHA	–8.6 ± 0.2	–5.6 ± 0.4	3.0 ± 0.3	0.8 ± 0.2	
C7-cSAHA	–8.7 ± 0.1	–4.6 ± 0.5	4.1 ± 0.1	0.8 ± 0.1	
t-SAHA	–7.3 ± 0.4	–4.5 ± 0.3	2.8 ± 0.3	1.0 ± 0.1	
TSA	–8.6 ± 0.3	–8.93 ± 0.5	–0.3 ± 0.1	0.8 ± 0.1	
MH-12/4	–8.0 ± 0.4	–2.72 ± 0.3	5.3 ± 0.4	0.9 ± 0.1	
a The magnitudes of thermodynamic
parameters represent their average values obtained from two or three
independent ITC experiments, and the associated standard errors represent
the standard deviation from the mean.

Figure 3 ITC profiles for the binding of the SAHA analogues to HDAC8: SAHA
(top left), C6-cSAHA (top middle), C7-cSAHA (top right), t-SAHA (bottom
left), TSA (bottom middle), and MH-12/4 (bottom right). The experimental
conditions used for the ITC titrations are described in Materials and Methods. The corresponding bottom panels show
the plots of the integrated heat signal as a function of the molar
ratio of ligand to enzyme. The solid smooth lines in the bottom panels
represent the best fits of the data, yielding the observed thermodynamic
parameters summarized in Table 1.

A comparative account of the data presented in
Table 1 shows several noticeable features.
It is evident that all
the ligands bind to HDAC8 with a stoichiometry nearly equal to 1.
Besides stoichiometry, the data of Table 1 show
a marked similarity in the observed free energies (ΔG°obs) for the binding of the SAHA analogues
to HDAC8, implying an enthalpy–entropy compensation effect
(see Discussion). In rationalizing the structural
basis of the thermodynamic parameters listed in Table 1, we noted that the binding enthalpy for t-SAHA was ∼6.4
kcal/mol less favorable than that of SAHA. This difference can be
attributed, at least in part, to the monodentate binding of the thiol
moiety of t-SAHA to the catalytic Zn2+ ion as compared
to the bidentate binding mode of the hydroxamate moiety of SAHA. Such
a differential mode of binding yields a larger entropic loss in the
case of hydroxamate-SAHA over thiol-SAHA (Table 1). In fact, the data of Table 1 reveal that
except for SAHA and TSA, all SAHA analogues exhibit a considerable
entropic gain upon their binding to HDAC8. Aside from the chelation
states, we believe that the differences in the enthalpic and entropic
parameters between hydroxamate- and thiol-SAHA are further contributed
by the ligand-selective desolvation of the enzyme’s active
site cavity and/or the conformational flexibility in the enzyme structure
(see Discussion). Although a higher magnitude
of desolvation of the enzyme’s active site pocket upon the
binding of t-SAHA (as compared to SAHA) to HDAC8 is supported by the
difference in their ΔCp° values (see below), a marked difference
in the entropic changes in the ligand (due to the monodentate vs bidentate
binding modes) weakens such deduction. However, to our surprise, the
thermodynamic parameters for the binding of hydroxamate- and thiol-SAHA
to HDAC8 showed a remarkable enthalpy–entropy compensation
effect, which is manifested in an only 0.9 kcal/mol difference in
the standard free energy (ΔG°) change between these ligands (Table 1).

The effect of variation in the “cap” region of the
SAHA analogues became evident upon comparison of the thermodynamic
parameters for the binding of SAHA and C6-cSAHA (Table 1). The enthalpic change (ΔH°) for the binding of C6-cSAHA to HDAC8 (−5.6
kcal/mol) is ∼5.3 kcal/mol less favorable compared to that
with SAHA (−10.9 kcal/mol). On the other hand, the entropic
change (TΔS°) for the binding of the latter ligand (3.0 kcal/mol) is ∼5.5
kcal/mol more favorable compared to that of the former ligand (−2.5
kcal/mol). Hence, once again, a marked enthalpy–entropy compensation
effect is noteworthy for the binding of these SAHA analogues to the
enzyme, which differ only with respect to the “cap”
regions. This feature was further evident upon comparison of the thermodynamic
parameters of these ligands with those of MH-12/4, which harbors a
bulkier (dihydropyrene) “cap” moiety. While the binding
of MH-12/4 to HDAC8 is enthalpically less favorable by 8.2 kcal/mol,
it is entropically more favorable by 7.8 kcal/mol compared to that
of SAHA. Clearly, the substitution in the “cap” region
of the SAHA pharmacophore does not affect the binding free energy
(ΔG°) of the ligand to
the enzyme, and this feature is accomplished via a compensation between
the enthalpic (ΔH°) and
entropic (TΔS°) changes.

A comparison of the thermodynamic parameters for
the binding of
C6-cSAHA and C7-cSAHA, whose “linker” moieties differ
by only one methylene group, reveals the following interesting features.
While the enthalpy of binding (ΔH°) of C6-cSAHA to HDAC8 is more favorable by 1.0 kcal/mol compared
to that of C7-cSAHA, the corresponding binding entropy is less favorable
by 1.1 kcal/mol, resulting in a nearly similar binding free energy
(ΔG°). Evidently, strictly
from the binding point of view, there is a leeway of changing the
“linker” region of the SAHA pharmacophore without gaining
or losing the binding free energy.

Unlike SAHA, C6-cSAHA, and
thiol-SAHA, which have identical “linker”
regions, TSA harbors two unsaturated centers and contains two additional
methyl groups, although the latter ligand is one carbon shorter than
the other SAHA analogues. A comparative view of the thermodynamic
parameters for the binding of SAHA versus TSA (Table 1) reveals that the binding of the latter ligand is enthalpically
unfavorable by 2.1 kcal/mol but is entropically favorable by 2.2 kcal/mol,
yielding a nearly identical ΔG° value. A 2 kcal/mol higher favorable binding enthalpy of SAHA compared
to that of TSA could be attributed, at least in part, to the fact
that the former ligand makes an additional hydrogen bond with the
Asp 101 residue of the enzyme, which is evident from the structural
data.7 Apparently, the constraints (imposed
by the unsaturated centers) and the bulkiness (due to two methyl groups)
in the “linker” region of TSA do not have a significant
influence on the binding affinity of the ligand for the enzyme. As
will be elaborated in the Discussion, the
marked enthalpy–entropy compensation effect observed for the
binding of all the SAHA analogues utilized herein, differing with
respect to the “cap”, “linker”, and “metal-binding”
regions, could be primarily attributed to the reorganization of water
molecules in conjunction with the changes in the conformational flexibility
of HDAC8.

Proton Inventory upon Binding of SAHA Analogues to HDAC8
The observed enthalpic changes (ΔH°obs) for the binding of ligands to their
cognate enzymes are partially contributed by the enthalpic changes
associated with the protonation and/or deprotonation of the ligands
and/or enzymes, which can be probed by performing the ITC studies
using buffers of varied ionization enthalpies.42 Because the catalytic Zn2+ ion of HDAC serves
as a strong Lewis acid, it has the potential to deprotonate the metal-binding
groups (e.g., hydroxamate or thiol moieties) of the ligands, resulting
in the release of protons. The latter would be absorbed by the buffer
anions producing an additional heat signal in the ITC experiments.
To quantitate the extent of deprotonation of the metal-binding groups
of the SAHA analogues, we performed the ITC studies in four different
buffers, namely, phosphate, Hepes, triethanolamine, and Tris (all
maintained at pH 7.5), whose ionization enthalpies are known.39 Figure 4 shows the representative
plots for the observed binding enthalpy (ΔH°obs) of SAHA (left panel) and C6-cSAHA
(right panel) as a function of ionization enthalpy (ΔH°ion) of the buffers listed
above. Note that while the ΔH°obs value for the binding of SAHA to the enzyme is linearly
dependent on the ionization enthalpy of the buffers, it remains essentially
the same for C6-cSAHA binding. Evidently, despite the structural similarity
between SAHA and C6-cSAHA, the binding of the latter ligand to HDAC8
does not release any proton to the exterior medium. The release of
the proton in the former case is likely to originate from ionization
of the hydroxamate moiety of SAHA upon its binding to the active site
resident Zn2+ ion, as noted for the binding of other hydroxamate
ligands to their cognate metalloenzymes.43 The solid lines in Figure 4 represent the
best linear fits of the experimental data by eq 1 (see Materials and Methods), yielding an
intrinsic binding enthalpy (ΔH°ins) and a stoichiometry (p) of the proton
released upon the binding of SAHA to HDAC8 of −2.56 ±
0.02 kcal/mol and 0.73 ± 0.4, respectively. The corresponding
parameters for C6-cSAHA were −5.6 ± 0.5 kcal/mol and 0,
respectively. Note that a part of the observed enthalpy (ΔH°obs) for the binding
of SAHA to HDAC8 originates from the deprotonation of its hydroxamate
moiety (see Discussion). We performed similar
experiments for the binding of C7-cSAHA, thiol-SAHA, TSA, and MH-12/4
in the buffers mentioned above (see Figures S7–S12 of the Supporting Information). All experimental data
were analyzed by eq 1, which yielded values
of ΔH°ins and
stoichiometry (p) of the proton released upon enzyme–ligand
interaction (Table 2). A close examination
of the data of Tables 1 and 2 reveals that depending on the chemical structure of the SAHA
analogue, the intrinsic binding enthalpy (ΔH°ins) is lower (e.g., in the case of SAHA,
t-SAHA, TSA, and C7-cSAHA) than the observed binding enthalpy (ΔH°obs) or the parameters
listed above are nearly identical (e.g., in the case of C6-cSAHA and
MH-12/4).

Table 2 Summary of the Intrinsic Thermodynamic
Parameters for the Binding of SAHA Analogues to HDAC8
ligand	ΔH°ins (kcal/mol)	stoichiometry
of proton released to buffer (p)	
SAHA	–2.56 ± 0.2	0.73 ± 0.4	
C6-cSAHA	–5.6 ± 0.5	0.00 ± 0.01	
C7-cSAHA	–1.24 ± 0.21	0.31 ± 0.03	
t-SAHA	–0.06 ± 0.1	0.39 ± 0.02	
TSA	–1.04 ± 0.31	0.71 ± 0.04	
MH-12/4	–1.63 ± 0.20	0.08 ± 0.03	
Figure 4 Proton
inventory upon the binding of different SAHA analogues to
HDAC8. The observed enthalpies (ΔH°obs) for the binding of SAHA (left) and C6-cSAHA (right)
to HDAC8 are plotted as a function of the buffer ionization enthalpy
(ΔH°ion).
The red lines represent the linear regression analyses of the binding
data, yielding values of the intrinsic enthalpy and stoichiometry
of the proton released to the buffer medium upon the binding of SAHA
to HDAC8 of −2.56 ± 0.2 kcal/mol and 0.73 ± 0.04,
respectively, and of the binding of C6-cSAHA of −5.6 ±
0.5 kcal/mol and 0.00 ± 0.01, respectively.

With regard to the magnitude of proton release (Table 2), we note that there is no net proton release upon
binding of C6-cSAHA to HDAC8, and there is a miniscule amount of proton
release (0.08) upon binding of MH-12/4 to the enzyme. To our surprise,
the stoichiometry of proton release increased from 0 to 0.31 with
an increase in the “linker” length of the ligand by
one methylene group (i.e., from C6- to C7-cSAHA), which is reflected
in the difference between the ΔH°ins and ΔH°obs values of C7-cSAHA. Hence, it appears that the increase
in the “linker” chain length (even by one carbon chain)
alters the mode of binding of C7-cSAHA to HDAC8 such that the hydroxamate
moiety of the ligand resides in the proximity of the active site resident
Zn2+ ion, resulting in its deprotonation. Hence, the most
interesting observation from the proton inventory data is that although
the metal-binding moiety (hydroxamate) of the SAHA analogues (SAHA,
TSA, C6-cSAHA, C7-cSAHA, and MH-12/4) remains the same, the magnitude
of deprotonation is dependent on the type of “linker”
and “cap” regions, and this feature is intrinsic to
their modes of binding to HDAC8 (see Discussion).

We note that among SAHA analogues, which release protons
to the
exterior buffer medium, the stoichiometry (p) of
proton release varies from one ligand to the other, and such a difference
can be ascribed to the differential influence of the enzyme’s
active site Zn2+ ion in modulating the pKa values of the metal-binding moieties of the ligands.
Using the Henderson–Hasselbalch equation, we could predict
the pKa values of the hydroxamate moieties
of TSA and SAHA bound to HDAC8 as being equal to 7.0 and 7.1, respectively,
and that for the thiol moiety of t-SAHA as being 7.7. Given that the
pKa values of hydroxamate and thiol moieties
in aqueous solution are 8.9 and 10.2, respectively,44,45 it appears logical to surmise that the active site resident Zn2+ ion (serving as a Lewis acid) decreases their pKa values. Consequently, the hydroxamate and thiol groups
of the ligands described above preferentially interact with the active
site resident Zn2+ ion in their deprotonated forms at pH
7.5. On the other hand, because the proton inventory for the binding
of C6-cSAHA and MH-12/4 is equal to zero (or nearly zero), it appears
evident that the hydroxamate moieties of the latter ligands are not
deprotonated while they are bound to the enzyme’s active site
pocket. This feature could be attributed, at least in part, to differential
positioning of the hydroxamate moieties of C6-cSAHA and MH-12/4 proximal
to the Zn2+ ion, in comparison to TSA, SAHA, and the other
ligands. In this regard, it should be mentioned that independent computational
studies by Wu et al. and Chen et al. provide contradictory results
with regard to the change in the protonation state of the hydroxamate
moiety of SAHA analogues upon binding to HDAC8 (see Discussion).46,47

The intrinsic enthalpy
(ΔH°ins) for
protein–ligand interaction, derived from
the proton inventory data, provides the magnitude of binding enthalpy
in the absence of the heat signal (due to protonation and/or deprotonation)
contributed by the buffer medium. Hence, the intrinsic enthalpic changes
are generally taken as the measures of the binding enthalpies, originating
from the direct (noncovalent) interactions between the ligands and
their cognate proteins. A comparative account of the intrinsic enthalpy
for the binding of the different SAHA analogues to the enzyme (Table 2) suggests that their values are markedly different
from one another, and such differences could primarily arise from
the reorganization of the water molecules in conjunction with the
differential modulation in the dynamic features of the enzyme (see Discussion).

Temperature Dependence
of Thermodynamic Parameters of Enzyme–Ligand
Interactions
To gain insight into the molecular forces involved
in the binding of the SAHA analogues to HDAC8, we determined the heat
capacity changes (ΔCp°) associated with the enzyme–ligand interactions
by performing the ITC experiments in the temperature range of 5–25
°C. We performed all the temperature-dependent ITC experiments
in Tris-HCl buffer, as the ΔCp° for the ionization of this buffer has
the lowest value.39 Figure 5 shows the representative ΔCp° plots for the binding of
SAHA (left panel) and C6-cSAHA (right panel) to HDAC8. Note that the
observed enthalpy (ΔH°obs) for the binding of both these ligands to HDAC8 becomes
more favorable (i.e., its negative value increases) with an increase
in temperature. The solid lines in Figure 5 represent the linear regression analysis of the experimental data,
yielding ΔCp° values for the binding of SAHA and C6-CSAHA of −0.23
± 0.02 and −0.11 ± 0.01 kcal mol–1 K–1, respectively. We performed similar temperature-dependent
ITC experiments for the binding of other SAHA analogues to HDAC8 (see
Figures S13–S18 of the Supporting Information), and their ΔCp° values are summarized in Table 3. Note that the ΔCp° values for the binding of all SAHA
analogues to HDAC8 are negative, but their magnitudes are significantly
different. According to the classical model of protein folding and
unfolding as well as protein–ligand interactions, a negative
value of ΔCp° primarily arises due to hydrophobic interactions.48−50 As per this model, thiol-SAHA (ΔCp° = −0.27 kcal mol–1 K–1) and C7-cSAHA (ΔCp° = −0.05
kcal mol–1 K–1) should make the
most and least hydrophobic interactions within the ligand-binding
cavity of HDAC8, respectively. This is unlikely to be the case, because
the polar and nonpolar surface areas in these ligands are not too
different. Hence, as noted with many enzyme-ligand complexes, the
ΔCp° values for the binding of the SAHA analogues to HDAC8 cannot be
rationalized solely in light of the classical hydrophobic model (see Discussion).51 This is
further substantiated by the fact that the ΔCp° values, calculated
on the basis of the changes in the water accessible surface areas
of the enzyme (Materials and Methods), for
the binding of TSA and SAHA to HDAC8 are ∼1 order of magnitude
higher (more negative) than the experimentally determined values (Table 3).

Table 3 Summary of the Heat
Capacity Changes
Associated with the Binding of SAHA Analogues to HDAC8
ligand	ΔCp° (kcal mol–1 K–1)	temp (K), where ΔG° =
ΔH°	
SAHA	–0.23 ± 0.02	288	
C6-cSAHA	–0.11 ± 0.01	329	
C7-cSAHA	–0.05 ± 0.02	377	
t-SAHA	–0.27 ± 0.01	310	
TSA	–0.21 ± 0.01	295	
MH-12/4	–0.13 ± 0.02	341	
Figure 5 Temperature
dependence of the observed enthalpy (ΔH°obs) for the binding
of SAHA (left) and C6-cSAHA (right) to HDAC8. The ΔH°obs values are plotted as a function
of temperature. The red lines represent the linear regression analysis
of the data, yielding values of ΔCp° for binding of SAHA and C6-cSAHA
to HDAC8 of −0.23 ± 0.02 and −0.11 ± 0.01
kcal mol–1 K–1, respectively.

The temperature-dependent ITC
data for the binding of ligands to
HDAC8 allowed us to ascertain a plausible enthalpy–entropy
compensation effect, which is the hallmark feature of the biomolecular
interactions. The molecular origin of such a compensatory effect often
lies in the weak physical interactions and/or the direct involvement
of water molecules in the binding processes.52−55 To probe the enthalpy–entropy
compensation effect for the binding of the SAHA analogues to HDAC8,
we plotted the experimentally determined values of ΔH° and ΔG° as a function of TΔS°. Figure 6 shows representative enthalpy–entropy compensation plots
for the binding of SAHA (left panel) and C6-cSAHA (right panel) to
HDAC8. Note that whereas the ΔH° value linearly increases as a function TΔS°, the value of ΔG° remains nearly invariant for the binding
of the ligands to the enzyme. As a consequence, both these plots intersect
at a common point at which the magnitude of TΔS° is equal to zero. When TΔS° = 0, ΔG° can be envisaged to be solely contributed
by ΔH°. We determined
the temperatures at which ΔH° is equal to ΔG° (by
interpolating the parameters described above from the corresponding
ΔCp° plots), and they were found to be 288 and 329 K for the binding
of SAHA and C6-cSAHA, respectively. We performed a similar ITC titration
and data analysis for the temperature-dependent binding of other SAHA
analogues to HDAC8 (see Figures S19–S21 of the Supporting Information) and determined the temperatures
at which ΔH° is equal
to TΔS° (summarized in Table 3). Evidently, the enthalpy–entropy
compensation temperature varies from one SAHA analogue to the other,
and the highest and the lowest temperatures were observed for the
binding of C7-cSAHA (377 K) and SAHA (288 K), respectively. Notably,
the range of the enthalpy–entropy compensation temperature
observed for the binding of the SAHA analogues utilized herein is
higher than those (between 250 and 315 K) previously reported by Lumry
and Rajender for diverse bimolecular/physical interactions.53 We believe that the origin of our observed difference
in the ligand specific compensatory effects lies in the favorable
(i.e., vibrational and hydrophobic entropies) and unfavorable (i.e.,
rotational, translational, and conformational) entropies of the interacting
species (which are offset by the complementary enthalpic changes).
Such a feature could arise, at least in part, from the ligand-induced
modulation in the protein dynamics and/or flexibility and/or the reorganization
of solvent (water) on the surface of ligand as well as the ligand-binding
cavity upon the formation of the ligand–protein complexes.

Figure 6 Enthalpy–entropy
compensation plot for the binding of SAHA
(left) and C6-cSAHA (right) to HDAC8. The values of ΔH° (black squares) and ΔG°obs (red circles) were
plotted as a function of TΔS°. Note that the value of ΔG° essentially remain the same because
of the enthalpy–entropy compensation.

Discussion
We provide, for the first time, a detailed
account of the thermodynamic
data for the binding of structurally similar SAHA analogues to HDAC8.
This paper elaborates on the contribution of different, viz., “cap”,
“linker”, and “metal-binding”, regions
of the SAHA pharmacophore to the modulation of the thermodynamic parameters
of the enzyme–ligand complexes. We argue that the difference
in thermodynamic parameters for the binding of the SAHA analogues
to HDAC8 can be attributed to the reorganization of water molecules
on the surface of the ligands and/or enzyme ligand-binding cavity,
as well as to the inherent conformational flexibility and/or dynamics
in the protein structure.

The experimental data presented herein
lead to the following conclusions.
(1) Although the enthalpic (ΔH°) and entropic (TΔS°) contributions for the binding of the different SAHA
analogues—with varying “cap”, “linker”,
and “metal-binding” regions—to HDAC8 are markedly
different, their standard free energy changes (ΔG°) are nearly identical among hydroxamate-containing
ligands, and they are slightly more favorable (by ∼1.3 kcal/mol)
than the binding free energy of a thiol-containing ligand (t-SAHA),
resulting in a high degree of enthalpy–entropy compensation
among different SAHA analogues (Table 1 and
Figure 7). (2) The enthalpy–entropy
compensation effect also accounts for the changes in the temperature
dependence in the parameters of binding of SAHA analogues to HDAC8
(Figure 6 and Figures S19–S21 of the Supporting Information). (3) Except for C6-cSAHA
and MH-12/4, the binding of other SAHA analogues to HDAC8 results
in the release of proton to the exterior medium, and the stoichiometry
(p) of proton release is dependent on the changes
in the pKa values of their metal-binding
groups under the influence of the catalytic Zn2+ ion (serving
as a Lewis acid) of the enzyme (Table 2). (4)
The heat capacity changes (ΔCp°) associated with the binding of the
different SAHA analogues to HDAC8 cannot be rationalized in view of
the classical hydrophobic binding model of the enzyme–ligand
complexes. In the case of SAHA and TSA, whose crystal structures in
complex with HDAC8 are known, the experimentally determined ΔCp° values
differ by one order magnitude from those calculated on the basis of
the changes in the water accessible surface areas of the enzyme and
the ligands.

Figure 7 Thermodynamic signatures for the binding of the different
SAHA
analogues to HDAC8. Despite the marked differences in the binding
thermodynamic signatures of these ligands, their binding free energies
are nearly the same, highlighting an enthalpy–entropy compensation
effect.

Because the HDAC-catalyzed reaction
involves deacetylation of acetylated
lysine residues of peptide substrates, it is not surprising to see
that the enzyme is poised to accommodate the aliphatic side chain
of the lysine residue. Recent proteomic studies have shown that for
an artificial peptide to be utilized as an HDAC8 substrate, it must
harbor an aromatic amino acid at the C-terminal end of the acetyllysine
residue.56 In such substrate, the acetyl
moiety interacts with the active site resident Zn2+ ion,
the aliphatic side chain of the lysine moiety sits in the tubular
binding cavity, and the aromatic side chain of the C-terminal (aromatic)
amino acid occupies the enzyme’s entry pocket. In view of these
features, it is not surprising that SAHA (harboring the corresponding
“metal-binding”, “linker”, and “cap”
regions) serves as a structural analogue of the substrate and thus
inhibits enzyme catalysis. However, unlike other HDAC isozymes, HDAC8
is known to interact with structurally diverse ligands, and therefore,
the latter must possess a conformationally flexible binding cavity
to accommodate non-SAHA pharmacophores (e.g., SB-379278A, CRA-A, and
other “linkerless” inhibitors) with reasonable binding
affinities.25−27 In this regard, HDAC8 falls in the category of promiscuous
enzymes, which are usually flexible in nature, and they do not interact
strongly with their cognate ligands.57−59 A survey of the binding
affinities of substrates and inhibitors with class I HDACs reveals
that HDAC8 indeed has the weakest binding affinity for its substrates
and inhibitors (see below).10−12 Moreover, the X-ray crystallographic
data reveal that HDAC8 attains significantly different conformations
even to accommodate structurally similar ligands (e.g., SAHA and TSA),
highlighting the intrinsic flexibility of the enzyme’s active
site pocket (Figure 8).7

Figure 8 Topologies
of the enzyme active site’s pocket forming loops
(and the residues therein) in different HDAC8–ligand complexes.
This figure was generated using UCSF Chimera (http://www.cgl.ucsf.edu/chimera/).

An enzyme–substrate/inhibitor
interaction involves “multipoint”
contacts between the juxtaposed atoms of the interacting species,
and the overall binding energy of an enzyme–ligand complex
is derived from the cumulative sum of the energies contributed by
the individual interacting atoms.60,61 As discussed
below, the latter may have both “positive” and “negative”
cooperative manifestations.60 Hence, the
different binding regions (viz., “cap”, “linker”,
and “metal-binding” group) of a SAHA analogue can be
envisaged to contribute synergistically to the overall binding energy
of the ligand. Because the different binding region of a SAHA analogue
may interact differently within the enzyme’s active site pocket,
one would predict that the binding free energies of various SAHA analogues
would be substantially different (see Table 1). However, to our surprise, the binding free energies of different
SAHA analogues with HDAC8 are similar (7.3–8.6 kcal/mol). We
note that besides the ligands used herein, other SAHA analogues also
show similar binding free energies. For example, Bradner and co-workers
have reported the Ki values of several
inhibitors, of which at least three inhibitors, viz., APHA, pyroxamide,
and 4-PBHA, are the structural analogues of SAHA, for HDAC8.10 The corresponding Ki values of these inhibitors for HDAC8 have been reported to be 0.6,
1.0, and 1.85 μM, which could be translated into binding free
energies of −8.4, −8.1, and −7.8 kcal/mol, respectively.
Note that these values are very similar to the binding free energies
of the SAHA analogues described herein (Table 1). Taken together, HDAC8 exhibits the potential to interact with
structurally diverse SAHA analogues with similar binding free energies
(see below).

Our proton inventory data provide evidence that
depending on the
chemical structures of the SAHA analogues, HDAC8 exhibits the potential
to extract different magnitudes of binding energy from the different
regions of the ligands. The catalytic divalent metal ions (e.g., Zn2+) in various metallohydrolases function as Lewis acids, and
they generate tightly bound OH– ion (by deprotonating
water), which serves as a strong nucleophile during the hydrolytic
reactions.62,63 By virtue of this feature, the
HDAC8-bound Zn2+ ion is expected to deprotonate the metal-binding
groups (e.g., hydroxamate and thiol) and subsequently interact with
their anionic forms. Notably, a recent quantum mechanics study performed
by Chen. et al. also suggests that the hydroxamate moieties of SAHA
and TSA are deprotonated upon binding of Zn2+ to HDAC8.47 Unlike the computational study described above,
in which the hydroxamate moieties of ligands are predicted to be equally
deprotonated upon their binding to HDAC8, our ITC experiments demonstrate
that the extents of deprotonation of the zinc-binding groups of the
ligands (upon binding to the enzyme) are remarkably different from
one another (Table 2). Because the active site
pocket of HDAC8 is relatively hydrophobic (Figure 9), we believe the difference in the proton inventory of the
SAHA analogues is a consequence of the Zn2+-mediated perturbation
of the pKa values of the metal-binding
groups, and the extent of such perturbation is dictated by the distance
between the Zn2+ and the ionizable metal-binding groups.
We argue that the other regions (e.g., “cap” and “linker”)
of the ligands are intimately involved in positioning of the metal-binding
groups proximal to the active site resident Zn2+ ion. Whether
the proton released from the Zn2+-binding moieties of our
ligands is directly released to the exterior buffer media or is shuttled
via the enzyme’s active site resident His142 is not clear at
this time.47

Figure 9 Surface representation
of the HDAC8–ligand complexes showing
the differences in surface topology, shape, and organization of crystallographically
captured water molecules. The residues located in a 5 Å zone
around the ligand (TSA/SAHA) are shown, and they are colored according
to their hydrophobicity index. The crystallographically captured water
molecules present on the surface of the binding cavity are shown as
red spheres.

The question of why some
of the SAHA analogues, particularly C6-cSAHA
(and to some extent MH-12/4), do not release any proton upon binding
to HDAC8 arises. The only major difference between C6-cSAHA and SAHA
is that the former ligand contains a bulkier coumarin (instead of
aniline) moiety in the “cap” region. A similar situation
exists in the case of MH-12/4, which contains a bulky pyrene moiety
in the “cap” region. Hence, it appears plausible that
the bulkier “cap” moieties (present in both C6-cSAHA
and MH-2/14) preclude the positioning of their terminal hydroxamate
moieties proximal to the active site Zn2+ ion; thus, they
are not effectively deprotonated. However, this simplistic explanation
does not hold in the case of C7-cSAHA [showing a proton inventory
of 0.31 (see Table 2)], which also contains
coumarin as the “cap” moiety but slightly differs from
C6-cSAHA because of the presence of an additional methylene group
in the “linker” region. Hence, both the “cap”
and “linker” regions of the SAHA analogues modulate
the avidity of their metal-binding moieties (e.g., hydroxamate) to
the catalytic Zn2+ ion. Furthermore, depending on the extent
of ionization of the metal-binding groups, the gain in favorable binding
free energy, originating from the electrostatic interaction between
the catalytic Zn2+ ion and the anionic form of the metal-binding
group, of the different SAHA analogues is likely to be different.
In view of the facts presented above, we surmise that depending on
the chemical structure of the SAHA analogue, the enzyme extracts a
different magnitude of binding energy from different regions of the
ligand structure. Additionally, because the ligand-binding cavity
of HDAC8 is comprised of several pocket-forming loops whose orientations
are differently modulated even upon the binding of structurally similar
ligands (Figure 8),7 it is likely that the metal-binding groups of the SAHA analogues
may experience a substantially different microenvironment within the
enzyme’s binding pocket, leading to their differential deprotonation.

The thermodynamics of binding of the SAHA analogues to HDAC8 described
in this work clearly shows a strong enthalpy–entropy compensation
effect, which is a fairly common phenomenon in a variety of biomolecular
interactions. Apart from biomolecular interactions, enthalpy–entropy
compensation has been observed in a wide variety of other physiochemical
phenomena in water, such as solvation of ions, ionization of electrolytes,
hydrolysis, oxidation reduction, quenching of indole fluorescence,
etc.53 In protein chemistry, the enthalpy–entropy
compensation effect has been frequently observed in the temperature-dependent
binding of ligands to their cognate proteins.54,64,65 The enthalpy–entropy compensation
effect has been widely observed in the binding of structurally similar
ligands to their common target, and this feature is known to hinder
the affinity optimization of lead molecules toward finding a tight-binding
drug molecule.66 Aside from equilibrium
binding, the enthalpy–entropy compensation has been reported
in various kinetic processes, including the transient kinetics for
the binding of SAHA and TSA to HDAC8 reported previously from our
laboratory.67,68 However, the enthalpy–entropy
compensation effect is not observed in processes that involve stronger
interactions.52,69,70 Taken together, the enthalpy–entropy compensation effect
appears to be a ubiquitous phenomenon involving weak interactions
among biomolecular species in aqueous solution.52,53,71

The physical origin of enthalpy–entropy
compensation has
been a matter of significant controversy. This is partly because the
molecular origin of the hydrophobic effect, initially proposed by
Kauzman and Tanford, is not universally applicable, and it appears
that depending on the molecular context, the hydrophobic effect is
either enthalpically or entropically dominated.72,73 In recent years, the molecular explanation for the origin of enthalpy–entropy
compensation effect has been revised.52,53,70−77 In the case of binding of structurally similar ligands to their
target, an entropic penalty, caused by a decrease in the flexibility
and/or randomness of the ligand and/or the protein upon ligand–protein
interaction, is often compensated by the enthalpic gain due to atomic
contacts, producing the enthalpy–entropy compensation effect.74 Qian has demonstrated that the local changes
in the conformational fluctuations of a protein upon binding to its
ligand are transmitted to the rest of the protein, and the enthalpy
and the entropy associated with these conformational fluctuations
compensate each other.75 In addition, the
reorganization of water molecules surrounding the ligands as well
as the ligand-binding cavities has been proposed to mediate the enthalpy–entropy
compensation effect in the overall binding processes.53,76,77

Recently, Portman et al.
reported an enthalpy–entropy compensation
effect for the binding γ-lactones to OBP3.78 These authors argued that the molecular origin of the enthalpy–entropy
compensation effect lies in the opposite thermodynamic signatures
for the desolvation of the ligand surface and the binding cavity.78 The desolvation of ligand surface (prior to
its binding to protein) is analogous to the transfer of a nonpolar
molecule from water to the nonpolar solvent, as previously suggested
by Kauzmann, and thus, it contains the thermodynamic signatures of
+ΔS and +ΔH.72 Contrastingly, the desolvation of the protein
cavity releases the “high-energy” water molecule to
the bulk solvent, yielding thermodynamic signatures of −ΔS and −ΔH. Because the thermodynamic
signatures for the desolvation of ligand and the binding cavity are
opposite, they compensate for each other, leading to the enthalpy–entropy
compensation effect. Notably, the aforementioned water-centric enthalpy–entropy
compensation feature primarily relies on the fact that the water molecules
surrounding the surface of the binding cavity are highly disordered.
They make more hydrogen bonds (−ΔH)
with the surrounding water molecules and become more ordered (−ΔS) upon being released to the bulk water. On the other hand,
Klebe, Whitesides, and others have argued that the thermodynamic signatures
for the release of water molecules from proteins’ cavities
(to the bulk phase) are dependent on the molecular contexts, i.e.,
their resident sites as well as the extent (partially or fully) to
which they are ordered on the interacting surfaces.73,76,79 Besides these water-centric views, Williams
and co-workers maintain that the thermodynamic parameters derived
from the binding of ligands to proteins cannot be easily explained
in light of the local (interfacial) interactions because they are
the property of the “whole” system.60 For example, a remarkably tight binding affinity of biotin
for streptavidin (Ka = 1013 M–1) cannot be rationalized on the basis of the
interfacial forces between the interacting species.60 In this regard, it is noteworthy that even a small (∼1%)
change in the hydrogen bonds in protein structures, mediated via the
changes in the conformational flexibility of proteins upon the binding
to their cognate ligands, contributes significantly to the overall
thermodynamic parameters of the protein–ligand complexes.60 Fenley et al. maintain that the ligand-assisted
shift in the protein conformation plays a major role in the enthalpy–entropy
compensation effect.80 According to these
authors, if the enthalpically driven ligand binding shifts the conformation
of a protein from the “low entropic” state to the “high
entropic” state, the enthalpic gain (due to ligand binding)
will be essentially transduced (compensated) into the entropic changes
in the protein structure.80 Furthermore,
the magnitude or extent of the conformational changes, contributing
to the enthalpy–entropy compensation, will be dependent on
the intrinsic dynamics of free and ligand-bound protein structures.81,82 In view of these literature precedents, we conclude that the origin
of the enthalpy–entropy compensation effect for the binding
of the structural analogues of SAHA to HDAC8 lies both in the reorganization
of water molecules and in the conformational flexibility in the enzyme
structure. The latter feature is further evident from a remarkable
difference in the crystallographically derived B factors
of the apo and ligand-bound forms of HDAC8 (Figure S22 of the Supporting Information). Nonetheless, a thorough
elucidation of the conformational flexibility and/or dynamics of HDAC8
in the presence of structurally diverse ligands must await high-resolution
NMR studies.

In view of the observed thermodynamic parameters
for the binding
of different SAHA analogues to HDAC8, we argue that the different
(i.e., “metal-binding”, “linker”, and
“cap”) regions of SAHA analogues interact differently
with their complementary sites/regions at the active site of the enzyme,
and the overall binding process is mediated both via local and global
changes in protein conformation. Hence, the marked differences in
the ligand-induced conformational changes in the enzyme even due to
the structurally similar ligands, which may or may not be discernible
via X-ray crystallography, would yield markedly different thermodynamic
signatures for ligand binding. Given these, we conclude that the structure-based
rational design of highly potent and/or isozyme-selective inhibitors
of HDAC8 would be a challenging task. However, we believe that the
inhibitory potency as well as the isozyme selectivity of a canonical
HDAC inhibitor (e.g., SAHA) toward HDAC8 could be enhanced by attaching
a “teether” moiety that could interact with the surface
residues of the enzyme, akin to our “two-prong inhibitor design
approach”.83,84 The “two-prong”
approach to designing HDAC8 inhibitors appears to be logical considering
that an extended peptide substrate binds to the enzyme’s surface
(designated as “exosites”), and such binding enhances
the catalytic efficiency of the enzyme.85 We are in the process of employing our two-prong inhibitor design
strategy (by incorporating the “exosite” binding feature)
to produce highly potent and HDAC8-selective inhibitors, and we will
report these findings subsequently.

Supporting Information Available
Raw thermodynamic data and
their fitted curves for the binding of all the SAHA analogues. This
material is available free of charge via the Internet at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bi500711x_si_001.pdf

 The research
was supported by National Institutes of Health (NIH) Grant CA113746
and National Science Foundation Grant DMR 1306154 to D.K.S. and S.M.
and NIH COBRE Grant NCRR-P20-RR15566 to G.C.

The authors declare no
competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
We acknowledge the members of our research group for their
valuable comments on the manuscript.



   
References
Fersht A.   (1998 ) Structure
and Mechanism in Protein Science: A Guide to Enzyme Catalysis and
Protein Folding , 1 st ed., W. H. Freeman and Co. , New York .
Dembowsky K. , and Stadler P.   (2001 ) Novel
Therapeutic Proteins: Selected Case Studies , 1 st ed., Wiley-Blackwell , Hoboken, NJ .
Ladbury J. E. , and Connelly P. R.   (1997 ) Structure-Based Drug Design: Thermodynamics, Modeling, and Strategy
(Biotechnology Intelligence Unit) , 1 st
ed., R. G. Landes Co. , Georgetown, TX .
Teague S. J.  (2003 ) Implications
of protein flexibility for drug discovery . Nat.
Rev. Drug Discovery 
2 , 527 –541 .
Davis A. M. ; Teague S. J. ; Kleywegt G. J.  (2003 ) Application and limitations of X-ray
crystallographic data in structure-based ligand and drug design . Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 
42 , 2718 –2736 .
Mobley D. L. ; Dill K. A.  (2009 ) Binding of Small-Molecule Ligands to Proteins: “What
You See” Is Not Always “What You Get . Structure 
17 , 489 –498 .19368882 
Somoza J. R. ; Skene R. J. ; Katz B. A. ; Mol C. ; Ho J. D. ; Jennings A. J. ; Luong C. ; Arvai A. ; Buggy J. J. ; Chi E. ; Tang J. ; Sang B.-C. ; Verner E. ; Wynands R. ; Leahy E. M. ; Dougan D. R. ; Snell G. ; Navre M. ; Knuth M. W. ; Swanson R. V. ; McRee D. E. ; Tari L. W.  (2004 ) Structural
Snapshots of Human HDAC8 Provide Insights into the Class I Histone
Deacetylases . Structure 
12 , 1325 –1334 .15242608 
Dowling D. P. ; Gantt S. L. ; Gattis S. G. ; Fierke C. A. ; Christianson D. W.  (2008 ) Structural
studies of human histone deacetylase 8 and its site-specific variants
complexed with substrate and inhibitors . Biochemistry 
47 , 13554 –13563 .19053282 
Vannini A. ; Volpari C. ; Gallinari P. ; Jones P. ; Mattu M. ; Carfí A. ; De Francesco R. ; Steinkühler C. ; Di Marco S.  (2007 ) Substrate binding to
histone deacetylases as shown
by the crystal structure of the HDAC8-substrate complex . EMBO Rep. 
8 , 879 –884 .17721440 
Bradner J. E. ; West N. ; Grachan M. L. ; Greenberg E. F. ; Haggarty S. J. ; Warnow T. ; Mazitschek R.  (2010 ) Chemical phylogenetics
of histone deacetylases . Nat. Chem. Biol. 
6 , 238 –243 .20139990 
Schultz B. E. ; Misialek S. ; Wu J. ; Tang J. ; Conn M. T. ; Tahilramani R. ; Wong L.  (2004 ) Kinetics and Comparative Reactivity
of Human Class I and Class IIb Histone Deacetylases . Biochemistry 
43 , 11083 –11091 .15323567 
Wolfson N. A. ; Pitcairn C. A. ; Fierke C. A.  (2013 ) HDAC8 substrates: Histones and beyond . Biopolymers 
99 , 112 –126 .23175386 
De
Ruijter A. J. M. ; van Gennip A. H. ; Caron H. N. ; Kemp S. ; van Kuilenburg A. B. P.  (2003 ) Histone deacetylases (HDACs): Characterization of the
classical HDAC family . Biochem. J. 
370 , 737 –749 .12429021 
Choudhary C. ; Kumar C. ; Gnad F. ; Nielsen M. L. ; Rehman M. ; Walther T. C. ; Olsen J. V. ; Mann M.  (2009 ) Lysine acetylation
targets protein complexes and co-regulates major cellular functions . Science 
325 , 834 –840 .19608861 
Gregoretti I. V. ; Lee Y.-M. ; Goodson H. V.  (2004 ) Molecular evolution of the histone
deacetylase family: Functional implications of phylogenetic analysis . J. Mol. Biol. 
338 , 17 –31 .15050820 
Blander G. ; Guarente L.  (2004 ) The Sir2 family of protein deacetylases . Annu. Rev. Biochem. 
73 , 417 –435 .15189148 
Gao L. ; Cueto M. A. ; Asselbergs F. ; Atadja P.  (2002 ) Cloning and functional
characterization of HDAC11, a novel member of the human histone deacetylase
family . J. Biol. Chem. 
277 , 25748 –25755 .11948178 
Gallinari P. ; Di Marco S. ; Jones P. ; Pallaoro M. ; Steinkühler C.  (2007 ) HDACs, histone
deacetylation and gene transcription: From molecular biology to cancer
therapeutics . Cell Res. 
17 , 195 –211 .17325692 
Oehme I. ; Deubzer H. E. ; Wegener D. ; Pickert D. ; Linke J.-P. ; Hero B. ; Kopp-Schneider A. ; Westermann F. ; Ulrich S. M. ; von Deimling A. ; Fischer M. ; Witt O.  (2009 ) Histone deacetylase
8 in neuroblastoma tumorigenesis . Clin. Cancer
Res. 
15 , 91 –99 .19118036 
Maris J. M. ; Hogarty M. D. ; Bagatell R. ; Cohn S. L.  (2007 ) Neuroblastoma . Lancet 
369 , 2106 –2120 .17586306 
Chuang D.-M. ; Leng Y. ; Marinova Z. ; Kim H.-J. ; Chiu C.-T.  (2009 ) Multiple
roles of HDAC inhibition in neurodegenerative conditions . Trends Neurosci. 
32 , 591 –601 .19775759 
Deardorff M. A. ; Bando M. ; Nakato R. ; Watrin E. ; Itoh T. ; Minamino M. ; Saitoh K. ; Komata M. ; Katou Y. ; Clark D. ; Cole K. E. ; De Baere E. ; Decroos C. ; Di Donato N. ; Ernst S. ; Francey L. J. ; Gyftodimou Y. ; Hirashima K. ; Hullings M. ; Ishikawa Y. ; Jaulin C. ; Kaur M. ; Kiyono T. ; Lombardi P. M. ; Magnaghi-Jaulin L. ; Mortier G. R. ; Nozaki N. ; Petersen M. B. ; Seimiya H. ; Siu V. M. ; Suzuki Y. ; Takagaki K. ; Wilde J. J. ; Willems P. J. ; Prigent C. ; Gillessen-Kaesbach G. ; Christianson D. W. ; Kaiser F. J. ; Jackson L. G. ; Hirota T. ; Krantz I. D. ; Shirahige K.  (2012 ) HDAC8 mutations in Cornelia de Lange
syndrome affect the cohesin acetylation cycle . Nature 
489 , 313 –317 .22885700 
Bolden J.
E. ; Peart M. J. ; Johnstone R. W.  (2006 ) Anticancer activities of histone
deacetylase inhibitors . Nat. Rev. Drug Discovery 
5 , 769 –784 .
Wagner J. M. ; Hackanson B. ; Lubbert M. ; Jung M.  (2010 ) Histone deacetylase
(HDAC) inhibitors in recent clinical trials for cancer therapy . Clin. Epigenet. 
1 , 117 –136 .
Hu E. ; Dul E. ; Sung C.-M. ; Chen Z. ; Kirkpatrick R. ; Zhang G.-F. ; Johanson K. ; Liu R. ; Lago A. ; Hofmann G. ; Macarron R. ; de los Frailes M. ; Perez P. ; Krawiec J. ; Winkler J. ; Jaye M.  (2003 ) Identification
of novel isoform-selective inhibitors within class I histone deacetylases . J. Pharmacol. Exp. Ther. 
307 , 720 –728 .12975486 
Krennhrubec K. ; Marshall B. L. ; Hedglin M. ; Verdin E. ; Ulrich S. M.  (2007 ) Design
and evaluation of “linkerless” hydroxamic acids as selective
HDAC8 inhibitors . Bioorg. Med. Chem. Lett. 
17 , 2874 –2878 .17346959 
Galletti P. ; Quintavalla A. ; Ventrici C. ; Giannini G. ; Cabri W. ; Penco S. ; Gallo G. ; Vincenti S. ; Giacomini D.  (2009 ) Azetidinones
as zinc-binding groups to design selective HDAC8 inhibitors . ChemMedChem 
4 , 1991 –2001 .19821480 
Garbett N. C. ; Chaires J. B.  (2012 ) Thermodynamic studies for drug design and screening . Expert Opin. Drug Discovery 
7 , 299 –314 .
Freire E.  (2008 ) Do enthalpy
and entropy distinguish first in class from best in class? . Drug Discovery Today 
13 , 869 –874 .18703160 
Ladbury J. E. ; Klebe G. ; Freire E.  (2010 ) Adding calorimetric data to decision
making in lead discovery: A hot tip . Nat. Rev.
Drug Discovery 
9 , 23 –27 .
Olsson T.
S. G. ; Williams M. A. ; Pitt W. R. ; Ladbury J. E.  (2008 ) The Thermodynamics
of Protein–Ligand Interaction and Solvation: Insights for Ligand
Design . J. Mol. Biol. 
384 , 1002 –1017 .18930735 
Schön A. ; Madani N. ; Smith A. B. ; Lalonde J. M. ; Freire E.  (2011 ) Some binding-related
drug properties are dependent on thermodynamic signature . Chem. Biol. Drug Des. 
77 , 161 –165 .21288305 
Bantscheff M. ; Hopf C. ; Savitski M. M. ; Dittmann A. ; Grandi P. ; Michon A.-M. ; Schlegl J. ; Abraham Y. ; Becher I. ; Bergamini G. ; Boesche M. ; Delling M. ; Dümpelfeld B. ; Eberhard D. ; Huthmacher C. ; Mathieson T. ; Poeckel D. ; Reader V. ; Strunk K. ; Sweetman G. ; Kruse U. ; Neubauer G. ; Ramsden N. G. ; Drewes G.  (2011 ) Chemoproteomics
profiling of HDAC inhibitors reveals selective targeting of HDAC complexes . Nat. Biotechnol. 
29 , 255 –265 .21258344 
Singh R. K. ; Mandal T. ; Balasubramanian N. ; Cook G. ; Srivastava D. K.  (2011 ) Coumarin-suberoylanilide
hydroxamic acid as a fluorescent probe for determining binding affinities
and off-rates of histone deacetylase inhibitors . Anal. Biochem. 
408 , 309 –315 .20816742 
Suzuki T. ; Kouketsu A. ; Matsuura A. ; Kohara A. ; Ninomiya S.-I. ; Kohda K. ; Miyata N.  (2004 ) Thiol-based SAHA analogues as potent
histone deacetylase inhibitors . Bioorg. Med.
Chem. Lett. 
14 , 3313 –3317 .15149697 
Gediya L.
K. ; Chopra P. ; Purushottamachar P. ; Maheshwari N. ; Njar V. C. O.  (2005 ) A New Simple
and High-Yield Synthesis of Suberoylanilide
Hydroxamic Acid and Its Inhibitory Effect Alone or in Combination
with Retinoids on Proliferation of Human Prostate Cancer Cells . J. Med. Chem. 
48 , 5047 –5051 .16033284 
Tellinghuisen J. ; Chodera J. D.  (2011 ) Systematic errors in isothermal titration calorimetry:
Concentrations and baselines . Anal. Biochem. 
414 , 297 –299 .21443854 
Wiseman T. ; Williston S. ; Brandts J. F. ; Lin L. N.  (1989 ) Rapid measurement
of binding constants and heats of binding using a new titration calorimeter . Anal. Biochem. 
179 , 131 –137 .2757186 
Goldberg R. N. ; Kishore N. ; Lennen R. M.  (2002 ) Thermodynamic quantities for the
ionization reactions of buffers . J. Phys. Chem.
Ref. Data 
31 , 231 –370 .
Fraczkiewicz R. ; Braun W.  (1998 ) Exact and
efficient analytical calculation of the accessible surface
areas and their gradients for macromolecules . J. Comput. Chem. 
19 , 319 –333 .
Murphy K. P. ; Freire E.  (1992 ) Thermodynamics of structural stability and cooperative
folding behavior in proteins . Adv. Protein Chem. 
43 , 313 –361 .1442323 
Baker B. M. ; Murphy K. P.  (1996 ) Evaluation of linked
protonation effects in protein
binding reactions using isothermal titration calorimetry . Biophys. J. 
71 , 2049 –2055 .8889179 
Parker M. H. ; Lunney E. A. ; Ortwine D. F. ; Pavlovsky A. G. ; Humblet C. ; Brouillette C. G.  (1999 ) Analysis of the binding of hydroxamic
acid and carboxylic acid inhibitors to the stromelysin-1 (matrix metalloproteinase-3)
catalytic domain by isothermal titration calorimetry . Biochemistry 
38 , 13592 –13601 .10521266 
Chiu Y.-H. ; Gabriel G. J. ; Canary J. W.  (2005 ) Ternary ligand-zinc-hydroxamate complexes . Inorg. Chem. 
44 , 40 –44 .15627358 
Hansen R. E. ; Winther J. R.  (2009 ) An introduction
to methods for analyzing thiols and
disulfides: Reactions, reagents, and practical considerations . Anal. Biochem. 
394 , 147 –158 .19664585 
Wu R. ; Lu Z. ; Cao Z. ; Zhang Y.  (2011 ) Zinc chelation with hydroxamate in
histone deacetylases modulated by water access to the linker binding
channel . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
133 , 6110 –6113 .21456530 
Chen K. ; Zhang X. ; Wu Y.-D. ; Wiest O.  (2014 ) Inhibition
and Mechanism
of HDAC8 Revisited . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
136 , 11636 –11643 .25060069 
Baldwin R. L.  (1986 ) Temperature
dependence of the hydrophobic interaction in protein folding . Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 
83 , 8069 –8072 .3464944 
Privalov P. L. ; Makhatadze G. I.  (1990 ) Heat capacity of proteins. II. Partial molar heat capacity
of the unfolded polypeptide chain of proteins: Protein unfolding effects . J. Mol. Biol. 
213 , 385 –391 .2160545 
Loladze V. V. ; Ermolenko D. N. ; Makhatadze G. I.  (2001 ) Heat capacity changes upon burial
of polar and nonpolar groups in proteins . Protein
Sci. 
10 , 1343 –1352 .11420436 
Syme N. R. ; Dennis C. ; Phillips S. E. V. ; Homans S. W.  (2007 ) Origin of Heat Capacity
Changes in a “Nonclassical” Hydrophobic Interaction . ChemBioChem 
8 , 1509 –1511 .17625803 
Dunitz J. D.  (1995 ) Win some,
lose some: Enthalpy-entropy compensation in weak intermolecular interactions . Chem. Biol. 
2 , 709 –712 .9383477 
Lumry R. ; Rajender S.  (1970 ) Enthalpy-entropy compensation phenomena in water solutions
of proteins and small molecules: A ubiquitous property of water . Biopolymers 
9 , 1125 –1227 .4918636 
Lumry R.  (2003 ) Uses of enthalpy-entropy
compensation in protein research . Biophys. Chem. 
105 , 545 –557 .14499917 
Lumry R.  (2003 ) Practical
limitations on the use of thermodynamic data from isothermal processes . Biophys. Chem. 
105 , 609 –620 .14499922 
Gurard-Levin Z. A. ; Kim J. ; Mrksich M.  (2009 ) Combining mass spectrometry and peptide arrays to profile
the specificities of histone deacetylases . ChemBioChem 
10 , 2159 –2161 .19688789 
Watkins R. E. ; Wisely G. B. ; Moore L. B. ; Collins J. L. ; Lambert M. H. ; Williams S. P. ; Willson T. M. ; Kliewer S. A. ; Redinbo M. R.  (2001 ) The human
nuclear xenobiotic receptor PXR: Structural determinants of directed
promiscuity . Science 
292 , 2329 –2333 .11408620 
Redinbo M. R.  (2004 ) Promiscuity:
What protects us, perplexes us . Drug Discovery
Today 
9 , 431 –432 .15109946 
Khersonsky O. ; Tawfik D. S.  (2010 ) Enzyme
promiscuity: A mechanistic and evolutionary
perspective . Annu. Rev. Biochem. 
79 , 471 –505 .20235827 
Williams D. H. ; Stephens E. ; O’Brien D. P. ; Zhou M.  (2004 ) Understanding noncovalent
interactions: Ligand binding energy and catalytic efficiency from
ligand-induced reductions in motion within receptors and enzymes . Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 
43 , 6596 –6616 .
Christensen T. ; Gooden D. M. ; Kung J. E. ; Toone E. J.  (2003 ) Additivity and the
physical basis of multivalency effects: A thermodynamic investigation
of the calcium EDTA interaction . J. Am. Chem.
Soc. 
125 , 7357 –7366 .12797810 
Lowther W.
T. ; Matthews B. W.  (2000 ) Structure
and function of the methionine aminopeptidases . Biochim. Biophys. Acta 
1477 , 157 –167 .10708856 
Rajagopalan P. T. R. ; Grimme S. ; Pei D.  (2000 ) Characterization of Cobalt(II)-Substituted
Peptide Deformylase: Function of the Metal Ion and the Catalytic Residue
Glu-133 . Biochemistry 
39 , 779 –790 .10651644 
Srivastava D. K. ; Wang S. ; Peterson K. L.  (1997 ) Isothermal titration
microcalorimetric
studies for the binding of octenoyl-CoA to medium chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase . Biochemistry 
36 , 6359 –6366 .9174351 
Cooper A.  (1999 ) Thermodynamic
analysis of biomolecular interactions . Curr.
Opin. Chem. Biol. 
3 , 557 –563 .10508661 
Chodera J. D. ; Mobley D. L.  (2013 ) Entropy-enthalpy compensation: Role and ramifications
in biomolecular ligand recognition and design . Annu. Rev. Biophys. 
42 , 121 –142 .23654303 
Singh R. K. ; Lall N. ; Leedahl T. S. ; McGillivray A. ; Mandal T. ; Haldar M. ; Mallik S. ; Cook G. ; Srivastava D. K.  (2013 ) Kinetic and Thermodynamic Rationale for Suberoylanilide
Hydroxamic Acid Being a Preferential Human Histone Deacetylase 8 Inhibitor
As Compared to the Structurally Similar Ligand, Trichostatin A . Biochemistry 
52 , 8139 –8149 .24079912 
Lumry R. ; Eyring H.  (1954 ) Conformation Changes of Proteins . J. Phys. Chem. 
58 , 110 –120 .
Berg A. K. ; Srivastava D. K.  (2009 ) Delineation of alternative conformational states in Escherichia coli peptide deformylase via thermodynamic
studies for the binding of actinonin . Biochemistry 
48 , 1584 –1594 .19191548 
Gallicchio E. ; Kubo M. M. ; Levy R. M.  (1998 ) Entropy–Enthalpy
Compensation
in Solvation and Ligand Binding Revisited . J.
Am. Chem. Soc. 
120 , 4526 –4527 .
Sharp K.  (2001 ) Entropy–enthalpy
compensation: Fact or artifact? . Protein Sci. 
10 , 661 –667 .11344335 
Kauzmann W.  (1959 ) Some factors
in the interpretation of protein denaturation . Adv. Protein Chem. 
14 , 1 –63 .14404936 
Snyder P. W. ; Mecinovic J. ; Moustakas D. T. ; Thomas S. W. ; Harder M. ; Mack E. T. ; Lockett M. R. ; Héroux A. ; Sherman W. ; Whitesides G. M.  (2011 ) Mechanism of the hydrophobic effect
in the biomolecular recognition of arylsulfonamides by carbonic anhydrase . Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 
108 , 17889 –17894 .22011572 
Lafont V. ; Armstrong A. A. ; Ohtaka H. ; Kiso Y. ; Mario Amzel L. ; Freire E.  (2007 ) Compensating Enthalpic and Entropic Changes Hinder
Binding Affinity Optimization . Chem. Biol. Drug
Des. 
69 , 413 –422 .17581235 
Qian H.  (1998 ) Entropy-enthalpy
compensation: Conformational fluctuation and induced-fit . J. Chem. Phys. 
109 , 10015 –10017 .
Breiten B. ; Lockett M. R. ; Sherman W. ; Fujita S. ; Al-Sayah M. ; Lange H. ; Bowers C. M. ; Heroux A. ; Krilov G. ; Whitesides G. M.  (2013 ) Water Networks Contribute to Enthalpy/Entropy Compensation
in Protein–Ligand Binding . J. Am. Chem.
Soc. 
135 , 15579 –15584 .24044696 
Grunwald E. ; Steel C.  (1995 ) Solvent Reorganization
and Thermodynamic Enthalpy-Entropy Compensation . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
117 , 5687 –5692 .
Portman K. L. ; Long J. ; Carr S. ; Briand L. ; Winzor D. J. ; Searle M. S. ; Scott D. J.  (2014 ) Enthalpy/Entropy Compensation Effects
from Cavity Desolvation Underpin Broad Ligand Binding Selectivity
for Rat Odorant Binding Protein 3 . Biochemistry 
53 , 2371 –2379 .24665925 
Biela A. ; Nasief N. N. ; Betz M. ; Heine A. ; Hangauer D. ; Klebe G.  (2013 ) Dissecting the hydrophobic
effect on the molecular level: The role
of water, enthalpy, and entropy in ligand binding to thermolysin . Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 
52 , 1822 –1828 .
Fenley A. T. ; Muddana H. S. ; Gilson M. K.  (2012 ) Entropy-enthalpy transduction caused
by conformational shifts can obscure the forces driving protein-ligand
binding . Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 
109 , 20006 –20011 .23150595 
Diehl C. ; Engström O. ; Delaine T. ; Håkansson M. ; Genheden S. ; Modig K. ; Leffler H. ; Ryde U. ; Nilsson U. J. ; Akke M.  (2010 ) Protein Flexibility
and Conformational
Entropy in Ligand Design Targeting the Carbohydrate Recognition Domain
of Galectin-3 . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
132 , 14577 –14589 .20873837 
Ferrante A. ; Gorski J.  (2012 ) Enthalpy-entropy compensation
and cooperativity as
thermodynamic epiphenomena of structural flexibility in ligand-receptor
interactions . J. Mol. Biol. 
417 , 454 –467 .22342886 
Banerjee A. L. ; Eiler D. ; Roy B. C. ; Jia X. ; Haldar M. K. ; Mallik S. ; Srivastava D. K.  (2005 ) Spacer-based
selectivity in the binding
of “two-prong” ligands to recombinant human carbonic
anhydrase I . Biochemistry 
44 , 3211 –3224 .15736932 
Jude K. M. ; Banerjee A. L. ; Haldar M. K. ; Manokaran S. ; Roy B. ; Mallik S. ; Srivastava D. K. ; Christianson D. W.  (2006 ) Ultrahigh
resolution crystal structures of human carbonic anhydrases I and II
complexed with “two-prong” inhibitors reveal the molecular
basis of high affinity . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
128 , 3011 –3018 .16506782 
Gurard-Levin Z. A. ; Mrksich M.  (2008 ) The activity of HDAC8
depends on local and distal sequences
of its peptide substrates . Biochemistry 
47 , 6242 –6250 .18470998 



