Maintaining
the integrity of
the DNA genome is essential to all organisms. Not only is DNA continuously
subjected to assaults from endogenous and exogenous chemicals, but
the fidelities of DNA polymerases are not sufficiently high to generate
error-free copies of the DNA during replication. Multiple DNA repair
pathways have evolved to counter these challenges. DNA mismatch repair
(MMR) proteins identify and correct DNA synthesis errors that occur
during replication. These proteins also participate in DNA damage-induced
activation of cell-cycle checkpoints and apoptosis, as well as several
other DNA transactions. Inactivation of MMR genes not only dramatically
increases the frequency of mutations but also decreases the level
of apoptosis, increases the level of cell survival, and results in
resistance to many chemotherapeutic agents.− In humans, mutations
in genes responsible for the initiation of MMR are associated with
&gt;80% of hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancers (HNPCCs) and
certain
sporadic cancers.−

MMR is initiated by MutS and MutL homologues,
which are highly
conserved throughout prokaryotes and eukaryotes. They are both dimers
and contain DNA binding and ATPase activities that are essential for
MMR in vivo. The MMR
cascade is initiated after MutS binds specifically to a mismatch or
base insertions/deletions (IDLs). Productive mismatch recognition
leads to an ATP-dependent conformational change in MutS, inducing
formation of a mobile clamp state that can move along the DNA. This
activated state of MutS, in turn, interacts with MutL, promoting the
downstream events that lead to repair.,

Crystal
structures of Thermus aquaticus and Escherichia
coli MutS and human MutSα bound to a number
of different mismatched DNA bases and IDLs− reveal that only two specific
amino acid contacts are made between MutS or MutSα and the mismatched
base. These contacts are located in a conserved Phe-Xaa-Glu motif,
where the phenylalanine stacks with the mismatched base and the glutamate
forms a hydrogen bond with N3 of the mismatched pyrimidine or N7 of
the mismatched purine− (Figure A). All other interactions between
MutS and the DNA are nonspecific backbone contacts. These specific
and nonspecific interactions induce a sharp bend (or kink) in the
DNA at the mismatch site. Atomic force microscopy (AFM), single-molecule
Förster resonance energy transfer (smFRET), and small-angle
X-ray scattering (SAXS) studies have revealed that MutS–mismatch
complexes adopt multiple bent conformations as well as an unbent (or
slightly bent) conformation, which exist in dynamic equilibrium.− Notably, for prokaryotic MutS, mismatch recognition does not necessarily
lead to sliding clamp formation and repair,− and the unbent conformation has been proposed to
be a necessary precursor to the formation of the ATP-induced sliding
clamp state that signals repair.,, Overall, DNA bending and unbending at mismatches
have been proposed to play a fundamental role in mismatch recognition
or subsequent repair signaling.,

Representative single-molecule
FRET traces for MutS and MutS-E41A
bound to GT, T-bulge, and CC mismatch DNA. (A) Models illustrating
the interactions between Phe39 and Glu41 of Taq MutS
and a GT mismatch or a T-bulge. The Taq MutS–T-bulge
structure is derived from Protein Data Bank entry 1EWQ. The Taq MutS–GT structure is a
model derived from aligning the recognition motifs of E. coli MutS GT (Protein Data Bank entry 1E3M) with the Taq MutS–T-bulge structure (Protein Data Bank entry 1EWQ). Molecular models were created using PyMOL Molecular Graphics
System, version 1.3 (Schrödinger, LLC). (B) Cartoon illustrating
the 50 bp DNA substrate used in single-molecule FRET studies. DNA
was immobilized via a biotin and streptavidin surface functionalization.
A TAMRA or Cy3 donor dye is located at the 3′ end, and a Cy5
acceptor dye is located 19 bases from the donor. (C and D) Example
smFRET traces for MutS and MutS-E41A, respectively, in the presence
of (i) GT, (ii) T-bulge, and (iii) CC. Acceptor or donor blinking
causes excursions to zero FRET in some traces. Each tick mark on the
x-axis represents 20 seconds.

Here, we report smFRET measurements of the conformational
dynamics
for T. aquaticus MutS (MutS) and a MutS mutant, in
which the Glu in the Phe-Xaa-Glu mismatch recognition motif is changed
to Ala (MutS-E41A), bound to different DNA mismatches. We examine
the DNA bending dynamics of MutS bound to a single T insertion (T-bulge),
a GT mismatch, and a CC mismatch and those of MutS-E41A bound to a
T-bulge and a GT mismatch. We chose these complexes because studies
of MutS and its homologues indicate that MutS–T-bulge, MutS–GT,
and MutS-E41A–T-bulge complexes are competent to signal repair,
whereas MutS–CC and MutS-E41A–GT complexes are impaired
with respect to signaling repair.− As outlined in Table , comparison
of the properties of these complexes allows us to begin to dissect
the roles of base–base and MutS-E41–base hydrogen bonding
in determining the MutS–mismatch conformations, and how these
conformations correlate with repair signaling. To examine the recognition
states that precede the formation of the ATP-induced sliding clamp,
we examine the conformational dynamics of MutS–mismatch complexes
in the absence of nucleotide cofactors.

Summary of Implications of Comparisons
of Experiments
 	hydrogen bonding	repair
signaling	conformational properties	
comparing T-bulge to GT	probes role of base–base hydrogen bonding (base stacking
may also play a role)	both are well repaired	longer-lived, less bent states for T-bulge than for GT	
comparing T-bulge and GT to CC	not
applicable	T-bulge and GT efficiently repaired; CC poorly
repaired	very short binding times and only bent states
on CC compared
to bent and unbent states on the T-bulge and GT	
comparing flow to steady state for GT and T-bulge	not applicable	not applicable	observed initial conformational state upon binding differs
between GT and T-bulge	
comparing wild-type MutS to MutS-E41A	probes hydrogen bonding between Glu41 and the mismatched
base	E41A signals repair on the T-bulge; E41A impaired
for repair
signaling on GT	loss of the Glu hydrogen bond to the
mismatched base has minimal
effect on T-bulge conformations but alters GT conformations and increases
the conformational dynamics of both T-bulge and GT complexes	
By monitoring changes
in DNA bending upon MutS binding as well
as the subsequent equilibrium DNA bending dynamics, we characterized
the conformational states and pathways associated with recognition
of the different mismatches by MutS and MutS-E41A. The conformational
dynamics of all the complexes can be described in terms of three classes
of DNA conformations: slightly bent/unbent (U), intermediately
bent (I), and strongly bent (B); however,
the relative stabilities of these states and their rates of interconversion
vary dramatically for the different complexes. Comparison of the conformational
properties of the wild-type and mutant MutS–mismatch complexes
with their abilities to signal repair supports the idea that the slightly
bent/unbent state (U) must be sufficiently populated
to signal repair, and provides a mechanistic model
of how U is achieved. Taken together, our data suggest
that the dynamics of MutS–mismatch/IDL complexes may be a key
factor in the overall ability of the MMR system to repair certain
types of mismatches.

Experimental Procedures
Protein and DNA Substrates
Wild-type MutS and MutS-E41A
from T. aquaticus were overexpressed
in E. coli and purified as previously described. High-performance liquid chromatography-purified
single-stranded oligonucleotides (labeled and unlabeled as indicated)
were purchased from Integrated DNA Technologies and TriLink Biotechnologies.
Oligonucleotide names and sequences are listed in Table . The location of the DNA mismatch is noted at the underlined
base. DNA substrates containing a TAMRA-labeled oligonucleotide (Table , A1) or a Cy3-labeled oligonucleotide (Table , A2) were annealed to a Cy5-labeled oligonucleotide
(Table , C1-GT, C2-T-bulge, and C3-CC) to
create a duplex DNA fragment containing the desired mismatch (Figure B). Oligonucleotides were annealed in buffer containing
20 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.8), 100 mM sodium acetate, and 5 mM magnesium
chloride in a 1:1 ratio at 65 °C for 20 min followed by slow
cooling. When the temperature reached 55 °C, an additional unlabeled
complementary oligonucleotide (Table , B1)
was added and annealed to complete the duplex DNA substrate. The substrate
was allowed to slowly cool to room temperature and was stored on ice
or at 4 °C.

Sequences of DNA Oligonucleotides
Used in smFRET Experiments
oligo	sequence (5′ to 3′)	
A1	biotin-TGT CGG GGC TGG
CTT AAG GTG TGA AAT ACC TCA TCT CGA
GCG TGC CGA TA-TAMRA	
A2	biotin-TGT CGG GGC TGG CTT AAG GTG TGA AAT
ACC TCA TCT CGA
GCG TGC CGA TA-Cy3	
B1	AGG TAT TTC ACA CCT TAA GCC AGC CCC GAC A	
C1-GT	TAT CGG CAC GTT CGA GAT G-Cy5	
C2-T-bulge	TAT CGG CAC GTC TCG AGA TG-Cy5	
C3-CC	TAT CGG CAC CCT CGA GAT G-Cy5	
All sequences are shown in the 5′
to 3′ order with biotin and fluorophore labels noted at the
appropriate positions. The locations of mismatch sites are noted as
underlined bases.

Fluorescence
Microscopy
Quartz microscope slides and
flow channels were prepared as previously described., For DNA immobilization, the quartz surface was treated first with
biotinylated BSA (Sigma, 1 mg/mL, 5 min incubation) followed by streptavidin
(Invitrogen, 0.1 mg/mL, 5 min incubation), similar to methods previously
described. Annealed biotinylated, fluorescently
labeled, mismatched DNA was added to the treated surfaces at a concentration
ranging from 10 to 30 pM for 5 min, and the unbound DNA was removed
by rinsing with chilled buffer [20 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.8), 100 mM NaOAc,
and 5 mM MgCl2]. Samples were imaged at room temperature
in the rinsing buffer described above upon addition of enzymatic oxygen-scavenging
components [2% glucose (Sigma), 1% β-mercaptoethanol (Fluka),
0.1 mg/mL glucose oxidase (Sigma), and 0.025 mg/mL catalase (Sigma)]
to enhance the fluorophore lifetime and upon addition of triplet-state
quencher cyclooctatetraene (Sigma-Aldrich) (∼50 μM).
Images were collected in the presence and absence of 200 nM MutS.
MutS was allowed to bind the DNA for at least 5 min prior to the collection
of images for steady-state experiments. Protein was added through
a flow-cell apparatus for flow binding experiments while imaging in
real time.

Data were collected using a prism-type total internal
reflection fluorescence (TIRF) laser microscope operating with alternating
532 and 635 nm illumination, as described previously. Fluorescence emission was collected with a 60× 1.2
NA water immersion objective and split by a 645dcrx dichroic mirror
(Chroma) into short and long wavelength paths, filtered for TAMRA
and Cy5 emissions using HQ 585/70 and HQ 700/75 bandpass filters (Chroma),
and relayed as side-by-side images onto a charge-coupled device camera
(Cascade 512B, Roper Scientific). Images were collected at 10 or 66
frames per second (100 or 15 ms frame rate, respectively) using software
written in house.

Observed intensities of single molecules were
integrated with software
written in house to obtain individual fluorescence emission time traces
as described previously. Emission traces
were background subtracted and corrected for leakage of the donor
signal into the acceptor channel (∼5%). Molecules not confirmed
to contain exactly one donor and one acceptor fluorophore were excluded
from further analysis. FRET efficiencies were calculated from the
respective donor and acceptor emissions as E = IA/(ID + IA), where ID and IA are the corrected intensities of the donor
fluorophore and acceptor fluorophore, respectively.

FRET Data Analysis
We apply a Gaussian derivative kernel
algorithm to isolate FRET transitions in single-molecule traces. This algorithm (as previously described and
available at http://www.cs.unc.edu/∼nanowork/cismm/download/edgedetector/index.html) yields each FRET efficiency sampled in a given FRET trace as well
the time the molecule spends at that FRET efficiency (“dwell
time”, or Δt) and the transition sequence. Data for the MutS-E41A–GT complex underwent
an additional analysis for short-lived transitions using hidden Markov
modeling (HaMMy version 4.0 acquired from http://bio.physics.illinois.edu/HaMMy.html). FRET transitions are used to generate
transition density plots (TDPs), and lifetimes are used to assess
the kinetics of the different conformations sampled for a given MutS–DNA
complex. Details of this analysis approach have been previously described. Histogram distributions are generated from the
average FRET value of each transition in a given single-molecule FRET
trace identified using the Gaussian derivative algorithm. FRET values
in histograms and TDPs are not weighted with respect to the lifetime
of a state.

Results
We used smFRET to characterize
the DNA conformations sampled when
MutS or MutS-E41A is bound to three different DNA mismatches/IDLs
that exhibit differences in repair properties: a single-thymine insertion
(T-bulge), a GT mismatch, and a CC mismatch.,,,, We employed 50 bp double-stranded DNA substrates,
labeled with a FRET acceptor dye (Cy5) on one end, a FRET donor dye
(TAMRA) 19 bases 3′ of the acceptor dye, and a mismatch located
midway between the dyes. In addition,
the 5′ end of the DNA is biotinylated to allow immobilization
on a quartz substrate (Figure B and ). Changes in smFRET signals
represent changes in DNA bending (and/or twisting).

MutS–DNA Conformations and Conformational Dynamics Exhibit
Mismatch Specific Behavior
Figure  shows representative FRET traces for T-bulge, GT, and CC DNA mismatches
in the presence of MutS (Figure C) or MutS-E41A
(Figure D). Inspection of the individual time
traces reveals that MutS–DNA complexes sample different conformations
and exhibit different rates of switching between FRET states for the
three mismatches.

As previously described, MutS–GT complexes (Figure Ci) sample six different conformational states, with rates of interconversion
between states ranging from 0.002 to 0.6 s–1. The
stability and the rates of transitions between states of the MutS–GT
complex are optimally matched to the detection capability of our single-molecule
fluorescence assay (given the limitations of fluorophore photobleaching
and emCCD-based detection), which allowed the complete conformational
landscape to be characterized in detail. In contrast, MutS–T-bulge complexes are significantly more
stable and exhibit fewer conformational transitions with smaller changes
in DNA bending, limiting our ability to identify poorly populated,
closely spaced states and to evaluate the complete kinetic landscape
of these complexes. Most MutS–T-bulge FRET traces (Figure Cii) displayed a constant FRET state over the observation
period, which is limited by dye photobleaching. Approximately 20%
of the complexes showed one or two FRET transitions during the observation
time (approximately 100 s). The CC mismatch represents the other end
of the kinetic spectrum, where MutS appears to be bound only for a
short period, usually a few frames at an acquisition rate of 10 Hz
(Figure Ciii). Consequently, we used faster
camera frame rates (Figure 1 of the ) and determined the lifetime to be ∼80 ms
for MutS bound to CC. This short binding time is consistent with the
weak binding affinity of T. aquaticus MutS for a
CC mismatch (Kd = 720 nM).

Figure  shows
histograms of the populations
of FRET states sampled for MutS–homoduplex, MutS–GT,
MutS–T-bulge, and MutS–CC complexes. The MutS–homoduplex
DNA complexes do not exhibit a significant shift away from the FRET
of free DNA (Figure G), as seen previously. Also consistent our previous observations, no variation in fluorescence intensity was observed
with homoduplex DNA in the presence or absence of MutS, confirming
little direct binding of MutS to the fluorophores altering quantum
yields in this study (Figure 2 of the ). In contrast, the FRET distributions vary widely
among the MutS–GT, MutS–T-bulge, and MutS–CC
complexes (Figure A,B,H). The distribution
of MutS–GT FRET values is very broad, covering six different
states. Like that of the MutS–GT
complex, the distribution of the MutS–T-bulge complex (Figure B) is also broad, consistent with multiple bent
states; however, the distribution is shifted to lower FRET values
relative to those of the MutS–GT complex. This result is consistent
with AFM analysis of DNA bend angles, which showed that MutS–T-bulge
complexes were less bent than MutS–GT complexes.,

Distributions
of smFRET efficiencies for MutS– and MutS-E41A–mismatch
complexes. Histograms of steady-state distributions of observed FRET
efficiencies for MutS bound to GT (A) (n = 2992),
T-bulge (B) (n = 1664), homoduplex DNA (G) (n = 200), and CC (H) (n = 909) and for
MutS-E41A bound to GT (E) (n = 2931) and T-bulge
(F) (n = 2680), respectively. Histograms of the distributions
of FRET efficiencies induced upon MutS binding to GT (C) and T-bulge
(D) during buffer exchange experiments are displayed. For each histogram,
black cityscapes indicate the distribution of the observed innate
FRET for the TAMRA-Cy5-labeled DNA substrate in the absence of protein
and colored bars represent the distribution of FRET in the presence
of the indicated protein. Histogram values are determined as described
in  and are not scaled
by the dwell times of MutS on the DNA. The proposed MutS–DNA
bending states are outlined for each distribution: F,
free DNA; U, unbent state; I, intermediately
bent state; B, bent state. The data for the steady-state
experiments with MutS–GT complexes were taken from ref ().

Our smFRET measurements of CC DNA in the absence of MutS
(Figure H) are shifted to slightly higher
FRET values with
a modestly larger width compared to those of GT or T-bulge substrates,
consistent with free DNA having increased flexibility at the CC mismatch. MutS–CC complexes (Figure H) show two peaks: one overlapping free DNA and a broad peak
ranging from FRET values of 0.4 to 0.8. The fraction of events overlapping
free DNA for each mismatch is consistent with their relative binding
affinities (Kd values of 5 nM for the
T-bulge, 40 nM for GT, and 720 nM for CC),,− and our experimental
MutS concentration (200 nM). CC has the most events overlapping with
free DNA, and the T-bulge has the fewest.

Analysis of plots
of the FRET values before and after transitions
between states [so-called transition density plots (TDPs)] (Figure ) reveals the prevalence of the conformational transitions
for MutS bound to different mismatches. In addition, the TDPs are
particularly useful for identifying states with closely spaced FRET
values, which can overlap in the histograms. For example, the MutS–T-bulge complexes show only small changes
in FRET, preferentially sampling two FRET states centered at FRET
values of ∼0.36 and ∼0.46 (Figure C). These states overlap in the broad peak in the histogram but can
clearly be observed in individual traces (Figure Cii) and the TDPs (Figure ). Six conformational
states have been identified for MutS–GT complexes. Independent analysis of the MutS–T-bulge
complexes identified three distinct conformational states with variable
degrees of bending (B, I, and U). Despite the short binding time for binding of MutS to the CC mismatch,
we also identified two bending states (B and I) that overlap with the states independently found for the T-bulge
and the GT mismatch complexes.

Transition density plots for MutS and
MutS-E41A in the presence
of GT, T-bulge, and CC mismatch DNA. TDPs of FRET changes observed
due to conformational changes and protein binding and unbinding for
MutS in the presence of GT (A) (n = 2535 transitions),
a T-bulge (C) (n = 2046 transitions), or a CC (E)
(n = 899 transitions) and for MutS-E41A in the presence
of a GT (B) (n = 2046 transitions) or a T-bulge (D)
(n = 1672 transitions). TDPs were generated from
FRET transitions identified using a Gaussian derivative kernel algorithm
described previously. The specific transitions
between states are circled: F, free DNA; U, slightly bent/unbent state; I, intermediately bent
state; B, bent state. The data for MutS–GT complexes
were taken from ref ().

Although we have identified six
states for MutS–GT complexes,
some of these states had overlapping FRET values that could be separated
only by careful kinetic analyses. The
slow MutS–T-bulge and fast MutS–CC kinetics prevented
the separation of those overlapping FRET states. The FRET values of
the poorly populated MutS–GT states are contained within the
three states (B, I, and U)
identified for the T-bulge– and CC–MutS complexes. In
fact, the conformational properties of both wild-type and mutant (see
below) MutS bound to all of the mismatches studied can be effectively
compared using these three dominant classes of DNA conformations:
unbent/slightly bent (U; FRET values of 0.30–0.40),
intermediately bent (I; FRET values of 0.4–0.55),
and significantly bent (B; FRET values of &gt;0.55) (Figures  and ). Quantitative analysis
of the transitions among these states and free DNA (F) (see below)
allows estimation of their relative stabilities and determination
of their conformational pathways (Figure ).

Relative
stabilities of states for MutS– and MutS-E41A–DNA
complexes. (A) Mechanistic depiction of MutS–DNA conformational
states, including energy level diagrams representative of the relative
stabilities of U, I, and B states
for (B) the MutS–GT complex, (C) the MutS–T-bulge and
MutS-E41A–T-bulge complexes, (D) the MutS-E41A–GT complex,
and (E) the MutS–CC complex. The relative stabilities of the
states are estimated on the basis of the changes in their occupancies
relative to those of the MutS–GT complexes for which we were
able to obtain quantitative kinetic data. The data for MutS–GT complexes were taken from ref ().

MutS–GT and MutS–T-bulge complexes exhibit
multiple
conformational states; however, each complex switches back and forth
between two dominant states. MutS–GT complexes show relatively
rapid transitions between B and U (with
large changes in DNA bending), with rare transitions to I. In contrast, the more stable MutS–T-bulge complexes (Kd values of 5 nM for the T-bulge and 40 nM for
GT) rarely populate B and
undergo infrequent transitions between the long-lived conformational
states, I and U (with only small changes
in DNA bending). Interestingly, the long dwell times and infrequent
transitions between states I and U for the
T-bulge are similar to the transition rates between states I and U determined for GT (0.05 s–1 for U to I and 0.02 s–1 for I to U). Notably, for MutS–GT complexes, I is not on
path to formation of U because MutS preferentially dissociates
from I (Figure ); however, the
increased stability of the MutS–T-bulge complex relative to
those of MutS–GT complexes results in I preferentially
undergoing the transition to U instead of dissociating,
and I becomes on path to U for MutS–T-bulge
complexes. These results suggest that the 8-fold increase in binding
affinity of MutS for a T-bulge relative to a GT results from the stabilization
of states I and U but not B (Figure A,B).

The transitions for
CC are dominated by short binding events (Figure E). MutS binds to I and B with similar
frequencies and dwell times, suggesting that I and B have similar stabilities, and U is rarely observed
(Figures  and ). The
smFRET histograms for experiments with the
CC mismatch acquired at 15 ms using a different donor–acceptor
pair with a different FRET scaling (Figure 1 of the ) display a distinct gap between FRET
DNA values and higher FRET values that clearly illustrates the low
probability of visiting U as compared to the other mismatches
where the higher FRET values in the histograms smoothly overlap with
those of the free DNA state. These results can be explained if the
18-fold lower binding affinity of MutS for CC relative to that for
GT (Kd values of 40 nM for GT and 720
nM for CC),,− results from destabilization of both B and U but not I (Figure ).

Flow Experiments Reveal Different Initial
Conformations for
Binding of MutS to GT and the T-Bulge
All of the conformational
dynamics discussed above were determined from steady-state studies,
where MutS was preincubated with the DNA prior to single-molecule
imaging and was present in solution during imaging. This steady-state
protocol limits our level of confidence in assigning binding events
for GT mismatches, and because of the high affinity of MutS for T-bulge
mismatches, binding events are rarely observed for the T-bulge in
steady-state experiments. Consequently, to unequivocally identify
the initial binding conformations induced by MutS, we directly monitored
the first DNA conformation induced at the mismatch upon MutS binding,
by imaging immobilized DNA in a flow chamber while adding MutS in
real time (Figure C,D).

The distribution
of FRET states adopted upon binding of MutS to the GT mismatch (Figure C) indicates that it preferentially binds to the
bent states (B and I) observed in the steady-state
experiments (Figure A). This observation is
consistent with our previous conclusion, based on steady-state data,
that MutS preferentially binds GT in B and then undergoes
the transition to U. In
contrast, the distribution of FRET states for binding of MutS to a
T-bulge (Figure D) shows that MutS binds preferentially
to the less bent state (U) of the two dominant populations
(U and I) in the steady-state experiments.

MutS-E41A–DNA Complexes Exhibit Wild-Type-like Conformations
on a T-Bulge but Not on a GT Mismatch
The distribution of
FRET states visited for MutS-E41A–T-bulge complexes (Figure F) is similar to the distribution for MutS–T-bulge
complexes (Figure B). As shown in FRET traces
of individual molecules (Figure D), MutS-E41A–T-bulge
complexes are more dynamic than MutS–T-bulge complexes, with
the dominant transition between U and I occurring
with a greater frequency (20% of the MutS–T-bulge complexes
and 50% of the MutS-E41A–T-bulge complexes showed transitions
during our observation window of 100 s). Despite this difference in
dynamics, the overall distributions of transitions among FRET states
for MutS and MutS-E41A bound to the T-bulge are very similar (Figure C,D). These results indicate that the same states
and transitions occur for both the MutS– and MutS-E41A–T-bulge
complexes, only with faster dynamics for the MutS-E41A complex. Taken
together with the similar binding affinities of MutS and MutS-E41A
for a T-bulge, these results suggest
that mutation of Glu to Ala does not significantly alter the stabilities
of U, I, and B but slightly
lowers the transition barriers between U and I (Figure ).

In contrast to the similarity
of conformational states for MutS– and MutS-E41A–T-bulge
complexes, MutS– and MutS-E41A–GT complexes exhibit
both different distributions and different lifetimes of states (Figures –). Two of the most
stable states (B and U) and the dominant
transition (B to U) that are seen for the
MutS–GT complex are rarely observed for the MutS-E41A–GT
complex, where the dominant transitions are binding to I and unbinding from I (Figures  and ). Although B is populated
for MutS-E41A–GT complexes, its lifetime is dramatically shortened
compared to that of MutS–GT complexes, in which it is the longest-lived
state (Figure Di). In fact, B is so short-lived for MutS-E41A–GT complexes that it is not
efficiently detected by our edge detection algorithm, which uses a
five-point window. Consequently, B is underrepresented
in the population histogram (Figure E), although
transitions to and from it are visible upon inspection of individual
traces (Figure Di). To improve the detection
of these fast transitions, we used hidden Markov modeling-type analysis
() of these fast transitions to verify that the most common
transition from B is unbinding. In MutS-E41A–GT
complexes, U can be visited via a transition from B, but with a greatly reduced frequency relative to that of
MutS–GT complexes (Figure ). The observed
reduction in the level of complexes in U and the increase
in the level of complexes in I are consistent with previous
AFM studies, which showed a shift of the unbent population to ∼15°. These results, taken together with the similar
binding affinities of MutS and MutS-E41A for GT, suggest that B and U are destabilized and I is
stabilized for MutS-E41A–GT complexes relative to MutS–GT
complexes (Figure ).

Discussion
Previous smFRET, AFM, and SAXS studies of Taq and E. coli MutS indicate that MutS–mismatch complexes
adopt multiple conformations, with different extents of DNA bending,−, and that the time scales of interconversion
of these states can vary by 2 orders of magnitude. In addition, it has been suggested that MutS bends homoduplex
DNA while searching for a mismatch and, upon recognition of a mismatch,
undergoes a two-step transition via a kinked intermediate to a slightly
bent/unbent conformation., Formation of this unbent
conformation is proposed to be essential for the ATP activation of
MutS that signals repair., Our current data, which
significantly expand on these previous studies, both support the idea
that sufficient sampling of an unbent (or slightly bent) conformation
is necessary for signaling repair and provide insight into the mechanisms
by which signaling may be impaired. In particular, we find that the
dynamics of the MutS–mismatched DNA complexes are predictive
of the differential abilities of wild-type and mutant MutS–mismatch/IDL
complexes to undergo the ATP-induced formation of the sliding clamp
that signals repair.

Although MutS efficiently undergoes the
conformational change to
the sliding clamp state that signals repair on both the T-bulge and
GT, the mutant MutS-E41A can undergo this conformational change on
a T-bulge but not on a GT, even though MutS-E41A exhibits binding
affinities for both substrates similar to those of MutS., Interestingly, we find that removal of E41, which makes a hydrogen
bond to the mismatch or IDL base, increases the conformational dynamics
of both T-bulge and GT complexes (Figure D).
For the T-bulge, transitions between states occur approximately twice
as often for MutS-E41A as for MutS, but this increase in dynamics
does not significantly alter the occupancies of the different conformational
states (Figure ) or the dominant transitions,
which are between I and U (Figure ). These results indicate that E41 plays only a
small role in dictating MutS–T-bulge conformational properties
and are consistent with the wild-type-like signaling behavior of MutS-E41A
on a T-bulge., In contrast, MutS-E41A–GT
complexes show both different distributions of conformations and different
conformational dynamics relative to those of MutS–GT complexes.
For MutS–GT complexes, B is the most stable state
and the dominant transition is B to U, whereas
for MutS-E41A–GT complexes, B is only briefly
visited and U is rarely observed. In
addition, the dominant transitions are binding to I and
unbinding from I (Figures  and ), which is the most stable state for MutS-E41A–GT
complexes (Figure ).

The different properties
of MutS-E41A on a GT and T-bulge suggest
that formation of both B and U involves
changes in base–base hydrogen bonding (although base stacking
also could be playing a role). Specifically, removal of the interaction
between the T-bulge and E41 minimally affects the conformational properties
of MutS bound to a T-bulge, which does not have a hydrogen-bonding
partner, whereas removal of this interaction greatly affects the properties
of MutS bound to a GT, which makes two base–base H-bonds. If B represents the conformation observed in the crystal structures
of MutS–mismatch complexes, it is not surprising that removal
of E41 reduces its stability, because the bent conformation seen in
the crystal structures reveals significant changes in base–base
hydrogen bonding relative to that of free DNA. Interestingly, loss
of this hydrogen bonding interaction appears to stabilize I for the MutS–GT complexes (Figure ), indicating that E41 inhibits the formation I for
the GT complexes.

A similar analysis can be applied to the binding
of MutS to a CC
mismatch, which is also thought to be impaired for signaling., In the case of MutS–CC complexes, however, the stability
of the complex is greatly reduced (Kd =
720 nM), with the stability of both B and U lowered relative that of the MutS–GT complex. As a result,
MutS exhibits very short dwell times (&lt;1 s), binding to both B and I but not U. Taken together
with our MutS-E41A results, the concomitant destabilization of U and B for both MutS–CC and MutS-E41A–GT
complexes support the idea that B is a required precursor
to the formation of U and that I is off
path, except for the case in which the complexes are extremely stable
(e.g., MutS–T-bulge complex).

Our flow experiments following
binding of MutS to GT show that
MutS preferably binds in B and then undergoes the transition
to U, supporting the suggestion that B is
an intermediate in the formation of U. In contrast, MutS
appears to preferentially bind a T-bulge in U and remains
stably bound with occasional transitions to I, which
is also long-lived, and B is rarely populated (Figures, B,D and C). The observation
that MutS binds to a T-bulge directly into U suggests
either that MutS recognition of a T-bulge follows a pathway different
from that of MutS recognition of a GT or that MutS follows the same
conformational pathway for recognition of both GT and the T-bulge
but the transition from B to U is too fast
to observe for the T-bulge in these experiments. This latter idea
is supported by previous studies that strongly suggest that MutS searches
DNA by one-dimensional diffusion and that MutS bends the DNA during
its search.,, Consequently, it is likely that the initial encounter of MutS with
the mismatch occurs via a conformation in which the DNA is bent. Furthermore,
a recent SAXS study suggests that DNA
distortion is involved in the earliest mispair recognition steps.

The suggestion that MutS–T-bulge complexes undergo a transition
from B to U too quickly for observation
upon initial binding is supported by studies of base-flipping enzymes
that induce DNA bending prior to DNA unbending and base flipping., Studies of the DNA binding properties of uracil DNA glycosylase
(UDG) showed that bases lacking base pair hydrogen bonding interactions
(such as the T-bulge) are more flexible and have lower bending free
energies, and the transition barrier through the bent conformation
and into an unbent, base-flipped conformation is reduced by ∼3
kcal/mol relative to that of hydrogen-bonded base pairs. In addition, conformational transitions observed
in DNA methyltransferase EcoRI showed that the enzyme–DNA
complex undergoes a transition from a bent DNA conformation to an
unbent, base-flipped DNA conformation within the first 25 ms after
binding to the DNA. Consequently, it
is likely that MutS binds the T-bulge in the bent state but rapidly
undergoes a conformational change to the unbent state, with the transition
occurring faster than the time resolution of our experiments. In other
words, the lack of observation of bending upon binding can be explained
if the rate constant for the transition from B to U is significantly increased for the T-bulge relative to that
of GT (transitions with rates faster than ∼10 s–1 would be missed in our experiments). This latter suggestion is consistent
with the observed stabilization of U, but not B, in MutS–T-bulge complexes relative to MutS–GT complexes.
An increase in rate of the transition from B to U is also consistent with the increased population of I, because U preferentially undergoes the transition
to I, and if I undergoes
the transition to B, B will rapidly convert
to U. Transitions from I to U are rarely observed for MutS–GT complexes because MutS preferentially
dissociates from GT when MutS is bound in the I conformation. The increased affinity of MutS for a T-bulge
relative to that for GT reduces the dissociation rate, which in turn
allows transitions from I to U rather than
dissociation of MutS from the DNA, and I becomes on path
to the formation of U for the T-bulge.

Given that
the interaction of MutS with a mismatch significantly
alters base–base hydrogen bonding, our results suggest that hydrogen bonding between the mismatch bases,
in part, inhibits the formation of the signaling state, and the formation
of U involves disruption of base–base hydrogen
bonding. Differences in base stacking interactions between the T-bulge
and GT DNA also likely play a role but are difficult to tease apart
in this study. These results, taken together with the lack of correlation
between the affinity of MutS for a mismatch and its ability to signal
repair,− suggest that differences in hydrogen bonding, as well as base stacking,
of mismatches may govern, in part, the efficiency of mismatch repair.

Our results reveal that both the DNA conformations as well as the
dynamics of transitions between these conformations play an important
role in mismatch recognition and the ability to signal repair. The
well-repaired mismatches studied in this work sample a number of different
states but follow a preferred pathway that ultimately proceeds to
a stable slightly bent/unbent state (U). In contrast,
complexes whose homologues show poor repair in vivo and/or poor signaling in vitro, such as MutS with
CC or MutS-E41A with GT, do not efficiently proceed through the conformational
pathways that lead to the unbent state. Our observations support previous
suggestions that an unbent state is a point of entry into the repair
pathway.,, Thus, a growing
set of observations suggests a model in which a progression of conformations
from bent to unbent may be an essential step in the signaling that
initiates repair. In this model, the more dynamic MutS–DNA
complexes could sample the unbent conformation less frequently and
yet still be repaired (e.g., MutS-E41A–T-bulge complex) while
others that do not sample the unbent conformation for a sufficient
period of time will activate repair less efficiently (e.g., MutS-E41A–GT
and MutS–CC complexes), resulting in refractory or decreased
mismatch repair.

Finally, our data suggest that the functional
pathway we identified
is common across three different mismatches despite the wide range
of affinities and kinetic rates. Consequently, if this generalization
is valid for all mismatches, blocking any conformation that is on
the functional pathway can lead to impaired repair. This model, or
another such model that addresses molecular details of MMR signaling
mechanisms, will provide a framework that may allow the rational design
of drugs that could either promote or inhibit the main conformational
pathway. The potential of such engineering approaches to redesigning
the DNA MMR machinery is foreshadowed by a cysteine mutant of MutSα,
which restricted MutSα conformational changes and inhibited
the ability of MutSα to signal the downstream events that lead
to repair.

Supporting Information Available
Supplemental data and figure.
This material is available free of charge via the Internet at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bi401429b_si_001.pdf

Author Contributions
V.C.D., L.E.S.,
R.Q., D.A.E., and K.R.W. designed experiments. V.C.D., L.E.S., and
R.Q. conducted experiments and performed data analysis. V.C.D., L.E.S.,
D.A.E., and K.R.W. wrote and edited the manuscript. V.C.D. and L.E.S.
contributed equally to this work.

The authors
declare no competing financial interests.

Abbreviations
MMRmismatch repair

HNPCChereditary nonpolyposis
colorectal
cancer

AFMatomic
force microscopy

smFRETsingle-molecule Förster resonance energy transfer

MutSwild-type MutS

BSAbovine serum albumin

TIRFtotal internal
reflectance fluorescence

TDPtransition density plot

emCCDelectron-multiplying charge-coupled device

TAMRAtetramethylrhodamine.

