Since the proof-of-concept in
1998, RNA nanotechnology has been emerged
as a popular field.− RNA has the simplistic chemical characteristics of DNA with the
complex folding and functionality of proteins. These attributes make RNA an ideal candidate for creating nanoparticles
with diverse functionalities for targeting and treating cancer tumors
and viral infections, as well as other applications in nanodevices.,,− RNA nanotechnology in therapeutics provides many advantages over
current technologies:, (1) RNA can be produced with
a defined shape and stoichiometry as well as high reproducibility.,,, There are many modified nucleosides within RNA, but it is primarily
composed of only four nucleic acid bases, allowing for simplicity
in structure and predictable interactions between molecules and formation
of structures. (2) RNA can target specific cell groups by targeting
cell surface receptors through the use of RNA aptamers that function
like protein or chemical ligands.− These structures do
not induce antibody production, allowing for repeated delivery and
therapy. (3) RNA nanoparticles that have
been produced have a size range of 10–50 nm,− the perfect
size to be retained within the body and pass through leaky blood vessels
in cancer tumors,, as well as cell membranes by
cell surface receptor endocytosis. (4)
RNA can be created to harbor multiple therapeutic elements by utilizing
branch scaffolds,− and bottom-up construction., Even with these advantages, RNA nanotechnology has been hindered
because of the instability of RNA itself, specifically in
vivo. Dissociation of complex without covalent bonds is an
intrinsic property of molecules, for example, RNA molecules, that
are thermodynamically unstable in nature.−

When RNA nanoparticles are delivered systemically to the body,
the particles will exist in low concentrations due to dilution by
circulating blood. Only those RNA particles that do not dissociate
at low concentrations are feasible for therapeutic purposes that require
systemic delivery. Furthermore, RNA can easily be degraded and cleaved
by RNases found throughout the human body. Chemically modified nucleotides have been developed to combat the
nuclease degradation. Specifically, 2′-F modified nucleotides
have been shown to keep the original folding and functionality of
the RNA molecules while significantly increasing the half-life. To overcome the instability issues and push
the RNA nanotechnology field to progress further, a stable platform
needs to be produced that can remain stable at low concentrations
and high temperatures while resisting RNase degradation.−

Recently, a three way junction motif (3WJ) in the packaging
RNA
(pRNA) of the bacteriophage phi29 dsDNA packaging motor was found
to be ultrastable. The pRNA-3WJ produced
a melting curve indicative of a low Gibbs free energy (ΔG°),, as well as a high melting temperature
(Tm). It has also been elucidated that
the 3WJ is stable in ultralow concentrations, as well as in 8 M urea.
This junction serves as the central core of the pRNA linking the helical
domain to the interlocking looped regions and allows for intermolecular interactions with
other pRNA molecules (Figure ). The core can
be formed from three individual RNA oligos with a high efficiency
without the presence of metal ions. It has been found that this junction
can incorporate RNA functional moieties, such as receptor-binding
aptamer,, siRNA,,, ribozyme,− miRNA,− or riboswitch., Additionally, the resulting structures have the ability to keep
the strong folding of the core, while retaining the functionality
of the conjugated RNA moieties. Even
with the strong stability of the 3WJ, it is still very much susceptible
to degradation by RNases; therefore, chemical modifications to the
RNA are required.,, The effects on the thermodynamic stability of the pRNA-3WJ core,
though, are still unknown.

Background information for motor pRNA, pRNA
three-way junction
(3WJ), and the application of their thermodynamic stability to build
RNA nanoparticles. (A) The side-view of the hexametric structure of
phi29 DNA packaging motor. Two bottom
panels are side-view and top-view of the hexameric pRNA derived from
X-ray crystallography. (B) Predicted
secondary structure of the phi29 packaging RNA (pRNA) with the 3WJ
motif outlined and the pRNA-3WJ and pRNA-3WJ secondary structure with
solved crystal structure.

Previously, thermodynamics of nucleic acids and their folding
properties
have been studied; however, the majority of the studies have been
completed on RNA and DNA duplex sequences.,−,− An estimation of thermodynamic parameters for RNA 3WJ and 4WJ have
been surmised from studies completed
using two piece designs by incorporating looped regions between helical
branches. A gap has remained within the thermodynamic studies of nucleic
acids regarding elucidating thermodynamic characteristics of multibranched
structures, that is, multistranded motifs. Additionally, the understanding
of chemical modifications to the RNA backbone on RNA junctions has
remained a mystery, and untouched. To understand the thermodynamic
characteristics of such structures and comprehend the governing laws
of motif folding, new methods must be developed to be able to see
multistranded interactions.

Here we report the measured thermodynamic
parameters for 3WJ complexes
containing DNA, RNA, and 2′-F U/C modified RNA strands (Figure ), as well as hybrid complexes by means of comparison
of their stability using a real-time polymerase chain reaction (rtPCR)
machine and temperature gradient gel electrophoresis (TGGE). Results
concluded that use of DNA strands weakened the structure of the pRNA-3WJ,
while 2′-F modifications strengthened the RNA motif by elevating
the transition temperatures and lowering ΔG°. More importantly, the data appear to show the 3WJ formed
in a single step without displaying the presence of dimer species,
showing that all three strands of the pRNA-3WJ formed together into
a complex rapidly with the intermediate product undetectable. The
assembly was also revealed to be entropy driven.

Materials and Methods
Oligonucleotides
and Assembly of 3WJs
RNA and DNA oligonucleotides
were obtained from Integrated DNA Technologies (IDT). RNA oligonucleotides
containing 2′-F U/C modifications were ordered from Trilink
BioTechnologies. Assembly of 3WJs was performed by mixing equimolar
concentration of corresponding strands in TMS buffer (50 mM TRIS pH
= 8.0, 100 mM NaCl, 10 mM MgCl2), heating to +80 °C,
and slowly cooling to +4 °C at a rate of 2.0 °C/min for
a total of 37 min. The 3WJ formations were assayed on a 12% native
PAGE TBM running buffer (89 mM Tris, 200 mM borate acid, and 5 mM
MgCl2) ran at 100 V at 4 °C for 90 min. Gels were
stained with ethidium bromide (EB) and imaged using a Typhoon (GE).

KD Measurements
Apparent
equilibrium dissociation constants (KD) for 3WJ formations were determined by titration over a range of
concentrations from 0.1 nM to 512 nM, as previously described., Concentrations of the 3WJs were calculated using the absorbance
of UV light at 260 nm using a Nanodrop 2000 (Thermo Scientific) using
an optical density equaling one as 40 μg/mL and 50 μg/mL
for RNA and DNA, respectively. Briefly, fixed amounts of [32P] ATP 5′-end labeled 3WJb strands of RNA, DNA,
and 2′-F modified RNA (0.1 nM final) were mixed with variable
amounts of unlabeled 3WJa and 3WJc strands RNA
to make the indicated final concentration (0.1 nM to 512 nM) of each.
The resulting 3WJs were then heated to 80 °C for 3 min in TMS
buffer and slowly cooled to 4 °C. The resulting gel shifts were
measured using Image J software and interpreted with the program Origin
8.0. The fractions (f) for each trimer forming complex
was calculated by dividing the corresponding quantified values for
trimers by the total sum of values for all complexes (monomer, dimer,
and trimer) presented in the corresponding lane. The combined data
from several independent measurements were subjected to nonlinear
curve fitting using the equation:where Ct is the
total concentration of RNA strands in each lane, and f is the fraction of 3WJ complex to total concentration.

In
calculating the Ct, the concentration
of the labeled 3WJb strand was not included, as it was
in trace amounts and negligible to the concentrations of 3WJa and 3WJc. The Ct at equilibrium
was calculated by interpolation of the fraction (f) at 50%. These values were then in turn used to calculate the equilibrium KDs. Marky et al.
described this calculation using changing temperature to reach equilibrium,
thus requiring equal concentrations of each strand; however, equilibrium
was reached here by varying concentrations, as previous performed,, thus not requiring equal concentrations of each strand.

Real-Time PCR
Annealing Curves of 3WJ Complexes
Each
synthesized pRNA-3WJ strand (3WJa, 3WJb, 3WJc) was mixed at equimolar concentrations in the presence of
1× SYBR Green II dye (Invitrogen) at equal molar ratios of 10
μM to create a 3WJRNA, 3WJDNA, and 3WJ2′-F. SYBR Green II dye is a reporter dye with
higher specificity for RNA but shows binding to both DNA and RNA bases. Using a Roche Lightcycler 480 real-time PCR
machine, with accurate readings of temperatures to ± &gt;0.25
°C,
samples were heated to 95 °C for 5 min for an initial denaturing
period and then slowly cooled at a rate of 0.11 °C/s until 20
°C. The Roche Lightcycler 480 was able to detect the fluorescence
levels and thus monitor the formation of the 3WJ cores. All samples
were completed in triplicate to ensure accuracy of the annealing temperatures
and profiles. Samples were then subjected to electrophoresis on a
12% polyacrylamide gel to ensure the formation of the 3WJs. All hybrid
structures of the pRNA-3WJ core were created using a mix of RNA/DNA,
RNA/2′-F RNA, or DNA/2′-F RNA in the same method described
as above.

TGGE and Thermodynamic Parameters
All 3WJs were assembled
as described above. The TGGE system from BiometraHmbGh, Germany, was
used in this study. Temperature was varied perpendicular or parallel
to the electrical current. All experiments were performed in TMS running
buffer. The RNA bands were detected in native 15% gel by total RNA
stain using EB. The concentrations of 3WJs were typically 10 μM.
All varieties were run a minimum of three times to ensure accuracy
of measurement.

Various concentrations of preassembled pRNA-3WJs
covering 1000-fold dilutions from 10 μM to 0.016 μM were
subjected to the perpendicular TGGE for thermodynamic parameter calculations.
3WJ bands were detected with radiolabeled 3WJc strands
at the 5′-end using γ-32P ATP (Perkin-Elmer).
A linear temperature gradient was applied perpendicular to the electric
field. The gels were run for 1 h at constant 80 V, dried, and exposed
to phosphoroimaging screen overnight. Gels were then visualized on
a Typhoon (GE), and Image J software was used to quantify the area
of bands on each lane by plotting intensity of each band intensity
and integrating the area under the curve for each band. Background
signal of each lane immediately surrounding the band of interest from
the gel was subtracted and removed from the band intensity and not
included in calculations. The fractions of 3WJ bands were obtained
by subtracting the area of melted bands from the trimer band. Melting
temperatures were then calculated from a plot of 3WJ fraction (f) versus temperature, with f = 0.5 (50%)
corresponding to the Tm.

Calculation
of Thermodynamic Parameters
Tm values at different concentration of 3WJs were used
to calculate thermodynamic parameters. van’t Hoff plots were
generated by plotting the Tm versus the
concentrations of non-self-complementary three molecular strands according
to a previous method:where R is the gas constant
1.987 cal mol–1 K–1, Ct is the total concentration of each 3WJs, and ΔH° and ΔS° are enthalpy
and entropy changes, respectively. Under this method of calculation,
the assumption is made that the heat capacity remains unchanged throughout
the entire melting profile.

Fluorescence of pRNA 3WJ-MG Aptamer
The assembled unmodified
and 2′-F A/C modified 3WJs (1 μM) were mixed with MG
(2 μM) in binding buffer containing 100 mM KCl, 5 mM MgCl2, and 10 mM HEPES (pH 7.4) and incubated at room temperature
for 30 min. The fluorescence was measured using a fluorospectrometer
(Horiba Jobin Yvon; SPEX Fluolog-3), excited at 615 nm, and scanning
from 625 to 800 nm for emission.

Results
and Discussion
Assembly of the Three-Way Junctions
pRNA three way
junctions composed of RNA (3WJRNA), DNA (3WJDNA), and 2′-F U/C modified RNA (3WJ2′-F) were assembled using equimolar concentrations of each strand of
the 3WJ. The formation of the pRNA-3WJs in each of the species was
confirmed by 12% native PAGE (Figure ). A
stepwise assembly through the polyacrylamide gel was observed between
the monomer to dimer and finally to the fully assembled trimer band
indicating the formation of 3WJs. The assembled RNA, DNA, and 2′-F
3WJs products resulted in high yield (&gt;90%). Any side product is
assumed
to be contributed to a slight mismatch in strand concentrations loaded
during assembly, preventing all nucleic acid strands from forming
into the 3WJ complex. The data are in agreement with previously reported
results of RNA-3WJ assembly.

Assembly of
pRNA-3WJ core structures. 12% polyacrylamide gels in
native conditions displaying the stepwise assembly of the 3WJ2′-F, 3WJRNA, and 3WJDNA.

Dissociation Constants
(KD) Measurements
of the 3WJs
The KD values of
nucleic acids formation are directly related to their stabilities
as more stable complexes require lower concentrations of the components
for self-assembly resulting in a lower KD value. We measured the apparent dissociation equilibrium constants
for RNA, DNA, and 2′-F modified RNA 3WJ complexes (Figure ). For the 3WJRNA and 3WJ2′-F, the KD values were found to be 11.4
and 4.5 nM, respectively. For the 3WJDNA complex, this
value was about five times higher (47.7 nM). This indicates that 3WJ2′-F and 3WJRNA were the most stable
complexes, and the least stable was 3WJDNA.

Dissociation constant
measurements. Electrophoeretic mobility shift
assay (EMSA) of 32P-labeled 3WJb (constant concentration)
assembling with increasing concentrations of 3WJa and 3WJc for RNA, 2′-F RNA, and DNA on 12% polyacrylamide gels
in native conditions. Plot of percentage of 3WJ formed versus total
concentration to solve for KD of each
3WJ.

These results demonstrated that
the incorporation of enzymatically
resistant DNA or 2′-F modified RNA strands into the RNA 3WJ
motif could increase the resistance of the complex to RNases. However,
while the DNA strand incorporation decreases the stability, the 2′-F
modified RNA increases the stabilization of the 3WJ complex, as shown
by the lower dissociation constant compared to the 3WJRNA. Therefore, the stability and properties of 3WJRNA motif
can be potentially tuned by alternating the ratio of 2′-F modified
RNA and DNA strands.

Determination of the Formation of Complex
and Ta of DNA, RNA, and 2′-F RNA-3WJs
by rtPCR Machine
The thermostability of 3WJs complexes were
compared by measuring
their fluorescence intensities as a function of temperature in the
presence of SYBR Green II dye on a Roche 480 Lightcycler to obtain Ta. The annealing
transitions in Figure A–C show that
the mixture of three strands (3WJa, 3WJb, and
3WJc) produced the highest annealing temperature compared
to any monomer or dimer formation. Within the assembling profile,
the slope of the transitions directly correlates with ΔG°, as the steeper slope results in more negative ΔG° values., These results showed
that the assembly of the 3WJ was preferred over any dimer formation
of any two strands in each of the three species: RNA, DNA, and 2′-F
modified RNA.

Assembly curves produced from the Roche 480 Lightcycler
using SYBR
green II reporter dye. (A) 3WJRNA, (B) 3WJDNA, (C) 3WJ2′-F, and each of the components
of the 3WJs. (D) The three 3WJ species directly compared, showing
the differences in annealing temperatures (Ta).

From each of the transitions obtained
by the Roche 480 Lightcycler,
the curves of the each of the completed 3WJ structures were compared
(Figure D). The 3WJ2′-F was the most stable with Ta = 69.8 °C,
the 3WJRNA was the next stable at 59.3 °C, and the
3WJDNA had the lowest where Ta = 48.9 °C. These results correlated with literature reported
values of overall thermostability for nucleic acids and followed the
order of stability: 2′-F RNA &gt; RNA &gt; DNA.,,

Surprisingly, from the
assembly profiles of the pRNA-3WJ species,
a single annealing temperature, not two, was seen. This is evidenced
by the single slope to the transition profile and hinting that the
3WJ forms rapidly with all three strands producing no byproducts,
whereas a two-step association would display a plateau within the
melting curve itself or two individual sloped regions, resulting in
two annealing temperatures. These results show the three-stranded
motif forming together, and a dimer species was undetectable due to
the rapid 3WJ formation. This rapid formation from three fragments
to form the pRNA-3WJ is highly beneficial because it allows a high
yield of assembly while permitting the construction and assembly of
RNA nanoparticles without creating side products as a result of the
dimer formation.

Comparison of Stability between DNA, RNA,
and 2′-F RNA-3WJs
by TGGE
TGGE is common technique to measure Tm of large and complex nucleic acids.,, This approach has an advantage over the
real-time PCR in that it can be applied to directly measure the Tm of RNA complexes as fractions of RNA versus
temperature with no intercalation dye required.

Melting temperatures
of 3WJ complexes were determined by measuring the decrease in the
yield of 3WJs versus temperature (Figure ).
A temperature gradient was applied perpendicular to the electrical
current, with an increasing temperature that resulted in the melting
of the structures in the later lanes. Here, the percent 3WJ complex
was compared to dimer and monomer formations. Tm values were determined as 50% of 3WJ remaining. Any remaining
dimers were not considered as a complex, as it was not complete 3WJ
formations.

Representative 15% native TGGE with temperature gradient perpendicular
to the electrical current. (A) 3WJ2′-F, (B)
3WJRNA, and (C) 3WJDNA; total 3WJ concentration
in each lane = 10 μM. Panels (D) and (E) are control gels showing
migration of 3WJRNA (D) before reaching its Tm in the temperature range of 20–40 °C and
migration of 3WJDNA (E) in the temperature range of 40–70
°C that is over its Tm. The 3WJ bands
were detected by total nucleic acid stain with EB.

From the resulting gels, melting temperatures were
derived for
the 3WJ2′-F, 3WJRNA, and 3WJDNA as 66.5 °C, 57 °C, and 35.2 °C, respectively.
The melting temperatures for the two RNA species were within the range
of error from the Tm found by the fluorescence
melting curves, but there was a large difference in Tm between the two methods for the 3WJDNA. This
difference between these two methods was presumably due to differing
affinities of SYBR Green II to DNA and RNA stacking bases. Nevertheless, both methodologies produced data
that allowed direct comparison of the stability among 3WJ complexes
and demonstrated the trend that 2′-F RNA had a higher melting
temperature than RNA, and RNA had a higher Tm than DNA.

Within the TGGE melting gels, the dimer species
were again undetected
in the melting curves in the 2′-F RNA and RNA 3WJ species,
further pointing to the possibility of the unusual assembly pathway.
However, the 3WJDNA seemed to display a dimer intermediate,
which was previously not seen from the PCR profiles. It is believed
that this difference is because the TGGE showed the melting profile,
while the PCR curves showed the association of the molecules. Therefore,
the TGGE system of the DNA species was dissociation down to a dimer
then a monomer, possibly because DNA was not the natural species of
the pRNA-3WJ and forced the motif into an unnatural conformation.
Furthermore, any dimer species that is seen in radiolabeled gel analysis
can be attributed to the presence of extreme excess unlabeled strands
allowing for a mismatch in concentrations between each individual
strand and were therefore ignored.

Thermodynamic Parameters
for 3WJs Formation
Non-self-complementary
nucleic acids usually exhibit a linear correlation Tm and RNA concentration, as the Tm increased with the increase in nucleic acid strands concentration.,, The TGGE approach was further
applied to measure Tm of 3WJ species as
a function of concentration using ∼1000 fold dilution of the
3WJRNA, 3WJ2′-F, and 3WJDNA complexes from 10 μM to 0.016 μM (Figure A). Tm’s were calculated by finding the temperature
at which 50% of the nucleic acids were in trimer formation compared
to the total concentration of the bands observed. 3WJ Tms were used to calculate thermodynamic parameters for
three components of nonself complementary sequences, according to
Marky et al. The typical van’t
Hoff plots for 3WJ2′-F, 3WJRNA, and 3WJDNA are represented in Figure C. From the obtained ΔH° and ΔS° parameters, the ΔG°37 was calculated using eq :where ΔH° and
ΔS° are enthalpy and entropy, respectively,
and K is the abbreviation for Kelvin. All thermodynamic parameters
are summarized in Table . Here the data produced
a near linear trend lines with r2 values
very near 1.00. Because this little error is seen in calculating melting
temperatures, samples were repeated in a selective fashion due to
the high number of gels that would be needed. The repeated experiments
allowed for calculation of error in the thermodynamic parameters which
remained low. The results indicated that the most thermodynamically
stable was the 3WJ2′-F (ΔG°37 = −36 kcal/mol) complex, followed by 3WJRNA (ΔG°37 = −28
kcal/mol), and the 3WJDNA (ΔG°37 = −15 kcal/mol). On the basis of the parameters of
free energy change for RNA and 2′-F RNA-3WJ assemblies, it
can be determined that the energy for these complexes were favored
2-fold compared to the 3WJDNA. The 3WJDNA displayed
a more favorable decreased enthalpy value of ΔH° = −220 kcal/mol, compared to 3WJ2′-F (ΔH° = −200 kcal/mol) and 3WJRNA (ΔH° = −170 kcal/mol).
However, the comparison of entropy parameters resulted in a significant
increase for the RNA and 2′-F RNA complexes. The two RNA species
resulted in more negative free energy changes, yet had higher enthalpies
when compared to DNA. This data combined with the increased entropy
values of the RNA species indicated that the thermodynamic stabilities
of the 3WJRNA and 3WJ2′-F were
entropy-driven (Table ).

Thermodynamic Parameters for 3WJs
Formation
 	1/Tm vs log (Ct)	
3WJs	ΔG°37 (kcal/mol)	ΔH° (kcal/mol)	ΔS°37(e.u.)	Tm (°C)	
2′-F RNA	–36 ± 0.45	–200 ± 5.7	–520 ± 17	72.1	
RNA	–28 ± 0.58	–170 ± 13	–440 ± 39	60.4	
DNA	–15 ± 0.71	–220 ± 25	–650 ± 83	35.2	
Parameters derived
from 15% native
TGGE.

Tm values
for 3WJ strand concentrations of 10–6 M.

Calculation of thermodynamic parameter for 3WJs
formation. (A)
Representation of native 15% TGGE for the 3WJ complexes at the lowest
concentration (0.016 μM in each lane). The radiolabeled C strand
of corresponding 3WJ complexes indicated with asterisk “*”.
Lanes 3WJc* and 3WJc*+3WJa served
as controls for monomer and dimer location. (B) Melting temperature
profiles of RNA, 2′-F RNA, and DNA 3WJs obtained after quantification
of the corresponding band from the perpendicular TGGE at various concentrations.
(C) Plots of Tm versus 3WJ concentrations
(van’t Hoff analysis) evaluated from melting curves of the
3WJ complexes obtained at different strand concentrations.

The findings of more negative ΔG° values
for 2′-F RNA and RNA are consistent with other studies comparing
helical DNA, RNA, and 2′-F RNA.,,,, However, the notion that was RNA entropically driven, compared to
DNA in helical structures, appeared less unanimous as the majority
report RNAs to be less entropically favored and that folding is normally
driven by a lower enthalpy value.,,, Here it is believed
that the 3WJDNA provided a more rigid structure, producing
a lower internal energy or ΔH compared to the
RNAs; however, the flexibility of the RNAs provided more disorder,
thus giving strong stability, ease of folding, and a more negative
ΔG°. This entropy-driven assembly combined
with the one-step assembly expresses the unusual thermodynamic characteristics
of the pRNA-3WJ.

Analysis of 3WJ Hybrid Formations and Thermostability
The hybrid composition (2′-F RNA/RNA; RNA/DNA; DNA/2′-F
RNA) within the RNA 3WJs are of great interest due to their ability
to maintain the diverse functionality of structured RNA molecules,
while incorporating the chemical stability of 2′-F RNA and
DNA. To test for hybrid 3WJ viability, the 2′-F RNA/RNA; RNA/DNA;
DNA/2′-F RNA hybrids of the 3WJs complexes were characterized
by parallel TGGE and fluorescence annealing temperature experiments.
Using the TGGE, a temperature gradient was applied in parallel to
the electrical current (Figure ). As the samples
migrated through the gel, the temperature increased from 20 to 70
°C, therefore melting the hybrid structures as they migrated
further into the gel. A less stable 3WJ complex migrates further as
the elevated temperature melts the structure to smaller single strands,
thus causing an increased rate of migration and separating the stable
hybrids from unstable hybrids.

Native 15% TGGE of some hybrids 3WJs with
temperature gradient
in parallel of the electrical current. As the 3WJs migrated into the
gels, weaker structures melted due to the elevating temperatures,
resulting in a more rapid migration; stable structures migrated at
slower rates. Concentration of hybrids in each lane = 10 μM;
the bands were detected by total nucleic acid stain with EB. (A) Hybrids
analyzed in a linear temperature gradient of 20–40 °C
and (B) the same samples but the temperature range was 40–70
°C.

The TGGE analysis demonstrates
that each hybrid structure forms
correctly and is stable at lower temperature ranges 20–40 °C
(A). However, at a higher range of 40–70 °C, the RNA/DNA
and DNA/2′-F RNA-3WJ hybrid structures melted, resulting in
a more rapid migration rate compared to 2′-F RNA/RNA hybrids
(Figure B). This direct comparison between
hybrid stability demonstrates weakness in the thermostability of hybrids
involving DNA strands. In addition, the 3WJs hybrids followed the
general trend that more strands with 2′-F modifications equate
to a higher stability overall. These results were further confirmed
by the annealing temperatures produced for each hybrid on the Roche
480 Lightcycler as shown in Figure  and Table . Combining the TGGE gels along with the annealing
temperatures provided from the fluorescence annealing curves, the
data further support the findings that 2′-F modifications strengthen
the thermostability of the pRNA-3WJ, while DNA substitutions only
weaken the 3WJ complex. In this case, even limited modifications lead
to a difference in the thermostability.

Comparison of pRNA-3WJ
hybrid structures. Assembly curves produced
from the Roche 480 Lightcycler of the pRNA-3WJ (A) RNA/DNA hybrids,
(B) RNA/2′-F RNA hybrids, and (C) DNA/2′-F RNA hyrbids.

Annealing Temperature
for 3WJ Hybrid
Formation
2′-F RNA
to RNA	Ta (°C)	RNA to DNA	Ta (°C)	DNA to 2′-F RNA	Ta (°C)	
a2′-F/b2′-F/c2′-F	69.8 ± 2.0	aRNA/bRNA/cRNA	59.3 ± 1.7	aDNA/bDNA/cDNA	48.9 ± 3.2	
a2′-F/b2′-F/cRNA	65.4 ± 0.1	aRNA/bRNA/cDNA	42.6 ± 2.2	aDNA/bDNA/c2′-F	48.4 ± 1.6	
a2′-F/bRNA/c2′-F	64.1 ± 0.2	aRNA/bDNA/cRNA	48.6 ± 1.5	aDNA/b2′-F/cDNA	51.6 ± 0.4	
aRNA/b2′-F/c2′-F	65.5 ± 0.2	aDNA/bRNA/cRNA	53.1 ± 0.1	a2′-F/bDNA/cDNA	47.2 ± 1.5	
a2′-F/bRNA/cRNA	62.1 ± 0.1	aRNA/bDNA/cDNA	44.5 ± 2.6	aDNA/b2′-F/c2′-F	59.5 ± 0.2	
aRNA/b2′-F/cRNA	62.7 ± 0.2	aDNA/bRNA/cDNA	45.9 ± 2.4	a2′-F/bDNA/c2′-F	52.4 ± 0.6	
aRNA/bRNA/c2′-F	61.9 ± 0.4	aDNA/bDNA/cRNA	47.3 ± 0.4	a2′-F/b2′-F/cDNA	51.2 ± 1.8	
Annealing temperatures calculated
at 10 μM total strand concentration in TMS buffer.

MG-Aptamer Functionality Assay and Stability
To ensure
that the added stability of the 2′-F modifications to the pRNA-3WJ
was true for a functional, more complex RNA nanoparticle, a fluorescence
assay was performed. The pRNA-3WJ used in this study harbored the
Malachite Green (MG) RNA aptamer that binds to Malachite green triphenylmethane dye causing the chemical to fluoresce. Malachite green itself emits very low fluorescence;
therefore, a change in the fluorescence can be used to confirm binding
and complexation between the RNA aptamer and chemical.,,,

It has been previously shown that the MG aptamer remains active
in binding when nucleotides remain unmodified, as well as when using
2′-F cytosine and adenine modified nucleotides. Therefore, we constructed the pRNA-3WJ-MG using
unmodified RNA strands and 2′-F A/C modified RNA strands (see
Figure A for 2D structure). The resulting
particles were then tested for binding to the MG to show the folding
and functionality of the MG aptamer by measuring its fluorescence
emissions (Figure B). Both nanoparticles showed
almost identical fluorescence values indicating the formation of correctly
folded structures.

Thermostability of functional pRNA-3WJ nanoparticle. (A)
Secondary
structure and sequence of the 3WJ-MG aptamer. (B) Fluorescence emission
of 3WJ-MG aptamer, demonstrating binding of the nanoparticle to MG
in both RNA and 2′-F species. (C) Melting curves for the 3WJ-MG
and 2′-F A/C RNA-3WJ.

Further, we used real-time PCR to measure the Ta of pRNA-3WJ-MG and 3WJ-MG2′-F constructs (Figure C). The annealing curves
show that the 2′-F A/C modified 3WJ resulted in the annealing
temperature of 69.7 °C, higher than unmodified RNA variant with Ta value of 62.8 °C. This is consistent
with the trend of increased RNA 3WJ stability using 2′-F modifications.
Thus, the data demonstrate the effectiveness of the fluorine modifications
regardless of the complexity of the structure, while retaining the
functional conformation of the pRNA-3WJ.

Conclusions
In
this paper, we obtained thermodynamic parameters for the pRNA-3WJ
using real-time PCR and TGGE approaches. It was seen that the three
fragments existed either in 3WJ complex or as monomers, with the intermediate
of dimers almost undetectable. It seems that the three fragments can
lead to the formation of 3WJ complex efficiently within a rapid time.
It is also found that the formation of the three-component complex
was governed by entropy, instead of enthalpy, as usually found in
RNA complexes. By combining this beneficial assembly with the improved
thermodynamic characteristics by 2′-fluoro modifications to
the pRNA, 3WJ stable RNA nanoparticles can be constructed with high
yield for the treatment of cancers and viral infections.

The authors declare
the
following competing financial interest(s): P. Guo is a co-founder
of Kylin Therapeutics, Inc., and Biomotor and RNA Nanotechnology Development
Corp. Ltd.

Acknowledgments
The authors would like to thank Jeannie Haak
for help in preparing
this manuscript and Zhengyi Zhao for help in preparing figures.

Abbreviations
pRNApackaging RNA

2′-F2′-fluoro chemical
modification

KDdissociation constant

3WJthree-way junction

Tmmelting temperature

Taannealing temperature

rtPCRreal-time polymerase chain reaction

TGGEtemperature gradient
gel electrophoresis

ΔG°change of Gibbs free energy

ΔH°change in enthalpy

ΔS°change in entropy

EBethidium bromide

MGMalachite green

