Peripheral myelin protein 22
(PMP22) is a member of the claudin/EMP/PMP22 tetraspan membrane protein
family and is strongly expressed in the myelinating Schwann cells
of the peripheral nervous system., Among its functions,
PMP22 is critical to the formation and maintenance of the myelin ultrastructure,− including possible roles in the tight junctionlike assemblies therein., A number of genetic aberrations, including more than 40 different
missense mutations that encode single-amino acid changes in PMP22
distributed throughout its sequence, result
in mild to severe peripheral neuropathy and disability (Figure S1
of the ).

Final alignment
of human PMP22 with murine claudin-15 utilized
for homology modeling, with secondary structure indicated. Orange
secondary structure elements are observed in the claudin-15 crystal
structure, but not in the final top-scoring models; purple elements
are observed in the final model but not in claudin-15. The sequence
in ECL2 that was unresolved in the crystal structure and was removed
in the final alignment is colored red within the dashed lines; the
claudin-15 disulfide bond is denoted in black, and the C-to-A mutations
in the claudin-15 crystal construct are depicted below the sequence
in red.

These peripheral neuropathies
include heritable neuropathy with
liability to pressure palsies (HNPP, mild neuropathy), Dejerine Sottas
syndrome (DSS, severe), and Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease (CMTD, moderate
to severe). It is believed that most disease
mutant forms of PMP22 induce misfolding of the protein, leading to
loss of function and possible toxicity from accumulated misfolded
protein.−

Previous work indicates at least some PMP22 disease mutants
are
considerably destabilized; even wild-type (WT) PMP22 is only marginally
stable,− being transported to cell plasma membranes with an
efficiency of only ∼20%. This
inherent instability is among the reasons an experimental high-resolution
structure of PMP22 has thus far proved elusive.

In this study,
we utilized the recently published 2.4 Å crystal
structure of claudin-15 (Protein Data Bank entry 4P79), the first high-resolution structure of a claudin/EMP/PMP22
family member, as a template for building a homology model of PMP22.
The model presented here provides a step toward the goal of discriminating
mechanisms of disease-inducing mutations.

Briefly, we employed
BCL::Align, an alignment program that accounts
for sequence identity and similarity as well as secondary structure
and transmembrane region predictions, to generate an alignment of PMP22 (NP_696997.1) with claudin-15 (NP_068365.1). The alignment was truncated
to cover only portions of the protein present in the crystal structure
(Figure ; see the  for details), and the confidence of this alignment
was evaluated (Figure S2 of the ). In the final alignment, sequences were 25% identical and ∼60%
similar. Interestingly, TM1 was much more divergent (only 13% identical)
than the other transmembrane helices (TM2–TM4 being 36, 50,
and 38% identical, respectively). Extracellular loop 1 (ECL1) was
relatively well-conserved (30% identity), while there was limited
conservation in the intracellular loop (ICL, 7%) and ECL2 (14%).

Using the loop rebuilding utility within Rosetta 3.5, a starting
set of homology models of PMP22 was constructed (see the  for details). Knowledge-based
potentials included within the calculation utilized secondary structure
predictions as well as transmembrane residue lipid-facing propensity
(so-called “lipophilicity”) generated within the Rosetta membrane ab initio utility.− These models were scored
by Rosetta, and the top models were relaxed
iteratively (see Figure  and Figures S3 and
S4 of the ).

(A) Top-scoring
PMP22 model color-coded according to the average
chain root-mean-square deviation (rmsd) in the top 10 scoring models.
The rmsd ranges from 0.6 Å (blue, thin backbone trace) to &gt;10
Å (red, thick backbone trace). (B) Top-scoring model with the
claudin motif residues highlighted in cyan as stick and surface view.
Sulfur atoms are colored yellow. (C) Top-scoring model showing the
most (red) and least (blue) “lipophilic” sites as determined
by the LIPS algorithm. The Protein Data
Bank format coordinates of this model are available in the . The extracellular face
of the protein is at the top in the left panels.

The top-scoring PMP22 model (Protein Data Bank format coordinates
in the ) was evaluated
with MolProbity (see the  for details). After energy
minimization, only the first four of five extracellular β-strands
present in the claudin-15 template were retained (Figure A); these strands are all in ECL1. On the basis
of the root-mean-square deviation (rmsd) from the top 10 models (Figure A), Rosetta most confidently predicts the TM1–TM4
region with slight uncertainty at the TM1 N-terminus. The predictions
for ECL1 appear to be relatively uniform within the β-strands
but have very weak convergence in the loop of the first β-hairpin.

Additionally, there is conformational heterogeneity among high
scoring models present in both ECL2 and the ICL. It is observed that
a portion (W-DLW) of the conserved claudin motif (W-[N/G/D]LW-C-C) dips back into the membrane to stabilize the
helical packing on the extracellular side of the helical bundle (Figure B). While claudins have an extracellular disulfide
bond, it is unclear whether a bond forms between the corresponding
Cys pair in PMP22. This bond was not therefore not enforced in the
generation of this model (3.6 Å between sulfur atoms). Repeating
model generation with a forced disulfide bond did not require gross
alterations in the structure (overall rmsd to the reduced form structure
of 1.96 Å), suggesting that this model may be accurate in either
case (Figure S5 of the ). We also note that the computed “lipophilicity” predicts transmembrane helix–helix contacting
faces that are fully consistent with what is seen in the model (Figure C).

Assessment of disease mutation locations in the PMP22
model. (A)
PMP22 homology model with color coding of wild-type residues mutated in neuropathies according
to patient motor nerve conduction velocities (NCVs), with maroon having
the lowest NCVs and cream representing a benign polymorphism (see
Table S1 of the ).
Note that for a number of known disease mutations, patient nerve conduction
velocities have not been reported, such that the associated sites
are not highlighted in this figure. Note also that the lone site of
a severe mutation facing the lipid environment is a proline substitution
(L71P) in the middle of a TM2, which is expected also to disrupt helical
packing. (B) Comparison of the packing interface between the WT model
and the top two L16P models, showing a reduced interface for L16P
between TM1 and the rest of the bundle: red for TM1, marine for TM2,
violet for TM3, green for TM4, and salmon for the additional contacting
residue on L16P TM1.

Previous studies indicate that even WT PMP22 is only marginally
stable,− and nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) studies indicate
that under micellar conditions at 45 °C WT PMP22 occupies a folding
intermediate in which TM1 dissociates from the rest of the transmembrane
domain, with TM2–TM4 forming a molten globule-like bundle. The TrJ disease mutant (L16P in TM1) increases
the propensity of this helix to dissociate. Interestingly, Rosetta
found the initial conformation of TM1 in the WT protein to be unfavorable;
consequently, the loop rebuilding and side chain repacking algorithms
readjusted the position of the packing of the bundle in nearly every
case. In our final WT model, TM1 of PMP22 is packed much less tightly
to TM2–TM4 than the corresponding helices of claudin-15 (Figure
S6 of the ). Additionally,
the L16 residue, along with several other disease mutation sites,
appears to be involved in TM1 packing with the helical bundle (Figure A and Figure S7 of the ).

A number of the most severe disease mutations
(associated with
patients presenting nerve conduction velocities of &lt;10 m/s), including
L16P, are at residues located along the helix-packing interface between
TM1 and TM2/TM4, while less severe mutation sites tend to either face
the lipid or “cap” the helices (Figure A and Table S1 of the ). Modeling of the L16P mutation with Rosetta generates structures
with a significantly higher Rosetta energy (p &lt;
0.0001). These models conform to the predictions made by the NMR data;
the size of the TM1 interface with TM2–TM4 is reduced, with
predicted structures sharing an interface with either the N- or C-terminal
side of L16P TM1, but not both (Figure B and
Figure S8 of the ).

This study provides the first high-resolution working model
for
PMP22 and will be used as a springboard for future work through its
potential predictive power. Future studies will focus on verifying
which disease mutations are indeed destabilizing as well as providing
experimental restraints for refinement of this computational model.

Supporting Information Available
Materials and methods, table,
references, figures and captions, and atomic coordinates. This material
is available free of charge via the Internet at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bi500809t_si_001.pdf

bi500809t_si_002.txt

bi500809t_si_003.txt

Author Contributions
⊥ These authors contributed equally to this work.

This work was
supported by National Institutes of Health (NIH) Grants U54 GM094608,
R01 HL122010, and R01 DC007416 to C.R.S. and NIH Grants R01 GM099842
and R01 DK097376 and National Science Foundation (NSF) Grant CHE 1305874
to J.M. K.F.M. was supported by NSF Predoctoral Fellowship DGE090966.
B.M.K. was supported by NIH Grant T32 NS007491-13.

The authors
declare no competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
We thank Dr. Jonathan Schlebach, Amanda Duran,
and Stephanie
DeLuca for their critical input regarding this work.

