The recruitment of host positive
transcription elongation factor b (P-TEFb) kinase is a required step
for transcription elongation of HIV., The catalytic
activity of P-TEFb (a heterodimer of CycT1 and Cdk9) in cells is dynamically
controlled by inhibitory 7SK small nuclear ribonucleoprotein (snRNP),
composed of Hexim1 protein and noncoding 7SK snRNA.− Recent works illustrated that HIV Tat protein releases
P-TEFb from the 7SK snRNP through competitive binding with the emerging
TAR element, and this release directs P-TEFb toward Pol II,, resulting in the transition from Pol II pausing to elongation (Figure ).

HIV transactivation model. A transcriptionally active
Tat/P-TEFb/TAR
complex was formed after TAR competitively dislodged 7SK from the
Tat/P-TEFb complex, resulting in the transition from Pol II pausing
to elongation.

The conserved stem loop
4 of 7SK (7SK-SL4) contains a substantial
sequence homology to the HIV TAR RNA (Figure ); therefore, Tat, which is similar to Hexim1 in
possessing an arginine-rich motif, could directly bind 7SK snRNA to
displace Hexim1 in the complex. The molecular
mimicry between viral Tat-TAR and host Hexim1–7SK snRNA complex
suggested a competition whereby Tat–TAR takes the place of
7SK snRNP and activates P-TEFb to promote HIV elongation., The TAR–Tat interaction is a classic paradigm of RNA–protein
interactions.− However, the structural recognition of 7SK snRNA upon Tat binding
and subsequent competition by TAR RNA still need further in-depth
investigation.

Secondary structure of models of HIV-1/2 TAR and 7SK RNAs
(wild
type and GC mutants) and sequence of Tat peptide. All numbering is
based on that of HIV-1 TAR. Bases in blue are labeled by 2-aminopurine.
Mutated positions are labeled in red.

Ultrafast dynamics-based approaches have been recently developed
to dissect the dynamic behavior of different biological systems, particularly
RNA systems.− We have demonstrated that in HIV-1 TAR RNA, the ligand-free state
samples multiple families of conformations with different base-stacking
patterns around the functionally critical bulge region. Binding of Tat stabilizes a conformation that
features the coaxial stacking, shifting equilibrium toward this state,
but other states still exist. The conformational transition mechanism
of Tat binding manifests itself as conformational capture.,− In this study, we have elucidated the role of conformational dynamics
and resulting structural heterogeneity in HIV-1/2 TAR and 7SK snRNA
recognition to capture the changes upon interaction with Tat. As opposed
to the trinucleotide bulge in HIV-1 TAR (Figure ), HIV-2 and 7SK snRNA feature a dinucleotide bulge. Our data demonstrate
distinct novel mechanisms for Tat binding to these RNAs and lay the
foundation for drug design to target similar structures based on distinct
dynamic behaviors.

Experimental Procedures
Materials
All
of the RNA constructs were purchased
from Dharmacon (Lafayette, CO) and purified by PAGE. The wild-type
constructs and the GC mutants are shown in Figure . RNA concentrations were calculated from UV absorbance measurements
at 260 nm using extinction coefficients provided by Dharmacon. The
oligos were dissolved in sodium phosphate buffer (20 mM sodium phosphate,
25 mM NaCl, and 0.1 mM EDTA, PH 6.8) for all experiments. The 26-mer
basic region of Tat protein was obtained from the University of Texas
Southwestern Medical Center Peptide Facility. The peptide was synthesized
using Fmoc chemistry, the crude product was purified by HPLC and lyophilized
to remove failure sequences and impurities such as TFA to avoid its
potential effects on peptide properties, and the identity was confirmed by mass spectrometry. The concentration
of the peptide was determined by absorbance at 280 nm using the tyrosine
residue.

Steady-State Fluorescence Spectroscopy
RNA solutions
of 200 nM were annealed in sodium phosphate buffer by heating at 95
°C for 1.5 min followed by flash cooling. Fluorescence measurements
were performed using a Shimadzu RF 5301 spectrofluorophotometer. The
sample cuvette was thermostatted at 25 °C using a circulating
water bath. The excitation wavelength was 320 nm, and the emission
wavelength was 370 nm. Titrations were carried out by adding 1–4
μL aliquots of Tat, from stock concentrations of 5, 20, 40,
or 180 μM, with constant stirring. Between each injection of
ligand, a 3 min period was allowed for the binding reaction to reach
equilibrium. All measurements were performed in triplicate, and the
fluorescence intensity of the buffer was subtracted from that of the
samples. Fluorescence intensity at 370 nm was plotted versus ligand
concentration and analyzed using the Dynafit program.

Femtosecond Time-Resolved Fluorescence Spectroscopy
Briefly, femtosecond pulses (120 fs, 800 nm, 2.3 mJ) were generated
from a Ti:sapphire laser system (Spectra Physics). Half of the pulse
was used to pump one optical parametric amplifier (OPA), and the output
signal was quadrupled to generate the excitation pump pulse at 320
nm. The remainder of the fundamental 800 nm was also used to pump
another OPA as the probe pulse. The emission from the sample cell
was collected by a pair of parabolic focus mirrors and mixed with
the probe pulse in a BBO crystal (barium borate crystal). The upconverted
signal at 257 nm (upconverted from 380 nm) was detected by a photomultiplier
tube (PMT) after passing through a double-grating monochromator. RNA
concentration of all femtosecond samples was 120 μM, which was
optimal for the generation of a sufficient fluorescence signal. The
RNA sample was annealed prior to each experiment by heating at 95
°C for 1.5 min followed by flash-cooling for 30 min to allow
the RNA to fold into the native hairpin structure. Samples were measured
at 22 °C in a quartz cell with a 5 mm path length. For magic-angle
fluorescence measurements, the pump beam polarization was set at the
magic angle (54.7°) with respect to fluorescence polarization
set by the BBO crystal to avoid complications from orientational motions.

The femtosecond transients were collected up to 400 ps, and the
fluorescence decay profiles were fit to a sum of multiple exponential
functions convoluted by the following Gaussian instrument response
functionwhere τi and Ai are the decay
lifetimes and the pre-exponential amplitudes, respectively, for the ith decay component; t0 is time
zero; Δ is the width of the instrument response function (cross
correlation, typically 500–600 fs determined by recording the
Raman emission profile for solvent water); and erf is the error function.

Mathematical software (Scientist) was used to analyze the ultrafast
dynamics data. χ2 and F-test statistical tests were used to
analyze and identify the number of transients needed to fit the sample
population the best. The parameter for
the slowest component was fixed at the average value (11.3 ns) of
the observed lifetimes for free 2AP base, 9-methyl-2AP, and 2AP-riboside
(ranging from 10.4 to 11.8 ns) for most of the transients because the time window of the femtosecond experiments
(up to 400 ps) was too short to determine uniquely the slowest decay
component. The specific choice of the fixed value for this component
on the order of 10–11 ns did not affect the fitting of the
faster components, but our testing indicated that the fitting may
not converge if it is not fixed. Hundreds of transients were collected
to give an average decay profile, and uncertainty in the fitted parameters
was within ±5%.

Results and Discussion
HIV TAR and 7SK RNA Constructs
A series of RNA constructs,, was synthesized with 2-aminopurine
(denoted as P) replacing nucleotides within the bulge (Figure ). The 7SK model RNA was based on a minimal construct
used in ref (). The
choice of the sequence allowed us to compare directly with the behavior
of HIV-1 TAR reported earlier, with the focus on the bulge region.
It has been shown that Tat binds WT HIV TAR RNAs with low nanomolar
affinity, and argininamide, a Tat peptide mimic, binds
WT 7SK RNA with low micromolar affinity. Our steady-state fluorescence spectroscopy measurements showed that
Tat peptide bound these 2AP-labeled constructs with high affinities
in the low nanomolar range (Table ) with similar
titration patterns (Figure ) as reported before; therefore, these constructs can be used as good
probes for our study.

Steady-state fluorescence titrations of Tat binding to
(A) HIV-1
P24, HIV-1 P25, HIV-2 P25, and 7SK RNAs and (B) GC mutants HIV-1 P25-GC,
HIV-2 P25-GC, and 7SK P25-GC.

Dissociation Constants of Tat Binding
Constructs	Kd1 (nM)	Kd2 (μM)	
HIV-1 P24	60 ± 10	∼1	
HIV-1 P25	6 ± 2	∼0.1	
HIV-2 P25	∼1	0.2 ± 0.05	
7SK P25	29 ± 10	1.1 ± 0.2	
HIV-1 P24-GC	7 ± 3	∼1	
HIV-1 P25-GC	2 ± 1	0.1 ± 0.01	
HIV-2 P25-GC	∼1	0.08 ± 0.03	
7SK P25-GC	27 ± 5	1.3 ± 0.5	
Conformational Heterogeneity of HIV TAR and 7SK RNAs in the
Free State
We have collected ultrafast dynamics decays for
the HIV-2 TAR and 7SK RNA constructs in the free state in comparison
to those for HIV-1 TAR RNA (Figure ). All of the decay profiles were multiphasic and
fit to multiexponential decay functions (Table ), and the number of parameters was determined by statistical analyses,
including the χ2 and F tests.,

Ultrafast fluorescence
time-resolved fluorescence decay profiles
for HIV-1 P24, HIV-1 P25, HIV-2 P25, and 7SK P25 in the free state.

Ultrafast Dynamics
Decay Parameters
Constructs	τ1 (ps), A1 (%)	τ2 (ps), A2 (%)	τ3 (ns), A3 (%)	
Free RNAs	
HIV-2 P25	3.7, 61	58, 15	11.3, 24	
7SK P25	8.8, 42	126, 18	11.3, 40	
HIV-2 P25-GC	7.3, 56	74, 19	11.3, 25	
7SK P25-GC	6.5, 49	112, 22	11.3, 29	
Tat Complexes	
HIV-2 P25	7.0, 15	 	4.7, 85	
7SK P25	9.3, 23	200, 21	11.3, 56	
HIV-2 P25-GC	9.4, 15	145, 9	11.3, 76	
7SK P25-GC	7.5, 35	111, 24	11.3, 41	
The multiphasic
nature of the decay profiles indicated that theses
RNAs, like their HIV-1 TAR counterpart, sample various heterogeneous conformations. The decay profile for
HIV-2 P25 is similar to that for HIV-1 P25, with ultrafast decay component
(3.7 ps, 61%) being dominant, indicating significant stacking interaction
of base 25 with G26. The intermediate component (58 ps, 15%) represents
dynamic motion of the base or stacking interaction with U24, whereas
the slow component (11.3 ns, 24%) represents a conformation in which
this base is completely bulged out of the loop. However, for 7SK P25, the fastest component (τ1 =
8.8 ps) is less populated (42%) compared to those for HIV-1/2 P25.
Correspondingly, the totally unstacked population (11.3 ns, 40%) is
larger than that of HIV-1/2 TAR. These findings suggest that like
HIV-1 TAR the bulge-base 25 of HIV-2 TAR and 7SK also interconvert
between stacked and unstacked states, featuring heterogeneous populations.
However, the bulge bases in these RNAs have different equilibrium
between these substates. The population distribution data can be used
to calculate the free-energy differences between the substates and
are in the range of ΔG°22 °C ∼0.03–0.82 kcal/mol, with the population of the highest
occupancy (represented by τ1) representing the overall ground
state for the ligand-free state.

Tat Induces Distinct Conformational
Transition Pattern in TAR
and 7SK RNAs
For HIV-1 TAR RNA, base 24 serves mostly as
a linker during Tat complex formation, and base 25 has more critical
functional roles in Tat recognition. Next,
we probed the population distribution of base 25 in HIV-2 TAR and
7SK when bound by Tat peptide to elucidate further their potentially
different roles in RNA recognition. Because looping-out of this bulge
base is necessary for the formation of both HIV-1/2 Tat–TAR
complexes,−, 7SK snRNA may employ
a similar strategy. Changes in the dynamic
profiles of base P25 upon Tat binding would indicate such a conformational
transition.

Figure A shows that binding
of Tat to HIV-2 TAR induced the most significant changes in the decay
profile, with the unstacked population in the Tat complex for HIV-2
P25 (85%) being higher than that for HIV-1 P25 (61%) but resembling
that of the complex for HIV-1 P24 (79%), as reported in our previous
study. For 7SK, the final profile for
the Tat complex is similar to that of HIV-1 TAR P25 complex (Figure B). However, because of the higher unstacked population
in the free state for 7SK RNA, the amplitude of change was much smaller
than in the case of HIV-1/2 TAR. This evidence strongly indicates
that the bulge region of 7SK RNA is more preorganized than in HIV-1/2
TAR. Previous NMR result showed that 7SK undergoes little conformational
changes upon argininamide binding. Our
results showed that the 7SK RNA in the free state exists in a roughly
1:1 equilibrium between two major conformations (Table ), one of which resemble the bound state with base 25 looped
out, in addition to a third minor population. This shows that the
7SK RNA already preorganizes a significant portion of its population
for Tat binding, at least at the critical bulge region. Tat binding
induced a shift in this equilibrium only slightly toward the bound
state, resulting in about a 16% increase from the starting 40%. Other
techniques viewed 7SK RNA as an average structure of these different
populated states, and because Tat binding only induced a small population
shift between the substates compared to HIV-1 or HIV-2 TAR RNAs, it
appears that little overall conformational changes occurred in 7SK
RNA upon Tat binding. Contrary to the
lack of conformational changes upon ligand binding observed by previous
NMR studies, our unique approach provides more intricate details of
the RNA conformational transition patterns among the subpopulations
as an ensemble, with quantitative information on the equilibrium distribution
of the different substates and their unique structural features, allowing
determination of the energetic profiles of the transition and the
subtle and specific structural changes.

Comparison between changes
in decay dynamics upon Tat binding between
HIV-1 and HIV-2 TAR RNAs and 7SK RNA. Upward arrows indicate the direction
and magnitude of changes in the dynamics decay profiles upon Tat binding
to each RNA.

GC Mutation at the Bulge-Stem
Junction Affects the Dynamics
Differently
We and others have demonstrated that mutating
the A22-U40 base pair in HIV-1 TAR to a GC pair at the bulge-stem
junction can significantly shift the population toward the unstacked
state., We further tested the potential effects
of such a mutation (Figure ) in HIV-2 TAR
and 7SK RNAs. Interestingly, in HIV-2 P25-GC, the G22–C40 replacement
did not affect the behavior of P25 as much in either the free state
or upon Tat binding (Figure A). This suggests
that bulge-base 25 in HIV-2 TAR functions more like a linker providing
flexibility for the bulge region for conformational changes similar
to the case of base 24 in HIV-1 TAR. The
NMR structure of HIV-2 TAR in complex with argininamide is also consistent with such a conclusion. However,
in the case of 7SK P25, the GC mutation (7SK P25-GC) somewhat increases
the stacked population and decreases the unstacked population in both
the free RNA and in the Tat complex, suggesting that base 25 plays
more roles in structural recognition than being a linker (Figure B). The GC mutation at the bulge-stem junction makes
the bulge region in 7SK RNA even more preorganized, similar to the
effect observed for HIV-1 TAR at base 25.,

Effect
of GC mutation on decay dynamics for (A) HIV-2 P25 RNA and
(B) 7SK P25 RNA. Upward arrows indicate the direction and magnitude
of changes in the dynamics decay profiles upon Tat binding to each
GC mutant RNA; the downward arrow (black) indicates the effect of
GC mutation on the 7SK RNA in the Tat-free state.

In summary, we sought to understand the different patterns
of the
dynamic conformational heterogeneity of the functionally important
bulge regions of the 7SK and HIV TAR RNAs and the consequence of such
heterogeneity on biological recognition. RNA-based therapeutics has
been a challenging area, and recent efforts have led to some significant
progress.− To advance this field further, detailed knowledge on how RNA dynamics
impact its recognition was investigated in this study. Although similar
in base sequence and structural pattern, implying a common evolutional
origin, the HIV-1/2 TAR RNA and the 7SK snRNA have very distinct dynamic
behaviors in the free state, leading to very different patterns of
Tat binding from a dynamic conformational ensemble point of view.
Important lessons can be learned from these findings with regard to
designing drug molecules to target similar structures based on distinct
dynamic behaviors. The ensemble pictures of these RNAs suggest that
some of the unique conformations can be selected for structure-specific
targeting by novel drug molecules to achieve specificity. In particular,
drugs do not have to be developed to target the abundant state or
the Tat-bound state; rather, a specific conformation may contain more
unique structural features than the dominant conformation in the free
RNA state. If novel drugs could act to bind the minor alternative
state specifically, then they can lock the RNA into an inactive state
for Tat binding and interfere with the virus lifecycle. We envision
that information on the plasticity and elasticity of RNA conformations
will be extremely useful for RNA-based therapeutics in general.

Author Contributions
∥ These
authors contributed equally to this work.

This work was
supported by grants from the Robert A. Welch Foundation (AT-1645)
to T.X., the Emerging Pathogens Institute to X.Q., and in part by
the NIH/NCATS Clinical and Translational Science Award to the University
of Florida (UL1 TR00064) to X.Q. V.W. is supported by UF HHMI Science
for Life program.

The authors declare no
competing financial interest.

Abbreviations Used
TARtrans-activation response

Tattrans-activator of transcription

P-TEFbpositive transcription
elongation factor b

PAGEpolyacrylamide gel electrophoresis

2AP2-aminopurine

fwhmfull width at half-maximum

OPAoptical parametric amplifier

fsfemtosecond

pspicosecond

nsnanosecond

