The DNA oxidation product deoxy-spiroiminodihydantoin
(dSp) is produced via secondary oxidation of the common guanine damage
8-oxo-7,8-dihydroguanine (OG) along the reaction pathway that also
produces guanidinohydantoin (Gh). Both dSp and Gh are excised by Nei-like
glycosylases (NEILs) of the base excision repair pathway, with NEIL1
and NEIL3 removing these lesions in telomeric sequences., When unrepaired, these oxidized bases can be highly mutagenic, with
some replicative polymerases inserting either dATP or dGTP opposite
the hydantoin lesions and others blocked at the lesion site., The secondary oxidation event that converts OG to dSp produces an
additional chiral center about the C4 position resulting in the conversion
of the purine base into two perpendicularly oriented five-membered
rings (Figure A), of which two diastereomers
are possible: dSp1 and dSp2, recently reconciled as the S diastereomer and R diastereomer, respectively., While several crystal structures of replicative DNA polymerases
have been obtained with OG, or Gh, and
with the DNA repair polymerase β (pol β) bound to OG-containing
DNA,− no one so far has visualized the dSp lesion in the
context of DNA.

Verification of the S diastereomer configuration
of dSp. (A) Drawing of (S)-Sp, with the numbering
based on guanine. (B) Composite omit map (gray mesh) contoured at
1.2σ of dSp. (C) Residual map (green mesh, 3σ) prior to
inclusion of the lesion in the model. (D) Residual map (green for
+3σ and red for −3σ) calculated with the R diastereomer colored beige with a superposition of the S diastereomer (cyan), illustrating that dSp1 adopts the S configuration.

Here we present the 2.08 Å crystal structure of DNA
pol β
variant E295K with dSp1 in the templating position, where dSp1 refers
to the first diastereomer eluting from an ion-exchange column (Figure
S1 of the ). Crystals
in the presence of the dSp1-containing single-nucleotide gapped DNA
duplex were obtained as previously described. The model was refined to a free R factor of 21.7%
(Rwork = 17.7%), root-mean-square deviations
on bonds and angles of 0.002 Å and 0.66°, respectively,
and a maximum likelihood coordinate error of 0.23 Å (Table ). Crystallographic Data Collection and
Refinement
PDB entry	4PPX	
space group	P2(1)	
cell dimensions	a = 54.3
Å, b = 79.1 Å, c = 54.7
Å, β = 105.4°	
resolution
(Å)	14–2.08 (2.15–2.08)	
no. of unique reflections	25842	
completeness (%)	96.4 (80.7)	
redundancy	3.3 (2.2)	
Rmerge (%)	5.0 (26.1)	
I/σ	22.8 (3.4)	
Wilson B factor (Å2)	27.0	
Refinement	
Rwork/Rfree (%)	17.7 (21.7)	
rmsd for bonds (Å)	0.002	
rmsd for
angles (deg)	0.66	
coordinate
error, maximum
likelihood (Å)	0.23	
B factor
(Å2)	 	
protein	35.3	
DNA	33.0	
sodium ion	27.9	
water	38.4	
no. of atoms	 	
protein	2472	
DNA	630	
sodium ion	2	
water	348	
Values in parentheses
denote data
for the highest-resolution shell.

Rmerge = (∑|Ii –
⟨I⟩|)/∑|I|,
where ⟨I⟩ is the mean intensity of
measured observations for reflection Ii.

Root-mean-square
deviation.

Attempts to crystallize
wild-type (WT) pol β with
the same oligonucleotide produced only small, poorly diffracting crystals.
The E295K fingers domain variant serves as a viable model because
the binary complex of the variant bound to DNA is isomorphous with
that of the WT and the mutation does not negatively impact the binding
affinity of the enzyme for DNA or the conformation of the templating
base in the binary complex. A similar
approach was used to investigate lesion binding in the RB69 gp43 polymerase
where the Y567A and L561A mutations were more amenable to structural
studies involving Gh or syn OG.,

The crystal structure of the dSp1 pol β complex was obtained
via isomorphous replacement by using an analogous complex containing
dA in the templating position. A composite
omit map using a model devoid of dSp1 and neighboring nucleotides
in the 3′ and 5′ direction was generated prior to model
building (Figure B). Residual maps produced
just prior to including the lesion revealed clear density verifying
the lesion to be in the syn conformation. The maps
also show clear density for water molecules within H-bonding distance
of the base pairing face of the A-ring (Figure C).

Initial electron density maps suggested the orientation
of the
lesion represents the S diastereomer (dSp1). To verify
the isomer of the dSp lesion within the DNA duplex, maps were calculated
by substitution with the R diastereomer of dSp2 and
evaluation of the electron density residual peaks (Figure D). The resulting strong peak/hole pair (greater
than ±5σ) indicates that the position of N2 of the B-ring
is consistent with the (S)-dSp configuration. A 3.0σ
peak was also observed for the corresponding position of O6.

This binary structure sheds light on the implications for further
oxidation of OG in the context of the DNA duplex: both OG and dSp1
generate distortions in the DNA backbone in the T(−1) and T(+1)
positions (the nucleotide 5′ or 3′ to the templating
position for the DNA polymerase). An isomorphous difference Fourier
map (Figure A) showed the clear position for the B-ring of (S)-dSp
along with a rearrangement of the DNA backbone when compared to dA
in the same position. The mean displacement for all backbone atoms,
including N9, is 1.9 Å, with the largest being for the 5′-PO4 atom of the lesion with displacements of 2.4 and 2.3 Å
for the 3′-hydroxyl. The distortion is most notable for the
changes in both the α (from 64° to −65°) and
γ (from 55° to −90°) torsion angles for the
dSp position. These angles are unchanged regardless of whether the
comparison involves the WT or the E295K binary complex with undamaged
DNA. A summary of the torsion angles for T(−1), the lesion,
and T(+1) is listed in Table S1 of the  for comparison with those of the pol β E295K
variant containing dA and the WT containing a templating dG. Interestingly,
the 5′-PO4 repositioning matches that seen for the syn OG in the active site of WT pol β (Figure B). A comparison with
WT pol β and templating dG is shown in Figure S2 of the .

Molecular dynamics
simulation calculations predicted (R)-dSp to favor
the anti form and (S)-dSp to favor
the syn form in the interior context
of a DNA duplex. In the dSp1 pol β
structure, a collection of clashes requires dSp1 to adopt the predicted syn conformation in the DNA duplex. Placement of the B-ring
in the anti position on the minor groove side of
the duplex would place O6 of the lesion 1.1 Å from the purine
ring of the T(−1) position. There would also be a clash of
N2 with the OH of Tyr271 (1.8 Å) in the polymerase active site
(Figure S3A of the ). Selection of the syn conformation due to these
clashes dictates the backbone distortion for the T(+1) position with
the repositioning of the B-ring to the major groove side. Prior to
backbone rearrangement, the nonbridging oxygens of the phosphodiester
linkage between T(+1) and the lesion would be 1.4 Å from N1 and
2.1 Å from C6 of the B-ring (Figure S3B of the ).

Crystals were subsequently
soaked with a deoxynucleoside triphosphate,
either dCTP, dATP, dGTP, or the nonhydrolyzable analogue 2′-deoxyuridine
5′-(α,β)-imidotriphosphate (dUMPNPP), in the attempt
to capture a ternary complex. X-ray data were collected on all four
types of soaked crystals, but none of the crystals resulted in the
formation of a ternary complex with visible density for the incoming
nucleotide, which is consistent with the low Cross R values ranging from 18 to 26% on intensity comparing the putative
ternary complexes with the binary form. The most significant density
in the isomorphous difference Fourier maps was for that of the dUMPNPP
triphosphate and ribose moiety. However, the conformational change
in the fingers domain expected upon nucleotide binding was not observed
for any of the soaks. The resulting poor binding could be due to the
lesion itself or the nucleotide binding properties of E295K. An additional mutation akin to the Y567A variant
in RB69 gp43, which opened the polymerase active site and was necessary
to visualize a Gh–dATP ternary complex, may be necessary to capture a ternary complex with pol
β bound to (S)-dSp-containing DNA and dNTP.

Backbone
distortion of the (S)-Sp-containing DNA
strand. (A) Fo – Fo isomorphous difference Fourier map (±3σ)
between dA (gray) and (S)-dSp (cyan) in the templating
position. The (S)-dSp A-ring is indicated. (B and
C) (S)-dSp DNA (cyan) in comparison with OG (Protein Data Bank entry 3RJE) (B) in the syn conformation (magenta) or (C) in the anti conformation (orange) (same orientation as panel A).

Supporting Information Available
A description of materials
and methods along with Figures S1–S3 and Table S1. This material
is available free of charge via the Internet at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bi500270e_si_001.pdf

Accession Codes
The coordinates
and structure factors have been deposited as Protein Data Bank entry 4PPX.

These studies
were funded by National Institutes of Health Grants R01 CA080830 to
J.B.S., R01 CA090689 to C.J.B., and R01 CA052040 to S.D.

The authors
declare no competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
We thank April Averill for protein
purification and Haein
Kim for help with crystallization trials.

