Hepatitis
C virus (HCV), a member
of the Flaviviridae family, is a major
causative agent for liver cirrhosis and hepatocellular carcinoma in
man. The infection of a host cell by HCV
is followed by the release of the about 9.6 kb single-stranded (+)RNA
viral genome that is translated and replicated in the cytoplasm. The central enzyme involved in the viral RNA
replication process is the RNA-dependent RNA polymerase (RdRp) NS5B., As part of an as yet incompletely characterized viral replication
complex, the HCV-polymerase initiates RNA polymerization de
novo and first copies the (+)RNA, generating (−)RNA
molecules., In a second step, the 3′-end of the
(−)RNA serves as an initiation site for the polymerase, which
then catalyzes the synthesis of progeny (+)RNAs. The latter step can
be easily recapitulated with the purified enzyme and accordingly serves
as a suitable model in studies aimed at understanding the mechanisms
that underlie the initiation of RNA polymerization on an authentic
template (see scheme in Figure A).

Generally,
the catalytic action of the HCV-polymerase involves
a conformational transition from an initiation to an elongation state.− Several crystal structures were solved, and the HCV-polymerase was
shown to display a classic right-handed topology.− Accordingly, the palm domain contains the residues responsible for
catalysis and NTP binding, whereas the finger and thumb domains are
in tight contact in the initiation-competent “enclosed form”
of the polymerase. The RNA template is assumed to enter the polymerase
through a hydrophilic groove in the finger’s subdomain. A β-hairpin loop in the thumb domain located
close to the active site is supposed to function in positioning the
3′-end of the RNA template. Conformational
changes of the HCV-polymerase such as a rotation of the thumb domain
or a reorientation of the C-terminus were suggested to accommodate
the formation of the double-stranded RNA product.,,− The HCV-polymerase is expected to feature as yet
undisclosed conformational regulatory properties during its activity
on an authentic RNA template. In the
present study, we applied a novel combination of biophysical methods
and one-dimensional, real-time proton nuclear magnetic resonance (1D 1H NMR) spectroscopy, to the HCV-polymerase
while operating on an RNA template that corresponds to the (−)RNA
3′-end. Thus, we could (i) elucidate the local stability and
thermodynamics of the RNA template, (ii) follow the thermodynamics
and kinetics of binary and ternary complex formation, which were shown
to be associated with conformational changes of the polymerase, and
(iii) continuously monitor product formation. The obtained NMR data
confirmed earlier indications that the viral polymerase acts in a
processive manner. Most interestingly, with the applied partially
double-stranded RNA template, the activity of NS5B was substantially
delayed. The study hence excluded NS5B acting as an RNA helicase and
emphasized the need for further RNA-modulating factors that assist
the RdRp during the viral replication process.

Materials and Methods
Preparation
of the HCV-Polymerase
The gene coding for
HCV-polymerase NS5B (genotype 2a, subtype JFH-1) containing a deletion
of 21 amino acids at the C-terminus was cloned into the pET SUMO vector
and expressed in Escherichia coli strain
BL21 (DE3) star. Biomass production, gene expression, and purification
of HCV-polymerase were carried out as described with minor modifications (see  Materials and Methods). Purified HCV-polymerase
was dialyzed against 50 mM HEPES/NaOH, 20% (v/v) glycerol, 6.5 mM
MgCl2, 2 mM TCEP, pH 7.5 (referred to as assay buffer),
centrifuged, and stored at −80 °C. Protein concentration
was determined by measuring the absorbance at 280 nm using ε280 = 85 260 M–1 cm–1.

Nucleotides and Oligonucleotides
NTP(s) used for the
RNA-dependent RNA polymerization reaction were purchased from Thermo.
NTPs used to quantify interactions with the HCV-polymerase by circular
dichroism spectroscopy were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich. The oligonucleotides
5′-CUAAGAUGCUCGCUGC-3′ (single-stranded
RNA) and 5′-UCGCCCCUAUUAG GGGCAGGU-3′
(3′(−)SL RNA) as well as the 5′-FAM-EX-5-labeled
RNAs were purchased from IBA (Göttingen, Germany). The concentrations
of unlabeled oligonucleotides were determined by absorbance at 260
nm using the extinction coefficients ε260 = 148 600
M–1 cm–1 (ssRNA) and ε260 = 200 400 M–1 cm–1 (3′(−)SL RNA). The concentration of the 5′-FAM
fluorescently labeled template RNA was determined from the absorbance
at 260 nm using the extinction coefficient ε260 =
148 600 M–1 cm–1.

Circular
Dichroism Spectroscopy
Far-UV circular dichroism
was applied to monitor the binding of NTPs to HCV-polymerase (nucleotide
complex formation) as described previously. Measurements were performed in assay buffer using an enzyme concentration
of 20 μM.

Fluorescence Spectroscopy
HCV-polymerase
NS5B (genotype
2a, subtype JFH-1) was added to 50 nM 5′-FAM-EX-5-labeled RNA
in assay buffer supplemented with NaCl at the concentrations indicated.
Fluorescence changes were monitored on a Fluoromax-4 Spectrofluorometer
(Jobin Yvon, France) at 22.5 °C unless otherwise stated. After
attaining equilibrium, the signal amplitudes of the FAM-probed RNAs
were measured (excitation at 491 nm, emission at 515 nm, slit widths
0.2 and 5 nm) and corrected for the volume change. Fluorescence intensities
relative to the starting fluorescence were plotted against the protein
concentration. Fitting the binding isotherms according to eq  with the program KaleidaGraph (Synergy Software)
yielded the KD values of the interaction
of HCV-polymerase with the labeled RNA.where ΔF is the change
of normalized fluorescence, m is the concentration
of the 5′-FAM-EX-5-labeled template RNA, n is the concentration of NS5BΔ21, and KD is the equilibrium constant between RNA and e.g. HCV-NS5B.
The equilibrium constants of the binary complexes in dependence on
the salt concentration were determined and analyzed according to a
linear free energy relationship using eq .where ΔG0 is the difference in
free energy at equilibrium, ΔGb0 is the difference
in free energy at equilibrium at ionic strength
of the buffer, R is the gas constant, T is the temperature (K), m is the correlation coefficient
in the linear free energy relationship, and Ka is the association constant between the RNA and HCV-polymerase.
The equilibrium constants of HCV-polymerase and labeled RNAs were
determined in the assay buffer supplemented with 150 mM NaCl at different
temperatures. Data was analyzed according to van’t Hoff (eq ), which revealed the thermodynamic parameters for
binary complex formation.where
ΔG0 is the difference in free energy
at equilibrium, ΔH0 is the difference
in free enthalpy at equilibrium,
ΔS0 is the difference in free entropy
at equilibrium, R is the gas constant, T is the temperature (K), and Ka is the
association constant between the RNA and HCV-polymerase. Fast kinetics
of association and dissociation of RNA and HCV-polymerase were performed
as described previously. Data was evaluated
according to eqs  and .where ΔF is the total
change of relative fluorescence amplitude; v, x, y, and z are the signal
amplitudes of the respective phases; kv′, kx′, ky′, and kz′ are the first-order rate constants
of the respective phases; t is the time; n is the relative fluorescence intensity at the end point
of the reaction (offset); kon is the rate
constant of substrate association (bimolecular reaction); and koff is the rate constant of substrate dissociation
(monomolecular reaction). All thermodynamic and kinetic measurements
were performed at least in duplicate. Errors of the parameters obtained
from the fitting routine were in the range of 10%.

NMR Spectroscopy
All 1D 1H NMR spectra were
recorded in 50 mM HEPES/NaOH, 200 mM NaCl, 6.5 mM MgCl2, 1 mM TCEP, pH 7.5, at 295.6 K, containing 10% (v/v) D2O and 5% (v/v) deuterated glycerol. Data was acquired on a Bruker
Avance III 600 MHz spectrometer equipped with a room temperature probe
or on an Avance III 800 MHz spectrometer equipped with a cryoprobe.
Water suppression was achieved by usage of the double pulsed field
gradient spin echo approach. Spectra
were processed using TopSpin 2.1. Five hertz exponential line broadening
and polynomial baseline correction were manually applied before integration
of the spectra. Spectra monitoring the RNA-dependent RNA polymerization
reactions were recorded using 30 μM HCV-polymerase and 30 μM
3′(−)SL RNA either with or without 0.5 mM nucleotides.
Spectra accumulated for a time period of 21 h were normalized to the
spectra accumulated for a time period of 8 h by the factor 0.4 (8/21). Integrals of the 1D 1H NMR spectra in the region of interest were
plotted against the reaction time. The reaction times indicated correspond
to the beginning of recording the respective NMR spectra plus half
of the time resolution of each spectrum. Two-dimensional 1H–1H NMR NOESY spectra to assign the imino proton
NMR signals were acquired at a temperature of 295.6 K using mixing
times of tm = 120 and 250 ms. Spectra
were recorded with spectral widths of 20.01 ppm in both dimensions.
The 1H carrier frequency was set to 4.7 ppm. 1024 increments
were recorded in the indirect dimension, and 8192 points in the direct
dimension. Each increment was recorded with 160 scans. Water suppression
was achieved using the double pulsed field gradient spin echo approach.

Thermodynamic Stability of the Secondary
Structure of the 3′(−)SL
RNA
The signal intensity changes of the imino protons in
the 1D 1H NMR spectrum of 100 μM 3′(−)SL
RNA were recorded at 278, 286, 294, 302, 310, 318, 326, 334, 342,
350, and 358 K. The integrated signals, correlating to the double-stranded
character of the respective base pairs, were analyzed according to
a two-state folding mechanism (eq ), yielding
the thermodynamic parameters of the secondary structure.where ΔGT0 is the difference in free energy at equilibrium and temperature Tm (K), ΔHTm0 is the difference in free enthalpie at equilibrium and temperature Tm (K), ΔSTm0 is the difference in free entropy at equilibrium and temperature T (K), ΔCp is the change in heat capacity during folding/unfolding, Tm is the temperature at the transition midpoint, X is the signal intensity change of the imino proton signal
in the 1D 1H NMR spectrum, nN is the signal intensity of the native imino proton signal in the
1D 1H NMR spectrum, and nU is
the signal intensity of the unfolded imino proton signal in the 1D 1H NMR spectrum.

Results
Binary Complex Formation:
Binding of the RNA Template by the
Polymerase
RNA synthesis catalyzed by the HCV-polymerase
is a two-substrate reaction (Figure A). The first half-reaction involves the binding
of the RNA template by the active site of the enzyme. To evaluate
the binding behavior of the HCV-polymerase with differently structured
RNAs, we applied a previously established assay utilizing a purified HCV-polymerase (HCV genotype 2a, subtype
JFH-1) and two fluorescently labeled RNA templates, i.e., (1) a randomly
composed 16 nt single-stranded oligonucleotide (ssRNA) and (2) a 21
nt oligonucleotide that forms a stable stem-loop structure (Figure B). The latter RNA, termed here as 3′(−)SL,
corresponds to the immediate 3′-end of the HCV (−)RNA.
It was used to mimic the initiation of the second step of the viral
RNA replication process, the synthesis of progeny (+)RNA. Under physiological
conditions, the HCV-polymerase revealed the highest affinity to the
random ssRNA template (Figure A and Table ). Elevation of the ionic strength by NaCl perturbed
the polymerase–RNA association and decreased the affinity following
a linear free energy relationship (LFER). The dependence on the ionic
conditions was less pronounced during binding of the HCV-polymerase
to the 3′(−)SL RNA. This suggested that the formation
of the binary complex with 3′(−)SL followed a different
mode involving, for example, additional nonionic contributions that
were not screened by salt.

RNA synthesis catalyzed by the HCV-polymerase
on the structured
3′(−)SL RNA template. (A) The HCV-polymerase NS5B is
schematically depicted with thumb (T), palm (P), and finger (F) domains.
The 3′(−)SL RNA template forms a stem-loop structure;
the inset provides the secondary structures that were determined by
NMR (see also Figures  and  and Table ). For the synthesis of
progeny (+)RNA molecules, the HCV-polymerase binds in a first half-reaction
(binary complex formation). The interaction with NTPs (as indicated)
results in the formation of the catalysis-competent ternary complex.
Our data suggest that RNA secondary structures of the template have
to be resolved to accomplish double-stranded RNA product formation
and release (second half-reaction). (B) Schematic presentation of
the primary structure of the 3′(−)SL RNA template. Two
possible structures of the stem-loop were derived by the program mfold.

Characterization of the binding of the HCV-polymerase to different
RNA templates. Association constants of fluorescently labeled RNAs
and the HCV-polymerase were determined as described in the . (A) Binding of the HCV-polymerase
to ssRNA (white squares) and to the 3′(−)SL RNA (black
circles) was determined as a function of the concentration of NaCl
at 22.5 °C. The affinity constants were analyzed according to
a linear free energy relationship, with NaCl
perturbing the binary complex formation. (B) Association constants
of the HCV-polymerase and ssRNA (white squares) and the 3′(−)SL
RNA (black circles) were determined as a function of temperature at
0.15 M NaCl and analyzed according to the van’t Hoff approximation.
The respective thermodynamic parameters are summarized in Table .

Parameters
of RNA Binding to the HCV-Polymerase
RNA template	m (kJ mol–1 M–1)	ΔG (kJ mol–1)	ΔH (kJ mol–1)	–TΔS (kJ mol–1)	
ssRNA	–29.3 ± 0.9	–30.6 ± 0.1	≈0	–30.7 ± 0.2	
3′(−)SL RNA	–13.6 ± 3.7	–28.7 ± 0.5	+37.4 ± 9.3	–66.3 ± 9.2	
Perturbation of
the polymerase–RNA
interaction by NaCl at 22.5 °C (slope of the LFER).

Thermodynamic parameters of polymerase–RNA
interaction at an ionic strength of 0.192 M (0.15 M NaCl) and at 22.5
°C.

To dissect the
GIBBS free energy of binding (ΔG) by its enthalpic
(ΔH) and entropic (ΔS) contributions, the temperature dependence of the respective
equilibrium constants was measured and analyzed according to the van’t
Hoff approximation (Figure B and Table ). Binary complex formation of the HCV-polymerase
with ssRNA resulted in a ΔH0 ≈
0. In contrast, an endothermic reaction (ΔH0 &gt; 0) was observed for binding of the 3′(−)SL
RNA. However, with this RNA, the positive and unfavorable binding
enthalpy was compensated by a significant change in entropy. Thus,
in comparison to the association of the HCV-polymerase with the ssRNA,
the favorable entropic contributions (population of microstates) along
with the binding of the enzyme to the structured 3′(−)SL
RNA increased by a factor of 2. With both, the ssRNA and the 3′(−)SL
RNA, the interaction of the polymerase accordingly turned out to be
entropically driven, which may be related to the conformational freedom
of the binary complex. In the case of the native 3′(−)SL
RNA, the increased entropic change was assumed to result from a partial
disbanding of the stem structure or from a specific rearrangement
of the polymerase’s conformation on binding.

Kinetically,
the RNA binding by the HCV-polymerase proceeded along
defined intermediates. Both RNA templates were shown to interact with
the HCV-polymerase via initial Michaelis-complex formation and some
subsequent intramolecular reactions (Figure  and Table ). In analogy to earlier findings, four phases of template binding were resolved,
which could be differentiated by their rate constant and by the amplitude
of quenching of the fluorescence emission of the labeled RNA. The
fastest process depended on the RNA concentration; accordingly, we
assigned this phase to the initial complex formation as a second-order
reaction. The three slower processes did not depend on the RNA concentrations
and were attributed to intramolecular rearrangements. The kinetics of the interaction between the HCV-polymerase
and the two RNA templates significantly differed only in the fastest
process, corresponding to the second-order rate constant kon of association. Here, the native 3′(−)SL
RNA template was observed to bind 6-fold slower than the random ssRNA.
No significant differences were observed for the three slower monomolecular
reactions and the first-order dissociation rate constant koff. This indicated that the intramolecular substrate
positioning and release by the polymerase mostly occurred independently
of the RNA moiety.

Binding kinetics of the HCV-polymerase to short RNAs (binary
complex
formation). The kinetics of binary complex formation was measured
using fluorescently labeled RNAs. The binding process of single-stranded
RNA (16 nucleotides) (A) was recorded at template concentrations of
21 nM (dark blue), 124 nM (light blue), 164 nM (dark green), 185 nM
(lime), 329 nM (yellow), 410 nM (orange), 492 nM (red), and 817 nM
(pink). Binding the native 3′(−)SL RNA (21 nucleotides)
(C) was recorded at template concentrations of 12.5 nM (dark blue),
100 nM (dark green), 200 nM (lime), 300 nM (orange), and 500 nM (red).
The protein concentration was 270 nM. Complex formation proceeded
at least via three intermediates; accordingly, the kinetics was fitted
according to quadruple-exponential first-order reactions (B, D). The
observed rate constants were plotted against the respective RNA concentration
and yielded a second-order rate constant and three intramolecular
first-order rate constants that are summarized in Table .

Rate Constants of
the Binding Process
of RNA Templates to HCV-Polymerase
RNA template	kon1 (μM–1 s–1)	koff1 (s–1)	k1′ 10–1 (s–1)	k2′ 10–2 (s–1)	k3′ 10–3 (s–1)	
ssRNA	45.9 ± 5.3	2.7 ± 2.0	6.4 ± 0.5	6.2 ± 0.6	4.3 ± 0.3	
3′(−)SL
RNA	7.9 ± 1.9	2.7 ± 0.7	4.4 ± 0.5	4.5 ± 0.4	4.2 ± 0.5	
Kinetics was fitted
according to
quadruple-exponential first-order reactions. Second-order rate constants kon1 and first-order rate constants koff1 were derived from the concentration
dependence of kv′.
Experiments were performed as described in the .

Structure and
Thermodynamics of the 3′(−)SL RNA
To analyze
the thermodynamic stability of the 3′(−)SL
RNA and its conformational changes during substrate turnover in the
enzymatic reaction, we applied 1D 1H NMR spectroscopy.
For this purpose, the NMR resonances of the imino protons of the nucleobases
were utilized; these were generally well-resolved
in the proton spectra (Figure ) and easily assignable to the respective nucleotide
base (Figure ).
Base-paired imino protons are able to form hydrogen bonds and are
discernible because the exchange rate with the solvent is strongly
reduced. Their signal intensity reports on each single canonical base
pairing. Along this line, the secondary structure of the native RNA
was first confirmed to predominantly consist of a stem-loop with 5
base pairs composed of G3C4C5C6C7 and G13G14G15G16C17 and a penta-loop (Figure ). An additional signal at 12.85 ppm in the spectrum accounted
for a less stable sixth U–A bp (U8 and A12) of an underrepresented stem-loop with a triple-loop structure.
Both RNA species were in equilibrium under the chosen conditions.
Subsequent measurements of the thermodynamic stability of these structures
in the 3′(−)SL RNA revealed a cooperative transition
pattern during temperature-induced unfolding (Figure B and Table ). Interestingly, the G3–C17 bp at the
edge of the stem turned out to be most stable and showed a transition
temperature (Tm) of 341 K followed by
C7–G13 (336 K) and C4–G16 (335 K). C5–G15 (307 K) and
C6–G14 (312 K) were less stable and remained
unpaired for a significant number of molecules, even at room temperature.

Structural
analysis and thermodynamic stability of the stem-loop
formed by a 21 nt RNA oligonucleotide corresponding to the 3′-end
of the HCV (−)RNA. (A) One-dimensional 1H NMR spectrum
of the 3′(−)SL RNA. The RNA displays 5 prominent base
pairs that form the stem. The spectral region that is sensitive for
double-stranded RNA is shown. Each signal corresponds to the respective
imino proton that contributes to hydrogen bonding of one canonical
base pair, as indicated. Assignment of the individual signals was
performed by a NOESY spectrum and by considering some RNA variants
(see Figure ). (B) The thermodynamic stability
of the stem structure of the 3′(−)SL RNA was determined
from thermal unfolding transitions monitored by 1D 1H NMR
spectroscopy that are sensitive to individual base pairing within
the stem. Integrated signal intensities of the respective imino protons
were analyzed according to a two-state folding–unfolding mechanism
(G3–C17, filled square; G16–C4, filled circle; G15–C5, open circle; G14–C6, open triangle;
G13–C7, filled triangle). The thermodynamic
parameters that derived from fitting the transition curves are summarized
in Table . The secondary structure of the
RNA is schematically shown in the inset.

Assignment of 1H NMR signals to double-stranded base
pairs that form the 3′(−)SL RNA secondary structure.
The 3′(−)SL RNA displays 5 distinct major imino proton
signals in the 1H NMR spectrum that correspond to a stem-loop
RNA secondary structure comprising a 5 base-paired stem, a penta-loop,
and 4 and 2 nucleotide single-stranded parts at the 3′- and
5′-ends, respectively. (A) A spectrum of the wild-type 3′(−)SL
RNA was compared with the spectrum of a 3′(−)SL RNA
mutant G13C, which features only 4 prominent base pairs. This enabled
the assignment of the imino proton signal of G13, as indicated
by the arrow. (B) An alternative stem-loop structure with an additional
sixth base pair, U8–A12, resulting in
a conformation consisting of a 6 base-paired double-stranded stem
and a triple-loop, is less populated in solution. This was shown by
substitution of the wild-type U8–A12 by
C8–G12, which resulted in a new imino
proton signal in the 1H NMR spectrum at higher field, as
indicated by the arrows. (C) Two-dimensional 1H–1H NOESY spectrum of 1 mM 3′(−)SL RNA was recorded,
yielding intramolecular imino–imino NOE signals. Depicted are
the following NOE cross peaks: G16–G15, turquoise; G16–G3, red; G13–G14, ocher.

Thermodynamic Parameters of Unfolding
of the 3′(−)SL RNA
 	ΔH0Tm	ΔS0Tm	Tm	ΔCp	ΔG0296K	
base pair	(kJ mol–1)	(kJ mol–1 K–1)	(K)	(kJ K–1 mol–1)	(kJ mol–1)	
G3	88	0.26	340.8 ± 1.4	0.059	11.3	
G16	88	0.26	334.6 ± 1.0	0.063	10.1	
G15	147	0.48	306.9 ± 0.7	0.113	5.0	
G14	118	0.38	311.7 ± 0.5	0.084	4.2	
G13	101	0.30	335.8 ± 0.8	0.067	11.7	
Thermodynamic parameters
were derived
from fitting the thermal unfolding transitions (change of the corresponding
integral signal intensities in the 1H NMR spectrum) according
to a two-state folding model. Errors of the thermodynamic parameters
obtained from the fitting routine were in the range of about 20–30%.

Ternary Complex Formation:
Binding of NTPs and RNA by the Polymerase
During the polymerization
process, the viral RdRp catalyzes RNA
synthesis in a nucleotidyl-transfer reaction. Thus, besides binding
of the RNA template, the enzyme also associates nucleotides in a second
half-reaction. First, we applied UV circular dichroism at the negative
local extremum at 241 nm to measure the formation of polymerase–NTP
complexes, (). The obtained data revealed dissociation constants in a low micromolar
range of the respective NTPs as well as a positive cooperativity,
which was indicated by a Hill coefficient of ∼1.5 (summarized
in Table ). In the absence of template RNA,
two nucleotide molecules associated with the polymerase (see ). In a second approach, the initiation
of binary complex formation of the HCV-polymerase with the 3′(−)SL
RNA was monitored by 1D 1H NMR spectroscopy. The data revealed
an overall line-broadening of the imino proton signals in the substrate
part of the spectrum. This was explained by an equilibrium formed
between the unbound nucleic acid, the signals of which remained detectable,
and the high molecular weight complex where the RNA-related signals
disappeared due to the proton’s restricted tumbling motion.
To further explore the impact of NTP binding on the binary complex
consisting of the HCV-polymerase and the 3′(−)SL RNA
template, we again applied time-resolved 1D 1H NMR. Interestingly,
the addition of NTPs led to an intensity loss of the RNA template’s
imino proton signals (Figure A,B), which indicated
a decrease in the concentration of unbound RNA and an increase in
the amount of RNA that bound to the polymerase. Hence, the formation
of the binary complex increased the affinity of the HCV-polymerase
for the RNA template (KM &lt; KD), leading to the catalysis-competent ternary
complex.

RNA-dependent RNA polymerization monitored by real-time 1D 1H NMR spectroscopy. Product formation (double-stranded RNA)
by the HCV-polymerase was monitored with the native 3′(−)SL
RNA template following the addition of NTPs. (A) Proton spectra sensing
double-stranded RNA were recorded at different time points of the
polymerization reaction: 0–8 h, magenta; 8–16 h, red;
16–24 h, orange; 25–46 h, yellow; 46–67 h, green;
and 67–88 h, blue after the addition of NTP to the polymerase–RNA
complex (binary complex) (black). Upon binding of NTPs to the binary
complex, the intensity of the RNA-related 1H NMR signals
decreased. During an initial period of ca. 24 h, a constant signal
pattern of the RNA was observed. After about 25 h, newly developed
imino proton NMR signals were detectable that corresponded to the
released double-stranded RNA product. (B) The enzymatic progress curve
illustrates the HCV-polymerase interacting with the partially double-stranded
3′(−)SL RNA as well as the subsequent product formation
and release process of the double-stranded RNA. The initial decrease
of the integrated imino proton NMR signals upon addition of NTPs indicates
an increased affinity for the RNA template in the catalysis-competent
ternary complex compared to the binary polymerase–RNA complex.
After a significant lag phase, new imino proton NMR signals developed,
corresponding to dsRNA product formation and release. The kcat ≈ 0.1 min–1 (NTP)
was determined assuming that 20 μM RNA product (21 bp) was produced
by 20 μM polymerase–RNA complex within 5 h. The horizontal
bars reflect the time of accumulation of the respective spectra. (C)
Comparison of the 1D 1H NMR spectrum of the product of
the HCV-polymerase-catalyzed polymerization reaction (solid black
line) with a chemically synthesized and annealed 21 bp double-stranded
RNA (dashed red line). The integral of the signal at 13.75 ppm in
the 1H NMR spectrum (marked by an asterisk) is equal to
0.05 of the total integral of all imino proton signals, as expected
for 21 paired bases.

Binding Parameters of NTP to HCV-Polymerase
nucleotide	KD (mM)	KS (mMn)	Hill-coefficient n	
ATP	0.056 ± 0.001	0.011 ± 0.002	1.55 ± 0.06	
CTP	0.058 ± 0.002	0.012 ± 0.002	1.56 ± 0.06	
GTP	0.044 ± 0.002	0.009 ± 0.002	1.53 ± 0.07	
UTP	0.101 ± 0.002	0.038 ± 0.004	1.42 ± 0.04	
NTP binding was
measured by circular
dichroism change of the HCV-polymerase; parameters were determined
by fitting the binding isotherms according to a cooperative binding
mode.

RNA Polymerization Monitored
by Real-Time 1D 1H NMR
Spectroscopy
Generally, the incorporation of nucleotides
by RNA polymerases proceeds by complementary base pairing. To monitor
product formation with the 3′(−)SL RNA template directly,
we established a time-resolved 1D 1H NMR approach, which
analyzed the set of imino proton signals of the substrate and product
RNAs. The experimental setup was such that a nearly single turnover
reaction was investigated. Considering the previously determined binding
parameters of all substrates, this was enabled by a minimum of 66%
turnover in the first polymerization round. The reaction was followed
by spectra recording in 8 and 21 h increments, respectively. Interestingly,
during the initial ca. 20 h, the signal profile remained essentially
constant and revealed a lag phase where no release of double-stranded
product was detectable (Figure A,B). We interpreted
this finding such that this phase reflects a rearrangement of the
enzyme-bound substrate structure that is susceptible to product formation
(see ). Within the subsequent ca.
5 h, a set of defined imino proton signals appeared in the 1D 1H NMR spectrum that corresponded to newly developed base pairs.
The spectra were normalized by setting the signal intensity of the
discrete imino proton NMR signal at 13.75 ppm to correspond to 1 bp
(marked with an asterisk in Figure C). Thus,
with the polymerization product, integrated peaks corresponding to
21 bp were detectable in total, indicating that a (+)RNA molecule
was synthesized that was full-length complementary to the original
3′(−)SL template. This notion was confirmed when we
compared the NMR signals of the polymerization product with those
of a chemically synthesized 21 bp dsRNA (Figure C). Measurements of the signal intensity change of a constant signal
pattern further demonstrated that the product formation proceeded
in a processive manner with no free RNA intermediates detectable.
In these experiments, 20 μM polymerase–3′(−)SL
RNA complex was applied to the assay. Considering this value, the
ternary complex decay and product release in a single turnover reaction
was estimated to proceed with a kcat ≈
0.1 min–1 with regard to NTPs.

Discussion
HCV-Polymerase
Binding of the RNA Template
About a
decade ago, the structure elucidation of the HCV-polymerase led to
the assumption that substrate/template binding and double-stranded
RNA product formation are necessarily accommodated by major conformational
changes of the enzyme to an open conformation., This view was supported by a recent report of Rigat et al. These authors demonstrated that in solution
and while binding RNA an otherwise compacted region of the polymerase
becomes hypersensitive to proteolysis. Consistently, our kinetic and
thermodynamic studies suggest that the HCV-polymerase adopts different
conformations while interacting with the template. Both the randomly
composed single-stranded RNA as well as the structured 3′(−)SL
RNA were shown to interact with the HCV-polymerase, although with
different affinities. Kinetically, these differences were realized
by the second-order rate constant of association. Following the formation
of the very initial polymerase–RNA complex, additional steps
were monitored that occurred independently of the RNA concentration
and RNA moiety and most likely reflect conformational transitions
of the polymerase. The here-applied fluorescence-based assay enabled
accurate measurements of the affinity constants of the HCV-polymerase
and the RNAs and revealed that the formation of the binary polymerase–RNA
complex follows a linear free energy relationship that typically governs
chemical processes. The finding that the Gibbs free binding energy
is differently perturbed in dependence on the nature of the RNA template
accordingly suggests that the HCV-polymerase is capable to adapt to
differently structured RNAs and to realize various binding modes.
Interestingly, the distinction of templates by the polymerase manifests
during the very initial interaction rather than in the course of subsequent
intramolecular positioning reactions. This fuels the speculation that
different subpopulations of the native state of RNAs may be bound
by slightly differing sets of residues on the enzyme’s surface.
van’t Hoff analysis of the polymerase–RNA interaction
demonstrated that the binding of RNA by the polymerase is generally
entropically driven. Compared to the situation with the ssRNA, the
association of the structured 3′(−)SL RNA even increased
favorable entropic contributions. Since the interaction of the polymerase
with the 3′(−)SL RNA turned out to be also less dependent
on the ionic strength compared to ssRNA, we explained this increase
of entropy not only by solvation effects but also by an increase of
the conformational freedom of this polymerase–RNA complex.
Considering that unfavorable enthalpic contributions usually arise
by the disruption of existing interactions, this data further supports
earlier studies that binary complex formation requires an opening
of the HCV-polymerase.,,,,,,,−

Formation of the Catalysis-Competent Ternary
Complex
Upon the binding of NTPs and RNA template, the polymerase
forms the
catalysis-competent ternary complex, which also involves a selection
mechanism to incorporate the cognate nucleotide into the growing dsRNA
product. Like many, if not all, template-directed polymerases, this
process is accompanied by conformational rearrangements of some closed
states back to some open or ajar states, where improper nucleotides
might exit the active site prior to misincorporation., Our experimental setup allowed the quantification of the interaction
of NTPs with the polymerase in the absence of RNA template. Two NTP
molecules were shown to bind to the HCV-polymerase with positive cooperativity
at dissociation constants in the micromolar range (Table ). This indicated that one NTP associates with the
nucleotide binding site while the second NTP, due to its chemical
similarity with the RNA template, presumably interacts with the RNA
binding site. To show the impact of nucleotides on the RNA-loaded
HCV-polymerase, we monitored the imino proton signals of the 3′(−)SL
RNA in the presence of the HCV-polymerase by NMR spectroscopy. Note
that the 1D 1H NMR spectrum of the binary complex containing
the 3′(−)SL RNA reflects only the unbound nucleic acid
that is in equilibrium with the enzyme. Following the addition of
nucleotides, the NMR signals of the imino protons of the RNA template
decreased rapidly, indicating a decrease in the concentration of the
unbound RNA. This data demonstrated an increase of the template’s
affinity in forming the catalysis-competent ternary complex (see 4
h spectrum in Figure A,B). Hence, the association
of NTPs resulted in a positive cooperative binding of the RNA template.
A structural rearrangement of the HCV-polymerase was also monitored
by circular dichroism as the protein’s ellipticity changed
after the addition of NTPs ().

Double-Stranded RNA Product Formation and
Release
Previous
studies demonstrated that the purified HCV-polymerase is capable of de novo initiation of RNA polymerization., Accordingly,
for the synthesis of progeny (+)RNA molecules in the HCV replication
process, initiation essentially occurs at the immediate 3′-end
of the (−)RNA to prohibit the loss of genetic information.
As demonstrated here by 1H NMR spectroscopy, the applied
3′(−)SL RNA that corresponds to the HCV (−)RNA’s
3′-end adopts stable stem-loop structures. Signal changes in
the RNA’s 1D 1H NMR spectra during polymerization
revealed the formation of the final double-stranded RNA product in
real time when the reaction was started by the addition of NTPs. A
21 bp product was detected, indicating that a (+)RNA molecule was
synthesized by de novo initiation that was full-length
complementary to the 3′(−)SL template. Interestingly,
with the structured 3′(−)SL RNA template, we observed
an evident lag phase that preceded product formation (Figure B). This was in contrast to observations during
earlier experiments that applied a nonstructured ssRNA as a template. It was also unexpected because conventional
radioactive assay systems commonly detect de novo RNA synthesis by the HCV-polymerase within minutes to hours., One explanation for this discrepancy may relate to the short 3′(−)SL
template that was applied here on purpose to specifically investigate
the polymerase’s activity on a highly homogeneous and structured
template. The conventional assays mostly applied long RNA transcripts
and thus contained populations of various RNA conformations, some
of which may be immediately susceptible to polymerization. Another
explanation relates to the NMR assay, which, in contrast to a radioactive
incorporation assay, focuses exclusively on the detection of the predominant
product. In any case, the apparent delay in product formation with
the 3′(−)SL template clearly points to the requirement
of an additional mechanism of activation that makes this template
more susceptible to efficient polymerization (see below).

How
does the polymerase deal with the 3′(−)SL RNA? Temperature
transitions with the unbound RNA demonstrated that the stem’s
edge base pair G3–C17 is thermodynamically
more stable than the intrinsic base pairs. This indicated local differences
in the intramolecular stability of the RNA structures and suggests
that the folding/unfolding of the stem proceeds consecutively (“breathing”).
Initiation of RNA synthesis by the polymerase thus requires first
an opening of the edge base pair G3–C17, which would then result in a destabilization of the whole stem.
In the course of the enzymatic polymerization reaction, the entire
stem-loop RNA structure is accordingly expected to cooperatively unfold
by coupling to binding, with the edge
base pair G3–C17 being the main energy
barrier. Concerning the enzymatic characteristics of the HCV-polymerase,
it is important to note that almost all two-substrate-two-product
reactions such as nucleotidyl-transfer are formally group-transfer
reactions. They are further mechanistically
classified according to their sequence in turnover (i.e., substrate
binding and product release). Regarding the experimentally identified
two half-reactions of substrate binding by the HCV-polymerase, namely,
of the RNA template and NTPs, the entire enzymatic reaction can be
termed to proceed according to a random-order ternary complex mechanism.
This mechanism is characterized by a random binding of the two substrates
that form individual binary complexes and that finally result in ternary
complex formation. During the entire polymerization reaction, the
inorganic diphosphate product will release from the ternary complex,
thus yielding another defined binary complex that contains the bound
polymer substrate ready for the subsequent second half-reaction (next
nucleotide incorporation). As the polymerization product is a double-stranded
RNA, binding of the stem-containing 3′(−)SL RNA template
will at least partially result in a more product-like state. This
notion is in line with the finding that the polymerase binds ssRNA
with a significantly higher affinity (smaller KD value). An enzyme-bound single-stranded template RNA is accordingly
expected to be more accessible for nucleotide incorporation and supposed
to be stabilized intramolecularly. In turn, this implies that the
incorporation of NTPs requires an unfolding of the 3′(−)SL
RNA secondary structure. Besides monitoring substrate binding and
product release, our data does not provide detailed information about
conformational changes of the enzyme-bound substrates or products.
Since no free product-like intermediates were detectable (Figure ), the NMR experiments clearly revealed the processive
action of the HCV-polymerase. However, with the 3′(−)SL
template, the rate constant kcat was only
0.1 min–1. This was in contrast with nonstructured
RNA, where kcat was bigger than 10 min–1 and indicates an impaired
activity of the polymerase on the structured RNA. Moreover, these
observations suggest that NS5B has no significant helicase activity
that would enable the enzyme to destabilize the double-stranded moiety
of 3′(−)SL and effectively initiate RNA synthesis also
on this template. While the NS5B RdRp catalyzes the amplification
of the HCV genome, an as yet uncertain number of supporting viral
and host factors are implicated to assist this process (for review,
see ref ()). This
report accordingly highlights the potential role of RNA helicases,
RNA chaperones, or RNA annealers that are expected to either directly
affect the sequential enzymatic action of NS5B and/or to modulate
the active structure of the RNA template. The here established techniques
are expected to considerably guide the further characterization of
the function of, for example, the viral helicase NS3 or cell-encoded
RNA binding proteins that were indicated to support HCV replication.−

Supporting Information Available
NTP binding parameters to the
HCV-polymerase and protocols for enzyme purification and for measuring
RNA binding to the enzyme by stopped-flow kinetics. This material
is available free of charge via the Internet at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bi5006656_si_001.pdf

Author Contributions
Stefan Reich
designed and performed experiments and wrote the manuscript. Michael
Kovermann performed experiments. Hauke Lilie performed experiments.
Paul Knick performed experiments. Rene Geissler performed experiments.
Ralph Peter Golbik, Jochen Balbach, and Sven-Erik Behrens designed
experiments and wrote the manuscript.

The project
was supported by the National Institutes of Health (grant no. 5-RO1-DK-62847-3
to S.-E.B.), by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (grant nos. BE
1885/6-1 and 1885/6-2 to R.G. and P.K., and grants from the SFB 610
to M.K.), by the Graduiertenkolleg 1026 (grants to S.R. and M.K.),
and by the Exzellenzinitiative of the State of Saxony-Anhalt.

The authors declare
no
competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
Significant investments
into our NMR facility from the European
Regional Development Fund (ERDF) by the European Union are gratefully
acknowledged.

Abbreviations
bpbase pair(s)

5′-FAM-EX-56-carboxy-fluoresceine
attached to the 5′-end of RNA

JFHJapanese fulminant hepatitis

LFERlinear free energy relationship

NS5Bnonstructural
protein 5B

NTP(s)/ntnucleotide(s)

SLstem loop

ssRNAsingle-stranded RNA

