Multiple
antibiotic resistance
regulator (MarR) proteins are important transcriptional regulators.
More than 12,000 genes have been identified, which encode MarR family
transcription factors, most of them in eubacteria. Many proteins of this family bind small molecule ligands
such as household disinfectants, antibiotics, or organic solvents,
and some are modified by reactive oxygen species (for a review, see
refs (−)). For many MarR homologues, the natural ligand is
unknown, which poses a challenge for understanding their mechanism
of action., Most proteins of this family bind intergenic
regions separating their own gene and a gene under their control,
thereby repressing expression of both. In the presence of a small
molecule ligand or specific cysteine oxidation, DNA binding is attenuated,
which relieves repression.,− As sensors of changing environments, MarR proteins often regulate
expression of genes involved in stress responses, virulence, and multidrug
resistance.−

Gene regulation that depends on environmental cues is, for
example,
elicited when a bacterium infects a host. Part of the early response
to a bacterial infection is for the host to produce reactive oxygen
species (ROS) in defense against the invading bacterial pathogen.
The primary sources of ROS generation are xanthine oxidase and NADPH
oxidase. Xanthine oxidase converts hypoxanthine to xanthine and xanthine
to urate, and it transfers electrons from these substrates to molecular
oxygen to produce ROS.− The urate that is produced during the generation
of ROS is a potent antioxidant that may attenuate the adverse effects
of ROS on the host.,

An important corollary
of the simultaneous production of both ROS
and urate is that the invading bacterium may detect and respond to
both. Several bacterial transcription factors, including MarR homologues,
have been characterized that respond directly to such host-derived
ROS.,, That urate
may function as an effector of gene activity has also been reported,
and a subset of MarR family proteins have been identified that bind
urate as their ligand. Members of this MarR subfamily, the urate responsive
transcriptional regulators (UrtR), contain an N-terminal extension,
which is not present in the prototypical MarR from Escherichia
coli and other homologues. UrtRs
also have four conserved residues, which have been shown to be important
for urate binding and the attendant attenuation of DNA binding. Previously characterized UrtR proteins include
PecS from Rhizobium radiobacter (Agrobacterium
tumefaciens), which causes crown gall disease, and the soil
bacterium Streptomyces coelicolor.(,) In both species, the pecS gene is divergently oriented
from pecM, which encodes an efflux pump that belongs
to the Drug Metabolite Transporter superfamily. In presence of the
ligand urate, DNA binding by PecS is attenuated and genes encoding
PecS and PecM are upregulated., These PecS proteins
are homologous to the previously characterized PecS from the phytopathogenic
bacterium Erwinia chrysanthemi (Dickeya dadantii), where it regulates the expression of
several virulence genes, including genes encoding enzymes involved
in the biosynthesis of the secondary metabolite indigoidine as well
as PecM, the efflux pump through which the antioxidant indigoidine
is extruded.,, At the time of infection, this global regulator regulates multiple
genes involved in virulence and disease progression.,

Recently, we reported a distinct urate-responsive MarR homologue,
major facilitator transport regulator (MftR), which is encoded by Burkholderia thailandensis.() The gene encoding MftR is not divergently oriented from a pecM gene but instead a gene that encodes the efflux pump
MFTP (major facilitator transport protein). MFTP is an MFS (Major
Facilitator Superfamily) homologue, and it has similarity to EmrD,
a drug efflux pump from E. coli. MFS efflux pumps
are abundant. They can export a wide
variety of cytotoxic molecules, which contributes to multidrug resistance. MftR binding to the mftR-mftP intergenic region revealed two cognate sites, each consisting of
9 bp imperfect inverted repeats. Among the intermediates of purine
catabolism, urate efficiently attenuated DNA binding. However, unlike
previously characterized homologues, xanthine and hypoxanthine also
antagonized DNA binding, suggesting relaxed ligand specificity.,,

Here, we report site-directed
mutagenesis of MftR, which reveals
a differential mode of ligand binding compared to that of previously
characterized UrtR homologues. MftR binds two cognate sites in the mftR-mftP intergenic region with comparable affinity and
sensitivity to urate, and in the presence of exogenous urate, divergently
oriented genes mftR and mftP are
upregulated. MftR exhibits a two-step melting transition and binds
DNA with lower affinity at 37 °C. We propose that DNA binding
by MftR is attenuated upon host infection by both ligand binding and
thermal destabilization.

Experimental Procedures
Sequence Alignment and
Phylogenetic Analysis
MarR homologues
were aligned using the MUSCLE sequence alignment server. Amino acid residues were shaded using BOXSHADE
v3.21. Secondary structure elements were predicted based on the structure
of D. radiodurans HucR. In MEGA4, the neighbor-joining method with 500 bootstrap replicates
was used to generate the phylogenetic tree. The tree was drawn to scale, and positions containing gaps were
removed. The evolutionary distances are in the unit of number of amino
acid substitutions per site.

Generation of Mutant MftR and Protein Purification
MftR was cloned and purified as described previously. In brief, genomic DNA was extracted from B. thailandensis E264 and used as the template to amplify mftR (BTH_I2391). The PCR product was digested
with NdeI and EcoRI and cloned into pET28b for expression of protein
with an N-terminal His6-tag. Recombinant plasmid was used
to create mutants. To create the W11F, D56S, R63S, and R89N substitutions
in MftR, an overhanging primers technique was used for whole plasmid
amplification (for primer sequences, see , Table S1). Parental
recombinant plasmid was digested using DpnI, and mutant plasmid was
gel purified using a gel and PCR clean up kit (Promega). The plasmid
was transformed into E. coli TOP10 (Invitrogen),
and the mutated plasmid was verified by sequencing. Mutant proteins
were expressed as described for wild-type MftR: plasmids were transformed
into E. coli BL21(DE3)pLysS. A single colony was
used to grow an overnight culture in LB with 50 μg/mL kanamycin
at 37 °C; the culture was then diluted 1:100 and protein expression
induced by the addition of 1 mM isopropyl-1-thio-β-d-galactopyranoside (IPTG) at OD600 of 0.4–0.5.
After 1 h, cells were chilled on ice, pelleted, and stored at −80
°C.

Cell pellets were thawed on ice for 1 h and cells resuspended
in chilled wash buffer containing 50 mM sodium phosphate buffer (pH
7.0) and 300 mM NaCl. Before preparing lysate by centrifugation at
10 000g for 60 min, lysozyme (1.0 mg/mL),
10× DNase I buffer, and 2 μL of DNase I were added to each
5 mL cell suspension and incubated for 1 h. The supernatant was collected
and mixed with HIS-Select Nickel Affinity beads previously washed
with 10 volumes of chilled double distilled water and two times with
wash buffer. After 1 h of incubation with beads at 4 °C, the
mixture was directly transferred to a gravity flow column, and protein
was eluted by increasing the concentrations of imidazole from 10 mM
to 150 mM. Peak fractions, which contained pure protein, were pooled.
Proteins were concentrated, and buffer was exchanged to wash buffer
with 10% glycerol by using an Amicon centrifugal filter device (Millipore).
The purity of proteins (WT and mutants) was verified by sodium dodecyl
sulfate–polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS–PAGE)
and staining the gel with Coomassie brilliant-blue. Concentration
was calculated using the BCA protein assay kit (Pierce).

To
determine oligomeric states, proteins were cross-linked in a
total volume of 10 μL with 0.5% (v/v) glutaraldehyde on ice
for 30 min. An equal volume of Laemmli sample buffer was added to
terminate the reaction, and the cross-linked proteins were subjected
to SDS–PAGE.

Circular Dichroism Spectroscopy
A Jasco J-815 circular
dichroism spectrophotometer (Jasco, Inc.) was used to measure far
UV circular dichroism spectrum. To measure ellipticity, 0.2 mg/mL
MftR and its variants were in CD buffer (50 mM sodium phosphate buffer
(pH 7.0), 100 mM NaCl, and 2.5% glycerol), and a quartz cuvette with
0.1 cm path length was used. All protein samples were equilibrated
at room temperature for 20 min (except the W11F mutant, which was
kept on ice for equilibration). Measurements were conducted in triplicate
with 1 nm steps. Predicted secondary structure was calculated using
the K2D program from DichroWeb.− The goodness of fit was determined
from the NRMSD value, which was in the range of 0.094 to 0.110.

For melting profiles, samples were diluted to 0.8 mg/mL in CD buffer.
Samples were scanned from 225 to 219 nm over the temperature range
of 20–65 °C with 1 °C increments. Each sample was
also reverse scanned (for W11F, the temperature range was 18–65
°C). Thermal equilibration time after each temperature step was
15 s. To verify the native state, samples were also scanned at 240–200
nm at 25 °C (W11F was scanned at 18 °C). The thermal denaturation
curve for each wavelength was fitted using the four-parameter sigmoidal
equation of Sigma Plot 9.

Fluorescence Spectroscopy and Fluorescence
Quenching
A PTI QuantaMaster4/2006SE spectrofluorometer was
used to measure
the fluorescence spectra from 310 to 440 nm with excitation at 295
nm at 25 °C using a 0.3 cm path length cuvette. For the measurement,
WT and mutants were resuspended in FL buffer (40 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.0),
0.2 mM EDTA, 0.1% (w/v) Brij58, 100 mM NaCl, and 10 mM MgCl2) to a final concentration of 0.03 mg/mL. Reactions were incubated
for 2 min before measuring the fluorescence. To measure the effect
of urate, urate was dissolved in 0.4 M NaOH and serially diluted with
0.4 M NaOH. To correct for the inner filter effect and for the normalization
of data, the absorbance of FL buffer, free ligand in FL buffer, and
reaction mixture were measured. Correction of observed fluorescence
and fluorescence quenching calculation and fitting to Hill equation
were carried out as described previously.

In Vivo Determination of mRNA Levels Using
qRT-PCR
The B. thailandensis culture was
grown overnight at 37 °C in LB media. The overnight culture was
diluted 1:100 with LB media containing 10 mM urate. Urate was dissolved
in 0.4 N NaOH and sterilized by passing through a 0.2 μM nylon
syringe filter. The control culture was grown in LB to which an equal
volume of 0.4 N NaOH was added. Both cultures were grown for 6 h before
cells were collected using centrifugation. Cells were immediately
suspended in chilled DEPC treated water and then collected by centrifugation.
Total RNA was isolated using the hot phenol method with slight modifications. Instead of using phenol and chloroform in two
steps, acid saturated phenol/chloroform (Ambion) was used twice. RNA
quality was measured using Nanodrop 2000c (Thermo Scientific). cDNA
generated using AMV reverse transcriptase (New England BioLabs) mixed
with RNA, 25 mM dNTP, and 25 mM MgCl2 and kept for 1 h
at 42 °C was used in quantitative PCR (qPCR). qPCR was carried
out using an Applied BioSystems 7500 real time PCR system (Life Technologies).
Primers used are shown in , Table S1. As a control, gapdh was used. SYBR Green
I (Sigma) was used for detection. qRT-PCR generated data was analyzed
using the comparative CT method (2–ΔΔCT).

Thermal Stability Assay
Fluorescent dye SYPRO Orange
(Invitrogen) (5×) was added to thermal stability buffer (200
μM Tris (pH 8.0) and 200 mM NaCl) with MftR (6 μM). DNA
containing either of the two palindromes in the mftRO and mftpO intergenic region (36 bp) was prepared
by annealing complementary oligonucleotides by heating to 95 °C
followed by slow cooling to room temperature in TE′ (10 mM
Tris, pH 8.0, 0.1 mM EDTA) with 100 mM NaCl. Oligonucleotides were
purified using 12% polyacrylamide denaturing gels. DNA was added to
1:1 stoichiometry with protein. To measure the effect of ligand, urate
(dissolved in 0.4 M NaOH) was added to protein in a ratio of 1:1 and
at ∼16-fold excess. Mutant proteins (W11F, D56S, R63S, and
R89N) were analyzed in the same way as wild-type MftR. Control samples
excluded protein. An Applied BioSystems 7500 real time PCR system
was used with increasing temperature from 5 °C to 94 °C
in 1 degree increments, and fluorescence emission was corrected using
the control sample without protein. The four-parameter sigmoidal equation
of Sigma Plot 9 was used to fit the sigmoidal part of the melting
curve. Data represent the mean of three replicates.

DNA Binding
Assays
DNA binding was determined using
electrophoretic mobility shift assays (EMSA). The 130 bp intergenic
region (mftO) between mftR (BTH_I2391) and mftP (BTH_I2392) was amplified as previously described. DNA was radiolabeled using γ-32P-ATP and T4 polynucleotide
kinase. Protein and DNA were mixed in binding buffer (0.5 M Tris-HCl
pH 8.0, 250 mM NaCl, 0.1 M EDTA, 0.1 mM dithiothreitol, 0.05% Brij58,
10 μg/mL BSA, and 5% glycerol) and incubated at room temperature
for 30 min. The high concentration of Tris was used to prevent pH
changes upon subsequent addition of urate dissolved in 0.4 M NaOH.
This mixture was loaded on a running 10% polyacrylamide gel (39:1
acrylamide/bis(acrylamide)), previously prerun for 30 min in 0.5 X
Tris borate EDTA (TBE) at room temperature. After electrophoresis,
gels were dried and exposed to phosphorimaging screens. Data were
visualized using a storm 840 phosphorimager (GE Healthcare) and quantified
with ImageQuant 5.1. Fractional complex formation was analyzed using
KaleidaGraph 4.0 (Synergy Software) by fitting to f = fmax·[X]nH/(Kd + [X]nH) (where nH is the Hill coefficient, Kd is the apparent equilibrium dissociation constant reflecting
half-maximal saturation of the DNA (not the microscopic dissociation
constant), and [X] is the protein concentration). For DNA with a single
site, this equation simplifies to a single-site binding isotherm (nH = 1). For the W11F mutant, EMSA were performed
at 4 °C, and the effect of temperature on DNA binding by WT MftR
was assessed by EMSA performed at 37 °C (incubation of binding
reaction as well as electrophoresis). EMSA with HucR was performed
as described by Perera et al.

To
determine the effect of urate, increasing concentrations of urate
were added to the reaction mixtures. Since urate was dissolved in
0.4 M NaOH, equal volumes of 0.4 M NaOH were added to every reaction.
After 30 min of incubation, samples were electrophoresed and data
retrieved as described above. Fractional complex formation was fitted
to f = A + Be–kL (where f is fraction saturation, k is decay constant, L is the ligand concentration, A is the saturation plateau, and B represents
the decay amplitude). IC50 was calculated as the ligand
concentration at which 50% of complex formation is inhibited. While
the first-order decay equation does not consider the molecular events
associated with MftR binding to DNA containing two DNA sites, it is
suitable for comparing the ligand sensitivity of MftR variants. Densitometric
data were derived from three independent experiments.

Results
Genomic
Locus and Secondary Structure of MftR
The B. thailandensis gene BTH_I2391 encodes
a predicted MarR homologue that is divergently oriented from gene BTH_I2392 annotated as a major facilitator transport protein
(MFTP) (Figure ). mftP is
separated from mftR by an intergenic region of 114
bp. The mftR-mftP locus is conserved among Burkholderia species, for example, in B. mallei and B. pseudomallei, where the intergenic region, mftO, also shares two similar palindromic sequences. B. mallei and B. pseudomallei cause glanders
and melioidosis, respectively. Being highly infectious and causing
infections that are difficult to treat, they are considered as category
B priority pathogens.

B. thailandensismftR-mftP intergenic
region. Genes are represented by arrows. The sequence of the intergenic
region, mftO, is shown with two imperfect palindromes
shown in bold face. mftrO represents a DNA construct
with the palindrome near mftR, and mftpO is the region upstream of mftP.

As noted above, alignment of UrtR homologues previously
revealed
the conservation of four residues involved in urate binding (shown
with arrows in Figure A). The N-terminal extension,
α1, is a signature of urate-responsive MarR homologues, and
it is absent from canonical MarR homologues such as E. coli MarR and MTH313.,, In the Deinococcus-radiodurans-encoded UrtR homologue
HucR, this extension was shown to adopt an α-helix that braces
the helices that form the dimer interface. UrtR homologues conserve sequence in helices α3 and α5;
α3 contains residues involved in ligand binding by HucR and
PecS, and α5 is the DNA recognition helix. Conservation of the
recognition helices is also reflected in the conservation of cognate
DNA sites among UrtR homologues.

Sequence alignment
of MarR homologues. (A) Alignment generated
using MUSCLE. Residues involved in urate binding or in communicating
its binding to the recognition helix are shown using arrows. The alignment
includes MTH313 (Methanobacterium thermoautotrophicum), D. radiodurans HucR, S. coelicolor PecS, D. dadantii PecS, Pectobacterium
atrosepticum PecS, R. radiobacter PecS,
MftR from B. thailandensis, B. mallei (BMA_0906), and B. pseudomallei (BURPS_1958). Secondary
structure elements are based on the structure of HucR. (B) Phylogenetic
tree of selected MarR homologues based on their amino acid sequence.
Tree includes MarR homologues from panel A and B. oklahomensis and Rhizobium mesoamericanum PecS. The evolutionary
distances are in units of the number of amino acid substitutions per
position, and the scale bar represents an evolutionary distance of
0.1.

A phylogenetic tree was created
to analyze the evolutionary relationship
between MftR from Burkholderia spp. and other MarR homologues, particularly PecS homologues, which also
belong to the UrtR family (Figure B). Phylogenetic
analysis revealed that MftR homologues are clustered together and
that urate responsive MarR homologues (D. dadantii PecS, S. coelicolor PecS, and D. radiodurans HucR) are more closely related, while E. coli MarR
and MTH313 are distantly related. That MftR homologues from Burkholderia cluster together suggests common ancestry.

Among MarR homologues for which structures are known, HucR has
∼39% identity and ∼51% similarity with MftR and was
used as the template to generate a model of MftR (Figure ). MftR contains the N-terminal extension that forms
an α-helix in HucR. Four residues found to bind urate in HucR
(W11, D56, R63, and R89) and communicating ligand binding to the DNA
recognition helices are predicted to occupy the same position in the
model of MftR (shown in red in Figure ). MftR
was purified to apparent homogeneity (, Figure S1); far UV circular dichroism spectroscopy
showed that the secondary structure composition of MftR is about 57%
α-helix and 8% β-sheet (, Figure S2A). This is comparable to the HucR secondary
structure composition of 55% α-helix and 5% β-sheet.

Predicted model of MftR. MftR model based on the structure
of HucR
(2fbk), created using SwissModel in automated mode. One monomer is
colored blue to red (amino-terminus to carboxy-terminus; helices are
shown as α1 to α7) and the other is in purple. Conserved
residues, which are predicted to bind urate, are in red stick representation.

MftR Binding to mftO Regulates Expression of
Divergently Oriented mftR-mftP Genes
MftR was previously shown to bind two sites in the mftR-mftP intergenic region (mftO; Figure ) with modest negative cooperativity, and the ligand urate
was shown to attenuate DNA binding. Such
binding mode predicts repression of mftR and mftP gene expression in the absence of ligand. Therefore,
we determined mRNA levels of mftR and mftP
in vivo in the presence of urate. Growing cells at 37 °C
resulted in measurable levels of transcript (Figure A). However, growth with 10 mM urate resulted in elevated
expression of mftR (5.1 ± 0.7-fold) and mftP (13.7 ± 3.5-fold) (Figure ). This suggests that MftR binding to mftO represses
the transcription of mftR and mftP in vivo and that accumulation of urate leads to increased gene activity.

In vivo transcript level of mftR and mftP. (A) PCR product (mftP) obtained from
cDNA generated with increasing concentration of total
RNA extracted from cells not exposed to exogenous urate. Lane M is
the 100 bp marker, and lanes 1 to 5 show the PCR product obtained
with increasing concentrations of RNA (25–100 ng/μL).
(B) PCR product (mftP) with RNA extracted from cells
grown in the presence of 10 mM urate. Lane M is the 100 bp marker
and lanes 1 to 5 show the PCR product obtained with increasing concentrations
of RNA (25–100 ng/μL). (C) Relative abundance of mftR and mftP transcript levels after the
addition of 10 mM urate. Relative abundance of transcript level was
calculated with the comparative CT method, with the reference
control gene gapdh. Error bars represent the standard
deviation of three experiments.

The intergenic region mftO contains two
imperfect
palindromes (Figure ). To assess if differential
gene expression might be due to differential MftR binding to these
sites, DNA constructs containing either of the two identified palindromes
were designed and named mftrO and mftpO (Figure ) and used in electrophoretic mobility
shift assays. MftR formed a stable complex with both mftrO and mftpO (Figure A and
data not shown) as evidenced by an apparent dissociation constant
(Kd) of 0.7 ± 0.1 nM and 0.6 ±
0.1 nM, respectively (Figure B). With increasing
concentration of urate, the binding of MftR to mftrO and mftpO was attenuated (with an IC50 of 3.7 ± 0.3 mM and 2.2 ± 0.0 mM) (Figure C–D and data not shown). Evidently, MftR binds comparably
to mftrO and mftpO and with equivalent
sensitivity to ligand. The observed differential gene regulation in vivo is therefore not likely to derive from differences
in MftR binding to its cognate sites.

MftR binds both palindromes in its operator
DNA, and the complexes
are sensitive to urate. (A) EMSA showing mftpO (3.0
nM) titrated with increasing concentrations of MftR (0.1–200
nM; lanes 2–15); reaction in lane 1 contains DNA only. Complex
and free DNA are identified at the right as C and F, respectively.
(B) Fractional complex formation plotted as a function of MftR concentration.
Binding isotherm with mftrO (○; solid line)
and mftpO (+; dashed line). (C) Effect of urate on
the binding of MftR to mftpO. Lane 1 contains DNA
only. Reaction in lane 2 contains no ligand. The MftR-mftpO complex was titrated with increasing concentrations of urate (3–18
mM; lanes 3–11). (D) Normalized complex fraction as a function
of urate concentration. MftR-mftrO complex (○;
solid line) and MftR-mftpO complex (+; dashed line)
titrated with increasing concentrations of urate. Error bars represent
the standard deviation of three independent repeats.

Ligand Binding by MftR Impacts Two Parts
of the Protein
In contrast to HucR and PecS proteins that
respond primarily to the
ligand urate by attenuated DNA binding, DNA binding by B.
thailandensis MftR is also appreciably reduced by other intermediates
in the purine degradation pathway, specifically xanthine and hypoxanthine,
indicating relaxed ligand specificity.,, To determine the effect of the four residues previously
implicated in urate binding to HucR and PecS, the equivalent residues
in MftR were therefore mutated to generate W11F, D56S, R63S, and R89N
MftR variants. For both HucR and PecS, substitution of residues corresponding
to MftR residues W11, D56, and R63 generally ablates the response
to urate, while mutating the equivalent of R89 in the DNA recognition
helix severely compromises DNA binding.,

All
MftR protein variants were purified to apparent homogeneity (, Figure S1A). All structures
of MarR proteins, including that of HucR, reveal highly intertwined
monomers,, suggesting that any mutations that preclude
dimerization would also exhibit significantly altered (or abolished)
secondary structure. Glutaraldehyde cross-linking revealed equivalent
formation of dimeric species for all protein variants, suggesting
that mutations did not interfere with dimerization (, Figure S1B). The far UV CD spectra
of MftR variants indicated similar secondary structure composition
when compared to those of MftR and HucR (, Figure S2), indicating that mutations did not
significantly affect the overall protein fold.

Since these substitutions
have the potential to affect protein
stability, the thermal stability of WT and mutants was determined
using differential scanning fluorometry; SYPRO Orange was used as
a fluorescent reporter of protein unfolding as a function of temperature.
WT MftR exhibited a two-step melting transition, which is unusual
for MarR homologues (Figure A). Domain 1 (D1)
has a significantly lower melting temperature (Tm = 49.4 °C) than domain 2 (D2; Tm = 57.8 °C) (Table  and Figure A), perhaps corresponding to independent unfolding
transitions for the DNA binding lobes and the dimerization region.
By comparison, D1 has a melting temperature similar to that of HucR
(51.1 °C) and S. coelicolor PecS (47.3 °C),
and D2 has a melting temperature similar to that of R. radiobacter PecS (61.3 °C) and S. coelicolor TamR (59.9
°C).,,, D56S (Tm = 50.5 °C)
and R89N (Tm = 53.0 °C) substitutions
destabilized MftR less than R63S (Tm =
43.0 °C), while the W11F mutant was severely destabilized (Tm = 24.7 °C; Table  and Figure B–C). All mutants showed
one-step melting transitions.

Melting temperature of MftR and mutant proteins
determined by differential
scanning fluorometry. Thermal denaturation is represented by the fluorescence
intensity resulting from the binding of SYPRO Orange to denatured
protein as a function of temperature. (A) Thermal denaturation profile
of WT MftR. (B) Thermal denaturation profile of D56S, R63S, and R89N.
(C) Melting profile of W11F; a higher initial fluorescence may reflect
the presence of already denatured protein. (D) Melting profile of
WT with the addition of 100 μM urate. (E) Denaturation profile
of D56S, R63S, and R89N with urate. (F) Denaturation profile of W11F
with urate. (G) Thermal denaturation profile of MftR with 6 μM mftpO. (H) Denaturation profile of mutant D56S, R63S, and
R89N with mftpO. (I) Symbols used in panels A–H
for MftR and mutants.

Thermal Stability of MftR and Mutants
 	 	6 μM urate	100 μM urate	mftrO	mftpO	
MftR D1	49.4 ± 0.3	49.2 ± 0.2	61.3 ± 1.0	53.0 ± 0.2	52.7 ± 0.2	
MftR D2	57.9 ± 0.1	58.0 ± 0.1	60.3 ± 0.1	60.9 ± 0.3	
W11F	24.7 ± 0.1	27.0 ± 0.1	28.8 ± 0.7			
D56S	50.5 ± 0.2	52.3 ± 0.3	51.3 ± 0.1	48.4 ± 0.1	48.0 ± 0.1	
R63S	43.0 ± 0.1	48.7 ± 0.4	64.1 ± 3.9	42.8 ± 0.2	43.0 ± 0.2	
R89N	53.0 ± 0.2	55.9 ± 0.2	63.0 ± 0.6	54.0 ± 0.1	55.6 ± 0.9	
Did not yield quantifiable
data.

All MftR mutants were
destabilized compared to WT MftR. However,
the magnitude of the fluorescence was variable, with the D56S mutant
protein in particular showing very low levels of fluorescence. We
therefore repeated the determination of thermal stability using CD
spectroscopy. These experiments verified that all MftR mutations resulted
in reduced thermal stability, and they showed that the calculated Tm values are comparable to those measured using
SYPRO Orange (, Figure
S2 and Table S2; all values obtained by CD spectroscopy are ∼2
°C higher due to the different compositions of the CD buffer).

These experiments also revealed that thermal melting is irreversible,
likely due to protein aggregation, as evidenced by the formation of
a white precipitate upon denaturation. This precludes a thermodynamic
analysis of the unfolding transition, and only the Tm is reported. Even though the unfolding was irreversible
due to aggregation, information about relative stability may still
be obtained. Irreversible thermal denaturation is also a characteristic
of HucR. For the R63S and D56S mutants
that lead to lower SYPRO Orange fluorescence upon denaturation, we
surmise that these protein variants aggregated during (as opposed
to after) the formation of the fully denatured state, thus resulting
in lower fluorescence yields. Such reduced fluorescence is commonly
seen following protein denaturation, as such aggregates exclude the
bound dye. The observed reduction in
dye binding to the R63S and D56S variants clearly shows that the thermally
induced transitions are inherently different compared to those of
wild-type MftR. We also note that the denaturation of MftR domain
D1, which leads to a significant increase in SYPRO Orange fluorescence
(Figure A), was associated with only a modest
change in ellipticity (, Figure S2A). Taken together, these experiments show that all substitutions
destabilize either one or both MftR domains D1 and D2 and/or result
in accelerated protein aggregation.

Combining protein and urate
at a stoichiometric ratio of 1:1 did
not significantly change protein stability (using 6 μM urate
and protein; Table ), whereas a higher concentration
of urate (100 μM) resulted in increased thermal stability, suggesting
ligand binding to both WT and mutant proteins. A one-step unfolding
transition was observed for WT, with a Tm of 61.3 °C, suggesting predominant stabilization of domain
D1 (Figure D). Whereas only a marginal increase
in the Tm of D56S was observed on urate
binding, W11F had a Tm of 28.8 °C,
an increase of ∼4 °C compared to that of the protein alone,
while R63S and R89N were significantly stabilized (Tm of 64.1 and 62.9 °C, respectively; Figure E).

Changes in thermal stability of MftR and
mutant proteins were equivalent
when measuring Tm for stoichiometric ratios
of protein and DNA representing either cognate site (mftrO and mftpO) (Figure G–H,
Table ). WT MftR in complex with either mftrO or mftpO still exhibited a two-step
unfolding transition, and both D1 (Tm =
52.7 °C) and D2 (Tm = 60.9 °C)
were modestly stabilized as compared to WT MftR alone. W11F when mixed
with mftRO and mftpO showed aggregation.
In contrast, D56S was modestly destabilized on DNA binding (Tm ∼48 °C), while the Tm for R63S and R89N was not significantly altered.

Mutations
Reduce Affinity for mftO
To determine whether
the mutations affect DNA binding, EMSAs were
performed with MftO, which contains both cognate
sites. When experiments were performed at room temperature, no DNA
binding was observed for W11F, likely due to its thermal instability.
EMSAs with this mutant were therefore performed at 4 °C. All
mutants except R89N bound DNA, forming two clearly distinguishable
complexes (C1 and C2; , Figure S3). The failure of R89N to bind DNA is consistent with
the effect of the equivalent mutation in HucR and PecS (for Kd values measured for HucR and PecS variants
harboring the equivalent substitutions, see , Table S3)., All other mutations
significantly reduced DNA binding affinity, with W11F yielding a Kd that is 4 times higher, D56S a Kd that is approximately 140 times higher, and R63S a Kd approximately 10-fold higher than that of
WT MftR (Table  and , Figure S3). The observation that two complexes
are formed with MftO that contains two MftR sites
(yet would be long enough for nonspecific binding of additional proteins)
suggests retention of specificity. That all mutant proteins exhibit
a comparable modest negative cooperativity is also consistent with
a common mode of binding.

Binding Affinity
and Inhibition Constant
of MftR and Variants
 	Kd (nM)	nH	IC50 (mM)	
MftR	1.6 ± 0.1	0.8 ± 0.1	3.0 ± 0.1	
W11F	6.3 ± 0.5	0.6 ± 0.2	5.9 ± 0.8	
D56S	220.0 ± 1.8	0.7 ± 0.1	3.1 ± 0.1	
R63S	15.1 ± 1.3	0.9 ± 0.1	8.0 ± 0.2	
Considering the gradual increase
in fluorescence, reflecting the
thermal instability of WT MftR above 30 °C, DNA binding was examined
at 37 °C. At this temperature, which would correspond to the
body temperature of a mammalian host, a 4-fold higher Kd (6.9 ± 1.9 nM) was observed compared to that at
room temperature (, Figure S3F). To evaluate if such behavior is specific to MftR,
we also performed this experiment with HucR. No difference was observed
in Kd as a function of temperature (1.0
± 0.2 nM at room temperature and 1.2 ± 0.2 nM at 37 °C; , Figure S4).

Taken
together, these data show that the effect on DNA binding
of MftR mutations is different from that of the equivalent mutations
in HucR or PecS. For HucR, only substitution of Arg in the DNA recognition
helix has a significant effect on DNA binding, causing the mutant
protein to bind DNA nonspecifically and with low affinity, while the
other three substitutions have little effect on DNA binding affinity
(, Table S3). Similarly, substitution of Arg in the recognition
helix of PecS abolishes DNA binding. While
substitution of MftR residue R63 resulted in an ∼10-fold decrease
in DNA binding affinity, only a marginal (∼2-fold) decrease
in binding affinity is observed when the equivalent mutation is made
in PecS. Trp in α1 of PecS is important for folding, as evidenced
by its substitution causing protein aggregation, but substitution
of Asp results in only a modest decrease in DNA-binding affinity,
in contrast to the ∼140-fold decrease observed for MftR-D56S.
In addition, our data indicate that DNA binding is reduced at the
physiological temperature associated with host infection; in contrast,
binding of HucR to its cognate site is not affected by an increase
in temperature to 37 °C.

For both HucR and PecS, mutagenesis
of individual residues in the
ligand-binding pocket (corresponding to MftR substitutions W11F, D56S,
and R63S) largely abolishes the response to urate., The effect of urate on DNA binding by the equivalent MftR mutants
was therefore measured. With increasing concentration of urate, the
binding of each mutant to mftO was attenuated (, Figure S5). IC50 was equivalent for WT and D56S (Table )
with W11F and R63S exhibiting an IC50 only 2 and 2.5 times
higher than that of WT MftR (Table ). The
ability of urate to attenuate DNA binding by mutant proteins is consistent
with the observed increase in thermal stability on ligand binding.
Evidently, the association of ligand with MftR is different from that
observed for HucR and PecS and is consistent with the previously reported
ability of related ligands to disrupt DNA binding by MftR.

Fluorescence Quenching
of MftR and
Mutants with the Addition of Urate
 	K (μM)	nH	
MftR	6.1 ± 2.1	0.8 ± 0.1	
W11F	2.4 ± 2.0	0.7 ± 0.2	
D56S	8.4 ± 2.5	0.8 ± 0.2	
R63S	6.6 ± 0.5	2.9 ± 1.3	
R89N	4.8 ± 2.0	1.0 ± 0.2	
The binding of urate to MftR variants was further investigated
by measurement of intrinsic tryptophan fluorescence. The fluorescence
intensities of WT and mutants were variable in the region of 310 to
440 nm (Figure A). For W11F, the fluorescence
was almost negligible, which suggests that it is the primary source
of fluorescence in WT MftR, which has an additional tryptophan (W98).
W98 is predicted to be located in the loop near the DNA recognition
helix; by comparison, HucR has an additional tryptophan in α3
that is quenched by a nearby Tyr. Presumably,
the fluorescence of W98 is likewise quenched. The other mutants also exhibited lower fluorescence intensity at
325 nm compared to that of WT. Mutant W11F and D56S displayed maximum
fluorescence at 327 nm, while R63S and R89N had fluorescence maxima
at 329 nm. These data indicate a change in the environment of tryptophan
in the mutant proteins.

Fluorescence of MftR and mutant proteins and
response to urate.
(A) Fluorescence profiles of MftR mutants. Mutation of W11 to F (solid
black dashed line) causes a significant loss in the intrinsic fluorescence.
WT MftR (●), D56S (×), R63S (solid gray line), and R89N
(◊). (B) Fluorescence quenching upon urate addition. WT MftR
profile is shown as a solid black line and open square with ×.
W11F (+) profile with dashed line, and D56S (⧫) with gray lines.

Titration of protein variants
with increasing concentration of
urate resulted in a concentration-dependent fluorescence quenching
at 325 nm (Figure B and Table ). None of the individual mutations significantly altered
the affinity for urate, which is consistent with the ability of urate
to attenuate DNA complex formation. The ∼6 μM affinity
for urate also rationalizes the modest effect of 6 μM urate
in modulating protein stability, as only ∼50% of MftR would
have urate bound at this concentration of ligand. It may also indicate
that occupancy of both ligand-binding sites is required for changes
in protein stability to be manifest.

Discussion
Differential
Upregulation of mftR and mftP in
the Presence of Urate
When B. thailandensis cultures were grown in the presence of urate, mftR and mftP genes were upregulated ∼5- and
14-fold, respectively (Figure ). The significant
attenuation of MftR binding to the mftR-mftP intergenic
region in vitro on binding to urate supports the
conclusion that MftR controls the expression of these genes in vivo (, Figure S5). Considering that MftR has equivalent affinity for each
of the identified palindromes and that urate is equally potent as
an antagonist of DNA binding to each site (Figure ), we infer that the differential upregulation of mftR and mftP is not due to preferential
association of MftR with either cognate site. Instead, different promoter
strengths of the divergent promoters may be responsible for the observed
differences in gene expression. We also cannot rule out the possibility
that other transcription factors contribute to the observed regulation in vivo.

Domain Organization of MftR
The
structures of MarR
proteins reveal a highly conserved fold in which three helices from
each monomer (corresponding to HucR helices α2, α6, and
α7) form a tightly intertwined dimer interface, with the central
helices α3, α4, and α5 forming the DNA binding domain
(Figures –).,,,, The sequence conservation and secondary
structure composition of MftR is consistent with conservation of this
overall fold (, Figure
2A). The two-step unfolding transition observed for MftR therefore
most likely reflects independent unfolding transitions for these two
regions of the protein. A three-state unfolding of the MftR dimer
may arise from native dimer N2 undergoing a transition
to a partly unfolded dimeric intermediate I2, followed
by the formation of unfolded monomers U (N2 ↔ I2 ↔ 2U). Alternatively, dissociation of monomers may
precede unfolding (N2 ↔ 2I ↔ 2U).

The
MftR residues W11, D56, R63, and R89 are predicted to occupy equivalent
positions in HucR and MftR. In the structure of HucR, residues corresponding
to R89 (α5) and D56 (α3) form a salt bridge that participates
in anchoring the DNA recognition helix α5 (dark green in Figure ) to α3 (yellow; Figure ). The failure of R89N to yield a detectable complex with DNA in
EMSA is consistent with this interpretation and with the observation
that the equivalent substitution in HucR and PecS likewise results
in severely compromised DNA binding., D56S also
binds DNA with significantly reduced affinity, suggesting that the
interaction of D56 with R89 is important for proper disposition of
the DNA recognition helix. The observed modest destabilization of
D56S on DNA binding is consistent with its lower DNA binding affinity,
which may imply the need for conformational changes that disrupt stabilizing
contacts in order to position DNA recognition helices for optimal
DNA interaction.

On the basis of these considerations, the 51–53
°C
melting temperature of the D56S and R89N mutants is predicted to reflect
disruption of a salt bridge and therefore a destabilization of the
DNA binding lobe, leading to the inference that domain D1 (Tm ∼ 49 °C) in WT MftR corresponds
to the dimer interface, while D2 (Tm ∼
58 °C) represents the DNA binding region. This inference is supported
by the observation that denaturation of D1 is associated with only
a modest change in ellipticity (, Figure S2A) but a significant increase in binding of SYPRO Orange
(Figure A); if the dimer interface is “loosened”
with an increase in temperature to yield a partly unfolded dimeric
species, or if MftR monomers dissociate, overall helical content may
not be significantly affected, whereas hydrophobic patches may be
exposed to which the dye can bind. R63 is predicted to reside at the
end of α3 (dark green; Figure ), near
W11 from α1 of the second monomer, which braces the long helices
α6 that connect the dimerization and DNA-binding regions of
the protein (Figure ). The location of these
residues at the juncture of these two protein regions would rationalize
the more severe destabilization observed when these residues are substituted
to generate R63S (Tm ∼43 °C)
and W11F (Tm ∼25 °C), with
melting temperatures reflecting destabilization of both MftR regions
D1 and D2. Taken together, our data suggest a three-state unfolding
of MftR in which the first transition corresponds to an unfolding
event involving the dimer interface that either leads to a partially
folded dimeric intermediate or to complete disentanglement of monomers.
These possibilities cannot be distinguished based on these experiments.
The second transition would then correspond to unfolding of the transient
intermediate, an event that includes unfolding of the DNA-binding
lobes.

Thermal unfolding of MftR begins above ∼30 °C,
as evidenced
by a gradual increase in fluorescence of the SYPRO Orange reporter
of protein unfolding. Consistent with this observation, MftR binds
DNA with ∼4-fold reduced affinity at 37 °C. RovA, a MarR-type
regulator from Yersinia pseudotuberculosis that participates
in the establishment of infection, was recently reported to have a
thermosensing loop in the dimerization domain. Upon host entry, the thermal upshift results in a structural
rearrangement in the RovA dimer, which leads to attenuated DNA binding
and regulation of virulence-associated processes. In RovA, the residues responsible for reduced DNA binding
at 37 °C reside in the loop between the two C-terminal helices
that constitute the dimerization domain (corresponding to HucR helices
α6 and α7). MftR also binds DNA less efficiently at 37
°C compared to that at room temperature. The inference that the
less stable domain D1 corresponds to the dimerization region suggests
that MftR likewise responds to a thermal upshift by conformational
changes in the dimerization domain that result in attenuated DNA binding.
We also note that the ∼4-fold reduction in DNA-binding affinity
observed when RovA binds its cognate sites at 37 °C is comparable
to the observed increase in Kd for MftR binding from 1.6 to 6.9 nM. Communication between
DNA-binding lobes and the dimer interface is also reflected in the
modest stabilization of both domains D1 and D2 on DNA binding (Table ).

When Burkholderia species
invade plants or mammals,
an oxidative burst is encountered during which urate may be produced.
Urate production is therefore a signal for successful host colonization.
In addition, infection of mammalian species would be associated with
a thermal upshift. Our data suggest that DNA binding by MftR is attenuated
both by exposure to the physiological temperature associated with
infection of mammalian hosts and by urate, resulting in upregulation
of mftR and mftP. The observation
that mftP and mftR transcripts are
readily detectable when cells are grown in the absence of urate at
37 °C (Figure A) is consistent with the
inference that repression may be more efficient at lower temperatures.

Ligand Binding to MftR
Structures of MarR homologues
in complex with ligand reveal a shared ligand-binding pocket in a
deep crevice between the dimerization domain and the DNA-binding lobes.,, This crevice corresponds to the
urate-binding pocket identified in HucR and PecS., That MftR binds urate with modest negative cooperativity is consistent
with the existence of two sites; such negative cooperativity of urate
binding was also observed for HucR and PecS.,,

MftR conserves the N-terminal helix
and the four residues previously shown to be involved in urate binding
and attenuation of DNA binding by HucR and PecS., The proposed mode of urate interaction with HucR involves the Trp
of α1 and Arg of α3 interacting with urate by a hydrogen
bond and a salt bridge, respectively. At the bottom of the binding
pocket, Arg of the recognition helix (α5) forms a salt bridge
with Asp of α3; the binding of urate would cause a charge repulsion
of Asp in α3 that would in turn displace the DNA recognition
helix α5, resulting in attenuated DNA binding. For MftR, however, it was already reported that hypoxanthine
and xanthine also inhibit DNA binding, albeit less efficiently than
urate. This contrasts with the observation
that these ligands have little or no effect on DNA binding by HucR
and PecS., Since hypoxanthine is uncharged, this suggests
that binding of ligand to MftR induces a conformational change to
attenuate DNA binding without a strict requirement for charge repulsion;
consistent with this inference, D56 can be substituted without significantly
affecting urate-mediated attenuation of DNA binding. The ability of
the uncharged xanthine to attenuate DNA binding by MftR also suggests
that a salt bridge to R63 in α3 is not critical for ligand binding
and is consistent with the observation that this residue can be substituted
without loss of urate binding. R89 in the recognition helix is not
predicted to interact directly with the ligand; this prediction is
borne out by the observation that the R89N mutant binds urate with
an affinity comparable to that of WT MftR.

Urate-bound MftR
showed a one-step melting curve with a Tm of ∼61 °C, suggesting predominant
stabilization of domain D1 (Tm ∼49
°C), inferred to correspond to an unfolding event involving the
dimerization region or dissociation of MftR monomers. Such stabilizing
interactions might derive from direct contacts to residues in helices
α1, α2, or α6 that are predicted to line the binding
pocket based on the HucR structure; in addition to W11 from α1,
candidate residues include a His from α6 and a Gln from α2.
By comparison, binding of the anionic phenolic ligand protocatechuate
to PcaV involves direct contacts to His and Arg from helix one (corresponding
to HucR helix α2). Notably, urate
binding to the R63S and R89N mutants completely reversed the destabilization
imposed by these substitutions and resulted in a Tm comparable to that observed for WT MftR in complex with
urate. This suggests that urate binds between the DNA binding lobe
and dimer interface, resulting in stabilization of both the DNA-binding
lobe and the dimer interface. In contrast, urate binding only modestly
stabilized W11F (Tm ∼29 °C);
evidently, stabilizing contacts to the ligand were insufficient to
overcome the destabilization imposed by the W11F substitution. Urate
binding also did not stabilize D56S, suggesting that both stabilizing
contacts to the DNA binding lobe (perhaps residues in α3) and
the dimerization region were compromised by this mutation. Taken together,
our data suggest the binding of urate in a cleft that bridges the
dimerization and DNA-binding regions likely by contacts to residues
in helices α1, α2, and α6 from the dimer interface
and α3 from the DNA-binding HTH motif. Urate binding to MftR
is predicted to lead to structural rearrangements, which attenuate
DNA binding; the significantly altered unfolding transitions observed
on ligand binding are consistent with this premise.

Phylogenetic
analyses show that UrtR proteins cluster together,
separate from other MarR homologues (Figure  and ref ()). We
have also shown that sequence conservation of UrtR DNA recognition
helices correlates with conservation of cognate sites in gene promoters. However, UrtR proteins appear to have diverged
with regard to ligand specificity and mode of ligand binding, despite
apparently featuring a shared ligand-binding pocket in the cleft that
bridges the DNA-binding lobes and the dimerization region. D. radiodurans HucR, which regulates the expression of a
uricase gene, and PecS, which controls the expression of a gene encoding
the efflux pump PecM, are specific for urate, with little or no effect
of other intermediates in purine metabolism.,,, MftR features
relaxed ligand specificity, but urate remains the most efficient ligand
as measured by its ability to attenuate DNA binding. In contrast, S. coelicolor encodes another
UrtR homologue, TamR, which is responsible for regulating the activity
of genes encoding proteins involved in maintaining flux through the
citric acid cycle: DNA binding by TamR is attenuated by trans-aconitate and closely related compounds but not by urate.

Four conserved residues are characteristic
of UrtR homologues:
amino acids corresponding to MftR residues R89 and D56 appear to be
important for positioning the DNA recognition helices properly, as
reflected in attenuated DNA binding on their substitution. In addition,
the negative charge of Asp is necessary for conformational changes
associated with attenuated DNA binding in HucR and PecS on binding
the negatively charged urate;, in MftR, such charge
repulsion is not required. Tryptophan
in α1 may be conserved among UrtR homologues primarily for structural
reasons, as reflected in the significant thermal instability of MftR-W11F
and in the observed aggregation of the equivalent PecS mutant. Similarly, the residue corresponding to R63
in MftR may be structurally important, as evidenced by the thermal
instability imposed on its substitution. In HucR and PecS, however,
this residue is also important for conferring specificity for the
negatively charged urate. Taken together, we propose that the four
residues that are characteristic of UrtR proteins are conserved primarily
for structural reasons. Ligand specificity is conferred by select
residues lining the identified ligand-binding pocket; in HucR and
PecS, these residues include amino acids corresponding to W11, D56,
and R63, while the relaxed ligand specificity of MftR requires the
interaction of bound ligand with distinct residues.

In conclusion,
our data suggest that MftR shares with other urate-responsive
MarR homologues a ligand-binding pocket that bridges the DNA-binding
lobes and the dimerization region. Residues seen to be strictly conserved
among UrtR proteins may play mainly structural roles, although they
may also participate in conferring specificity for the negatively
charged ligand urate. In contrast, the relaxed ligand specificity
of MftR is consistent with other residues lining the ligand-binding
pocket participating in direct contacts to the ligand. The two-step
thermal unfolding transition of MftR is unusual; we propose that the
thermal upshift associated with infection of a mammalian host leads
to structural rearrangements in the dimer interface that manifest
in attenuated DNA binding. MftR may therefore respond to both the
ligand and an increase in ambient temperature by attenuated DNA binding
and upregulation of the gene encoding the MFTP efflux pump.

Supporting Information Available
Primer sequences,
melting temperatures
for all MftR variants as determined by CD spectroscopy, apparent dissociation
constants for HucR and PecS mutants binding to their respective cognate
sites, SDS–PAGE gels of purified MftR variants and dimers produced
after glutaraldehyde cross-linking, CD spectra and melting curves
for all MftR variants, EMSAs of MftR variants binding to MftO, HucR binding to its cognate site at room temperature and 37 °C,
and effect of urate on DNA binding by MftR variants. This material
is available free of charge via the Internet at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bi500219t_si_001.pdf

This work
was
supported by National Institutes of Health grant 1R15GM107825 (to
AG).

The authors declare no
competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
We thank Professor Evgueni E. Nesterov
for the use of his
spectrofluorometer and spectrophotometer and Professor Claudia Husseneder
for the use of the Nanodrop. We thank Dinesh K. Deochand for purified
HucR protein and Chinmay V. Tikhe for assistance with the Nanodrop.

Abbreviations
EMSAelectrophoretic mobility shift
assay

MarRmultiple
antibiotic resistance regulator

MftRmajor facilitator transport regulator

MFTPmajor facilitator transport
protein

MFSmajor
facilitator superfamily

ROSreactive oxygen species

UrtRurate-responsive transcriptional regulator

