

   
BiochemistryBiochemistrybibichawBiochemistry0006-29601520-4995American
Chemical Society 10.1021/bi501011mArticleElectrostatic Properties of Complexes along a DNA
Glycosylase Damage Search Pathway Cravens Shannen
L. Hobson Matthew Stivers James T. *Department
of Pharmacology
and Molecular Sciences, The Johns Hopkins
University School of Medicine, 725 North Wolfe Street, Baltimore, Maryland 21205-2185, United States* E-mail: jstivers@jhmi.edu. Phone: (410) 502-2758. Fax: (410) 955-3023.19 11 2015 19 11 2014 09 12 2014 53 48 7680 7692 12 08 2014 13 10 2014 Copyright © 2014 American
Chemical Society2014American
Chemical SocietyThis is an open access article published under an ACS AuthorChoice License, which permits copying and redistribution of the article or any adaptations for non-commercial purposes.

Human uracil DNA glycosylase (hUNG)
follows an extended reaction
coordinate for locating rare uracil bases in genomic DNA. This process
begins with diffusion-controlled engagement of undamaged DNA, followed
by a damage search step in which the enzyme remains loosely associated
with the DNA chain (translocation), and finally, a recognition step
that allows the enzyme to efficiently bind and excise uracil when
it is encountered. At each step along this coordinate, the enzyme
must form DNA interactions that are highly specialized for either
rapid damage searching or catalysis. Here we make extensive measurements
of hUNG activity as a function of salt concentration to dissect the
thermodynamic, kinetic, and electrostatic properties of key enzyme
states along this reaction coordinate. We find that the interaction
of hUNG with undamaged DNA is electrostatically driven at a physiological
concentration of potassium ions (ΔGelect = −3.5 ± 0.5 kcal mol–1), with only
a small nonelectrostatic contribution (ΔGnon = −2.0 ± 0.2 kcal mol–1).
In contrast, the interaction with damaged DNA is dominated by the
nonelectrostatic free energy term (ΔGnon = −7.2 ± 0.1 kcal mol–1), yet retains
the nonspecific electrostatic contribution (ΔGelect = −2.3 ± 0.2 kcal mol–1). Stopped-flow kinetic experiments established that the salt sensitivity
of damaged DNA binding originates from a reduction of kon, while koff is weakly dependent
on salt. Similar findings were obtained from the salt dependences
of the steady-state kinetic parameters, where the diffusion-controlled kcat/Km showed a
salt dependence similar to kon, while kcat (limited by product release) was weakly
dependent on salt. Finally, the salt dependence of translocation between
two uracil sites separated by 20 bp in the same DNA chain was indistinguishable
from that of kon. This result suggests
that the transition-state for translocation over this spacing resembles
that for DNA association from bulk solution and that hUNG escapes
the DNA ion cloud during translocation. These findings provide key
insights into how the ionic environment in cells influences the DNA
damage search pathway.

National Institutes of Health, United Statesdocument-id-old-9bi501011mdocument-id-new-14bi-2014-01011mccc-priceThis work was
supported by the National Institute of Health Grants T32 GM 8403-23
and RO1 GM056834 (to J.T.S.). Shannen Cravens was supported in part
by NIH Grant RO1 GM056834 and National Science Foundation CHE1307275
(to J.T.S.).



   
DNA glycosylases
initiate the
base excision repair pathway by localizing to a specific lesion site
and catalytically cleaving the glycosidic bond of a damaged base.
Different glycosylases can be highly specialized for the removal of
specific lesions that in some cases vary only subtly from native bases.5,6 Achievement of high enzymatic specificity for damaged sites as well
as rapid searching of abundant undamaged DNA sequences requires highly
optimized thermodynamic and kinetic interactions with both specific
and nonspecific sequences. The basis for this statement is straightforward:
if the enzyme binds too tightly to nonspecific DNA sequences, the
residence time will be too long to efficiently scan the entire genome
before the next replication event, while if interactions are too weak,
insufficient time will be spent inspecting individual DNA base pairs,
leading to overlooked base lesions.7,8 Determining
the factors that contribute to the molecular recognition of both specific
and nonspecific DNA sequences can shed light on how these enzymes
have optimized their scan-and-repair mechanisms under solution conditions
found in human cells.

It is generally accepted that the DNA
glycosylase damage search
process involves two major modes: an associativea mode that involves tracking along the DNA using
a loosely associated enzyme state (often called “sliding”)
and a dissociative mode that involves intermittent
dissociation and reassociation of the enzyme with the DNA chain (“hopping”).4,9−21 Since most studies of the damage search mechanism have used dilute,
low-salt solutions,11,12,22,23 a key unknown is how the individual nonspecific
and specific complexes respond to the high salt concentrations encountered
in the cell nucleus. A general understanding of such electrostatic
effects is important given the generally large impact salt concentration
has on the kinetic and thermodynamic properties of many enzyme-DNA
complexes.5,6,24−27

Counterion condensation (CC) theory attributes the electrostatic
component of the protein–DNA binding free energy to the cratic
entropy of mixing. In this view, during binding to the phosphate backbone
the cationic side chains of the protein displace cations from the
DNA ion cloud into bulk solution.7,8,27−29 As the bulk salt concentration
is increased, the cratic entropy of mixing becomes less favorable
because the ion gradient between the DNA ion cloud and bulk solution
is reduced. These effects are described by eq 1,7,8,27−29 where the term log Kanon accounts
for the nonelectrostatic contribution to the free energy of binding,
and the second term reflects the electrostatic component, where N is the total number of counterions displaced during binding.  1    These counterions
may be cations released
from the DNA (ZΨ) or tightly bound anions (β)
that are displaced from cationic side chains of the protein. In this
formalism, Z is equal to the number of DNA phosphate
groups in contact with the bound protein, and Ψ is the fraction
of a cation bound per phosphate group according to polyelectrolyte
theory (Ψ ≈ 0.64 for short DNA oligos).30−32 A feature of this model is that extrapolation of the binding energy
to 1 M salt makes the electrostatic term equal to zero, allowing the
nonelectrostatic free energy component to be estimated. This approach,
though simplistic in terms of its dissection of the nonelectrostatic
and electrostatic terms,28,33,34 provides useful parameters that describe the driving forces governing
the stability of various protein–DNA complexes on the damage
recognition pathways of DNA glycosylases. It should be noted that
CC theory focuses solely on effects derived from ion displacement
and does not explicitly take into account the effect of ion concentration
dependent changes in protein and DNA hydration. However, it has previously
been established that changes in water activity do not occur with
increasing concentrations of typical monovalent salts, and consequently,
that electrostatic effects can be probed independently from changes
in hydration.35

In this study, we
use CC theory to understand how each transient
complex on the damage search pathway of human uracil DNA glycosylase
(hUNG) responds to changes in salt concentration (Figure 1). We measured the salt concentration dependences
of the thermodynamic and kinetic parameters for formation of both
nonspecific and specific DNA complexes and the effect of salt on steady-state
catalysis by hUNG. Finally, we make the first measurements of how
the electrostatic environment of DNA impacts intramolecular DNA translocation
by hUNG between uracil sites separated by 20 bp. The results show
that an ionic environment approximating that of the cell nucleus enhances
the specificity of hUNG but significantly diminishes the efficiency
of facilitated diffusion by the dissociative (“hopping”)
pathway, but not the associative (“sliding”) pathway.
The implications of these findings to the damage search process in
human cells are discussed.

Figure 1 Human UNG (hUNG) DNA search and repair pathway
is composed of four
transient states: stationary states where the enzyme is engaged with
nonspecific (DN) or specific uracilated sequences (DS), and two mobile states where the enzyme can translocate
along DNA via associative or dissociative pathways of facilitated
diffusion. Nonspecific and specific complexes must have distinct interactions
that facilitate efficient recognition and repair (see text). The DN complex is characterized primarily by contacts with the phosphate
backbone, while the DS complex involves additional nonpolar
and hydrogen bonding interactions with the uracil base (see Figures 2A and 3A). The overall transfer
probability between two uracil lesions is defined as the sum of two
pathways: Ptrans = Passoc + Pdiss, where Passoc and Pdiss are the probabilities
of transfer via the associative and dissociative pathways, respectively.
When uracils are spaced far enough apart such that all successful
transfers occur via at least one dissociation event, this equation
reduces to Ptrans = Pdiss. Kinetically, Pdiss is
defined as the product of two probabilities: Pdiss = [koff/(kassoc + koff)][kreturn/(kbulk + kreturn)]. The first term describes the probability that
hUNG will dissociate from a nonspecific DNA site as opposed to making
an associative step along the DNA, and the second term gives the likelihood
that the enzyme, once dissociated, escapes to the bulk solvent (kbulk) rather than reassociating with the DNA
chain (kreturn) to complete transfer by
the dissociative pathway.

Experimental Methods
Expression and Purification of hUNG
The catalytic domain
of wild-type, N-terminal truncated hUNG (residues 82–304) was
cloned into a pET-21a vector and expressed in Bl21-DE3 pLysS Escherichia coli cells. Cells containing the hUNG encoding
vector were grown in 2 L of LB medium at 37 °C to an optical
density (D600) of 0.5, then hUNG expression
was induced at 25 °C by the addition of 0.25 mM IPTG, and the
cells were grown at 25 °C overnight. The cells were harvested
by centrifugation and frozen at −80 °C overnight. Cells
were resuspended in lysis buffer (50 mM Tris-acetate pH 7.0, 10 mM
NaCl, 5% glycerol, 0.1% Triton-X-100, 1 mM EDTA, 1 mM DTT) followed
by addition of lysozyme, 5 mM MgCl2, and DNase1. The supernatant
was then clarified by centrifugation at 40000g for
60 min at 4 °C and directly loaded onto an anion exchange column
(UNO-Q12, BioRad) that had been preequilibrated with Buffer A (50
mM Tris-Acetate pH 7.0, 10 mM NaCl, 1 mM DTT). The flow through containing
hUNG was loaded onto a Mono-S cation exchange column (GE Healthcare)
preequlibrated with Buffer A. hUNG was then purified by gradient elution
with Buffer A containing 800 mM NaCl. Fractions containing hUNG were
dialyzed and concentrated into 10 mM sodium phosphate pH 7.5, 300
mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 1 mM DTT, 25% glycerol and passed through a gel
filtration column using BioRad P-100 resin and eluted in 10 mM sodium
phosphate pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl. The purified protein was then diluted
to final buffer conditions of 10 mM sodium phosphate, 110 mM NaCl,
20% glycerol and stored at −80 °C. The concentrations
of hUNG stock solutions were determined using the absorbance at 280
nm and an extinction coefficient of 33.68 mM–1 cm–1.

Oligonucleotide Preparation
1-[2-Deoxy-5-O-(4,4′-dimethoxytrityl)-2-fluoro-1-β-arabinofuranosyl]uracil
was previously synthesized.4,9−21,36 The specific substrate (DS) was synthesized using standard phosphoramidite chemistry
on an Applied Biosystems 390; however, the coupling time for the addition
of the fluorinated uracil nucleoside phosphoramidite was increased
to 10 min. The size, purity, and nucleotide composition of DS were assessed by denaturing polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis with
visualization by crystal violet staining and MALDI mass spectrometry.
All other oligonucleotides sequences were purchased from either Integrated
DNA technologies (http://www.idtdna.com) or Eurofin (http://www.operon.com) and purified in house by denaturing
polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (PAGE). Concentrations of solutions
were determined by the absorbance at 260 nm using nearest neighbor
extinction coefficients. Characterization of the previously synthesized
phosphoramidite and all oligonucleotide sequences used in this study
are listed in the Supplementary Methods, Supporting
Information.

Experimental Conditions
Most experiments
were conducted
at 20 °C in Buffer B (20 mM potassium phosphate (pH 7.5), 0.002%
Brij 35 detergent (Sigma-Aldrich), 1 mM DTT) unless otherwise stated.
The potassium phosphate stock was brought to pH 7.5 using concentrated
KOH; this resulted in a final potassium concentration of 36 mM. Site
transfer experiments were conducted at 20 °C in Buffer C (20
mM HEPES (pH 7.5), 0.002% Brij 35 detergent (Sigma-Aldrich), 3 mM
EDTA (added from a 0.5 M stock at pH 8.0), 1 mM DTT). HEPES stock
was brought to pH 7.5 using concentrated KOH; this resulted in a final
potassium concentration of 12 mM. Higher potassium concentrations
for both buffers were achieved by addition of either KCl, KGlu, or
KF.

Dissociation Constants for DNA Binding Using Fluorescence Measurements
Binding of hUNG to nonspecific DNA (DN) was measured
by fluorescence anisotropy with a SPEX Fluoromax 3 spectrofluorometer
at 20 °C (excitation wavelength of 494 nm, emission wavelength
of 518 nm). Concentrated hUNG in Buffer B was titrated into a cuvette
containing 100 nM of fluorescein labeled DNA in Buffer B. After each
addition, the solution was allowed to equilibrate for 4 min inside
the fluorometer, and three measurements were averaged. For dissociation
constants (1/Ka) of &gt;6 μM, values
were determined by diluting a solution of concentrated hUNG and 100
nM labeled DNA in Buffer B with a solution of 100 nM labeled DNA only.
Potassium concentrations were adjusted by addition of KCl, KGlu, or
KF to Buffer B to sample a range of 36–170 mM. Temperature
dependence of the nonspecific binding affinity was measured using
the same experimental procedure at additional temperatures of 10,
15, and 25 °C in the presence of 36 mM and 150 mM K+ using KGlu. All data were then fitted using eq 2, where A0 and Af are the minimal and maximal anisotropy values, respectively. 2    

Binding
of hUNG to specific DNA (DS) was followed by an increase
in the fluorescence of 2-aminopurine
(2-AP). Emission was recorded over the wavelength range of 330–500
nm using an excitation wavelength of 310 nm, 0.25 s integration time,
and averaging of three scans. Background corrected fluorescence intensity
at 370 nm was plotted against hUNG concentration and fitted using
eq 2. Similar results were obtained by integrating
the entire emission spectrum.

Stopped-Flow Kinetic Measurements
Stopped-flow fluorescence
experiments were performed at 20 °C in Buffer B using an Applied
Photophysics device in two-syringe mode (dead time = 2 ms). The dissociation
and association kinetics for specific DNA (DS) were followed
using 2-AP fluorescence changes using an excitation wavelength of
310 nm and a 360 nm cut-on filter. Ten to fifteen kinetic traces were
averaged to produce an acceptable signal-to-noise ratio. All bimolecular
association reactions were performed under second-order conditions
with equivalent concentrations (400 nM or 600 nM) of both the enzyme
and DNA well above the 1/Ka to ensure
irreversibility of the binding event. Higher specific DNA concentrations
were used at higher salt due to increased background fluorescence
of KGlu. Data were then linearized as a function of unbound DNA concentration
and fitted using the second order rate equation (eq 3), where A0 and At are the initial and final unbound DNA concentrations,
respectively. 3  

Dissociation kinetics were measured
by mixing a solution containing both DS and saturating
amounts of hUNG with an equal volume of a concentrated solution of
duplex DNA containing an abasic site (aDNA) to ensure irreversible
trapping of dissociated enzyme molecules. Data were fitted using a
single exponential decay expression Ft = ΔF exp(−kofft) + C, where Ft is the voltage at time t, ΔF is the amplitude of the voltage change, and C is a constant offset. All other relevant specifications for the
individual experiments are described in the figure legends and text.

Steady-State Kinetic Measurements
Time-dependent increase
in the steady-state fluorescence of DNA containing a uracil lesion
adjacent to 2-AP (PUA-30) was followed using a SPEX Fluoromax 3 spectrofluorometer
in the time base mode as previously described.37 Emission was observed at 370 nm using an excitation wavelength
of 315 nm and a sampling interval of 10 s. Michaelis–Menten
parameters were determined from hyperbolic fits of the initial rates
as a function of DNA substrate concentration.

Intramolecular Site Transfer
Assay
The methods of Schonhoft
and Stivers4 were followed using a substrate
with two uracil sties spaced by 20 bp such that all intramolecular
site transfers occurred by the dissociative pathway.4 Stock solutions of DNA containing either a 5′ or
3′ 32P end label were generated by incubation of
a DNA strand with [γ32P]ATP (PerkinElmer) and T4
polynucleotide kinase (New England Biolabs) or [α32P]ATP (PerkinElmer) and terminal transferase (New England Biolabs),
respectively. The 5′- and 3′-labeled strands were hybridized
by heating to 95 °C in a heating block for 20 min and allowing
the block to cool to room temperature. Unincorporated [γ32P] and [α32P]ATP were removed by gel filtration.

Each reaction of the site transfer assay contained 40 nM 32P-labeled duplex DNA substrate, composed of mixing equal amounts
of 5′- and 3′-labeled DNA, in Buffer C. Site transfer
experiments were conducted in Buffer C due to the reduced intramolecular
site transfer (Ptrans) observed when phosphate
buffer was used (Buffer B). We attribute this affect to competitive
inhibition by phosphate dianion. The reaction was then initiated by
the addition of hUNG to a final concentration of 5 pM and incubated
at 20 °C. At each time point, an aliquot of the reaction mix
was quenched with uracil DNA glycosylase inhibitor (UGI) at a final
concentration of 0.1 U (New England Biolabs), which rapidly and efficiently
quenched hUNG activity. Following reaction quenching, abasic sites
were cleaved by heating each aliquot at 95 °C for 10 min in the
presence of 165 mM EDA pH 8.0. The fragments were then separated on
a 12% nondenaturing polyacrylamide gel. The gel was dried, exposed
overnight to a storage phosphor screen, and imaged with a Typhoon
8600 phosphorimager (GE Healthcare). All gel images were quantified
using QuantityOne (Bio-Rad) by the box method. Background correction
was accomplished by subtracting the intensity of a portion of the
gel directly below each band from the intensity of the corresponding
band of interest.

Results
Ion Effects on Nonspecific
DNA Binding
The DNA binding
interface of hUNG consists of a well-conserved 27 Å groove with
positive electrostatic potential.38 Despite
this substantial cleft, close contact (≤3.3 Å) between
cationic groups of hUNG and the phosphate backbone are localized to
only a few sites shared in both the nonspecific and specific DNA complexes
(Figure 2A).38−40 The relatively sparse ionic contacts between hUNG and DNA leads
to the question of the nature of the thermodynamic interactions that
stabilize the nonspecific hUNG-DNA complex. To determine if interactions
between hUNG and nonspecific DNA were predominantly electrostatic
or nonelectrostatic in nature, the salt dependence of the nonspecific
equilibrium association constant (KaN) was measured at concentrations of potassium ions in the
range 36–170 mM using three different counterions (Cl–, F–, and Glu–). Different anions
were used to determine whether there was a contribution from anion
release from hUNG during formation of the nonspecific complex.32 Plots of the log [salt] against log KaN were used to determine the electrostatic
(ΔGelect) and nonelectrostatic (ΔGnon) contributions to the binding free energy,
and the number of ions (N) displaced upon hUNG-DNA
association according to eq 1.

Figure 2 Salt dependence of the
nonspecific DNA (DN) equilibrium
binding affinity. (A) Schematic of electrostatic interactions implicated
in ion release (dashed arrows) and the nonelectrostatic (solid arrows)
interactions between hUNG and nonspecific DNA (Protein Data Bank entry 2OXM,40 4MF = 4-methylindole). Using mutagenesis and NMR imino
exchange methods, the partially extruded thymine residue and its interactions
with the enzyme have been substantiated in solution using an hUNG-nonspecific
DNA complex with central T/A base pair.73,74 These studies
showed that normal T/A base pairs (not G/C) undergo enhanced imino
proton exchange when bound to hUNG and involve the residues depicted
in the graphic. Electrostatic interactions are defined by nitrogen
and oxygen atoms &lt;3.3 Å apart from DNA phosphate oxygens,
while nonelectrostatic interactions are all carbon–carbon pairs
&lt;3.9 Å apart. An additional hydrogen bond between hUNG and
the O2 of the partially extruded thymine across from 4MF was omitted
in the diagram for clarity.40 (B) Changes
in fluorescence anisotropy of DN (100 nM) as a function
of hUNG concentration at varying potassium ion concentrations (36–170
mM). Full binding curves for 81–170 mM K+ are provided
in Supplementary Figure S1, Supporting Information. (C) Dependence of Ka on the concentrations
of KGlu (triangles), KCl (circles), KF (squares). Inclusion of 500
μM MgCl2 at physiological K+ (150 mM)
had a negligible effect on the observed Ka (red triangle, see text).

Fluorescence anisotropy measurements revealed a strong KCl
dependence
of hUNG binding to nonspecific DNA (N = −3.8,
Table 1). The binding affinity was 300-fold
weaker when using 170 mM potassium chloride (1/KaN = 360 ± 50 μM) as
compared to the 36 mM potassium phosphate reference state (1/KaN = 1.3 ±
0.3 μM). The presence of small anion effects was indicated by
the observation that the slope of the salt dependence reduced to −3.2
and −3.0 for KGlu and KF (Table 1).
For comparison, the binding affinities in the presence of 170 mM of
either salt were 3-fold lower than when the same concentration of
KCl was used (1/KaN = 118 ± 5 μM) (Figure 2B, Figure S1, and Table S1, Supporting Information). The complete binding curves at high salt (81–170 mM K+) are shown in Supplementary Figure S1,
Supporting Information.

Table 1 Analysis of the Salt
Dependences of
the Thermodynamic and Kinetic Parameters Using Equation 1a
 	slope (N)b	Xnonc	
KaN	–3.2 ± 0.1	29 ± 3 M–1	
 	–3.0 ± 0.1d	38 ± 1 M–1d	
 	–3.8 ± 0.1e	3.2 ± 0.7 M–1e	
KaS	–2.1 ± 0.1f	2.29 ± 0.05 ×
105 M–1f	
 	–2.2 ± 0.3d	8.9 ± 0.5 × 104 M–1d	
konN,g	–1.5 ± 0.2	6 ± 2 × 106 M–1 s–1	
konS	–1.5 ± 0.2	6 ± 2 × 106 M–1 s–1	
koffN,h	1.4 ± 0.1	9.5 ± 0.2 × 104 s–1	
koffS	0.5 ± 0.1	24 ± 2 s–1	
kcat	0.9 ± 0.2	83 ± 12 s–1	
1/Km	–2.2 ± 0.2	1.4 ± 0.1 × 10–4 Md	
kcat/Km	–1.3 ± 0.2	5.9 ± 0.2 × 105 M–1 s–1	
Ptransi	–1.5 ± 0.3	0.00 ± 0.05	
a All experiments
were conducted using
KGlu unless otherwise noted.

b The slope (N) obtained
from nonlinear regression fitting to eq 1.

c Xnon is the extrapolated value of the indicated parameter to the condition
of 1 M [K+].

d Determined from equilibrium binding
measurements using KF.

e Determined
from equilibrium binding
measurements using KCl.

f Calculated from the ratio of the
kinetic constants konS/koffS.

g konN is assumed
equal to konS.

h Calculated from the ratio of konN/KaN.

i Ptrans is defined in terms of the ratio of kinetic constants
detailed in
the legend to Figure 1.

We also evaluated whether the nonspecific
DNA binding affinity
was affected by the addition of 500 μM MgCl2 to the
standard buffer containing 150 mM KGlu. (This approximates the concentrations
of free potassium and magnesium ions in eukaryotic cells.41,42) The binding affinity was only slightly weakened with the addition
of magnesium [1/KaN (MgCl2) = 97 ± 6 μM, versus 1/KaN = 80 ± 5
μM (no MgCl2)], indicating that monovalent cations
dominate over divalent cations under physiological conditions. Accordingly,
we performed the remainder of the experiments using monovalent salts.

As expected from CC theory, a linear dependence between log KaN and log[KCl]
was observed (eq 1, Figure 2C). The absolute value of the slope (N ≈
−4) reflects the total number of ions displaced from the DNA
(ZΨ) and hUNG (β) upon binding (N = ZΨ
+ β). This number of displaced ions is slightly greater than
the number of cations that are expected to be released based on the
theoretical value of Ψ = 0.64 cations/per DNA phosphate,27,32 and the observation that hUNG makes ionic contacts with five phosphate
groups within the backbone of nonspecific DNA [ZΨ
= (5)(0.64) ≈ 3 cations].1 This
result suggested that one anion might also be displaced from hUNG
during binding. Consistent with this suggestion, the slope decreased
to N ≈ −3 when KGlu and KF were used
(Figure 2C, Table 1).
Thus, one chloride ion and three potassium ions are likely released
from hUNG and nonspecific DNA when KCl is used as the salt.32

The above behavior of KCl, KF, and KGlu
salts is consistent with
the fact that small ions of high charge density (such as fluoride
and the carboxylate anion) interact more strongly with water than
with the ammonium and guanidinium side chain atoms of hUNG. In contrast,
the large weakly hydrated chloride anion forms weak interactions with
water and binds tightly to these protein side chains.43,44 Thus, the KCl data reflect the additional displacement of a chloride
anion from hUNG to allow DNA phosphate binding. To focus our study
on cation effects at the hUNG-DNA interface, we chose to perform all
subsequent experiments using KGlu or KF.

Extrapolating the log
linear data to a 1 M standard state for KGlu
simplifies eq 1 such that only the nonelectrostatic
binding component remains (log Kanon) (Table 1). From this simplification,
the nonelectrostatic free energy contribution to the total binding
free energy is ΔGnon = −2.0
± 0.2 kcal mol–1 (Table 2). If ΔGnon is subtracted from
the observed binding free energy at physiological salt (ΔGbind), the electrostatic contribution can be
estimated (i.e., ΔGelec = ΔGbind – ΔGnon = −3.5 ± 0.5 kcal mol–1).
This analysis shows that the formation of the nonspecific complex
at physiological salt concentration is primarily driven by electrostatic
interactions resulting in ion release.

Table 2 Electrostatic
(ΔGelec) and Nonelectrostatic (ΔGnon) Contributions to the Binding Free Energy
(ΔGbind) for Nonspecific (DN) and Specific
(DS) hUNG Complexes in the Presence of 150 mM K+a
 	DN	DS,b	
ΔGbindc (kcal mol–1)	–5.5 ± 0.3	–9.4 ± 0.1	
ΔGelecd (kcal mol–1)	–3.5 ± 0.5	–2.3 ± 0.2	
ΔGnone (kcal mol–1)	–2.0 ± 0.2	–7.2 ± 0.1	
a All values are
derived from experiments
using KGlu.

b Ka calculated
from the ratio kon/koff obtained from stopped-flow fluorescence measurements

c Calculated ΔGbind = −RT ln Ka, using Ka at 150 mM [K+].

d ΔGelec = ΔGbind – ΔGnon. ΔGelec pertains to the condition of 150 mM K+.

e ΔGnon = −RT ln Ka,
using the measured Ka at 1 M K+.

Ion Effects on the Binding
Equilibrium for Specific DNA
The electrostatic and nonelectrostatic
interactions predicted from
the crystal structure of a specific complex between hUNG and DNA are
depicted in Figure 3A.45 In general, this complex appears
to retain the electrostatic contributions that were observed in the
nonspecific complex (Figure 2A), but gains
substantial nonelectrostatic interactions arising from flipping of
the uracil base into the active site and the intercalation of a leucine
side chain into the base stack. In addition, the DNA is severely bent
in this structure leading to compression and expansion of the interphosphate
distances typically seen in B DNA.

Figure 3 Salt dependences of the association and
dissociation constants
and equilibrium binding affinity for specific DNA (DS)
determined by stopped-flow fluorescence measurements at 20 °C.
(A) Schematic of electrostatic interactions implicated in ion release
(dashed arrows) and the nonelectrostatic (solid arrows) interactions
between hUNG and specific DNA (Protein Data Bank entry 1EMH(45)). Insertion of the side chain of Leu272 into the DNA duplex
and movement of uracil into the hUNG active site results in numerous
nonelectrostatic contacts not present in the nonspecific complex.
(B) Dependence on KGlu concentration of konS (circles), koffS (triangles), the calculated KaS obtained from the ratio koffS/konS (solid squares), and
the measured KaS from equilibrium
fluorescence titrations using KF (open squares). Log koffS is plotted on the left y-axis and the remaining parameters are plotted on the right y-axis [X = KaS (M–1) and kon (M–1 s–1)]. (C) Linearized kinetic
trace of the second-order association of DS (600 nM) with
hUNG (600 nM) at 150 mM K+. Equal volume solutions of DS and hUNG of equal concentration (400–600 nM) were
mixed and the time dependent increase in 2-AP fluorescence was followed
(λex= 310 nm). The line is the best-fit to a second-order
rate equation. (D) Kinetic trace of the dissociation of hUNG from
DS at 150 mM K+. Abasic site-containing DNA
(aDNA, 5 μM) was mixed with an equal volume solution containing
0.8 μM hUNG and 0.2 μM DS and the time dependent
decrease in 2-AP fluorescence was followed (λex =
310 nm). The line is the best-fit to a single exponential decay. Controls
established that the observed rate was zero-order with respect to
DNA trap.

To evaluate the relative importance
of these specific interactions,
the salt dependence of the binding affinity for the specific substrate
(DS) was measured by monitoring the increase in 2-AP fluorescence
as a function of hUNG concentration using various concentrations of
potassium fluoride. These experiments used a 19 base pair duplex (DS) that contained the fluorescent base 2-AP adjacent to Uβ. This 2′-fluorinated uracil nucleotide prevents
glycosidic bond cleavage during the time frame of the measurements
(the fluorine is in the β anomeric configuration in this substrate
analogue).36 Upon binding of hUNG, the
uracil base is flipped into the active site, unstacking 2-AP and leading
to an increase in its fluorescence intensity.36 In these experiments KF was used because high concentrations of
KGlu introduced spectral interferences that prevented reproducible
fluorescence measurements. This substitution is justified because
the salt dependences of nonspecific DNA binding are identical in the
presence of both of these salts (Figure 2C).

For the specific substrate, a linear dependence between log KaS and the log [KF] was observed
(Figure 3B, Figure S4), but a shallower slope was observed than for the nonspecific complex
(N = −2.1, Table 1).
Although the reduced slope may indicate that fewer ions are displaced,
this conclusion is not consistent with the number of ionic contacts
observed in the crystal structure (Figure 3A). This apparent discrepancy may arise from the severe bending observed
in the specific complex, which is not accounted for by simple polyelectrolyte
theory where DNA is considered as a rod with identical phosphate-phosphate
distances.28,29,33 Regardless, Table 2 shows that the specific
complex is primarily stabilized by nonelectrostatic interactions at
a physiological salt concentration (ΔGnon = −7.2 ± 0.1 kcal mol–1,
ΔGelec = −2.2 ± 0.2
kcal mol–1). This is consistent with the structural
findings described above where hUNG interacts extensively with the
extruded uracil base and Leu272 inserts into the DNA duplex. None
of these nonelectrostatic interactions are observed in the nonspecific
complex (Figure 2A).

Salt Effects on the Kinetics
for Binding and Dissociation from
Specific DNA
Association and dissociation kinetics of the
specific DNA complex (DS) was measured by following the
changes in 2-AP fluorescence using a stopped–flow rapid kinetic
device (Figure 3C,D). To determine the salt
sensitivity of kon, we monitored the increase
in 2-AP fluorescence under irreversible second-order conditions, in
which both the enzyme and DNA were mixed in equal molar amounts (400
or 600 nM) using increasing concentrations of KGlu (36–150
mM). The large signal-to-noise ratio at these high DNA concentrations
significantly decreased the spectral interference from KGlu that was
observed in the equilibrium binding assay, where the DNA concentration
was 20-fold lower. To ensure that association was essentially irreversible
for these measurements, the hUNG and DNA concentrations were kept
well above the value for the equilibrium dissociation constant (1/KaS) at all salt concentrations. The
irreversible conditions at high salt were confirmed by measuring kon using 400 and 600 nM concentrations of both
DNA and enzyme (110 mM KGlu). These conditions resulted in kon values that were the same within the errors
of these measurements (1.0 ± 0.7 × 108 M–1 s–1 and 1.8 ± 0.1 × 108 M–1 s–1). The irreversible
nature of these association reactions was further substantiated by
the fact that the same change in voltage was observed at all salt
concentrations tested, indicating that the same degree of saturation
was reached (Supplementary Figure S2A, Supporting
Information). A linearized kinetic trace at 150 mM K+ is shown in Figure 3C, which was fitted to
eq 3 to obtain the association rate constant
[kon = (9.6 ± 0.4) × 107 M–1 s–1]. All additional
kinetic traces are shown in Supplementary Figure
S2A. This association rate increased by an order of magnitude
as the salt concentration was decreased to 36 mM [konS = (8.5 ± 0.1) × 108 M–1 s–1] (Table S2, Supporting Information). We note that this represents
one of the most rapid macromolecule binding reactions, approaching
the extreme of previously reported electrostatically enhanced association
rates.46

The dissociation rates for
specific DNA complexes (koffS) were also determined at increasing concentrations of potassium
ions (36–150 mM) by monitoring the decrease in 2-AP fluorescence
upon dissociation of hUNG from the DNA (Figures 3D and S2B). To ensure that all enzyme
molecules dissociated irreversibly, the dissociated enzyme was trapped
with an excess of DNA containing an abasic site (aDNA). In contrast
with the association rate, the first-order dissociation rate was found
to increase only modestly (∼2-fold) when the salt concentration
was raised from 36 to 150 mM K+ (3.8 ± 0.3 s–1 to 8.7 ± 0.7 s–1) (Table
S2, Supporting Information). On the basis of comprehensive
kinetic measurements with the similarly behaved E. coli enzyme,36,47,48 it is long-known
that the single-exponential dissociation reflects rate-limiting exit
of the uracil base from the enzyme active site.36,47,48 The dissociation of the DNA from the enzyme
occurs in an extremely rapid step after the slower internal steps
and is not detected in the fluorescence measurements. Thus, the relative
salt insensitivity of koff is fully consistent
with a slow internal step being overall rate limiting for dissociation
of the specific DNA, while association is influenced by a different
salt sensitive step.

The salt dependence of the binding kinetics
to nonspecific DNA
was not directly addressable due to weak binding and the fast association
and dissociation rates. Since nonspecific binding precedes formation
of the specific complex, it is reasonable to conclude that the association
rates for the nonspecific complex are similarly affected by salt as
the specific complex (i.e., konN = konS). Using these assumed
values for konN, the dissociation
rates for nonspecific DNA at each [K+] were calculated
from the relationship koffN = konN/KaN using the measured equilibrium association
constants at each salt concentration. The approach indicated a 7-fold
increase in koffN over the
salt range tested [koffN (calculated,
36 mM salt) = 1100 ± 300 s–1, koffN (calculated, 150 mM salt) = 7700 ±
500 s–1], which is similar to the effect on konN and konS. This analysis suggests the same rate-limiting transition
state is being followed in the forward and reverse directions for
binding and dissociation of nonspecific DNA (i.e., two-state behavior).

Salt Effects on Steady-State Kinetics of hUNG Catalyzed Uracil
Excision
Steady-state kinetic measurements used a continuous
fluorescence assay and a 30 base pair oligo (PUA-30) that contained
a 2-AP base adjacent to a U-A base pair.37 The initial rate of reaction was determined by monitoring the time-dependent
increase in 2-AP fluorescence, which reports on hUNG catalyzed excision
of the adjacent uracil base. Nonlinear regression fitting of the data
to the Michaelis–Menten equation is shown in Figure S3A–D, from which kcat, Km, and kcat/Km values were determined (Table S3). As shown in Figure
S3, we were able to attain greater than &gt;85% saturation
of
the enzyme with substrate at salt concentrations between 36 and 110
mM. However, at the highest concentration of 150 mM only 63% saturation
was achieved, resulting in a larger uncertainty in kcat. Nevertheless, even at this salt concentration kcat/Km was well-determined
because this second-order rate constant is also given by the initial
slope of the saturation curve when [S] ≪ Km (Figure S3D). We attempted
to attain greater saturation of the enzyme at 150 mM concentration
of salt, but the DNA concentration could not be increased beyond 4
μM due to apparent substrate inhibition or aggregation as the
concentration was increased further.

Plots of log kcat, log 1/Km, and log kcat/Km against log
[K+] were all linear (Figure 4A–C).
The kcat value increased 4-fold as the
salt concentration was increased from 36 to 150 mM K+ (3.5
± 0.3 s–1 and 15 ± 2 s–1) (Figure 4A), which is a similar response
as koff. The slopes of the log–log
plots for kcat and koff were slightly positive, implying ion uptake,
with Nkcat = 0.9 ±
0.2 and Nkoff = 0.5 ±
0.1 (Table 1). Since kcat is limited by product release and not chemistry,49,50 and the product complex is structurally and thermodynamically similar
to the substrate complex,50 it would appear
that the rate-limiting transition states for both substrate and product
dissociation do not involve significant ion uptake. In contrast, the
1/Km and kcat/Km values had stronger dependences on
the salt concentration, with slopes resembling that of KaS and kon, respectively
(N1/Km = −2.2
and Nkcat/Km = −1.3, compare values in Table 1). The approximately 10-fold greater values of kon as compared to kcat/Km at each salt concentration may arise from
the different sequences of these specific substrates, or the presence
of additional partially rate-limiting transition states that comprise kcat/Km (for instance,
uracil excision occurs at a single-turnover rate kex = 240 s–1).4 Regardless, these results indicate that diffusion-controlled (or
near diffusion-controlled) processes like kon and kcat/Km involve transition-states that necessitate ion release.

Figure 4 Salt dependences
of kcat, Km, and kcat/Km. (A) The value for kcat (circles)
is limited by product release and is minimally dependent on KGlu concentration.
This is similar to the behavior observed for koff (dashed line). (B) The dependence of 1/Km (circles) on KGlu concentration is very similar to that
observed for specific DNA binding KaS (dashed line). (C) The dependence of kcat/Km (circles) on KGlu concentration
is identical to the dependence observed for kon (dashed line).

Increased Salt Concentrations Reduce the Probability of Intramolecular
Site Transfer
To characterize the salt dependence of the
transition state for intramolecular translocation of hUNG between
two uracil sites spaced 20 base pairs apart on the same strand in
duplex DNA (S20), we used our previously developed assay for measuring
facilitated diffusion.12,51 This site spacing was chosen
because all transfer events result from hUNG dissociating and reassociating
with the DNA at least once (only the dissociative pathway is operational, Pdiss).4 After postreaction
sample processing (see Methods), the electrophoretically
separated DNA fragments produced from uracil from single and double
uracil excision events were quantified using phosphorimaging analysis.
Intramolecular site transfer results in the production of excess A
and C fragments that result from double-excision events, while single
site excision produces exactly equal amounts of the A, C, AB, and
BC product bands (Figure 5A,B).21,51 The time independent
dissociative site transfer probability (Pdiss) can be calculated precisely using eq 4 by
linear extrapolation of the observed transfer probabilities (Pdissobs) to zero time.b 4  

We measured Pdiss in the presence
of 13–63 mM K+ ion, beyond which site transfer by
the dissociative pathway was no longer detectable. As shown in Figure 5C, Pdiss showed a strong
dependence on salt concentration, decreasing 4-fold between 13 mM
and 63 mM K+ (Table S4). A log
linear dependence was observed between 22 mM and 63 mM K+ (Figure 5D),c which
provided a slope value N = −1.5 ± 0.3.
This slope value is identical to the salt dependence of the association
rate kon, which suggests that hUNG molecules
undergoing dissociative translocation move outside of the ion cloud,
and their reassociation is influenced in the same way by the presence
of bulk salt ions (see Discussion).

Figure 5 Salt dependence
of the intramolecular dissociative transfer probability
of hUNG between two uracil sites spaced 20 bp apart (Pdiss). (A) Schematic of the substrate (S20) used. The
asterisk denotes the location of the 32P end labels. (B)
Phosphorimages of the gel-resolved site transfer products derived
from S20 in the presence of 13 mM and 63 mM K+. (C) Determination
of Pdiss at varying K+ levels
in the range 13–63 mM. The observed site transfer probability
(Pdissobs, eq 3) is calculated at each time point and then linearly extrapolated
to time zero to determine the true value (Pdiss). (D) Comparison of the dependences of Pdiss (circles) and kon (dashed line) on K+ concentration. The Pdiss value
at 13 mM (red circle) deviated negatively from the linear correlation
and was omitted from the linear regression analysis.c

Discussion
Electrostatic
Contribution to Nonspecific DNA Binding is Entropy
Driven
The disparate effects of salt ions on the binding
of hUNG to undamaged and damaged DNA indicates that distinct thermodynamic
interactions are involved in stabilizing these complexes. According
to CC theory, weaker binding induced by high salt concentrations originates
from a reduction in the entropy of mixing associated with expelling
ions from the DNA ion cloud into bulk solution. Therefore, the electrostatic
component of the binding energy is purely entropic. We confirmed this
entropic expectation for the nonspecific DNA complex by measuring
the logarithmic salt dependence of the binding affinities at four
temperatures, where the slopes of the log Ka vs log [KGlu] plots were indistinguishable at each of the temperatures
(Figure S5, Supporting Information).27 The corresponding analyses for the specific
complex could not be performed because of experimental difficulties
in making reliable 2-AP fluorescence measurements of equilibrium binding
at low DNA concentrations at multiple temperatures.

Previous
studies have shown that the complex between hUNG and nonspecific DNA
is held together by a handful of enzyme contacts with the phosphate
backbone, with minimal distortion of the double helix (Figure 2A).40 The structural
view is in agreement with the present thermodynamic findings, where
approximately three monovalent cations are released from the DNA upon
binding, and only a small nonelectrostatic contribution to the binding
free energy is indicated, suggesting minimal duplex distortion (Figure 6). These data characterize the nonspecific DNA complex
as a loosely associated state that is formed by virtue of the entropic
effects of cation displacement from the DNA. The weak electrostatic
character of the nonspecific complex provides a binding mode for hUNG
that is consistent with rapid facilitated diffusion by the previously
described dissociative and associative pathways (Figure 1). A binding lifetime on nonspecific DNA in the millisecond
to sub-millisecond time regime has the virtue of minimizing the time
spent bound to undamaged DNA sequences and provides frequent opportunities
for repeated cycles of enzyme dissociation, rapid 3D diffusion and
local rebinding of the DNA chain. This type of mechanism, combined
with short-range associative transfers where the enzyme remains in
contact with the DNA (&lt;10 bp),4 provides
excellent search coverage at a maximum possible rate that is only
bounded by the limits of diffusion.

Figure 6 Summary of the salt dependences of each
measured thermodynamic
and kinetic parameter (X) (see Discussion). The dependences are represented as the slopes of the respective
log [salt] vs log X plots. Positive slopes indicate
dissociation processes resulting in ion condensation, which are facilitated
by high ionic strength (kcat, koff). Negative slopes result from processes
that involve ion displacement and are hindered by high salt concentrations.

Specific DNA Binding is
Driven by Nonelectrostatic Interactions
In contrast with
nonspecific DNA, the formation of the specific
complex with uracilated DNA was driven primarily by nonelectrostatic
forces depicted in Figure 3A. Despite the crystallographic
evidence that all the ionic interactions present in the nonspecific
complex are preserved in the specific complex,40,52 the stability of the specific hUNG-DNA complex was less dependent
on salt (Table 1). Such behavior of a specific
and nonspecific protein–DNA complex has been observed in studies
of lac Repressor and attributed to structural differences between
the two complexes that lead to changes in ion displacement stoichiometry.53−58 For the case of hUNG, the most striking difference between the nonspecific
and specific complexes is the severe distortion of the helical parameters
of the DNA in the latter, suggesting that similar effects of duplex
deformation may be operative. In general, it is not clear how distortions
of the DNA helix that are induced upon protein binding alter the surrounding
ion cloud and the observed stoichiometry of ion displacement. If an
increase in charge density of the phosphate backbone upon DNA bending
promotes the condensation of additional cations, then the net number
of ions displaced upon binding would be reduced. This potential contribution
to the interpretation of ΔGelect for the specific complex does not impact the primary finding that
a large nonelectrostatic component to the binding free energy is introduced
upon formation of this complex.

Another implication of the different
contributions of electrostatic and nonelectrostatic binding energy
terms for the nonspecific and specific complexes is that binding specificity
is enhanced at higher salt concentrations (defined as the ratio KaS/KaN).35 While this calculation
is best performed for sequences of identical length and nearly identical
sequence (which is not the case for the specific and nonspecific duplexes
used in this study), the relative change in specificity as a function
of salt is still informative. At low salt (36 mM), the specificity
of hUNG for the specific DNA is 290 ± 90 while at physiological
salt (150 mM), the specificity increases approximately 4-fold (1300
± 200). The greater salt sensitivity of nonspecific DNA binding
and the large nonelectrostatic component of the binding energy for
the specific complex have the combined effect of minimizing sequestration
of the enzyme on bulk undamaged DNA, while allowing the specific complex
to persist long enough for efficient catalysis to take place.

Association
of hUNG with DNA Is Accelerated by Electrostatics
Long-range
electrostatic interactions are known to play a significant
role in accelerating the association of proteins with various targets,
and the polyanionic nature of DNA makes this effect especially significant
in the case of protein–DNA association.59,60 The acceleration provided by the electrostatic interaction will
supply a biasing force that increases the basal rate of association
in the absence of such a force (konnon).46 For modest sized enzymes
such as hUNG that exhibit diffusion-controlled binding, an upper limit
for konnon ≈ 106 M–1 s–1 has been estimated
from theoretical considerations.61−64 This theoretical upper limit
has been achieved in some highly efficient systems (the association
of barnase with its inhibitor barstar is one well-characterized example).65 For hUNG we estimate konnon = 6 ± 2 × 106 M–1 s–1 from extrapolating the salt dependent association
rates to 1 M salt (Table 1). Extrapolation
from the 1 M standard state used to estimate konnon to a physiologically relevant salt concentration
of 150 mM reveals that the association rate is increased by 1 order
of magnitude. The electrostatic contribution toward lowering the free
energy barrier for association at physiological salt may be calculated
using eq 5 (Gelec‡ = −1.6 ± 0.3 kcal mol–1). 5  An electrostatic
enhancement of the same magnitude
is also indicated from the salt dependence of kcat/Km (Table 1). This correspondence indicates that the rate-limiting transition
state for enzyme-DNA association and steady-state turnover under limiting
substrate conditions share similar electrostatic characteristics.
It should be noted that Gelec‡ comprises all net effects arising from electrostatic interactions.
This includes an increased contribution from facilitated diffusion
as the salt concentration is decreased from 1 to 0.15 M. However,
a large contribution from facilitated diffusion would not be expected
for the relatively small duplexes used in this study.

Dissociation
of the Specific Complex is a Multistep Process
Although dissociation
of the nonspecific complex (koffN) was enhanced by increasing salt concentrations,
the salt effect was reduced for dissociation of both the specific
(koffS) and abasic product
DNA complexes (using kcat as a surrogate
for the product koff) (Table 1 and Figure 6). These different
salt effects on the nonspecific and two specific complexes can be
rationalized by the crystallographic finding that extensive nonelectrostatic
contacts are formed in the specific complexes, which must be broken
prior to dissociation (Figure 3A).40,45,50 Breaking of these specific contacts
must occur in a relatively salt-insensitive rate-limiting transition
state that precedes dissociation. This view is consistent with previous
rapid kinetic studies with UNG that have elucidated a two-step binding
mechanism for formation of specific complexes.48 In contrast, the nonspecific complex apparently forms in
a salt sensitive single-step reaction, with association and dissociation
occurring in the same rate-limiting transition-state. Thus, equal
numbers of counterions should be released in the forward binding direction
and taken up in the reverse dissociation reaction, which is supported
by the similar slopes for the salt dependences of konN and koffN in Table 1 and Figure 6.

The Dissociative Facilitated Diffusion Pathway Involves Escape
of hUNG from the DNA Ion Cloud
We previously reported that
the associative pathway for intramolecular site transfer was salt
insensitive, but that the dissociative pathway was salt sensitive
over the range that was studied.4 The insensitivity
of associative pathway was explained by the relatively constant nature
of the ion cloud around the DNA over a wide range of salt concentrations,66−68 and the supposition that associative transfers do not lead to net
ion displacement. The salt dependence of the dissociative pathway
was interpreted to result from enzyme molecules diffusing beyond the
ion cloud during short-range dissociation and reassociation events.

The data presented here provide further support for the conclusion
that the fundamental distinction between the associative and dissociative
pathways is that during dissociative transfers hUNG escapes the ion
cloud prior to reassociating at a nearby position on the DNA chain.
We utilized a substrate containing a uracil site spacing of 20 base
pairs such that all transfers required at least one dissociation event
(the associative transfer length of hUNG is only about ∼5 bp).4 The finding that Pdiss and kon have indistinguishable dependences
on salt (Figure 6), demonstrates that the overall
dissociative transfer process involves a salt sensitive step resembling
that of enzyme-DNA association from bulk solution. This interpretation
is supported by the kinetic definition of the probability of dissociative
transfers: Pdiss = [koff/(kassoc + koff)][kreturn/(kbulk + kreturn)]. The first
term describes the probability that hUNG will dissociate from nonspecific
DNA (koff) as opposed to making an associative
step along the DNA (kassoc), and the second
term gives the likelihood that the enzyme, once dissociated, escapes
to the bulk solvent (kbulk) rather than
reassociating with the DNA chain to complete transfer (kreturn = kon). We have shown
here that koff is salt insensitive and
we have previously shown that kassoc is
salt insensitive.4 Thus, to a first approximation,
the first term remains the same at all salt concentrations. In contrast,
the second term contains the constant kreturn = kon, which is salt sensitive based
on our measurements, while escape to bulk is reasonably assumed to
be salt independent. Taking kreturn = kon and dividing the numerator and denominator
in the second term by kon, gives Pdiss = 1/(kbulk/kon + 1) at each salt concentration. This equation
predicts that Pdiss will decrease to zero
in a manner that depends on the salt concentration dependence of kon, which is the basis of our assertion and
interpretation.

The above result sheds light on the nature of
the transition state
of enzyme molecules undergoing dissociative transfer. Since the DNA
ion cloud extends only a few nanometers from the DNA chain, enzyme
molecules that undergo dissociative transfers must diffuse at least
this distance. We have made estimates in the range 3–7 nm for
the mean distance that hUNG diffuses from the DNA chain during dissociative
transfers using simple Stoke-Einstein diffusion equations.4 More recently, we developed a Monte Carlo simulation
program for the glycosylase hOGG1 that can be used to further elaborate
microscopic aspects of the site transfer mechanism.4,69−71

The implication of the salt sensitivity of
the dissociative pathway
is that hUNG molecules undergoing dissociative transfers at physiological
salt will suffer a decrease in productive association events. Nevertheless,
the dissociated enzyme will still be positionally correlated with
the departed DNA chain in both high and low salt conditions. The reduced
efficiency at high salt is overcome by multiple rebinding attempts,
which may result in productive binding occurring at a position along
the DNA chain that is more distant from the initial position of dissociation
than at low salt concentrations. When productive binding finally occurs,
the salt insensitive associative search begins in the same manner
as at low salt. Thus, the fundamental aspects of the transfer mechanism
do not change between low and physiological concentrations of salt.
What remains to be taken into consideration is the effect of other
environmental factors within the nucleus, such as the macromolecular
crowding, that could modulate the effects of high ion concentrations
and favor the formation of compact hUNG-DNA search complexes as compared
to dilute solution.46,72 Thus, future studies will focus
on increasingly realistic experimental models to understand search
and repair mechanisms in physiologically relevant contexts and eventually
human cells.

Supporting Information Available
Supplemental methods, four
supporting tables, and five supporting figures. Nonspecific binding
affinities determined under various salt conditions (Table S1); kon, koff, and binding
affinities determined at all salt concentrations tested for specific
DNA (Table S2), steady-state kinetic parameters of hUNG and specific
DNA binding at various salt concentrations (Table S3), site transfer
probabilities at multiple salt concentrations (Table S4), full nonspecific
binding curves for high salt conditions (Figure S1), raw association
and dissociation kinetic data (Figure S2), double reciprocal plots
for the steady-state kinetic data presented (Figure S3), a comparison
of fluorescence titrations used to determine specific DNA binding
affinity and stopped-flow data (Figure S4), and the temperature dependence
of the nonspecific DNA binding affinity (Figure S5). This material
is available free of charge via the Internet at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bi501011m_si_001.pdf

 The authors declare no
competing financial interest.

Abbreviations
hUNGhuman uracil DNA glycosylase

hOGG8-oxoguanine DNA
glycosylase

Uβ1-[2-Deoxy-5-O-(4,4‘-dimethoxytrityl)-2-fluoro-1-β-arabinofuranosyl]uracil

2-AP2-aminopurine

CCCounterion Condensation

ΔGbindbinding free energy at physiological salt (150 mM
K+)

ΔGelectelectrostatic component
of the binding free energy

ΔGnonnonelectrostatic component
of the binding free energy

DN15mer nonspecific DNA

DS19mer specific DNA containing
a Uβ-G pair

aDNA19mer DNA containing an abasic site

PUA-3030mer DNA containing a single
U-A base pair

S2090mer-DNA with two U-A base pairs separated by 20 bp

a We use the term dissociative to refer to a facilitated diffusion pathway
that involves dissociation
of the enzyme from the DNA chain and diffusion outside of the DNA
ion cloud before reassociation. The term associative refers to a distinct pathway where the enzyme remains associated
with the DNA within the ion cloud. Historically, the terms “hopping”
and “sliding” have been used to describe these two pathways
for facilitated diffusion. However, recent studies with hUNG and 8-oxoguanine
DNA glycosylase (hOGG1) have established aspects of the intramolecular
site transfer mechanisms by these enzymes that are not consistent
with the older terminology.1−3

b The uracil excision efficiency is
not expected to greatly influence the salt sensitivity of the transfer
probabilities (i.e., the uracil excision efficiency is the probability
that once hUNG has located a uracil site it falls off the site before
base excision occurs).4 This expectation
is strongly supported by the largely salt insensitive specific substrate
dissociation rates (koffS)
over the salt range used in the measurements of Pdiss.

c Pdiss reached
a plateau at salt concentrations below 22 mM (Figure 5). The basis for this effect has not been explored, but it
likely arises from the kinetic definition of Pdiss, which includes a term for kon (see legend to Figure 1, where kon = kreturn). We speculate
that when salt is reduced below 22 mM the probability of returning
to the DNA could be constant and limited by the local electrostatic
environment rather than the bulk salt concentration.



   
References
Schonhoft J. D. ; Kosowicz J. G. ; Stivers J. T.  (2013 ) DNA Translocation
by Human Uracil
DNA Glycosylase: Role of DNA Phosphate Charge . Biochemistry 
52 , 2526 –2535 .23506309 
Rowland M.
M. ; Schonhoft J. D. ; McKibbin P. L. ; David S. S. ; Stivers J. T.  (2014 ) Microscopic
mechanism of DNA damage searching by hOGG1 . Nucleic Acids Res. 
42 , 9295 –9303 .25016526 
Schonhoft J. D. ; Stivers J. T.  (2013 ) DNA translocation by human uracil DNA glycosylase:
the case of single-stranded DNA and clustered uracils . Biochemistry 
52 , 2536 –2544 .23506270 
Schonhoft J. D. ; Stivers J. T.  (2012 ) Timing facilitated site transfer of an enzyme on DNA . Nat. Chem. Biol. 
8 , 205 –210 .22231272 
Stivers J. T. ; Jiang Y. L.  (2003 ) A Mechanistic Perspective on the Chemistry of DNA Repair
Glycosylases . Chem. Rev. 
103 , 2729 –2760 .12848584 
Friedman J. I. ; Stivers J. T.  (2010 ) Detection of Damaged DNA Bases by
DNA Glycosylase Enzymes . Biochemistry 
49 , 4957 –4967 .20469926 
Mirny L. ; Slutsky M. ; Wunderlich Z. ; Tafvizi A. ; Leith J. ; Kosmrlj A.  (2009 ) How a protein searches
for its site on DNA: the mechanism
of facilitated diffusion . J. Phys. A: Math.
Theor. 
42 , 434013 .
Slutsky M. ; Mirny L. A.  (2004 ) Kinetics of Protein-DNA
Interaction: Facilitated Target
Location in Sequence-Dependent Potential . Biophys.
J. 
87 , 4021 –4035 .15465864 
Gowers D. M. ; Wilson G. G. ; Halford S. E. ; von Hippel P. H.  (2005 ) Measurement
of the contributions of 1D and 3D pathways to the translocation of
a protein along DNA . Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
U.S.A. 
102 , 15883 –15888 .16243975 
Hedglin M. ; O’Brien P. J.  (2010 ) Hopping
Enables a DNA Repair Glycosylase To Search
Both Strands and Bypass a Bound Protein . ACS
Chem. Biol. 
5 , 427 –436 .20201599 
Blainey P.
C. ; Oijen A. M. V. ; Banerjee A. ; Verdine G. L. ; Xie X. S.  (2006 ) A base-excision
DNA-repair protein finds intrahelical lesion bases by fast sliding
in contact with DNA . Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
U.S.A. 
103 , 5752 –5757 .16585517 
Porecha R.
H. ; Stivers J. T.  (2008 ) Uracil
DNA Glycosylase Uses DNA Hopping and Short-Range
Sliding to Trap Extrahelical Uracils . Proc.
Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 
105 , 10791 –10796 .18669665 
Qi Y. ; Nam K. ; Spong M. C. ; Banerjee A. ; Sung R.-J. ; Zhang M. ; Karplus M. ; Verdine G. L.  (2012 ) Strandwise translocation of a DNA
glycosylase on undamaged DNA . Proc. Natl. Acad.
Sci. U.S.A. 
109 , 1086 –1091 .22219368 
Setser J.
W. ; Lingaraju G. M. ; Davis C. A. ; Samson L. D. ; Drennan C. L.  (2012 ) Searching
for DNA lesions: structural evidence for lower- and higher-affinity
DNA binding conformations of human alkyladenine DNA glycosylase . Biochemistry 
51 , 382 –390 .22148158 
Dunn A. R. ; Kad N. M. ; Nelson S. R. ; Warshaw D. M. ; Wallace S. S.  (2011 ) Single
Qdot-labeled glycosylase molecules use a wedge amino acid to probe
for lesions while scanning along DNA . Nucleic
Acids Res. 
39 , 7487 –7498 .21666255 
Terakawa T. ; Kenzaki H. ; Takada S.  (2012 ) p53 searches
on DNA by rotation-uncoupled
sliding at C-terminal tails and restricted hopping of core domains . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
134 , 14555 –14562 .22880817 
Leith J. S. ; Tafvizi A. ; Huang F. ; Uspal W. E. ; Doyle P. S. ; Fersht A. R. ; Mirny L. A. ; van Oijen A. M.  (2012 ) Sequence-dependent
sliding kinetics of p53 . Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
U.S.A. 
109 , 16552 –16557 .23012405 
Granéli A. ; Yeykal C. C. ; Robertson R. B. ; Greene E. C.  (2006 ) Long-distance lateral
diffusion of human Rad51 on double-stranded DNA . Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 
103 , 1221 –1226 .16432240 
Senavirathne G. ; Jaszczur M. ; Auerbach P. A. ; Upton T. G. ; Chelico L. ; Goodman M. F. ; Rueda D.  (2012 ) Single-stranded DNA scanning and
deamination by APOBEC3G cytidine deaminase at single molecule resolution . J. Biol. Chem. 
287 , 15826 –15835 .22362763 
Hammar P. ; Leroy P. ; Mahmutovic A. ; Marklund E. G. ; Berg O. G. ; Elf J.  (2012 ) The lac repressor displays facilitated diffusion in living cells . Science 
336 , 1595 –1598 .22723426 
Szczelkun M. D. ; Marko J. F. ; Halford S. E.  (2000 ) One-and three-dimensional pathways
for proteins to reach specific DNA sites . EMBO
J. 
19 , 6546 –6557 .11101527 
Blainey P.
C. ; Luo G. ; Kou S. C. ; Mangel W. F. ; Verdine G. L. ; Bagchi B. ; Xie X. S.  (2009 ) Nonspecifically bound proteins spin while diffusing
along DNA . Nat. Struct. Mol. Biol. 
16 , 1224 –1229 .19898474 
Hedglin M. ; O’Brien P. J.  (2008 ) Human alkyladenine
DNA glycosylase employs a processive
search for DNA damage . Biochemistry 
47 , 11434 –11445 .18839966 
Record M. T. J. ; Ha J. H. ; Fisher M. A.  (1991 ) Analysis
of equilibrium and kinetic
measurements to determine thermodynamic origins of stability and specificity
and mechanism of formation of site-specific complexes between proteins
and helical DNA . Methods Enzymol 
208 , 291 –343 .1779839 
Record M. T. J. ; Zhang W. ; Anderson C. F.  (1998 ) Analysis
of effects of salts and
uncharged solutes on protein and nucleic acid equilibria and processes:
a practical guide to recognizing and interpreting polyelectrolyte
effects, Hofmeister effects, and osmotic effects of salts . Adv. Protein Chem. 
51 , 281 –353 .9615173 
Record M. T. J. ; Anderson C. F. ; Lohman T. M.  (1978 ) Thermodynamic analysis of ion effects
on the binding and conformational equilibria of proteins and nucleic
acids: the roles of ion association or release, screening, and ion
effects on water activity . Q. Rev. Biophys. 
11 , 103 –178 .353875 
Privalov P. L. ; Dragan A. I. ; Crane-Robinson C.  (2011 ) Interpreting
protein/DNA interactions:
distinguishing specific from non-specific and electrostatic from non-electrostatic
components . Nucleic Acids Res. 
39 , 2483 –2491 .21071403 
Manning G. S.  (1996 ) Counterion
condensation theory constructed from different models . Physica A 
231 , 236 –253 .
Manning G. S.  (1978 ) The molecular
theory of polyelectrolyte solutions with applications to the electrostatic
properties of polynucleotides . Q. Rev. Biophys. 
11 , 179 –246 .353876 
Olmsted M. C. ; Bond J. P. ; Anderson C. F. ; Record M. T.  (1995 ) Grand canonical
Monte Carlo molecular and thermodynamic predictions of ion effects
on binding of an oligocation (L8+) to the center of DNA oligomers . Biophys. J. 
68 , 634 –647 .7696515 
Lohman T. M. ; deHaseth P. L. ; Record M. T. Jr. (1980 ) Pentalysine-deoxyribonucleic
acid interactions: a model for the general effects of ion concentrations
on the interactions of proteins with nucleic acids . Biochemistry 
19 , 3522 –3530 .7407056 
Dragan A. I. ; Li Z. ; Makeyeva E. N. ; Milgotina E. I. ; Liu Y. ; Crane-Robinson C. ; Privalov P. L.  (2006 ) Forces driving the binding of homeodomains to DNA . Biochemistry 
45 , 141 –151 .16388589 
Stigter D.  (1995 ) Evaluation
of the counterion condensation theory of polyelectrolytes . Biophys. J. 
69 , 380 –388 .8527651 
Satoh M. ; Kawashima T. ; Komiyama J.  (1988 ) A new model of counterion condensation
in polyelectrolyte solutions. III. Theoretical predictions of competitive
condensation between counterions of different valences . Biophys. Chem. 
31 , 209 –215 .17010923 
Jen-Jacobson L.  and Jacobson L. A.   (2008 ) Role of Water and Effects of Small Ions in Site-specific
Protein-DNA Interactions , in Protein-Nucleic
Acid Interactions: Structural Biology , pp 13 –46 . The Royal Society of Chemistry .
Stivers J. T. ; Pankiewicz K. W. ; Watanabe K. A.  (1999 ) Kinetic mechanism of damage site
recognition and uracil flipping by Escherichia coli uracil DNA glycosylase . Biochemistry 
38 , 952 –963 .9893991 
Stivers J. T.  (1998 ) 2-Aminopurine
fluorescence studies of base stacking interactions at abasic sites
in DNA: metal-ion and base sequence effects . Nucleic Acids Res. 
26 , 3837 –3844 .9685503 
Mol C. D. ; Arvai A. S. ; Slupphaug G. ; Kavli B. ; Alseth I. ; Krokan H. E. ; Tainer J. A.  (1995 ) Crystal structure and mutational
analysis of human uracil-DNA glycosylase: structural basis for specificity
and catalysis . Cell 
80 , 869 –878 .7697717 
Bianchet M. A. ; Seiple L. A. ; Jiang Y. L. ; Ichikawa Y. ; Amzel L. M. ; Stivers J. T.  (2003 ) Electrostatic guidance of glycosyl
cation migration
along the reaction coordinate of uracil DNA glycosylase . Biochemistry 
42 , 12455 –12460 .14580190 
Parker J. B. ; Bianchet M. A. ; Krosky D. J. ; Friedman J. I. ; Amzel L. M. ; Stivers J. T.  (2007 ) Enzymatic capture of an extrahelical thymine in the
search for uracil in DNA . Nature 
449 , 433 –437 .17704764 
MacDermott M.  (1990 ) The intracellular
concentration of free magnesium in extensor digitorum longus muscles
of the rat . Exp. Physiol. 
75 , 763 –769 .2271155 
Murphy E. ; Freudenrich C. C. ; Levy L. A. ; London R. E. ; Lieberman M.  (1989 ) Monitoring
cytosolic free magnesium in cultured chicken heart cells by use of
the fluorescent indicator Furaptra . Proc. Natl.
Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 
86 , 2981 –2984 .2704755 
Collins K. D.  (2004 ) Ions from
the Hofmeister series and osmolytes: effects on proteins in solution
and in the crystallization process . Methods 
34 , 300 –311 .15325648 
Collins K. D.  (2006 ) Ion hydration:
Implications for cellular function, polyelectrolytes, and protein
crystallization . Biophys. Chem. 
119 , 271 –281 .16213082 
Parikh S. S. ; Walcher G. ; Jones G. D. ; Slupphaug G. ; Krokan H. E. ; Blackburn G. M. ; Tainer J. A.  (2000 ) Uracil-DNA glycosylase-DNA
substrate and product structures: conformational strain promotes catalytic
efficiency by coupled stereoelectronic effects . Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 
97 , 5083 –5088 .10805771 
Schreiber G. ; Haran G. ; Zhou H.-X.  (2009 ) Fundamental aspects of protein-protein
association kinetics . Chem. Rev. 
109 , 839 –860 .19196002 
Jiang Y. L. ; Stivers J. T.  (2002 ) Mutational analysis
of the base-flipping mechanism
of uracil DNA glycosylase . Biochemistry 
41 , 11236 –11247 .12220189 
Krosky D. J. ; Song F. ; Stivers J. T.  (2005 ) The origins
of high-affinity enzyme
binding to an extrahelical DNA base . Biochemistry 
44 , 5949 –5959 .15835884 
Fitzgerald M. E. ; Drohat A. C.  (2008 ) Coordinating the
initial steps of base excision repair.
Apurinic/apyrimidinic endonuclease 1 actively stimulates thymine DNA
glycosylase by disrupting the product complex . J. Biol. Chem. 
283 , 32680 –32690 .18805789 
Parikh S. S. ; Mol C. D. ; Slupphaug G. ; Bharati S. ; Krokan H. E. ; Tainer J. A.  (1998 ) Base excision repair initiation revealed by crystal
structures and binding kinetics of human uracil-DNA glycosylase with
DNA . EMBO J. 
17 , 5214 –5226 .9724657 
Terry B. J. ; Jack W. E. ; Modrich P.  (1985 ) Facilitated diffusion during catalysis
by EcoRI endonuclease. Nonspecific interactions in EcoRI catalysis . J. Biol. Chem. 
260 , 13130 –13137 .2997157 
Zharkov D. O. ; Mechetin G. V. ; Nevinsky G. A.  (2010 ) Uracil-DNA glycosylase: Structural,
thermodynamic and kinetic aspects of lesion search and recognition . Mutat. Res. 
685 , 11 –20 .19909758 
Record M. T. ; Anderson C. F. ; Mills P. ; Mossing M. ; Roe J. H.  (1985 ) Ions as
regulators of protein-nucleic acid interactions in vitro and in vivo . Adv. Biophys. 
20 , 109 –135 .3914831 
Record M. T. ; deHaseth P. L. ; Lohman T. M.  (1977 ) Interpretation of monovalent and
divalent cation effects on the lac repressor-operator interaction . Biochemistry 
16 , 4791 –4796 .911790 
Winter R. B. ; von Hippel P. H.  (1981 ) Diffusion-driven mechanisms of protein translocation
on nucleic acids. 2. The Escherichia coli repressor--operator interaction:
equilibrium measurements . Biochemistry 
20 , 6948 –6960 .6274381 
Barkley M. D. ; Lewis P. A. ; Sullivan G. E.  (1981 ) Ion effects
on the lac repressor--operator
equilibrium . Biochemistry 
20 , 3842 –3851 .7272280 
Roe J. H. ; Burgess R. R. ; Record M. T.  (1985 ) Temperature dependence
of the rate
constants of the Escherichia coli RNA polymerase-lambda PR promoter
interaction. Assignment of the kinetic steps corresponding to protein
conformational change and DNA opening . J. Mol.
Biol. 
184 , 441 –453 .3900414 
Record M.
T. ; Mazur S. J. ; Melançon P. ; Roe J. H. ; Shaner S. L. ; Unger L.  (1981 ) Double helical
DNA: conformations, physical properties, and interactions
with ligands . Annu. Rev. Biochem. 
50 , 997 –1024 .7023371 
Alsallaq R. ; Zhou H.-X.  (2008 ) Electrostatic rate
enhancement and transient complex
of protein–protein association . Proteins 
71 , 320 –335 .17932929 
Zhou H.-X.  (2001 ) Disparate
ionic-strength dependencies of on and off rates in protein-protein
association . Biopolymers 
59 , 427 –433 .11598877 
Northrup S. H. ; Erickson H. P.  (1992 ) Kinetics of protein-protein association
explained by
Brownian dynamics computer simulation . Proc.
Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 
89 , 3338 –3342 .1565624 
Zhou H.-X.  (1997 ) Enhancement
of protein-protein association rate by interaction potential: accuracy
of prediction based on local Boltzmann factor . Biophys. J. 
73 , 2441 –2445 .9370437 
Camacho C.
J. ; Kimura S. R. ; DeLisi C. ; Vajda S.  (2000 ) Kinetics of desolvation-mediated
protein-protein binding . Biophys. J. 
78 , 1094 –1105 .10692300 
Schlosshauer M. ; Baker D.  (2004 ) Realistic protein-protein
association rates from a simple diffusional
model neglecting long-range interactions, free energy barriers, and
landscape ruggedness . Protein Sci. 
13 , 1660 –1669 .15133165 
Schreiber G. ; Fersht A. R.  (1996 ) Rapid, electrostatically
assisted association of proteins . Nat. Struct.
Biol. 
3 , 427 –431 .8612072 
Anderson C.
F. ; Record M. T. ; Hart P. A.  (1978 ) Sodium-23 NMR studies of cation-DNA
interactions . Biophys. Chem. 
7 , 301 –316 .623871 
Bleam M. L. ; Anderson C. F. ; Record M. T. Jr. (1983 ) Sodium-23 nuclear
magnetic resonance studies of cation-deoxyribonucleic acid interactions . Biochemistry 
22 , 5418 –5425 .
Bleam M. L. ; Anderson C. F. ; Record M. T.  (1980 ) Relative binding affinities of monovalent
cations for double-stranded DNA . Proc. Natl.
Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 
77 , 3085 –3089 .16592827 
Long H. ; Kudlay A. ; Schatz G. C.  (2006 ) Molecular dynamics studies of ion
distributions for DNA duplexes and DNA clusters: salt effects and
connection to DNA melting . J. Phys. Chem. B 
110 , 2918 –2926 .16471902 
Montoro J. ; Abascal J.  (1995 ) Ionic distribution
around simple DNA models. I. Cylindrically
averaged properties . J. Chem. Phys. 
103 , 8273 .
Millett I. S. ; Doniach S. ; Finkelstein K. D. ; Herschlag D.  (2003 ) Counterion
distribution around DNA probed by solution X-ray scattering . Phys. Rev. Lett. 
90 , 188103 .12786045 
Zhou H.-X. ; Rivas G. ; Minton A. P.  (2008 ) Macromolecular
crowding and confinement:
biochemical, biophysical, and potential physiological consequences . Annu. Rev. Biophys. 
37 , 375 –397 .18573087 
Cao C. ; Jiang Y. L. ; Stivers J. T. ; Song F.  (2004 ) Dynamic opening of
DNA during the enzymatic search for a damaged base . Nat. Struct. Mol. Biol. 
11 , 1230 –1236 .15558051 
Cao C. ; Jiang Y. L. ; Krosky D. J. ; Stivers J. T.  (2006 ) The catalytic power
of uracil DNA glycosylase in the opening of thymine base pairs . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
128 , 13034 –13035 .17017766 



