A variant of Staphylococcus
aureus that emerged in the early 1960s came to be known as
methicillin-resistant S. aureus (MRSA). This evolutionary outcome in response to selection
for resistance to second-generation penicillins negated the achievements
by medicinal chemists in the preceding decade, as resistance to the
β-lactam class of antibiotics was and is overencompassing.

The manifestation of resistance, which
is inducible in most strains,
is due to two related systems, termed the bla and mec operons (Figure ). Each is comprised of a β-lactam sensor/signal
transducer membrane protein (BlaR1 and MecR1 for bla and mec, respectively), whose surface domain binds
covalently to the antibiotic., Binding of the antibiotic
leads to transduction of the signal across the membrane, whereby the
cytoplasmic zinc-dependent protease domain of BlaR1 or MecR1 is activated., The membrane-bound protease degrades the respective gene repressor,
BlaI or MecI, which regulates transcription of the blaI or mecI gene for the repressor and of the blaR1 or mecR1 gene for the corresponding
sensor/transducer protein, respectively.− The two systems also
comprise two additional genes, blaZ and mecA, which encode the antibiotic-resistance determinants, namely, the
PC1 β-lactamase and penicillin-binding protein 2a (PBP2a), respectively.
The PC1 β-lactamase hydrolyzes the β-lactam ring of these
antibiotics, hence rendering them ineffective. On the other hand,
PBP2a is a unique cell-wall cross-linking dd-transpeptidase
(the target for β-lactam antibiotics), which is impervious to
inhibition by these antibiotics. The molecular basis for this dichotomy
of function for the enablement of PBP2a for its physiological function
and for evasion from inhibition by β-lactam antibiotics has
recently been elucidated.

Transcription of the
genes for antibiotic-resistance determinants
PBP2a and PC1 β-lactamase is regulated by MecI and BlaI. Red,
blue, and green arrows represent the blaI/mecI, blaR1/mecR1, and blaZ/mecA genes, respectively. The gene
repressor binding sites in each operon are highlighted in gray.

Our survey of the known genomes
of MRSA strains () has revealed that the strains that
have MecI also have MecR1. MecR1 may exist in the absence of MecI,
in which case mecA transcription is either constitutive
(in the absence of the bla operon) or, conversely,
regulated by the bla operon, if it were to be present.
These findings are also supported by complementation studies that
documented that MecI- or BlaI-mediated mecA transcription
repression could be lifted by induction through homologous, but not
heterologous, sensor proteins., Hence, the two systems
exhibit corepression, but not co-induction. In this report, we disclose
our investigation of the interactions of the MecI and BlaI repressor
proteins with the mec and bla operons.
The mechanism of DNA binding is complex, involving both the monomeric
and dimeric forms of the repressor proteins, for which we report the
dissociation constants. Binding by both these species would appear
to be relevant at the in vivo concentrations that
we have evaluated for the repressors.

We amplified the mecI gene from S. aureus NRS70 (N315) by
polymerase chain reaction and cloned it in plasmid
pET-24a(+), which was used to transform Escherichia coli OverExpress C41(DE3). The MecI protein was expressed and purified
to homogeneity ().
The BlaI protein was also purified to homogeneity by the method that
was described previously. We had documented
previously that the BlaI repressor exists as both monomeric and dimeric
species in solution. Purified MecI exhibits
the ability to oligomerize (Figure A). We
were able to detect distinct species from monomer to pentamer in a
12 μM solution of MecI by matrix-assisted laser desorption ionization
(MALDI) mass spectrometry. In the presence of DNA, we also detected
the complexes with the monomer and dimer of MecI. Even at this high
concentration, the monomer and dimer appear to dominate the mixture
(Figure A). Clearly, the potential relevance
of the higher-order oligomers under physiological conditions depends
on the solution concentration of MecI in vivo, to
which we will return shortly.

(A) MALDI mass spectrum of MecI at 12 μM.
(B) Electrophoresis
mobility shift assay of mec double-stranded DNA (150
nM) in the presence of increasing concentrations of MecI.

Nonetheless, to gain insight into the nature of
MecI in solution,
we conducted sedimentation velocity and sedimentation equilibrium
assays. The average molecular mass of MecI, calculated within the
concentration range of 0.5–36 μM, revealed the existence
of a monomer–dimer equilibrium with a dissociation constant
of 0.30 ± 0.03 μM. The details of these experiments are
given in the .

The bla operator consists of a 61 bp stretch with
two binding sites designated as the R1 and Z dyads. Each of these
dyads is an 18 bp palindrome separated by a 13 bp linker (Figure ). The mec operator is shorter, consisting of a 43 bp sequence with a single
30 bp palindrome with two 15 bp half-sites, with 12 bp dyad symmetry
within each half-site., To characterize the interactions
of MecI with the mec and bla operator
regions by electrophoretic mobility shift assays (EMSAs) and by fluorescence
anisotropy assays, two fluorescein-labeled double-stranded DNA samples
were prepared, each containing one of the operator regions (). The concentration of
the mec double-stranded DNA (dsDNA) was kept constant
(150 nM) in the EMSA, and the concentration of MecI was changed (Figure B). A transition to species 1 was noted at lower
MecI concentrations, followed by the formation of species 2 at higher
concentrations. Species 2 was the predominant one at 2 μM MecI,
but at higher concentrations, oligomeric complexes of MecI and DNA
accumulated, which did not move out of the well in the electrophoretic
cell. An EMSA for MecI protein with bla dsDNA and
for BlaI protein with mec and bla dsDNA segments also showed two species, in addition to higher-order
oligomer–dsDNA complexes that remained trapped in the well
(). On the basis
of these results and the previously reported equilibria for binding
of BlaI to the bla dsDNA, we propose that species 1 and 2 correspond to monomer–dsDNA
and dimer–dsDNA complexes, respectively. We also note that
the transition between species 1 and 2 straddles the dissociation
constant for the MecI dimer of 0.30 ± 0.03 μM (Figure B).

We studied binding of the MecI protein
to the operator regions
of the mec and bla operons by fluorescence
anisotropy. Anisotropy data were fit using equations for seven distinct
models of binding. The best fit for binding
of MecI to the bla operator region (Figure A) was achieved with the equations derived for the
model described in the inset of Figure A (see
the  for equations),
which accounted for sequential binding of two MecI monomers (Kd1 = 0.3 ± 0.1 μM, and Kd2 = 0.3 ± 0.1 μM) and for binding of the MecI
dimer to the DNA (Kd3 = 0.4 ± 0.2
μM) (Table ). Similarly, for the case
of binding of MecI to the mec operator region, the
best fit was obtained with the same model [Kd1 &lt; 0.01 μM; Kd2 = 0.67
± 0.02 μM; Kd3 &lt; 0.03 μM
(Figure A and Table )]. These data correlated with the mass spectrometry data and with
the sedimentation equilibrium data that revealed that both the monomer
and dimer of MecI were present in solution. We add that our previous
evaluation of binding of BlaI to the operator region of the bla operon was also consistent with this model. Here we
also show that the same model accounted for binding of BlaI to the mec operator region (Figure B and
Table ). Hence, the four sets of interactions
that are outlined for the two proteins with the two operators are
similar to each other, as indeed the systems are kin from an evolutionary
perspective (Table ). However, there are some
subtle differences as MecI and BlaI monomers and dimers bind tighter
to the mec operator region. The predominant DNA complex
is the one with the monomer in the case of BlaI, while the amount
of the dimer–DNA complex equals or exceeds the amount of the
monomer complex for MecI, in the higher range of in vivo protein concentrations ().

Dissociation Constants for Binding
of MecI or BlaI to the mec or bla Operator
 	dsDNA	Kd1 (μM)	Kd2 (μM)	Kd3 (μM)	
MecI	mec	&lt;0.01	0.67 ± 0.02	&lt;0.03	
 	bla	0.3 ± 0.1	0.3 ± 0.1	0.4 ± 0.2	
BlaI	mec	0.013 ± 0.006	2.8 ± 0.1	&lt;0.04	
 	bla	0.45 ± 0.07	2.6 ± 0.1	0.72 ± 0.07	
Kd1 and Kd2 define dissociation of the monomer from the
monomer–DNA and dimer–DNA complexes, respectively, and Kd3 is for dissociation of the dimer from the
dimer–DNA complex.

Data from ref ().

To assess the relevance
of these dissociation constants to the
case of living bacteria, we evaluated the concentrations of MecI in S. aureus strains NRS70 and MRSA252. The analysis was performed
by Western blotting, and the concentration of MecI was estimated with
a standard curve prepared with purified MecI (). The cytoplasmic concentrations of
MecI in S. aureus MRSA252 were estimated to be approximately
0.6–1.6 μM at the exponential phase of growth and 1.1–3.0
μM in the stationary phase. On the other hand, S. aureus NRS70 gave lower levels of MecI (&lt;0.2 μM in the stationary
phase). Incidentally, we have determined () that our anti-BlaI and anti-MecI antibodies do
not have cross-reactivities between the MecI and BlaI proteins, notwithstanding
their similarities in sequence and structure. These in vivo concentrations indicate that the full set of events of the DNA binding
model are relevant for S. aureus strain MRSA252,
but the contribution of MecI to the repression of genes in strain
NRS70 is dominated by monomer binding.

Fluorescence anisotropy
measurements for (A) binding of MecI to
the mec (●) and bla (○)
operators and (B) binding of BlaI to the mec operator
(●). The lines show the fit to the model given as the inset
of panel A.

The data of Table  indicate that in the
cases of binding of MecI to the mec operator and
binding of BlaI to either the mec or bla operator, monomer binding (Kd1) dominates,
followed by that of the dimer (Kd3). The
second step in sequential monomer binding (Kd2) cannot occur, except at much higher repressor concentrations.
All three binding events would appear to compete with one another
in the case of binding of MecI to the bla operator,
so this scenario is distinct.

How does S. aureus recover from mobilization in
response to the antibiotic? First, the activated BlaR1 or MecR1 should
return to its unactivated form. Because the ester linkage of the sensor
domain with the antibiotic enjoys considerable longevity, nature resorted to proteolytic turnover of these
proteins, which is initiated by an autolytic process in the case of
BlaR1.− This allows for the buildup of the concentration
of the gene repressor(s), which slows transcription of the genes in
the operon. The transcriptional events cannot be shut down entirely,
as a basal level is needed to replenish proteins that are turned over
regularly as vanguards against future contact with antibiotics. Given
the concentration of the operator, that of MecI in vivo, and the DNA dissociation constants reported herein, our analysis
reveals that 1–4% of the operator molecules in a S.
aureus culture would be uncomplexed and would experience
transcription in the absence of an antibiotic (). A similar analysis for binding of
BlaI to the mec operator gives 0.7–2.4% uncomplexed
DNA. Because we deal with a single chromosomal copy in the case of
the mec operon and a few in the case of the plasmid-borne bla operon, one needs to consider populations of bacteria
in this analysis and not a single microorganism. As such, a basal
level of transcription will take place incrementally in an entire
population of S. aureus upon removal of the challenge
by the β-lactam antibiotic, to allow for the return to demobilization
of resources in the antibiotic.

Supporting Information Available
Experimental procedures for
MecI and BlaI (cloning and purification), MecI ultracentrifugation
experiments (sedimentation velocity and sedimentation equilibrium),
MecI quantification in S. aureus cells, fluorescence
anisotropy experiments, and simulation of species. This material is
available free of charge via the Internet at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bi500074w_si_001.pdf

Author Contributions
B. Blázquez
and L. I. Llarrull contributed equally to this work.

This work was supported
by National Institutes of Health Grant AI104987 and by postdoctoral
fellowships from the Fundación Española para la Ciencia
y la Tecnología and Ministerio de Educación, Cultura
y Deporte (to B. Blázquez).

The authors
declare no competing financial interests.

