Polyketides
are a large class
of medicinally relevant natural products, many of which are produced
in an assembly line fashion by multimodular polyketide synthases (PKSs).
Each PKS module is composed of several enzymatic domains that together
are responsible for one round of polyketide chain elongation and processing.
The acyltransferase (AT) domains within each module are responsible
for selection of coenzyme A (CoA)-linked extender units for incorporation
into the growing polyketide chain. Because
this specificity influences the structural diversity and biological
activity of the natural product, AT domains are often targeted in
the engineering of PKSs for the production of novel polyketides.

The reaction catalyzed by AT domains is
shown in Scheme . Each AT transfers an acyl
group from an α-carboxyacyl-CoA
(carboxyacyl-CoA) extender unit to the phosphopantetheine arm of an
acyl carrier protein (ACP) domain. Assembly line PKSs are known to
harbor two types of AT domains. In systems such as the 6-deoxyerythronolide
B synthase (DEBS), each AT domain is paired with its own ACP domain;
these ATs are typically referred to as cis-acting
AT domains (Scheme A). In contrast, trans-acting ATs exist as stand-alone enzymes; they catalyze
extender unit transfer onto one or more ACPs of a multimodular PKS
assembly line (Scheme B,C). Examples of PKSs harboring trans-acting
AT domains include assembly lines that synthesize disorazole, leinamycin, and bryostatin.

Reactions Catalyzed by Three Acyltransferase
(AT) Domains
(A) The cis-AT domain from DEBS module 3 transfers a methylmalonyl extender
unit from the corresponding carboxyacyl-CoA precursor onto the phosphopantetheine
arm of the ACP within the same module; (B) the trans-AT from the DSZS loads malonyl extender units onto the phosphopantetheine
arms of all the ACP domains of this polyketide synthase; module 1
of DSZS is shown as a representative example; (C) the trans-AT from the kirromycin synthase, KirCII, exclusively transfers an
ethylmalonyl extender unit from the corresponding carboxyacyl-CoA
precursor onto the phosphopantetheine arm of the ACP in module 5;
the remaining ACP domains of the kirromycin polyketide assembly line
are poor substrates for this trans-acting AT.

trans-Acting AT domains have the potential to
be useful engineering tools: a cis-AT could in principle
be inactivated by site-directed mutagenesis, and the resulting PKS
could be complemented with a trans-AT that transfers
a different extender unit onto the ACP domain of the module. However,
rational implementation of such a strategy requires a firm understanding
of the carboxyacyl-CoA and ACP specificities of these AT domains.

Most trans-AT domains are specific for malonyl-CoA.
A trans-AT involved in the biosynthesis of kirromycin,
however, was shown to preferentially utilize ethylmalonyl-CoA extender
units. Indeed, this enzyme was able to
load its cognate ACP with a range of non-natural extender units.trans-Acting ATs may also have
good tolerance for unnatural ACP substrates., For
example, the AT from the disorazole synthase (DSZS) had higher specificity
constants (kcat/KM) for ACP domains from DEBS than did an AT from the DEBS assembly
line. In this study, we therefore sought
to exploit a recently developed fluorometric assay to compare the specificity of the DSZS AT, the ethylmalonyl-specific
kirromycin AT (KirCII), and a representative AT domain from DEBS for
alternative carboxyacyl-CoA and ACP substrates. In turn, these quantitative
insights led us to predict the efficacy with which the two trans-AT domains would complement a mutant of the DEBS assembly
line in which a single AT domain had been catalytically inactivated.
Our predictions were verified in vitro using a recently
established LC-MS assay.

Experimental
Procedures
Reagents and Chemicals
Protein
Expression and Purification
Isopropyl β-d-1-thiogalactopyranoside
(IPTG) was from Gold Biotechnology.
Ni-NTA affinity resin was from MCLab, and SDS-PAGE gradient gels were
from Bio-Rad. The Hi-Trap Q anion exchange column was from GE Healthcare.
The Ni-NTA superflow cartridge was from Qiagen, and centrifugal filter
units were from Millipore.

Synthesis
of Ethylmalonyl-CoA
All solvents and chemicals
were from Fisher Scientific with the following exceptions: diethylethylmalonate
was from Santa Cruz Biotechnology, and coenzyme A, thiophenol, dimethylformamide,
and dicyclohexylcarbodiimide were from Sigma-Aldrich.

Fluorometric Assays
Methylmalonyl-CoA,
malonyl-CoA,
β-NAD+, NADH, α-ketoglutarate dehydrogenase
(porcine heart) (αKGDH), α-ketoglutarate, thiamine pyrophosphate
(TPP), and EDTA were from Sigma-Aldrich. TCEP was from CalBiochem
and BSA was from New England Biolabs. The 96-well microtiter plates
(black polystyrene, flat bottom, half area, nonbinding surface) were
from Corning.

In vitrotrans-AT Complementation
of DEBS
NADPH, propionyl-CoA, methylmalonic acid, malonic
acid, and magnesium chloride hexahydrate were from Sigma-Aldrich.
ATP was from Teknova.

Constructs for Protein Expression
DEBS AT3, ACP3, and
ACP6 were expressed from plasmids pAYC47, pVYA05, and pFW55, respectively. The DSZS AT and ACP1 were expressed from
plasmids pFW3 and pFW69, respectively. Proteins required to reconstitute DEBS, including
the loading didomain, module 1, module 2, DEBS2, and DEBS3 were expressed
from pBL12, pBL13, pBL36, pFW98, and pFW100, respectively. The genes for Streptomyces coelicolor MatB and methylmalonyl-CoA epimerase, both in pET28 expression vectors,
were gifts from Professor Michelle Chang’s laboratory at the
University of California, Berkeley.

All remaining proteins were
expressed from DNA constructs prepared for this study. Genes encoding
KirCII and the ACP domains from modules 4 and 5 of the kirromycin
synthase were purchased from Genscript as codon-optimized sequences
for expression in Escherichia coli. These synthetic
sequences can be found in Table S1, . Expression plasmids for KirCII, ACP4, and ACP5
(pKW29, pFW139, and pFW140 respectively) were engineered by inserting
the corresponding NdeI–EcoRI fragments into a pET28 vector. The expression plasmid encoding
DSZS ACP7.1 was obtained by PCR amplification of the relevant gene
as an NdeI–EcoRI fragment
from pKOS254–190.4, followed by
insertion into a pET28 vector to obtain pBD61. The expression plasmid
encoding DEBS module 1 harboring a Ser → Ala mutation in the
AT active site was constructed using Quikchange site-directed mutagenesis
(Agilent) on plasmid pBL13 as the template, resulting in plasmid pTR1. The identity of all constructs was confirmed
by DNA sequencing.

Protein Expression and Purification
All plasmids were
introduced into E. coli BAP1 cells by electroporation. DEBS AT3 and the DSZS AT were expressed
and purified as previously described., KirCII was
purified according to a recent reference with slight modifications. Cells were grown in LB medium at 37 °C
until the culture optical density reached 0.6. The culture was cooled
to 16 °C, induced with 0.2 mM IPTG, and grown for an additional
15 h. Cells were harvested by centrifugation (4420g for 15 min). The cell pellet was resuspended in lysis buffer (50
mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.7, 500 mM NaCl, 20% glycerol) and lysed by sonication
(5 × 1 min, on ice). After centrifugation at 42700g for 60 min, the supernatant was incubated with Ni-NTA agarose for
1 h. The resin was washed with 10 column volumes of wash buffer (50
mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.7, 500 mM NaCl, 20 mM imidazole), and the bound
protein was eluted with four column volumes of elution buffer (50
mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.7, 500 mM NaCl, 400 mM imidazole). The eluent was
concentrated using a 30000 MW cutoff centrifugal filter and redissolved
in 25 mL of buffer A (50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.7, 500 mM NaCl, 20% glycerol,
10 mM imidazole). The solution was applied to a Ni-NTA Superflow cartridge,
and protein was eluted with a linear gradient of increasing imidazole
concentration (10–400 mM). Fractions containing KirCII were
pooled and concentrated in storage buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.7,
500 mM NaCl, 8% glycerol).

To express ACP proteins, plasmids
were introduced into E. coli BAP1 cells by electroporation. Holo-DEBS ACP3, DEBS ACP6, DSZS
ACP1, DSZS ACP7.1, Kirr ACP4, and Kirr ACP5 were all expressed and
purified using a previously described protocol. Complete phosphopantetheinylation of ACP proteins was confirmed
by MALDI-TOF mass spectrometry.

The DEBS loading didomain, module
1, module 2, DEBS2, DEBS3, and
module 1-ATnull proteins were expressed and purified as
previously described.

Acyltransferase
Assays
Assays were performed as previously
described with the following modifications.
Assays were run in 96-well microtiter plates, and NADH fluorescence
was monitored using a Synergy HT multimode microplate reader (BioTek).
Samples were illuminated with a tungsten light source and a 360 nm
filter, and fluorescence emission was monitored using a 460 nm filter.
For each assay, data was collected for 5 min using the minimum interval
between measurements (8 s). All measurements were made in triplicate
at a minimum, and appropriate controls lacking enzyme were run in
parallel.

Assay components were prepared in three different
solutions. For kinetic measurements involving varying concentrations
of alternative carboxyacyl-CoA substrates, solution 1 contained the
ACP, α-KGDH, NAD+, TPP, and α-ketoglutarate
at four times their final concentrations, solution 2 contained the
carboxyacyl-CoA substrate prepared at four times its final concentration,
and solution 3 contained the AT prepared at twice its final concentration.
For kinetic measurements involving varying concentrations of alternative
ACP substrates, solution 1 contained the carboxyacyl-CoA substrate,
α-KGDH, NAD+, TPP, and α-ketoglutarate at four
times their final concentrations, solution 2 contained the ACP prepared
at four times its final concentration, and solution 3 contained the
AT domain prepared at twice its final concentration. All solutions
were prepared in 50 mM sodium phosphate buffer, pH 7.6, 10% glycerol,
5 mM TCEP, and 1 mM EDTA. The AT stock solutions also contained 0.1
mg/mL BSA. Solutions 1 and 2 (25 μL of each) were combined for
approximately 1 min before addition of 50 μL of solution 3 to
initiate the reaction. Final assay concentrations were 50 mM sodium
phosphate, pH 7.6, 10% glycerol, 1 mM TCEP, 1 mM EDTA, 0.4 mU/μL
αKGDH, 0.4 mM NAD+, 0.4 mM TPP, 2 mM α-ketoglutarate,
and 0.05 mg/mL BSA. AT, ACP, and carboxyacyl-CoA concentrations were
varied as described.

To measure rates of carboxyacyl-CoA hydrolysis
by AT domains in
the absence of an ACP cosubstrate, enzyme concentrations ranged between
0.1 and 1 μM, and carboxyacyl-CoA concentrations ranged between
0 and 200 μM. To measure acyl transfer kinetics in the presence
of varying concentrations of carboxyacyl-CoA or ACP substrates, the
concentration of DEBS AT3 was 0.2–0.5 μM, whereas KirCII
was present at a concentration of 0.5 μM. DSZS AT was present
at a concentration of 3–30 nM in assays involving malonyl-CoA,
and 0.2 μM for all other acyl-CoA substrates. Individual holo-ACP
and carboxyacyl-CoA concentrations ranged between 0 and 200 μM.

Data Analysis
Data was analyzed as previously described with several modifications. Relevant competing
hydrolysis rates were subtracted from their transacylation counterparts
before the calculation of the kinetic parameters describing transacylation.
In analyzing data describing the transacylation of DSZS ACP1 and ACP7.1
with malonyl-CoA by the DSZS AT domain, only the linear portion of
the curve was considered due to possible rate limitation by the coupling
enzyme at the highest ACP concentrations. The velocity versus concentration
curves were fit to the Michaelis–Menten equation using the
curve-fitting functionality of GraphPad Prism.

Synthesis of Ethylmalonyl-CoA
Ethylmalonyl-CoA was
synthesized as previously described with
several modifications. For a detailed protocol, see the .

In Vitro Complementation of the Mutant DEBS
Assembly Line by DSZS AT or KirCII
The fully reconstituted
DEBS assembly line (composed of purified proteins) was assayed as
previously described, with the AT-null
version of module 1 replacing its wild-type counterpart. The DSZS
AT was titrated from 0 to 1 μM in the presence of equimolar
concentrations of malonate and methylmalonate (1 mM each); these diacids
were converted in situ into racemic forms of their
corresponding CoA monothioesters using the Streptomyces coelicolor MatB and methylmalonyl-CoA epimerase enzymes, as before. Similarly,
KirCII was titrated into the AT1-null DEBS assembly line from 0 to
10 μM in the presence of equimolar concentrations of ethylmalonate
and methylmalonate (1 mM each). All reactions were quenched after
3 h by the addition of ethyl acetate and analyzed by LC-MS as previously
described. The presence of 6-deoxyerythronolide
B (6-dEB) was verified by comparison of LC-MS data to that of an authentic
6-dEB standard. The putative 12-desmethyl-6-dEB
analogue, didesmethyl-6-dEB analogues, and 12-desmethyl-12-ethyl-6-dEB
analogue (along with other ethyl-6-dEB analogues produced by natural
incorporation of ethylmalonate by the DEBS assembly line) were identified
by first extracting the [M + Na]+ species (m/z = 395.22–395.26, m/z = 381.20–381.24, and m/z = 423.26–423.28, respectively). The presence of
these analogues was then considered confirmed only if ions for at
least two of the following derived species were also present: [M +
H]+, [M + H – H2O]+, or [M
+ H – 2H2O]+. For representative extracted
ion chromatograms (EIC), full mass spectra, and details on integration
areas used for quantification of EIC values, please see Figure S1
(DSZS) and Figure S2 (KirCII), . Although the 12-desmethyl-12-ethyl-6-dEB analogue could not be
identified definitively, we did observe a KirCII-dependent change
in analogue ratios (Figure S2, ).

Native and Mutant DEBS Assembly Line Control Reactions
The fully reconstituted DEBS assembly line (composed of purified
proteins) was assayed as previously described, in the presence of 1 mM methylmalonate. The mutant DEBS
assembly line in the absence of trans-AT was assayed
similarly, with the AT-null version of module 1 replacing its wild-type
counterpart. This reaction was also run in the presence of 1 mM methylmalonate.
Reactions were run for 30 min.

Results
For this
study, we chose to compare the properties of three acyltransferase
(AT) domains: (i) the ethylmalonyl-CoA specific trans-AT domain from the kirromycin synthase, KirCII, due to its unique
substrate specificity;,, (ii)
the malonyl-CoA specific trans-AT domain from the
DSZS,, which was previously shown to transacylate
DEBS ACP domains; (iii) the methylmalonyl-CoA
specific cis-AT domain from module 3 of DEBS, which
has been characterized both structurally and kinetically. The reactions catalyzed
by each of these AT domains are shown in Scheme . The panel of carboxyacyl-CoA substrates included the natural substrates
of each of these three enzymes. The acceptor ACP cosubstrates used
in this study included: (i) the ACP domain from module 5 of the kirromycin
synthase, which is the natural substrate of KirCII;,, (ii) the ACP from module 4 of the kirromycin
synthase, which is not normally transacylated by KirCII;,, (iii) both ACP1 and the first
ACP from module 7 (ACP7.1) of the DSZS, each of which is apparently
recognized by the DSZS AT; (iv) both DEBS ACP3 and ACP6, representing
preferred and nonpreferred substrates, respectively, of DEBS AT3.,,

Hydrolytic Activity of cis- and trans-AT Domains
Carboxyacyl-CoA
hydrolytic activity has been
observed for cis-AT domains from several different
PKS assembly lines., Although hydrolytic cleavage
of a thioester linkage by a trans-AT-like enzyme
has been proposed as a proofreading mechanism in the biosynthesis
of pederin, the hydrolytic activity of trans-AT domains toward carboxyacyl-CoA substrates has not
been examined. We therefore determined the kinetic parameters describing
DSZS AT-, KirCII-, and DEBS AT3-mediated hydrolysis for a panel of
three carboxyacyl-CoA substrates (Figure ).
Interestingly, the basal hydrolytic activity varies considerably among
the AT domains tested. While the rates of hydrolysis (as measured
by kcat/KM) of all three carboxyacyl-CoA substrates were below detectable limits
for the DSZS AT, the hydrolytic rate constants of KirCII and DEBS
AT3 were comparable to their transacylation rate constants for a number
of the substrates tested. KirCII hydrolyzed carboxyacyl-CoA substrates
relatively indiscriminately, whereas DEBS AT3 showed the highest rate
of hydrolysis with its natural substrate, methylmalonyl-CoA. It is
therefore unlikely that the substrate specificity of DEBS AT3 is determined
by a hydrolytic mechanism, but rather likely that the enhanced hydrolytic
rate simply reflects the strong substrate specificity of this cis-AT domain. In contrast,
KirCII may utilize a hydrolytic correction mechanism in vivo so as to minimize competing incorporation of methylmalonyl or malonyl
extender units.

Kinetic analysis of the hydrolytic reaction catalyzed
by cis- and trans-AT domains in
the absence
of added ACP acceptor. Note that AT-catalyzed hydrolysis involves
attack of the carboxyacyl–enzyme intermediate by a solvent
nucleophile rather than the phosphopantetheine arm of the ACP cosubstrate:
(A) DEBS AT3; (B) KirCII. aPreviously reported data shown
for comparison.

Extender Unit Specificity in AT-Catalyzed Transacylation Reactions
To quantify the transacylation specificity of DEBS AT3, DSZS AT,
and KirCII for alternative extender units, varying concentrations
of carboxyacyl-CoA substrates were used in the presence of a fixed
concentration of the cognate holo-ACP cosubstrate. As seen in Figure , all AT domains had at least 20-fold specificity
for their cognate substrate. Of the three, DSZS AT had the highest
substrate specificity, with a kcat/KM for malonyl-CoA approximately 5 orders of
magnitude higher than the kcat/KM for either methylmalonyl-CoA or ethylmalonyl-CoA.
In contrast to DEBS AT3, which could not be saturated by its cognate
methylmalonyl-CoA substrate, both trans-ATs had KM values for their cognate substrates in the
2–10 μM range.

Kinetic analysis of the carboxyacyl-CoA substrate
dependence of
the transacylation reaction catalyzed by cis- and trans-AT domains. MCoA, malonyl-CoA; MMCoA, methylmalonyl-CoA;
EMCoA, ethylmalonyl-CoA. (A) DEBS AT3; (B) DSZS AT; (C) KirCII. aPreviously reported data shown for comparison.

The data in Figure  also revealed
an unexpected
trend with respect to the specificity constants for transacylation
compared with those for hydrolysis. AT-catalyzed transacylation of
an ACP acceptor is normally thought to occur by a ping-pong bi-bi
mechanism, in which the first half-reaction
involves formation of a carboxyacyl–enzyme intermediate and
release of the coenzyme A (CoASH) product, while the second half reaction
involves nucleophilic attack on the carboxyacyl–enzyme intermediate
by the terminal thiol of the phosphopantetheine arm of the ACP (Scheme A). Competing hydrolysis involves attack on the
carboxyacyl–enzyme intermediate by a solvent nucleophile rather
than the nucleophilic thiol. According to this mechanism, in the absence
of high concentrations of free CoASH, the value of kcat/KM should be the same
for carboxyacyl-CoA-limited transacylation and for competing hydrolysis,
because the first half-reaction is effectively irreversible in either
case. The experimentally determined values of kcat/KM for hydrolysis of the carboxyacyl-CoA
substrate and for transfer to the ACP are essentially identical for
DEBS AT3. This suggests that the ping-pong mechanism is relevant for
this enzyme and the carboxyacyl-CoA specificity is primarily determined
by the first half-reaction, since the kcat/KM is intrinsically a function of only
those microscopic rates constants up to and including, but not following,
the first irreversible step. Indeed,
the invariability of kcat/KM as a function of the concentration (or identity) of
the second substrate is a fundamental characteristic of the canonical
ping-pong mechanism. Unexpectedly, however, the observed kcat/KM values for the carboxyacyl-CoA
substrates of both KirCII and especially DSZS AT vary considerably
when comparing the hydrolytic and transacylation reactions for each trans-AT. Both enzymes show a marked increase in the specificity
constant kcat/KM for their cognate carboxyacyl-CoA substrates when the holo-ACP cosubstrate
is present. Assuming that hydrolysis is a relevant reaction catalyzed
by the DSZS AT (despite measured hydrolysis rates being below detectable
limits) and that comparison of kcat/KM values is meaningful for this enzyme, the
above observation is inconsistent with a classical ping-pong mechanism.
Rather, it suggests that interaction with the ACP cosubstrate occurs
prior to irreversible release of the CoASH product during transacylation
by both trans-ATs. Examination of the double reciprocal
plots (Lineweaver–Burk) at varying ACP concentrations could
resolve these mechanistic possibilities. The low KM values (below 10 μM) of these trans-ATs for their cognate carboxyacyl-CoA substrates, however, made
detection of product difficult using the coupled assay and therefore
precluded accurate generation of double reciprocal plots, despite
our best efforts.

Reaction Mechanisms Describing AT-Catalyzed Transacylation
(A) The traditional ping-pong
bi-bi mechanism; (B) possible sequential or random ordered bi-bi mechanisms
in which the ACP binds before formation of the carboxyacyl–enzyme
intermediate; (C) possible sequential ordered bi-bi mechanism in which
the carboxyacyl–enzyme intermediate forms before ACP binding,
but the ACP must bind before CoASH release. The trans-AT domains characterized in this study appear to function by transacylation
mechanisms such as those shown in parts B and C, in which ACP association
occurs before the first irreversible step (•Association; ∼Covalent
intermediate; −Covalent product).

ACP Specificity
in AT-Catalyzed Transacylation Reactions
In order to complement
a mutant PKS assembly line, a trans-AT domain must
be tolerant of a range of noncognate ACP substrates.
We therefore quantified the ACP specificity of each of the three AT
enzymes by varying the ACP concentration in the presence of fixed
concentrations of their respective cognate carboxyacyl-CoA substrates
(Figure ). The ACP specificity of KirCII is
comparable to that of DEBS AT3, with both displaying approximately
20-fold preference for their cognate ACP partner compared with the
next most active ACP acceptor, as measured by the relative values
of kcat/KM. In contrast, the DSZS AT is considerably more promiscuous with
respect to the ACP substrate, with only a modest 5–7-fold preference
for its cognate ACP partners compared with other ACP proteins. This
is consistent with a previous estimate of the relative ACP specificity
of DSZS AT, determined by a different assay. Interestingly, the kcat/KM values for DSZS AT with the two DEBS ACP domains were
three times greater than the kcat/KM displayed by DEBS AT3 for its native partner,
DEBS ACP3. By contrast, the corresponding kcat/KM values for KirCII-mediated transacylation
are substantially lower than those seen with the DSZS AT. Thus, the
tolerance of DSZS AT for variations in the acceptor ACP domain clearly
makes it a superior candidate for complementation of module-specific
AT lesions, notwithstanding its restricted specificity for the carboxyacyl-CoA
substrate. The specificity constants for trans-AT
catalyzed transacylation with a noncognate assembly line ACP should
therefore be considered when designing biosynthetic complementation
systems, as described in the following section.

Kinetic analysis of the
ACP substrate dependence of the transacylation
reaction catalyzed by cis and trans-AT domains. (A) DEBS AT3, (B) DSZS AT, (C) KirCII. aPreviously
reported data shown for comparison.

In Vitro Complementation of an AT-null DEBS
Assembly Line with trans-Acting Acyltransferases
To test the implications of the above kinetic analysis of stand-alone
AT domains on the operation of a complete PKS assembly line, we utilized
the reconstituted DEBS enzyme system recently developed in our laboratory. For these studies, the protein harboring the
native DEBS module 1 was replaced with a mutant in which the AT domain
had been inactivated by an active site Ser → Ala substitution
(Figures A and A).
Based on the relevant kcat/KM parameters (Figures  and ), we predicted that the DSZS AT would be more effective
than the KirCII AT in supplying its preferred malonyl-CoA extender
unit to the mutated DEBS assembly line. What could not be predicted a priori, however, was the dependence of trans-complementation on the concentration of the trans-AT or the effect of introducing a non-native extender unit in the
modified diketide intermediate produced by the complemented DEBS module
1 on the net turnover rate of the entire PKS assembly line.

In
vitro complementation of the fully reconstituted
DEBS assembly line harboring an AT1-null mutation with the trans-acting DSZS AT in the presence of equimolar malonate
and methylmalonate concentrations: (A) Schematic of the overall enzyme
system and the expected product, 12-desmethyl-6-dEB; (B) LC-MS analysis
of product distribution ratios at varying DSZS AT concentrations.
For details regarding the identification of products and extracted
ion chromatogram (EIC) quantification, see . IS, internal standard, N-Boc glutamic acid benzyl
ester (11.6 μM).

In vitro complementation of the fully reconstituted
DEBS assembly line harboring an AT1-null mutation with the trans-acting KirCII AT in the presence of equimolar ethylmalonate
and methylmalonate concentrations: (A) Schematic of the overall enzyme
system and the expected product, 12-desmethyl-12-ethyl-6-dEB; (B)
LC-MS analysis of product distribution ratios at varying KirCII concentrations.
Because DEBS incorporates ethylmalonate naturally, EIC quantification of the 12-desmethyl-12-ethyl-6-dEB analogue
also includes other ethyl-6-dEB analogues. For details regarding the
identification of products and EIC quantification, see the . IS, internal standard,
N-Boc-glutamic acid benzyl ester (11.6 μM).

When the DSZS AT was titrated up to a final concentration
of 1
μM in the presence of nonlimiting concentrations of methylmalonyl-CoA
and malonyl-CoA and 2 μM of each DEBS protein, increasing yields
of the putative 12-desmethyl-6-dEB product were observed (Figure B). Indeed, this 6-dEB analogue was produced at
a DSZS AT concentration as low as 10 nM. Unexpectedly, the natural
product, 6-dEB, was also observed under all conditions tested, even
in the absence of added DSZS AT, implying that DEBS ACP1 can be transacylated
at measurable efficiency by one or more of the catalytically active
DEBS AT domains of the remaining five modules. The possibility that
the Ser → Ala mutant of AT1 has residual activity is ruled
out by our previous observation that the analogous mutation in module
2 of DEBS yields a protein with undetectable turnover capacity. Further, we have observed that the AT1-null
mutant shows no capacity for turnover in the absence of trans-AT, based on an NADPH consumption assay similar to those performed
previously (data not shown). Also notable
is the appearance of a molecular ion corresponding to the mass of
a didesmethyl-6-dEB analogue at the highest DSZS AT concentrations,
suggesting competitive incorporation of a malonyl extender unit in
other modules of the engineered DEBS assembly line harboring wild-type
AT domains. Our data thus indicate that the DSZS AT is potent enough
to complement an AT lesion in DEBS at substoichiometric concentrations
that could readily be achieved in vivo.

In
contrast to the effective complementation of the AT1-null form
of DEBS by DSZS AT, the available kinetic evidence predicted that
analogous trans-complementation by KirCII (Figure A) would be much less effective. This experiment
is further complicated by the fact that the wild-type DEBS assembly
line naturally incorporates ethylmalonyl extender units. Nonetheless, as shown in Figure S2, , in the presence of KirCII,
we observed a concentration-dependent increase in the yield of one
ethylmalonyl-CoA-derived analogue, provisionally assigned as 12-desmethyl-12-ethyl-6-dEB.
This analogue remained a minor product, even in the presence of a
5-fold molar excess of KirCII relative to DEBS (Figure B), suggesting that KirCII does not compete effectively with
other functional DEBS AT domains in the transacylation of ACP1. The
kinetic data in Figures  and  also suggest that, under the assay conditions, the preferred
extender unit for KirCII is methylmalonate.

Discussion
While most PKS assembly lines contain dedicated acyltransferase
(AT) domains harbored within each module, several systems utilize
stand-alone ATs that act in trans. These trans-acting ATs may have considerable potential for regioselective
production of modified polyketide antibiotics if they can be used
to complement mutant biosynthetic assembly lines in which the natural cis-AT domains of targeted modules have been inactivated.
Rational implementation of such a strategy, however, requires a detailed
understanding of the catalytic mechanism of the reactions catalyzed
by these stand-alone ATs, as well as their specificity for both carboxyacyl-CoA
and ACP substrates. We have characterized both the hydrolytic and
the transacylation activities of two representative trans-AT enzymes, the malonyl-CoA specific AT from the disorazole synthase,
DSZS AT, and the ethylmalonyl-CoA specific AT from the kirromycin
synthase, KirCII. We have also analyzed the individual specificity
of these two trans-AT enzymes for different carboxyacyl-CoA
and ACP substrates and compared these properties with those of a representative cis-AT domain, DEBS AT3. We have also evaluated the implications
of the mechanistic analysis of both trans-AT domains
by determining their ability to complement the entire DEBS assembly
line harboring a module-specific AT lesion.

Although we anticipated
at the onset of these studies that all
AT enzymes would catalyze acyl transfer by a standard ping-pong mechanism
(Scheme A), we were surprised to discover
that, in contrast to the behavior of the cis-AT3
domain of DEBS, the relative kcat/KM values for transacylation and for hydrolysis
of carboxyacyl-CoA substrates are significantly different for each trans-AT enzyme examined. This indicates that the presence,
and likely the identity, of the cosubstrate ACP acceptor protein influences
the carboxyacyl-CoA specificity parameter for both the DSZS and KirCII
ATs. This observation prompts consideration of alternative mechanisms
for this critical enzymatic component of assembly line PKSs (e.g.,
Scheme B,C) and suggests that the trans-AT-catalyzed reaction occurs in a coupled, vectorial
manner on an intact assembly line. Examination
of trans-AT catalytic mechanisms will be the topic
of further investigations in our laboratory.

The three AT domains
analyzed in this study showed significant
specificity for their cognate carboxyacyl-CoA substrate (at least
20-fold as measured by kcat/KM), with the DSZS AT exhibiting the highest level of substrate
specificity, with a kcat/KM for malonyl-CoA approximately 5 orders of magnitude
higher than that for either methylmalonyl-CoA or ethylmalonyl-CoA.
This trans-AT domain thus appears to have evolved
to maximize both the kcat and kcat/KM for its native
substrate. In contrast, KirCII appears to have evolved toward optimization
of KM only compared with other AT domains
(Figure ). At saturating substrate concentrations,
KirCII actually favors methylmalonyl-CoA over ethylmalonyl-CoA. Given
the likely low titers of both methylmalonyl- and ethylmalonyl-CoA
extender units in an actinomycete cellular environment,, optimization of KM is presumably an
effective specificity-determining strategy. This behavior should be
considered in the design of engineered PKS assembly lines, where extender
unit concentrations must be carefully controlled to achieve regiospecific
incorporation of an ethylmalonyl extender unit by KirCII.

In
contrast to its high carboxyacyl-CoA specificity, the DSZS AT
had a more modest, ∼10-fold, specificity for its cognate ACP
substrates compared with ACP domains from heterologous PKS systems.
This combination bodes well for the potential use of the enzyme as
a trans-acting AT in conjunction with an engineered
PKS assembly line. On the other hand, KirCII had a low kcat/KM value for noncognate
ACP domains. This suggests that, notwithstanding its promising carboxyacyl-CoA
tolerance and the potential to engineer
the AT-ACP protein–protein interface for improved interaction,trans-complementation using
KirCII would only be feasible if it could be drastically overexpressed
to give high protein concentrations in vivo (Figure ).

To test these predictions, in vitro complementation
studies were performed with the DSZS AT or KirCII added to a fully
reconstituted DEBS assembly line in which the AT domain of the first
module had been inactivated by site-directed mutagenesis (Figures  and ). Whereas efficient trans-complementation was observed at substoichiometric
concentrations of DSZS AT, production of the putative 12-desmethyl-12-ethyl-6-dEB
analogue was extremely low even when KirCII was present in 5-fold
molar excess over the DEBS proteins.

Two other notable conclusions
can be drawn from these trans-complementation experiments.
First, as the concentration of the
DSZS AT was increased, the overall preference for the desired 12-desmethyl-6-dEB
product decreased due to the competing formation of additional putative
didesmethyl-6-dEB analogues, most likely due to competitive incorporation
of a malonyl extender unit by the DSZS AT at an otherwise fully functional
DEBS module. This suggests that the concentration of DSZS AT must
be carefully controlled so as to achieve regiospecific incorporation
of a non-native extender unit. Second, even at the highest tested
concentrations of both DSZS AT and KirCII, incorporation of a non-native
extender unit at module 1 of DEBS led to a significant drop in the
rate of product formation (Figure ). This
resulting decrease in overall productivity is not surprising given
that the DSZS AT or KirCII mediated transacylation must be followed
by at least 20 enzyme-catalyzed reactions that must accommodate the
resulting structural change and that the overall specificity of a
multistep metabolic pathway reflects the discrimination capacity of
individual active sites. The lower yield of 6-dEB analogues might
also result from hydrolysis of aberrant intermediates produced by
the assembly line, or it could be due to a partial decoupling of the
normal vectorial enzyme-catalyzed reactions controlled by the PKS. These observations warrant further investigation,
given their profound implications for polyketide biosynthetic engineering.

LC-MS
product profiles for the native DEBS assembly line and the
AT1-null DEBS assembly line with and without trans-AT. Methylmalonate was the only extender unit present in the native
DEBS and AT1-null DEBS (without trans-AT) controls.
Equimolar concentrations of methylmalonate and malonate (DSZS AT)
or methylmalonate and ethylmalonate (KirCII) were present in the complementation
reactions. All reactions were allowed to proceed for 30 min. For details
regarding the identification of products and EIC quantification, see . IS, internal standard,
N-Boc-glutamic acid benzyl ester (11.6 μM).

Supporting Information Available
Ethylmalonyl-CoA
synthesis
protocol, codon-optimized sequences used for expression of kirromycin
proteins, and LC-MS data. This material is available free of charge
via the Internet at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bi5004316_si_001.pdf

Author Contributions
⊥ B.J.D. and K.R.W. contributed equally. The manuscript was written
through contributions of all authors. All authors have given approval
to the final version of the manuscript.

K.R.W. is a
recipient of an NIH Institutional Research and Academic Career Development
Postdoctoral Award (Grant NIH K12-GM088033). This work was supported
by grants from the National Institutes of Health (Grant R01 GM087934
to C.K. and Grant R01 GM022172 to D.E.C.).

The authors declare
no
competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
The
authors thank Dr. Fong Tian Wong for plasmids pFW3, pFW139,
and pFW140 and for assistance in ordering codon-optimized constructs.
We also thank Dr. Elizabeth Sattely for advice and access to LC–MS
instrumentation (NIH Grant R00GM089985 and Stanford School of Engineering).

Abbreviations
PKSpolyketide synthase

ATacyltransferase

CoAcoenzyme A

ACPacyl carrier protein

DEBS6-deoxyerythronolide
B synthase

DSZSdisorazole synthase

LC-MSliquid chromatography–mass spectrometry

IPTGisopropyl β-d-1-thiogalactopyranoside

SDS-PAGEsodium dodecyl sulfate-polyacrylamide gel
electrophoresis

β-NAD+β-nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide

NADHnicotinamide adenine
dinucleotide, reduced form

α-KGDHα-ketoglutarate dehydrogenase

TPPthiamine pyrophosphate

EDTAethylenediaminetetraacetic
acid

TCEPtris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine

BSAbovine serum albumin

NADPHnicotinamide
adenine dinucleotide phosphate, reduced form

ATPadenosine triphosphate

Kirrkirromycin

X-CoAcarboxyacyl-CoA

6-dEB6-deoxyerythronolide
B

EICextracted
ion chromatogram

ISinternal standard

