ABC transporters constitute
a family of proteins that conduct important cellular transport functions.
Some members of this family catalyze the import of nutrients, while
others are responsible for the export of wastes and toxins, especially
amphipathic or hydrophobic cytotoxins., Several members
of this family also cause problems in the treatment of cancer and
viral infections because of their role in exporting cytotoxic chemotherapeutics
administered for the treatment of cancer or viral infection.− One of these problematic transporters is the multidrug resistance
P-glycoprotein (Pgp or ABCB1). Pgp is a 1280-residue, single polypeptide
that contains two transmembrane domains (TMDs) and two nucleotide
binding domains (NBDs) with a TMD1–NBD1–TMD2–NBD2
topology. The two nucleotide binding sites are shared between the
large N- and C-terminal nucleotide binding domains. Each TMD consists
of six transmembrane helices responsible for the binding and discharge
of transported substrates. The binding sites for transport substrates
[drug binding sites (DBS)] are formed by interaction of several transmembrane
helices.− Some sites appear to be large enough to accommodate more than one
drug molecule at a time. ATP hydrolysis
is stimulated in the presence of drugs that are transported, indicating
direct coupling of drug transport and ATP hydrolysis.− ATP hydrolysis most likely occurs via an alternating site mechanism. Formation and collapse of the catalytic transition
state may be directly coupled to the transport of drug across the
membrane.

Although high-resolution
structures of the human Pgp are not yet
available, crystal structures for mouse Pgp and several bacterial homologues exist.− In the structural
model for mouse Pgp, the catalytic glutamates that likely activate
the waters used in hydrolysis of ATP are
separated by &gt;30 Å, indicative of a complete disengagement
of
the two NBDs. Very similar structures resulted when the mouse Pgp
was cocrystallized with two different stereoisomers of cyclic tris-valineselenazole
inhibitors bound in the DBS. The widely
opened NBDs in these structures create a 9 Å opening for access
to the DBS on the cytoplasmic side of the membrane that are formed
by transmembrane (TM) helices (TM4 with TM6 and TM10 with TM12). Structures of the closely related Staphylococcus
aureus multidrug transporter (SAV1866) have been obtained
with either ADP bound or the nonhydrolyzable AMP-PNP bound to the
nucleotide binding sites., SAV1866 was shown to
transport many compounds that are known transport substrates for human
Pgp. The crystal structures of SAV1866
show fully engaged and dimerized NBDs with catalytic glutamyl residues
separated by only 14 Å. The TMDs of these structures are oriented
in an “outward-facing” arrangement with a relatively
polar cavity exposed to the extracellular space. This orientation
has been equated with a “drug release” conformation., ATP hydrolysis and the release of ADP and Pi may cause
a change to an “inward” orientation that reveals high-affinity
drug binding sites. Four structures of
the bacterial lipid flippase, MsbA, show
dramatic conformational differences that have been equated with different
stages of the transport mechanism. These
include structures with TMDs opened inward with slightly disengaged
NBDs [Protein Data Bank (PDB) entry 3B5X], and structures with an opened outward
DBS and fully engaged, dimerized NBDs (PDB entries 3B5Z, 3B5Y, and 3B60). One of these structures
is noteworthy in having ADP-Vi, a transition state analogue,
bound in one of the nucleotide binding sites (PDB entry 3B5Z). In addition, one
MsbA structure displayed fully disengaged NBDs with catalytic glutamates
separated by more than 65 Å, similar to the mouse Pgp discussed
above.

Powerful new computational schemes for a more complete
analysis
of protein dynamics and ligand binding have recently been reported.− These methods begin with molecular dynamics (MD) simulations from
which representative “non-redundant” structures are
identified using statistical methods.− These methods were applied here using targeted
MD simulations of Pgp with four crystal structures of homologues of
Pgp as targets. In this approach, the current position of each atom
is steered toward target coordinates derived from the crystal structures
via application of a force vector calculated to decrease the distance
between present and target positions., Targeted MD
allows sampling of large conformational changes that would normally
be inaccessible because of the large energy barriers that likely lie
between such conformations and limitations in computational time.
The resulting nonredundant intermediate structures derived from these
targeted MD calculations were then used in ligand docking calculations
to elucidate binding of the ligand to the different structures. This
approach combines the conformational information gained from MD with
ligand docking and accounts for the dynamic movement of both protein
and ligand.

In this paper, homology models of human P-glycoprotein
have been
applied to targeted MD simulations to move the Pgp structure through
conformations that were based on just a few known, catalytically relevant
crystal structures. These crystal structures are germane to the dynamics
of transport catalysis by Pgp, because the transporter very likely
transitions through structures that are similar to these individual
states during catalysis. In this study, 26 novel, nonredundant catalytically
intermediate conformations were identified using the targeted molecular
dynamics techniques. Ligand docking studies over the dynamic trajectory
of the 26 catalytically relevant structures were performed, and results
were consistent with published biochemical and biophysical findings.
The results of these studies are discussed with regard to the molecular
mechanisms that underlie the drug binding and drug transport mechanisms
of human P-glycoprotein.

Experimental Procedures
Materials
The Visual Molecular Dynamics program suite
(VMD) was extensively used in this work.
MD experiments were performed using NAMD. XPLOR-NIH was employed for simulated annealing calculations., Secondary structures were identified using STRIDE. Procheck version 3.5.4 was used to validate the geometry
of calculated protein structures. Small
commodity computing clusters, the High Performance Computing Cluster
at SMU, and the Ranger cluster at the Texas Advanced Computing Center
were used for calculations.

Modeling Human Pgp with Sav1866
Models for human P-glycoprotein
were created using sequence homologies between Sav1866 and the protein sequence of Pgp (Uniprot entry P08183).
After the alignment of sequences with clustalW, the coordinates of non-hydrogen backbone and Cβ atoms
of the structural template Sav1866 (PDB entry 2HYD, with ADP bound) that were homologous to Pgp residues were
renamed as Pgp residues. Corresponding backbone and side chains were
then built using psfgen. The linker that connects NBD1 and TMD2 in the human Pgp, residues
632–693, was not included in these models. Lists of distances
and topologies (helical or sheet) were compiled with VMD. These lists
were employed as distance or torsional restraints for use in simulated
annealing using XPLOR-NIH., A total of 94414 distance
and 1475 dihedral restraints were used in these calculations, and
several hundred annealing experiments were performed. The Pgp structure
that had the fewest distance and dihedral restraint violations was
then positioned into a 1-palmitoyl-2-oleoyl-sn-glycero-3-phosphocholine
(POPC) bilayer, and water (TIP3 model) and ions (Na+ and
Cl–) were added using the solvate and autoionize functions in VMD. ATP, Mg2+, and a catalytic water were substituted for ADP at NBD1, and a Mg2+ ion was added at NBD2 (see ). The final system contained two protein chains, one ATP, one ADP,
two Mg2+ ions, six Na+ ions, 17 Cl– ions, 203 POPC phospholipids, and 24689 water molecules (120016
total atoms). Energy minimizations to eliminate any van der Waals
clashes between atoms and poor geometries of residues and extensive
equilibrations of the lipid, the water, the protein, and the entire
system were performed using NAMD to ensure the integrity of the system
before any simulation experiments were performed.

Molecular Dynamics Simulations
MD simulations used
NAMD 2.6 and the CHARMM27 force field with constant temperature and pressure (NPT ensemble) in a periodic cell using Langevin temperature
and pressure control, as well as particle-mesh Ewald electrostatic
calculations at 310 K. Targeted MD simulations, were performed using target coordinates derived from mouse Pgp, Sav1866, and MsbA
structures (PDB entries 3B5X and 3B5Z). Structures were aligned using STAMP, and the coordinates of homologous Cα atoms
for each structure then functioned as target coordinates in sequential
simulations. Targeted MD simulations were performed in NAMD using tcl scripts that applied forces to Cα atoms that were
directed at individual target coordinates. The magnitudes of these
forces were calculated to be inversely proportional to the distances
separating the targeted Cα atoms and the target coordinates.

Clustering of Dynamic Structures
The structural redundancy
inherent in the molecular dynamics simulations was reduced using the
methods applied to protein structures introduced by Luthey-Schulten. Coordinate files from targeted MD calculations
were saved at ∼1 ps intervals. These files were then analyzed
for similarity using the QR factorization methods built into Multiseq, which
employed STAMP structural alignments. Phylogenetic trees using QR clustering (or in other cases rmsd clustering)
were also determined in Multiseq. Nonredundant
structures were selected using a QH cutoff of 0.2 or an rmsd cutoff of 2 Å.

In Silico Drug Docking Analyses
AutoDock 4.2− was used with each of the nonredundant structures
identified from the targeted MD clustering experiments. Grids were
calculated using a 0.375 Å spacing in a 126 Å3 cube. Two overlapping grids were used in each set of docking experiments.
For each ligand, 100 genetic algorithm experiments were performed
with each grid with a population size of 300, 3 million evaluations,
and 27000 generations. The preferred mode of binding of each ligand
was determined using ligand results clustering at rmsd values of ≤2.0
Å. This type of analysis takes advantage of one of the strengths
of the technique (the determination of the mode of binding of the
ligand to the protein) while minimizing the reliance on a relative
weakness of the method (the estimation of binding affinity).,, The clustering of ligand docking
results by rmsd puts each of the 100 independent docks per experiment
per ligand into a set of docking results based on ligand geometry
and position in space. These cluster sets can have anywhere between
1 and 100 members in them, depending on the results of the experiments.
The cluster set with the greatest number of members is considered
here to be the preferred docking cluster because it is the most reproducible
docking pose of binding of the ligand to the protein. In general,
only the preferred docking cluster for each ligand will be discussed.

Results
Catalytic Conformations of Human P-Glycoprotein
The
3.0 Å resolution, “partially opened outward” Sav1866
structure was used as a structural template in simulated annealing
calculations to generate an all-atom homology model of human Pgp.
Sav1866 was chosen as a template because of its relatively high resolution
and because, having a sequence 53% homologous to that of human Pgp,
it can be regarded as a close relative. Comparison of the secondary structure topologies of Sav1866 with
those of mouse Pgp demonstrated highly
conserved folds for both transporters. Human Pgp structures were built
using distance and torsional restraints obtained from Sav1866 that
were then applied to the human Pgp sequence. The best Pgp model produced
had less than 0.2% distance restraint violations (159 of 94414), less
than 0.5% torsional violations (8 of 1475), and an rmsd of 0.96 Å
between Cα atoms of the model and template. An overall G factor score (Procheck) of 0.03 suggested that individual residues approached
ideal geometries. A total of 15 of 1190 residues were found in disallowed
regions of Ramachandran plots (1.3%). Prior to MD simulations, ATP,
Mg2+, and water were substituted for ADP at NBD1. This
added water was observed to engage the catalytic glutamyl residue
(E556) in what appeared to be a chemically competent manner during
energy minimizations. In subsequent MD trials, this nucleotide·Mg2+·H2O complex was retained in NBD1, indicating
that these interactions were relatively stable (data not shown). Similar
engagement of catalytic glutamyl 1201 with ATP, Mg2+, and
H2O placed at NBD2 was not observed. Only the ADP and Mg2+ were therefore retained at NBD2.

Targeted Molecular Dynamics of Human Pgp
Targeted MD
simulations were performed on the human Pgp model in attempts to elucidate
possible catalytic transitional states. Targeted MD allows the sampling
of large conformational changes that would not be computationally
accessible with other techniques. In this work, the Sav1866-derived
human Pgp structure was initially pushed toward the “fully
opened inward” mouse Pgp conformation (PDB entry 3G60). Subsequent simulations sequentially targeted the “partially
opened inward” MsbA structure (PDB entry 3B5X), the Sav1866 partially opened outward, fully engaged NBDs
conformation (PDB entry 2HYD()), and finally the MsbA
transition state structure with fully engaged NBDs and “fully
opened outward” DBS (PDB entry 3B5Z). Using
the force constants described in , the close approach of the human Pgp model to each of the crystal
structure targets was achieved with rmsds for targeted Cα atoms
and modeled atoms varying between 0.4 and 0.6 Å for each of the
four target structures.

Several striking characteristics of
the conformational changes that Pgp undergoes as it moves from the
fully opened inward to fully opened outward conformations were observed
in these simulations. Videos of these conformational changes are presented
as Figures S1 and S2 of the . One can clearly see the twisting movement of the NBDs relative
to the TMDs when engagement of the NBDs occurs. From the extracellular
view of the transmembrane domains, one can also clearly observe a
gradual rearrangement of TM helices that orient the TMDs from inward-facing
to outward-facing structures. In addition, a dramatic widening of
the TMDs into the extracellular space occurs, which is very clearly
observed when the fully opened outward transition state is adopted.

Reducing Structural Redundancy in the Targeted Molecular Dynamics
Simulations
The analysis of protein structures using multidimensional
QR factorization to remove redundancy in the structure set has been
pioneered by Luthey-Schulten. Such analyses
were performed as described in ref () using the N-terminal and C-terminal halves of
Pgp obtained from the targeted MD simulations to identify a small
set of structures that represent the entire simulation trajectory.
Using these techniques to cluster similar structures allows the creation
of structurally based phylogenic trees that aid in choosing nonredundant
samples. Two such factorizations performed on the TMD1–NBD1
and TMD2–NBD2 halves of Pgp over the complete targeted MD trajectory
were performed to identify “unique” or “nonredundant”
conformations of the transporter. A ΔQH cutoff of 0.2, where
QH is a measure of structural similarity, resulted in 16 representative nonredundant structures for each of
the two analyses of the Pgp-targeted MD trajectory. A total of 26
unique nonredundant conformations for the complete Pgp structure were
therefore obtained from these simulations (six structures were common
to each of the N- and C-terminal QR clusterings). Figure  shows the results of these factorizations performed on the
NBD1–TMD1 and NBD2–TMD2 motifs over the complete trajectory.
Similar results were obtained from rmsd clustering with a 2.0 Å
cutoff (not shown). The 26 nonredundant conformations identified via
QR factorization were used in all subsequent analyses of the conformational
changes and in ligand docking studies presented here.

Phylogenetic tree representations
for human Pgp structures derived
from target molecular dynamics trajectories. QR factorizations on
the N-terminal half (left) and C-terminal half (right) of the human
P-glycoprotein targeted molecular dynamics trajectory were performed
as described in . A
ΔQH cutoff of 0.2 (solid vertical lines) resulted in the selection
of 16 representative structures in each half of the protein. Selected
representative trajectory structure numbers are shown on the inside
of each tree. The locations of the four targets (fully opened inward,
partially opened inward, partially opened outward, and fully opened
outward) are also indicated with text. The trajectory frame numbering
was sequential from fully opened inward to fully opened outward conformations.
Model numbers are arbitrary other than indicating the sequential order
of the structure snapshots.

Figure  (■) shows
the separation
distances of the catalytically important glutamyl residues 556 and
1201 in the two NBDs over the simulated TMD trajectory. These residues
are thought to activate the catalytic water of hydrolysis at the active
sites and are therefore at a crucial position in the catalytic sites.
One can see that as the simulation progresses from wide open inward
to partially opened inward (two leftward arrows in the figure), the
separation of the catalytic glutamyl residues, although they do move
throughout this phase of the trajectory, remains relatively constant
at approximately 30 Å. These initial movements of the transporter
correspond to a rotation of the two NBD domains relative to each other
while the drug binding domain (DBD) undergoes a transition from fully
open inward to partially opened inward states. During this initial
transition, two residues of the DBD implicated in verapamil binding
[F728 and V982 on TM7 and TM12, respectively (Figure , ●)], show a progressive widening from
∼11 to 17 Å. As the simulation progressed from partially
opened inward to fully engaged NBDs with partially opened outward
DBD (second and third arrows from the left), the degree of “engagement”
of the two NBDs as judged by catalytic glutamate separation was reduced
fairly smoothly from 34 to 17 Å (■). This smooth closure
between residues 556 and 1201 continued through to the final “transition
state” targeted structure with a fully opened outward DBD where
the minimal separation of 15 Å between these catalytically important
residues was observed. The progression over these final transitions
was significantly different for the verapamil-associated residues
of the DBD. This residue pair underwent a transition to a minimal
separation of ∼14 Å in the fully engaged NBD–partially
opened outward structure (third arrow from the left) but then opened
up significantly by ∼8 Å to a &gt;22 Å separation.
This
final conformational change represented a dramatic opening of the
verapamil-associated residues as the final transition state target
was approached and may represent the “export” state
of the transporter.

Movement of catalytically important residues of the human
P-glycoprotein
from target molecular dynamics simulations. Shown are the distances
that separate two glutamyl residues that have been implicated in the
catalytic activation of the waters of hydrolysis (residues 556 and
1201) and two residues of the drug binding domain that have been implicated
in verapamil binding (residues 728 and 982). The distances that separate
these two pairs of residues were calculated for each of the 26 nonredundant
Pgp structures over the course of the simulation.

The dramatic opening in the DBD observed for residues
728 (TM7)
and 982 (TM12) was also observed when the extracellular ends of the
transmembrane helices were examined in a pairwise fashion as shown
in Figure . This figure presents the movement
of homologous α-helices from the N-terminal and C-terminal halves
of the drug binding domains on both the extracellular ends of each
pair of transmembrane helices (1/7 through 6/12) and the intracellular
cytoplasmic ends of these helices (Figure , top and bottom panels, respectively). As observed for the NBD catalytic
glutamyl residues and verapamil-associated residues in Figure , the initial part of the simulation proceeds with
gradual movements of the drug binding domain helices, especially for
transitions that occur between the wide open to the cytoplasm and
partially open to the cytoplasm targets (first two arrows from the
left). These movements correspond to the expected opening of the extracellular
helices and closing of the intracellular helices as the transporter
undergoes a transition from wide opened inward to partially opened
inward conformations. During the next transitions between the partially
opened inward and fully engaged NBDs–partially opened outward
conformations and finally the transition state fully opened outward
conformations, the extracellular ends of helices 1/7 and helices 2/8
continued the relatively smooth trend of opening outward all the way
through to the final transition state conformation of the simulation.

Coordinated
movements within the drug binding domain of the human
P-glycoprotein from target molecular dynamics simulations. The figure
presents the distances between the ends of homologous α-helices
in each half of the drug binding domain. The top panel represents
paired helical movements on the external face of the membrane for
helices 1/7, 2/8, 3/9, 4/10, 5/11, and 6/12 as separation distances
between residues 72 and 732, 112 and 753, 210 and 853, 217 and 856,
318 and 961, and 328 and 972, respectively. Similarly, in the bottom
panel, helical movements at the cytoplasmic end of helical pairs 1/7,
2/8, 3/9, 4/10, 5/11, and 6/12 very near the NBDs were quantitated
as the separation distances between residues 51 and 711, 156 and 797,
168 and 811, 256 and 895, 270 and 916, and 368 and 1010. Distances
were calculated for each frame using tcl scripts
in VMD. The x-axis numbering represents the 26 nonredundant
trajectory-derived structures identified in Figure , numbered sequentially from the wide opened inward to wide
opened outward targets. The double-headed arrows show the structures
closest to the crystal structures that were used as targets, i.e.,
from left to right in the figure, the fully opened inward, mouse Pgp 3G5U() targeted structure; the partially opened inward structure
from the MsbA 3B5X() structure; the opened outward structure
from the Sav1866 2HYD() targeted structure; and the fully opened
outward structure of the MsbA ADP-Vi-bound 3B5Z() structure, respectively.

A dramatic opening and widening movement of the
extracellular ends
of the four remaining helical pairs (3/9, 4/10, 5/11, and 6/12) was
observed, however, as the transporter approached the final catalytic
transition state structure from the engaged NBD–partially opened
outward state (Figure , top panel). These
latter movements appeared to be very similar to those presented in
Figure  for the verapamil-associated residues
during this phase of the simulation. The largest changes in this phase
of the simulation were observed for helices 4 and 10 and helices 5
and 11. The extracellular ends of these helices separated over the
entire simulation by 17 and 24 Å, respectively. Similar extents
of movement in the direction of closing of the cytoplasmic NBD-associated
helical ends of these same helices (20 and 17 Å, respectively)
were observed. It can be seen, however, that the movement on the cytoplasmic
NBD ends of these helices occurred with a more constant rate (Figure , bottom panel), showing much less if any of the
dramatic movement apparent in the extracellular parts of the DBD (Figure , top panel). Analogous changes in the other helical
pairs (helices 3/9 and helices 6/12) were also observed, but the magnitudes
of these changes were smaller than that of the changes observed for
helices 4/10 and helices 5/11 (not shown).

Correlation with Previously Observed Helical Movements during
ATP Hydrolysis
In a series of studies,− Loo, Clarke,
and co-workers were able to show that transmembrane helices 11 and
12, which have been implicated in drug binding,− undergo movement during ATP hydrolysis. In a very large mutational
cross-linking study designed to investigate helical interactions with
TM11, these authors showed that of 350 possible double-cysteine mutations
in TM11 and TM1, -3, -4, -5, or -6, cross-links were observed between
only TM1 and TM11 and that all five of the observed cross-links formed
only if the transporter turned over via ATP hydrolysis. In related work involving disulfide bond formation or cross-linking with an extended multifunctional
maleimide compound, similar observations
were made for pairs of residues present on TM6 and -12. Most of the
cross-links observed in these latter studies also required ATP hydrolysis
to form.

The dynamics of the interacting pairs of residues implicated
in these ATP hydrolysis-dependent cross-linking studies were analyzed
in the simulations made here in attempts to further investigate these
helical movements. Relatively complex movements of TM1 and -11 and
TM6 and -12 were observed as the transporter moved from conformations
with the DBD wide open inward to conformations that were wide open
to the outside (see Figures S3–S5 of the ). These complex movements proceeded
in three distinct phases. To start, as the transporter moved from
a conformation with DBD wide open to the inside with fully disengaged
NBDs (see frame 0 in Figures S3–S5 of the ) to a conformation with the DBD partially
opened to the inside (frame 12 in the figures), each of the Cα
atoms of the cross-linked residue pairs identified in refs (−) moved from near minimal separation to near maximal
separation. As the simulation progressed from the partially opened
inward to partially opened outward conformation (frames 12–22
of Figures S3–S5 of the ), movement of the DBD helices to near minimal separation of the
identified cross-linked residues of TM1 and -11 and TM6 and -12 occurred.
Finally, as the transition state conformation with fully opened outward
DBD was reached (frame 26 of the figures), the cross-linked residues
once again separated to large and in some cases near maximal values.
It is clear that if the transporter ground state in the absence of
turnover is at or near the partially opened inward conformation, cross-linking
of the paired cysteine residues of TM1 and -11 and TM6 and -12 would
be unlikely, because this conformation showed maximal separation of
the Cα atoms of the cross-linked residues. It is reasonable
to infer that catalytic turnover would likely be required to move
the helices into closer contact so that disulfide bond formation could
occur. The simulations reported here are consistent with the observations
of Loo et al.− about the movements of TM1 and -11 and TM6 and -12.

Mechanistic Insights from the TMD Analyses
Analysis
of the structures of the transporter during the TMD simulation phases
where the conformation changes from an intracellularly oriented DBD
to one with partially and then fully extracellularly oriented DBD
reveals several detailed transitions that may serve as testable hypotheses
in future studies. Figure S1 of the  sequentially shows each of the 26 nonredundant
protein structures identified from the targeted MD trajectory as a
video animation. An alternate video with color-coded transmembrane
helices (Figure S2 of the ) has also been included for easier identification of individual
substructures. In both videos, concerted movements of the NBDs with
the DBD α-helices can be observed. One feature that was very
apparent in these simulations was the dramatic widening of the extracellular
ends of transmembrane helices 3/9, 4/10, 5/11, and 6/12 (as quantitatively
shown in Figures  and ). As Dawson and Locher pointed out previously for the Sav1866 protein, helices 2/8 and 3/9 and helices 4/10 and 5/11
of the DBD of the transporter are connected at the interface with
the NBDs by short α-helices that are oriented parallel to the
membrane and were termed “coupling helices” (CHs) by
these authors. The equivalent residues that make up the coupling helices
in the human Pgp transporter are 160–167 (CH1), 260–267
(CH2), 801–808 (CH3), and 903–911 (CH4). Because these
helices are the connection points between the power-generating NBDs
and the structures of the DBD that undergo the energy requiring conformational
changes that transport ligands across the membrane, it is reasonable
to infer that movement of these coupling helices is critical for the
pumping mechanism of the transporter.

Consistent with this inference,
in the simulations performed here it appeared that the coupling helices
at the NBD interface moved in concert with the nucleotide binding
domains as the transporter underwent the transition from the partially
opened inward to partially opened outward conformation. This concerted
movement continued relatively smoothly as the fully opened outward–transition
state conformation was reached. An elucidation of the structures of
the NBD that interacted directly with the coupling helices during
the targeted MD simulation at this transmission interface was conducted,
and the results are listed in Table . Consistent
with the analyses of the Sav1866 structure conducted in ref () and with work that indicated
close contact and movement between the CH2–NBD2 and CH4–NBD1
fragments, coupling helices CH1 and CH3
each contacted both the NBD1 and NBD2 domains while coupling helices
CH2 and CH4 interacted only with the NBD domains of the opposite halves
of the transporter [NBD2 and NBD1, respectively (see Table )]. From the results presented in Table , it can be seen that CH2 and CH4 made many more
contacts with the NBDs than did CH1 and CH3 during the simulations.
It may be that the CH2 and CH4 contacts are structurally more important
in driving the necessary conformational changes in the DBD to effect
pumping of substrates than are those contacts made between the NBDs
and CH1 and CH3.

Close Contacts between NBD Residues
and Coupling Helices
coupling
helix	NBD residues
in contact with CH residues	NBD	comments	
CH1 (residues 160–167)	371, 372	NBD1	residues of NBD1 loop C-terminal
to TMD helix 6	
 	401, 402	NBD1	residues
of A-loop	
 	443, 444	NBD1	residues C-terminal to Walker A	
 	1174, 1175	NBD2	residues N-terminal to signature
sequence	
CH2 (residues 260–267)	1118	NBD2	residue of NBD2 loop
C-terminal
to TMD helix 12	
 	1077	NBD2	Walker A	
 	1081, 1084, 1086, 1087	NBD2	helix
following Walker A	
 	1110, 1114–1117,
1119–1123	NBD2	residues at and
around Q-loop	
 	1133, 1135	NBD2	loop that returns to CH2
located after Q-loop	
 	1188,
1189, 1192	NBD2	residues just after signature
sequence and just before Walker B	
 	1200	NBD2	Walker B	
CH3 (residues 801–808)	1015–1017	NBD2	residues
on NBD loop at
top of helix 12	
 	1044–1046	NBD2	residues at A-loop	
 	1086–1088	NBD2	residues C-terminal to Walker A	
 	523, 526, 527	NBD1	residues of Walker B	
CH4 (residues 901–911)	378	NBD1	residue on NBD1 loop at
top of helix 6	
 	438	NBD1	helix following Walker A	
 	441, 443	NBD1	loop after the helix following Walker A	
 	476, 478–480, 491–493	NBD1	residues at and around Q-loop	
 	476, 478–480, 491–493	NBD1	residues C-terminal to Q-loop,
including the short helix just after Q-loop	
 	527, 543, 547	NBD1	residues
before Walker B	
Residues in the nucleotide binding
domains (NBDs) found to be within 2.5 Å of coupling helix residues
in any of the 26 nonredundant Pgp structures were identified using tcl scripts in VMD.

It seemed to be of interest to propose a mechanism
for the dramatic
movements of the extracellular face of the DBD that occur during the
final conformational change to the “transition state–fully
opened outward” structure. Figure S6 of the  presents a video that allows the visualization
of the conformational changes that occurred in the transporter during
this transition. Helices 4 and 5 and helices 10 and 11 prior to reaching
the catalytic transition state conformation possessed a pronounced
bend that produced an arclike shape that was especially pronounced
in the fully engaged NBD–partially opened outward structures.
This curvature in essence kept the extracellular face of the DBD closed
or only partially opened at the inward opened and partially opened
outward stages of the simulation. As the catalytic transition state
was approached, however, and as CH2 and CH4 moved the final few angstroms
in concert with the NBDs, helices 4 and 5 and helices 10 and 11 were
positioned in a manner that appeared to allow these helices to adopt
much more straightened and more ideal α-helical conformations.
This straightening of helices 4 and 5 and helices 10 and 11 resulted
in the dramatic widening of the distance between the extracellular
ends of these helices (see also third and fourth arrows from the left
in Figures  and ).
As the catalytic transition state was being approached, the N-terminal
ends of CH2 and CH4 were observed to move away from each other by
2.1 Å, while the corresponding C-terminal ends moved together
by ∼1.7 Å. This twisting motion of these coupling helices
is very likely driven by nucleotide binding domain conformational
changes as bound ATP approaches its hydrolytic transition state. This
relative motion of coupling helices 2 and 4, although very slight
(comprising relative movements of ≤2 Å), is hypothesized
here to allow the NBD-located ends of helices 4 and 5 and helices
10 and 11 enough movement to allow the remainder of these helices
to straighten out into a more ideal α-helical structure. This
associated straightening of helices 4 and 5 and helices 10 and 11
and the consequent coupled movement of helices 3 and 9 (which are
connected via very short externally located loops with helices 4 and
10) and helices 6 and 12 (which are connected to helices 5 and 11
by short externally located loops) is hypothesized to move the external
face of the drug binding domain in a coordinated manner to its fully
opened catalytic transition state conformation. Less relative movement
of helices 1/7 and helices 2/8 during this approach to the catalytic
transition state is apparent and is consistent with the quantitative
data of Figure  that show most of the dramatic
opening of the drug binding domain to the outside occurring with helices
4/10, 5/11, 3/9, and 6/12. Although these simulations clearly cannot
demonstrate the driving force for these rearrangements, it seems evident
that the energy input for these movements must originate with rearrangements
at the NBDs with nucleotide binding and/or hydrolysis and the consequent
movement of the contacted coupling helices.

Drug Docking to Human Pgp
The 26 nonredundant Pgp structures
derived from the targeted MD simulations were used in drug docking
studies to analyze binding of the ligand to dynamic transitions of
human Pgp structures. The ligands analyzed were selected because they
are known to bind Pgp, are transport substrates of Pgp, or inhibit
Pgp (Table S1 of the ). Two molecules, ADP and PPi, served as negative controls
for Pgp docking because they do not fit the criteria of good Pgp transport
substrates. Two of the Pgp ligands used here are sulfur analogues
of the selenium-containing cyclic peptide inhibitors, QZ59-RRR and
QZ59-SSS, that were shown previously to crystallize to three closely
placed but different binding sites in mouse Pgp. The docking of these QZ59 analogues to the fully opened
inward conformation of Pgp was closely analyzed here for validation
of the human Pgp structure and targeted MD. Figure A shows the results of the initial docking to human Pgp. Comparison
with the mouse crystal structure (Figure B) indicates extensive similarities in the location
of binding sites for the inhibitors. A clear correlation of both the
positioning of the drug within the pockets of the two transporters
and the positions of the residues that make up the binding pockets
was observed (Figure , human Pgp in panel
C vs mouse Pgp in panel D). Although the mode of binding to human
Pgp and the mouse structure is not identical, there are clearly very
similar interactions with homologous residues. Drug binding in the
proximity of the partial binding site for QZ59-SSS identified by ref () was observed here as a
less populated docking cluster (data not shown). Nineteen of the 21
residues identified by ref () as interacting with QZ59-SSS were within 3.5 Å of
the preferred docking cluster for the QZ59-SSS sulfur analogue in
these experiments (Figure C,D, bottom). Tryptophan
315 and threonine 837 were &gt;4 Å from the preferred docking
cluster
for the QZ59-SSS sulfur analogue in the Pgp model. The results from
these initial docking experiments strongly support the validity of
the structural modeling as well as the drug docking simulations presented
here.

Docking of cyclic inhibitor analogues, QZ59-RRR (blue) and QZ59-SSS
(red), to fully opened inward Pgp conformations. (A) Human Pgp showing
the preferred docking clusters, the most reproducible drug docking
clusters for two simulation frames at the fully opened inward conformation,
superposed. (B) Mouse Pgp structures from ref () with the QZ59-RRR (blue)
and QZ59-SSS (red) cyclic inhibitors bound. Transmembrane regions
of both proteins are colored silver. (C) The top portion shows the
results for docking of the sulfur analogue of the QZ59-SSS stereoisomer
to the fully opened inward conformation of human Pgp. Residues within
3.5 Å of the three most reproducible docking clusters are shown
as licorice colored by atom type. The most reproducibly docked QZ59-SSS
analogue is shown bound as black licorice. (D) The top portion shows
the mouse Pgp structure from ref () with QZ59-SSS bound (black). Amino acids identified
by Aller et al. to be involved in drug
binding are shown as licorice colored by atom type. The bottom portions
of panels C and D identify the residue numbers of the amino acids
shown in the top panel (C, human numbering, and D, mouse numbering).
Note that each residue shown in either panel has its homologue shown
in the same relative position in the other panel.

Figure  shows the docking
of the QZ59-RRR
analogue to three neighboring conformational states within the dynamic
trajectory of Pgp near the fully opened inward conformation (Figure A–C, left). For comparison, the mouse Pgp
structure in complex with QZ59-RRR is shown in each right-hand panel. The positions of side chains in previous and/or
subsequent frames are indicated in the figure with thin lines. All
12 of the residues (Figure D) that make up
the QZ59-RRR “middle” binding site are within 3.5 Å of the QZ59-RRR analogue docked into
the human fully opened inward conformation, indicating very similar
docking of the RRR analogue compared to that seen in the mouse Pgp
crystal structure. Comparison of docking to human Pgp in panels A
(left), panel B (left) and panel C (left) shows what could represent
potential aromatic gates to the drug binding site. These results again support the results of docking and
simulation reported here as valid representations of the human Pgp
transporter.

Ligand binding to the drug binding pocket of P-glycoprotein:
RRR
stereoisomer of the cyclic inhibitor QZ59 binding. The left side of
each panel shows the results of docking to three sequential TMD frames
bracketing the fully opened inward conformation of the human Pgp model.
The right side of each frame shows the crystal structure of mouse
Pgp with QZ59_RRR bound. (A) First frame of the cyclic peptide docking
to human Pgp as licorice with the positions of side chains in the
subsequent two frames (see panels B and C) shown with thin lines.
(B and C) Two subsequent frames as licorice with previous and/or subsequent
frames shown with thin black lines. Panel D shows the respective positions
of the homologous residues that make up the binding pocket for QZ59-RRR
as identified by ref (): left side, human Pgp model; right side, mouse Pgp crystal structure.

Drug–Protein Interaction Dynamics
Different
modes of drug interaction throughout the transmembrane regions of
the DBS were found in docking experiments performed on the 26 nonredundant
Pgp structures using 21 potential transport ligands (see Table S1
of the ). It seems
noteworthy that the fully opened outward conformations did not show
preferential docking in the extracellular half of the transmembrane
regions, potentially reflecting structural destabilization of ligand
binding to the DBS as Pgp adopts the opened outward conformation (see
below). Docking of either PPi or ADP was found exclusively
outside of the transmembrane DBS and was limited to a narrow band
around the outside of the protein at the cytoplasmic face of the membrane
(data not shown). Representative results for docking of daunorubicin
to four conformations from the fully opened inward to fully opened
outward states are shown in Figure . There
appear to be several preferred docking sites that are dependent on
the conformation of the protein. While both the partially opened inward
and partially opened outward conformations preferred daunorubicin
docking to the extracellular half of the DBS, the fully opened
outward conformation showed only preferred docking in the cytoplasmic
half of the DBS. This may reflect structural destabilization of ligand
binding to the extracellular half of the DBS as it adopts the opened
outward conformation and may be mechanistically important as a “release”
state of the transporter.

Docking interactions of daunorubicin with the
drug binding domain
of Pgp. The protein backbone is shown as a tube with the transmembrane
helices colored silver. Daunorubicin is shown in space-filling representation.
Pgp and daunorubicin are shown in the fully open inward, partially
opened inward, partially opened outward, and fully opened outward
conformations (from left to right, respectively) in side views (top)
and in views from the extracellular space (bottom). A similar figure
with color-coded helices for ease of identification of individual
structures is presented in Figure S7 of the .

Figure  summarizes the
docking results
obtained using all of the ligands tested here by showing the residues
of the DBS that were ≤3.5 Å to any of the best docked
ligand clusters (colored red). Figure A shows
the conformational opening of the extracellular parts of Pgp and the
exposure of the drug binding surfaces inside the DBS as the conformations
progress from fully opened inward to fully opened outward states.
Figure B depicts Pgp from the cytoplasmic
side of the drug binding domains (the nucleotide binding domain portions
were removed for the sake of clarity). This row of images demonstrates
that the drug binding surfaces of Pgp are exposed to the cytoplasmic
face of the membrane and cytoplasm in the fully opened inward conformation
and that the drug binding surfaces become progressively less accessible
to the cytoplasm as the transporter moves toward the fully opened
outward conformation.

Views of the drug binding surfaces of Pgp during catalytic
transitions.
Amino acid residues observed to approach Pgp within 3.5 Å are
shown with van der Waals surfaces colored red. Secondary structures
of the protein are colored black (extramembranous residues) or silver
(transmembrane residues). (A) Extracellular views of Pgp with a viewpoint
given by the tip of the arrow in the left image. (B) Views of the
drug binding domains from inside of the cytosolic portion of Pgp with
a viewpoint given by the tip of the arrow in the left image (nucleotide
binding domains have been removed for the sake of clarity). Images
of the fully opened inward, partially opened inward, partially opened
outward, and fully opened outward conformations are presented from
the targeted MD docking trajectory from left to right, respectively.
A similar figure with color-coded helices for ease of identification
of individual structures is presented in Figure S9 of the .

In analyses designed to determine whether inhibitors
of Pgp interacted
with the transporter differently than transport substrates, the close
contacts between protein and docked ligands of the preferred docking
clusters on all 26 nonredundant Pgp structures of the inhibitors and
transport substrates listed in Table S1 of the  were compared. Of the 46 ≤3.5
Å contacts between ligands and residues of the drug binding domains,
one inhibitor (biricodar) was found to contact a residue on TM6 (F335)
that was not within 3.5 Å of any other docked inhibitor or substrate.
Several different substrates and inhibitors, however, contacted the
neighboring residues L332 and F336 of TM6, making it unlikely that
residue 335 was of special interest in establishing Pgp inhibition.
(A text file containing a table listing Pgp residues within 3.5 Å
of any docked inhibitor or transport substrate from these studies
can be downloaded from the .) Of the 39 ≤3.0 Å contacts between ligands and Pgp
residues of the drug binding domains, no inhibitor was found to contact
a residue that was not also contacted by one or more transport substrates.
These results suggest that no differences between the inhibitor or
modulator binding to Pgp and the normal transport substrate binding
to Pgp could be detected using the ligand docking techniques described
here.

Discussion
Model Structures of Human Pgp
Homology modeling using
a simulated annealing approach with the 3.0 Å partially opened
outward Sav1866 structure produced a human Pgp structural model with
very few restraint violations and excellent overall geometries. The
Sav1866 crystal structure shows ADP bound to NBD1 and -2. Substitution
of the ADP at NBD1 in the human Pgp model with ATP, Mg2+, and H2O at NBD1 resulted in stable binding and an orientation
that engaged the catalytic glutamyl 556 in a manner that is consistent
with known general base ATP hydrolysis mechanisms. Very strong evidence
has recently been presented that favors this type of catalytic mechanism
for ABC transporters (see the high-resolution transition state crystal
structures of the maltose ABC transporter from Oldham and Chen and Senior’s recent mini-review). Similar substitutions of ATP, Mg2+, and H2O at NBD2 did not result in the engagement of
the corresponding catalytic glutamyl 1201, so ADP was retained at
NBD2 in all subsequent simulations. Comparable results were observed
in MD simulations of the BtuCD vitamin B12 transporter where only
one of two ATP molecules was observed to fully engage with residues
of the nucleotide binding sites of the protein. Although the observations that the catalytic glutamyl residue
in NBD1 engaged the bound H2O·ATP·Mg ion complex
in these simulations while the NBD2 glutamyl remained disengaged from
bound substrate are consistent with an alternating sites mechanism
for hydrolysis, a more systematic study
of the phenomena seems to be warranted.

Testing the stability
of homology models with MD simulations has been noted to be critical
to the validation of such models. Indeed,
MD simulations of a homology model based on early crystal structures
demonstrated instabilities that helped point out problems with these
structures., To investigate the stability
of the Pgp model created here, we performed NPT dynamics
for ∼28 ns. During these simulations, the secondary structure
of Pgp did not significantly change and nucleotides and Mg2+ remained stably bound. These results suggest that this Pgp model
was relatively stable and had no obvious energetic problems. Since
2007, when corrected versions of the MsbA structures became available,
several homology models for Pgp have been reported.,− Validations similar to ours were obtained from these models, providing
additional support for the dynamic transitions between protein conformations
that were investigated here.

Targeted MD of Human Pgp
Several authors have suggested
catalytic mechanisms for Pgp that involve the opened inward, nucleotide-free
conformations that bind drug and nucleotide, converting the NBDs to
fully engaged structures that then allow relatively large conformational
changes that reorient the TMDs from inward-facing to outward-facing
structures.,,,,− There is debate about whether the wide opened to the cytoplasm conformations
observed in some studies, are stringently required
for transport activity. Recent studies suggest that Pgp may not need
to open fully to remain active., Despite these controversies,
a progression of structures from the “fully opened inward–disengaged
NBDs” of mouse Pgp to the “partially
opened inward–disengaged NBDs” MsbA structure to the “partially opened outward–fully
engaged NBDs” of Sav1866 and finally
the ADP-Vi transition state MsbA structure showing “fully
opened outward TMDs and engaged NBDs” may approximate conformational transitions required for catalysis.
The experiments presented here attempt to investigate the possible
transitions between these known conformations by using a targeted
MD approach. Results presented here show that the human Pgp could
be moved very close to each of the four targeted structures. This
simulation of conformational dynamics reveals interesting subtleties
in the catalytic mechanism. The simulations revealed that the helices
that form the drug binding sites of Pgp undergo large movements in
relative position, on both the inside and the outside of the cell
membrane. The largest movements of drug binding site helices were
observed for the pairs of helices 4/10 and helices 5/11. A rather
abrupt widening of the drug binding sites to the outside of the cell
was observed as the ADP-Vi transition state was approached.
Twisting of the NBDs as they fully engage appeared to be coupled to
the helical movements in the TMDs that seem to open the drug efflux
sites.

Drug Docking to Dynamic Human Pgp
To analyze binding
of the drug and ligand to Pgp over the course of the catalytic conformational
transitions simulated here, a reduction of the structural complexity
of the dynamic trajectories was required. Luthey-Schulten and McCammon and colleagues− have developed
methods for reducing the amount of conformational information of a
MD simulation to a small set of nonredundant structures that can be
used individually in drug docking experiments. The application of
these methods to the targeted MD simulations of Pgp presented here
resulted in the identification of 26 nonredundant transitional structures
that have allowed the analysis of ligand docking over the entire dynamic
transition from the fully opened inward to fully opened outward states.

Drug docking routines have been shown to be very accurate in predicting
the mode of binding of small molecules to proteins while not necessarily
accurately predicting binding energies.,, In rigorous studies, binding energies for known ligand–protein complexes had standard
errors of ∼2.5 kcal/mol (∼3 orders of magnitude for
a typical Kd value). The results discussed
here will therefore emphasize the location and geometrical interactions
between the ligand and protein and will not stress calculated affinities.
Ligand clustering at rmsd values of ≤2.0 Å was used to
classify docked ligands. This type of clustering analysis reveals
docking configurations that are the most reproducible as those clusters
with the greatest number of members. It is assumed that these preferred
clusters represent the most favorably bound ligand configuration detected.
It should be noted that several of the ligands analyzed had more than
one well-populated ligand docking cluster, so it should not be assumed
that the docking experiments presented here suggest that each ligand
has only one possible docking orientation.

It is worth mentioning
that the programs used here for ligand docking
allow for fully flexible ligand conformations, which in combination
with docking analyses performed on the 26 nonredundant Pgp conformations
results in docking analyses that fully encompass both the dynamics
of ligand binding and the dynamic conformational changes in the protein
throughout the targeted MD simulation. Docking of the drug to all
26 nonredundant Pgp structures using 21 compounds known to be transported
by or to inhibit transport by Pgp was performed here. In addition,
docking of two compounds, ADP and PPi, was performed as
a control for nontransported ligands. To validate the structural modeling,
the targeted molecular dynamics, and the docking techniques, we closely
analyzed docking of two compounds in the fully opened inward conformations,
because crystallographic information was available for the mouse homologue. It should be noted that these experiments should
not be considered typical “redocking” experiments in
which a cocrystallized ligand is removed from a protein crystal structure
and then docked back into the protein without any intervening dynamic
movement of the target protein. All 26 of the protein structures used
here were derived from very long molecular dynamics simulations at
310 K on human Pgp without any ligand bound to the drug binding domains.
Despite the differences between the docking results presented here
and the cocrystallization studies described in ref (), docking of both the SSS
and RRR analogues of the QZ59 inhibitors (Figures  and ) closely reproduced the binding
interactions seen in ref (). More than 90% of the residues identified at the QZ59-SSS
inhibitor binding sites in the mouse model were observed within 3.5
Å of the preferred SSS analogue binding cluster in the human
Pgp, and 100% were found to be identical for the RRR analogue docking.

Potentially interesting results were obtained for the docking of
the QZ59-RRR analogue to three neighboring conformational states close
to the fully opened inward conformation (Figure ). The figure shows what could represent the QZ59 analogue entering
the binding pocket as the side chain of phenylalanine 978 (top of
the binding site) moves out of the way, allowing access to the homologous
pocket shown in the mouse structure. This
movement is reminiscent of the aromatic gates that control access
of ligands to substrate binding sites and active sites as discussed
for acetylcholinesterase and membrane transport channels., In Figure C, docking of the QZ59S-RRR analogue
to Pgp appears to be very similar to that observed in the mouse transporter.
These results support the hypothesis that the docking and simulation
results reported here are valid representations of the human Pgp transporter
and extend to the postulation of putative aromatic gating structures
in the drug binding sites of Pgp.

Preferred docking clusters
for 21 ligands to the 26 nonredundant
conformations of Pgp were observed throughout the transmembrane regions
of the DBS for the fully opened inward to the partially opened outward
conformations. In the Pgp conformations that approached the fully
opened outward ADP-Vi transition state, ligand binding
in the extracellular half of the TMDs was not favored, with preferred
docking found in the cytoplasmic half of the membrane regions. This
may be mechanistically important, because the destabilization of ligand
binding in the extracellular half of the drug binding site, coupled
with denied access to ligand binding on the cytoplasmic side, would
effectively force release of the ligand to the extracellular space.
It should be noted that the docking experiments performed here do
not require connected pathways from one ligand cluster to another
and in this sense do not reflect actual pathways that a ligand might
travel through the transporter. It will be of interest to follow the
molecular dynamics of a single ligand through the entire conformational
trajectory to directly test this mechanism.

Figure  shows the drug binding sites of
Pgp by highlighting any side chain within 3.5 Å of a preferred
drug binding cluster that was found in these studies. One can observe
that the drug binding surfaces are closed off from the extracellular
space in the fully opened inward conformation, while access to the
extracellular space increases with each step toward the fully opened
outward conformation until a large portion of the drug binding surface
is exposed to the outside of the cell in the fully opened outward
conformation. Figure  clearly demonstrates
large conformational changes that allow access of the drug binding
surfaces to change from the cytoplasm toward the extracellular space
as the transporter opens outward. Actual pumping of the drug transport
substrate may or may not reflect a significant change in affinity
for the drug binding surfaces. If no change occurs, transport may
be effectively a matter of changed access from inside to outside as
the transport mechanism progresses.

Significantly, all of the
ligands tested except for ADP and pyrophosphate
were found to bind like daunorubicin to the DBD of Pgp with multiple
preferred ligand clustering sites found within the transmembrane regions
of the DBS. The results obtained for ADP and pyrophosphate were significantly
different because neither of these ligands is a good Pgp transport
substrate and neither of these compounds docked within the drug binding
sites of Pgp. These results further strengthen the docking obtained
for the known transport ligands of Pgp. Very large ligands such as
cyclosporine A, valspodar, and ivermectin were found preferentially
docked to the cytoplasmic half of the transmembrane DBS. This could
be due to the fact that targeted MD trajectory was produced with unoccupied,
“empty” drug binding sites. It may be worth investigating
how much plasticity in structure the DBS demonstrate when large ligands
are incorporated in MD simulations.

It is clear from the analyses
of the residues of Pgp that were
contacted by ligands in these docking experiments that no apparent
differences in the location of binding of transport substrates versus
Pgp inhibitors or modulators could be detected using these techniques.
These results suggest that there is not a specific “inhibitor
binding site” located within the drug binding domain of Pgp
and that the mode of inhibition by these compounds, if binding occurs
at the locations deduced from these docking studies, may be more simply
to compete with transport substrate drugs for the normal pathway(s)
of transport through Pgp.

Correlation of Biochemical Data with Dynamic Structural Models
Loo, Clarke, and co-workers were able to show that transmembrane
helices 11 and 12 undergo movement relative to helices 1 and 6 during
ATP hydrolysis.− In mutational cross-linking studies, these authors
showed that double cysteine mutations introduced into TM1 and TM11
formed five different disulfide cross-links, but only if the transporter
catalytically turned over via ATP hydrolysis. Similar observations of ATP hydrolysis-dependent cross-linking of
residues on TM6 and -12 were also made by these investigators., The simulations presented here showed complex relative movements
of transmembrane helices 1 and 11 and helices 6 and 12 that proceeded
in three distinct phases (Figures S3–S5 of the ). As the transporter moved from a wide
open to the inside to partially opened to the inside conformation,
distances between cross-linked residues on TM1 and -11 and TM6 and
-12 moved from near minimal to near maximal separations. This was
followed by movements to near minima as the simulation progressed
from the partially opened inward to partially opened outward conformation.
Then as the transition state conformation with the fully opened outward
DBD was reached, the cross-linked residues on helices 1 and 11 and
helices 6 and 12 separated widely again.

Petersen et al. in a study of 351 naturally occurring cystines
in known protein structures noted that the range of separation of
Cα atoms between two half-cystines was 3.4–7.6 Å
with averages between 5.3 and 5.8 Å depending on the cystine
geometry. The corresponding values for Pgp at its partially opened
inward conformation were approximately 3 times these averages, and
values at the transition state conformation with the DBD fully opened
to the outside were more than twice these averages, making oxidation
of cysteines to cystine unlikely in these conformations. The minimal
values observed in the simulations for the TM1–TM11 residue
pairs were still larger than the range of naturally occurring cystines
reported in ref (), however, with Cα–Cα values for the cross-linked
residues ranging from 8.6 to 11.6 Å. Some of this difference
might be explained by conformational flexibility of the noncovalently
cross-linked helices in these simulations, the fact that two S–H
bonds exist in the mutated and reduced transporters (up to ∼1
Å each depending on the orientation), and the need for flexibility
in the mutated structures to accommodate the employed oxidant.

Analysis of the geometric orientations of the TM1 and -11 residue
pairs suggests that the relative orientation of the interacting residues
as also discussed by Loo and Clarke may
be important in determining whether cystine can form (see Figure S8
of the ). In the
conformations with Cα–Cα distances at or near observed
minima, the wide opened to the inside and partially opened to the
outside conformations (first and third panels from the left, respectively,
in Figure S8 of the , equivalent to frames 0 and 22, respectively, in Figures S3–S5),
the helical surfaces of the interacting residue pairs face each other
directly. In the partially opened to the inside conformation (second
panel in Figure S8 of the ), while the orientation of the helical faces of the interacting
pairs would appear to be acceptable for cystine formation, the Cα–Cα
distances are close to observed maxima, which may preclude reaction
to cystine. In the transition state conformation (fourth panel in
Figure S8 of the ), distances between reactive residues on TM1 and -11 vary between
12.4 and 14.5 Å and are intermediate between the fully opened
inward and partially opened outward minima. A slight reorientation
of the reactive helical faces away from each other may have made reaction
to disulfide in this latter conformation less probable. Loo et al. report that no cross-linking occurred with transporter
preparations that were inhibited by ATP-Vi (a transition
state analogue).

In summary, the simulations reported here are
consistent with the
observations of Loo et al.− of the movements of transmembrane
helices 1 and 11 and helices 6 and 12. The fact that ATP hydrolysis
was required for the cystine formation in these experiments, and enhanced other cross-links strongly
suggests that the resting ground state of the transporter is not one
of the conformations with minimal Cα–Cα distances
(conformations with the DBD fully opened to the inside or partially
opened to the outside). Catalytic turnover was likely required to
bring the reactive residues into closer contact and perhaps to supply
required conformational flexibility such that the oxidations to disulfide
bonds could proceed. It is a reasonable assumption from refs (−) that the transporter ground state without turnover
is at or near a conformation with a greater separation of the paired
cysteine residues such that cross-linking of these residues in this
conformation would be unlikely. Because the transition state conformation
of the transporter by definition is quite unlikely to be the ground
state, it is tempting to speculate that the remaining conformation
reported here with cross-linked residues showing maximal Cα–Cα
separation, the partially opened inward conformation, might be similar
to the resting conformation of the transporter. It also follows that
enough flexibility in the helical backbones is generated during turnover
to position the reactive cysteines close enough for disulfide bond
formation in conformations where the paired cysteines reach minimal
separation (either the conformation with the DBD wide open to the
inside or partially opened to the outside). Interestingly, all but
one of the ATPase-dependent cross-linked residue pairs examined also
showed the dramatic widening as the conformation moved from the partially
opened outward to the fully opened outward transition state (Figures
S3–S5 of the ). The single exception that did not show this effect was the TM6
residue 350–TM12 residue 993 pair. Because these residues are
found very near the center of helices 6 and 12, they would not be
expected to show an opening as dramatic as those of other residues
located close to the exterior. The simulations presented here expand
on the demonstrations by Loo, Clarke, and co-workers that helices
1 and 11 and helices 6 and 12 move during ATP hydrolysis by presenting
three plausible movements of these helices as catalysis proceeds from
transporter conformations fully opened to the cytoplasm to those fully
opened to the extracellular space.

Loo and Clarke were also
able to identify many residues involved
in drug binding using analogues of transport substrates with sulfhydryl
reactive functional groups and cysteine or arginine scanning mutagenesis.
In their studies, protection of labeling by inclusion of unlabeled
substrate was used as the highest criterion for mapping residues of
the DBS. Their work demonstrated that S222, L339, A342, and G984 were
fully protected by verapamil while I868, F942, and T945 showed less
protection. All of these seven protected
residues were found in this study within 3.5 Å of one or more
preferred ligand docking clusters. Similar studies using dibromobimane,− identified 16 residues that could be protected by
transport substrates. All 16 residues were found within 3.5 Å
of a preferred cluster. A thio-reactive rhodamine B analogue was used
to identify F343, and MTS–verapamil
labeling at I306 permanently activated ATP hydrolysis. Both F343 and I306 were found within 3.5 Å of the
preferred ligand clusters elucidated here. F343 in our studies was
found to interact very closely with docked ligands (Figure ). A novel arginine mutagenesis approach for rescuing
Pgp folding mutants was used by Loo and Clarke to argue that the bulky
arginine side chain, when present in the drug binding site, mimicked
the rescue of folding of certain mutations by transport substrates
that has been observed. Alteration of
known substrate affinities was taken as evidence that the A302R, F336R,
L339R, G872R, F942R, Q946R, V982R, S993R, and M986R mutations were
at drug binding locations. All of these residues were found to be
within 3.5 Å of the ligand docking sites identified in our study.
Of the 43 residues identified by Loo and Clarke or by Aller et al. to be at the drug binding sites of Pgp, 42 of
them (all but T837) were found within 3.5 Å of a preferred docking
cluster of at least one of the drugs tested. In summary, the docking
results presented here are in very good agreement with the biochemical
studies that have elucidated the specific residues of the drug binding
sites of Pgp.

Mechanistic Implications
Alanine 841, which is found
within 3.5 Å of preferred docking clusters, deserves further
mention. This residue is present on TM9 and appears in our models
to be packed against TM7 during much of the conformational change
from the wide opened inward to the partially opened outward conformation
(Figure ). Interestingly, however, as the
transporter approaches the opened outward states, A841 moves clear
of TM7 as these helices separate widely (Figure ). One can clearly observe the opening of the drug binding domains
in these side views (see also Figures S1 and S2 of the ). Whether this represents
the opening of a possible transport substrate “exit gate”
in analogy to the entrance gate observed in the opened inward conformations
will have to be confirmed in future studies. It should be noted that
an analogous opening of TM1 and -3 was observed on the opposite side
of the transporter during the opened inward to opened outward conformational
transitions.

Possible exit gate in the drug binding domain of Pgp.
The transmembrane
helices of the drug binding domain of Pgp are shown as silver cartoons,
while the extramembranous protein is colored black. Alanine 841 (TM9),
V715 (TM7), and G722 (TM7) are shown in space-filling representation.
A841 is on the right-hand side of each figure, while V715 and G722
are on the left. V715 is above G722. From left to right are shown
the fully opened inward, partially opened inward, partially opened
outward, and fully opened outward conformations, respectively. A similar
figure with color-coded helices for ease of identification of individual
structures is presented in Figure S10 of the .

Loo et al. showed
in 2003 that different
transport substrates differentially changed the cross-linking patterns
between residues present in the drug binding domain transmembrane
helices. These results were interpreted as evidence of a substrate-induced
fit mechanism for the binding of different transport substrates by
Pgp. The simulations presented here demonstrated the great plasticity
of the drug binding domain structures of Pgp in two different and
important ways: the very large movements of the DBD helices observed
as the conformation of the transporter changed and the localized,
more subtle rearrangements of the side chains of residues surrounding
drug binding sites that can be inferred from the three neighboring
conformational states in the QZ59-RRR analogue binding site (see Figure ). This report therefore provides mechanistic support
for the proposal that local rearrangements of residues that interact
with transport substrates together with more global repositioning
of helices between the wide open to the inside to partially opened
to the inside conformations of Pgp would be expected to be able to
accommodate many different ligand structures in a substrate-induced
fit mechanism such as that proposed in ref ().

Several mechanisms for Pgp catalysis
and transport have been postulated.,,− Most have in
common the hypothesis that ATP binding or hydrolysis promotes the
association of NBDs and the adoption of outward-facing DBS, and that
release of hydrolysis products promotes the dissociation of NBDs and
inward-facing DBS. The results from the targeted MD simulations presented
here show some of the details of the progression of the protein conformations
from an initial state, where the drug binding domains are opened to
the cytoplasm and the nucleotide binding domains are fully disengaged,
to a conformation in which the drug binding domains are fully opened
to the extracellular space and the nucleotide binding domains are
fully engaged. Very large helical movements in the TMD and the relative
twisting of the NBDs as they approach each other can be observed.
It seems reasonable to conclude that the ADP-Vi transitional
state conformation represents a state of the transporter in the catalytic
cycle where the drug bound in the DBS would be free to dissociate
to the extracellular space. The conformational analyses performed
here support this hypothesis because this conformation shows the greatest
access of the DBS to the extracellular space. The Sav1866 conformations
(with ADP and AMPPNP bound) appear to exist in a more relaxed state
where the outside of the cell is still accessible from the DBS, but
the extent of opening of the DBS to the extracellular space is smaller.
In the simulations presented here, the ADP-bound Sav1866 conformation
was taken to be an approximation of a conformation with fully engaged
NBDs that followed the partially opened inward conformation with slightly
disengaged NBDs but preceded the fully opened outward transitional
state. It is very likely that this relaxed opened outward Sav1866
state (or one similar to it) would also follow the transition state
as was originally suggested.,,, It will be
of interest in the future to perform additional targeted molecular
dynamics simulations with Pgp as new structures of transporters with
other catalytically relevant conformations are discovered.

The
dramatic opening of the external face of the DBD as the transporter
moved from the partially opened outward to the fully opened outward
conformation of the catalytic transition state observed here is hypothesized
to occur by a realignment of coupling helices 2 and 4 caused by movements
of the nucleotide binding domains during this catalytic transition.
The movement of coupling helices 2 and 4 appeared to allow helices
4 and 5 and helices 10 and 11 to straighten into much more ideal α-helical
conformations. The straightening of helices 4 and 5 and helices 10
and 11 is hypothesized to occur as a consequence of the relative twisting
of coupling helices 2 and 4. Coordinated movement of helices 3 and
9 and helices 6 and 12 (which are directly connected to the extracellular
ends of helices 4 and 10 and helices 5 and 11, respectively) together
with the described straightening of helices 4 and 5 and helices 10
and 11 accounted for most of the dramatic opening of the external
face of the DBD as the transition state conformation was approached.
This opening of the extracellular part of the DBD likely allows dissociation
of the bound transport ligand to the extracellular membrane leaflet
or the extracellular bulk matrix.

In this work, transitions
between well-established ABC transporter
conformations have been studied using targeted MD in attempts to assemble
a series of conformational changes that reflect structural changes
required for catalysis. Over the course of these simulations, drug
and inhibitor binding have been investigated and the coordinated movements
of individual helices have been correlated with the proposed conformational
changes. The detailed movements described here should provide ample
hypothetical tests for future experimentation.

Supporting Information Available
Figures S1 and S2 present
videos
showing the 26 sequential nonredundant conformational changes of Pgp
that were observed in the targeted molecular dynamics simulations
presented here. Figures S3–S5 show the complex helical movements
observed previously by Loo, Clarke, and co-workers during ATP hydrolysis
for transmembrane helices 1 and 11 and helices 6 and 12. Figure S6
presents video animations of the helical movements within the drug
binding domains of Pgp that fully open the extracellular face of the
transporter as the catalytic transition state conformation is approached.
Figures S7, S9, and S10 are color versions of Figures –, respectively, that have
color-coded transmembrane helices that allow identification of specific
substructures of Pgp should that be desired. Figure S8 shows changes
in the orientation of mutated residues on TM1 and -11 during simulated
catalysis that are known to form disulfide cross-links in an ATP hydrolysis-dependent
manner. Table S1 presents the list of compounds and their relevant
characteristics that were used here in docking studies of the 26 nonredundant
Pgp conformations. Table S2 is a text file containing a table of residues
of Pgp that come within 3.5 Å of any docked ligand in any of
the 26 nonredundant conformations tested here. This material is available
free of charge via the Internet at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bi300299z_si_001.pdf

bi300299z_si_002.pdf

bi300299z_si_003.mpg

bi300299z_si_004.mpg

bi300299z_si_005.mpg

The authors declare no
competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
I thank Pia D. Vogel for valuable discussions and critical
reading of the manuscript, Joe Gargiula and Jim Jaeger for their assistance
with computer resources, and Justin Ross for help with the High Performance
Computing Center at Southern Methodist University. I acknowledge the
Texas Advanced Computing Center (TACC) at the University of Texas
at Austin for providing some of the computational resources used in
this work and the High Performance Computing Center at Southern Methodist
University for the majority of the computational resources used here.

Abbreviations
ABCB1ATP
binding cassette transporter,
type B1

DBDdrug
binding domain (the domain of the transporter consisting of the 12
transmembrane helices and the intracellular extensions of these helices)

DBSdrug binding site(s)
(residues of the transporter found within the drug binding domain
that interact directly with transported ligands)

MDmolecular dynamics

NBDsnucleotide binding domains

NPTisothermic–isobaric
molecular simulation ensemble in which moles, pressure, and temperature
are held constant

PgpP-glycoprotein

POPC1-palmitoyl-2-oleoyl-sn-glycero-3-phosphocholine

rmsdroot-mean-square
deviation

TMtransmembrane

TMDtransmembrane domain.

