Dynamic reorganization
of the
cytoskeleton is a fundamental process in cell motility. RhoA/ROCK
signaling plays a dominant role in the regulation of cytoskeletal
reorganization by inducing spatiotemporal phosphorylation of cytoskeletal
proteins and their regulatory elements. Phosphorylation of myosin
II regulatory light chains (MLC20) determines myosin motor activity,
the affinity for actin filaments, and self-assembly in cells. The
MLC20 phosphatase (MLCP) holoenzyme, consisting of the protein phosphatase-1
catalytic subunit δ (also named β) isoform (PP1C), myosin-targeting
subunit MYPT1, and an accessory subunit M20,− is a downstream
effector of the RhoA/ROCK signaling axis. This trimeric PP1 holoenzyme also dephosphorylates other proteins,
such as ERM, adducin, tau, merlin, and Rb, mediating RhoA signaling
in the regulation of various cellular actions.

Lines of evidence suggest that the MYPT1 regulatory subunit
plays
a central role in the spatiotemporal regulation of cellular MLCP (reviewed
in refs () and ()). The N-terminal 300-residue
structural domain of MYPT1 forms a platform for the allosteric interaction
with PP1C, and the interaction defines the substrate specificity and
the sensitivity toward the endogenous inhibitor protein CPI-17.− MYPT1 tethers PP1C to myosin filaments through interaction of the
MYPT1 N-terminal domain with myosin subfragment-2 and/or the MYPT1
C-terminal 300-residue domain with the myosin rod domain., MYPT1 possesses multiple phosphorylation sites that negatively and
positively regulate the cellular activity of MLCP.− In permeabilized
smooth muscle tissues, G-protein activation induces MLCP inhibition
in parallel with MYPT1 thio-phosphorylation. ROCK phosphorylates MYPT1 at Thr696 and Thr853 (Thr695 and Thr850,
respectively, in chicken MYPT1), and the phosphorylation suppresses
MLCP activity., In addition, multiple kinases,
such as a MYPT1-associated kinase (ZIPK), ILK, and PAK, are capable
of selectively phosphorylating Thr696 and inhibiting the activity.− In smooth muscle tissues, Thr696 phosphorylation is relatively insensitive
to stimulus, whereas the level of Thr853 phosphorylation increases
in response to G-protein activation.− To fully interpret the
physiological data showing the differential phosphorylation of MYPT1
into the MLCP activity in mammalian cells, we must know the roles
of two inhibitory phosphorylation sites of human MYPT1 in the regulation.

It should be noted that characterization of MLCP has been mostly
conducted using native or recombinant avian MLCP enzymes. Inhibition
of the chimeric MLCP complex consisting of a full-length avian MYPT1
purified from bacteria lysates and isolated avian PP1C occurred upon
phosphorylation at Thr696 but not Thr853. On the other hand, avian and human MYPT1 fragments that are phosphorylated
at only Thr853 inhibit the activity of reconstituted or truncated
enzymes.,, Phosphorylation
of avian MYPT1 at Thr853 also interferes with the binding of the C-terminal
segment to isolated myosin filaments, although cellular interaction between MLCP and myosin filaments
is not fully understood. Thus, two inhibitory phosphorylation sites
may play distinct roles in the regulation of cellular MLCP. The C-terminal
domain of human MYPT1 possesses an extra 25-residue segment with a
coiled-coil motif, in addition to the conserved Leu zipper (LZ) domain
in chicken MYPT1, which is necessary for cGMP-induced smooth muscle
relaxation and the binding to myosin filaments and M20., The difference in the structure of the C-terminal domain between
species possibly affects MLCP regulation through Thr696 and Thr853
phosphorylation.

Unlike the native enzyme, PP1C expressed in
bacteria requires a
nonphysiological concentration of Mn2+ for activity and
lacks sensitivity to specific inhibitor compounds., Therefore, the methodology for preparing the recombinant human MLCP
holoenzyme that restores the function of the native complex is needed.
Here, we successfully overexpressed the recombinant MLCP holoenzyme
in mammalian cells. The phosphorylation-dependent inhibition of the
MLCP holoenzyme was characterized using the holoenzyme partially purified
from the mammalian cell lysates. The activity of the recombinant MLCP
was independent of Mn2+ ion and inhibited via phosphorylation
by ROCK. Systematic mutational analysis revealed distinguishable roles
of two phosphorylation sites, Thr696 and Thr853, in the regulation
of MLCP.

Experimental Procedures
Preparation of Recombinant MLCP
The recombinant MLCP
complex (MYPT1–PP1 dimer) was transiently expressed in COS1
cells. The cDNA fragment of Venus YFP (Vns) and the longest splicing variant of human MYPT1 were sequentially inserted at the HindIII–EcoRI site of the pCMV-FLAG-MAT expression vector (Sigma).
Vns cDNA was a gift from A. Miyawaki (Riken) through a Material Transfer
Agreement. The pHA3-PP1δ vector was cloned as described previously. The cDNA of the PP1δ isoform cloned from
a pig cDNA library encodes an amino acid sequence identical to that
of the human enzyme. COS1 cells (ATCC) were harvested in a 10 cm dish
in the presence of Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s medium
(DMEM) supplemented with 5% fetal bovine serum (FBS). The cells in
a 10 cm dish were transiently transfected for 24–36 h using
FuGene HD or XtremeGene 9 (Roche) with each 5 μg of MYPT1 and
PP1 vectors. A longer transfection did not increase the yield (data
not shown). After the transfection, cells were rinsed with PBS and
then homogenized using a Dounce homogenizer with 1 mL of extraction
buffer [0.5 M NaCl, 20 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.0), 0.1 mM EGTA, 5% glycerol,
and 0.1% Tween 20] supplemented with 4 mM Pefabloc (PFB, Roche) and
0.5 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP, Pierce). The lysates were
incubated for 15 min on ice and clarified by centrifugation at 12000
rpm for 15 min (4 °C). Under these conditions, &gt;80% of MYPT1
was recovered in the supernatant (data not shown). Talon Co2+ affinity resin slurry (100 μL) was added to the supernatant.
After a 30 min incubation, the beads were collected and washed three
times with extraction buffer (200 μL). The MLCP complex bound
to the beads was released by stepwise elution with 100 μL of
elution buffer [0.5 M imidazole-HCl (pH 7.0), including 0.1 M NaCl,
0.1 mM EGTA, 5% glycerol, 0.1% Tween 20, 4 mM PFB, and 0.5 mM TCEP].
The total protein concentration and the composition of each fraction
were determined by a Bradford assay and immunoblotting, respectively.
The elution fractions containing the MLCP complex were combined, dispensed
into 50 μL aliquots, and stored at −80 °C until
they were used. The preparation and activity of trimeric MLCP with
the M20 subunit are shown in Figure S2 of the .

MLCP Assay
MLCP
activity was determined as the amount
of inorganic phosphate (Pi) released with the phospho-MLC20
peptide as the substrate, unless noted. We used the phosphopeptide
to avoid allosteric effects caused by the multiple-site interaction
with the myosin molecule. The phospho-MLC20 peptide {P-MLC20(3–26)
mimicking human MLC20 residues 3–26 [KRAKAKTTKKRPQRAT(Sp)NVFAMFD]} was synthesized by
LifeTein. The amount of released Pi was measured using
a malachite green assay (BioMol Green kit, Enzo). The assay was performed
in triplicate in a 96-well plate with a final volume of 50 μL.
Conditions included 0.003–0.04 mg/mL recombinant MLCP in the
presence of assay buffer [25 mM MOPS-NaOH (pH 7.0), 0.5 mM TCEP, 0.1
mM EDTA, 4 mM PFB, and 1 nM okadaic acid (OA)] at 30 °C. A small
dose of OA was added to eliminate the activity of potential contaminants
(PP2A/4/6) in the purified MLCP sample. The phosphatase reaction was
initiated by the addition of 5 μL of 0.25 mM P-MLC20(3–26).
After a 30 min incubation, 100 μL of BioMol Green reagent was
added to each well to terminate the reaction. The plate was incubated
at room temperature for 20–30 min, and the absorbance at 650
nm in each well was read by the plate reader. The amount of Pi was obtained using the OD value from the triplicate wells
with a standard Pi solution. The MLCP assay with 32P-labeled MLC20 was conducted as described previously.

Proximity Ligation Assay (PLA)
The
PLA was performed
using a Duolink-II kit (Olink) following the manufacturer’s
protocol. Human leiomyosarcoma cells [sk-LMS-1 (ATCC)] were seeded
onto fibronectin-coated coverslips. Cells were harvested overnight
in DMEM without FBS, stimulated for 1 h with 10% FBS and then fixed
with 10% TCA (for phosphorylation) or 4% paraformaldehyde (for protein–protein
interaction). TCA fixation was critical
for preserving The853 phosphorylation (data not shown). After being
fixed, cells were permeabilized with 0.1% Triton X-100 and subjected
to PLA staining. PLA signals and nuclei were detected using confocal
microscopy with Texas Red and DAPI filter sets, respectively. More than 12 images were captured in each specimen.
Spots of the PLA signal above background were counted using a semiautomated
script written in IP-Lab. The number of PLA spots divided by the number
of nuclei was obtained from each image, and mean values ± the
standard error of the mean (SEM) of the ratio was defined as PLA/cell.

Other Methods
Molecular cloning, immunoblotting, immunoprecipitation,
and the S-tag pulldown assay were performed as described previously., Expression vectors for myosin heavy chain fragments were prepared
using cDNA of human non-muscle myosin heavy chain, a gift from M.
Takahashi (Hokkaido University, Sapporo, Japan), as a polymerase chain
reaction template. The DNA sequence was verified at the Kimmel Cancer
Center Cancer Genomic Core Laboratory (Thomas Jefferson University).
Primary antibodies for GFP, pan-actin, HA, and myc were purchased
from the Aves lab, Sigma-Aldrich, and the University of Virginia Core
Facility. Antibodies for total-MYPT1, P-MYPT1(T696), and P-MYPT1(T853)
were from Millipore. The specificity of the phospho-specific antibodies
was verified using Ala-substituted MYPT1 (see Figure A). Thio-phosphorylation was assessed following the method
reported by Allen et al. using p-nitrobenzyl mesylate
(PNBM) and the antibody specific to the alkylated thiophosphate (Epitomics). Dot blotting was performed using a nitrocellulose
membrane. The phosphorylation of MLCP was terminated by adding 2×RIPA
buffer. Aliquot (2 μL) of the sample was spotted on the membrane
and subjected to immunostaining, followed by densitometry for quantification.
A Student’s t test assuming an equal distribution
and nonlinear regression were conducted using Excel and Kaleidagraph,
respectively.

Results
Figure  shows a summary of the preparation
and characterization of the recombinant MLCP complex. FLAG-Vns-MAT
(fvm)-tagged ectopic full-length (FL) MYPT1 was transiently co-expressed
for 24 h with HA-tagged PP1δ in COS1 cells and partially purified
using Co2+-chelated TALON beads. The eluent was subjected
to sodium dodecyl sulfate–polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis
(SDS–PAGE) and immunoblotting with anti-FLAG and anti-HA antibodies
(Figure A). On the Coomassie-stained gel (Figure A, left), fvm-MYPT1(FL) was a major component in
the eluent along with HA-PP1δ (arrowhead). A truncated form,
fvm-MYPT1(1–300), including the PP1 docking site also formed
a complex with HA-PP1δ (Figure A, 300).
The unidentified polypeptides existed in both preparations, suggesting
that these are due to nonspecific binding to resins, but not degradation
from MYPT1 FL. In a typical preparation, the yield was approximately
0.1 mg of partially purified enzyme from COS1 lysates from a 10 cm
dish. On the basis of the densitometric analysis of the Coomassie
gel, the molar ratio of fvm-MYPT1 to HA-PP1δ was close to 2,
indicating approximately 50% fvm-MYPT1 is bound with HA-PP1δ.
The yield, purity, and molar ratio of the recombinant MLCP were consistent
between preparations and insensitive to the mutations described below.
We also tested other cell lines, such as HEK293, HeLa, and A7r5, although
only COS1 cells were able to produce a significant amount of the active
MLCP complex (data not shown). Because of the low recovery, we were
unable to further purify the MLCP complex (data not shown).

Characterization
of the recombinant MLCP complex. Full-length (FL)
FLAG-Vns-MAT (fvm)-tagged MYPT1 and fragment 1–300 (300) were
co-expressed with 3×HA-PP1C (δ isoform) and partially purified
as described in . Each
sample was subjected to SDS–PAGE, and the proteins were detected
by Coomassie staining (A, left) and immunoblotting with anti-FLAG
and anti-HA antibodies (A, right). The arrowhead indicates the location
of 3×HA-PP1C detected with the anti-HA antibody. The MLCP complex
was subjected to an MLCP assay in the presence of MnCl2, okadaic acid (OA), and microcystin LR (MC) with P-MLC20(3–26)
as a substrate (B). Bar C indicates the activity without additives,
which was set to 100%. An asterisk indicates p &lt;
0.05 (n = 3), compared with bar C.

A litmus test of the recombinant PP1 preparation
is the sensitivity
to Mn2+. MLCP activity was determined by measuring the
release of phosphate from a phospho-peptide mimicking MLC20(3–26:P-Ser19)
as a substrate using the Malachite Green method. The recombinant fvm-MLCP(FL)
complex dephosphorylated the P-MLC20 peptide in the absence of Mn2+. Under this condition [25 μM P-MLC20(3–26)],
the specific activity of fvm-MLCP(FL) was ∼200 nmol min–1 mg–1. The MLCP activity was unchanged
by the addition of 0.1 mM MnCl2 but decreased to 59% in
the presence of 1 mM MnCl2 (Figure B). Okadaic acid (OA) and microcystin LR (MC) are potent inhibitor
compounds for PP1 and PP2A. The addition of 10 nM okadaic acid, which
inhibits PP2A, had no effect on MLCP activity, while the addition
of 1 μM okadaic acid and 10 nM MC, which inhibits both PP1 and
PP2A, substantially decreases MLCP activity to 23 and 12%, respectively
(Figure B). These results suggest that the
Mn2+ and inhibitor sensitivity of the recombinant MLCP
is indistinguishable from that of the native MLCP enzyme. Furthermore,
the recombinant MLCP did not hydrolyze p-nitrophenyl
phosphate (PNPP), a synthetic substrate dephosphorylated by Mn2+-dependent PP1 (data not shown).

Phosphorylation-dependent
inhibition of the recombinant MLCP complex.
(A) Phosphorylation of recombinant MLCP. Untreated (left) or phosphorylated
recombinant MLCP with MYPT1 wild type (WT) and T696A, T853A, and T696A/T853A
(AA) mutants by ROCK (100 milliunits) (right) was subjected to immunoblotting
using antibodies for total-MYPT1, phospho-Thr696, and phospho-Thr853.
No phosphorylation was detected with untreated MLCP. (B) MLCP assay.
Each MLCP preparation was thio-phosphorylated for 90 min at 30 °C
with ROCK (100 milliunits) and 0.1 mM ATPγS prior to the MLCP
assay. The relative activity of thio-phosphorylated MLCP (filled bar)
was normalized against the untreated enzyme (empty bar) (left). The
mean value ± SEM was obtained from triplicate assays with at
least three independent thio-phosphorylated MLCP trials. An asterisk
indicates p &lt; 0.05 compared to the value with
the untreated enzyme. The difference in activity between thio-phosphorylated
and untreated enzymes was defined as inhibition (%) (right).

Figure  shows
the phosphorylation-dependent inhibition of the recombinant MLCP.
No phosphorylation at Thr696 or Thr853 was detected in the MLCP preparations,
including the fvm-MYPT1 wild type (WT), T696A, T853A, and T696A/T853A
(AA) (Figure A, left). Probably, it is due
to autodephosphorylation (see Figure ). The
incubation with recombinant ROCK (100 milliunits) yielded phosphorylation
of mutant MYPT1s at Thr696 or Thr853 at a level equivalent to that
of WT. Under the same condition, the MLCP complex was thio-phosphorylated
with ROCK and ATPγS and subjected to the phosphatase assay (Figure B). Thio-phosphorylation caused a decrease in the
activity of WT MLCP to 29%. Substitution of Thr696 with Ala eliminated
the phosphorylation-dependent inhibition, whereas the extent of inhibition
of T853A MLCP was indistinguishable from that of WT MLCP (Figure B). Neither AA MLCP nor the MLCP consisting of MYPT1(1–300)
was sensitive to the thio-phosphorylation. Further addition of ROCK
and/or prolonged thiophosphorylation did not enhance the inhibitory
potency (data not shown). These results suggest that two inhibitory
phosphorylation sites of human MYPT1 play distinguishable roles in
the regulation of MLCP. As shown in Figure S1A of the , there are two Pro residues
in the region prior to Thr853 that corresponds to the middle of an
α-helix prior to Thr696 (B-helix) (Figure S1B of the ), although both regions are enriched with basic residues. The difference in the structure may confer specific
roles on the two inhibitory phosphorylation sites. We also tested
whether the M20 subunit plays a role in the regulation using the recombinant
trimeric MLCP (Figure S2 of the ). Neither the specific activity nor the extent of phosphorylation-dependent
inhibition was distinguishable between the dimeric and trimeric holoenzymes.
Therefore, we characterized only the MYPT1–PP1 dimeric complex.

GST-tagged MYPT1 fragments, including either phosphorylated Thr696
or Thr853, is capable of docking at the active site and inhibiting
purified MLCP, suggesting an autoinhibition mechanism for the regulation. We tested the autoinhibition model using the
recombinant MLCP complex. As shown in Figure A, thio-phosphorylation of T853A MLCP at Thr696 reduced the Vm value from 0.32 to 0.15 nmol min–1 mg–1 and the Km value
from 12.3 to 4.7 μM, indicating noncompetitive inhibition, in
disagreement with the autoinhibition model, including competition
at the active site. The autoinhibition model was further tested using
the antibody for phospho-MYPT1(Thr696) (Figure B). To avoid interference with the Malachite Green assay by components
in the antibody solution, 32P-labeled MLC20 was used as
a substrate for the assay. Incubation of WT MLCP with ROCK and ATP
reduced the activity to 60% (Figure B). Addition
of the anti-P-MYPT1(Thr696) antibody after the phosphorylation reversed
the phosphorylation-induced inhibition. Thus, masking of phospho-Thr696
is sufficient for the attenuation of inhibition. In the sequence alignment
(Figure S1B of the ), acidic and basic residue clusters, DEE and RK, prior to MYPT1
Thr696, are highly conserved between species (human, fruit fly, and
chicken) as well as other MYPT1 family members, such as MYPT2 and
MBS85. If phospho-Thr696 docks at the active site, the position of
the basic cluster, RK, is predicted to be in the proximity of an acidic
cluster that exists at the edge of the PP1C active site groove, based
on X-ray crystal structure data. To test
this possibility, the MLCP complexes including two versions of Gln-substituted
MYPT1, RK &gt; QQ (“RK”) and DEE &gt; QQQ (“DEE”),
were subjected to the thio-phosphorylation-dependent inhibition assay
(Figure C). Compared with that of the WT,
relative phosphorylation levels of DEE and RK MYPT1 at Thr696 were
1.0 ± 0.04 and 1.4 ± 0.27, respectively (n = 3). Thio-phosphorylation
of DEE MLCP yielded a moderate decrease in activity to 72% (Figure C). On the other hand, the RK mutation eliminated
the thio-phosphorylation-dependent inhibition of MLCP, suggesting
an importance of the basic cluster prior to phospho-Thr696 in the
inhibition, in agreement with the autoinhibition model. Therefore,
we propose that the direct binding of phospho-Thr696 is a cause of
the inhibition of human MLCP.

Autoinhibition of MLCP through Thr696 phosphorylation.
(A) Activity
of thiophospho-MLCP. Specific activity of untreated T853A MLCP (U-853A)
and T853A MLCP thio-phosphorylated at Thr696 (tP-853A) determined
using P-MLC20(3–26) at the indicated concentration. Vm and Km values
were obtained by curve fitting (n = 3). (B) Interference
with autoinhibition by the anti-P-T696-MYPT1 antibody. WT MLCP was
preincubated for 90 min at 30 °C under the indicated conditions
in the absence or presence of ROCK (100 milliunits) and then subjected
to the MLCP assay using 32P-labeled MLC20 (1 μM).
The anti-P-T696 antibody was added 30 min prior to the assay (n = 3). (C) Thio-phosphorylation-dependent inhibition of
MLCP activity. Untreated and thio-phosphorylated WT, DEE &gt; QQQ
(DEE),
and RK &gt; QQ (RK) MLCPs were subjected to the MLCP assay using P-MLC20(3–26),
and the relative activities against untreated enzymes are shown. p &lt; 0.05 (n = 6). The number indicates
the relative extent of thio-phosphorylation of MYPT1, which was determined
by immuno-dot blotting using PNBM and the antibody for the alkylated
thiophosphate, as described in .

The inhibition of MLCP induced
by the phosphorylation was less
potent, compared with thio-phosphorylation (Figures B and B). We asked if phospho-Thr696
and Thr853 are dephosphorylated in the recombinant MLCP (“auto-dephosphorylation”).
WT, T696A, and T853A MLCP complexes were phosphorylated with a submaximal
amount of recombinant ROCK in the absence and presence of microcystin,
and the specific phosphorylation at Thr696 and Thr853 was assessed
using immunostaining (Figure A). The inhibition of phosphatase activity with microcystin
resulted in a 5-fold increase in the level of phosphorylation at Thr696,
which indicates the extent of autodephosphorylation at the inhibitory
phospho-Thr696 (Figure A, left). The level
of phosphorylation of Thr853 was more sensitive to microcystin, which
elevated it 13-fold, suggesting a higher turnover rate of the phosphorylation
at Thr853, compared with the rate of that at Thr696. In the T696A
MLCP, phosphorylation of Thr853 was less sensitive to microcystin,
compared with that of WT MLCP (Figure A).
The T853A mutation also moderately reduced the level of phosphorylation
at Thr696. Thus, each phosphorylation at Thr696 and Thr853 may stabilize
the phosphorylation at the other site. A synergy between two phosphorylation
sites was determined using the GST-MYPT1(654–880) fragment
that does not possess the phosphatase activity. Recombinant ROCK failed
to phosphorylate the T696A protein at Thr853, whereas the phosphorylation
at Thr853 was enhanced by phospho-mimicking substitution at Thr696
(Figure B). These results suggest communication
between two inhibitory phosphorylation sites of MYPT1. For an unknown
reason, we failed to produce stable GST-MYPT1(654–880) protein
with a substitution of Thr853 with Ala or Asp.

Phosphorylation of MYPT1
by ROCK. (A) WT, T696A, and T853A MLCPs
were phosphorylated for 30 min at 30 °C with ROCK (36 milliunits)
in the absence or presence of 1 μM MC-LR and subjected to immuno-dot
blotting using antibodies for total, P-T696, and P-T853 MYPT1. Potential
contamination of PP2A was eliminated with OA (10 nM) in the mixture.
The mean value ± SEM of staining density of phospho-Thr696 or
Thr853 vs total MYPT1 was obtained from triplicate assays. An asterisk
and a carrot indicate p &lt; 0.05 against the value
without MCLR and the value of P-Thr696, respectively. (B) GST-tagged
MYPT1 fragment (residues 654–880) phosphorylated for 30 min
at 30 °C with ROCK (36 milliunits) and subjected to immunoblotting.
Representative data from duplicate assays are shown.

Figure  shows the phosphorylation
of endogenous
MYPT1 and the interaction with myosin filaments in human leiomyosarcoma.
The level of phosphorylation of MYPT1 at Thr696 was spontaneously
high in the quiescent cells and unchanged upon serum stimulation (Figure A, top, and Figure S3 of the ). This spontaneous phosphorylation
at Thr696 is potentially attributed to the slower autodephosphorylation
(Figure A). On the other hand, the level of
phosphorylation of MYPT1 at Thr853 and the level of diphosphorylation
of MLC20 at Thr18/Ser19 were low under quiescent conditions and elevated
in response to serum stimulation (Figure A
and Figure S3 of the ). ROCK inhibition blocked the increase in the level of phosphorylation
(Figure A and Figure S3 of the ). A parallel assay for
Thr853 phosphorylation and dissociation of MYPT1 from myosin filaments
was performed using the proximity ligation assay (PLA) (Figure B,C). Cells were fixed with 4% paraformaldehyde
and subjected to the PLA, except for the assay that detected MYPT1
phosphorylation, in which 10% TCA was used as a fixative to preserve
the phosphorylation. The PLA signals and the number of nuclei in each
image were counted under a fluorescence microscope (Figure B). The relative PLA signal was determined using
the anti-total MYPT1 antibody paired with anti-P-MYPT1(Thr853), anti-MLC20,
and anti-PP1δ antibodies and preimmune IgG as a control (Ctl)
that indicates the background signal (Figure C). The magnitude of the PLA signal between P-MYPT1(Thr853) and total-MYPT1
was increased upon serum stimulation, indicating an increased level
of Thr853 phosphorylation (Figure B,C). In
parallel, the magnitude of the PLA signal between anti-total MYPT1
and MLC20 was significantly reduced upon stimulation, indicating an
increase in the distance between MYPT1 and MLC20. In addition, the
magnitude of the PLA signal against PP1δ was also reduced in
parallel to Thr853 phosphorylation (Figure C). These results suggest that phosphorylation of MYPT1 at Thr853
is sensitive to ROCK-induced signaling and is synchronized with the
disassembly of the myosin–MYPT1–PP1δ complex in
cells.

Phosphorylation and regulation of MLCP in leiomyosarcoma. (A) Cellular
phosphorylation of MYPT1. Quiescent leiomyosarcoma cells were stimulated
for 1 h with 10% FBS in the absence and presence of 10 μM Y27632,
fixed with 10% TCA, and subjected to immunoblotting. 2P-MLC20 denotes
MLC20 diphosphorylated at Thr18 and Ser19. (B and C) PLA analysis.
Quiescent and FBS-stimulated cells on coverslips were fixed with 10%
TCA (for P-Thr853) or 4% paraformaldehyde (MLC20 and PP1δ) and
subjected to the PLA using anti-total MYPT1 paired with preimmune
IgG (control), anti-P-MYPT1(T853), anti-MLC20, and anti-PP1δ.
Magenta and blue portions are the PLA signal and the nucleus, respectively
(B). Numbers of PLA spots and nuclei were obtained in each image field.
The mean value ± SEM of the ratio of the number of PLA spots
to the number of nuclei was obtained from 12–43 image fields
in two independent assays (C). Asterisks denote p &lt; 0.05 vs the quiescent condition.

N-Terminal and C-terminal domains of chicken MYPT1 have been
reported
to bind to heavy meromyosin (HMM) and rod domains (Figure A), respectively, although little is known about
the contact regions of human MYPT1. S tag fusion peptides of three
regions in the myosin rod domain, S-2, the N-terminal portion of light
meromyosin (LMM-N), and the assembly competence domain (ACD), a minimal
region required for filament formation, were expressed in COS1 cells
and used for the S pull-down assay with the MLCP complex, including
myc-tagged human MYPT-1 (Figure B,C). The
myc-MYPT1 subunit of the MLCP complex in the cell lysates was coprecipitated
only with S tag LMM-N, but not with S-2 or the ACD domain (Figure B). Next, the pull-down assay was conducted using
S-S-2 and -LMM-N beads with cell lysates including myc-MYPT1(1–498)
(N) and myc-MYPT1(495–1030) (C) (Figure C). Only the C-terminal segment of MYPT1 was coprecipitated with
S-LMM-N beads (Figure C, right). Neither myc-MYPT1-N
nor myc-MYPT1-C was coprecipitated with S-S-2 (Figure C, left). In a manner consistent with the pull-down assay
data, only myc-MYPT1-C was coprecipitated with the cytoskeletal fraction
in the cell lysates (Figure D). Thus, the
C-terminal domain of human MYPT1 docks at the LMM-N domain. As shown
in Figure S4 of the , human MYPT1(934–1030), including both Leu zipper (LZ) and
coiled-coil (CC) domains, was predominantly found in the cytoskeletal
fraction, suggesting that the C-terminal helical domain of MYPT1 is
responsible for the interaction with the helical LMM subdomain.

Interaction
of MYPT1 with myosin. (A) Structure of myosin II heavy
chain. Abbreviations: S-1, subfragment-1; S-2, subfragment-2; LMM-N,
N-terminal portion of light meromyosin; ACD, assembly competent domain.
(B and C) Binding of recombinant MLCP to S-tagged myosin fragments.
S-tagged S-2, LMM-N, and ACD were expressed in COS1 cells and captured
with S-protein affinity beads. The beads were mixed with cell lysates,
including the complex of myc-MYPT1 with 3×HA-PP1C (B) or myc-MYPT1(1–498)
with 3×HA-PP1δ and myc-MYPT1(495–1030) with 3×HA-M20
(C). The proteins bound to the beads were analyzed by immunoblotting.
(D) Subfractionation of cells expressing recombinant MLCP. myc-MYPT1(1–498)
(“N”) and myc-MYPT1(495–1030) (“C”)
were co-expressed in COS1 cells with 3×HA-PP1C (H124N) and 3×HA-M20,
respectively. Cells were lysed with buffer [10 mM HEPES (pH 7.4) with
0.2 M NaCl, 5 mM Mg(OAc)2, 2 mM EGTA, and 0.1% Triton X-100]
and subjected to airfuge for 30 min at 80000 rpm. S and P denote the
cytoplasm and cytoskeletal fractions, respectively.

Discussion
In this work, we established
a new method for the preparation of
the recombinant PP1 holoenzyme and revealed distinguishable roles
of MYPT1 phosphorylation at two inhibitory phosphorylation sites in
the regulation of human MLCP. Recently, we have proposed the autoinhibition
of MLCP in response to phosphorylation at either Thr696 or Thr853,
based on the data that the MYPT1 fragments phosphorylated at Thr696
or Thr853 are capable of inhibiting purified MLCP and the endogenous
MLCP in smooth muscle fibers. In the
recombinant MLCP complex, only Thr696 phosphorylation is responsible
for the inhibition of MLCP. The inhibition is attenuated by substitution
with Gln or the neutralizing antibody, suggesting the direct docking
of phospho-Thr696 at the active site. Phospho-Thr696 is autodephosphorylated
at a rate slower than that of phospho-Thr853. The difference in the
stability of the phospho-ester likely confers the function of each
phosphorylation. It should be noted that the apparent Vm value of MLCP activity decreases in response to Thr696
thiophosphorylation, implying an allosteric inhibition in the Michaelis–Menten
model. The thiophosphorylation-dependent reduction of Vm is also shown in the previous report with the native
MLCP and the reconstituted enzyme., We presume
that the high affinity and the proximity of the thiophosphorylated
intrinsic autoinhibitory domain to the active site result in stable
docking of thiophospho-Thr696, reducing the number of accessible active
sites (decreasing [E]total). Under the circumstances, the
reversible competitive inhibition model of the Michaelis–Menten
equation is not applicable. This stabilized autoinhibitory interaction
of phospho-Thr696 with the active site must be necessary for the potent
regulation of MLCP in cells, where the enzyme is anchored to the substrate,
resulting in an apparent high [S] value.,

Accumulating
lines of evidence show the spontaneous MYPT1 phosphorylation
at Thr696 in resting smooth muscle− and quiescent cells,
including human leiomyosarcoma in this work. The slow autodephosphorylation
and the basal kinase activity at Thr696 likely contribute to the elevated
levels of phosphorylation and autoinhibition under the resting condition.
The spontaneous autoinhibition of MYPT1 by Thr696 phosphorylation
suggests that cellular MLCP activity is at least partially suppressed
when the holoenzyme is synthesized in cells. MLCP autoinhibition is
necessary for maintaining the basal level of myosin phosphorylation
and cytoskeleton stability. For example, when the ectopic MLCP lacking
the autoinhibition site is introduced into cells by microinjection
or transfection, the stress fibers are distorted because of hypo-phosphorylation
of myosin., The data in this work also suggest
that the phosphorylation at Thr696 facilitates the phosphorylation
at Thr853. The priming effect of phospho-Thr696 to Thr853 phosphorylation
is more evident in the MYPT1 fragment. Thus, the slow turnover of
Thr696 phosphorylation is responsible for regulating the basal activity
of MLCP as well as the sensitivity of Thr853 phosphorylation to the
agonist stimulus. Although, in general, the spontaneous Thr696 phosphorylation
is unchanged in smooth muscle tissues,−, moderate fluctuations have been reported in cell cultures,, and smooth muscle tissues under
certain conditions.− Purified kinases, such as ROCK, ZIPK, and ILK, are capable of phosphorylating
MYPT1 at Thr696, but cellular kinases responsible for the phosphorylation
remain unclear. ROCK is unlikely involved
in Thr696 phosphorylation, because ROCK inhibition does not effectively
reduce the level of Thr696 phosphorylation in leiomyosarcoma cells
(this study) or others. ZIPK associated
with MYPT1 is a strong candidate as a Thr696 kinase, although genetically modified ZIPK failed to phosphorylate
MYPT1 at Thr696 in permeabilized smooth muscle strips. Identifying specific kinases responsible for
basal and pathologic phosphorylation at Thr696 is needed for a full
understanding of the autoinhibitory regulation of cellular MLCP.

Trinkle-Mulcahy et al. originally reported G-protein-induced incorporation
of [35S]thiophosphate into MYPT1 in parallel with force
development and MLCP inhibition using partially permeabilized portal
vein smooth muscle strips. Later, two
phosphorylation sites of MYPT1 at Thr696 and Thr853 leading to MLCP
inhibition were identified using purified ROCK., It becomes evident that Thr853 is enhanced in response to G-protein
activation in cells., Unlike the recombinant proteins
purified from bacterial lysates, the
activity of the recombinant MLCP complex prepared using mammalian
cells is insensitive to Thr853 phosphorylation. Instead, PLA analysis
shows that increases in the distance of MYPT1 from myosin and PP1C
parallel the increase in the level of Thr853 phosphorylation, suggesting
that Thr853 phosphorylation is indicative of disassembly of the myosin–MLCP
complex in cell cultures. Lines of evidence support the disassembly
of the MLCP–myosin filament. Gong et al. showed that treatment
with arachidonic acid causes dissociation of MYPT1 from PP1C. Velasco et al. reported that the phosphorylation
of isolated chicken MYPT1 at Thr850 (corresponding to human Thr853)
interferes the binding to myosin filaments. Agonist-induced redistribution of MYPT1 and PP1C was reported in
smooth muscle cells. Also, fluorescence
photobleaching analysis suggests the high mobility of GFP-tagged PP1C
in living cells, suggesting a reversible association–dissociation
cycle of the cellular PP1 holoenzyme. Thus, disassembly of the holoenzyme induced by G-protein-induced
Thr853 phosphorylation is a possible cause of the suppression of MLCP
activity in cells. Because Thr853 phosphorylation is not sufficient
for disassembly of our recombinant MLCP (data not shown), we presume
that multiple pathways in ROCK signaling are involved in the regulation
of MLCP–myosin complex stability in cells.

There are
more than 100 PP1 regulatory subunits that confer specific
functions to cellular PP1 catalytic subunits. There have been limitations in characterizing cellular PP1 signaling,
because classical inhibitor compounds for PP1 cannot distinguish between
PP1 holoenzymes in cells. Recently, guanabenz was shown to lead to
the dissociation of PP1C from a regulatory subunit, GADD34, and treatment
with the compound enhances cell viability under ER stress through
the inhibition of the GADD34–PP1C complex. Independently, we developed inhibitor compounds using MLCP
purified from aorta extracts. The lead compound induces apoptosis
of prostate cancer cells, suggesting the potential for anticancer
therapy, although the limitation of the production of the native enzyme
has hampered further characterization and refinement of the compound. PP1C has been prepared using expression systems
with Escherichia coli and Sf9 cells., These preparations produce a sufficient amount of recombinant PP1C
but yielded the enzyme that did not retain native PP1C function. For
high-yield preparation, a high concentration of Mn2+ ion
(1 mM) is necessary for bacterial culture and the solutions for purification. This is beyond the physiologic concentration
of the ion, which has been estimated to be &lt;20–50 nmol/g
in tissues and 200 and 20 nmol/L in blood and serum, respectively. The recombinant PP1C activity is Mn2+-dependent, unlike the native enzyme. In addition, the PP1C preparation
is not phospho-Ser/Thr-specific, dephosphorylating phospho-Tyr and
PNPP, which are not hydrolyzed by native PP1C. PP1C expressed in Sf9
cells, a eukaryotic insect cell culture, also displays partial Mn2+-dependent activity like bacterial PP1C. Importantly, all
bacterial preparations of PP1C displayed altered interactions with
the regulatory subunits. For example, E. coli PP1C is relatively insensitive to inhibition by
thiophospho-DARPP-32 or thiophosphoro-inhibitor-1, endogenous PP1C
inhibitors, or regulation by PP1 regulatory subunits, such as spinophilin
and PNUTS. This has significantly limited the study of PP1C–regulatory
subunit interaction. In our mammalian expression system, the recombinant
MLCP retains native function, such as Mn2+-independent
activity and inhibition by okadaic acid, and lacks activity toward
the PNPP substrate (data not shown). It is possible that the co-expression
of PP1C and the regulatory subunit contributes to the correct folding
and physiological metal binding of PP1C through multiple interactions.
We predict that the COS1 expression method and the Malachite Green
assay with the phosphopeptide can be applied for other PP1 holoenzymes
that retain physiological function and for high-throughput assay formats.
The new preparation system for the PP1 holoenzymes opens fresh avenues
for further investigation of mechanisms underlying cellular PP1 regulation,
as well as the development of tools for therapeutic intervention against
diseases.

Supporting Information Available
Sequence alignment and three-dimensional
structure of human MYPT1 phosphorylation sites (Figure S1), effects
of the M20 subunit on MLCP activity (Figure S2), densitometric analysis
of MYPT1 phosphorylation in LMS cells (Figure S3), and subcellular
fractionation with the lysates of cells expressing the MYPT1 fragments
(Figure S4). This material is available free of charge via the Internet
at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bi5001728_si_001.pdf

The authors declare
no
competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
We thank Professor Shin-ya
Ohki (Japan Advanced Institutes
for Science and Technology) for valuable suggestions.

