Melanopsin
is an atypical vertebrate
opsin involved in non-image-forming light functions such as photoentrainment
of circadian rhythms, constriction of the pupil, suppression of pineal
melatonin synthesis, direct regulation of sleep and arousal by light,
regulation of mood, and learning.− In mammals, melanopsin is expressed in a
small subset of retinal ganglion cells, termed intrinsically photosensitive
retinal ganglion cells (ipRGCs), that are important for luminance
detection and integration of light information.− Whereas mammals have only one
melanopsin gene (opn4m), nonmammalian vertebrates
(birds, amphibians, and fish) express two related groups of melanopsin
genes: opn4m and opn4x. These are
named on the basis of their similarity either to the mammalian form
of the gene (opn4m) or to the gene first isolated
from Xenopus laevis (opn4x). In zebrafish, there are five unique
melanopsin genes that are expressed in many different cell types both
in the retina and in the brain.,

All opsins are
members of the G protein coupled receptor (GPCR)
family. GPCR signaling endows cells with the ability to respond to
a stimulus and to suppress the response rapidly, allowing dynamic
stimulus detection. After activating heterotrimeric G proteins and
initiating a signal transduction cascade, GPCRs use a stereotypical
two-step mechanism for deactivation. The first step is phosphorylation
of the carboxy-terminal tail of the receptor by a member of the G
protein coupled receptor kinase family (GRK). This reduces the rate
of G protein activation and also serves as a signal for the activation
and binding of an arrestin molecule. In the second step, arrestin
is activated by interaction with the phosphorylated amino acids in
the carboxy tail and can then bind to the intracellular loops of the
receptor to prevent any further G protein activation.

Melanopsin, as a GPCR, undergoes light-dependent
phosphorylation
that is involved in deactivation of the photoresponse. However, it
possesses an unusually long carboxy tail that contains 37 serine and
threonine sites, any of which could be phosphorylated to mediate deactivation.
Recently, we showed that when all putative phosphorylation sites are
removed from the carboxy tail there is a severe deficit in the deactivation
response of mouse melanopsin in HEK cells.

To define the relevant phosphorylation sites within the carboxy
tail, we undertook mutational and functional analysis of mouse melanopsin
and characterized the naturally diverse proteins of zebrafish. Zebrafish
melanopsin-related proteins show variation in their carboxy-terminal
domain, which provides a naturally occurring example of changes in
phosphorylatable amino acid residues that lead to changes in deactivation.
Using these parallel approaches, we demonstrate that of the 37 phosphorylation
sites a small cluster of six or seven sites in the proximal region
of the carboxy tail is critical for mediating deactivation.

Materials
and Methods
cDNA Constructs
In experiments using mouse melanopsin
(opn4), the unmodified long isoform of wild-type
mouse melanopsin (accession no. NP_038915) was used. For calcium imaging,
both the long and short isoforms (accession no. NP_001122071) of wild-type melanopsin were used. Full-length cDNAs corresponding
to the five zebrafish melanopsin genes were appended with sequences encoding the last eight amino acids
of bovine rhodopsin (1D4 tag). All genes were cloned into the mammalian
expression vector pMT3.

Transfection
and Kinetic Measurements of Melanopsin Activity
Based on Fluorescent Ca2+ Imaging
HEK 293 cells
were grown in DMEM (Gibco) supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum
(Gibco) and a penicillin/streptomycin cocktail (10 units/mL of penicillin
and 10 μg/mL of streptomycin) and transfected in 12-well plates
with 3 μg of DNA and 5 μL of TurboFect (Fermentas) in
200 μL of DMEM. All HEK293 cells used in this article are HEK293
obtained from ATCC, Manassas, VA. (ATCC no. CRL-1573).

Cells
were harvested at 24 h post-transfection and reseeded into a 96-well
plate at a density of 6 × 104 per well. One day later,
cells were incubated with 20 mM 11-cis-retinal in
the presence of the calcium-sensitive dye fluo-4 (Invtirogen) for
1 h. The cells were washed twice in Hank’s balanced salt solution
(HBSS) in 20 mM HEPES buffer, and fluorescence measurements were taken
at an excitation of 485 nm and emission of 525 nm every second for
1 min on a Tecan Infinite M200 microplate reader. Data were averaged
and plotted in Microsoft Excel.

Construction of Truncated
Mouse Melanopsin Mutants
Truncation mutants of the carboxy
tail were constructed using PCR
to insert a stop codon (TAG) at various locations within the mouse
gene. The forward primer contained the restriction site EcoRI, whereas reverse primers contained a stop codon and a NotI restriction site. The truncated melanopsin PCR products
were then digested with NotI and EcoRI FastDigest enzymes (Fermentas) and recloned into a similarly digested
pMT3 expression vector. Sequences were verified by sequencing (GENEWIZ,
Inc.) using plasmid-specific primers. Primer sequences are listed
in .

Site-Directed
Mutatgenesis
Point mutations eliminating
putative phosphorylation sites were produced by site-directed mutagenesis.
Individual serines and threonines were changed to alanine using primers
containing the desired mutations (IDT DNA). High-fidelity polymerase
(Pfx Turbo, Invitrogen) was used to minimize unwanted mutations. Mutations
were confirmed by sequencing (GENEWIZ, Inc.).

Cassette Mutagenesis
To produce multiple mutations
in the carboxy-tail region of the gene, two unique restriction sites
(BlpI and XhoI) were introduced
by site-directed mutagenesis on either side of the region of interest
through silent mutations. Insertions were confirmed by sequencing
using plasmid-specific primers (GENEWIZ, Inc.). A 98-base oligonucleotide
was synthesized (IDT DNA) and made double-stranded by PCR amplification.
Double-stranded DNA and the plasmid containing the melanopsin gene
were digested with BlpI and XhoI
FastDigest enzymes (Fermentas) for 30 min and separated on an agarose
gel. Bands corresponding to the expected size were excised from the
gel, recovered (Nucleospin ExtractII, Machery-Nagel), and ligated
with T4 ligase (Promega). Ligated plasmid was transformed as above
and subsequently sequenced (GENEWIZ, Inc.) to confirm insertion.

In Silico Identification of Potential Phosphorylation
Sites
The group-based phosphorylation scoring (GPS) algorithm
in the Group-Based Prediction System (2.0) was used to analyze and
predict potential phosphorylaiton sites in the carboxy-tail region
of mouse melanopsin (opn4). This program determines
phosphorylation sites for families of kinases based on experimentally
demonstrated sites. All known GRK family phosphorylation sites (84
at the time of program design) were used to train the program to find
new sites for this family kinases.

Results
Truncation of Mouse Melanopsin Defines a Carboxy-Terminal Region
Controlling Deactivation
We used the group-based phosphorylation
(GPS) scoring algorithm in the Group-Based Prediction System (2.0)
to identify potential GRK phosphorylation sites. Using this method, 12 predicted phosphorylation sites were
found distributed throughout the carboxy-tail domain (Figure ). To determine if any of these sites are functionally
relevant, we created three early termination mutations by inserting
a stop codon at various locations in the carboxy tail of mouse melanopsin.
The first mutation truncated the protein after amino acid 385 (Δ385)
so that it contains only the phosphorylation sites homologous to those
phosphorylated in rhodopsin during deactivation. The second mutation truncated the protein after amino acid
396 (Δ396), immediately following a large cluster of predicted
sites, whereas the third truncated the protein after amino acid 420
(Δ420) (Figure ). The signaling kinetics
of these mutants was measured along with wild-type melanopsin and
the previously characterized phospho-null melanopsin mutant using a functional calcium fluorescence assay
(Figure ).

Secondary structure of mouse melanopsin.
Each circle represents
an amino acid, and every 10th amino acid is shaded black. Blue residues
represent putative GRK phosphorylation sites (predicted by the group-based
phosphorylation scoring (GPS) algorithm in GPS 2.0), green residues
represent the homologous residues to those most often phosphorylated
in rhodopsin, and the yellow dot represents a potential palmitoylation
site.

Calcium imaging of carboxy-tail-truncation mutants.
Kinetics of
the calcium response of a series of carboxy-tail-truncation mutants
compared to wild-type melanopsin and a phospho-null mutant. The fluorescent
Ca2+-imaging data presented in this article is normalized
to facilitate comparison of different melanopsin constructs.  demonstrates
that the normalized kinetics are not a function of the expression
levels of the heterologously expressed melanopsin gene.

The Δ385 mutant showed a severe defect in
deactivation identical
to the phospho-null construct. This finding demonstrates that, surprisingly,
the phosphorylation sites homologous to those important for deactivation
of rhodopsin are not sufficient for melanopsin deactivation. Neither
Δ396 nor Δ420 had defective kinetics, implying that the
region between amino acids 385 and 396 of the melanopsin carboxy tail
is critical for the deactivation response (Figure ). Within this region, there are six residues that can be
phosphorylated and are arranged in pairs separated by one amino acid.
Of these six sites, five were predicted GRK phosphorylation sites
by GPS (Figure ). Mutation of all six sites
to alanine (S388A, T389A, S391A, S392A, S394A, and S395A) by cassette
mutagenesis resulted in a phenotype equivalent to the phospho-null
mutant (Figure ). However, when each of the
six sites was individually mutated to alanine by site-directed mutagenesis,
alteration of the deactivation kinetics was not observed (Figure ).

Sequence of deactivation control region. (A) Sites highlighted
in green are predicted GRK family phosphorylation sites by the group-based
phosphorylation algorithm. (B) Mutation of all phosphorylatable residues
between amino acids 385 and 396 recapitulates the phospho-null phenotype.

Single phosphorylation site mutagenesis of putative
deactivation
control region. Each serine and threonine within the identified control
region was mutated individually to an alanine. Deactivation of each
mutant was determined in a kinetic calcium assay and compared to wild-type
melanopsin. None of the six single mutations had any effect on signaling
kinetics.

Zebrafish Melanopsins Have
Different Deactivation Kinetics
Recent work described five
unique melanopsin genes expressed in
zebrafish that are transcribed in diverse retinal cell types., Interestingly, examination of the carboxy-terminal regions of the
corresponding proteins reveals variation in the key phosphorylation
sites that we defined in mouse melanopsin (Figures –). To test whether these naturally
occurring mutations affect deactivation, the zebrafish proteins were
heterologously expressed in HEK293 cells and assayed for their kinetic
response. The five zebra fish melanopsin gene, opn4xa, opn4xb opn 4.1, opn4a, and opn4b, cDNAs were cloned into the mammalian expression vector
pMT3 and heterologously expressed. We were able to express the opn4xa, opn 4.1, opn4a, and opn4b genes; however, opn4xb was not produced in HEK293 cells, as determined by western blot
analyses (n = 3, data not shown), and was not analyzed
in subsequent experiments.

When the four zebrafish genes were
expressed in HEK293 cells and assayed for activity in the calcium-imaging
assay, their gene products exhibited different deactivation kinetics.
Deactivation of zebrafish Opn4a and Opn4b closely match with mouse
melanopsin (Opn4), deactivating to 40% of their maximum fluorescence
in 60 s (Figure ). In contrast, Opn4xa and
Opn4.1 were found to have greatly extended deactivation kinetics,
mimicking the phospho-null melanopsin phenotype (Figure ). To determine if the deactivation kinetics of zebrafish
melanopsins correlate with the amino acid foot print of the carboxy-tail
phosphorylation control region in mouse melanopsin (Figure A), the amino acid sequences of Opn4a, Opn4b, Opn4xa,
and Opn4.1 were aligned and analyzed. Alignment of the four melanopsin
zebrafish genes with mouse melanopsin demonstrated that there was
broad conservation of sequence in the region of the carboxy tail that
was defined as the region controlling deactivation kinetics (Figure ). Zebrafish Opn4a and Opn4b (which more closely
match the signaling kinetics of mouse melanopsin) share an identical
pattern of phosphorylatable residues. In contrast, Opn4xa and Opn4.1
(which displayed delayed inactivation kinetics) are missing three
or four serines and threonines in the important region of the carboxy
tail that is necessary for the deactivation kinetics. These results
suggest that naturally occurring variations in this region affect
the kinetics of the light response mediated by each melanopsin protein.

Kinetic
calcium assay of zebrafish melanopsins expressed in HEK293
cells. Four of the five melanopsins found expressed in zebrafish were
assayed for their deactivation kinetics. Opn4a and Opn4b were found
to have similar deactivation kinetics to mouse melanopsin. Opn4.1
and Opn4xa were found to have extended deactivation kinetics matching
the mouse melanopsin mutant lacking all carboxy-tail phosphorylaiton
sites (phospho-null).

Alignment of zebrafish melanopsins with mouse melanopsin. Alignment
of the zebrafish and mouse melanopsin sequences in the identified
control region. Shown in green are the phosphorylation sites that
are the same as mouse melanopsin, whereas the sites that are divergent
from mouse melanopsin are in red.

To directly test the importance of the variation in the amino
acids
in the carboxy-tail region of zebrafish melanopsin (amino acids 386–394),
we created a mouse melanopsin gene with the same amino acid sequence
of the zebrafish opn4.1, which shows slower deactivation
kinetics. This mouse melanopsin mutant (S381A, S388A, and S394A) showed
prolonged deactivation kinetics (Figure A),
similar to the zebrafish protein. Remarkably, double mutant (S381A
and S394A) mouse melanopsin does not alter the deactivation kinetics,
indicating that three changes are necessary for the observed effect.
Therefore, we defined this region of the carboxy tail of melanopsin
as an important region in the regulation of melanopsin deactivation
kinetics across species.

Kinetic calcium assay of mouse melanopsin constructed
to mimick
zebrafish melanopsin opn4.1. (A) Kinetic calcium
imaging of a mutant of mouse melanopsin engineered to match the pattern
of phosphorylatable sites found in slow deactivating zebrafish melanopsin.
(B) Mutation of the two conserved changed residues between opn4.1 and opn4xa and mouse melanopsin
has no effect on signaling.

Discussion
The temporal regulation of activated GPCRs
is typically controlled
by the phosphorylation of serines and threonines in the carboxy tail
by a GRK and the subsequent activation and binding of an arrestin
molecule. The initial phosphorylation of the carboxy tail reduces
the rate of G protein activation, and the binding of arrestin further
quenches G protein activation. In addition to quenching the activation
of a G protein pathway, the binding of arrestin can also trigger additional
signaling events such as receptor internalization. The regulation
of the active lifetime of the vertebrate rod photoreceptor’s
visual pigment rhodopsin by phosphorylation and the subsequent binding
of arrestin-1 (visual arrestin) is the most thoroughly studied GPCR
and visual pigment. In this study, we show that melanopsin, the photopigment
of ipRGCs, utilizes distinct residues for the deactivation of the
light signal in response to phosphorylation by GRK. This indicates
a divergence of function between the visual pigment rhodopsin and
melanopsin for the control of the deactivation kinetics. Specifically,
we show that six residues are necessary and sufficient for the deactivation
response of the melanopsin protein. Furthermore, we show that naturally
occurring mutations in zebrafish that correspond to the region we
defined in our mouse studies allow melanopsin proteins to modulate
their deactivation kinetics. This could be evolutionary important
because slower deactivation kinetics could lead to a much more prolonged
light response that can be tailored toward the function that is driven
by the melanopsin protein. As an example, measuring day length in
the environment will benefit from a slower deactivation kinetics,
whereas driving the pupillary light reflex may require faster shutoff
properties of the light response.

We have previously shown that
the deactivation of mouse melanopsin
is mediated in a phosphorylation-dependent manner. However, the necessary sites of phosphorylation in the
carboxy tail were not specifically determined. In the present study,
we identified a cluster of serines and threonines in the region of
amino acids 386–396 that is involved in controlling the deactivation
response. This region contains six phosphorylatable sites arranged
in three sets of pairs separated by a single amino acid (S388, T389,
S391, S392, S394, and S395). There was no effect on the signaling
kinetics when each site was mutated individually, implying that no
particular site is critically important in the deactivation response.

Melanopsin is more similar to invertebrate rhodopsins. In Drosophila, the deactivation of the light response
is not dependent on the carboxy tail of rhodopsin. This shows a divergence
of function between melanopsin and Drosophila rhodopsins in the mechanisms for deactivation. However, we should
mention that our studies were carried out in HEK cells, and to definitively
confirm whether these residues play a role in vivo, we should eliminate
these residues and determine the changes in the properties of the
intrinsic light response in the ipRGCs as well as the behavioral outcome
of such mutations.

Previous work has found that there are five
distinct melanopsin
genes expressed in the zebrafish, Danio rerio, of which four were functionally characterized here. Alignment of
these gene sequences revealed that although these melanopsins are
quite similar in the transmembrane region they have very little similarity
in the carboxy tail except for two domains corresponding to the predicted
eighth helix and to the region identified in the truncation mutants
as being responsible for deactivation. Upon closer examination of
the region between amino acids 386 and 396, there was some variation
in the number and location of phosphorylatable residues among the
zebrafish opsins. Opn4a and Opn4b are similar to mouse melanopsin
in the location and spacing of the phosphorylatabe residue. In contrast,
Opn4.1 and Opn4xa are missing two and three of the six sites, respectively,
with another serine located just outside of the identified area at
position 381 also being converted to a nonphosphorylatable residue.
Opn4.1 lacks S388, S394, and S381, whereas Opn4xa lacks T389, S392,
and S394 in addition to the loss of S381. The deactivation kinetics
of the four expressed zebrafish melanopsin genes correlates with either
wild-type mouse melanopsin or with the phosphorylation-defective mutant.
Opn4a and Opn4b deactivate in the kinetic calcium assay with a time
course similar to wild-type mouse melanopsin (Opn4). In contrast,
the deactivation kinetics of Opn4.1 and Opn4xa are similar to the
mouse melanopsin mutant lacking all phosphorylatable amino acids in
the carboxy-tail region. In zebrafish melanopsin, we conclude that
sites 381, S338, and S394 are required for rapid deactivation. There
has been great debate about which sites and how many are required
for deactivation of rhodopsin.−In vitro and in vivo work has shown that any phosphorylatable residue in the rhodopsin
carboxy tail can be phosphorylated.,− Mass spectrometric analysis of murine rhodospin’s carboxy
tail found that there were three amino sites that were most often
phosphorylated, but all serines and threonines in the tail were substrates
for GRK. Other work involving single
photon responses of isolated transgenic mouse rods found that only
three phosphorylation sites were necessary for deactivation regardless
of the specific identity of the sites. More recently, Vishnivetskiy et al. used purified rhodopsin fractions
with specific numbers of phosphorylated amino acids and determined
that three phosphorylations were necessary to fully activate arrestin-1
for rhodopsin binding. If a similar mechanism
is governing melanopsin deactivation, then the number of incorporated
phosphates is important, but the specific identity of the modified
amino acid is not.

The role of the five different zebrafish
melanopsins in the retina
has not yet been elucidated. It is intriguing to note that with the
duplication of the melanopsin genes and diversification in expression
there has also been a selection for variants in the region of carboxy
tail that is necessary for melanopsin deactivation. This variation
results in activated melanopsins having different active lifetimes.
It will be interesting to determine if the active lifetime of the
various zebrafish melanopsins correlate with their function in the
various cell types in which this visual pigment is expressed.

In contrast to the zebrafish retina, the mammalian retina expresses
one gene with two splice variants in five subtypes of intrinsically
photosensitive ganglion cells., The light response
in each of these five cell types has different deactivation kinetics,
suggesting that the regulation of the deactivation reactions of melanopsin
and the phototransduction cascade is varied. It has been suggested
that variation is due to the difference in the rate of melanopsin
deactivation and is due to the variation in the carboxy tail in the
short and long melanopsin splice variants. The alternative splice
variant only changes the distal region of the carboxy tail and not the more proximal control region that
contains the amino acids identified here that are important for melanopsin
deactivation. It therefore seems unlikely that these two isoforms
have different deactivation kinetics. However, we tested the deactivation
kinetics of the two mouse splice variants and observed no change in
the activation or deactivation kinetics (Figure ). These results suggested that the varied kinetics of the light
response in the five subtypes of mouse iPRGs is not due to the difference
melanopsin isoforms.

Calcium imaging of the two splice variants of mouse melanopsin.
The long (Opn4L) (Mel WT) and short (Opn4S) (Mel short) isoforms of
mouse melanopsins were assayed for their deactivation kinetics. They
were found to have similar deactivation kinetics.

In summary, melanopsin is an atypical vertebrate visual pigment
that is involved in regulating a large variety of physiological functions.
In the mammalian retina, the variation in function seems to be mediated
by the projection of the various retinal cell types and regulation
of the phototransduction cascade. The deactivation of melanopsin does
not appear to be regulated by changes to the carboxy terminal. In
contrast, in nonmammalian vertebrates, there are two major families
of melanopsin genes. In zebrafish, genes from both of these families
have been duplicated, and there has been diversification in the carboxy
terminus of these proteins. These zebrafish melanopsins have varied
deactivation kinetics, and this may correlate with the visual function
that these zebrafish isoforms drive.

Supporting Information Available
Primers used to create the
melanopsin mutants as well as data demonstrating that the inactivation
kinetics observed using calcium imaging in transfected HEK cells is
not a function of expression levels. This material is available free
of charge via the Internet at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bi401724r_si_001.pdf

This study was
supported by grants from the National Science Foundation to P.R.R.
(IOS0721608) and the National Eye Institute to P.R.R. and S.H. (R01EY019053).
J.R.B. and E.C. were supported by an NIH training grant (T32 GM066706).

The authors declare
no
competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
We thank R. Crouch
for the gift of 11-cis-retinal.

Abbreviations
Used
DMEMDulbecco’s modified
Eagle’s
medium

GPCRG protein
coupled receptor

GPSgroup-based phosphorylation scoring

GRKG-protein dependent kinase

HBSSHank’s balanced salt solution

HEKhuman embryonic
kidney cells

HEPES4-(2-hydroxyethyl)-1-piperazineethanesulfonic acid

ipRGCsintrinsically photosensitive
retinal ganglion cells

PCRpolymerase chain reaction

