DNA polymerases perform a variety of critical
functions involved
in the replication, repair, and processing of genomic DNA, and their kinetic mechanisms have long been of
great interest. On the basis of phylogenetic analysis, six distinct
DNA polymerase families have been identified: A–D, X, and Y.
DNA polymerases from all families use a two-divalent metal ion mechanism
for nucleotide incorporation with a common minimal kinetic pathway− and share a structurally conserved polymerase core architecture
consisting of finger, thumb, and palm subdomains in a “right-hand”
geometry.,− Despite these similarities, DNA polymerases differ greatly in many
ways, such as their fidelity, response to DNA damage, and conformational
dynamics during substrate binding and catalysis. Thus, elucidating
the kinetic properties of individual DNA polymerases is an ongoing
endeavor.

As the Y-family DNA polymerases are able to bypass
various types
of DNA lesions in vitro, their primary biological
role is believed to be catalyzing translesion DNA synthesis (TLS) in vivo, a process in which they replicate past damaged
DNA bases that would otherwise stall a replication fork. However, when replicating undamaged DNA, the
Y-family DNA polymerases display low fidelity and poor processivity
and lack the intrinsic proofreading activities that high-fidelity,
replicative DNA polymerases utilize to remove misincorporated nucleotides.− Because of their low nucleotide incorporation fidelities, human
Y-family DNA polymerases have been implicated in the incorporation
of antiviral nucleoside and nucleotide analogue drugs with unusual
chemical structures, potentially contributing to these drugs’
clinical toxicities.,

The Y-family DNA polymerases
differ structurally from the enzymes
in the other families in that the Y-family enzymes contain a unique
subdomain termed either the little finger (LF) domain or the polymerase-associated
domain (PAD) in addition to the canonical finger, thumb, and palm
subdomains (Figure ).,− Interestingly, both the LF subdomain and the linker
that connects it to the polymerase core have been implicated in determining
the unique lesion bypass properties of a given Y-family DNA polymerase., In addition, DNA polymerase κ (pol κ) also has an N-clasp
domain involved in DNA binding (Figure C), and Rev1 contains large inserts into the finger
and palm domains and an additional N-digit that interacts with incoming
nucleotides (Figure E). Compared to DNA polymerases in the other families, the
Y-family members have more flexible and solvent-accessible active
sites that likely allow for the accommodation of various, often bulky,
lesions at the expense of the ability to strongly select for correct
nucleotides. A thorough review of the structural insights into Y-family
DNA polymerases also appears in this issue.

Ternary
crystal structures of prototype Y-family DNA polymerases
in complex with DNA and an incoming nucleotide. Ternary structures
of (A) Dpo4 (PDB entry 1JX4), (B) truncated hpol η (PDB entry 3MR2), (C) truncated
hpol κ (PDB entry 2OH2), (D) truncated hpol ι (PDB entry 1T3N), and (E) truncated
hRev1 (PDB entry 3GQC). The finger, palm, thumb, and LF/PAD subdomains are colored blue,
red, green, and magenta, respectively. The N-clasp of hpol κ
and the N-digit of hRev1 are colored yellow, and an insert into the
finger subdomain of Rev1 is colored cyan. The DNA template and primer
strands are colored gray and gold respectively, while each incoming
dNTP is colored black.

Because of their critical in vivo role,
the Y-family
DNA polymerases have been identified in all three domains of life. Notable family members include Escherichia
coli DNA polymerases IV (DinB) and V (UmuCD′), and human DNA polymerases η (hpol η), κ (hpol
κ), ι (hpol ι), and Rev1 (hRev1). Additionally, DNA polymerase IV (Dpo4) from thermophilic
archaeon Sulfolobus solfataricus has been considered
as a model Y-family enzyme because of its high expression levels in E. coli, its ease of purification, its high thermostability,
bypass abilities similar to those of hpol η, and the fact that
it is the only Y-family DNA polymerase encoded by S. solfataricus., Consequently, Dpo4 has been the most thoroughly
investigated Y-family member. Soon after the initial discovery of
the Y-family of DNA polymerases, numerous steady-state kinetic studies
established that there was great variability among the Y-family members
with regard to their preference for bypassing different types of DNA
lesions and their propensity to generate various types of mutations
during replication of both damaged and undamaged DNA as reviewed previously., Additionally, a wealth of structural information has revealed many
details of the diverse strategies that the Y-family DNA polymerases
use to accommodate DNA lesions in their active sites and perform catalysis
on damaged DNA substrates.− The primary focus of this review
will be on published pre-steady-state kinetic studies in recent years,
which have revealed many new details about individual steps in the
varied catalytic pathways of the Y-family DNA polymerases.

Minimal
Kinetic Pathway for Nucleotide Incorporation by All
DNA Polymerases
Prior to the discovery of the Y-family DNA
polymerases, pre-steady-state
kinetic studies of numerous model DNA polymerases from the other families
and reverse transcriptases,,− had helped to establish a minimal kinetic pathway for nucleotide
incorporation consisting of six elementary steps (Figure ):, (1) the binding of a DNA substrate
to a DNA polymerase to form the E·DNA binary complex, (2) the
binding of a dNTP to form the E·DNA·dNTP loose ground-state
ternary complex, (3) the conversion from the ground state to the E′·DNA·dNTP
tight activated state with a conformational change in the polymerase,
(4) a phosphodiester bond formation step, (5) a reverse protein conformational
change step, and (6) the release of pyrophosphate, after which the
polymerase can either dissociate from the elongated DNA substrate
or remain bound and incorporate additional nucleotides. It is clear
that the dissociation of the elongated product from the polymerase
limits the multiple turnovers of correct nucleotide incorporation;
however, there has been a long-standing debate over whether step 3
or 4 in Figure  is rate-limiting during the
first turnover.,, Various kinetic studies have shown that polymerases may differ substantially
in the relative rates of different steps or the inclusion of additional
steps in the minimal kinetic mechanism.,,,−,, In comparison, the kinetic studies of incorrect nucleotide incorporation
were not as detailed as those of correct dNTP incorporation but did
suggest that the chemistry step (step 4 in Figure ) limits misincorporation in the first turnover.,,

Minimal kinetic pathway for nucleotide
incorporation catalyzed
by DNA polymerases. The elementary steps for nucleotide incorporation
common to all DNA polymerases are shown. E and E′ represent
different conformations of the DNA polymerase, while PPi denotes pyrophosphate.

Kinetic Mechanisms of Replication of Undamaged DNA by the Y-Family
DNA Polymerases
Early pre-steady-state kinetic analyses of
yeast pol η (ypol
η), hpol η, and Dpo4,,, suggested that the
Y-family DNA polymerases may follow a similar kinetic pathway for
correct nucleotide incorporation into undamaged DNA with a rate-limiting,
induced-fit conformational change (step 3 in Figure ), as described previously for all other kinetically characterized
DNA polymerases and reverse transcriptases.,,− Interestingly, the conformational change step was also suggested
to be rate-limiting for misincorporation for ypol η, whereas the chemistry step (step 4) was shown
to be rate-limiting for incorrect dNTP incorporation in the case of
Dpo4. A detailed study comparing the
efficiency of all 16 possibly correct and incorrect nucleotide incorporations
revealed that the fidelity of Dpo4 was in the range of 10–3 to 10–4, and that the observed fidelity was primarily
due to differences in the maximal incorporation rate constants (kp) for correct versus incorrect incorporation
rather than differences in nucleotide binding affinities (KDdNTP). More recent studies have probed details of specific types of mutagenic
incorporations by Dpo4., In one such study,
Dpo4 was shown to accommodate purine-purine mispairs via a Hoogsteen
base pairing mechanism in which the incoming dNTP adopts the usual anti conformation while the template nucleotide flips into
a syn orientation. Using
a combination of structural insight and pre-steady-state kinetics,
it was recently shown that both Dpo4 and hpol κ generate single-base
deletions on specific repetitive sequence mutational hot spots through
a template slippage mechanism in which the template misaligns with
the primer strand prior to nucleotide incorporation., However, hpol κ was able to realign the primer and template
strands after nucleotide incorporation, resulting in a base substitution
rather than a deletion. The mechanism
of template-independent, blunt-end nucleotide addition catalyzed by
Dpo4 has also been investigated by employing pre-steady-state kinetic
methods, and it was demonstrated that dATP addition was preferred
because of the favorable intrahelical stacking interactions with both
the 5′-base of the opposite strand and the 3′-base of
the elongating strand of a DNA blunt end.

Most DNA polymerases have been observed to incorporate nucleotides
with a similar fidelity and efficiency for each of the four undamaged
template bases. However, pre-steady-state kinetic studies with pol
ι revealed drastic differences in fidelity and efficiency depending
on the identity of the templating base.− For example, pol ι
incorporates nucleotides opposite dA with a high fidelity and efficiency
and opposite dG and dC with moderate to low fidelity, while incorporation
opposite templating dT is highly inefficient and unfaithful, with
misincorporation of dGTP significantly favored over correct dATP incorporation.− Subsequent structural studies were able to provide some insight
into the observed differences in kinetics for each template base.
Crystal structures show that pol ι holds templating purine bases
fixed in a syn conformation in the dNTP-bound ternary
complex, which leads to a Hoogsteen base pairing mechanism for correct
nucleotide incorporation, rather than the Watson–Crick base
pairing observed for other DNA polymerases (Figure A)., A template dT was observed to
maintain an anti conformation regardless of the identity
of the incoming nucleotide, with an incoming dATP adopting a syn conformation with a reduced level of base stacking. In contrast, an incoming dGTP remained in an anti conformation opposite the dT template and made an additional
stabilizing hydrogen bond to Gln59 of the finger subdomain of pol
ι, thus explaining the preferential misincorporation of dGTP
opposite dT. Recent pre-steady-state
kinetic investigation of pol ι has further suggested that wobble
base pairing or Watson–Crick base pairing may be preferred
over Hoogsteen base pairing for some specific dNTP incorporations
opposite templating pyrimidines.

Noncanonical
base pairing in the active sites of hPolι and
hRev1. Close-ups of the active sites of (A) truncated hpol ι
with an incoming dCTP in a Hoogsteen base pair with the templating
dG (PDB entry 2ALZ) and (B) truncated hRev1 with an incoming dCTP base pairing with
amino acid residue R375 (PDB entry 3GCQ). Protein subdomains and DNA template
and primer strands are colored as in Figure .

Rev1 utilizes perhaps the most
unusual nucleotide selection mechanism
of any DNA polymerase as it preferentially inserts dCTP opposite all
template bases by flipping the templating base out of the active site
and instead pairing the incoming dCTP with the side chain of residue
R357 in the LF domain (Figure B).,− Pre-steady-state kinetics have shown that, because
of the protein template mechanism, Rev1 incorporates dCTP opposite
dC, dT, and dA only slightly less efficiently than opposite dG, whereas
incorporation of all other dNTPs is significantly less efficient,
regardless of the identity of the templating base. Furthermore, the preferential selection of dCTP is believed
to be achieved at the nucleotide binding step rather than the incorporation
step, and the role of hydrogen bonding
between the incoming nucleotide and the side chain of R375 was shown
to be more important for catalytic efficiency than base stacking.

Pre-Steady-State Kinetic and Sequencing Studies
of the Mechanisms
and Mutagenic Profiles of DNA Lesion Bypass
Steady-state
kinetics provided initial qualitative insight into
TLS by the Y-family DNA polymerases., More recent
pre-steady-state kinetic studies have provided the necessary detailed
insight into the kinetic mechanisms of lesion bypass and have illustrated
that some DNA lesions are bypassed with kinetic parameters similar
to those of undamaged DNA for a given Y-family DNA polymerase, while
other lesions may have drastic consequences for nucleotide insertion
kinetics.− With the exception of two studies with ypol η,, the majority of the early pre-steady-state kinetic studies of TLS
were performed by using Dpo4 as a model enzyme.− Notably, although S. solfataricus grows optimally
at temperatures of ≥80 °C, temperature-dependent studies
showed that the nucleotide incorporation fidelity, induced-fit mechanism,
and secondary structural features of Dpo4 remained unchanged over
a wide range of temperatures,, validating the appropriateness
of comparison between Dpo4 and other Y-family DNA polymerases at 37
°C. As initially observed for the bypass of a cis-syn thymine-thymine (TT) dimer and a 7,8-dihydro-8-oxoguanine
(8-oxoG) by ypol η,, Dpo4 was shown to bypass
an 8-oxoG lesion with KDdNTP and kp values similar to those for the
analogous undamaged DNA bases, indicating that the kinetic mechanism
was not significantly perturbed by this lesion., In fact, these studies demonstrated that Dpo4 bound to both correct
dCTP and DNA more tightly with 8-oxoG as the templating base as compared
to unmodified dG, whereas the efficiency of incorporation opposite
the related O6-methylguanine lesion is
slightly reduced. In contrast, in running
start assays with Dpo4 where a stretch of a template is replicated
in the presence of all four dNTPs starting several positions upstream
from a DNA lesion, a significant accumulation of intermediate products
corresponding to incorporations opposite and adjacent to the lesion
has been observed for a number of DNA lesions.,,− The observation of these “polymerase pause sites”
indicates that, while these DNA lesions can be traversed by Dpo4,
the significant slowing of the progress of DNA synthesis is a general
mechanism for the bypass of more disruptive DNA lesions.

Pre-steady-state
kinetic methods have been used to provide detailed
insight into how DNA lesions alter the kinetics of nucleotide incorporation
by Dpo4 at these pause sites.,,, For example, a comprehensive
pre-steady-state kinetic investigation showed that the kinetic efficiency
(kp/KDdNTP) of Dpo4 was reduced by up to 3 orders of magnitude at
the two strong pause sites corresponding to nucleotide incorporation
opposite and extending from a noncoding abasic site due to a strong
reduction in both the kp and nucleotide
binding affinity (1/KDdNTP)
compared to those of correct incorporation into undamaged DNA. The authors also demonstrated that Dpo4 utilized
two competing mechanisms for abasic site bypass: an “A-rule”
mechanism in which dATP was preferentially incorporated opposite the
lesion or a “lesion loop-out” mechanism in which the
template base 5′ to the lesion dictates nucleotide incorporation
preference (Figure ). Subsequently, two analogous incorporation modes were also proposed
for the bypass of a benzo[a]pyrene-derived N2-dG adduct by Dpo4 in certain sequence contexts.

Competing pathways for abasic lesion bypass catalyzed
by Dpo4.
An example of a branched pathway for lesion bypass is shown where
the identity of the incorporated nucleotide determines which bypass
mechanism is utilized. X denotes an abasic site.

Further branching of the lesion bypass pathway occurs during
nucleotide
incorporations following the initial lesion loop-out in which the
damage base can remain looped-out, leading to a frameshift mutation,
or the primer can realign with the template, allowing the previously
incorporated base to be positioned opposite the lesion (Figure ). In the case of Dpo4 bypassing an abasic site,
the pathway in which the lesion remained looped-out was shown to be
dominant over realignment.

To verify
the predictions of kinetic studies regarding the types
and frequencies of the various products generated during TLS, a short
oligonucleotide sequencing assay (SOSA) method was developed to directly
determine the sequences of individual products generated during TLS
through abasic sites by Dpo4. This novel
methodology was used to confirm the relative frequencies of insertion
of dATP versus insertion of dCTP via the lesion loop-out mechanism
predicted from the kinetic efficiencies of each pathway and to provide
information about more rare mutation events both opposite and downstream
from the lesion. The development of
“next-generation sequencing” allows for a high-throughput
alternative to the original SOSA method and has been used to assess
the mutagenic profiles of several carboxymethylated DNA lesions in E. coli. In a recent publication,
novel software (Next-Generation Position Base Counter, available for
download at https://chemistry.osu.edu/∼suo.3/index.html) was developed to allow for efficient analysis of millions of DNA
sequences yielded from the next-generation sequencing-based high-throughput
version of the SOSA technique (HT-SOSA). This new methodology provides a powerful and cost-effective tool
for investigating the mutagenic potential of various types of DNA
damage as demonstrated by its use in the analysis of the products
of cis-syn TT dimer bypass catalyzed by human Y-family
DNA polymerases.

Performing single-turnover
kinetic experiments in the presence
of an unlabeled DNA trap, which removes all polymerase molecules that
dissociated from the 32P-labeled, lesion-containing DNA
substrate prior to mixing with correct dNTP, can provide important
insight into nucleotide incorporation mechanisms during lesion bypass
and subsequent extension. In this trap DNA assay with Dpo4, biphasic
kinetics were observed for nucleotide incorporation opposite both
an abasic lesion and the next template base. The observation of a small reaction amplitude in the fast phase
and a large reaction amplitude in the slow phase was interpreted to
represent a mechanism in which Dpo4 could form either a productive
E·DNAnP binary complex
or a distinct nonproductive E·DNAnN complex that could be slowly converted to the productive
complex or dissociate (Figure A). Similar
studies of the bypass of various N2-alkylguanine
adducts, a 3-nitrobenzanthrone adduct, or a double-base cisplatin–d(GpG) adduct by Dpo4 suggested that this two-species binary
complex pathway may be a general mechanism for TLS, though significant
differences were observed in the relative reaction amplitudes of the
two phases depending on the size and position of the adduct or of
the first and second cross-linked base in the cisplatin–d(GpG)
adduct. Notably, this type of biphasic kinetics is not observed with
undamaged DNA or 8-oxoG, indicating that
this mechanism is unique to the bypass of more disruptive DNA lesions.
Evidence of a third “dead-end” binary complex that could
not be converted to the active complex was found for the bypass of
a bulky N-(deoxyguanosin-8-yl)-1-aminopyrene (dGAP) adduct by Dpo4 due to the observation that a large percentage
of dGAP-containing DNA substrate was never elongated in
the presence of a DNA trap (Figure B). However, an increase in the rate of dissociation
of the nonproductive complex is another possible interpretation of
this result. X-ray crystallographic studies,, have supported these conclusions
by demonstrating that the bulky hydrocarbon adducts of several lesions,
including dGAP, adopt multiple conformations relative to
the active site of Dpo4 corresponding to the productive, nonproductive,
and dead-end complexes inferred from the aforementioned kinetic studies.
Structural evidence also suggests that ypol η can potentially
adopt productive and nonproductive ternary complexes during the bypass
of a cisplatin adduct. Because of rapid
nucleotide binding, the biphasic kinetic assays cannot distinguish
between binary and ternary complexes in the productive or nonproductive
states, and thus, an expanded kinetic scheme was proposed to allow
for the possibility of productive and nonproductive states in both
binary and ternary complexes (Figure C). Interestingly, pre-steady-state kinetic studies
suggest that hpol η exhibits the biphasic kinetic behavior during
incorporation opposite both dGAP and an unmodified dG,
though the full implications of this observation in the case of the
undamaged DNA are unclear.

Kinetic schemes
derived from biphasic kinetic analysis. (A) Kinetic
scheme for lesion bypass, including productive and nonproductive binary
complexes. Expanded schemes also include the possibility of a dead-end
binary complex (B) or productive and nonproductive ternary complexes
(C).

With a foundation established
for the kinetics of TLS by Dpo4,
more recent work has aimed to investigate the mechanistic differences
in the ability (or inability) of each of the four human Y-Ffamily
DNA polymerases to bypass various lesions. For example, steady-state
and pre-steady-state kinetic studies indicated that both hpol η
and hpol κ can bypass an M1dG [3-(2′-deoxy-β-d-erythro-pentofuranosyl)pyrimido[1,2-a]purin-10(3H)-one] adduct, while hpol
ι and hRev1 cannot. In the case
of an abasic site, while all human Y-family enzymes were able to incorporate
dNTPs opposite the lesion,, both the kinetic efficiency
of lesion bypass and the mutagenic profiles derived from SOSA assays
indicate that hpol η is the most suitable polymerase for bypassing
abasic lesions in vivo. An exhaustive study of the pre-steady-state kinetics of dGAP bypass polymerases illustrated many differences in the kinetic mechanisms
of the four human Y-family enzymes. This
study showed that both fidelity and efficiency were reduced for all
four human Y-family enzymes during both incorporation opposite the
lesion and extending from the dGAP:dC base pair. It was
also shown that the decrease in efficiency was primarily due to the
drastically reduced kp, especially for
hpol κ and hpol ι, which was measured to be up to ∼1000-fold
slower than for undamaged DNA. In a follow-up study using the previously
developed SOSA method, the bypass of dGAP by the human
Y-family enzymes was shown to be very mutagenic, with a high frequency
of deletion mutations. Interestingly,
despite the fact that the kinetic studies revealed hpol η to
be the most efficient in bypassing and extending from the dGAP lesion, the mutagenic profiles suggested
that in vivo bypass of the lesion might primarily
involve the incorporation of dCTP opposite the adduct by hRev1 followed
by an extension of the lesion bypass product by hpol κ. Notably, hRev1 may play a general role in bypassing
many guanosine adducts because of its strong preference for incorporating
dCTP regardless of the identity of the templating base, and it has
been shown to have only moderately reduced efficiency when replicating
bulky N2- and O6-alkylguanine DNA adducts.

Conformational
Changes Revealed by Crystal Structures
Upon binding to an
incoming nucleotide, many DNA polymerases have
been shown to undergo a finger subdomain closing conformational change
that helps bring functionally important enzyme residues into contact
with the nucleotide. This transition
was first observed by comparing X-ray crystal structures of binary
complexes (E·DNA) and ternary complexes (E·DNA·dNTP),, and was initially believed to
represent the rate-limiting conformational change step (step 3 in
Figure ) inferred from kinetic studies. However,
solution-based pre-steady-state fluorescence studies with pol β
demonstrated that this conformational change was fast and occurred
prior to the rate-limiting step., Subsequently,
stopped-flow fluorescence studies also suggested that the finger subdomain
closure was too rapid to be the rate-limiting step for Taq DNA polymerase,,, T7 DNA polymerase, and HIV reverse transcriptase.

Notably, a large finger domain motion
upon nucleotide binding is
not observed in crystal structures of the Y-family DNA polymerases., However, a large conformational change does occur from the apo state
to DNA-bound binary state characterized by a rotation of the LF domain
relative to the polymerase core for some Y-family polymerases, including
Dpo4, pol κ, and to a lesser extent pol η.,,,− Also, in contrast to replicative DNA polymerases,
binary structures of Dpo4 show that the terminal base pair of the
DNA substrate occupies the binding pocket for an incoming nucleotide,
implying that the DNA must translocate by 1 bp relative to Dpo4 to
allow for dNTP binding., Further investigation of the
potential conformational changes of the Y-family DNA polymerases in
the solution state has been an area of active research in recent years
as discussed in the following section.

Solution-State Conformational
Dynamics during dNTP Incorporation
Despite the lack of crystallographic
evidence of a large finger
subdomain motion upon nucleotide binding, several stopped-flow fluorescence
studies have provided information about various conformational change
steps during nucleotide incorporation by the Y-family DNA polymerases,− leading to the development of an expanded minimal kinetic pathway
(Figure )., One such
study using DNA labeled with the fluorescent reporter 2-aminopurine
(2-AP) suggests the existence of several rapid noncovalent steps between
the initial binding of dNTP and the covalent incorporation step in
the catalytic mechanism of Dbh, the Dpo4 homologue from Sulfolobus
acidocaldarius. While the exact
nature of these steps was unclear, they were interpreted to result
from rearrangements in the polymerase active site necessary to properly
align catalytic residues, metal ions, and substrate functional groups
for catalysis. Another study revealed several conformational change
steps during nucleotide incorporation by Dpo4 by monitoring fluorescence
from Trp introduced at residues distant from the active site. This study suggested that Dpo4 does indeed
undergo a precatalytic protein conformational change too rapid to
be rate-limiting, along with a slower reverse conformational change
after the chemistry step. To provide more detailed information about
the nature of these putative conformational changes, a thorough stopped-flow
Förster resonance energy transfer (FRET)-based study was conducted
to monitor the motions of each subdomain of Dpo4 during correct nucleotide
incorporation. The results from the
FRET investigation showed that the pre- and postcatalytic conformational
changes involve motions of all four subdomains of Dpo4 relative to
a fluorophore on the DNA substrate. Because the precatalytic conformational
change associated with these domain motions was rapid (step 5 in Figure ), a rearrangement of the active site residues was
instead proposed to limit the rate of correct nucleotide incorporation
(step 6 in Figure ). Additionally, by monitoring multiple sites in each protein subdomain,
this study provided information about the rotational and translational
aspects of each subdomain’s motion. This allowed for the subsequent
identification of alterations in the structural nature of the conformational
changes in the finger, thumb, and palm subdomains during nucleotide
incorporation opposite and extending from an 8-oxoG lesion, whereas no such differences in conformational
changes during incorporation into 8-oxoG-containing or undamaged DNA
could be detected by monitoring only Trp fluorescence. However, more recent Trp fluorescence studies
have indicated that bulky N2-alkylguanine
adducts can impair the ability of Dpo4 to undergo precatalytic conformational
changes, while smaller adducts at the same position have only minor
effects on the rate of conformational change. These stopped-flow studies have provided the first evidence
to suggest the Y-family DNA polymerases may modify their conformational
change steps to accommodate various types of DNA damage, and investigations
are underway to determine the effects of other DNA lesions on the
conformational changes of Dpo4.

Expanded kinetic mechanism of correct
nucleotide incorporation
catalyzed by Dpo4. E·DNAn* (E·DNAn+1*) and E·DNAn represent pre- and post-translocation binary complexes, respectively.
Eapo, E, E′, and E″ represent conformations
of Dpo4 in the apo state, the DNA-bound binary complex, after the
precatalytic domain motion, and after the active site rearrangement,
respectively. PPi denotes pyrophosphate. The relative speeds
of the forward rates for several of the conformational changes steps
are indicated.

A recent study used an
interdomain FRET system to monitor the motion
of the LF subdomain relative to the polymerase core during DNA binding, which had previously been observed in crystal
structures. The results from this study
suggest that the conformational change of the LF subdomain occurs
as a relatively fast step distinct from the initial binding or dissociation
of the Dpo4·DNA complex (step 1 in Figure ). In addition to the conformational change in the protein, the results
of the 2-AP fluorescence study proposed an expansion of the DNA binding
step by including an equilibrium between pre- and post-translocation
conformations of the DNA substrate in the Dpo4·DNA binary complex inferred from binary crystal structures in
which the terminal base pair occludes the dNTP binding site (step
3 in Figure )., Similarly,
using the FRET methodology, an observed very rapid FRET decrease phase
was interpreted to represent this shift in equilibrium toward the
post-translocation state induced by nucleotide binding. Furthermore, when extending from an 8-oxoG:C
base pair, this translocation step was significantly slowed compared
to that for undamaged DNA, perhaps because
of an increased level of hydrogen bonding between Arg 331 and Arg
332 residues in the LF domain of Dpo4 and the modified base.

Beyond stopped-flow fluorescence methods,
several additional biophysical
techniques offer the potential for gaining further understanding of
the conformational dynamics of the Y-family DNA polymerases. For example,
molecular dynamics simulations with Dpo4 have revealed subtle but
potentially important conformational changes in the LF and finger
subdomains upon the release of catalytic metal ions prior to catalysis
that may be involved in repositioning the DNA substrate to allow for
different types of DNA lesions in the active site. More recently, hydrogen–deuterium exchange in tandem
with mass spectrometry has been used to demonstrate changes in flexibility
in certain regions of the finger and thumb subdomains of Dpo4 that
are involved in correct nucleotide selection. In another recent publication, the combination of femtosecond
fluorescence spectroscopy and molecular dynamics simulation was used
to probe the solvent dynamics in apo, binary, and ternary Dpo4 complexes. The results from this study suggested that
a hydrated binding interface facilitates the sliding of Dpo4 on the
DNA substrate to allow for rapid translocation and that the dynamic
solvent accessibility of the active site contributes to the low fidelity
of Dpo4. Additionally, the recent chemical
shift backbone assignment of the polymerase core and LF subdomain of Dpo4
will facilitate the investigation of conformational dynamics at atomic-level
resolution via protein NMR spectroscopy. Single-molecule FRET investigations
have also begun to provide new insights into the kinetic mechanisms
of several canonical DNA polymerases− and may prove to be useful in studying the Y-family DNA polymerases,
as well.

Concluding Remarks
Y-Family DNA polymerases are fascinating
enzymes that exhibit many
unique catalytic properties because of their ability to accommodate
a wide range of modified DNA substrates in their active sites. Pre-steady-state
kinetic methods have begun to reveal some of the distinctive mechanistic
details for this interesting class of enzymes and have shed light
on how they alter their kinetic properties and conformational dynamics
during replication of damaged and undamaged DNA. However, many questions
remain unanswered, particularly with regard to how the kinetic and
structural properties of the Y-family DNA polymerases influence the
regulation of switching between the replicative and Y-family DNA polymerases
before and after the bypass of DNA lesions to ensure that undamaged
DNA is copied with high fidelity. Additionally, the Y-family DNA polymerases
may play critical roles in several cellular processes beyond TLS.
To address these lingering concerns, the Y-family DNA polymerases
are sure to be the subject of many future investigations, especially
as new biophysical and biochemical techniques evolve to allow for
deeper probing of enzyme mechanisms and conformational dynamics.

The
authors declare no
competing financial interest.

Abbreviations
2-AP2-aminopurine

8-oxoG7,8-dihydro-8-oxoguanine

dGAPN-(deoxyguanosin-8-yl)-1-aminopyrene

DinBE. coli DNA polymerase IV

Dpo4S. solfataricus DNA polymerase IV

FRETFörster resonance energy transfer

hPolηhuman DNA polymerase η

hPolιhuman DNA
polymerase ι

hPolκhuman DNA polymerase κ

hRev1human Rev1

LFlittle finger

PADpolymerase-associated domain

PDBProtein Data Bank

SOSAshort oligonucleotide
sequencing assay

TTcis-syn thymine-thymine dimer

TLStranslesion DNA
synthesis

UmuCD′E. coli DNA polymerase V

yPolηyeast DNA polymerase η.

