The eye lens
is a unique tissue
in the human body, responsible for maintaining transparency to allow
the passage of light as well as producing refractive power to focus
an image onto the retina. During lens formation, epithelial cells
terminally differentiate into elongated fiber cells, wrapping onto
an organized core of existing fiber cells. Thus, much of the body
of the human lens is formed early in life. In the process of differentiation, the cells produce large quantities
of crystallin proteins, which become the major proteins of the lens
fibers. As they mature and terminally differentiate, the fiber cells
undergo enucleation, degrading their nuclei and other organelles and
shutting down many metabolic functions., Fully differentiated
lens fiber cells do not produce or degrade proteins, so existing proteins
must remain stable in solution for the lifetime of the individual.

Cataract is the leading cause of blindness in the world, projected
to affect 30 million people in the United States alone by 2020. Several variations of the disease exist, but
the most prevalent is age-related cataract, affecting primarily the
elderly. In the aging lens, damaged or misfolded proteins aggregate
into insoluble high-molecular-weight complexes, scattering visible
light and causing the lens to become opaque, blocking vision.− Currently, the only therapy is surgical removal of the cataractous
lens and replacement with an artificial lens. Although this is effective
and safe, it is costly and requires modern medical facilities. As
populations age in many developed countries, cataract will become
an increasing social and economic burden.

Characterizations of lens proteins by mass spectrometry and
immunohistochemistry
have shown that over time covalent modifications, including deamidation,
racemization, glycosylation, and oxidation, accumulate on lens proteins.− Several modifications that reduce protein stability and promote
aggregation are more abundant in cataractous lenses than healthy lenses.,, Although a number of factors
are known to increase covalent modification and the risk of cataract,
one ubiquitous hazard is solar ultraviolet radiation.

Ultraviolet
radiation (UVR) in the UVA (320–400 nm) and
UVB (280–320 nm) ranges can cause direct damage to living tissue
through photochemical reactions with amino acids, nucleotides, and
lipids− as well as indirect damage through the generation of reactive oxygen
species (ROS) and subsequent oxidative damage. UVR exposure is associated
in many tissues with increased mutation rates and cell death., The lens is shielded from UVR beneath 295 nm by the cornea, but
the long-lived nature of lens proteins means even relatively rare
events can be significant to the pathology of cataract. Because of
the lens’ chronic exposure to light and lack of protein turnover,
photo-oxidative damage to lens proteins can accumulate over a lifetime.,

The crystallin family of proteins are the primary proteins
of the
human lens. Together, the α, β, and γ-crystallins
make up more than 90% of total lens protein and are key to maintaining
the translucency of the lens tissue for vision. The β/γ-crystallins consist of two homologous
domains; the β-crystallins are multimeric and contain N-terminal
extensions, whereas the γ-crystallins are monomeric.− Both β- and γ-crystallins are highly stable, resisting
denaturation by heat and chemicals., The domain
structure of each β/γ-crystallin consists primarily of
β-sheet in the form of a double Greek Key fold in which the
third strand of each key is exchanged with the other key. α-Crystallin,
the major lens chaperone, is a member of the small heat shock protein
family (sHSP) and consists of two subunits, αA-crystallin and
αB-crystallin (HαB-Crys), which assemble into high-molecular-weight
multimeric complexes.,

During refolding from the
fully denatured state, the γD-crystallin
chains populate a partially folded intermediate, with the N-terminal
domain disordered and the C-terminal domain nativelike. The C-terminal
face of the domain interface serves as a template for N-terminal folding. At high protein concentrations, these partially
folded species aggregate into high-molecular-weight light-scattering
species. In contrast, the native state,
when incubated at low pH, forms well-formed amyloid fibers., Using two-dimensional IR spectrosocpy and segmental 13C labeling, Moran et al. identified domain-specific interactions
present in the amyloid form.

The
β/γ-crystallins contain a number of highly conserved
aromatic residues. An extensive literature exists documenting the
importance of aromatic residues to protein stability and folding.− Clustering of aromatic and other hydrophobic amino acids drives
the folding of polypeptide chains, and aromatics are key components
of the water-tight hydrophobic core of the crystallins. However, these residues also absorb light in
the UV range, entering into short-lived singlet excited states from
which they can fluoresce or undergo intersystem crossing, converting
to longer-lived triplet excited states. These can participate in radical
chemistry, leading to covalent damage and protein cross-linking. In both excited states, tryptophan, tyrosine,
and phenylalanine have been shown to transfer excited-state energy
nonradiatively to other aromatics in close proximity (5–10
Å),, and in the triplet state, to molecular oxygen,
generating singlet oxygen., Singlet oxygen, like
other reactive oxygen species (ROS), can react and cause oxidative
damage to many biological targets, including the amino acids tryptophan,
tyrosine, lysine, histidine, and cysteine.

Previous work has investigated the effect of UVR on extracted
lenses
and lens proteins as well as ROS generated using photosensitizers.
Bovine crystallin solutions exposed to photodynamically generated
ROS became cloudy, and exposed proteins partitioned to the insoluble
fraction. Human and bovine crystallin
solutions exposed to UVR also displayed a rise in turbidity, non-Trp
fluorescence, protein oxidation, and protein cross-linking.− UVR has been found to cause cataract in a number of animal models,
including guinea pig, squirrel, rat, and rabbit.−

Human γD-Crystallin
(HγD-Crys) is a 173 amino acid
protein, one of the more abundant γ-crystallins in the nucleus
of the human lens, and a model for protein aggregation. Previous work
has found that HγD-Crys aggregates when subjected to thermal
denaturation and also when refolding from a guanidine-HCl fully denatured
state., At pH 3 or lower, HγD-Crys forms amyloid
fibrils.

HγD-Crys contains
4 tryptophans, 14 tyrosines, and 6 phenylalanines.
The tryptophan residues are highly conserved across vertebrate β/γ-crystallins
and arranged in homologous pairs. Previous work on HγD-Crys
has explored the contributions of its high number of aromatic residues
to folding and long-term stability.− Recent work by Chen
et al. characterized an energy-transfer mechanism between tryptophan
residues within a pair that rapidly dissipated excited-state energy
down the protein backbone., This was hypothesized
to play a photoprotective role given the lens’ chronic exposure
to light. In silico work by Xia et al. simulated the effect of photodamage
to the tryptophans, replacing the buried tryptophan with kynurenine,
its photodamaged product. Kynurenine
replacement loosened the hydrophobic core of HγD-Crys, destabilizing
the protein and speeding unfolding.

Previous experiments showed
that HγD-Crys photoaggregates
when exposed to UVR in vitro. Recent
work by Moran et al. found that HγD-Crys photoaggregated into
amyloid-like structures when exposed to UVB, primarily through interactions among strands of the C-terminus.
The aggregated, high-molecular-weight states generated upon UV irradiation
appear to include both amyloid and nonamyloid polymers., Moran et al. concluded that the aggregation pathway involved loss
of the native Greek Key fold and its reorganization.

We have tried to identify the UVR-induced modification(s)
that
initiate and/or promote aggregation. By examining the photoaggregation
of W:F mutants of HγD-Crys, we showed that the tryptophan energy-transfer
mechanism played a protective role and also suggested that tryptophan
was not a site of photodamage or cross-linking when HγD-Crys
photoaggregated in vitro.

If the
tryptophan pairs act photoprotectively and are not major
sites of photodamage, then some set of the remaining aromatic residues
must participate as UVR absorbers and/or photodamage sites. Six pairs
of interacting tyrosines and phenylalanines also exist across HγD-Crys
(Figure ). Four of these, Y6/F11, Y45/Y50,
Y92/Y97, and Y133/Y138, are Greek Key pairs conserved between two
HγD-Crys domains in homologous positions at β-hairpins. Two pairs, Y16/Y28 and F115/F117, are non-Greek
Key pairs positioned at nonhomologous locations. In addition, individual
tyrosines Y62 and Y150 are also important as the Greek Key signature
tyrosine corners, making structurally key hydrogen bonds with the
peptide backbone of the next β-strand. The tyrosine corners also form three-residue clusters with W68 and
Y55 in the N-terminal domain and W156 and Y143 in the C-terminal domain.
Recent work has examined the structural and folding roles of the tyrosine
and phenylalanine pairs, showing that mutation of pairs to alanine
significantly disturbs folding and stability for a given HγD-Crys
domain. In silico molecular dynamics
experiments by Yang et al. have also shown that Y:A mutation of the
tyrosine pairs destabilizes HγD-Crys, opening the hydrophobic
cores to water.

Schematic of aromatic
residues in HγD-Crys, with the N-terminal
domain in blue and the C-terminal domain in red. The positions of
the aromatic amino acids are labeled with circles representing tyrosines,
diamonds phenylalanines, and purple rectangles tryptophans. Connected
orange residues are members of the Greek Key aromatic pairs, connected
green residues are members of the non-Greek Key aromatic pairs, and
black residues are not members of pairs, with dotted black lines showing
participation in a tyrosine, tryptophan, tyrosine cluster.

In this work, we investigated whether the aromatic
pairs of HγD-Crys
play a role in UVR-induced aggregation in vitro and the types of photodamage
that occur during UVR exposure. We used double alanine mutant HγD-Crys
constructs targeting the aromatic pairs and examined their photoaggregation
behavior using light scattering to monitor the development of larger,
late-stage aggregates and SDS-PAGE to monitor initial dimeric/multimeric
photoproducts. We also used liquid chromatography coupled with electrospray
ionization tandem mass spectrometry to search directly for photodamaged
sites and to examine the photoaggregation behavior of cysteine-to-serine
mutant constructs. In addition, C18 oxidation was quantitatively monitored
with increasing irradiation time by multiple reaction monitoring (MRM)
mass spectrometry. Using this data, we propose a mechanism for photoaggregation
of HγD-Crys.

Experimental Procedures
Mutagenesis, Expression,
and Purification of HγD-Crys
N-terminally 6×-His
tagged wild-type (WT) HγD-Crys expression
constructs were modified via site-directed mutagenesis to introduce
Y:A, F:A, and C:S substitutions as described previously., All constructs were confirmed via sequencing (Genewiz).

Recombinant
WT HγD-Crys and mutant proteins were expressed and purified
as described previously with several
modifications. Cells were grown to OD600 ∼1 in Super
broth media at 37 °C with shaking. IPTG was added to 1 mM, and
cultures were transferred to 18 °C followed by shaking overnight.
Cells were pelleted by centrifugation for 20 min at 17 000g and resuspended in 30 mL of Ni-NTA lysis buffer (300 mM
NaCl, 50 mM NaPO4, and 18 mM imidazole, pH 8) containing
two tablets of Roche complete EDTA-free protease inhibitor. After
addition of lysozyme to 3 mg/mL and DNase to 3 μg/mL of lysate,
pellets were lysed via ultrasonication and centrifuged at 17 000g for 45 min. Supernatants were filtered and applied to
a Ni-NTA column (GE Healthcare). Protein was eluted using a linear
gradient of increasing imidazole concentration. Fractions containing
the protein of interest were pooled and dialyzed three times against
storage buffer (10 mM ammonium acetate, pH 7.0). HγD-Crys was
concentrated using 10 000 MWCO Vivaspin 20 concentrators (Sartorius
Stedim Biotech).

Protein Concentration Measurement
Stock protein sample
concentration was determined using absorbance at 280 nm with the following
extinction coefficients (determined using SIB’s ProtParam):
WT, single C:S, NoCys, and double F:A HγD-Crys, 42 860
M–1 cm–1; double Y:A HγD-Crys,
39 880 M–1 cm–1; single
Y:A HγD-Crys, 41 370 M–1 cm–1; and quadruple W:F HγD-Crys, 20 860 M–1 cm–1.

Photoaggregation Experiments
Samples
of HγD-Crys
were prepared at 1 mg/mL in 1× reaction buffer (100 mM Na2PO4 and 1 mM EDTA, pH 7). Samples were irradiated
at room temperature in a quartz cuvette (Starna Group) using a UVP
Inc. UVLMS-38 lamp equipped with a 302 nm midrange bulb delivering
a range of UVA/UVB light. UVR dose delivery was set to 2 mW/cm2 by adjusting the cuvette’s distance to the lamp and
was determined before each experiment by a UVX radiometer with midrange
UVX-31 sensor. Turbidity readings at OD600 on a Cary UV/vis
spectrometer were taken at regular time points during irradiation.
Samples removed and analyzed via SDS-PAGE were reduced and boiled
and electrophoresed through 14% acrylamide gels at 170 V for 1 h;
gels were stained using Krypton fluorescent protein stain (Thermo
Fisher Scientific) and imaged on a Typhoon 9400 (Amersham Biosciences).
Gel band quantification was performed using ImageJ.

Mass Spectrometry
Measurements
HγD-Crys samples
for LC–MS/MS were prepared and irradiated as described in the
photoaggregation section. Exposed samples (0 and 60 min) were mixed
with SDS loading buffer lacking BME (to final concentration 333 mM
Tris, pH 6.8, 2% SDS, and 30% glycerol). DTT was added to 10 mM, and
samples were incubated for 1 h at 37 °C. Iodoacetamide was added
to 55 mM, and samples were incubated for an additional hour in the
dark at 37 °C.

Samples then underwent SDS-PAGE through
a 14% acrylamide gel at 170 V for 1 h. The monomer and dimer gel bands
were excised and destained with three consecutive washes of 50 mM
ammonium bicarbonate/acetonitrile (ACN) (1:1, v/v) for 10 min each.
The gel bands were then washed three times with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate/ACN
(1:1, v/v) for 10 min each. The dehydrated gel bands were completely
dried by SpeedVac. Each sample containing an individual band was rehydrated
in 10–15 μL of solution containing 10 ng/μL of
trypsin or chymotrypsin (Promega) in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate for
15 min. Fifty microliters of 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer was
added to each sample, and the samples were incubated at 37 °C
for 18 h. Peptides were extracted using 20% ACN/0.1% formic acid (FA)
once, 60% ACN/0.1% FA twice, and 80% ACN/0.1% FA once. The extract
solutions were pooled and dried in by SpeedVac and reconstituted in
0.1% formic acid for subsequent LC–MS/MS analysis.

Peptides
were separated on a one-dimensional fused silica capillary
column (150 mm × 100 μm) packed with Phenomenex Jupiter
resin (3 μm mean particle size, 300 Å pore size) using
the following gradient at a flow rate of 0.5 μL/min: 0–10
min: 2% ACN (0.1% formic acid), 10–50 min: 2–35% ACN
(0.1% formic acid), 50–60 min: 35–90% ACN (0.1% formic
acid) balanced with 0.1% formic acid. The eluate was directly infused
into a Velos Pro mass spectrometer or a Velos Orbitrap mass spectrometer
(ThermoScientific) equipped with a nanoelectrospray source. Dynamic
exclusion (repeat count, 2; exclusion list size, 300; and exclusion
duration, 60 s) was enabled to allow detection of less-abundant ions
for all LC–MS/MS analyses.

HγD-Crys samples for
multiple reaction monitoring (MRM) mass
spectrometry were prepared at 2 mg/mL in 1× reaction buffer and
exposed to 2 mW/cm2 UVR as in the photoaggregation experiments.
Two-hundred microliter samples were removed at 0, 10, 20, 30, 40,
50, and 60 min of UVR exposure. Time samples were centrifuged at 4
°C for 30 min at 17 000g, and the supernatant
was removed and diluted 10-fold into guanidine HCl (GuHCl) buffer
(final concentrations 5.5 M GuHCl, 100 mM sodium phosphate, pH 7,
and 1 mM EDTA); these were labeled as the soluble fraction. The pellets
were resuspended in 100 μL of GuHCl buffer and labeled as the
pellet fraction. Soluble and pellet fraction time samples were incubated
overnight at 37 °C followed by sequential addition of DTT to
10 mM and 1 h incubation at 37 °C and iodoacetamide to 55 mM
and 1 h incubation at 37 °C in the dark. Soluble and pellet samples
were then precipitated using a methanol/chloroform protocol to separate
protein from GuHCl. After pellets were separated from supernatants,
sample pellets were dried, rehydrated, and suspended in 30 μL
of 2 M urea and 100 mM Tris HCl (pH 8.5). Porcine trypsin (Promega)
was added to all samples to a final concentration of 16.7 ng/μL,
and samples were incubated overnight at 37 °C. Digestions were
stopped by adding 1.5 μL of 1% trifluoroacetic acid to each
sample.

Samples were analyzed by multiple reaction monitoring
(MRM) on
a TSQ Vantage mass spectrometer (ThermoScientific). After an unscheduled
run to determine retention times for peptides of interest, a scheduled
MRM method was created using Skyline to include a 10 min window around
the measured peptide retention time along with calculated optimum
collision energies. Q1 peak width resolution
was set to 0.7, collision gas pressure was 1 mTorr, and an EZmethod
cycle time of 5 s was utilized. The resulting RAW instrument files
were imported into Skyline for peak-picking and quantitation. For
relative quantitation of C18 trioxidation, the peak area for trioxidized
peptide 15-31 was compared to the summed intensity of two peptides
determined to be unchanged by UV irradiation: peptides 3-9 and 169-173.

Circular Dichroism Thermal Unfolding Measurements
CD
spectra of the WT and mutant proteins were obtained using an AVIV
model 202 CD spectrometer (Lakewood, NJ). Protein samples were prepared
at a concentration of 0.1 mg/mL in 10 mM sodium phosphate, pH 7.0.
Data were collected at 218 nm in a 1 cm quartz cuvette. Sample temperature
was increased from 25 to 95 °C in 1 °C steps with 1 min
of equilibration time per degree Celsius followed by 5 s reads. Data
were corrected for buffer blank readings, and mean residue ellipticity
was calculated. The mean residue ellipticity versus temperature data
were fit to a sigmoidal curve using Kaleidagraph (Synergy Software),
and the unfolding midpoints were calculated. The unfolding temperatures
reported are averages of three thermal unfolding experiments.

Results
Photoaggregation
of Aromatic Pair Mutants
To investigate
the potential roles of the aromatic pairs in the photoaggregation
of HγD-Crys, we employed HγD-Crys double mutant proteins
in which both members of an aromatic pair were mutated to alanine.
We exposed these mutant HγD-Crys proteins to 2 mW/cm2 UVR for 60 min while monitoring aggregation using light scattering
at 600 nm (Figure a,b). Two of the three N-terminal
mutant pairs, Y6A/F11A and Y45A/Y50A, and one of the C-terminal mutant
pairs, Y133A/Y138A, photoaggregated slightly more quickly than WT,
indicating their loss likely made HγD-Crys slightly more vulnerable
to UVR. Two of the C-terminal mutants, Y92A/Y97A and F115A/F117A,
behaved similarly to WT, indicating they had no effect on HγD-Crys
photoaggregation. One N-terminal pair mutant, Y16A/Y28A, photoaggregated
significantly slower than WT, suggesting that one or both residues
are important participants in photodamage.

Comparison of UVR-induced
aggregation of HγD-Crys constructs
with aromatic pairs replaced by alanines. Samples were prepared at
1 mg/mL in reaction buffer, and light scattering was monitored at
600 nm during the UVR exposure time. (a) N-terminal pairs: WT (black
diamonds), Y6A/F11A (red triangles), Y16A/Y28A (green hashes), and
Y45A/Y50A (blue circles). (b) C-terminal pairs: WT (black diamonds),
Y92A/Y97A (orange squares), F115A/F117A (lavender dashes), Y133A/Y138A
(turquoise X’s).

The differences in photoaggregation between the aromatic
pair mutants
suggested that specific tyrosines and phenylalanines of HγD-Crys
are distinct in their absorptive and photochemical properties. Because
absorbed energy can be transferred between nearby aromatic amino acids,
the pair mutants that photoaggregated more quickly and severely than
WT could have roles transferring energy to the highly conserved tryptophan
pairs previously shown to play a protective role., Light scattering eventually developed at longer UVR exposure times
in the Y16A/Y28A samples, suggesting that other photodamage sites
must still be operating in the absence of these tyrosines.

Photoaggregation
of C:S Mutant HγD-Crys
To identify
the sites that are modified after UVR treatment, irradiated HγD-Crys
protein was digested by protease treatment, and the resulting peptides
were analyzed by mass spectrometry. C18, and to a much lesser extent
C78 and C108, were identified as sites of oxidative damage after UVR
exposure (). Cysteine thiols were oxidized to sulfinic and sulfonic acid.

To determine the importance of the individual cysteine residues identified
via mass spectrometry in photoaggregation, we constructed HγD-Crys
mutant constructs with cysteines of interest mutated to serines. We
exposed the purified proteins to UVR, monitoring turbidity as with
the aromatic pair mutants (Figure ). C78S
HγD-Crys and C108S HγD-Crys both behaved similarly to
WT or aggregated slightly more rapidly, suggesting their oxidation
might have been unrelated to aggregation.

Comparison of UVR-induced
aggregation of HγD-Crys constructs
with select cysteine residues replaced with serines. Samples contained
protein at 1 mg/mL in reaction buffer, and light scattering was monitored
at 600 nm as a function of UVR exposure time: WT (black diamonds),
C18S (magenta squares), C78S (green triangles), C108S (blue X’s),
and NoCys (maroon hashes).

C18S HγD-Crys photoaggregated much more slowly than
WT, suggesting
that C18 played an important role in HγD-Crys photoaggregation.
This is consistent with the mass spectrometry data, which showed a
much higher abundance of C18 oxidation than C78 or C108 in both soluble
and aggregated pellet fractions, suggesting it more readily reacts
with ROS (). In addition, mass spectrometry data showed that C18 oxidation
in the aggregated pellets was present at higher levels than in the
soluble fraction, supporting a role for C18 oxidation during protein
aggregation (). It seems unlikely that the oxidation product of C18 by itself
produces a covalent photocross-link, but it could be involved in the
formation of noncovalent protein interactions contributing to aggregation.

Prior experiments using SDS-PAGE revealed a dimerlike gel band
that appeared immediately upon UVR exposure of HγD-Crys and
suggested the formation of covalent photoproducts preceding or separate
from the development of light-scattering aggregates. The complete oxygen dependence of in vitro photoaggregation
established that ROS were required during UVR exposure and also suggested
that aggregates possessed at least a partially covalent character. In light of this data, HγD-Crys photoaggregates
may form through free-radical polymerization, for example, through
a transient thiol radical. The stable C18 oxidation product may be
an off-pathway photodamage reaction in competition with a C18-related
aggregation pathway.

Cysteine thiol groups have been shown to
participate in radical
photochemistry that produces cross-links to a variety of chemical
groups.− Fu et al. observed intra- and intermolecular cross-linking
mediated by cysteine thiols when synthetic peptides were exposed to
hypochlorous acid. Given the oxidation
of C18, it seems likely that a cysteine radical could also be produced.
Thiol radicals might be expected to form thio–ether cross-links
to many residues on the surface of HγD-Crys. Intramolecular
cross-links would require a high degree of resolution to identify,
and the heterogeneity of these cross-links would make them difficult
to discover by mass spectrometry.

To determine the extent of
photoaggregation of HγD-Crys in
the absence of cysteine, we created a multiple mutant HγD-Crys
construct, NoCys, with all six cysteines mutated to serine. When exposed
to UVR, the NoCys HγD-Crys protein photoaggregated, but the
rate of photoaggregation was slowed as compared to WT and was similar
to C18S HγD-Crys (Figure ). This suggested
that C18 may be the only HγD-Crys cysteine important for photoaggregation,
as removing all cysteines retarded photoaggregation to a similar extent
as mutating C18.

The NoCys HγD-Crys protein still exhibited
some delayed photoaggregation,
so other sites may be involved in secondary-photoaggregation pathways.
NoCys HγD-Crys was extremely destabilized relative to WT HγD-Crys
(Table ), but it still photoaggregated much
more slowly than WT, demonstrating that overall thermodynamic stability
does not appear to play a significant role in photoaggregation propensity.

Circular Dichroism Thermal Unfolding
Data for HγD-Crys Mutant Constructs
construct	melting temperature (°C)	standard
deviation (°C)	
WT	82.1	0.4	
Y16A	77.3	0.07	
Y28A	76.9	0.04	
C18S	72.5	0.3	
Y16A Y28A	75.3	0.07	
Y16A C18S	73.2	0.13	
C18S Y28A	73.3	0.1	
Y16A C18S Y28A	72.3	0.06	
NoCys	59.6	0.08	
Analyzing Mutants of the
Y16/C18/Y28 Cluster
In the
high-resolution HγD-Crys crystal structure by Slingsby and co-workers,
the thiol group of C18 is in direct contact with the aromatic ring
of Y16, which is itself stacked in a pair with Y28. To investigate the relationships among these three residues
implicated in photoaggregation, we made different individual and combination
mutant HγD-Crys constructs of the three sites and compared the
mutant protein photoaggregation behavior by monitoring turbidity (Figure a,b).

Comparison of UVR-induced aggregation of HγD-Crys
constructs
with individual or combination mutations of C18S, Y16A, and Y28A.
Samples were prepared at 1 mg/mL in reaction buffer, and light scattering
was monitored at 600 nm during UVR exposure time. (A) WT (black diamonds),
Y16A (turquoise circles), C18S (magenta squares), Y28A (orange triangles),
and Y16A/Y28A (green hashes). (B) WT (black diamonds), Y16A/Y28A (green
hashes), Y16A/C18S (purple circles), C18S/Y28A (red dashes), and Y16A/C18S/Y28A
(blue triangles).

The Y16A HγD-Crys
single mutant displayed retarded photoaggregation
as compared to WT, similar to C18S and Y16A/Y28A HγD-Crys. Y28A
HγD-Crys photoaggregation was only mildly delayed and much more
similar to WT. This suggested that for photoaggregation Y16 is the
important tyrosine of the Y16A/Y28A pair tested earlier (Figure ). Because of the similarity in photoaggregation
rates of Y16A and C18S HγD-Crys, it is likely that the slowing
of photoaggregation in each single mutant was due to removal of a
shared activity dependent on the presence of both residues. Therefore,
we postulate that mutating one residue would be sufficient to abolish
the relevant photochemical activity of both. Additionally, Y28A HγD-Crys’
mild photoaggregation retardation as compared to WT may have nothing
to do with its own participation in photochemistry and could simply
be a consequence of Y28’s proximity to Y16 and C18.

Y16A/C18S
HγD-Crys, C18S/Y28A HγD-Crys, and triple
mutant Y16A/C18S/Y28A HγD-Crys were exposed to UVR and compared
to Y16A/Y28A HγD-Crys and WT to investigate the interplay between
the three residues. C18S/Y28A HγD-Crys behaved similarly to
C18S and Y16A/Y28A, suggesting again that Y28 is not important for
photoaggregation and that the mutation of C18 or Y16 is sufficient
to produce the observed retardation.

Curiously, the Y16A/C18S
double mutant HγD-Crys and triple
mutant Y16A/C18S/Y28A HγD-Crys photoaggregated at an intermediate
rate between Y16A/Y28A and WT HγD-Crys. The simple lack of an
additive delay when Y16 and C18 were both mutated away is further
evidence that they participate in a single photochemical process.
However, the moderate increase in photoaggregation rate over the single
mutants when the Y16A and C18S mutations are put together suggested
that although the double mutation abolishes the photochemistry that
Y16 and C18 are involved in it increases the rate of some other photoaggregation
related reaction, perhaps by subtly perturbing the structure of the
N-terminal domain. A similar analysis applies to the Y16A/C18S/Y28A
triple mutant HγD-Crys, and its similarly intermediate behavior
to Y16A/C18S HγD-Crys is further evidence of the peripheral
photoaggregation activity of Y28.

MRM Mass Spectrometric
Analysis of C18 Trioxidation
To test the hypothesis that
Y16 and C18 are involved in the same
photochemical-damage mechanism, targeted MRM mass spectrometric analysis
was performed to compare levels of tryptic HγD-Crys peptide
15-31 in UVR-exposed WT and Y16A HγD-Crys (Figure ). The abundance of the trioxidized, sulfonic acid form of
tryptic HγD-Crys peptide 15-31 from soluble or pelleted photoaggregate
samples was monitored as a function of UVR-exposure time. The amount
of peptide containing C18 oxidized to sulfonic acid rose in a UVR
dose-dependent manner for both WT and Y16A HγD-Crys soluble
protein samples, whereas the pelleted samples were steadily much higher
than the soluble samples. However, the amount of trioxidized peptide
in the Y16A samples was much lower than in WT and rose more slowly
in the soluble samples. This supports the idea that Y16 and C18 are
a single photochemically linked site. Disrupting one residue disrupted
both the photochemistry and photoaggregation effect of the site.

MRM mass
spectrometry monitoring C18 trioxidation. Quantitation
of trioxidized peptide 15-31 for UVR-exposed WT, Y16A, and NoTrp HγD-Crys
as a function of exposure time. The y axis plots
the 15-31 peptide peak area divided by peak areas for peptides 3-9
and 169-173 for internal protein loading control. (a) Soluble UVR-exposed
protein samples and (b) pelleted photoaggregated protein samples,
with WT (black triangles), Y16A (turqouise circles), and NoTrp (red
squares).

Previously, we determined that
the four tryptophans of HγD-Crys
played a protective role against photoaggregation. It seemed likely that this protective role involved minimizing
photochemical damage to the aromatic residues. It is also possible
that the tryptophan energy-transfer mechanism could be protective
against other types of photodamage. To test whether the tryptophans
played a role in C18 oxidation, we examined UVR-exposed NoTrp HγD-Crys
via the same MRM mass spectrometry experiment as WT and Y16A HγD-Crys
(Figure ). NoTrp HγD-Crys showed higher
amounts of C18 oxidation to sulfonic acid, and oxidation appeared
more rapidly than WT or Y16A, suggesting that the photoprotective
effect of the tryptophans extends to C18 oxidation.

Early- versus
Late-Stage Photoaggregation
Monitoring
UVR-exposed HγD-Crys with SDS-PAGE revealed the development
of initial cross-linked dimeric photoproducts. This early dimerization was differentiated from the later
rise in larger, visible light-scattering aggregates. We used the same
comparison to determine whether the Y16A, C18S, and NoCys mutations
affect early- or late-stage photoaggregation (Figure a,b). When WT HγD-Crys was exposed to UVR, dimers appeared
quickly, before light scattering. Despite the significant delay in
light-scatter development seen with the Y16A, C18S, and NoCys mutants,
all three developed photodimers at early times, similar to WT. This
indicated that the photochemical process(es) that involve C18 and
Y16 influence the light scattering late-stage of photoaggregation
but not the early stage dimer formation. The formation of dimeric
photoproducts when NoCys HγD-Crys protein was exposed to UVR
also conclusively demonstrated that the dimer-producing cross-link
does not involve cysteine.

Comparing turbidity to dimeric product formation
with Y16A, C18S,
NoCys, and WT HγD-Crys. Comparison of turbidity development
at 600 nm (left axis, solid lines and closed symbols) and density
of dimer gel band (right axis, dotted lines and open symbols) versus
UVR-exposure time for 4 HγD-Crys constructs. Samples were prepared
at 1 mg/mL in reaction buffer. Twenty microliters of samples was added
to 10 μL of 3× gel loading buffer, the samples were boiled,
and then 15 μL was electrophoresed. Dimer band density was normalized
to final dimer band density to give the fraction of final dimer band
density. (a) WT (black diamonds) and Y16A (turquoise circles) and
(b) C18S (magenta squares) and NoCys (maroon hashes).

Discussion
The initiation of UVR-induced
protein damage proceeds from absorption
of UV photons. The photoaggregation monitored in the above experiments
depended on the presence of oxygen. Aggregation
rapidly slowed after turning off the UVR source, indicating that dark
reactions were a very minor component of the aggregation reaction
(). Thus,
photoaggregation appears to depend on excited states of UVR-absorbing
components of HγD-Crys interacting with ROS. Although the four
buried and conserved tryptophans are the most efficient absorbers
of UV photons in HγD-Crys, these residues are not required for
the major photoaggregation pathway. In fact their UVR absorption and
subsequent quenching appears to be photoprotective. Moran et al. reported photo-oxidation of Trp130 (and Histidine
121). These changes were found after
many hours of UVR exposure and were not coupled to the initiation
of aggregation.

The next most efficient UVR absorbers are tyrosine
residues. The
results reported here show that one pair of tyrosines, N-terminal
Y16/Y28, together with neighboring C18 appear to be important to the
in vitro photoaggregation of HγD-Crys. What differentiates Y16
and Y28 from the other five tyrosine pairs whose replacement by alanine
did not significantly affect photoaggregation?

Solvent exposure
and the proximity of amino acid side chains known
to undergo radical chemistry mark Y16 and Y28 as different from other
aromatic pairs (Figure ). In the HγD-Crys
crystal structure, both Y16 and Y28 are surface-exposed compared to
other aromatic pairs, making it more likely for them to encounter
molecular oxygen and perhaps more prone to participate in an intermolecular
cross-link. Additionally, the Y16/Y28 pair is the only pair in the
HγD-Crys crystal structure with a cysteine thiol (C18) contacting
an aromatic ring. There is also a histidine, H22, in close proximity
to Y16 and Y28. Both the thiol and imidazole side chains have been
shown to participate in radical photochemistry, for example, in the
cysteine-based variants of thiol-ene click chemistry or in the formation
of histidine–histidine or histidine–lysine cross-links
via singlet oxygen.,

Three-dimensional structure of HγD-Crys
N-terminal domain
highlighting Y16, Y28, and C18. Ribbon structure of the N-terminal
domain of HγD-Crys highlighting the identified key residues
for photoaggregation as spheres: Y16 (turquoise carbons), Y28 (indigo
carbons), and C18 (salmon carbons). Panels A and B are approximately
90° rotations of the same structure, highlighting the positioning
of the three residues relative to each other.

Y16 and Y28 are members of the N-terminal non-Greek Key aromatic
pair and are not as strongly conserved across βγ-crystallins
as the Greek Key pairs. Kong et al. aligned
the sequences of 79 β/γ-crystallin protein sequences across
eight species and found that Y16 and Y28 were only conserved across
44% of sequences, primarily in the γ-crystallins, whereas the
Greek Key pairs were conserved across 82–100%. It is possible
that selective pressures for structural stability and against photoaggregation
propensity are at odds with respect to the Y16/Y28 aromatic pair.
The C-terminal non-Greek Key aromatic pair mutant, F115A/F117A HγD-Crys,
although also poorly conserved, photoaggregated similarly to WT, suggesting
no similarity to its N-terminal counterpart in this regard. This homologous
C-terminal pair also lacks a neighboring cysteine.

The oxygen
dependence of the in vitro photoaggregation of HγD-Crys strongly favors a mechanism of indirect photodamage
with singlet oxygen mediating cross-linking and photo-oxidation., The major modified side chains detected by mass spectrometry were
C18, C78, and C108. ROS-mediated cross-links and oxidation can target
a number of amino acids, and as such, there could be additional minor
sites of photodamage too low in abundance to be detected by our methods.

Because the aggregated protein was not
solubilized by boiling in
SDS in the presence of reducing agents, it seemed likely that the
protein molecules were covalently cross-linked. However, we did not
recover cross-linked peptides. If aggregation proceeds by free-radical
polymerization, for example, through tyrosyl or cysteine radicals,
then the cross-links could be very diverse so that no single cross-linked
peptide species was well-populated.

The covalent changes in
irradiated crystallin described here occurred
at the beginning of the aggregation reaction, as monitored by turbidity
and SDS-PAGE. The side-chain oxidation and fragmentation reported
by Moran et al. were associated with later changes in the irradiated
proteins. Moran et al. showed by FTIR
that their aggregated material contained amyloid structure.,, Well-formed amyloid fibrils have
been reported and described upon incubation of γ-crystallins
at pH 3., Previous experiments examining the UVR-induced
aggregates of WT HγD-Crys using transmission electron microscopy
revealed their morphology to be lumpy and irregular, distinctly non-amyloid-like. However, our aggregated state could have included
amyloid species. This material requires further characterization.

Photocross-linked species are likely resistant to protease digestion,
as the native β/γ-crystallin family proteins have proven
to be (data not shown); the denaturants present in our digestion reactions
may be insufficient to produce a trypsin-digestible substrate. It
is also possible that large cross-linked peptides are resistant to
extraction from the gel. This would explain why we observe complete
peptide coverage but primarily for unmodified peptides. This could
also explain why mass spectrometric analysis of gel bands containing
dimeric photoproducts did not identify cross-linked peptides. Moran
et al. also did not recover cross-linked peptides under conditions
in which they obtained 94% sequence coverage. They did find semitryptic covalent fragments, with one terminus
clustered around tryptophans 42 and 130.

From the current study
of the aromatic pairs and the previously
investigated protective role of the conserved tryptophan pairs, we can envisage a photoaggregation mechanism
involving radical polymerization and noncovalent association of HγD-Crys,
as shown in Figure . Y16 can absorb a UV photon,
entering into an excited state. It can transfer its excited-state
energy nonradiatively to other aromatic residues, themselves excitable
by UVR. Homotransfer of excited-state energy between aromatic amino
acids is well-established,, and the high number
of aromatic residues in HγD-Crys means no aromatic residue is
more than ∼10 Å from another. These excited aromatic residues
can transfer their energy to the conserved tryptophan pairs, which
have been shown to transfer energy very efficiently from W42 to W68
and W130 to W156, respectively, dissipating it without undergoing
photochemistry.,, In this model, the tryptophan pairs act photoprotectively as a sink
for excitation energy.

Model for in vitro photoaggregation of HγD-Crys.

Y16 (or Y28), unlike the other
aromatic residues examined, is on
the surface of HγD-Crys and might transfer its excited state
to molecular oxygen, generating singlet oxygen. Singlet oxygen can
react at a number of sites on HγD-Crys. Y16 can also participate
in radical chemistry while excited,, creating a
tyrosyl radical and a free radical. C18’s thiol group, in contact
with Y16’s aromatic ring, could react with Y16*, generating
a thiol radical; if the exchange of the radical electron is reversible,
then this might stabilize these intermediate photoproducts, increasing
the likelihood of a damaging reaction or generation of ROS. Thiol
and tyrosyl radicals can also interact with molecular oxygen, generating
superoxide radical, which can, like singlet oxygen, target a number
of sites on HγD-Crys, causing cross-linking and photoaggregation.
The exposure-time-dependent build up of C18 oxidation products observed
via mass spectrometry indicates a competing side reaction where ROS
oxidize C18. The reduction in this side-reaction product, as observed
via MRM mass spectrometry when Y16 is mutated to alanine, is strong
evidence for photochemical interaction of C18 and Y16, and the significant
increase in C18 trioxidation in the NoTrp mutant suggests a link between
photodamage to C18 and the tryptophan photoprotective role.

Other photodamage sites besides the Y16/Y28 pair and C18 must exist,
as photoaggregation occurred in their absence, but these were either
too heterogeneous or too low in abundance to be detected.

The
formation and molecular basis of the initial photodimer of
HγD-Crys remains obscure. Because it presented as a distinct
band after boiling, reduction, and SDS-PAGE, we can be reasonably
sure that it is covalent and nondisulfide based. However, none of
the sites studied via mutagenesis in this work appeared to be involved
in the initial dimer’s formation. It is likely that the initial
dimer is an off-pathway photoproduct without relevance to light-scattering
photoaggregation. However, the first step in a polymerization scheme
is the linking of two individual monomers, and because initial dimer
formation occurs before light-scattering development, the dimer is
still plausibly the first intermediate on the path toward photoaggregation.
Alternatively, the fast-forming, gel-visible dimers could be protective
dead-ends in which ROS cause cross-linking that leads to less photoaggregation-prone
species.

The lens is a very different environment from the test-tube
conditions
here. Besides maintaining a protein concentration of 200–400
mg/mL, lens fiber cells have several
defense mechanisms against photo-oxidative damage: free UV filter
molecules consisting of kynurenine/tryptophan derivatives, the thioredoxin
system, and the thioltransferase system.− Additionally,
the lens, an avascular, bloodless tissue, maintains very low oxygen
levels. Despite this, the oxygen-dependent
photocross-linking observed in this study in vitro is likely still
very physiologically relevant to cataract. Protein damage leading
to aggregation and cataract develops over the course of a human lifetime;
on such a timeline, even relatively rare damage events such as those
dependent on oxygen can be significant to pathological outcomes. Additionally,
eye injury or surgery drastically raises the oxygen level of the lens,
likely making photo-oxidative damage a greater threat to lens proteins.

As our understanding of protein photodamage in the lens increases,
so too do our options for retarding cataract formation. Giblin, Andley,
and colleagues have shown that UVR-blocking contact lenses prevent
the UVR-induced opacification of lab-animal lenses.,, Carnosine, an inhibitor of ROS-generating
lipid peroxidation, shows promise as an anticataract drug.− HαB-Crys peptide fragments injected into animal cataract models
have been shown to suppress aggregation and protein oxidation. The identification of specific sites important
to HγD-Crys photoaggregation will continue to inform these efforts.

The extensive literature on UVR damage to DNA has focused on the
multiple enzymatic systems that cells have for repairing damaged DNA.
It may be that some proteins play a role in protecting DNA from photodamage.
The protein Absent in Melanoma (AIM1) appears to play some tumor-protective
role in skin cells. AIM1 has a sequence
and conformation related to the lens γ- and β-crystallins
and may be protecting skin cells by absorption and dispersion of UV
photons. Thus, the photobiology of the lens crystallins may provide
insights into other UVR-linked pathologies.

Supporting Information Available
Tandem mass spectrum of HγD-Crys
peptide 15-31 with trioxidation on C18; selected ion chromatograms
of HγD-Crys peptides 99-114 and 15-31 in trypsin digested UV-irradiated
samples; and turbidity curves of WT HγD-Crys removing the UVR
source at various times. This material is available free of charge
via the Internet at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bi401397g_si_001.pdf

This work was
supported by a grant from the National Eye Institute (EY015834).

The authors
declare no
competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
The Biophysical Instrumentation Facility for the Study
of
Complex Macromolecular Systems (NSF-007031) is gratefully acknowledged.

