Introduction
In establishing a quantitative
PCR assay for human thymidylate
synthase (TS), a partially overlapping gene at the
chromosome location 18p11.32, designated reverse thymidylate
synthase (rTS), was found to be transcribed
in the reverse direction with marginal overlap between the 3′-untranslated
region of rTS and the last intron of TS. Since then, two other isoforms have
been identified from alternatively spliced mRNA, yielding a total
of three isoforms: rTSα (Uniprot ID G2MQH2), rTSβ (G2MQH3),
and rTSγ (Q7L5Y1)., All three proteins share
the same 341 C-terminal amino acid sequence but differ in their N-terminal
sequences and lengths. rTSα appends an additional 20 residues
to the N-terminal of the shared sequence making it a 361 residue polypeptide.
rTSβ has a different N-terminal sequence of 75 residues making
it a 416 residue polypeptide, while rTSγ appends an additional
27 amino acids to the N-terminus of rTSβ to form a 443 residue
polypeptide ( Figure
S1). The rTS genes have been of clinical interest
in the cancer research community for over 20 years, yet their functions
remain largely unknown. The main interest lies in the correlation
of cell lines resistant to the common chemotherapeutics methotrexate
and 5-fluorouracil, with rTSβ overexpression.− Methotrexate is a competitive inhibitor of dihydrofolate reductase
(DHFR), and 5-fluorouracil is an irreversible inhibitor of TS. Both
DHFR and TS play central roles in the synthesis of dTMP, a precursor
for DNA synthesis. In clinical studies, rTSβ was found to be
expressed in breast cancer tissue but not the surrounding tissues. Furthermore, a statistically significant correlation
was found between the level of rTSβ expression and a decrease
in the five year survival rate of colon cancer patients. The 27 residue longer N-terminus of rTSγ,
compared to rTSβ, is proposed to constitute a mitochondrial
signaling sequence, suggesting that rTSβ
and rTSγ serve similar enzymatic functions. The function of
rTSα, the shortest of the three proteins, remains to be postulated.

Based on sequence homology and inspection of key catalytic residues,
the three rTS isozymes are members of the mandelate racemase (MR)
subgroup of the enolase superfamily (ENS) that is known to catalyze
the racemization of mandelate as well as dehydration of various acid
sugars. All ENS members catalyze the
abstraction of a proton alpha to a carboxylate group of the substrate
to form a Mg2+ stabilized enediolate anion, although the
overall reaction is not conserved. Furthermore,
members of the ENS share common structural motifs that form the catalytic
machinery, including a capping domain for substrate specificity and
a (β/α)7β-barrel domain for acid/base
chemistry.,

In order to provide functional
insights into the medically relevant
rTSβ and facilitate future studies, we isolated recombinant
human rTSβ and rTSγ isoforms, identified rTSγ as
an l-fuconate dehydratase using a medium throughput enzymatic
screen, and determined the crystal structure of rTSγ at 1.74
Å resolution.

Materials and Methods
Cloning, Expression, and
Purification of Human rTSγ (HsrTSγ)
A DNA fragment
containing residues 1–440 of HsrTSγ
(IMAGE clone: 3454185) was subcloned into the pNIC28-Bsa4
vector (GenBank accession EF198106) incorporating an N-terminal
TEV-cleavable His6-tag. The plasmid was transformed into E. coli BL21(DE3)-R3-pRARE2 cells, grown overnight
at 18 °C in 12 L of TB medium after induction by 0.1 mM IPTG.
Cells were harvested, lysed in buffer A (50 mM HEPES, pH 7.4, containing
500 mM NaCl, 5% glycerol, 10 mM imidazole, 0.5 mM TCEP, and an EDTA-free
protease inhibitor), and centrifuged to remove insoluble debris.

The initial stage of purification involved passing the clarified
cell extract through a 2.5 mL column of Ni-NTA resin pre-equilibrated
with buffer A. Bound protein was eluted with buffer B (buffer A +
250 mM imidazole). The fractions containing HsrTSγ
were applied onto a HiLoad 16/60 Superdex 200 column pre-equilibrated
with GF buffer (10 mM HEPES, pH 7.4, containing 500 mM NaCl, 5% glycerol,
and 0.5 mM TCEP). Fractions containing HsrTSγ
were treated with TEV protease overnight at 4 °C, and passed
over Ni-Sepharose resin pre-equilibrated with GF buffer. The tagless
protein was then diluted to 50 mM NaCl, and applied to a 1 mL Resource-S
column pre-equilibrated with IEX buffer (50 mM Tris–HCl pH
8.5, containing 50 mM NaCl). Protein was eluted with a linear gradient
of 0–500 mM NaCl and concentrated to 35 mg/mL for storage at
−80 °C. Further purification details can be found at http://www.thesgc.org/structures/4a35.

Crystallization, Data Collection,
and Structure Determination
Crystals of HsrTSγ were grown by vapor diffusion
at 20 °C. A sitting drop containing 100 nL protein (35 mg/mL)
and 50 nL well solution was equilibrated against well solution containing
25% (v/v) PEG3350 and 0.1 M Bis-Tris, pH 5.5. Crystals were mounted
in the presence of 25% (v/v) ethylene glycol and flash-cooled in liquid
nitrogen. Diffraction data for the native HsrTSγ
crystal were collected at the Diamond Light Source beamline I03 and
processed with the XDS and SCALA. HsrTSγ crystallized
in the hexagonal space group P6522 with
one polypeptide in the asymmetric unit. The structure was solved by
single-wavelength anomalous dispersion (SAD) phasing.

Crystals
were derivatized by incubation with reservoir solution supplemented
with 1 mM thiomersal for 60 min. Diffraction data were collected at
the Diamond Light Source beamline I03, and processed and scaled with
XDS and Scala, respectively. SHELXD identified two
heavy atom sites, and after phase refinement in SHARP and subsequent density modification with SOLOMON, () an electron density map of excellent quality
was obtained and substantial parts of the model were automatically
built with ARP/wARP. The resulting model
was refined against the native data, where manual model rebuilding
was carried out with Coot, and structure
refinement with BUSTER (Global Phasing Ltd., Cambridge, UK).

Cloning,
Expression, and Purification of Human rTSβ (HsrTSβ)
The gene encoding HsrTSβ was PCR amplified
from the HsrTSγ:pNIC28-Bsa4 plasmid using platinum Pfx polymerase (Invitrogen). The PCR reaction (30 μL)
contained 50 ng template, 1 mM MgCl2, 1X Pfx Amp Buffer,
0.33 mM dNTP, 0.33 μM of each primer (forward primer 5′-TGGGTACCGAGAACCTGTACTTCCAACATATGCACACGGACCC-3′
and reverse primer 5′-CAGTGGTGGTGGTCGTGGTGCTCGAGT3′),
and 1.25 units Pfx polymerase (Invitrogen Platinum Pfx DNA Polymerase
kit). Amplifications were performed according to the manufacturer’s
guidelines. The amplification product was digested by NdeI and EcoRI (New England Biolabs) and ligated into NdeI/EcoRI digested pET17b (Novagen). The rTSβ gene in
pET17b was expressed in Escherichia coli BL21 (DE3). Small-scale cultures were grown at 37 °C for 18
h in 5 mL of LB containing 100 μg/mL ampicillin and used to
inoculate 1 L LB containing 100 μg/mL ampicillin. The 1 L cultures
were grown for an additional 18 h at 37 °C without induction.
The cells were harvested by centrifugation at 5000 rpm for 10 min
and resuspended in 70 mL of binding buffer (6 mM imidazole, 20 mM
Tris–HCl, 5 mM MgCl2, and 500 mM NaCl, pH 7.9).
The resuspended cells were lysed by sonication and centrifuged at
17,000 rpm for 30 min. The supernatant was loaded onto a 300 mL DEAE-Sepharose
column (Amersham Biosciences) and eluted with a NaCl gradient (0 -
1 M over 1.6 L) in 10 mM Tris–HCl, pH 7.9, containing 5 mM
MgCl2. Fractions were analyzed using SDS-PAGE. Fractions
that contained rTSβ were combined and dialyzed for 2 h at 4
°C against 4 L of 10 mM Tris–HCl, pH 7.9, containing 5
mM MgCl2. The dialyzed protein was then loaded onto a 30
mL Q-Sepharose column (Amersham Biosciences) and eluted with a NaCl
gradient (0–1 M over 500 mL) in 10 mM Tris–HCl, pH 7.9,
containing 5 mM MgCl2. Fractions were analyzed using SDS-PAGE.
Fractions that contained HsrTSβ at high purity
were combined and dialyzed for 2 h at 4 °C against 4 L of 10
mM Tris–HCl, pH 7.9, containing 5 mM MgCl2. Ammonium
sulfate was added to a final concentration of 1 M, and the protein
was loaded onto a 30 mL phenylsepharose column (Amersham Biosciences).
The protein was eluted with a gradient of ammonium sulfate (1–0
M over 500 mL) in 10 mM Tris–HCl, pH 7.9, containing 5 mM MgCl2. Fractions were analyzed using SDS-PAGE. Fractions with pure HsrTSβ were combined and dialyzed for 2 h at 4 °C
against 4 L of 10 mM Tris–HCl pH 7.9, containing 5 mM MgCl2, 100 mM NaCl, and 10% glycerol. Finally, the protein was
concentrated to 7.6 mg/mL, flash frozen using liquid N2, and stored at −80 °C prior to use.

Screen for
Dehydration
Reactions to test for dehydration
activity for HsrTSβ and HsrTSγ were performed in acrylic, UV transparent 96-well plates
(Corning Incorporated) using a library of 72 acid sugars ( Figure S2). Reactions
(60 μL total volume) contained 50 mM HEPES, pH 7.9, 10 mM MgCl2, 1 μM enzyme, and 1 mM acid sugar substrate (blanks
with no enzyme). The plates were incubated at 30 °C for 16 h.
After incubation, 240 μL of a semicarbazide solution (1% semicarbazide
w/v, 1% sodium acetate w/v) was added to each well and the plate was
incubated for 1 h at room temperature. The absorbance at 250 nm was
measured (semicarbazone ε = 10,200 M–1 cm–1) using an Infinite M200 PRO microplate reader (Tecan
Group Ltd.).

Kinetic Assays of HsrTSγ
Kinetic
constants for
the dehydration of L-galactonate, D-arabinonate, L-arabarate, and
D-ribonate were measured using a discontinuous assay containing the
semicarbazide assay., Kinetic constants for the dehydration
of l-fuconate were determined using a coupled enzyme assay
as described by Yew and co-workers.

Differential Scanning Fluorimetry
HsrTSβ
and HsrTSγ were assayed for shifts
in melting temperature as previously described. Each protein (5 μg) was assayed as purified and,
also, in the presence of 5 mM MgCl2 or 5 mM MgCl2 and 5 mM d-erythronohydroxamate.

Methotrexate and 5-Fluorouracil
Assays
Methotrexate
(Sigma-Aldrich) or 5-fluorouracil (Sigma-Aldrich) (10 mM) was incubated
(800 μL) with 50 mM deuterated Tris–DCl, pD 7.9, 5 mM
MgCl2 and 1 μM purified protein (rTSβ or rTSγ)
in D2O for 48 h at 37 °C. Immediately following incubation,
samples were analyzed for deuterium incorporation into methotrexate
or 5-fluorouracil via 1H NMR. In the case of a reaction
that occurs without deuterium incorporation (with methotrexate), the
optical activity at 589 nm was measured for an 800 μL reaction
containing 10 mM methotrexate, 50 mM HEPES, pH 7.9, 10 mM MgCl2, and 1 μM rTSβ in H2O. Measurements
were made at room temperature using a Jasco P-1010 polarimeter (Jasco
Inc.) configured with a halogen lamp and 589 nm sodium d-line filter.

Results and Discussion
Characterization of rTSγ
A
sequence similarity
network of all proposed acid sugar dehydratases within the ENS is
shown in  Figure
S3. Clusters in the network were assigned specific acid sugar dehydratase
functions based on homology to known acid sugar dehydratases, including
conservation of metal binding and catalytic residues. HsrTSγ, together with the canonical FucD from Xanthomonas
campestris (XcFucD), is found within the
fuconate dehydratase (FucD) cluster at an e-value threshold of 10–80 (∼40% identity) ( Figure S3). HsrTSγ and XcFucD separate as the e-value threshold is decreased to
10–180 (∼70% identity) (Figure ). The sequences of HsrTSγ and XcFucD are 52% identical and 71%
similar. In the mannonate dehydratase subgroup of the ENS, proteins
that are 67% identical and 79% can catalyze different enzymatic reactions. Therefore, experimental characterization is
necessary to assign an enzymatic function to HsrTSγ.

Panel
A, sequence similarity network for the l-fuconate
dehydratase subgroup at an e-value threshold of 10–80 (∼40% identity). Panel B, network at an e-value threshold
of 10–160 (∼65% identity). Panel C, network
at an e-value threshold of 10–180 (∼70% identity).
The nodes for XcFucD (PDB 2HXT) and rTSγ are
colored red and blue, respectively.

HsrTSγ was screened for dehydration
activity
with a library of 72 acid sugars. Positive screening hits were verified
via 1H NMR, and steady-state kinetic constants were obtained
for the confirmed substrates. The following sugars were positive hits
in the screen: l-fuconate, L-galactonate, D-arabinonate,
L-arabarate, and D-ribonate (Figure ). All
sugars with the exception of L-arabarate were similarly identified
as substrates for XcFucD substrates.l-fuconate shows the greatest catalytic efficiency
(kcat/KM =
2.5 × 103 M–1 s–1), which is an order of magnitude greater than that for the second
best substrate, L-galactonate (kcat/KM = 1.0 × 102 M–1 s–1) (Table ). Together
with conservation of active site catalytic and metal binding residues,
the kinetic data establish rTSγ as an l-fuconate dehydratase.
In humans, as well as bacteria, l-fuconate dehydratase is
important for the metabolism of L-fucose, which is found on the cellular
surface of mammalian, insect, and plant cells.,,

Structures of the top dehydration screening
hits for rTSγ.
The first order rate constants for dehydration are shown below the
corresponding acid sugar. Carbons with conserved stereochemistry to l-fuconate have their hydroxyl groups highlighted in red.

Steady-State Kinetic
Parameters for
rTSγ
substrate	kcat (s–1)	KM (mM)	kcat/KM (M–1 s–1)	
l-fuconate	0.5 ± 0.006	0.2 ± 0.01	2.5 × 103	
l-galactonate	0.3 ± 0.01	3.0 ± 0.2	1.0 × 102	
l-arabinarate	0.3 ± 0.004	4.0 ± 0.5	7.5 × 101	
d-arabinonate	0.04 ± 0.002	2.0 ± 0.1	2.0 × 101	
d-ribonate	0.002 ± 0.001	0.4 ± 0.2	5.0	
The kcat/KM value for l-fuconate in HsrTSγ is
10-fold lower than for XcFucD (4.5 × 104 M–1 s–1). This difference in catalytic efficiency may
not be surprising given the moderate percent identity shared between
the two enzymes. Additionally, the 10-fold reduction could also be
explained by post-translational modifications in native HsrTSγ that may not be present in the recombinant protein expressed
in bacteria.

Crystal Structure of HsrTSγ
The crystal structure
of HsrTSγ with Mg2+ was solved by
Hg-SAD phasing to a resolution of 1.74 Å (Table , PDB 4A35). The structure confirms its membership within
the MR subgroup of the ENS, with XcFucD being the
closest structural relative, as identified by the DALI server (root-mean-square deviation of 1.03 Å for
430 Cα atoms, Z-score 62.0, PDB 2HXT) (Figure a). As a member of the MR subgroup, HsrTSγ contains the following canonical signature sequences in
the core (β/α)7β-barrel domain that are
essential for catalysis ( Figure S1): (1) a KxK motif (Lys 220-Val 221-Lys 222; HsrTSγ residue numbering hereafter) at the end of the second
β-strand of the barrel domain for base-catalyzed proton abstraction,
(2) acidic residues Asp 250, Glu 276, and Glu 305 at the ends of the
third, fourth, and fifth β-strands of the barrel domain, respectively,
which provide the ligands for the essential Mg2+ (Figure b), and (3) a His-Asp dyad (His 355-Asp 328) at
the ends of the seventh and sixth β-strands of the barrel domain,
respectively, which is the general acid catalyst for dehydration of
the enediolate intermediate. The RMSD
of these conserved residues between the HsrTSγ
and XcFucD structures is 0.31 Å, supporting
their catalytic roles in HsrTSγ. Based on the
characterization of XcFucD, HsrTSγ
is assumed to utilize Lys 222 as the general basic catalyst for proton
abstraction and His 355 as the general acid catalyst for dehydration
(Figure b).

Panel A, an overlay of the structure of
rTSγ (PDB 4A35, tan)
and XcFucD bound to the substrate analog L-erythronohydroxamate
(PDB 2HXT, blue). The Cα RMSD is 1.03 Å. Panel B shows
an overlay of the active site residues of the structures. The Cα
RMSD for these metal binding and catalytic residues is 0.31 Å.
Residue number is from the structure of rTSγ.

Data Collection and Refinement Statistics
for rTSγ
Data collection	 	
space group	P6522	
no. of molecules	1	
in asym. unit	 	
cell dimensions	 	
a (Å)	84.77	
 b (Å)	84.77	
 c (Å)	316.30	
 β°	γ=120	
resolution (Å)	1.74	
no. of unique reflections	69165	
Rmerge	0.04 (0.79)	
completeness (%)	99.0 (93.9)	
refinement	 	
resolution (Å)	20.00–1.74 (1.78–1.74)	
Rcryst	0.152 (0.240)	
Rfree	0.176
(0.288)	
no. atoms	 	
 protein	3468	
 waters	594	
bound ligands	MG, EDO	
ligand atoms	30	
r.m.s deviations	 	
 bond lengths (Å)	0.015	
 bond angles (°)	1.11	
PDB accession code	4A35	
Bracketed values represent highest
resolution shell.

Liang
and co-workers previously postulated that HsrTSγ
was simply an isoform of HsrTSβ
appended with a mitochondrial signaling sequence at its N-terminus. Structural analysis of HsrTSγ
reveals that the extra 27 residues in the γ isoform comprise
the first β-strand within the capping domain, a short α
helix, and a large portion of the “20s” loop. This β-strand
is part of a three-stranded β-sheet in the capping domain and
packs closely against the C-terminus, while the “20s”
loop, a conserved structural feature in MR subgroup members, is known
to confer substrate specificity while occluding solvent from the active
site−(Figure ). Considering the structural integrity
of this region and its close proximity to the active site, we propose
that the extra 27 residues are not involved in mitochondrial targeting,
but instead are necessary for the enzyme architecture and also possibly
confer l-fuconate dehydratase activity to HsrTSγ. This is supported by the lack of definitive mitochondrial
targeting signals identified from various bioinformatics servers (data
not shown).

The structure of rTSγ (PDB 4A35) from side and top views.
Each structure has the first 27 amino acids, which would be missing
in rTSβ, highlighted in red. The metal binding residues are
highlighted in green and catalytic residues in cyan.

Pursuit of rTSβ Function
The
importance of the
N-terminal 27 residues for HsrTSγ reactivity
and integrity implies that HsrTSβ, lacking
this region, may have a deformed active site (e.g., highly solvent
exposed,  Figure
S4) and be devoid of l-fuconate dehydratase activity. Accordingly,
we pursued enzymatic characterization of recombinantly produced HsrTSβ. Our initial attempt to subclone the gene encoding HsrTSβ, as described for HsrTSγ
(i.e., N-terminal His-tagged fusion protein), resulted in insoluble
protein. This suggests the importance of the N-terminal 27 residues
for protein stability, in addition to its role in enzyme activity,
and is also consistent with our observations that truncation constructs
of HsrTSγ lacking the N-terminal 5, 8, or 12
residues rendered the γ isoform to be highly insoluble in E. coli ( Figure S5). We managed to subclone HsrTSβ
as a tag-less construct which resulted in a low level of expression
in E. coli. The purified protein was screened for
dehydration activity on the library of 72 acid sugars as described
above. Based on the expectation that the complete 20s loop is necessary
for catalysis, no dehydration activity was detected for HsrTSβ. We also characterized HsrTSβ and HsrTSγ by differential scanning fluorimetry ( Table S1) and showed that HsrTSβ is more thermolabile than HsrTSγ (ΔTm = 5 °C) and,
unlike HsrTSγ, is not thermally stabilized
by the addition of d-erythronohydroxamate, an enediolate
intermediate analog, thereby suggesting that HsrTSβ
does not bind the ligand. Taken together, our data substantiate the
hypothesis that the N-terminal 27 amino acid residues in rTSγ
are necessary for catalytic activity and confer stability to the protein.

Several studies have observed uncharacteristically high levels
of HsrTSβ expression in tumor cell lines that
also exhibit resistance to either methotrexate or 5-fluorouracil.− This correlation suggests the possibility that HsrTSβ, which does not exhibit the l-fuconate dehydratase
activity of HsrTSγ, could instead harbor an
alternative metabolic activity on these small molecules in a manner
that inactivates them. The observation that HsrTSβ
expression was found to be induced by TS inhibitors indicates the
protein may indeed be acting on these drug molecules.,, To explore this possibility,
methotrexate and 5-fluorouracil were analyzed for their ability to
act as substrates for HsrTSγ. Methotrexate
has a proton alpha to the carboxylate group of its glutamate side
chain, which could be racemized by an ENS member. Because methotrexate
has more than twice the molecular weight of l-fuconate, a
truncation of the “20s” loop, such as that seen in the
β isoform, could expose a larger binding surface to accommodate
methotrexate in the active site. Reactions were performed in D2O to determine if exchange of the alpha proton (racemization)
were occurring. Also, 5-fluorouracil was tested for defluorination.
No incorporation of deuterium was observed via 1H NMR in
the presence of either HsrTSγ or HsrTSβ. Furthermore, to test a racemization mechanism in which
deuterium exchange does not occur, methotrexate was incubated with HsrTSβ or HsrTSγ in a polarimeter,
but no change in optical rotation was observed. These negative results,
in conjunction with the lack of identification of an acid sugar substrate,
allow us to conclude that rTSβ is not involved in chemical modification
of methotrexate or 5-fluorouracil.

Dolnick proposed that HsrTSβ could function
by transferring a carboxylate group from S-adenosylmethionine to a
lipophilic acceptor.− We find this unlikely, considering that MR subgroup
members catalyze the abstraction of a proton alpha to a carboxylate
group, which is not a partial reaction known to result in decarboxylation.
Based on the in vitro function of HsrTSγ and
sequence homology to members of the MR subgroup, HsrTSβ likely lacks an enzymatic activity. This, however, does
not prohibit HsrTSβ from participating in protein–protein
interactions that may produce the observed resistance phenotype. In
fact, TS can physically associate with proteins of the same molecular
weight as rTSα and rTSβ, and conversely, rTSα and
rTSβ could form a dimer (as observed in the X-ray structure
for rTSγ) and coimmunoprecipitate with TS. Furthermore, preliminary data suggesting that rTS proteins interact with dihydrofolate reductase (DHFR) could explain
the correlation between rTSβ overexpression and methotrexate
resistance. The characterization of HsrTSγ as an l-fuconate dehydratase, coupled
with the inability of HsrTSβ to catalyze this
reaction, points to a mechanism of resistance that does not involve
catalysis, but rather interactions with one of the above proposed
partners. Future in vitro studies are needed to confirm the rTS/TS
or rTS/DHFR protein–protein interactions and characterize their
effect on TS or DHFR function.

Conclusion
Human
rTSγ has been characterized in vitro as an l-fuconate
dehydratase that belongs to the mandelate racemase subgroup
of the enolase superfamily. The additional N-terminal amino acids
in rTSγ compared to rTSβ are important for catalysis and
stability, refuting previous proposals that rTSγ is merely a
variant of rTSβ with an N-terminal mitochondrial signaling domain.
rTSβ has been implicated in the resistance of tumor cell lines
to methotrexate and 5-fluorouracil. Unfortunately, rTSβ does
not catalyze any chemical modification of these chemotherapeutics.
Therefore, we believe attempts to sensitize resistant cells lines
via inhibitors to rTSβ will not be successful. Based on the
crystal structure of rTSγ and the enzymatic screening performed
in this study, we do not believe rTSβ is catalytically active.
Therefore, hypotheses that involve protein–protein interactions
are more likely the source of the observed phenotypes and should be
investigated further.

Supporting Information Available
The sequence alignments, acid
sugar library, acid sugar dehydratase SSN, HsrTSγ
constructs, and surface representations of HsrTSγ
can be found in the Supporting Information. This material is available
free of charge via the Internet at http://pubs.acs.org

Supplementary Material
bi500349e_si_001.pdf

Accession Codes
The X-ray coordinates
and structure factors for HsrTSγ have been
deposited in the Protein Data Bank (PDB 4A35). This manuscript describes characterization
of in vitro enzymatic activities of proteins with the following UniProt
accession IDs: G2MQH2, G2MQH3, and Q7L5Y1.

Author Contributions
J.A.G. and
W.W.Y. conceived of the study. D.J.W., W.W.Y., and J.A.G. designed
the experiments. D.J.W., D.S.F., J.K., and J.R.C.M. performed the
experiments. D.J.W., W.W.Y., and J.A.G. analyzed the data and wrote
the manuscript. All authors have given approval to the final version
of the manuscript.

This research
was supported by a cooperative agreement from the U. S. National Institutes
of Health (U54GM093342). The Structural Genomics Consortium is a registered
charity (number 1097737) that receives funds from AbbVie, Boehringer
Ingelheim, the Canada Foundation for Innovation, the Canadian Institutes
for Health Research, Genome Canada, GlaxoSmithKline, Janssen, Lilly
Canada, the Novartis Research Foundation, the Ontario Ministry of
Economic Development and Innovation, Pfizer, Takeda, and the Wellcome
Trust [092809/Z/10/Z].

The authors declare no
competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
We thank Dr. Katie Whalen
for assistance in preparing the
manuscript. We also thank Drs. Tobias Krojer, Melanie Vollmar, and
Peter Canning for assistance in synchrotron data collection and initial
data processing.

Abbreviations
ENSenolase superfamily

FucDfuconate dehydratase

EDO1,2-ethanediol

MRmandelate racemase

RMSDroot-mean-square
deviation

rTSreverse
thymidylate synthase

TSthymidylate synthase

