Methods for
studying protein
dynamics still lag behind those for determining structure, although
alternative methods, like site-directed fluorescence labeling (SDFL),
are showing increasing promise and are being increasingly used.− Our lab and others have been developing SDFL methods that exploit
the small size and excellent spectral properties of the fluorophore
bimane, with the goal of improving the resolution and ability of SDFL
methods to study protein structure and dynamics. One especially powerful
method we have developed, called tryptophan-induced quenching (TrIQ),
can map interactions within and between proteins as well as assess
protein movements in real time, by monitoring changes in the distance-dependent
quenching of certain fluorophores caused by a nearby Trp residue.− TrIQ has some unique advantages that make it complementary to FRET;
it operates only over relatively short distances (&lt;15 Å) and
does not require labeling a sample with two different fluorescent
probes. TrIQ also does not require quantitative label incorporation,
because the quencher (Trp) is always encoded in the protein (see Figure ). Perhaps the most powerful aspect of TrIQ lies
in its ability to identify and quantify “static quenching”,−, a situation in which the fluorophore/Trp
pairs are so close they are already touching when the photon is absorbed
(see Figure ). Such data provide a near-instant
snapshot of a given protein conformation.

Model showing the fluorophores,
quenching residues, and sites of
attachment on T4 lysozyme used in this study. (A) Structures and abbreviations
for the quenching and nonquenching residues (Trp, Tyr, and Phe) and
fluorophores (bimane and BODIPY 507/545). The spectral qualities of
the fluorophores are listed below the name. (B) Model of T4 lysozyme
(top) highlighting the location of the Cα atoms of the cysteines
used for fluorophore incorporation using SDFL at sites 123, 128, 132,
and 135 (yellow spheres). The location of the fifth cysteine site,
at position 68, is shown below. The pink spheres indicate the Cα
atoms of sites N116X (top) and F4X (bottom), where X is phenylalanine
(F), tryptophan (W), or tyrosine (Y). The different Cα–Cα
distances between the probe and quencher site are also indicated.
The models were generated using coordinates from PDB entry 1L63 and the UCSF Chimera
package.

Models illustrating the three different quencher–fluorophore
conformations that can be quantified using fluorescence measurements
and how their fluorescence emission intensity and lifetime decay differ
(top row). As shown, at the moment of light excitation, the quencher
and fluorophore can either be far apart from each other and unable
to quench (top left), close enough for the quencher to dynamically
quench the fluorophore after excitation (top middle), or so close
that the pair touch before light excitation, resulting in a nonfluorescent
complex (top right). The effects of these different conformations
on the fluorescence emission and decay are shown in the second and
third rows, respectively. Note that both dynamic and static quenching
results in a decrease in fluorescence intensity, yet their fluorescence
decay results are drastically different. Dynamic quenching results
in a faster decay in fluorescence (shorter lifetime), while fluorophores
that are statically quenched have no lifetime and do not contribute
to this analysis. The relative contribution of each quenching state
can be elucidated from the fluorescence intensity (FO/F) and lifetime quenching ratios (⟨τO⟩/⟨τ⟩) using the equations in the
final row, as described in .

Here we set out to expand this
SDFL approach by testing if the
amino acid tyrosine (Tyr) can also be used as a quenching residue
and, if so, determining how the use of Tyr as a quencher could enhance
protein studies. To do this, we calibrated the distance-dependent
ability of Tyr to quench the fluorophores bimane and BODIPY 507/545
while attached to T4 lysozyme (T4L). This work was spurred by previous
observations by Kosower (and subsequently our lab) that free tyrosine
methyl ester can quench bimane fluorescence in solution,, as well as our growing realization
that the increasing use of bimane derivatives in SDFL studies−,− requires that the effect of Tyr
on bimane be fully defined to allow proper interpretation of SDFL
data.

As discussed below, our results show Tyr-induced quenching
(TyrIQ)
is intriguingly similar to as well as clearly different from Trp-induced
quenching (TrIQ). We also show how these differences could be exploited
to study the magnitude and energetics underlying a “hinge bending”
movement in T4L that occurs upon substrate binding., Together, our data highlight unique aspects of using Tyr as a quencher
and demonstrate how a combined use of TrIQ and TyrIQ in parallel significantly
enhances the resolution and ability of these SDFL methods to study
protein dynamics and energetics.

Materials and Methods
Materials
Chemicals and buffer components were purchased
from Fischer, except monobromobimane, which was purchased from Molecular
Probes.

Buffers
Buffer A consisted of 50 mM MOPS, 50 mM Tris,
and 1 mM EDTA (pH 7.6). Cell-pellet wash buffer consisted of 50 mM
Tris-PO4 (pH 7.2) and 50 mM sodium acetate. Lysis buffer
consisted of 50 mM Tris-PO4 (pH 7.2), 50 mM sodium acetate,
5 mM β-mercaptoethanol, 0.1 mM PMSF, and a 1× Complete
Protease Inhibitor tablet. Binding/wash buffer consisted of 100 mM
sodium phosphate (pH 7.2). Elution buffer consisted of 100 mM sodium
phosphate and 100 mM sodium fluoride (pH 7.2). Regeneration buffer
consisted of 100 mM phosphoric acid. Storage buffer consisted of 100
mM sodium phosphate (pH 7.2) and 0.02% sodium azide.

Construction,
Expression, and Purification of T4 Lysozyme Mutants
T4 lysozyme
was cloned into the pG58 vector, and
overlap-extension polymerase chain reaction was used
to introduce point mutations into the protein. All mutant sequences
were confirmed by DNA sequencing. Hereafter, mutants are named as
follows: the native amino acid residue, the residue number, and the
new residue. For example, a mutant called N116F has a phenylalanine
residue replacing the asparagine residue at position 116.

Mutant
T4 lysozyme was expressed in BL21(DE3) cells, using fresh transformants.
BL21(DE3) cultures were grown to an OD595 of 0.9 at 18
°C while being shaken. Expression was induced by IPTG at a final
concentration of 1 mM, and the culture was incubated at 37 °C
for 2 h while being shaken, harvested by centrifugation, washed with
cell-pellet wash buffer, and repelleted to remove as much chloride
from the cell pellet as possible. Pellets were then stored at −20
°C for up to 2 weeks, until they were used.

Purification
and Fluorescent Labeling of Proteins
Typically,
the cell pellets for six different mutants were prepared simultaneously.
Cell pellets were resuspended in lysis buffer and lysed using a Fisher
French pressure cell. For the T4L T26E active site mutants, wild-type
T4L lacking the Profinity tag (from Sigma-Aldrich) was added to the
bacterial homogenate to help hydrolyze the peptidoglycan, because
the active site mutant T4L covalently binds their substrate and does
not turn over. Major cell debris was removed by centrifugation at
14K rpm for 45 min in a Beckman JA20 rotor. The supernatant was decanted
and passed through a 0.8 μm filter to remove insoluble lysate
and then loaded on an equilibrated Profinity eXact resin (which will
bind only the tagged lysozyme mutants) and washed with at least 15
column volumes of binding/wash buffer, in a gravity flow apparatus.

Fluorescent labeling of the T4L samples was conducted while the
proteins were bound to the purification column. First, the resin-bound
T4L was incubated with an estimated 5-fold molar excess of monobromobimane
label in binding/wash buffer or a 5-fold excess of BODIPY 507/545
iodoacetamide in binding/wash buffer containing 10% dimethyl sulfoxide
(DMSO) for 2 h at room temperature with nutation. Subsequently, the
labeling buffer was drained and the column washed with 15 column volumes
of binding/wash buffer for bimane-labeled samples; when labeling was
conducted with BODIPY 507/545, the first 5 column volumes of wash
also contained 10% DMSO to remove unreacted label. Fluorescently labeled
T4L was eluted by incubating the column in elution buffer overnight
at room temperature with nutation. The eluate was concentrated and
buffer exchanged with buffer A with an Amicon Ultra centrifugal filter
(0.5 mL, 10 kDa), for a final exchange dilution of &gt;1/3000, which
also removed free fluorescent label (to &lt;1%) and allowed for buffer
exchange from elution buffer to buffer A.

Hydrolysis of Peptidoglycan
Bound to the Active Site of the
T4L T26E Mutants
The peptidoglycan bound to the active site
of the T4L T26E mutants was acid-hydrolyzed essentially as described
by Kuroki et al. when they first described this mutation. Samples were buffer exchanged with an Amicon
Ultra centrifugal filter (0.5 mL, 10 kDa) to a buffer containing 50
mM NaH2PO4 and 50 mM sodium acetate (pH 3) and
incubated for 1 h at 37 °C. The samples were then returned to
buffer A, also using Amicon Ultra centrifugal filters.

Fluorescence
Intensity Measurements
To allow direct
comparison of the data, sample concentrations were adjusted by dilution
so they had matching fluorophore maximal absorbances for bimane (typically
Abs = 0.05, and absorbance maxima ranged from 386 to 397 nm depending
on bimane location) and for BODIPY 507/545 at 507 nm. Fluorescence
intensity measurements were taken using a PTI Quanta Master fluorometer
(PTI). Bimane excitation was at 380 nm (1 nm slits), while emission
was scanned from 400 to 650 nm (8 nm slits using a 0.2 s integration
time per 1 nm step size). The total bimane fluorescence was obtained
by integrating the fluorescence from 400 to 650 nm for each bimane-labeled
sample. BODIPY 507/545 excitation was at 480 nm (1 nm slits), while
emission was scanned from 500 to 700 nm (3 nm slits using a 0.2 s
integration time per 1 nm step size). The total BODIPY 507/545 fluorescence
was obtained by integrating the fluorescence from 500 to 700 nm for
each BODIPY 507/545-labeled sample.

Quantum Yield Measurements
The quantum yield of bimane
was calculated by comparing its absorbance and fluorescence intensity
at 360 nm to those of quinine sulfate, a common fluorescent standard
that has a quantum yield of 0.54 in 1 N H2SO4, using the following equation.

Quantum yields were calculated for
T4L N116F/N132B, N116F/N132B, N116Y/N132B, and N116W/N132B to test
the merits of using Phe as the nonquenching control residue instead
of the native residue, as previously used.

Fluorescence Lifetime Measurements
Fluorescence lifetime
measurements were taken using a PicoQuant FluoTime 200 time-correlated
single-photon counting instrument (PicoQuant, Berlin, Germany), outfitted
with a Hamamatsu microchannel plate detector, using polarizers at
magic angle and 8 nm emission slits. Excitation was achieved using
a pulsed diode laser of 405 nm, which yielded an instrument response
function (IRF) of 64–128 ps [full width at half-maximum (fwhm)]
measured using a Ludox solution. Emission from the samples was collected
using a stack of two 470 nm long-pass filters on the detector side
of the sample holder using the same slits and the same polarization.
The fluorescence decay curves were fit with PicoQuant software using
an exponential decay model [I(t)
= ∑i–1nAie–t/τi, where Ai is the amplitude of the ith component in
counts, in the first range fitting channel and τi is the lifetime of the ith component].
The quality of each fit was assessed by considering the χ2 value, the residuals, and the autocorrelation function. In
some cases, fits with higher χ2 values were chosen
because the residuals and autocorrelation functions were more randomly
distributed and had lower values. The amplitude weighted average lifetime
(⟨τ⟩) resulting from the best fit were used in
calculations as discussed below.

The lifetime decay data were
also fit with a Lorentzian distribution model {I(t) = ∫–∞t IRF(t′) ∫–∞∞ ρ(τ)e–t–t′/τ dτ
dt′ ρ(τ) = ∑i=1n (Ai/π)[Δ(fwhm i/2)/(τ – τi)2 + Δ(fwhm i/2)2], where Ai is
the amplitude of the ith distribution component,
in counts, in the first range fitting model, τi is the center lifetime of the ith distributed
component, and Δfwhm i is the
distribution width (full width at half-maximum) of the ith distributed component}. The results and discussion for the distribution
fitting can be found in the .

Calculation of the Fraction of the Fluorophore in a Static Complex
with a Quencher
The fluorescence contribution of each quencher–fluorophore
pair was calculated as described previously.− Briefly, using
this analysis, the relative fraction of quencher and fluorophore in
an open, nonstatic conformation, called gamma (γ), is calculated
with the equation γ = F/FO × τO/τ, where F is the fluorescence intensity and τ is the lifetime (the subscript
O refers to the Phe-containing unquenched measurement). It is also
possible to further separate γ into the contribution by dynamic
quenching [γDQ = (1 – τ/τO)γ] and the contribution from unquenched fluorescence
(γO = τ/τO × γ).
The relative fraction of quencher–fluorophore pairs in a static
(nonfluorescent) complex at the moments of light excitation is then
simply determined as 1 – γ.

Analysis of the pH Dependence
of the TrIQ and TyrIQ Effects
The purified and labeled T4L
mutants N116F/N132B, N116Y/N132B,
and N116W/N132B were buffer exchanged into a 50 mM NaPO4, 50 mM sodium acetate buffer at pH 3, 7.5, and 10. The fluorescence
intensity and lifetime decay were measured as described above for
each of the mutants at each of the three pH conditions at 20 °C.
The fraction of the fluorophore in a static complex with the quencher
was calculated for each pH condition as described above.

Arrhenius
Analysis of Hinge Bending and Temperature Dependence
of the TrIQ and TyrIQ Effects
The fluorescence intensity
and lifetime decay were measured as described above but with the F4/K60B,
F4Y/K60B, and F4W/K60B mutants at 10, 15, 20, 25, and 30 °C to
evaluate the temperature dependence of the TrIQ effect and were used
for Arrhenius analysis.

The same measurements were also taken
on mutants containing the T26E active site mutation, which traps the
substrate by making a noncatalytically relevant covalent bond between
T4L and the peptidoglycan. For these studies, the bound substrate
was hydrolyzed prior to the measurements described above, lifetime
decays were fit with an exponential decay, and the amplitude-weighted
average lifetimes (⟨τ⟩) from the best fits were
used to calculate the dynamic quenching rate using the equation kq = 1/τ – 1/τO. The natural log of kq was plotted on
the y-axis against the reciprocal of the sample temperature
in kelvin on the x-axis. The slope of the resulting
line is taken to be the activation energy divided by the gas constant
(−Ea/R) from the
Arrhenius equation.

The average lifetime (⟨τ⟩)
was used for the
sake of simplicity in the dynamic quenching rate calculations because
multiple apparent lifetimes are detected in the TrIQ and TyrIQ data,
especially ultrashort lifetimes in samples with extensive quenching
(see Table 1 of the ). We attribute the latter very fast quenching events to quenchers
that are next to, but not touching, the fluorophore at the moment
of light excitation. Such phenomena are not due to multiple distinct
probe environments but rather occur because the limited diffusional
volume space for the fluorophore and quencher (due to their being
covalently attached to the protein) results in a very high apparent
quencher concentration (see the discussion in Chapter 9.6 of ref ()).

Results
Our goal was to determine if the amino acid Tyr, like Trp, could
be used as an internal quenching molecule in SDFL studies for mapping
proximity in proteins. To do this, we compared the extent of Trp-induced
quenching (TrIQ) and Tyr-induced quenching (TyrIQ) on the emission
from the fluorophores bimane and BODIPY 507/545 (Figure ), while these probes
were attached to the sites on the protein T4L indicated in Figure B. These sites provided varying probe–quencher
distances, ranging from ∼7 to 11 Å (Cα–Cα
distances). The data from these studies could be analyzed to determine
the relative fraction of fluorescence present in each sample (nonquenched,
dynamically quenched, and statically quenched, as described in the
legend of Figure ). The results are discussed below.

Phenylalanine Is a Structurally
Similar Control Residue for
TyrIQ and TrIQ Studies That Shows Minimal Bimane Quenching
We tested if Phe, a residue structurally similar to Tyr and Trp,
could act as a better “control” (nonquenching residue)
for TyrIQ and TrIQ studies, rather than our previous approaches that
simply used whatever native residue was at the site under investigation.
To do this, we studied T4L mutants containing a Phe, Tyr, Trp, or
Asn (the native residue) at position 116 and a bimane fluorophore
at position 132. Sites 116 and 132 show the largest amount of Trp
quenching and represent the closest quencher–fluorophore pair
in this study (Cα–Cα distance of 7.5 Å). The
results of absorbance and fluorescence measurements on these samples
are reported in Table 4 and Figure S1 of the . As one can see in Figure S1, the bimane absorbance
maximum is red-shifted for the Phe, Tyr, and Trp samples compared
to that of the sample containing the native Asn residue (∼386
nm for the N116/132B sample compared to ∼397 nm for the others).
Such a shift in absorbance indicates the formation of a ground-state
complex (contact) between the residue and bimane fluorophore, as we
have noted and discussed previously.−,

However, even with this contact, bimane quenching by Phe is
minimal, as indicated in the comparison of intensity quenching ratios,
calculated using N116/N132B as the unquenched control, 1.3 for the
Phe-containing sample (N116F/N132B) versus ∼14.0 for the Tyr-containing
sample (N116Y/N132B) and ∼27.0 for the Trp-containing sample
(N116W/N132B). These values, along with the measured quantum yields,
and relative changes in fluorescence lifetimes are reported in Table
4 of the . Together,
these studies demonstrate Phe is an excellent control residue for
TyrIQ and TrIQ studies, because of its structural similarity for both
Tyr and Trp, and because it causes limited quenching even when physically
in contact with bimane.

Tyrosine Can Quench the Fluorescence Intensity
of Bimane in
a Distance-Dependent Fashion but Does So over a Range Shorter Than
That of Tryptophan
We measured the ability of both Tyr and
Trp to quench bimane in our studies in parallel, both for the purpose
of comparison and to test the efficacy of our new streamlined purification
and fluorescence labeling strategy for T4L, shown in Scheme . As expected, the results reconfirm our previous
findings that Trp quenches bimane in a distance-dependent manner (Figure , top). The data show tyrosine also quenches the
emission intensity of bimane but does so less efficiently and over
a shorter distance range (Figure ). For example,
whereas tryptophan quenching of bimane is seen to extend to the 11.0
Å Cα–Cα distance, tyrosine exhibits essentially
no quenching for Cα–Cα separations of &gt;10 Å.

Fluorescence emission intensity for Phe-containing, unquenched
samples (black) and samples quenched by Trp (blue) or Tyr (red) for
the fluorophores bimane (top) and BODIPY 507/545 (bottom). In all
cases, the Phe, Tyr, or Trp was incorporated at one of the indicated
locations on T4L (site 116 or site 4 for N68C, indicated by asterisks)
and a fluorophore was covalently attached to unique cysteines at multiple
locations on T4L indicated in Figure , resulting
in the indicated different Cα–Cα distances separating
the quencher and probe. The data show Trp can quench bimane fluorescence,
to some degree, at all distances measured, with the best quenching
observed at the shortest distance and the least quenching at the longest
distance. Tyr can also quench bimane at short distances but, in contrast
to Trp, is unable to considerably quench bimane at separations longer
than ∼10 Å. Trp also quenches BODIPY 507/545 in a distance-dependent
manner, whereas Tyr does not dramatically quench BODIPY 507/545 at
any of the distances measured.

Unlike Tryptophan, Tyrosine Does Not Show Substantial Quenching
of BODIPY 507/545 Fluorescence
We previously established
that Trp can also efficiently quench the fluorescence of the probe
BODIPY 507/545 in a distance-dependent manner. Interestingly, we find here that Tyr does not show substantial
quenching of BODIPY 507/545 fluorescence (Figure , bottom, and Figure S4 of the ). Because these samples exhibited no dramatic fluorescence
intensity quenching, they were not studied further.

The Degree
of Intensity Quenching Does Not Always Match the
Degree of Lifetime Quenching for Both Quenchers, Trp and Tyr
Figure A shows how the ratio of Trp- and
Tyr-induced quenching of bimane (FO/F) measured in Figure  decreases
as a function of Cα–Cα distance. The quenching
mechanism occurring in these samples was further investigated by measuring
their fluorescence lifetimes (rates of fluorescence decay after excitation)
using a PicoQuant FluoTime 200 time-correlated single-photon counting
instrument with a time resolution of ∼50 ps. Representative
fits of the decay data can be found in Figure 2 of the . The amplitude-weighted
average lifetime (⟨τ⟩) from the exponential fits
of these decay data was used to calculate the lifetime quenching ratio,
(⟨τO⟩/⟨τ⟩), as
shown in Figure B.

Comparison of the distance-dependent
effect of Trp and Tyr quenching
on bimane emission, fluorescence lifetime, and the calculated relative
components of fluorescence quenching. (A) Ratio of the fluorescence
intensity of bimane-labeled T4L samples with the probe at different
Cα–Cα distances from a Phe (FO) or either of the quenching residues, Trp or Tyr (F). The data indicate the FO/F for Trp (blue bars, top left) is greater than
for Tyr (red bars, top right) and decreases less rapidly as a function
of Cα–Cα distance. The quenching ratios at each
Cα–Cα distance were measured in quadruplet, except
for that of the 8.4 Å sample, which was measured in triplicate.
(B) Comparison of the ratio of average fluorescence lifetimes (⟨τ⟩)
of bimane-labeled T4L containing a Phe at the quenching position (⟨τO⟩) to those of samples containing a quenching Trp (blue
cross-hatched bars, middle left) or Tyr (red cross-hatched bars, middle
right) (⟨τ⟩) residue at the indicated Cα–Cα
distance. (C) Relative fraction of probe–quencher pairs in
a static complex (and thus in direct physical contact) can be calculated
using respective FO and F, and ⟨τO⟩ and ⟨τ⟩
values. To do this, the fraction of quencher–probe pairs in
a static complex is calculated as 1 – γ, where γ
describes the fraction of quencher–probe pairs in the “open”
conformation and is given by γ = F/FO × τO/τ. For the
open (nonstatic) quencher–probe pairs, the fraction that is
not quenched is given by γO = τ/τO × γ, and within this group, the fraction of dynamically
quenched pairs is given by γDQ = (1 – τ/τO)γ.

For the unquenched bimane-labeled
samples (Phe residue at the “quenching”
position), the ⟨τ⟩ values ranged from 7.9 to 13.4
ns (Table 1 of the ), depending on the environment of the probe, similar to previous reports.−, For the Trp-containing T4L mutants, the ⟨τ⟩
lifetime was observed to decrease for all of the Trp–bimane
distances (7.5, 8.4, 10.1, 10.7, and 11.0 Å), with the most dramatic
changes in lifetime occurring at the shorter distances. In contrast,
the Tyr-containing T4L samples showed a dramatic decrease in lifetime
for the 8.4 Å Tyr–bimane distances and the closest and
intermediate distances (7.5 and 10.1 Å) and no decrease in the
longest distances (10.7 and 11.0 Å) compared to those of the
unquenched (Phe) samples. A similar pattern is observed when the decay
data are fit using a lifetime distribution model, as discussed in
the .

Differences
in the Ratio of the Fluorescence Intensity and Lifetime
Quenching Indicate Static Quenching Complexes Form in Some of the
Trp- and Tyr-Quenched Samples
We next used the combination
of intensity and lifetime quenching ratios to calculate the relative
amount of static quenching, dynamic quenching, and unquenched fluorescence
components (Figure C). This analysis shows
that Trp can statically quench bimane for the 7.5, 8.4, and 10.1 Å
Cα–Cα distances, whereas the quenching observed
at the 10.7 and 11 Å distances is primarily dynamic in nature.
These Trp quenching values for bimane show the same range of distances
as our previously reported results but a higher quenching ratio. We
surmise this difference in quenching ratio is due to our improved
purification and labeling method (which resulted in smaller amounts
of free bimane and presumably less misfolded protein).

In contrast
to the Trp samples, the Tyr-containing samples showed a large amount
of static quenching only at the shortest distance (7.5 Å), with
much less static quenching for the 8.4 Å sample. The longer Cα–Cα
distances show no static quenching for Tyr.

Assessment of the Effects
of pH and Temperature on the Efficiency
of Quenching for Trp and Tyr
We next tested the effect of
pH and temperature on both the fluorescence intensity and lifetime
decay using the N116X/N132B series of T4L mutants, where X = F, W,
or Y. For both Tyr- and Trp-containing samples, both the intensity
(FO/F) and the lifetime
(⟨τO⟩/⟨τ⟩) quenching
ratios were measured, where an O subscript indicates data from the
unquenched, Phe-containing sample.

The data show a relatively
weak pH dependency for both quenchers (Figures 5 and 6 of the ). When Trp is the quenching
residue, the intensity quenching ratio slightly increases with an
increase in pH (∼14% per pH unit), while the lifetime quenching
ratio is constant at the pH values tested. The intensity quenching
ratio when Tyr is the quenching residue also follows the pattern of
increasing with pH, although to a lesser extent than that of Trp (∼7%
per pH unit). Interestingly, the lifetime quenching ratio of Tyr does
not follow a pattern, as the ratio (or decrease in the lifetime of
the quenched probe relative to that of the unquenched probe at the
same pH) is higher at pH 3 and 10 than at pH 7.5. When these quenching
ratios are used to calculate the relative presence of static and dynamic
quenching, Trp shows a constant relative amount of each component
of fluorescence (Figure A, top), but the relative
contributions of static and dynamic quenching when Tyr is the quencher
vary only slightly across the pH range tested (Figure A, bottom).

The pH and temperature sensitivity of TrIQ and TyrIQ components
of fluorescence. TrIQ (top) and TyrIQ (bottom) components of fluorescence
calculations are essentially temperature-independent (right). TrIQ
is also independent of pH (bottom column), whereas TyrIQ does show
some slight variation with pH (bottom row, left column). Components
of bimane fluorescence were calculated for N116X/N132B samples at
three different pH values (left) when they were quenched by Trp (top)
and Tyr (bottom). The effects of multiple temperatures were also assessed
by calculating the components of fluorescence for F4X/N68B samples
across five temperatures with both Trp (top) and Tyr (bottom) as quenching
residues.

We also assessed the temperature
dependence of TrIQ and TyrIQ for
bimane-labeled samples, using temperatures of 30, 25, 20, 15, and
10 °C. The resulting quenching ratios (FO/F) as well as the lifetime quenching ratios
(⟨τO⟩/⟨τ⟩) are
shown in Figures 5 and 6 of the ; both ratios show a slight increase with temperature for both Trp
and Tyr (∼1–2% per degree Celsius). The relative components
of fluorescence, however, show consistent ratios of static and dynamic
quenching across all of the temperatures measured for both quenchers
(Figure B).

Both TrIQ and TyrIQ Can
Detect a Hinge Bending Movement in T4L
That Accompanies Substrate Binding
We next tested the ability
of TrIQ to measure dynamic structural changes in T4L, specifically,
a hinge bending motion that occurs in T4L upon substrate binding., These studies placed a probe and quencher on opposite sides of this
“hinge”, with the probe at K60B and the quencher at
site F4X, where X is a Trp, Tyr, or Phe residue, to act as the unquenched
control. In the substrate-free state, the quencher and probe Cα–Cα
distances are shorter (∼10.5 Å apart) and move farther
apart (∼14.5 Å) when T4L binds the substrate (Figure A). Thus, one would expect more quenching in the
apo state and less quenching upon substrate binding.

TrIQ and TyrIQ can be
used to measure the magnitude and energetics
of a hinge bending motion in T4L that occurs upon substrate binding.
(A) Models of T4L both with (left) and without (right) peptidoglycan
bound to the active site (PDB entries 150L and 2LZM, respectively). To monitor this change,
TrIQ and TyrIQ were employed, placing the bimane probe at site 60
and the quenching residue (Trp or Tyr) or nonquenching residue (Phe)
at site 4. With no substrate present, the Cα–Cα
distance (angstroms) separating the quenching residue and probe is
only ∼10.5 Å. When the substrate peptidoglycan binds,
the Cα–Cα distance increases to ∼14.5 Å,
too long for either Trp or Tyr to show substantial quenching. (B)
Ratio of fluorescence emission intensity for samples containing a
quenching Trp (blue line) or Tyr (red line) residue (F) compared to samples containing the nonquenching Phe residue (FO), in the presence or absence of bound substrate.
The T4L sample F4W/K60B (without substrate, empty bars) shows an FO/F ∼ 3.5 amount of
TrIQ, which is abolished in the active site (T26E) mutant that contains
peptidoglycan from the purification (horizontally hatched bars). When
the bound peptidoglycan is removed by acid hydrolysis, the quenching
is observed again (positive slope hatched bars), and this effect can
be reversed by adding peptidoglycan to the acid-hydrolyzed samples
(negative slope hatched bars). A similar but less extensive trend
in TyrIQ is also observed for the T4L F4Y/K60B samples (right). The
inset shows SDS–PAGE results for the respective samples showing
the covalently attached peptidoglycan substrate as indicated by the
slower mobility and smear in the band: T4L F4Y/T26E/K60B (I) with
peptidoglycan bound, (II) when peptidoglycan is released after pH
3 incubation, and (III) after incubation with purified peptidoglycan
(see Figure 7 of the  for the full gel). (C) Arrhenius analysis of the dynamic quenching
rate (kq) from Trp- and Tyr-induced quenching
of bimane in the T4L F4X/K60B mutants as a function of temperature
shows similar low Ea values using either
TrIQ or TyrIQ (∼1.5–2.5 kcal/mol), suggesting the energy
barrier for the hinge bending movement is small. The dynamic quenching
rates were calculated as described in .

As expected, the results
showed considerable TrIQ for the substrate-free
form of the Trp-containing sample (F4W/K60B), with an intensity quenching
ratio (FO/F) of ∼3.5,
and the amplitude-weighted average lifetime quenching ratio (⟨τO⟩/⟨τ⟩) of ∼2. This trend
is repeated with Tyr as the quencher (F4Y/K60B), although the amount
of quenching is much less pronounced, with an FO/F values of ∼1.5 (Figure B) and a ⟨τO⟩/⟨τ⟩
value of ∼1.2 (Table 3 of the ), as would be expected given the decreased apparent
“reach” of Tyr as a quencher.

To measure the effect
of substrate binding on the structure of
T4L, the same studies were conducted with samples containing an active
site mutation, T26E, in the F4X/K60B background. The T26E mutation
causes the peptidoglycan substrate to be covalently bound and thus
traps the protein in a distinct conformation with these two species separated by ∼14.5 Å (Cα–Cα).
For these samples, both the Trp- and Tyr-containing proteins showed
a decreased level of quenching (Figure B).
We attribute the changes in TrIQ and TyrIQ in these samples to the
samples containing covalently attached peptidoglycan from the cell
walls of bacteria. This was confirmed by SDS–PAGE, which shows
a smear for these samples [caused by the incorporation of heterogeneous
lengths of peptidoglycan polymers (see the inset in Figure B and Figure 7 of the )].

We then confirmed these differences in
TrIQ and TyrIQ were due
to bound peptidoglycan by incubating the T4L T26E samples for 1 h
at pH 3 and 37 °C to hydrolyze the peptidoglycan–lysozyme
covalent bond. After these samples had
been returned to the original experimental conditions of pH 7.6, the
substrate-free (acid-hydrolyzed) proteins show intensity and lifetime
quenching ratios similar to those of the non-active site mutant, indicating
their return to the empty conformation (Figure B). Finally, adding back purified peptidoglycan to the acid-hydrolyzed
T26E samples restored the amount of quenching to that of the static
peptidoglycan-bound protein (Figure B).

Both TrIQ and TyrIQ Can Be Used To Assess the Energetics of
a Protein Movement through Arrhenius Analysis of Dynamic Quenching
Rates
We next tested the ability of both TrIQ and TyrIQ to
assess the energetics underlying the hinge bending movement by measuring
the fluorescence intensity and lifetime decay of the samples described
above as a function of temperature. Samples with and without the T26E
active site mutation were measured, at different temperatures (30,
25, 20, 15, and 10 °C), and the data were then subjected to Arrhenius
analysis.

The results indicate a slight temperature-dependent
change in the dynamic quenching rate, from which we calculated the
activation energy for the hinge bending motion by assuming the slope
of the line resulting from an Arrhenius plot of the data was equal
to the activation energy divided by the gas constant, −Ea/R. This analysis resulted
in activation energies ranging from ∼1.5 to 2.5 kcal/mol (Figure C). The implications of these results are discussed
below.

Discussion
In this work we set out
to expand and calibrate an SDFL method
that is capable of mapping approximate distances within and between
proteins as well as studying protein dynamics and conformational changes.
Specifically, we sought to determine if Tyr, like Trp, could be used
as an internal quencher in SDFL studies, as Tyr has been reported
to quench bimane fluorescence in the free amino acid form., We also tested how well these internal quenching methods (TrIQ and
TyrIQ) could assess the dynamics and energetics of a protein structural
change, in this case, the hinge bending motion in T4L that occurs
upon substrate binding.

In the process of conducting this work,
we also developed a new
way to purify and label the proteins (see Scheme ), with the goal of increasing throughput and allowing future
automation, as we proposed previously. Briefly, this involved using the Bio-Rad Profinity eXact fusion
purification method and on-column labeling of the proteins. Together
with these modifications, we could substantially scale up and increase
the throughput of our SDFL studies. The reduced level of sample handling
and the ability to label and purify samples in parallel resulted in
a 6-fold increase in sample throughput and decreased the required
time from 3 days to 1. In the future, it should be possible to automate
this purification and labeling approach, significantly simplifying
the production of multiple samples for SDFL TrIQ and TyrIQ experiments.

Both Tyr
and Trp Show Distance-Dependent Quenching of Bimane
We find
that both Tyr and Trp quench bimane fluorescence in a distance-dependent
manner, but there are clear differences in their abilities to do so,
with Trp showing more quenching than Tyr over a longer range. Before
discussing these results in detail below, we first briefly review
how different types of fluorescence can be quantified in a TrIQ and
TyrIQ study, followed by a discussion of the results when this analysis
was applied to our samples.

There are several possible fates
for a fluorophore in a TrIQ or TyrIQ study (see Figure ). One possibility is that after absorbing light, the fluorophore
is not quenched at all, and thus, the fluorescence intensity and fluorophore
lifetime are unaffected. Alternatively, the fluorophore may be dynamically
quenched after absorbing a photon (i.e., the quenching event occurs
after absorption of a photon by the fluorophore), which results in
a change in both the fluorescence intensity and lifetime. The third
possibility, static quenching, is especially interesting and informative
because it indicates a fluorophore and quencher are in contact with
each other at the moment of light excitation. Static quenching also causes a decrease in fluorescence intensity,
but no similar relative change in the fluorescence lifetime τ
values (because these nonfluorescent complexes emit no light, they
are not detected in the lifetime measurement). Importantly, the relative
amounts of each type of quenching and the relative fraction of sample
in each state can be calculated as described in Figure  and .

Subjecting our data to this analysis demonstrates that the ability
of Tyr, like Trp, to exhibit static quenching of bimane depends on
the distance between the quencher and bimane (Figure ). Both quenchers show the largest relative amount of static
quenching for the N116X/N132B sample, the shortest Cα–Cα
distance (7.5 Å) measured here, and the Trp results reproduce
our previous observations.− Static quenching due to formation
of a ground-state complex between bimane and the quencher in these
samples is also indicated by shifts in their absorbance spectra. As
shown in Figure 1 of the , the absorbance λmax for the bimane probe at site
132 is ∼386 nm when an Asn is at site 116 (the native residue).
This absorbance λmax shifts to ∼397 nm for
the Tyr, Trp, and Phe samples, a strong indicator of ground-state
complex formation. Importantly, these data also show that Phe causes
minimal quenching of bimane, even when it is in contact with the fluorophore
at the moment of light excitation (Table 4 of the ).

Interestingly, the data show
Tyr has a “maximal sphere of
static quenching” that is smaller than that of Trp; that is,
Tyr has an apparent reach smaller than that of Trp. In fact, Tyr exhibits
no static quenching at Cα–Cα distances greater
than ∼10 Å, consistent with the smaller size of Tyr compared
to Trp, although the shorter apparent reach for Tyr quenching could
be due to different intrinsic properties and not a difference in length.
In either case, the shorter range of Tyr quenching can be used to
increase resolution in mapping studies, and we show in the next section
that the different ranges of quenching by Trp and Tyr can be used
to resolve the magnitude of a protein conformational change, such
as the hinge bending motion in T4L that occurs upon substrate binding
(Figure ).

We also explored the possibility
that new information could be
obtained from different analysis of the dynamic quenching component.
This involved fitting the fluorescent decay data with a lifetime distribution
model. Our working hypothesis was that quencher–probe pairs
in very close proximity of each other, but not touching, at the moment
of light excitation would exhibit ultrafast lifetimes (resulting from
“pseudostatic quenching”) and that separating this variable
might allow further probing of the dynamic quenching component reflected
in the longer lifetime component, and the results show an intriguing
pattern. As shown in Figure S3 of the , unquenched samples were well fit by a single distribution.
However, quenched species required a bimodal distribution, with an
ultrafast lifetime and a longer lifetime. Intriguingly, the longer
lifetime component decreases as the distance from the quencher decreases
(except in the case of extreme static quenching).

We also tested
the effect of pH and temperature and found that
although the magnitudes of intensity quenching in TrIQ and TyrIQ are
somewhat sensitive to different pH values and temperatures (Figures
S5 and S6 of the ), the effects of these parameters on the relative contribution of
different components of quenching (static, dynamic, and unquenched)
are not substantial (Figure ). Only Tyr showed
a slight difference in the relative contributions to static and dynamic
quenching at low pH for reasons that are not presently clear but might
be due to changes in the redox state of Tyr at different pH values.
Despite these slight differences, we have shown here that one can
still detect the presence and relative contribution of static quenching,
which will allow both TrIQ and TyrIQ to be used under a range of pH
and temperature conditions.

Tyr Does Not Substantially Quench BODIPY
507/545 in a Distance-Dependent
Manner, whereas Trp Does
Previously, we established that
Trp also quenches a number of other fluorophores besides bimane in
a distance-dependent fashion, thus expanding the palette of probes
that can be used in TrIQ studies. Here,
we reconfirmed that Trp can quench BODIPY 507/545, a red-shifted fluorophore
with an excellent quantum yield. Surprisingly, we find that Tyr does
not show obvious distance dependence quenching of BODIPY 507/545 (Figure  and Figure S4 of the ), despite previous reports that free tyrosine methyl
ester can cause some slight quenching of BODIPY 507/545 in solution. In fact, analysis using a form of the Rehm–Weller
equation and published redox potentials for Trp, Tyr, and BODIPY-FL, suggests that both Trp and Tyr might be able to quench some BODIPY
fluorophores in a PET fashion. Unfortunately, it was not possible
to conduct these calculations on the BODIPY 507/545 used here, because
of a lack of published Ered values. Interestingly,
although BODIPY 507/545 shares the same basic structure as the other
BODIPY fluorophores, its linkage group does not contain a methylene
“spacer” between the iodoacetamide reactive group and
the fluorophore. This difference might account for its inability to
be significantly quenched by tyrosine, and the possibility remains
that some other BODIPY fluorophores may still show tyrosine-induced
quenching, as has been reported in studies using free Tyr amino acid
and BODIPY-FL.

The observation
that Tyr does not significantly quench BODIPY 507/545, whereas Trp
does, suggests several possible uses. For example, when studying a
protein of unknown structure or conformation, one could rapidly determine
if some observed bimane quenching in an experiment is due to Trp or
Tyr by simply relabeling the same protein with BODIPY 507/545. A lack
of BODIPY 507/545 quenching would indicate the cause of the initial
bimane quenching was a Tyr residue. Similarly, one could exploit the
different quenching profiles obtained using Trp and Tyr to glean orientation
information about how two interacting proteins dock with each other.

Both TrIQ and TyrIQ Can Detect a Hinge Bending Movement in T4L
That Occurs with Substrate Binding
Crystal structures show
binding of the substrate to T4L involves a large domain movement between
two lobes that results in the exposure of the active site. We attempted
to measure this movement by placing a quencher (Trp or Tyr) on one
side of the active site cleft (residue 4) and a fluorescent probe
on the other side (residue 60). Crystal structures show the Cα–Cα
distances between these two sites are shorter (∼10.5 Å)
in the empty state and then become longer
(∼14.5 Å) upon binding of the substrate. The latter distances were determined using a T4L active
site mutant T26E, which covalently binds and traps the substrate peptidoglycan. This active site mutant has been used in numerous
previous studies focused on defining this hinge bending;, thus, here we tested if this hinge bending could be detected using
TrIQ or TyrIQ, which would result in a decreased level of quenching
upon substrate binding.

Indeed, the TrIQ and TyrIQ data reflect
the movements seen in the crystal structures. As seen in Figure , the Trp-containing sample shows significant quenching
in the absence of substrate, but almost no quenching for the substrate-bound
T26E mutant. In contrast, Tyr showed a very small amount of quenching
for the substrate-free T4L and no quenching upon binding of the substrate
to the T26E mutant.

These changes are exactly as one would expect
on the basis of the
distance-dependent constraints reported in the . As shown in Figures  and , the maximal reach is ∼15 Å for Trp, but only
∼10 Å for Tyr. Thus, significant Trp quenching and minimal
Tyr quenching are expected for T4L in the apo, freely hinge-bending,
state, as is observed (Figure ). In contrast,
no significant quenching should be expected for either Trp or Tyr
in the substrate-bound state in the T26E mutant, as the two sites
move 14.5 Å apart, outside of the maximal reach of either quenching
residue.

Together, these observations show how including Tyr
quenching increases
the resolution of an internal quenching study, by allowing the separation
of “very close” interaction distances (less than ∼10
Å) and those that are between ∼10 and ∼15 Å.

Arrhenius Analysis of the TrIQ and TyrIQ Data Suggests a Low
Energy Barrier for Hinge Bending Motion in T4L
We also assessed
the energetics of the hinge bending movement, described above, by
conducting studies at different temperatures and subjecting the results
to Arrhenius analysis. Specifically, we calculated a dynamic quenching
rate, Kq, at each temperature from the
amplitude-weighted average lifetime, ⟨τ⟩, as described
previously in , and used
these values for Arrhenius analysis., The similar
low Ea values resulting from this analysis
of both the TrIQ and TyrIQ data (∼1.5–2.5 kcal/mol)
are consistent with the idea that hinge bending movement between empty
and substrate-bound T4L conformations occurs in the protein, and is not impeded by a high activation energy barrier. The Ea values obtained from TrIQ and TyrIQ differ
by ∼1 kcal, and it is not yet clear if the difference is truly
significant, as the different physical properties of Trp and Tyr could
cause a subtle difference in this dynamic movement in T4L. Moreover,
the amount of quenching is low in the Tyr samples, and thus, the data
could potentially contain significant error due to the weak signal
and increased level of noise.

In summary, in this work we expanded
the tool set for characterizing and quantifying dynamic structural
movements in proteins by establishing and calibrating how Tyr can
be used in internal quenching SDFL studies. We find that TrIQ and
TyrIQ of bimane can be measured across a range of pHs and temperatures,
and we show how the use of these two approaches together increases
the resolution of structural and dynamics information that can be
obtained, thus significantly expanding the scope of this SDFL approach.

Some caveats with regard to TrIQ and TyrIQ need be mentioned. First,
in contrast to FRET, neither method has a straightforward and experimentally
verified theory for mathematically calculating precise distances between
the quencher and fluorophore. However, it is possible to identify
and quantify quencher–probe pairs that are in the proximity
of each other (dynamic quenching) and those in contact at the moment
of light excitation (static quenching), although we are using these
terms in an operational sense. It can also be difficult to separate “true”
static quenching from “pseudo” static quenching, the
latter of which occurs when ultrafast quenching events (due to excited-state
collisions between proximal quencher–probe pairs immediately
after light excitation) introduce ultrashort lifetime components into
the data. Thus, in these calculations, it is critical to take into
account the time resolution of the instrument and scattering propensity
of the sample when calculating the fluorescence lifetimes and differentiating
between light scattering and ultrafast quenching events. Second, for
the bimane probe used here, both TrIQ and TyrIQ work over only a limited
distance (&lt;15 Å), although this limitation can also be considered
a strength and used to increase the precision of a given measurement.
Third, the use of Cα–Cα distance as a calibration
metric is nonideal because it does not account for parameters like
probe–quencher orientation. In the future, a key step to advancing
the TrIQ and TyrIQ methods will be to include molecular dynamics simulations
in the analysis of the data to model the quencher–probe interactions,
as Ladhokin and colleagues have done using two Trp residues to approximate
the Trp–bimane pair.

Importantly,
TyrIQ introduces new advantages to this internal quenching
approach. For one thing, TyrIQ works over a range smaller than that
of TrIQ and thus can be used to provide higher distance resolution.
Furthermore, the fact that Tyr (the quencher) differs from the control
(Phe) by only an -OH group means that TyrIQ studies will be optimal
for use to minimize proteins sensitive to changes in steric volume.
Previously, bimane TrIQ has been used to asses movements within GPCRs,,,− and we have
recently begun using this approach to map the interactions between
the GPCR opsin and visual arrestin. Future
efforts will explore the use of TyrIQ in these efforts, as well.

Supporting Information Available
Includes a discussion
of the
results obtained fitting the unquenched and quenched fluorescence
decays using a lifetime distribution model (Lorentzian), tables of
data (including calculated lifetimes for each sample resulting from
the exponential fits and distribution fits), and quenching ratios
for T4L T26E mutants in various ligand-bound states. Quantum yield
analysis for T4L N116X/N132B samples, and figures of these samples
demonstrating how the maximal absorbance of the bimane peak shifts
due to static complex formation between quencher and fluorophore.
Examples of exponential fitting of bimane fluorescent decay data,
intensity quenching ratio bar graphs for BODIPY 507/545 quenching,
intensity and lifetime quenching ratios for the varying pH and temperatures
tested for bimane quenching, and an SDS-PAGE gel depicting the active
site mutant T4L with and without peptidoglycan. This material is available
free of charge via the Internet at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bi500493r_si_001.pdf

The authors declare no
competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
We thank Dr. Steve Mansoor, Dr. Jon
Fay, and Mr. Christopher
T. Schafer for their critical reading of the manuscript and Owen Chapman.

Abbreviations
BODIPY 507/545N-(4,4-difluoro-1,3,5,7-tetramethyl-4-bora-3a,4a-diaza-s-indacen-2-yl)iodoacetamide

EDTAN,N′-1,2-ethanediylbis[N-(carboxymethyl)glycine] disodium salt

FRETForster resonance energy transfer

IPTGisopropyl β-thiogalactoside

IRFinstrument response
function

MOPS3-(N-morpholino)propanesulfonic acid

PDBProtein Data Bank

SDFLsite-directed fluorescent labeling

SDS–PAGEsodium
dodecyl sulfate–polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis

T4LT4 lysozyme

Tris2-amino-2-(hydroxylmethyl)-1,3-propanediol

TrIQtryptophan-induced
quenching

TyrIQtyrosine-induced quenching

⟨τ⟩amplitude-weighted average fluorescence lifetime

FO/Ffluorescence intensity quenching ratio

τO/τfluorescence lifetime quenching ratio.

