The ability
of cells to respond
to external mechanical stimuli, encountered, for example, during cell
spreading or in response to pulses of force, requires signaling to
be transduced via transmembrane receptors to the actin cytoskeleton.
These mechanical stimuli initiate signaling cascades, permitting the
cells to adapt appropriately. Integrins, a major class of transmembrane
receptors that link the extracellular matrix (ECM) to the actin cytoskeleton,
are involved in force transmission. These
transmembrane receptors can activate a number of signaling pathways
and cellular processes, including cytoskeletal rearrangements and
assembly of focal adhesions (FAs)., External forces
that are applied to the cell via linkages with the ECM to integrins
promote cellular stiffening by activating pathways that promote cell
contractility. For instance, signaling downstream from integrins leads
to the activation of RhoA and promotes an increase in actomyosin contractility
and adhesion maturation.− Additionally, FA scaffolding proteins such as vinculin
are rapidly recruited to areas under tension, and loss of vinculin
results in a failure to respond to external applications of force.− Although vinculin can be recruited to FAs and reinforces the adhesion
under tension, this mechanism is poorly understood. Consistent with these observations, variants of vinculin
that are impaired in actin bundling significantly impair cell stiffening
in response to pulses of external force.,

Vinculin is a highly conserved and large (1066 amino acids)
structural
adaptor protein that localizes to both FAs and adherens junctions., Furthermore, vinculin is essential for embryonic development, as
vinculin knockout mice show defects in heart and neural tube formation
and do not survive past day E10.5. Fibroblasts
isolated from knockout mice exhibit a number of defects, including
a rounded morphology, increased motility, and resistance to apoptosis and anoikis. At the subcellular level, vinculin has been implicated in the regulation
of FA turnover, FA dynamics at the leading
edge of migrating cells, and force transduction. However, the mechanism by which vinculin regulates
these various functions remains to be fully characterized.

Vinculin
contains three main domains: a large, helical head domain
(Vh), a proline-rich linker region, and a tail domain (Vt). Each of
these respective regions binds to a number of proteins. While talin,
α/β-catenin, α-actinin, MAPK, and IpaA from Shigella flexneri bind to Vh,− VASP, Cbl-associated protein (CAP)/ponsin, vinexin α/β,
nArgBP2, p130CAS, and the Arp2/3 complex associate with the proline-rich
linker.− A number of ligands also bind Vt including PKCα, paxillin,
Hic-5, raver1, α-synemin, PIP2, and F-actin.− In the autoinhibited conformation, vinculin is unable to interact
with binding partners due to intramolecular interactions between Vt
and Vh.− Vinculin is considered to be active upon release
of Vt and Vh through combinatorial binding of ligands to each domain., Additionally, it has been shown that when external forces are applied
to cells, there is a robust recruitment of vinculin to FAs. However, the exact mechanism that controls the
activation of vinculin in response to mechanical stimuli has yet to
be fully elucidated. Once vinculin adopts an open conformation, additional
binding partners are recruited to maturing adhesion complexes., In FAs, vinculin aids in transducing mechanical cues by linking
integrins with the cytoskeleton through its association with talin
and F-actin.

Upon binding to F-actin, Vt undergoes a conformational
change that
exposes a cryptic dimerization site that enables F-actin bundling., In recent years, models for how Vt binds to and bundles F-actin
have been proposed., Janssen et al. proposed a structural
model of the Vt/F-actin complex using negative-stain electron microscopy
and computational docking, in which Vt binds to F-actin through two
sites: site one binds via helices 2 and 3 and site two binds through
helices 3, 4, and the C-terminus. In
the proposed model, deletion of the N-terminal strap impairs actin
bundling, while deletion of the C-terminus enhanced actin bundling. However, contrasting data have arisen that support
a distinct hydrophobic Vt interface critical for the association with
actin on helix 4.− Recent studies have shown that the C-terminal hairpin
of Vt is essential for Vt self-association and subsequent F-actin
cross-linking.,

Within the C-terminal hairpin,
there is a known Src phosphorylation
site, Y1065, which is the only tyrosine residue within Vt. Vinculin
was one of the first substrates identified to be phosphorylated by
the transforming oncogene of Rous sarcoma virus, v-Src. Previous studies have shown that phosphorylation
of Y1065 alters a number of cellular processes including traction
forces, exchange from adhesions, and cell spreading., Phosphorylation at Y1065 has also been shown to affect intramolecular
interactions with Vh and binding to the Arp2/3 complex.,

In this study, we provide evidence that Src phosphorylation
of
Vt disrupts F-actin bundling but retains binding to F-actin. This
phosphorylation also prevents binding to Vh, but does not affect binding
to PIP2. These results are consistent with our findings
that the C-terminal hairpin of Vt, containing Y1065, is critical for
F-actin bundling. Additionally, we show
that mutation of Y1065 to phenylalanine (Y1065F), a common nonphosphorylatable
variant, enhances F-actin bundling capacity, disrupts binding to Vh,
but retains binding to other ligands. We have also structurally characterized
alternate Vt variants that either mimic (Y1065E) or prevent phosphorylation
(Y1065A) to study the impact of phosphorylation at Y1065 on actin
binding and bundling. Using these variants, we have examined their
impact on FA morphology, cell spreading, and cellular stiffening in
response to force in vinculin knockout murine embryo fibroblasts (Vin
−/– MEFs).

Materials and Methods
Expression and Purification
of Proteins
Expression
of chicken Vt (residues 879–1066) was performed as previously
described. Full-length vinculin was transformed
into E. coli strain BL21-DE3 RIPL cells and purified
as previously described., The final product was
evaluated by SDS-PAGE for purity prior to use in biochemical assays.
The kinase domain of c-Src (residues 251–533) was kindly provided
by J. Kuriyan’s laboratory at the University of California
(Berkeley, CA) and was purified as previously described. The purified protein was stored in 50% glycerol
aliquots at −20 °C until use.

Expression and purification
of GST and GST-Vh (residues 1–811) were performed as previously
described, with minor modifications. Briefly, GST-Vh
was transformed into the E. coli strain JM109. 500
mL cultures were grown at 37 °C until induced with 0.1 mM IPTG
at an OD of 0.6. The cultures were then grown at room temperature
for an additional 12–16 h. Cells were lysed in 1× PBS,
1% Triton X-100 in the presence of 1 mM phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride
and 10 μg/mL of aprotinin and leupeptin. GST and GST-Vh were
purified by incubation with glutathione-sepharose 4B beads (GE Healthcare)
at 4 °C for 3 h and then washed three times with 1× PBS.

Generation of Phosphorylated Vt
Following initial purification,
WT Vt was dialyzed into phosphorylation reaction buffer (50 mM HEPES,
1 mM MgCl2, 1 mM MnCl2, 1 mM DTT, pH 7.5) prior
to incubation with ∼1 μM Src and 2 mM ATP at 37 °C
overnight. To separate phosphorylated Vt, the sample was loaded onto
a weak cation-exchange column with buffer A (20 mM Tris, 20 mM NaCl,
2.5 mM EDTA, 1 mM DTT, pH 7.5) and eluted using a gradient from 20
mM to 380 mM NaCl. Fractions were collected and verified for phosphorylation
by Western blotting using a phosphotyrosine antibody (Santa Cruz).
To determine the stoichiometry of the phosphorylated sample collected
through this method, samples were dialyzed in 10 μM ammonium
bicarbonate prior to submission for analysis by Fourier transform
ion cyclotron resonance mass spectrometry (FTICR-MS).

Actin Cosedimentation
Assays
Actin binding and bundling
by Vt and full-length vinculin were measured with a cosedimentation
assay as previously described., For bundling assays,
samples were prepared as described for the actin binding experiment
except samples were subjected to a low speed spin (5000 × g). Pellet and soluble fractions were separated by SDS-PAGE,
the band intensity was calculated using ImageJ, and percentages were calculated as previously described.

Lipid Cosedimentation Assays
Vt
binding to phosphatidylinositol
4,5-bisphosphate (PIP2) was evaluated by lipid cosedimentation
assays using small, unilamellar vesicles as previously described., Relative protein amounts were quantified using ImageJ.

Fluorescence Microscopy of F-Actin Bundles
F-actin
bundles were induced by the addition of full-length vinculin or Vt
variants to 10 μM actin. The bundles were visualized using fluorescence
microscopy as previously described.,, Images were acquired on a Zeiss axiovert 200M microscope
equipped with a 63× objective lens and a Hamamatsu ORCA-ERAG
digital camera.

Circular Dichroism (CD)
Spectra
were collected from
350 to 250 nm (near-UV) and 260–190 nm (far-UV) at protein
concentrations of 450 and 5 μM, respectively. Data were collected
on a Jasco J-815 CD spectrometer (Jasco; Easton, MD) and on an Applied
Photophysics Pistar-180 spectrometer at 25 °C in CD buffer (10
mM potassium phosphate and 50 mM Na2SO4, pH
7.5)

Thermal Stability of Vt
Fast quantitative cysteine
reactivity (fQCR) was used to measure changes in protein stability
as previously described. 1 μM Vt
was incubated with 1 mM 4-fluoro-7-aminosulfonylbenzofurzan (ABD-F,
Anaspec) in fQCR buffer (25 mM KPO4, 100 mM KCl, pH 7.5) for 1 min
at the desired temperature before being quenched with 0.1 N HCl. The
fluorescence intensity was measured on a PHERAstar plate reader (BMG
Labtech). The data were normalized and fit to a sigmoidal dose–response
curve to determine the temperature at which 50% of the protein was
unfolded, representing the Tm. The slope
as Vt transitioned from folded to unfolded was used as an indicator
of cooperativity for the unfolding protein. Data represents the mean
± SEM. Experiments were performed in triplicate for two independent
trials. Data sets were analyzed using the two-tailed Student’s t test for p-values.

NMR Spectroscopy
Vt samples for NMR were prepared from
cells grown in M9 media with 15NH4Cl as the
sole nitrogen source. The 15N-Vt samples were exchanged
into NMR buffer (10 mM KH2PO4, 50 mM NaCl, 0.1%
NaN3, 2 mM DTT, and 10% D2O, pH 5.5) and concentrated
to 50 μM for WT Vt, Vt Y1065F, Vt Y1065A, and Vt Y1065E and
35 μM for pY-Vt. All heteronuclear single quantum coherence
(HSQC) spectra were collected on a Varian INOVA 700 MHz spectrometer
at 37 °C. Processing was done with NMRPipe and spectral analysis with NMRViewJ.

Vinculin Head–Tail Pulldowns
Pulldown assays
were performed as previously described with the following modifications. Purified Vt and Vt variants were
dialyzed into TEEAN buffer (20 mM Tris, 150 mM NaCl, pH 7.5). Protein
concentration was calculated and adjusted to 10 μM per reaction
with TEEAN buffer containing 0.5% CHAPS, 1% BSA, 0.5 mM β-mercaptoethanol.
Approximately 10 μM of GST and GST-Vh were used for the pulldown
experiments. Incubations (450 μL) were nutated at 4 °C
for 2 h. The samples were collected by brief centrifugation and washed
four times in TEEAN. Samples were boiled in sample buffer and separated
by SDS-PAGE. Vt protein bands were detected using a rabbit anti-chicken
Vt antibody, a gift from Dr. Susan Craig
(Johns Hopkins University). GST was detected with a polyclonal anti-GST
antibody (Molecular Probes).

Cell Culture and Transfection
Vinculin knockout murine
embryo fibroblasts (Vin −/– MEFs) were obtained from
Dr. Eileen Adamson (Burnham Institute; La Jolla, CA) and grown in
Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s medium (DMEM; Invitrogen)
supplemented with 5% fetal bovine serum and antibiotic-antimycotic
solution in 10% CO2 at 37 °C. DNA constructs were
generated for cell culture as previously reported. Cells were transfected with GFP-tagged vinculin expression
constructs using Lipofectamine (Invitrogen) and Plus Reagent (Invitrogen)
according to the manufacturer’s protocol and examined 24–72
h following transfection.

RTCA and Spreading
Prior to plating,
cells were serum-starved
in DMEM media supplemented with 0.5% delipidated BSA and antibiotic-antimycotic
solution. Cells were then resuspended in the serum-free delipidated
BSA media for approximately 2 h. For the real-time cell analyzer (RTCA)
xCELLigence System (Acea Biosciences), 3500 cells per well were seeded
into the E-plate 16 that was coated with 50 μg/mL fibronectin
(FN). Attachment and spreading were monitored by impedance, given
as the arbitrary unit, cell index (CI), and was recorded with the
RTCA apparatus every 15 s over a 4 h time period. For the spreading
assay and subsequent adhesion site analysis, cells were prepared as
described above prior to seeding onto glass coverslips coated with
50 μg/mL FN. Cells were fixed for 10 min with 3.7% formaldehyde
and washed once with 1× PBS. Cells were then permeabilized for
10 min with 0.2% Triton X-100 in PBS and stained with phalloidin (Invitrogen,
Carlsbad, CA) and examined with a Zeiss axiovert 200M microscope equipped
with a 63× objective lens and a Hamamatsu ORCA-ERAG digital camera.
FAs were quantified as previously reported. Experiments were repeated three independent times and the resulting
data representing the mean ± SEM. Data sets were analyzed using
the two-tailed Student’s t test for p-values.

Force Microscopy
Three-dimensional
force microscopy
(3DFM) was used to apply controlled force to integrins in order to
track bead displacements as an indicator of cellular reinforcement.
Experiments and analysis were performed as previously described., Tracked bead displacements were analyzed using the two-tailed Student’s t test for p-values and are reported as
mean ± SEM.

Results
Phosphorylation or Mutation
at Y1065 Does Not Affect Actin or
PIP2 Binding, but Alters Actin Bundling
Removal
of the C-terminal residues (1052–1066) from Vt was previously
found to enhance F-actin bundling. However,
the C-terminus forms interactions with the helical core of Vt and
the N-terminal strap, and large C-terminal deletions beyond seven
amino acids lead to destabilization of the protein., The destabilizing effects of large C-terminal deletions are further
supported through protease digestion studies. We previously demonstrated that a C-terminal hairpin deletion mutant
(Vt ΔC5) retains the structural integrity and actin binding
of Vt, but is significantly disrupted in its ability to bundle actin
filaments and impairs formation of the
actin-induced Vt dimer. These findings
suggest that the C-terminal hairpin is critical for actin-induced
Vt dimerization, which in turn is necessary for F-actin bundling.
Since Y1065 lies within the C-terminal hairpin and is the sole Src
phosphorylation site in Vt, we examined the impact of phosphorylation
or mutation at Y1065 on the ability of Vt to bind and consequently
bundle F-actin. To generate phosphorylated Vt (pY-Vt) we incubated
purified Vt with the c-Src kinase domain and separated phosphorylated
from unmodified Vt by anion exchange chromatography. Modification
of Vt Y1065 by phosphorylation was verified by Fourier transform ion
cyclotron resonance mass spectrometry and determined to be ∼84%
phosphorylated ().

Consistent with our previous observations that removal of
the C-terminal hairpin does not alter actin binding, Y1065 variants
and pY-Vt showed a similar association with actin compared to WT Vt
in actin cosedimentation assays (Figure A
and )., However, significant differences were observed for actin bundling
(Figure B and ). While wildtype (WT) Vt and Vt Y1065A showed approximately the
same actin bundling efficiency, Y1065F exhibited significantly higher
bundling capacity than WT Vt. In contrast to WT Vt, pY-Vt, and Y1065E
showed greater than 3-fold reduction in their bundling efficiency.

Actin
binding and bundling with pY-Vt and Vt Y1065 mutants. (A)
Actin binding and (B) actin bundling cosedimentation assays in the
presence of WT Vt and Y1065 Vt mutants. (C) fluorescence microscopy
of actin bundles formed by Vt Y1065 variants. **p ≤ 0.001 comparing Y1065 variants to WT Vt. Error bars are
± S.E.M., n = 3. Scale bar: 25 μm.

To visualize the bundles formed
in the presence of the Vt variants,
we viewed the F-actin bundles by fluorescence microscopy. As shown
in Figure C, single actin filaments are observed
in the absence of Vt. However, in the presence of WT Vt and Vt Y1065A,
most of the filaments are packed into thick actin bundles, similar
to bundles previously observed. Upon
incubation of Y1065F with F-actin, larger F-actin bundles are observed,
which would account for the high bundling efficiency observed in the
actin bundling cosedimentation assays. As a result of this finding,
we have termed Vt Y1065F a “superbundler.” However,
upon phosphorylation or mutation to Y1065E, there is a deficiency
in the ability of the variants to form bundles that resemble WT Vt.
While some small bundles do form, they lack the persistence observed
with the native protein. Results from the actin bundling cosedimentation
assays and the bundles observed by fluorescence microscopy both indicate
that Y1065A behaves similarly to WT Vt, while Y1065F shows significantly
enhanced F-actin bundling in comparison to WT Vt. Furthermore, phosphorylation
or mutation to a phosphomimetic (Y1065E) disrupted actin bundle formation
to approximately the same severity. Previous studies have shown that
deletion of the C-terminal hairpin disrupts actin bundling due to
a disruption in forming the actin-induced dimer. Since Y1065 is located within the C-terminal hairpin and
we observe similar disruptions in actin bundling, we conclude that
phosphorylation at Y1065 can regulate Vt-driven F-actin bundling.

On the basis of studies using Vt C-terminal deletion variants (residues
1052–1066) and C-terminal peptides derived from Vt, it has
been proposed that the Vt C-terminus is critical for association and
insertion of Vt into membranes.,, However, these studies were performed with destabilizing Vt variants
or the C-terminal peptide alone and may not accurately portray interactions
with vinculin and PIP2. In fact, we showed that loss of
the C-terminal hairpin does not affect the association of Vt with
PIP2. Therefore, we anticipated
that mutation or phosphorylation of Y1065 within Vt would not affect
PIP2 association. To verify this, we performed lipid cosedimentation
assays to assess their binding to PIP2. As shown in , neither phosphorylation
nor mutation at Y1065 alters the association of Vt with PIP2-containing liposomes. These data support our previous findings that
the Vt C-terminal hairpin is not required for association with PIP2 and contradict previous studies using a vinculin C-terminal
peptide that propose a role for Y1065 phosphorylation in regulating
membrane association.

Mutation or
Phosphorylation of Y1065 Retains the Vt Helix Bundle
Fold
Because of the different actin bundling efficiencies
displayed by the Vt variants, we next performed near and far-UV circular
dichroism (CD) spectroscopy experiments to examine the overall secondary
and tertiary structure of pY-Vt and Vt variants in comparison to WT
Vt. As shown in Figure A, far-UV spectra for
Y1065 variants and pY-Vt were similar to WT Vt, indicating that mutation
or modification of Y1065 does not significantly alter the overall
α-helical signature of Vt. Next we examined near-UV spectra
of the Y1065 mutants and pY-Vt (Figure B).
These data are sensitive to tertiary interactions between the N-terminus
and C-terminus, due to aromatic packing interactions between W912
in the H1–H2 loop and W1058 in the C-terminal extension, (Figure C). While the near-UV
spectra of WT Vt and Vt Y1065A are similar, we observe a loss of tryptophan
packing when Y1065 is mutated to phenylalanine, glutamic acid, or
phosphorylated. These results indicate a disruption in tryptophan
packing. This suggests that, though the C-terminus of Vt is flexible,, altering the chemical environment can impact packing at the bottom
of the helix bundle. This is especially evident in the cases of pY-Vt
and Vt Y1065E, which show the same disruption in tryptophan packing,
suggesting that the presence of a negative charge alters interactions
of the C-terminus within Vt. Additionally, these data indicate that
Y1065F, previously used as a typical nonphosphorylatable Vt variant,
does not share some structural characteristics with unmodified WT
Vt, a criteria that should be met. Rather, Y1065A most closely resembles
nonphosphorylated WT Vt as shown by our actin bundling data (Figure B,C, ). However,
our far-UV CD data suggest that loss of these C-terminal contacts
do not significantly perturb the overall secondary structure of the
helix bundle, likely due to the higher conformational heterogeneity
of the C-terminal arm.

CD and fQCR of pY-Vt and Y1065 variants. (A) far-UV CD
spectra
and (B) near-UV CD spectra upon phosphorylation and mutation to Y1065.
(C) The side chain of Y1065 (red) lies within the C-terminal hairpin
(D) fQCR curves show temperature dependence of cysteine accessibility,
used to monitor Vt unfolding properties as buried cysteines within
Vt become exposed and modified by ABD-F upon Vt unfolding. (E) Results
indicate no significant changes in Tm upon
phosphorylation or mutation, but differences in cooperativity of the
unfolding protein are observed upon phosphorylation and mutation to
Y1065E.

To evaluate if mutation or phosphorylation
at Y1065 alters the
stability of Vt, we performed fast quantitative cysteine reactivity
(fQCR), a technique that uses a thiol-reactive fluorescent indicator
that covalently modifies cysteines as they become exposed when the
protein unfolds over a thermal gradient. Similar to a standard CD thermal melt, the fluorescent readout can
be used to determine the Tm of a protein
and provides an indication of the thermostability and cooperativity
of protein unfolding. Vt has three buried cysteines (C950, C972, and
C985) that become exposed upon thermal unfolding. Hence, cysteine
reactivity can be used to monitor thermal unfolding. As shown in Figure D,E, the Tm of the various
Vt variants is not significantly different; however, the unfolding
transition for pY-Vt and Y1065E is slightly less cooperative. These
results in combination with our near-UV CD data indicate that pY-Vt
and Y1065E cause some disruption in packing interactions likely due
to alternate interactions of these negatively charged residues within
Vt. Overall, these data suggest that while mutation or modification
of Y1065 does not alter the overall stability of the protein, the
presence of a negative charge at Y1065 can slightly alter helix bundle
packing interactions.

Next, we collected 1H–15N 2D heteronuclear
correlation spectra (HSQC) on 15N-enriched WT Vt, Y1065
variants and pY-Vt, to further delineate how Y1065 mutations and phosphorylation
alter Vt. 1H–15N HSQC NMR spectra report
on HN resonances associated with the protein backbone (except for
proline) and side chains, and give signals that are very sensitive
to changes in the local chemical environment of these nuclei. By monitoring
the position of peaks from backbone amides, the local or global consequences
of a perturbation within a protein can be tracked. Furthermore, changes
in peak intensity and/or line widths indicate the possibility of changes
in the dynamics of the protein. If signal changes correspond to residues
near the site of mutation or phosphorylation, this would indicate
that the mutation or phosphorylation likely had little effect on the
global structure and dynamics of the protein. However, if changes
in the chemical shifts and/or intensity of amide peaks are observed
for a significant fraction of the peaks corresponding to residues
remote from the site of perturbation, this can indicate that the perturbation
may alter the structural and dynamic properties of the protein. As
shown in , Vt produces a spectral dispersion indicative of a well-folded protein.
Phosphorylation or mutations at Y1065 do not change this. Overall,
the amide resonances do not show significant changes in chemical shift,
intensity, or line width in comparison to WT Vt. However, a small
subset of NH peaks show changes in chemical shift and/or line width
upon mutation or phosphorylation of Y1065. These changes have been
labeled on the respective HSQC spectra () and mapped onto the structure of Vt in . The changes are mostly localized
to the C-terminal arm of Vt, though some extend out to helix 5, the
helix 3–helix 4 loop, and the interface between the N-terminal
strap and helix 1. In conjunction with our CD and Tm results, these data indicate that mutation or phosphorylation
of Y1065 does not significantly alter the helix bundle fold. This
is not surprising given previous work examining the similarities between
NMR spectra of WT Vt in comparison to C-terminal hairpin deletion
(Vt ΔC5 and VtΔC2) variants. Notably, C-terminal hairpin deletions lead to small shifts that
are observed with NH resonances associated with residues near the
loop between helix 1 and 2 and residues within helix 5. These small
shifts may occur due to loss of the Y1065 phenol, since this side
chain forms weak contacts with residues in the Vt N-terminus. The changes in the HSQC that correspond to residues
further from Y1065 are likely propagated through the C-terminal arm
and the N-terminal strap, not through the helices comprising the bundle.
This is in agreement with the absence of defined secondary structure
in these regions and their increased flexibility, relative to the
helix bundle.

Phosphorylation and Mutations
at Y1065F Alter Vinculin Head–Tail
Interactions
Structures of full-length vinculin have been
obtained for its autoinhibited or inactive conformation. In these structures, numerous intramolecular
contacts were observed between Vt and D1, D3, and D4 of Vh., Consistent with the numerous autoinhibitory contacts between Vh
and Vt, Vt interacts with both D1 and D4 of Vh, which mediates head–tail
interactions and the active state of vinculin., Src phosphorylation of vinculin at Y1065 has been implicated in
disrupting head–tail interactions to activate vinculin. We wanted to examine how our Y1065 mutations
bound to Vh by performing head–tail pulldowns with GST-tagged
Vh (contains D1–D4; residues 1–811) and evaluated differences
in head–tail interactions. When pulldowns were performed at
a head/tail ratio of 1:1, we found that WT Vt and Y1065A retained
binding to the head domain (Figure A), whereas
pY-Vt and Y1065E exhibited reduced binding to Vh. The reduction in
binding observed for pY-Vt and Y1065E is not surprising in light of
previous findings that pY-Vt may disrupt autoinhibitory interactions
between Vh and Vt (Figure A). Surprisingly, Y1065F also showed reduced binding to GST-Vh,
indicating a perturbation in head–tail interactions (Figure A). Y1065F has been used previously as a nonphosphorylatable
variant, but our findings indicate that Y1065F not only enhances actin
bundling but also reduces association with Vh. These results indicate
that studies using Y1065F vinculin to prevent phosphorylation in cells
could be misleading.

Phosphorylation of Y1065 and select Y1065 mutants alter
Vt binding
to Vh, but do not ablate head–tail interactions. (A) The variants
were incubated with either GST alone or the GST-Vh domain protein
(residues 1–811). Bound proteins were eluted off the beads
and probed with the indicated antibodies. (B) The Y1065 mutants bind
actin in the presence of the activating virulent peptide, IpaA.

To determine whether head–tail
defects are observed in the
context of full-length protein, we performed actin cosedimentation
assays with the Y1065 mutants in full-length vinculin either with
or without IpaA peptide. IpaA is a peptide derived from virulent factor
from Shigella flexneri, which has been shown to be
sufficient to activate vinculin. If the
Y1065 mutations greatly perturb head–tail interactions, we
expect those variants to bind to F-actin in the absence of IpaA since
F-actin alone is not sufficient to release head–tail intramolecular
contacts. In the absence of IpaA, the
Y1065 variants are unable to bind or bundle actin. These findings
indicate that the vinculin Y1065 mutations are unable to significantly
disrupt head–tail interactions in the context of the full-length
protein (Figure B). Similar to previous observations,
Y1065A vinculin can bind and bundle F-actin similar to WT vinculin
in the presence of the IpaA peptide. In contrast, Y1065E vinculin
is unable to bundle actin in the presence of IpaA while Y1065F vinculin
displays a higher bundling efficiency (). These results are consistent
with a previous observation that phosphorylation of full-length vinculin
is not sufficient to facilitate F-actin association. When F-actin is visualized by fluorescence microscopy,
bundle formation is observed with WT, Y1065A, and Y1065F vinculin,
but not Y1065E, in the presence of the IpaA peptide (). These data indicate that the head–tail
defects observed by the Vh-Vt pulldown assay are not enough to overcome
the head–tail intramolecular interactions that would allow
full-length vinculin variants to bind F-actin in the absence of the
IpaA peptide. Furthermore, these results show that comparable behavior
is observed between Vt and the full-length protein, which is not surprising
given the structural similarities of isolated Vt and its conformation
in in full-length vinculin.,,

Mutation at Y1065 Affects Cell Spreading
To further
probe the differences between the Y1065 variants and better understand
the impact of Y1065 phosphorylation, we explored the impact of these
mutants in cells, particularly during cell spreading events. When
the F-actin bundling deficient mutant (ΔC5-vinculin) is expressed
in cells, the cells are found to be significantly smaller with significantly
fewer but slightly larger FAs. However,
previous studies have shown that both Y1065F and Y100F mutants are
required for a cell spreading defect. To examine cell spreading, we expressed our GFP-vinculin variants
in Vin −/– MEFs, examined their expression levels by
Western blot (data not shown), and monitored the cells using the real-time
cell analyzer (RTCA) xCELLigence system. The RTCA system is an impedance-based
method that monitors electrical impedance as cells attach and spread
on the electrode (given in the arbitrary units, cell index (CI)).
As previously reported, Vin −/– MEFs have difficulty
in adhering to and spreading on FN, while cells expressing WT vinculin
and Y1065A vinculin are well spread (Figure A,B). Cells expressing Y1065E vinculin
exhibited a higher CI, indicating cells are more spread. In contrast,
cells expressing Y1065F vinculin displayed lower impedance suggesting
a defect in cell spreading while Y1065A vinculin expressing cells
were comparable to cells expressing WT vinculin (Figure A,B).

Vinculin variants at Y1065 localize to FAs and affect
cell spreading
and FAs. (A) A representative trace of cell impedance (graphed as
cell index (CI)) from the RTCA xCELLigence system is taken every 15
s for 4 h; lower impedance indicates less contact with the electrode.
Each data point represents an average CI of at least duplicate wells
for each condition. (B) A graph showing the relative CI of cells spread
on FN 2 h following plating, which corresponds to the same time as
the pictures shown in (C). Data are the average ± SEM combined
from three independent experiments. *p ≤ 0.05.(C)
Vin–/– MEFs expressing either GFP-tagged WT-, Y1065F-,
Y1065A-, or Y1065E vinculin or untransfected cells were allowed to
adhere and spread on FN for 2 h. Plots of cell area (D), number of
FAs per cell (E) and FA area (F) (WT n = 47; Y1065F n = 31; Y1065A n = 41; Y1065E n = 33; Vin −/– n = 35). *p-value ≤ 0.05. Error bars are ± SEM. Scale bar is 25
μm.

We also visualized cells expressing
the vinculin mutants by microscopy
to see if their morphology corresponds to the CI observed by RTCA.
As shown in Figure C, cells expressing WT
vinculin and the Y1065 mutants retain vinculin localization to FAs,
which is not surprising since Vh is sufficient to localize vinculin
to FAs. The cell area was quantified
for Vin −/– MEFs expressing the vinculin variants and
Vin −/– MEFs to examine spreading on FN. Cells expressing
Y1065E vinculin are significantly larger (1971.99 μm2 ± 226.8), while Vin −/– MEFs (1156.19 μm2 ± 112.6) are significantly smaller, a finding that corresponds
to our RTCA observations (Figure D). Quantification
of FAs in cells expressing Y1065A and Y1065F vinculin revealed significantly
fewer FAs (average 182.7 ± 12.62; 163.2 ± 15.31, respectively)
compared to cells expressing WT vinculin (average 235.9 ± 12.83)
and cells expressing Y1065A and Y1065E vinculin have significantly
smaller FAs (Figure E,F). These results, taken
together, suggest that the phosphorylation state of Y1065 and vinculin-mediated
actin bundling capacity can affect cell spreading through their influence
on FA number and area.

Phosphorylation State of Y1065 Regulates
the Response to Mechanical
Force Applied to Integrins
Vinculin plays a critical role
in transducing signals that enable cellular reinforcement., We have recently shown that direct interactions between vinculin
and actin are important for cells to stiffen in response to external
pulses of force., Given our findings that phosphorylation
at Y1065 impairs F-actin bundling in vitro, we employed
three-dimensional force microscopy (3DFM) to examine cell stiffening
in response to external pulses of force. For these measurements, the
relative bead displacement for the first and second pulse was measured. Cells expressing either WT- or Y1065A vinculin
showed a significant decrease in bead displacement indicative of a
stiffening response (Figure ). However, cells
expressing Y1065F or Y1065E vinculin exhibited a similar bead displacement
upon the second pulse, indicating a lack of a stiffening response.
This result is surprising given the ability of Vt Y1065F to bundle
F-actin in vitro, but it could indicate the F-actin bundles formed
by vinculin need to be tightly attuned to the correct efficiency or
require a specific conformation in order to transduce the signals
to attain a cellular stiffening response.

The phosphorylation state
of Y1065 regulates the cellular stiffening
response to external forces on integrins. For the relative bead displacement
measurements, two pulses of force were applied to FN-coated beads
bound to Vin −/– MEFs transfected with either WT vinculin
(n = 17), Y1065F vinculin (n = 15),
Y1065A vinculin (n = 16), or Y1065E vinculin (n = 16). **p ≤ 0.001 comparing Y1065
vinculin variants to WT vinculin. Error bars are ± SEM.

Discussion
Vinculin
is an essential adaptor protein that has been implicated
in a number of cellular processes including cell adhesion, spreading,
regulating FA dynamics, and mediating external mechanical cues., The interaction between vinculin and F-actin is critical for vinculin
to operate in FAs as indicated by mutations that selectively disrupt
the ability of vinculin to bind or bundle F-actin.,,, Here, we show
that Y1065 is critical for vinculin-mediated F-actin bundle formation,
which in turn is important for cells to spread and transduce forces.
Furthermore, we find that phosphorylation of Vt by Src disrupts actin
bundling and reduces Vh-Vt interactions. We have also characterized
a series of Y1065 mutants to determine which variants best mimic phosphorylated
and unphosphorylated states of vinculin. Surprisingly, while Y1065F
vinculin has been previously used a nonphosphorylatable variant,− Y1065A possesses properties that better mimic nonphosphorylated
vinculin. While Vt Y1065A retains similar structure (Figure B), actin bundling (Figure B,C), and interactions with Vh (Figure A)
in comparison to WT Vt, Vt Y1065F shows alterations in tryptophan
packing interactions (Figure B), reduced affinity
for Vh (Figure A), and significantly enhanced
actin bundling relative to WT Vt and Vt Y1065A (Figure B,C). Additionally, our results indicate that phosphorylation
or mutation to a phosphomimetic (Y1065E) impacts not only the tertiary
structure (Figure B) and the cooperativity
of unfolding in response to increasing temperature (Figure C,D), but it also disrupts binding to Vh (Figure ), similar to previous observations. In contrast to previous studies, our results
provide additional support that the C-terminal hairpin is not critical
for acidic phospholipid association with Vt, and that Y1065 phosphorylation does not regulate the interaction
between PIP2 and Vt ().

Previous studies
investigating the ability of vinculin to bundle
actin have used large, destabilizing deletions.,, For instance, while removal of the Vt C-terminus
(residues 1052–1066) showed an enhanced actin bundling efficiency, it has been previously shown that this deletion
alters the structural integrity of Vt. We have previously shown that deletion of Y1065 and Q1066 from the
C-terminal hairpin retains Vt structure, actin, and phospholipid binding,
but greatly impairs actin bundling., Hence, our
finding that phosphorylation or certain mutations at Y1065 also impair
actin bundling is not surprising given the importance of the C-terminal
hairpin in actin-induced Vt self-association; however, we were surprised by the varying degrees of bundling efficiency
exhibited by the different Y1065 mutations (Figure B,C; ). While the results from the head–tail pulldowns found that
Y1065F, pY-Vt, and Y1065E were unable to bind to GST-Vh in the Vh-Vt
pulldowns with the same efficiency as WT Vt and Y1065A, actin cosedimentation
assays with full-length vinculin showed that the Y1065 mutants were
unable to bind F-actin unless the activating IpaA peptide was present
(Figure B). These results suggest that the
head–tail interaction defects exhibited by Y1065F and Y1065E
are not drastic enough to ablate head–tail intramolecular interactions
in the context of the full-length protein. Other factors may contribute
to priming the molecule to adopt an open conformation such as phosphorylation
of additional tyrosine residues (Y100) and PKC-mediated phosphorylation
of serine residues (S1033 or S1045).,, The differences observed between Vh-Vt pulldowns
and actin cosedimentations with full-length vinculin observed in vitro could be attributed to an avidity effect of having
Vt tethered to Vh by the proline-rich linker. Recent studies have
employed a vinculin activation biosensor to monitor the recruitment
of either Y1065F or Y1065E to the membrane in smooth muscle cells.
Results from these analyses have shown that Y1065F is defective in
recruitment and hence activation. However,
further studies are required to examine how these mutations modulate
the active conformation of vinculin in FAs. Overall, these data indicate
that Src phosphorylation at Y1065 provides a mechanism for regulating
vinculin-driven F-actin bundle formation in cells. Moreover, our characterization
of the Y1065 mutants indicate that Y1065A, rather than Y1065F, is
a better nonphosphorylatable variant whereas Y1065E mimics phosphorylated
vinculin.

As demonstrated in Figure , cells expressing
vinculin variants are affected by the phosphorylation state at Y1065,
as indicated by their ability to spread on FN. The RTCA and quantification
of cell area data indicate that cells expressing WT-, Y1065F-, and
Y1065A vinculin behave similarly with respect to cell spreading. These
results are similar to previous studies that have examined Y1065F. In contrast, cells expressing Y1065E, the phosphomimetic
vinculin construct, develop a larger area. Taken together with previous
studies that examined actin binding and bundling on cell spreading,, it is likely that vinculin-driven F-actin bundling does not play
a direct role in dictating cell area during spreading events since
the actin bundling-deficient variant, Y1065E vinculin, exhibits a
significant increase in the cell area. Rather, the phosphorylation
state of Y1065 is the main contributing factor that affects cell spreading
events which is likely attributed to interactions with an unidentified
binding partner. Additionally, we find that cells expressing Y1065A
and Y1065F vinculin mutants display significantly fewer FAs, and that
Y1065A and Y1065E vinculin-expressing cells have significantly smaller
FAs.

As shown previously, vinculin is a crucial component for
efficiently
transducing forces, whether they are external forces being applied
or internally generated forces. These forces are generated through
vinculin interactions with F-actin.− Preventing vinculin
binding to or bundling F-actin prevents cellular reinforcement when
external pulses of force are applied to integrins., We observed that when Y1065 is mutated, cells expressing Y1065A
vinculin are able to display a decrease in bead displacement with
subsequent pulses of force, thereby indicating a stiffening response
(Figure ). However, cells expressing Y1065F
and Y1065E vinculin are unable to stiffen upon applications of force
to integrins (Figure ). This observation is
not unexpected for Y1065E given its bundling defect in vitro. However, we were surprised with the lack of stiffening response
displayed by cells expressing Y1065F, given the “superbundling”
phenotype displayed by this variant in vitro. These results suggest
that the bundling efficiency displayed by vinculin needs to be tightly
controlled in order to attain efficient cellular reinforcement or
Y1065 is responsible for mediating additional functions. Whether it
is through association of an unknown binding partner that regulates
these events via the C-terminal hairpin or the actin-induced vinculin
dimer, the contribution to cell spreading and cellular reinforcement
appears to be phosphorylation dependent. While detection of this binding
partner is beyond the scope of this work, future efforts will be directed
toward the identification of the binding partner and elucidating its
interaction interface.

Supporting Information Available
Summary
of actin binding and
bundling for additional Vt Y1065 variants (Table S1) and mass spectrometry
confirmation of percent phosphorylation of Vt (Figure S1). Data also
include PIP2 cosedimentation results comparing the variants
(Figure S2), results of HSQC spectra comparing the variants (Figure
S3), and actin bundling results with full-length vinculin mutants
in the presence of IpaA (Figure S4). This material is available free
of charge via the Internet at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bi500678x_si_001.pdf

Author Present Address
¶ (C.E.T.)
Cell Motility Laboratory, Cancer Research
UK, London Research Institute, 44 Lincoln’s Inn Fields, London
WC2A 3LY, UK.

The
authors
declare no competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
We thank
Dr. Li Zhou for performing the mass spectrometry
analysis on phosphorylated Vt. We thank Dr. Greg Young, the NMR facility
manager at University of North Carolina-Chapel Hill, for assistance
in NMR data collection, and Dr. Ashutosh Tripathy, Director of the
UNC Macromolecular Interactions Facility, for assistance in the acquisition
of CD spectra. We thank Dr. Min-Qi Lu for the preparation of monomeric
actin.

Abbreviations
3DFMthree dimensional force microscopy

BMEβ-mercaptoethanol

CDcircular dichroism

DMEMDulbecco’s
modified Eagle’s medium

DTTdithiothreitol

fQCRfast quantitative cysteine reactivity

FAsfocal adhesions

F-actinfilamentous actin

FNfibronectin

G-actinmonomeric actin

KOknockout

MEFsmurine embryo fibroblasts

PBSphosphate buffered
saline

PIP2phosphatidylinositol
(4,5)-bisphosphate

SEMstandard error of the mean

RTCAreal-time cell analyzer

Vhvinculin head, residues 1–855

Vin −/–vinculin knockout cells

Vtvinculin tail, residues 879–1066

