Multielectron
multiproton reactions
are at the core of many chemical reactions important in biology, as well as nearly every reaction important in
energy conversion. These reactions present
a number of challenges, including the achievement of the complete
reaction of substrate without the release of reactive intermediates,
avoiding the requirement of physiologically inaccessible reduction
potentials, and ensuring the reaction proceeds across a relatively
narrow window of potential.

One strategy employed by Nature
to overcome the challenges inherent
to multielectron multiproton chemistry is the use of proton-coupled
electron transfer (PCET).− The coupled transfer of a proton and an electron
is encountered in many biological systems, and these PCET processes
have been well studied over the past several decades., Many of these studies have focused on the role of PCET in transferring
radical intermediates long-range,− in water oxidation,− and in the generation of proton gradients.,, Studies focused on how PCET processes are
governed during the transfer of multiple electrons and protons to
a single substrate by an enzyme during catalysis are therefore of
considerable importance for the development of a better understanding
of these complex biological processes.

Cytochrome c nitrite reductase (ccNiR) is a periplasmic
enzyme involved in bacterial respiratory nitrate ammonification. The
ccNiR enzyme catalyzes the remarkable six-electron seven-proton reduction
of nitrite to ammonia, the second step in the conversion of nitrate
to ammonia., The enzyme has also been shown
to perform the two-electron reduction of hydroxylamine and the five-electron
reduction of nitric oxide., Its ability to conduct
such complex reactions at relatively high turnover numbers without
the release of intermediates makes it a particularly interesting model
for multielectron multiproton reactions.

The Shewanella
oneidensis ccNiR enzyme is a homodimer,
containing five c-type hemes per protomer. Four of these hemes are bis-His-ligated and
are presumably involved in the transfer of electrons to the active
site heme, which is ligated by a single lysine residue and contains
an open coordination site for substrate binding. The ccNiR hemes have
been assigned potentials of −295, −230, −166,
−105, and −36 mV at pH 6 using PFV. The −105 mV heme is likely the active site heme,
on the basis of potential assignments to individual hemes using EPR
in the Escherichia coli enzyme, where the second
heme to be reduced is the active site heme., The active site of ccNiR is populated by a set of strongly conserved
amino acid residues (Tyr206, His257, and Arg103) that are presumably
involved in catalysis (Figure ).

Architecture
of the ccNiR active site. (A) Active site of S. oneidensis cytochrome c nitrite reductase. (B) Active site of nitrite-bound Wolinella
succinogenes ccNiR showing the hydrogen bonding network. Key active site residues are colored green.
Residues are numbered using S. oneidensis ccNiR numbering.
Images generated in PyMol from Protein Data Bank entries 3UBR and 2E80, respectively.

While a catalytic cycle has been
proposed,− (Scheme ), there have been
few studies providing direct experimental evidence of the nature of
the ET and proton-coupled steps occurring during the conversion of
nitrite to ammonia. Recently, we have shown that the reaction is likely
conducted in a series of one-electron transformations., Still lacking are experimental data describing the nature of proton
delivery steps occurring during catalysis in ccNiR. Computational
studies using DFT have focused on PCET during ccNiR catalysis and
offer a great deal of insight into the possible roles of the Tyr206,
His257, and Arg103 active site amino acid residues.,, To the best of our knowledge, there have
been only limited studies probing the role of the active site residues
in catalysis by ccNiR directly, a deficiency remedied by the work
presented here.

Proposed Reaction Scheme for the Six-Electron Seven-Proton
Reduction
of Nitrite to Ammonia by ccNiR
Proposed
radical intermediates
are denoted with asterisks. Residues predicted to be involved in steps
are denoted. Adapted from ref ().

Various ccNiR enzymes have been
studied using protein film voltammetry
(PFV),,− revealing distinct electrochemical
fingerprints characterized by attenuations (“switches”)
and enhancements (“boosts”) in activity depending of
the concentration of nitrite present. Here we seek to use PFV to improve
our understanding of the mechanism by which ccNiR conducts the six-electron
reduction of nitrite to ammonia, by coupling site-directed mutagenesis
to variable-pH experiments, to directly probe the roles of individual
active site residues in PCET processes.

Our findings expand
our understanding of how coupling of protons
to ET can be controlled within multielectron redox enzymes. We find
that ccNiR nitrite electrocatalysis can be described as being governed
by two components, a one-electron feature that is pH-independent and
a one-electron feature that is coupled to a single protonation event,
providing insight into the catalytic mechanism of this enzyme. Surprisingly,
we also find that mutations of individual resides within the active
site alter the nature of proton coupling but do not inhibit the ability
of ccNiR to complete its reduction of nitrite to ammonia. This indicates
that the rates and pKa values of proton-coupled
steps are tightly governed by the residues within the active site,
likely through an extensive hydrogen bonding network, yet these residues
do not necessarily direct the progression of the catalytic reduction
of substrate to product.

Materials and Methods
Enzyme Expression and Purification
S.
oneidensis TSP-C transformed with a TEV cleavable
10-histidine tag (C-terminal) in PHSG298 was grown in 1 L of 2×YT medium at 30 °C for 24 h. Cells
were pelleted by centrifugation at 6000g for 12 min
and resuspended in 20 mM 4-(2-Hydroxyethyl)piperazine-1-ethanesulfonic
acid (HEPES) and 500 mM NaCl (pH 8) with 0.1 mM PMSF. Cells were lysed
by sonication using 10 × 10 s bursts. The lysate was clarified
by centrifugation at 18000g for 25 min. The clarified
lysate was then loaded onto Ni-6-Sepharose resin (GE Healthcare) equilibrated
with 20 mM HEPES, 500 mM NaCl, and 20 mM imidazole (pH 8). Bound protein
was eluted with 20 mM HEPES, 500 mM NaCl, and 300 mM imidazole.

The His tag was then removed by digestion overnight with recombinant
TEV protease in 50 mM HEPES, 500 mM NaCl, 1 mM DTT, and 0.5 mM EDTA
(pH 8). The digested enzyme sample was then dialyzed into 20 mM HEPES,
500 mM NaCl, and 20 mM imidazole (pH 8). The sample was then loaded
onto Ni-6-Sepharose resin, and the tagless flow-through was collected.
Cleavage of the tag was usually &gt;80% efficient. The enzyme was
then
concentrated and buffer exchanged into 20 mM HEPES and 200 mM NaCl
(pH 8); glycerol was added to a concentration of 10%, and samples
were stored at −80 °C. These preparations typically yielded
1 mg/L cell culture and were &gt;95% pure as judged by sodium dodecyl
sulfate–polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis. Wild-type ccNiR
used in pH dependence experiments was purified as described previously.

Construction of Site-Directed Mutants
Active site variants
were constructed using an Agilent QuikChange Lightning kit with DNA
primers listed in Table 1 of the . All mutations were verified by sequencing.

Protein Film Voltammetry
Protein film voltammetry experiments
were conducted as previously described., Briefly, small
volumes of ccNiR were deposited onto pyrolytic graphite edge electrodes;
the electrode was rinsed and then immersed in the electrochemical
cell solution that consisted of a mixed buffer system of 5 mM sodium
acetate, 5 mM CAPS, 6 mM CHES, 5 mM MOPS, 5 mM MES, 4 mM TAPS, 100
mM NaCl, and 2 mM CaCl2, which allowed buffering over a
wide range of pH values. All PFV experiments were conducted in an
MBraun Labmaster inert chamber to prevent the background contribution
of oxygen reduction at the graphite electrode.

Steady-state
kinetic analysis was performed on wild-type (WT), Y206F, R103K, and
R103Q variants by recording cyclic voltammograms of ccNiR at different
nitrite concentrations and measuring the current magnitude (i.e.,
catalytic rate) at −550 mV.

Variable-pH experiments were
performed by changing the pH of a
master solution of buffer using HCl or NaOH, taking small aliquots
at a given pH, purging the buffer with argon, and then bringing the
samples into the inert chamber. Once a ccNiR film had been generated,
the pH of the cell solution was changed by simply replacing the existing
buffer with buffer at the new pH value and adding the desired concentration
of nitrite. After each experiment, the cell solution was saved and
the pH recorded again to ensure the pH of the cell solution did not
change during the electrocatalysis experiment.

H257Q Specific Activity
Experiments
The specific activity
of H257Q ccNiR was measured by following the oxidation of reduced
methyl viologen at 600 nm (ε = 13700 M–1 cm–1) in 20 mM HEPES and 100 mM NaCl (pH 7) at 20 °C.
Reactions were conducted in anaerobic vials and purged with argon
to remove oxygen. Reactions were initiated by addition of 1 mM sodium
nitrite. All reported values were corrected for nonenzymatic background
reoxidation of methyl viologen.

Quantification of Reducing
Equivalent Consumption and Ammonia
Production
The number of moles of methyl viologen consumed
per mole of ammonia produced was determined using a two-part assay.
Ammonia detection was performed according to a modified protocol described
by Chaney and Marbach., Reagent 1 contained 0.625 g of
NaOH and 200 μL of sodium hypochlorite (commercial bleach, 5.84%
available chlorine) in 25 mL of deionized water. Reagent 2 contained
1.25 g of phenol and 0.00625 g of sodium nitroferricyanide in 25 mL
of deionized water.

Assays were conducted in 20 mM HEPES and
100 mM NaCl (pH 7) at room temperature. Gastight syringes were used
for manipulation of all solutions. Enzyme and reduced methyl viologen
(final concentration of 500 μM) were added to a stoppered cuvette
containing buffer that had been purged with argon. The recording of
the absorbance at 600 nm was begun, and a baseline was recorded for
∼30 s. The reaction was initiated with 1 mM sodium nitrite,
and A600 was recorded until all methyl
viologen had been oxidized (A600 = 0).

Next, 400 μL of the reacted solution was mixed with 400 μL
each of ammonia detection reagents 1 and 2. The mixture was incubated
at 37 °C for 15 min, and the absorbance was measured at 625 nm.
The concentration of ammonia was then calculated using a standard
curve prepared with ammonium chloride. Final values for the number
of moles of methyl viologen consumed per mole of ammonia produced
were corrected for background levels of ammonia in reagents (using
oxidized methyl viologen) and background nonenzymatic reoxidation
of methyl viologen.

Results
WT and Mutant ccNiR Kinetics
To assess the importance
of proton delivery upon catalysis, PFV was used to determine kinetic
values for WT and mutant ccNiR by following the limiting current (ilim) at −550 mV with increasing nitrite
concentrations (Table ). For the WT enzyme,
steady-state kinetic data for nitrite turnover fit well to a substrate
inhibition model as was determined previously in PFV studies using
the Shewanella ccNiR purified from a high-yield expression
system., The physical basis of the apparent substrate
inhibition is still not well understood but may reflect the presence
of asymmetry between protomers within the ccNiR dimer. For all other mutants, kinetic data fit best
to a simple Michaelis–Menten model of enzyme kinetics, in which
the appearance of substrate inhibition is lost.

Kinetic Values of WT and Mutant ccNiR
 	KM (μM)	kcat (e– s–1)	kcat (% of WT)	KI (mM)	mol of MV/mol of NH4+	
WT	100 ± 15	150 ± 20	100	11	5.0 ± 1.0	
H257Q	ND	ND	0.8	ND	6.4 ± 0.6	
Y206F	35 ± 15	9 ± 3	6.0	NA	5.5 ± 0.1	
R103Q	910 ± 130	82 ± 9	55	NA	6.3 ± 0.5	
R103K	340 ± 50	20 ± 5	13	NA	6.0 ± 0.6	
All kinetic parameters were determined
by PFV as described in  with the exception of H257Q.

Because of low activity, the H257Q
percent activity was measured in solution at 1 mM nitrite, pH 7, and
20 °C and compared to that of WT ccNiR, also measured in solution,
under the same conditions. PFV was conducted at pH 7 and 20 mV/s with
a rotation rate of 3000 rpm.

Not determined.

Not available.

Y206F ccNiR was approximately
17-fold less active than WT with
a 3-fold smaller KM. R103Q ccNiR was approximately
2-fold less active than WT ccNiR but had a 9-fold larger KM. For this reason, the R103K variant was constructed
to investigate the possibility that a lost charge-based stabilization
was responsible for the increased KM in
the R103Q variant. It was found that R103K ccNiR had a KM closer to that of WT, but with a lower activity.

The activity of H257Q was found to be too low to measure using
PFV, so using a standard solution assay with 1 mM nitrite, the activity
was found to be reduced by approximately 150-fold compared to the
WT ccNiR activity measured in solution under the same conditions (Table ). (Because of the very low activity, catalytic
PFV could not be used to further characterize the H257Q variant.)

WT Catalytic Current–Potential Profile
As found
previously, examining a range of nitrite concentrations that span
the KM value, at pH 7, WT ccNiR displays
the same evidence of a preliminary onset of catalysis (centered at Ecat1), a secondary depletion of activity (Esw), and a secondary increase in activity (centered
at Ecat2) as the concentration of nitrite
becomes sufficiently high (Figure ). The potential of Ecat1 is dependent on the concentration of nitrite and varies from −200
to −250 mV across the range of concentrations of nitrite tested
(Figure A, inset). The boost feature, Ecat2, appears at −365 mV at the highest
concentration of nitrite under these conditions.

Current–potential
profiles of (A) WT ccNiR and its (B) Y206F,
(C) R103K, and (D) R103Q mutants. All experiments were performed at
pH 7, 20 mV/s, and 20 °C, with an electrode rotation rate of
3000 rpm. Top panels show overlays of raw cyclic voltammograms recorded
at increasing nitrite concentrations. Dotted cyclic voltammograms
show data of ccNiR films recorded in the absence of nitrite. Bottom
panels show first derivatives of baseline-subtracted reductive scans
of the voltammograms. Insets show plots of Ecat values vs nitrite concentration fit to eq . Substrate concentrations were 16–473 μM for
WT, 2–120 μM for Y206F, 16 μM to 1.9 mM for R103K,
and 76 μM to 8.4 mM for R103Q.

The relative contribution of both catalytic features to the
overall
waveform is dependent on pH (Figure ). At
pH 7 and 500 μM nitrite (greater than KM), both features are present, but the Ecat2 feature is visible only as a low-potential shoulder at
the highest nitrite concentrations. This feature becomes much more
prominent at higher pH values, and at pH &gt;8, the Ecat2 feature dominates waveforms produced at high nitrite
concentrations. At lower pH values and high nitrite concentrations,
the waveform is dominated by Ecat1, and Ecat2 is barely visible. At pH &lt;5.5, no boost
is observed at low nitrite concentrations.

Dependence of the ccNiR
catalytic waveform on pH. All scans were
recorded at 500 μM nitrite, 20 mV/s, and 20 °C, with an
electrode rotation rate of 3000 rpm. Top panels show raw voltammograms.
Bottom panels show first derivatives of baseline-subtracted reductive
scans. The cell solution pH is shown at the top left of each panel.

Y206F Catalytic Current–Potential
Profile
Mutation
of Y206 to a phenylalanine drastically alters the catalytic current–potential
profile during nitrite turnover (Figure B).
Y206F ccNiR current–potential profiles are characterized by
the presence of two catalytic features, which are easily resolved
from one another across all nitrite concentrations at pH 7. No “switch”
feature is observed under any of the conditions tested. At sub-KM nitrite concentrations, the catalytic wave
is dominated by a single feature, Ecat1, which is nearly indistinguishable from the nonturnover signal caused
by the low activity of this mutant. Only a very small boost in activity
centered at Ecat2 is observed under these
conditions. As the nitrite concentration is increased, Ecat2 begins to dominate the waveform. At saturating nitrite
concentrations, Ecat1 is visible only
as a high-potential shoulder in the first derivative of the catalytic
waveform.

The positions of both catalytic features shift with
increasing nitrite concentrations, with Ecat1 and Ecat2 spanning potential ranges
of −230 to −270 mV and −355 to −400 mV,
respectively (Figure B, inset).

Like
those of wild-type ccNiR, the relative contributions of each
of the catalytic features to the overall waveform vary with pH. In
Y206F ccNiR, however, this dependence is distinct from that of WT
(Figure 1 of the ). The low-potential feature dominates the catalytic waveform across
a wide pH range of 5–9, contrary to what is observed for the
WT enzyme (Figure ). Under the conditions
tested, Ecat1 is barely detectable at
most pH values. Only above pH 9, when the overall enzymatic activity
of Y206F is very low, does the high-potential (Ecat1) feature appear to be approximately the same size as the
low-potential feature.

R103K Catalytic Current–Potential
Profile
The
R103K variant also causes a distinct change in the catalytic current–potential
profile (Figure C). Only a single catalytic
feature is present across all concentrations of nitrite (i.e., there
is no boost), yet distinct switch behavior (attenuation in activity
at approximately −350 mV) is present at nitrite concentrations
up to KM for R103K. Also, the position
of the primarily catalytic feature shifts to more negative potentials
as the concentration of nitrite is increased and spans a range of
−235 to −310 mV (Figure C, inset).

R103Q Catalytic Current–Potential Profile
Mutation
of R103 to a glutamine residue also causes a significant change to
the overall catalytic waveforms observed during turnover of ccNiR
(Figure D). As seen for R103K, a single catalytic
feature is observed across the entire range of nitrite concentrations
tested, yet in contrast to R103K, at pH 7 no switch feature is observed
nor is an attenuation of activity ever observed. As with WT ccNiR,
the catalytic feature observed during R103Q ccNiR turnover becomes
more negative with an increasing substrate concentration and covers
a potential range of −210 to −300 mV (Figure D, inset), contained within the potential ranges
of Ecat1 and Ecat2 observed during WT nitrite turnover.

pH Dependence of WT ccNiR
Nitrite Turnover
Variable-pH
experiments reveal that the position of the lower-potential catalytic
feature associated with nitrite reduction, Ecat2, shifts with pH, while the position of the high-potential
feature, Ecat1, is invariant with pH over
a wide range of pH values (Figure A). The
position of Ecat2 is pH-independent at
pH values less than ∼6.5 and greater than ∼9. In the
pH range of 6.5–9, the position of Ecat2 becomes more negative as the pH of the electrochemical cell solution
is increased. Measuring the position of Ecat values at the pH extremes is made difficult by the lower activity
of ccNiR in these pH regions. Additionally, at more acidic pH values,
measurement of the position of Ecat2 is
further complicated because this feature overlaps significantly with Ecat1, making the two features difficult to resolve.

pH dependence
of catalytic features during WT and mutant ccNiR
nitrite turnover. (A) Plot of Ecat1 (○)
and Ecat2 (◆) for WT ccNiR. (B)
Plots of Ecat2 values for WT (◆),
Y206F (□), R103Q (■), and R103K (▲). Experiments
were conducted at 500 μM nitrite, 20 °C, and 20 mV/s, with
an electrode rotation rate of 3000 rpm. Ecat2 data for WT, R103Q, and R103K are fit to eq , and Ecat2 data for Y206F are fit to
eq .

The pH dependence of Ecat2 for
WT ccNiR
can be readily fit to a model of proton-coupled electron transfer,
in which a one-electron process is coupled to a single protonation
event (eq )where the fitted parameters
are summarized in Table .

Fitted Parameters from Fitting of
pH Dependence Data
 	Eacid (mV)	pKox1	pKred1	pKox2	pKred2	
WT	–324	7.0	8.5	NA	NA	
Y206F	–246	5.1	5.7	5.1	7.4	
R103Q	–220	7.6	≥8.4	NA	NA	
R103K	≤−209	≤4.7	6.2	NA	NA	
This value is estimated
because
of the low activity at the alkaline limit.

Not available.

pH Dependence of Y206F ccNiR
Like that of WT, the high-potential
catalytic feature (Ecat) observed during
Y206F electrocatalysis is invariant with pH across a wide range of
pH values (Figure 2 of the ). The pH profile of Ecat2 is distinct
(Figure B) and is not well-described by eq  (Figure 2 of the ). The pH dependence of Ecat2 is composed of two distinct regions. Between pH 6 and 8, the Ecat value changes with pH with a slope of −59
mV/pH unit, consistent with a one-electron one-proton process. At
pH values between 5 and 6, Ecat shifts
with a slope of −118 mV/pH unit, consistent with a one-electron
two-proton process. These data can be described by a model that accounts
for an additional protonation event (eq ):

Using this model, we assume pKox1 = pKox2, because
of the absence of an additional detectable one-electron one-proton
region below pH 5. While it is possible that the two pKox values may be slightly different from one another,
this cannot be reliably determined from our data. On the basis of
the results of the fit, the pKred and
pKox values associated with the −59
mV/pH unit region (pKox2 and pKred2, respectively) are shifted toward the acidic
direction compared to those of WT (Table ).

pH Dependence of R103Q ccNiR
The pH dependence of the
single catalytic feature observed during R103Q nitrite turnover is
well-described by eq  (Figure B). Despite the one-electron one-proton stoichiometry for
the observed PCET process, the pH dependence of R103Q is distinct
from that of WT ccNiR. Most notably, the value of Ecat at the acidic limit (Eacid) is shifted by approximately 100 mV relative to that of WT (Table ). We found that this difference could not be accounted
for by the larger KM exhibited by R103Q,
because repeating the pH dependence experiment in the presence of
approximately saturating (3 mM) nitrite decreases the difference in Eacid between R103Q and WT to only approximately
90 mV (Figure 3 of the ).

The pKox values for R103Q are
shifted in the alkaline direction by approximately half a pH unit
(Table ). It is not clear from these data
where the pH invariant region at the alkaline limit begins because
the low activity of R103Q ccNiR at pH &gt;9 precludes measurement
of
an Ecat value. Therefore, the reported
pKa values are taken to be estimates.

pH Dependence of R103K ccNiR
While the pH dependence
of the single catalytic feature observed during R103K electrocatalysis
is well-described by eq , the data are distinct
from those of WT, Y206F, and R103Q ccNiR, such that the Ecat feature is invariant with pH between pH ∼7
and 9 (Figure B). This corresponds to a shift
in pKa values of nearly two pH units.
A pH invariant acidic region could not be detected and can therefore
only be estimated (Table ). On the basis of
our estimates, we have found that the Eacid value for R103K has shifted to more positive potentials by at least
100 mV.

Substrate Dependence of WT and Variant ccNiR Ecat Values
The positions of all detected catalytic
features were dependent on the concentration of substrate (Figure , inset), and could be described by eq :

At pH 7, the Ecat2 feature is not well-defined for WT ccNiR
(Figure ). However, at pH 8.3, this feature
is better separated
from Ecat1, and the substrate dependence
of both features is apparent (Figure 4 of the ).

Production of Ammonia by
WT and Variant ccNiR
Quantification
of moles of reducing equivalents consumed per mole of ammonia produced
was performed on WT ccNiR and its variants. Within error, all variants
produced the expected one ammonia for every six reducing equivalents
consumed, strongly indicating that all tested ccNiR variants are competent
in conducting the six-electron reduction of nitrite to ammonia, regardless
of the overall kcat (Table ).

Discussion
PCET is a feature of
numerous enzymes involved in a wide variety
of different chemical processes and plays an especially important
role in multielectron multiproton reactions. In this study, we have
used PFV to directly probe proton coupling that occurs during the
six-electron seven-proton reduction of nitrite to ammonia and show
that PFV can describe multiple contributions to catalysis, some of
which are proton-dependent while others are not.

Cytochrome c nitrite reductase has been a model
for understanding multielectron multiproton catalysis for more than
a decade. However, until now, few details
of the roles of individual amino acid residues within the active site
or how proton-coupled steps that occur during the rate-limiting step
of ccNiR catalysis are controlled have been presented. This work offers
a first look at the roles of the individual active site amino acids
in governing activity, electrochemical properties, proton-coupled
redox steps, and competence to conduct the full reduction of nitrite
to ammonia. Importantly, we have found that while individual amino
acids are responsible for tuning the properties of the active site,
no single amino acid is responsible for gating proton delivery and
allowing the enzyme to conduct the full reduction of nitrite to ammonia.

Active
Site Mutations Alter Rate-Limiting Steps of Catalysis
in ccNiR
To date, all ccNiRs studied by protein film voltammetry
exhibit a similar current–potential profile, characterized
by attenuations and boosts in activity that depend on the concentration
of substrate present and the applied potential., The physical basis of either phase of electrocatalysis is still
not well-defined, although the relative dominance of one component
of current likely represents a shift in the rate-limiting steps of
catalysis, in a fashion that depends upon the applied potential. One inference drawn from this model historically
is that Ecat2 may be due to a secondary
redox process that accelerates the rate of catalysis, such as an alternative
relay to the active site heme., However, the substrate
dependence of both Ecat1 and Ecat2 strongly suggests that these features are the result
of processes occurring at the active site (Figure  and Figure 4 of the ) and suggest redox steps occurring during the conversion of nitrite
to ammonia. We therefore interpret Ecat1 and Ecat2 as indicating rate-limiting
steps of catalysis that involve chemistry occurring at the active
site.

Using site-directed mutagenesis, we can alter the appearance
of the phases that comprise a catalytic wave (Figure ). The Y206F, R103Q, and R103K variants all exhibit current–potential
profiles significantly altered compared to that of the wild-type enzyme
under the same conditions. Given that all of these mutations are at
the active site of ccNiR, the altered profiles provide further evidence
that the detected electron transfer steps are occurring at the active
site.

Like WT ccNiR, the Y206F variant displays multiple phases
within
its catalytic signals; however, these phases are altered. In terms
of potential, the Ecat1 and Ecat2 features for Y206F are far more distinct from one
another at pH 7 than those of WT, which we interpret to be the result
of the altered proton coupling (see below).

Surprisingly, changing
R103 to a glutamine or a lysine has different
effects on the current–potential profile of ccNiR, differentially
altering the detected phases of catalysis (Figure ). In the case of both variants, the current–potential
profile consists of a single catalytic feature, contrary to that of
WT ccNiR. R103K still exhibits the switch behavior, but in R103Q,
only a single feature is observed. The position of this feature lies
between Ecat1 and Ecat2 potentials observed in WT ccNiR.

Importantly, neither
R103Q nor Y206F exhibits the switch behavior,
while R103K does (at concentrations of nitrite up to the KM). The switch feature has been hypothesized to be the
result of uncompensated negative charge at the bis-His-ligated hemes
that has been supported by the apparent increase in the prominence
of the switch with increased pH, because at higher pH values there
are fewer protons present to counteract this buildup of negative charge. However, the modulation of the presence of the
switch by altering active site residues suggests the process responsible
for the switch behavior occurs at or near the active site, rather
than at hemes distant from the active site that are involved in relaying
ET reactions solely.

Catalysis Is Governed by One-Electron Events
and One-Electron
One-Proton events
Previous electrocatalytic analysis of S. oneidensis ccNiR indicated that the nature of the rate-determining
step for nitrite reduction at pH 8.3 varied with applied potential
and likely involved the transfer of a single electron. Our current data add to these findings by confirming
that at least one ET event (i.e., Ecat2) has one-electron one-proton stoichiometry, and all detected ET
events are consistent with n = 1 processes (Table
2 of the ). The presence
of a proton-coupled redox event during nitrite catalysis is clearly
demonstrated by the pH dependence of the Ecat2 feature at saturating nitrite concentrations, which fits well to
a one-electron one-proton model (Figure ).

Our findings also reveal that during the onset of catalysis, the
rate of the conversion of nitrite to ammonia is governed by an electron
transfer event that is not proton-coupled (Ecat1). This suggests that within the catalytic mechanism, both
proton-coupled redox steps and an ET step that is not coupled to a
protonation exist. The presence of both proton-coupled (Ecat2) and proton-independent (Ecat1) electron transfer events suggests that within the ccNiR catalytic
mechanism, not all ET steps necessitate a coupled proton transfer.

Active Site Residues Impact Proton-Coupled Redox Chemistry during
Electrocatalysis
Our data largely confirm the hypothesized
involvement of the His257, Arg103, and Tyr206 residues in proton-coupled
redox chemistry, as described by recent computational studies.,,, For example, computational evidence suggests Tyr206 acts as a proton
donor during catalysis, possibly during the final step in the six-electron
reduction (Scheme ), and Tyr206 has been shown to be important for the activity of Wolinella ccNiR. Here, the
altered proton dependence of Y206F confirms that this residue does
play a role in PCET during conversion of nitrite to ammonia (Figure B). First, the similarity between the current–potential
profiles for Y206F and WT where Ecat1 is
pH-independent and Ecat2 is pH-dependent
strongly suggests that the same processes are observed in each case.
The pH dependence profile for the Y206F variant consists of two regions,
an alkaline region and an acidic region. The alkaline region of pH
dependence has a slope consistent with a one-electron one-proton process
with pKa values shifted in the acidic
direction relative to those of WT ccNiR. The pH dependence region
between pH 6 and 8 has a slope of approximately −59 mV/pH,
which is consistent with a one-proton one-electron process. We interpret
this pH-dependent region to be the same process that is observed during
WT turnover for Ecat2, although the pKa values are apparently altered by the absence
of the terminal hydroxyl group of the tyrosine residue. The pH dependence
region from pH 5 to 6 appears to be a proton-coupled redox process
that in WT is outside the physiological pH range; the Y206F mutation
apparently alters the pKa values of this
process such that they are now accessible at higher pH values. Together,
we interpret these data to indicate that Y206 is involved in tuning
the pKa values of the proton-coupled redox
event observed in PFV. Altering this residue alters the pKa values of the observed proton-coupled redox process
and therefore alters the pH dependence profile of ccNiR.

Mutation
of Arg103 to Gln or Lys also alters the pH dependence profile of ccNiR
(Figure B). The R103Q mutation causes the
pKa values associated with the proton-coupled
redox event to shift slightly in the alkaline direction, although
importantly, the stoichiometry of the proton-coupled process is not
altered compared to that of WT. In the case of the R103K variant,
the pKa values shift in the acidic direction,
where the catalytic feature is no longer proton-coupled at physiological
pH. These data support the hypothesis that R103 plays a role in tuning
the pKa values of the detected proton-coupled
redox step.

Rationalizing how the Y206F, R103K, and R103Q variants
differentially
affect the properties of ccNiR catalysis can be assisted by examination
of the high-resolution crystal structure of the ccNiR from W. succinnogenes, which reveals a number of waters within
the active site (Figure B). Together with
R103, H257, and Y206, these waters make up an extensive hydrogen bonding
network within the active site. We hypothesize that even if crystallographically
resolved waters were the specific proton donors to intermediate species
produced during catalysis, Y206 and R103 are able to influence this
step through the hydrogen bonding network.

R103 Contributes to Substrate
Binding and Modulates the Operating
Potential of Catalysis
Our finding that R103Q has a significantly
altered KM suggests that the residue plays
at least a partial role in stabilizing binding of substrate, likely
through a charge–charge interaction between negatively charged
substrate and the positively charged guanidinium group. This partial
effect is confirmed by variant R103K, which has a KM value that is closer to that of WT. More significantly,
the entire pH profiles for the R103 variants are shifted by nearly
100 mV in the positive direction, suggesting that R103 plays a direct
role in tuning the potential of this proton-coupled redox step, likely
by directly influencing the potential of the active site heme. Inspection
of the crystal structures of all ccNiRs indicates that the arginine
nitrogen forms a hydrogen bonding contact with a heme propionate (C7)
(Figure B). Previous studies have shown that
the protonation state of heme propionates, which can be influenced
by the presence of nearby residues, can play a large role in determining
the potential of a heme., The interaction between
R103 and the active site heme propionate is apparently altered in
both the R103Q and R103K variants, potentially altering the protonation
state of the heme propionate, providing an explanation for the difference
in the operating potential of R103Q and -K variants compared to that
of WT ccNiR. However, this apparent change in the potential of the
active site heme could not be detected using protein film voltammetry,
and all variants tested here have similar electrochemical responses
(Figure 5 of the ). Our inability to observe the altered potential of the active site
heme is likely due to the highly overlapping nature of signals from
the hemes in ccNiR.

Ability of ccNiR Active Site Variants To
Catalyze Six-Electron
Reduction of Nitrite to Ammonia
Despite the apparent differences
in steady-state kinetic values, electrocatalytic profiles, and pKa values of PCET, all variants retain the ability
to conduct the full reduction of nitrite to ammonia in the expected
six electron equivalents consumed per one ammonia produced (Table ). As it is easy to imagine that a diminished degree
of proton delivery may result in the release of partially reduced
products, such a finding is truly surprising, as all residues considered
here have been implicated in required proton delivery, through computational
analyses. For example, it has been suggested that H257 participates
in the first N−O bond cleavage during nitrite catalysis by
acting as a proton donor. Additionally, previous work on the Desulfovibrio desulfuricans enzyme using electrochemistry
suggested an active site histidine is a potential proton donor to
the heme–substrate complex during catalysis,, yet our results clearly demonstrate that when H257 cannot act as
a proton donor, the complete reaction still proceeds, although at
a reduced rate. The proton likely instead comes from waters within
the active site, or alternatively Arg103, as has been proposed previously,
although this must occur at a much slower rate.

Similarly, according to DFT studies, residues Y206
and R103 also likely act as proton donors during the reduction of
nitrite to ammonia. Although alteration
of Y206 and R103 residues reduces activity, they do so to a lesser
extent than H257. R103 apparently has additional roles, which are
charge stabilization of the negatively charged nitrite as well as
possibly tuning of the active site heme potential.

These results
suggest that no individual residue tested here is
essential for directing or gating the complete catalytic reduction
of nitrite to ammonia; rather, the residues act collectively to accelerate
the completed reaction, which is feasible here as electrons are never
limiting.

Conclusions
The data presented here
offer insight into how multiple electron
transfer and protonation events are controlled within the ccNiR active
site during catalytic reduction of nitrite. First, our data clearly
demonstrate that ccNiR catalysis is governed by two distinct phases:
a one-electron one-proton event and a one-electron event not coupled
to a proton transfer. Second, the ability of the ccNiR variants tested
here to conduct their full reaction, with reduced rates and altered
pKa values, demonstrates the importance
of the precise control of proton-coupled electron transfer steps that
is required to achieve high turnover numbers at physiological pH values.
This control is likely mediated though an extensive hydrogen bonding
network, involving both the protein and solvent waters. Future studies
should focus on what factors drive the direction of catalysis, as
well as what roles each individual residue plays at each ET step throughout
the catalytic cycle.

Supporting Information Available
Primers used for construction
of ccNiR variants, table of half-height widths from first derivatives
of catalytic waves, dependence of wave shape and positions of features
on pH for the Y206F variant, pH dependence of the R103Q variant at
3 mM nitrite, dependence of WT ccNiR Ecat values on nitrite concentration, and nonturnover electrochemical
signals for WT ccNiR and its variants. This material is available
free of charge via the Internet at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bi500854p_si_001.pdf

The authors declare no
competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
We thank Matthew
Youngblut for supplying WT ccNiR protein
for the data shown in Figure .

Abbreviations
ccNiRcytochrome c nitrite
reductase

PFVprotein
film voltammetry

PCETproton-coupled electron transfer

PMSFphenylmethanesulfonyl fluoride

DTTdithiothreitol

TEVtobacco etch virus protease

DFTdensity functional theory

ETelectron transfer.

