Lipoyl synthase (LS) catalyzes
the final step in the de novo pathway for the biosynthesis
of the lipoyl cofactor (N6-(6R-6,8-dimercapto-octanoyl)-lysyl), which consists of the sequential
insertion of two sulfur atoms into C–H bonds at C6 and C8 of
an octanoyl chain appended to the ε-amino group of a specific
lysyl residue of lipoyl carrier proteins (LCPs)− (Figure ). Five LCPs are known: the E2 subunits
of the pyruvate, α-ketoglutarate, branched chain oxo-acid, and
acetoin dehydrogenase complexes as well as the H protein of the glycine
cleavage system.− In these complexes, the lipoyl cofactor functions as an electron
acceptor in oxidative decarboxylation or other oxidative C–C
fragmentation reactions while covalently transporting the resulting
intermediates to different subunits that catalyze their modification
with coenzyme A or attachment to tetrahydrofolate.− The lipoyl cofactor is virtually
ubiquitous among organisms that undergo, or are capable of undergoing,
aerobic respiration. In addition to its most notable role as an essential
cofactor involved in energy metabolism or amino acid degradation,
lipoic acid (LA) is gaining prominence as a broad-spectrum antioxidant
and regulator of key cellular signaling pathways, as in its regulation
of transcription factor NF-κB.,, Because of its antioxidant properties, it has been
reported to be efficacious in the treatment of a number of disorders
that are related to oxidative stress, such as diabetic neuropathy− and Alzheimer’s disease.

Proposed reaction
mechanism of LS. LS and its substrate are shaded
in orange and blue, respectively. In each structure, the RS cluster
is shown in the upper part of LS, and the auxiliary cluster is shown
in the lower part. The assignment of cluster charges is based on the
Mössbauer spectroscopic results.

Genetic and biochemical studies conducted primarily in Escherichia coli (Ec) provide evidence
for two distinct pathways for lipoyl cofactor biosynthesis, which
are generally conserved among organisms that utilize this cofactor.,, An exogenous pathway allows organisms
to salvage LA or acquire it from nutrient sources. In Ec, the bifunctional enzyme, lipoate protein ligase A (LplA), catalyzes
the ATP-dependent activation of the free acid to the adenylated species
as well as the subsequent attachment of the lipoyl group to target
lysyl residues of LCPs., In mammals and some
bacteria, two separate enzymes are utilized: one for activating lipoic
acid to lipoyl-AMP (lipoate activating enzyme) and one for transferring
the activated lipoyl group to target LCPs (lipoyl transferase)., A second pathway, labeled the endogenous pathway, intersects with
type II fatty acid biosynthesis., The first comitted
step in this pathway, catalyzed by octanoyltransferase (LipB), is
the transfer of an n-octanoyl chain from octanoyl-acyl
carrier protein to an LCP.− The second enzyme, lipoyl synthase (LS), then catalyzes
sulfur insertion at C6 and C8 to afford the intact cofactor.− Recent studies describing lipoyl cofactor biosynthesis in Bacillus subtilis and Saccharomyces
cerevisiae reveal important perturbations of the pathways
described in Ec, showing the centrality of the H
protein of the glycine cleavage system in lipoyl cofactor formation
on all LCPs in those organisms.− Although genes encoding proteins
in both pathways are present in mammals, mice that are homozygous
null for the lias gene (lipoyl synthase) die in utero, suggesting that they cannot use maternally supplied
LA. On the other hand, mice that are heterozygous null for the lias gene (i.e., they contain one functional copy) survive,
but they have increased markers for oxidative stress.

LS is a member of the radical-SAM (RS) superfamily,
enzymes that
use an electron donated from a [4Fe–4S]+ cluster
to cleave S-adenosyl-l-methionine (SAM)
reductively to l-methionine and a 5′-deoxyadenosyl
5′-radical (5′-dA•). 5′-dA• is a potent oxidant used to abstract hydrogen atoms
(H•) both from protein and small-molecule substrates,
many of which contain inert target C–H bonds.− The [4Fe–4S] cluster is ligated by three Cys residues that
reside typically in a CX3CX2C motif, which serves
as a signature sequence for RS enzymes. LS, like BioB, RimO, MiaB, MtaB, and MTL1, is a member of a subclass
of RS enzymes that catalyze sulfur insertion into hydrocarbon backbones.
BioB catalyzes sulfur insertion into dethiobiotin to form biotin,
whereas RimO, MiaB, MtaB, and MTL1 catalyze insertion of a sulfur
atom capped with a methyl group derived from a second molecule of
SAM.,− RimO modifies the β
carbon of a conserved aspartyl group (Asp 88 in Ec) in protein S12 of the small subunit of the bacterial ribosome,
whereas MiaB and MtaB catalyze methylthiolation of adenosine 37 of
certain tRNAs.− A common feature of all RS enzymes that catalyze sulfur insertion
into unactivated C–H bonds is a second Fe/S cluster, a [2Fe–2S]
cluster in BioB and [4Fe–4S] clusters in all other characterized
enzymes, which is proposed to be the source of the inserted sulfur
atom. Whether the sulfur atom emanates from one of the bridging μ-sulfido
ions of the cluster or an externally ligated sulfide or polysulfide
species is the subject of debate and may in fact depend on the individual
enzymatic reaction. In the former instance, the cluster would be degraded
concomitant with turnover, implying a single turnover reaction, whereas
in the latter instance, multiple turnovers can ensue if the ligated
sulfur source can be replenished.,,−

The LS reaction proceeds as two distinct half-reactions (Figure ).,, In
the first half-reaction, SAM bound to the [4Fe–4S] cluster
ligated by Cys residues in the CX3CX2C motif
(RS cluster) is reductively cleaved to a 5′-dA•, which is used to abstract an H• from C6 of the
octanoyl chain. The resulting carbon-centered radical attacks an activated
form of sulfide, believed to be a bridging μ3-sulfido
ion of the [4Fe–4S] cluster ligated by Cys residues in the
CX4CX5C motif (auxiliary cluster). In the second
half-reaction, another equivalent of 5′-dA• is similarly generated, but it abstracts an H• from C8 of the octanoyl chain. The carbon-centered radical at C8
attacks a second form of activated sulfide, presumably from the same
[4Fe–4S] cluster. Upon addition
of two protons, the lipoyl cofactor is formed in its two-electron
reduced state. In this mechanism, the auxiliary [4Fe–4S] cluster
is degraded during catalysis, and the enzyme is therefore inactivated
after a single turnover. This mechanism is consistent with the finding
that the protein itself is the source of the inserted sulfur atoms
and that both sulfurs derive from the same polypeptide. Although a monothiolated species, proposed to
be the product of the first half-reaction, has been detected in previous
studies, it has not been shown to be catalytically or kinetically
competent to form product., Herein, we provide evidence
that the intermediate is in fact competent and is covalently cross-linked
to LS. Characterization of the cross-linked species suggests a shared
sulfur atom between the monothiolated intermediate and a trinuclear,
partially degraded Fe/S cluster.

Materials and Methods
Materials
Kanamycin and ampicillin were from IBI Shelton
Scientific (Pecsto, IA) or Gold Biotechnology (St. Louis, MO). N-(2-Hydroxyethyl)piperazine-N′-2-ethanesulfonic
acid (HEPES), tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP), pyridoxal 5′-phosphate
(PLP), sodium sulfide, 2-mercaptoethanol (BME), and sodium dithionite
were from Sigma Corp. (St. Louis, MO). Ferric chloride was from EMD
Biosciences (Gibbstown, NJ), and Coomassie brilliant blue was from
ICN Biomedicals (Aurora, OH). Bradford reagent for protein concentration
determination as well as the bovine serum albumin standard was from
Pierce, Thermofisher Scientific (Rockford, IL). Dithiothreitol (DTT)
and isopropyl β-d-1-thiogalactopyranoside were purchased
from Gold Biotechnology (St. Louis, MO). 57Fe metal (98%)
was from Isoflex USA (San Francisco, CA), and [8,8,8-2H3]octanoic acid (99.7%) was purchased from CDN Isotopes (Pointe-Claire,
Canada). Sephadex G-25 resin was obtained from GE Healthcare (Piscataway,
NJ), and DE-52 anion-exchange resin was from Whatman (Maidstone, England).
Peptide substrates and standards were custom-synthesized by ProImmune
Ltd. (Oxford, UK), and their concentrations were estimated by weight
using their theoretical molecular masses. All other chemicals were
of reagent grade quality or higher.

Hexahistidine-tagged Ec LS was prepared essentially as described previously. The final protein was exchanged into buffer A
(50 mM HEPES, pH 7.5, 0.3 M KCl, 1 mM DTT, 20% glycerol) using a Sephadex
G-25 column, snap-frozen in small aliquots, and stored in liquid N2 until further use. Thermus thermophilus (Tt) LS was expressed and purified as described
previously for Ec LS.,S-Adenosylhomocysteine nucleosidase (SAHN) and SAM were prepared as
described previously., [8,8,8-2H3]-Octanoyl-H protein (OHP) was synthesized using Ec LplA as described previously.,

Methods
UV–vis
spectra were recorded on Cary
50 or Cary 300 spectrometers (Varian; Walnut Creek, CA). Low-temperature
X-band electron paramagnetic resonance (EPR) spectroscopy was performed
on a Bruker Elexsys E-560 spectrometer (Billerica, MA) equipped with
a SuperX FT microwave bridge. An ITC503S temperature controller and
ESR900 helium cryostat, both from Oxford Instruments (Concord, MA),
were used to control and maintain sample temperature. High-performance
liquid chromatography (HPLC) with detection by mass spectrometry (LC–MS)
was conducted on an Agilent Technologies (Santa Clara, CA) 1200 system
coupled to an Agilent Technologies 6410 QQQ mass spectrometer. The
system was operated with the associated MassHunter software package,
which was also used for data collection and analysis. Fast protein
liquid chromatography (FPLC) was conducted on an ÄKTA system
(GE Healthcare) housed in a Coy anaerobic chamber (Grass Lake, MI)
and fitted with a Mono Q (GE Healthcare) anion-exchange column. Sodium
dodecyl sulfate–polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE)
was conducted as described previously using a mini vertical electrophoresis unit from Hoefer (Holliston,
MA).

Mössbauer spectra were recorded on alternating constant
acceleration Mössbauer spectrometers equipped either with a
Janis SVT-400 variable-temperature cryostat (weak-field) or a Janis
8TMOSS-OM-12SVT variable-temperature cryostat (strong-field). The
external field at the sample is oriented parallel to the γ beam.
All isomer shifts are quoted relative to the centroid of the spectrum
of α-iron metal at room temperature. Simulation of the Mössbauer
spectra was carried out using the WMOSS spectral analysis software
(www.wmoss.org, WEB Research, Edina, MN). Simulations of
the 3Fe-clusters in external magnetic fields are based on the spin
Hamiltonian formalism given by eq , in which
the first term describes the electron Zeeman effect, the second and
third terms represent the zero field splitting of the S = 2 ground state, the fourth term represents the interaction between
the electric field gradient and the nuclear quadrupole moment, the
fifth term describes the magnetic hyperfine interactions of the electronic
spin with the 57Fe nuclei, and the last term represents
the nuclear Zeeman interaction. All symbols have their usual meaning. Simulations of the two spectroscopically distinct
sites (FeIII and Fe22.5+ pair) were
carried out with respect to the electronic spin of the ground state, S = 2. Spectra were calculated in the slow relaxation limit.

LS Activity
Determinations
LS activity assays using
OHP as substrate have been described previously.,,, When OHP was
replaced with the peptide substrate Glu-Ser-Val-(N6-octanoyl)Lys-Ala-Ala-Ser-Asp (peptide 1) or biotin-PEG-Glu-Ser-Val-([8,8,8-2H3]-N6-octanoyl)Lys-Ala-Ala-Ser-Asp (peptide 2) (), assays contained
the following: 50 mM HEPES, pH 7.5, 300 mM KCl, 10% glycerol, 200
μM LS, 300 μM octanoyl-peptide, 700 μM SAM, 2 mM
dithionite, and 500 nM SAHN. After pre-equilibration at the appropriate
temperature (37 °C or room temperature), reactions were initiated
by addition of dithionite. Aliquots were quenched at designated times
in 100 mM sulfuric acid containing 4 mM TCEP and 20 μM external
peptide standard (Pro-Met-Ser-Ala-Pro-Ala-Arg-Ser-Met). A standard
curve for analysis by LC–MS was prepared in assay buffer and
contained 20 μM external peptide standard, 2 mM TCEP, and 3.9–500
μM octanoyl- and lipoyl-peptide. The quantity of mercapto-octanoyl
(i.e., monothiolated species) peptide was estimated using the lipoyl-peptide
standards. The time-dependent formation and/or decay of octanoyl-,
6-mercapto-, and lipoyl-peptides was fitted individually to eqs , , or , respectively, using IgorPro graphing software (Wavemetrics, Lake
Oswego, OR). Equations  and  describe biphasic behavior, where t is time, A1 and A2, and A4 and A5 correspond
to the amplitudes of the two phases, and k1 and k2, and k5 and k6 correspond to the rate constants
for the two phases. Equation  describes the
formation and decay phases of an intermediate (B) in an A →
B → C reaction. Here, A3 corresponds
to the amount of intermediate formed, whereas k3 and k4 correspond to rate constants
for formation and decay of the intermediate.

Analysis
of Peptide Products by LC–MS
Substrates
and products were separated on an Agilent Technologies Zorbax Rapid
Resolution SB-C18 column (2.1 mm × 30 mm, 3.5 μm particle
size) equilibrated in 92% solvent A (0.1% formic acid, pH 2.6) and
8% solvent B (acetonitrile). A gradient of 8–19% B was applied
from 0 to 1 min and maintained at 19% from 1 to 5 min before returning
to 8% solvent B from 5 to 6 min. A flow rate of 0.4 mL/min was maintained
throughout the chromatographic procedure. The column was allowed to
re-equilibrate for 3 min under initial conditions before subsequent
sample injections. The external standard peptide elutes at approximately
1.5 min under these conditions, whereas the lipoyl-, mercapto-octanoyl-,
and octanoyl-peptides elute at 3.6, 4.1, and 4.8 min, respectively.

The external standard peptide and octanoyl-, mercapto-octanoyl-,
and lipoyl-peptides were detected by MS2 selected-ion monitoring at m/z ratios of 474.4, 932.5, 964.5, and
996.5, respectively (). Detection
of analytes was performed using electrospray ionization in positive
mode (ESI+) with the following parameters: a nitrogen gas
temperature of 340 °C and flow rate of 9.0 L/min; a nebulizer
pressure of 40 PSI; and a capillary voltage of 4000 V. The fragmentor
voltage was optimized for octanoyl- and lipoyl-peptides at 240 V,
which was used for all derivatives. The fragmentor voltage for the
external standard peptide was 135 V.

Analysis of Biotin-Tagged
Peptide Products by LC–MS
Assay mixtures were separated
as described above except that a
gradient of 8–35% solvent B was applied from 0 to 2 min and
was followed by a gradient of 35–48% solvent B from 2 to 3
min. The gradient was maintained at 48% solvent B for 1 min before
returning to 8% solvent B from 4 to 5 min. The column was allowed
to re-equilibrate for 2 min under initial conditions before subsequent
sample injections. The external standard peptide elutes at approximately
1.4 min under these conditions, whereas the lipoyl-, 6-mercapto-octanoyl-,
and octanoyl-peptides elute at 3.5, 3.5, and 3.6 min, respectively.

External standard and octanoyl-, mercapto-octanoyl-, and lipoyl-peptides
were detected using an MS2 selected-ion monitoring method at m/z ratios of 474.4, [M + 2H]+2; 1306.6, [M + H]+; 1338.6, [M + H]+; and 1369.6,
[M + H]+, respectively (). 8-Mercapto- and lipoyl-peptide standards lacking deuterium labels
were monitored at m/z ratios of
1335.5, [M + H]+; and 1367.6, [M + H]+, respectively.
Detection of analytes was performed as described above except that
the fragmentor voltage was optimized for octanoyl- and lipoyl-peptides
at 280 V and for the 8-mercapto-octanoyl-peptide at 300 V.

Assessment
of a Covalent Interaction between LS and [8,8,8-2H3]-OHP
Assay mixtures contained 180 μM
LS, 50 mM HEPES, pH 7.5, 2 mM dithionite, 1 mM SAM, and 300 μM
OHP or [8-2H3]-OHP in a total volume of 1 mL.
Reactions were initiated by addition of SAM and incubated for 20 min
at 37 °C under anaerobic conditions. After incubation, reactions
were immediately injected onto a Mono Q column equilibrated in 50
mM HEPES, pH 7.5, 0.1 M NaCl at a flow rate of 1 mL min–1. A gradient from 0.1 to 1 M NaCl was applied over 60 min, and 50
μL aliquots of each 1 mL fraction were combined with an equal
volume of 2× SDS-PAGE gel-loading buffer and boiled for 10 min.
After centrifugation, 10 μL aliquots of each sample were analyzed
by SDS-PAGE (15% gel) with Coomassie brilliant blue staining.

To generate quantities of cross-linked species suitable for spectroscopic
analysis, reaction volumes were increased to 7 mL and contained 50
mM HEPES, pH 7.5, 2 mM dithionite, 400 μM LS, 700 μM SAM,
and 200 μM [8,8,8-2H3]-OHP. After incubating
at room temperature for 1.5 h, the reaction was diluted 10-fold with
buffer (50 mM HEPES, pH 7.5, 300 mM NaCl, 20% glycerol) and loaded
onto a DE-52 column (2.5 × 10 cm) pre-equilibrated in cold (&lt;10
°C) 50 mM HEPES, pH 7.5. A 500 mL linear gradient (0.1–1
M NaCl in 50 mM HEPES, pH 7.5) was applied to the column while collecting
5 mL fractions. Each of the fractions was analyzed by SDS-PAGE as
described above to determine those that contained the cross-linked
species. Appropriate fractions were pooled and concentrated by ultrafiltration
and frozen in liquid N2 until further use. Protein, iron,
and sulfide concentrations of the cross-linked species were determined
as described previously. Samples to be
analyzed by Mössbauer and EPR spectroscopies were prepared
in the anaerobic chamber. Mössbauer samples contained 300 μL
of the cross-linked species or unreacted LS. EPR samples of both species
were prepared with and without prior incubation (20 min) with 8 mM
dithionite before freezing.

Generation of the Cross-Linked Species Using
a Peptide Substrate
A reaction containing 50 mM HEPES, pH
7.5, 300 mM KCl, 10% glycerol,
325 μM [8,8,8-2H3]-peptide 2, 275 μM Thermus thermophilus (Tt) LS, and 700 μM SAM was initiated by
the addition of 2 mM dithionite (final conc.). After 30 min at 30
°C, the reaction was applied to a 5 mL Streptavidin Mutein column
(Roche Diagnostics, Mannheim, Germany) equilibrated in 100 mM KH2PO4, pH 7.2, 150 mM NaCl, and 600 mM (NH4)2SO4. Unreacted LS was removed by washing
with 10 column volumes of the same buffer. The cross-linked species
was eluted from the column using an identical buffer containing 2
mM d-biotin. Alternatively, a reaction containing 50 mM HEPES,
pH 7.5, 300 mM KCl, 10% glycerol, 300 μM [8,8,8-2H3]-peptide 2, 200 μM Ec LS, and 700 μM SAM was initiated with 2 mM dithionite. After
90 min at room temperature (22 °C), a sample was frozen for Mössbauer
analysis without any additional chromatography.

Assessment
of the Chemical and Kinetic Competence of the Cross-Linked
Species
A reaction using peptide 1 as the substrate
was performed as described above except that the reaction mixture
contained 180 μM SAM and SAHN was omitted. The reaction was
allowed to proceed for 30 min and then was applied to a NAP-10 column
pre-equilibrated in 50 mM HEPES, pH 7.5, containing 300 mM KCl and
10% glycerol. The protein-containing fraction was collected, and an
aliquot (20 μL) was removed and added to an equal volume of
100 mM H2SO4 to quench the reaction and prepare
it for analysis by LC–MS. SAHN, SAM, and dithionite were added
to the remaining assay mixture to final concentrations of 200 nM,
500 μM, and 2 mM, respectively, to initiate the second half-reaction,
and aliquots were quenched at various times and analyzed as described
above. Four Mössbauer samples during various stages of the
reaction were prepared: (1) prior to initiation with dithionite, (2)
before size-exclusion chromatography, (3) after size-exclusion chromatography,
and (4) after size-exclusion chromatography and a further 90 min incubation
with added SAHN, SAM, and dithionite.

Results
Generation
of a Cross-Link between Ec LS and
OHP
Previous studies by Cicchillo et al. indicated that use
of [octanoyl-2H15]-HP in the LS reaction suppressed
formation of LHP, although a species consistent with one inserted
sulfur atom was observed by mass spectrometry. These findings, in conjunction with the observation that the total
amount of 5′-dA formed was ∼50% of that formed when
unlabeled OHP was used as a substrate, suggested that one C–D
bond, presumably at C6 or C8, was not readily cleaved because of significant
isotopic discrimination. Subsequent studies by Douglas et al. using
LS from Sulfolobus solfataricus (Ss) showed that deuterium incorporation at C8 of a target
(N6-octanoyl)-lysyl residue in a synthetic
tripeptide substrate significantly impeded formation of the lipoyl
group and that sulfur insertion at C6 precedes insertion at C8. This observation is in agreement with earlier
findings that showed that [8-3H]-octanoic acid administered
to growing Ec is incorporated intact into LA without
loss of radioactivity., Douglas et al. also commented
that when the peptide substrate containing an [8,8,8-2H3-octanoyl]-lysyl residue was incubated with Ss LS under turnover conditions, the peptide was poorly liberated from
the protein by ultrafiltration unless the protein/peptide complex
was denatured with acid, suggesting that it was bound tightly to the
protein.

To understand the nature
of the turnover-dependent interaction between LS and its substrate
and to provide evidence for a potential intermediate in catalysis,
we studied the Ec LS reaction with [8,8,8-2H3]-OHP. Because sulfur insertion takes place at C6 before
C8 and because quantitative deuterium substitution at C8 of the octanoyl
moiety results essentially in arrest of turnover after the first sulfur
insertion, our working model would predict that OHP and LS should
become cross-linked through the auxiliary cluster under turnover conditions
when using [8,8,8-2H3]-OHP as substrate. Ec HP binds tightly to Ec LS; however,
the two proteins can be separated by anion-exchange chromatography. Ec HP (pI = 4.59) adheres strongly to anion-exchange resin
under conditions described in , whereas Ec LS (pI = 8.15) adheres poorly, if at
all, under the same conditions. Figure A shows
an SDS-PAGE analysis of fractions eluting from a Mono Q column under
increasing concentrations of NaCl. Ec LS and [8,8,8-2H3]-OHP were applied to the column after their
coincubation under turnover conditions in the absence of required
low-potential reductant. LS elutes essentially in the void volume
of the column (fractions 1–6), whereas [8,8,8-2H3]-OHP begins to elute at approximately 750 mM NaCl. The faint
band that migrates slightly higher than [8,8,8-2H3]-OHP corresponds to LHP (or monothiolated LHP), which sometimes
contaminates our preparations of apo-HP that are used to prepare OHP.
When the proteins are incubated both in the presence of SAM and required
reductant (sodium dithionite), a new species appears that displays
migratory properties that are intermediate between those of LS and
OHP (Figure B; fractions 20–25). For
reasons that we do not understand, OHP supports no more than 30–40%
turnover (i.e., 0.3–0.4 equiv LHP per LS). Therefore, the majority of LS and OHP do not react productively
and elute in fractions 2–6 and 27–30, respectively.
Consistent with a cross-linked species, the intermediate fractions
contain both LS and HP (presumably with one sulfur atom inserted).
This same cross-linked species is observed under turnover conditions
with unlabeled substrate (), consistent
with sulfur insertion at C8 being rate-limiting.

SDS-PAGE analysis of
fractions from DE-52 column. Lanes are molecular
weight markers (M), flow-through during column load (A and B), and
samples from eluted 10 mL fractions as the NaCl gradient was increased
from 0.1–1 M (1–14). Fractions that were pooled and
used in further experiments are boxed.

Analysis of the Cross-Linked Species by Mössbauer Spectroscopy
To generate suitable concentrations of the cross-linked species
for analysis by Mössbauer spectroscopy, a large-scale reaction
was conducted using [8,8,8-2H3]-OHP as substrate,
and the cross-linked species was separated from unreacted proteins
by anion-exchange chromatography on DE-52 resin (). The 4.2-K/53-mT Mössbauer spectrum of the
non-cross-linked fraction of LS (Figure A)
can be adequately described using a broad quadrupole doublet with
parameters characteristic for [4Fe–4S]2+ clusters
(isomer shift (δ) of 0.45 mm/s and quadrupole splitting parameter
(ΔEQ) of 1.18 mm/s; ∼90%
of total Fe, 1.9 clusters per LS monomer; solid line in Figure A). These parameters are similar, albeit not identical,
to those reported previously for Ec LS. In addition to the prominent quadrupole doublet,
the spectrum exhibits a weak absorption line at ∼2.5 mm/s,
demonstrating that a small amount (∼10%) of N/O-coordinated
high-spin FeII is present in the sample.

Mössbauer-spectroscopic
characterization of the cross-linked
species observed during the reaction of Ec LS. 4.2-K/53-mT
Mössbauer spectrum of Ec LS (A, vertical bars)
and simulation thereof with parameters quoted in the text (A, black
line). 4.2 K Mössbauer spectra of the complex obtained upon
reacting Ec LS with [8,8,8-2H3]-OHP in the presence of SAM and dithionite recorded in externally
applied magnetic fields of 0 mT (B, vertical bars), 53 mT (C, vertical
bars), 200 mT (D, vertical bars), 1 T (G, vertical bars), and 4 T
(H, vertical bars) oriented parallel to the γ beam. Addition
of the features of the 3Fe-clusters in a 53 mT field (E, red line)
to the [0–53 mT] difference spectrum (E, vertical bars) yields
the zero-field reference spectrum of the 3Fe-clusters (F, vertical
bars). The blue and green lines in B–D are simulations of FeII and [4Fe–4S]2+ components, respectively,
with parameters quoted in the text. The red lines in B–H are
simulations of the 3Fe-clusters with parameters given in Table . The individual contributions from the FeIII site and Fe22.5 pair are shown in magenta
and purple, respectively, in F–H. The added contribution of
the FeII, [4Fe–4S]2+, and 3Fe-clusters
are shown as black lines in B–D. The black line in E is the
theoretical [0–53 mT] difference spectrum of the 3Fe-clusters.

The spectra of the cross-linked
complex after purification by anion-exchange
chromatography are distinctly different and reveal the presence of
three dominant components: [4Fe–4S]2+ clusters (20%
of 8.7 Fe per Ec LS, i.e., 0.4 clusters per LS, Figures B–D, green lines), N/O-coordinated FeII (16% of 8.7 Fe, Figures B–D,
blue lines), and 3Fe-clusters that exhibit spectroscopic properties
similar to those of [3Fe–4S]0 clusters− (54% of 8.7 Fe, 1.6 clusters per LS, Figures B–H, red lines). (The stoichiometry indicates that both [4Fe–4S]
clusters are (at least in part) converted to 3Fe clusters. We speculate
that they differ in the number of sulfide ligands because of the proposed
role of the auxiliary [4Fe–4S] cluster as sulfur donor. Because
the Mössbauer spectra might not be sensitive to the number
and nature of the bridging sulfur ligands, the cuboidal [3Fe–4S]0 and the hypothetical [3Fe–3S–1RS]+ clusters, both of which contain one FeIII site and one
valence-delocalized Fe22.5+ pair, may exhibit
similar Mössbauer spectra. We therefore refer to these cluster
forms collectively as 3Fe–clusters). The mismatches between
the summations of the theoretical spectra (Figure B–D, black lines) of these three components with the
experimental data reveal the presence of a minor and poorly defined
subspectrum (∼10% intensity). Because this sample does not
exhibit EPR features reminiscent of Fe/S clusters with S = 1/2 ground states (i.e., [3Fe–4S]+, [4Fe–4S]+, or [2Fe–2S]+; see ), we attribute the remaining broad component to
unspecifically bound iron.

Comparison of spectra recorded in
zero-field and small applied
fields (53 and 200 mT) shows that the features associated with the
[4Fe–4S]2+ cluster and the N/O-coordinated high-spin
FeII are not, or only slightly, broadened by the externally
applied field (Figures B–D, blue and
green lines). By contrast, the 3Fe-clusters exhibit sharp quadrupole
doublet features in zero field, which are significantly broadened
in weak applied fields, demonstrating that the 3Fe-clusters are associated
with a paramagnetic, integer-spin ground state. This behavior is illustrated
in the [0–53 mT] difference spectrum (Figure E, vertical bars). The zero-field reference spectrum of the
3Fe-clusters (Figure F, vertical bars) was
generated by adding back 54% of the simulated spectrum of the 3Fe-clusters
at 53 mT field (red line in Figure E). It
can be simulated with two quadrupole doublets with slightly different
line widths and assuming a 1:2 ratio with the following parameters:
δ = 0.31 mm/s and ΔEQ = 0.54
mm/s (18% of total Fe); and δ = 0.44 mm/s and ΔEQ = 0.97 mm/s (36% of total Fe) (magenta and
purple lines in Figure F). These parameters
are characteristic of high-spin FeIII–S4 sites and valence-delocalized Fe22.5+ pairs,
respectively. Together with the 1:2 intensity
ratio of the two sites, these parameters strongly suggest that the
3Fe-clusters are composed of a valence-delocalized Fe22.5+ unit and a high-spin FeIII-site. Indeed, the
spin Hamiltonian parameters of the intermediate are similar to those
reported for cuboidal [3Fe–4S]0 clusters,−, with the exception that the absolute
magnitude of the quadrupole splitting parameter of the mixed-valent
pair is approximately 0.50 mm/s smaller than the values reported previously
(Table ).

Comparison of the
Mössbauer
Parameters of the 3Fe-Cluster of the LS Monothiolated Intermediate
to Those of Cuboidal [3Fe–4S]0 Clusters
species	δ (mm/s)	ΔEQ (mm/s)	η	β (deg)	A (MHz)	ref	
Ec LS monothiolated intermediate	FeIII	0.31	–0.55	–2	16	+13.8, +16.2, +16.2	this work	
Fe22.5	0.44	0.98	0.4	25	–19.1, −19.1,
−15.7	
[3Fe–4S]0 cluster of D. gigas ferredoxin II	FeIII	0.32	–0.52	–2	16	+13.7, +15.8, +17.3	()	
Fe22.5	0.46	1.47	0.4	20	–20.5, −20.5,
−16.4	
[3Fe–4S]0 cluster of A. vinelandii ferredoxin (pH 6)	FeIII	0.29	–0.47	0.8	20	+15.0, +14.0, +17.3	()	
Fe22.5	0.47	1.41	1.1	24	–21.0,
−25.0,
−14.3	
0.47	1.41	0.2	24	–19.0, −22.0,
−16.7	
[3Fe–4S]0 cluster of A. vinelandii ferredoxin (pH 8.5)	FeIII	0.29	–0.47	5	27	+16.0, +14.0, +17.2	()	
Fe22.5	0.47	1.41	1	19	–19.0,
−27.0,
−16.7	
0.47	1.41	0	19	–20.0, −22.0,
−16.7	
[3Fe–4S]0 cluster of beef heart
aconitase	FeIII	0.30	0.49	nd	nd	nd	()	
Fe22.5	0.45	1.34	nd	nd	nd	
[3Fe–4S]0 cluster of human MOCS1A	FeIII	0.28	0.56	nd	nd	nd	()	
Fe22.5	0.47	1.44	nd	nd	nd	
Euler angle that rotates the electric
field gradient tensor into the frame of the zero-field splitting tensor.

Mössbauer spectra were
calculated
for S = 2 with gS=2 = (2.0,
2.0, 2.0), DS=2 = −4.0 cm–1, and (E/D)S=2 = 0.23.

Mössbauer spectra were calculated
for S = 2 with gS=2 = (2.0,
2.0, 2.0), DS=2 = −2.5 cm–1, and (E/D)S=2 = 0.23.

The features associated with the
3Fe-clusters in spectra collected
in externally applied magnetic fields (Figure C, D, G, and H) were simulated using the spin Hamiltonian parameters
given in Table . The parameters of the prototypical
cuboidal [3Fe–4S]0 cluster from Desulfovibrio
gigas ferredoxin II were used as a starting point
for these simulations together with the
isomer shift and quadrupole splitting values obtained from analysis
of the zero-field reference spectrum. Then, selected parameters were
adjusted to better match the features of the 3Fe-clusters of the field-dependent
spectra. We note that only minor adjustments are required to reproduce
the salient features of the 3Fe-clusters. Collectively, the Mössbauer
spectra demonstrate the presence of 1.5 equiv of 3Fe-clusters in the
cross-linked samples, with spectroscopic properties similar to those
of well-studied [3Fe–4S]0 clusters.−,,

Generation of a Cross-Linked Species with Thermus
thermophilus LS and a Synthetic Peptide Substrate
The observation that the sample of the Ec LS/[8,8,8-2H3]-OHP cross-linked species contains 1.5 equiv
of 3Fe-clusters rather than the expected 1:1 ratio of a 3Fe-cluster
and a [4Fe–4S] cluster suggests that the RS cluster is partially
degraded during anion-exchange chromatography, presumably to the [3Fe–4S]0 form by loss of one Fe ion. Therefore, a milder approach
was sought to remove the unreacted LS from the cross-linked species,
wherein the OHP substrate was replaced with an 8-amino acid synthetic
peptide containing a target [8,8,8-2H3]-N6-octanoyl-lysyl residue and an N-terminal biotin tag (peptide 2). The biotin tag was
intended for purification of the cross-linked species by affinity
chromatography on streptavidin mutein resin; however, the Ec LS/peptide 2 cross-linked complex did not
adhere to the column, suggesting that the biotin tag was occluded
from binding to the resin. By contrast, when the orthologous LS from Thermus thermophilus (Tt) was incubated
with peptide 2 under turnover conditions and the reaction
mixture was applied to a streptavidin mutein column, two brown protein
fractions were observed: a fast-migrating band, corresponding most
likely to unreacted LipA, and a band that was strongly retained on
the column. The latter band was subsequently eluted by addition of
2 mM biotin and analyzed by Mössbauer spectroscopy along with
a control sample containing as-isolated (AI) Tt LS.

The 4.2-K/53-mT Mössbauer spectrum of AI Tt LS (Figure A, vertical bars) can be simulated
with a broad quadrupole doublet with parameters (δ = 0.46 mm/s
and ΔEQ = 1.13 mm/s, ∼95%
of the total Fe; Figure A, solid line) typical
of [4Fe–4S]2+ clusters. This sample contains 5.3
Fe per Tt LS, resulting in a stoichiometry of 1.3
[4Fe–4S] clusters per Tt LS. The 4.2 K Mössbauer
spectra of the sample containing the Tt LS/peptide 2 complex collected in zero field (Figure B, vertical bars) and 53 mT (Figure C, vertical bars) reveal several new features. First, the spectra
are dependent on the presence of the external magnetic field, as is
evident from the [0–53 mT] difference spectrum (Figure D, vertical bars). This difference spectrum is essentially
identical to that observed for the 3Fe-clusters associated with the Ec LS/[8,8,8-2H3]-OHP complex (Figure D, solid line, scaled by a factor of 0.78). From
the amplitude of the difference spectrum, it is possible to estimate
the amount of 3Fe-clusters in the sample containing the Tt LS cross-linked species to be ∼40% of the total Fe. Given
that this sample contains 3.6 Fe ions after purification, a stoichiometry
of 0.5 3Fe-clusters per protein can be calculated.

Mössbauer spectroscopic
characterization of the monothiolated
intermediate in Tt LS. 4.2-K/53-mT Mössbauer
spectrum of Tt LS (A, vertical bars) and simulation
thereof with parameters quoted in the text (A, solid line). 4.2 K
Mössbauer spectra of the Tt LS/peptide 2 complex reacted with SAM and dithionite recorded in externally
applied magnetic fields of 0 mT (B, vertical bars) and 53 mT oriented
parallel to the γ beam (C, vertical bars). The solid black line
in B corresponds to the superposition of the features associated with
the 3Fe-cluster (40%, red line), [4Fe–4S]2+ cluster
(12%, green line), and site-differentiated [4Fe–4S]2+ cluster (48%, purple line, see below). The [0–53 mT] difference
spectrum (C, vertical bars) is similar to that observed for Ec LS (C, solid line is experimental spectrum shown in Figure E scaled by 0.75). The reference spectrum of the
site-differentiated [4Fe–4S]2+ cluster in Tt LS (E, vertical bars) is obtained by subtracting the
contribution of the other components (see text) and can be simulated
with three quadrupole doublets representing the valence-delocalized
Fe22.5 pair (green line; parameters given in
the text) and the two partially localized sites (orange and blue lines;
parameters given in Table ) in a 2:1:1 intensity
ratio. The black line in E is the added contribution of the three
quadrupole doublets.

Second, the spectra of the Tt LS cross-linked
species exhibit two new shoulders (see arrows in Figure C). These shoulders are reminiscent of the spectroscopic features
observed for SAM-coordinated [4Fe–4S]2+ clusters,
in which a pronounced site differentiation and valence localization
in one of the two mixed-valent pairs is caused by the coordination
of SAM to the unique, non-cysteinyl-ligated Fe site,, (Table ). Removal of the contributions of the 3Fe-clusters
(40% of spectrum shown in Figure E) and of
the [4Fe–4S]2+ clusters (36% of the spectrum shown
in Figure A) from the zero-field spectrum
affords a new spectrum with two resolved quadrupole doublets of equal
intensity (not shown). This spectrum can be fitted with two quadrupole
doublets with the following parameters: δ1 = 0.80
mm/s, ΔEQ1 = 1.30 mm/s; and δ2 = 0.40 mm/s, ΔEQ2 = 0.92
mm/s. Typically, in site-differentiated [4Fe–4S]2+ clusters, the second pair is valence-delocalized, having parameters
similar to those of the SAM-free [4Fe–4S]2+ cluster.
Thus, the reference spectrum of the site-differentiated [4Fe–4S]2+ cluster is generated by adding 24% of the spectrum of AI Tt LS to that of the two resolved sites (Figure E, vertical bars, with individual contributions
shown as colored solid lines). This form accounts for 0.4 equiv per
LS (48% of 3.6 Fe). The remaining fraction of [4Fe–4S]2+ clusters, which is not associated with the site-differentiated
[4Fe–4S]2+ clusters (12%), corresponds to 0.1 equiv
of SAM-free [4Fe–4S]2+ clusters.

Mössbauer Parameters of the
(Partially) Valence-Localized Mixed-Valent Pairs Observed in Site-Differentiated
[4Fe–4S]2+ RS Clusters
enzyme	δ1 (mm/s)	ΔEQ,1 (mm/s)	δ2 (mm/s)	ΔEQ,2 (mm/s)	ref	
BioB	0.64	1.26	0.40	0.86	()	
PFL-AE	0.71	1.17	0.40	0.77	()	
RimO	0.70	1.24	0.37	0.81	()	
Ec LS	0.79	1.15	0.40	1.10	this work	
Tt LS	0.80	1.30	0.40	0.92	this work	
Although the approach using
the biotinylated peptide substrate
for facile isolation of the cross-linked intermediate works well for Tt LS, we note that the cluster content of Tt LS (5.3 Fe corresponding to 1.3 [4Fe–4S]2+ clusters)
and of the cross-linked Tt LS/peptide 2 species (3.6 Fe corresponding to 0.5 3Fe-clusters, 0.4 site-differentiated
[4Fe–4S] clusters, and 0.1 SAM-free [4Fe–4S]2+ clusters) is significantly substoichiometric, given that approximately
half of the expected Fe content is observed. We therefore returned
to Ec LS for further studies, focusing on generating
the intermediate in sufficiently high yield to obviate the need for
purification before spectroscopic analysis.

Generation of the Ec LS/Peptide 2 Intermediate in High Yield
To generate the cross-linked
species in high yield, peptide 2 was incubated with Ec LS at room temperature for 90 min, which was sufficient
to allow the first sulfur insertion to take place in the absence of
detectable insertion of the second sulfur. As shown in Figure A, a similar unlabeled synthetic peptide substrate
supports almost 1 equiv of lipoyl product (closed, black triangles),
which is significantly greater than the lipoyl product generated (0.3–0.4
equiv) when using OHP as a substrate. However, incorporation of deuterium
at C8 of the octanoyl group of peptide 2 leads to arrest
of the reaction after insertion of the first sulfur atom and therefore
accumulation of a monothiolated species. Upon incubation of peptide 2 with Ec LS, a portion of the reaction mixture
was analyzed by LC–MS and shown to contain 0.9 equiv of a monothiolated
species, while the remainder was analyzed by Mössbauer spectroscopy.

LC–MS
analysis of the peptide products of LS. The reaction
of 200 μM LS with 300 μM peptide substrate in the presence
of SAM and dithionite (A) results in decay of the octanoyl peptide
(blue circles), formation and decay of the mercaptooctanoyl species
(red squares), and formation of the lipoyl product (black triangles).
The lines are fits of the data to the equations described in  with the following kinetic
parameters: octanoyl peptide decay: A1 = 157 μM, A2 = 132 μM, k1 = 1.5 min–1, k2 = 0.014 min–1; mercaptooctanoyl peptide
formation and decay: A3 = 126 μM, k3 = 1.31 min–1, k4 = 0.005 min–1; and lipoyl peptide
formation: A4 = 38 μM, A5 = 157 μM, k5 = 1.1
min–1, k6 = 0.017 min–1. Rapid production of intermediate and product is
observed in the first 4 min (inset) followed by a slower phase. The
reaction of approximately 120 μM cross-linked intermediate,
isolated as described in , with SAM and dithionite (B) results in decay of the intermediate
(red squares) and formation of lipoyl product (black triangles). The
lines are fits to a first-order single-exponential equation with the
following kinetic parameters: mercaptooctanoyl peptide decay: A = 60.0 μM, k = 0.16 min–1; and lipoyl peptide formation: A = 63.6 μM, k = 0.20 min–1.

The Mössbauer spectrum of the AI Ec LS
sample (i.e., before reaction) shows that &gt;95% of the Fe in the
sample
(7.5 Fe per LS; 1.8 [4Fe–4S]2+ per LS) is in the
form of [4Fe–4S]2+ clusters (). The cross-linked species prepared by reacting Ec LS with excess peptide 2 under turnover
conditions and without further purification afforded spectra very
similar to those of the Tt LS/peptide 2 cross-linked species ().
The analysis was carried out similarly and reveals that the sample
contains 0.68 3Fe-clusters (27% of total Fe), 0.45 SAM-bound [4Fe–4S]2+ clusters (24% of total Fe), and 0.45 [4Fe–4S]2+ clusters per protein, in addition to a significant fraction
of N/O-coordinated FeII (25% of total Fe; ). We note that the parameters of the two unique
sites of the SAM-bound [4Fe–4S]2+ cluster are slightly
different from those of the Tt LS/peptide 2 intermediate (Table ). Our finding of 0.9
equiv of monothiolated species by LC–MS is consistent within
experimental error with the stoichiometry of 3Fe-clusters (0.68) and
[4Fe–4S] clusters (0.9) observed by Mössbauer spectroscopy.
Theoretically, we would predict that the stoichiometry of 3Fe-clusters
and monothiolated species would be identical if one cluster were sacrificed
during turnover and that 0.9 [4Fe–4S] clusters (based on a
total of 1.8 [4Fe–4S] clusters in the starting enzyme) and
0.9 3Fe-clusters would remain. The slightly smaller fraction of 3Fe-clusters
observed appears to be due to nonproductive degradation of this species
to N/O-coordinated FeII.

Catalytic and Kinetic Competence
of the Cross-Linked Species
To assess whether the cross-linked
species, presumably 6-mercaptooctanoyl-H
protein bound to LS via an S–Fe bond to the auxiliary cluster,
is catalytically and kinetically competent, LS reactions were conducted
with peptide 1, which is not labeled with deuterium at
C8. As opposed to the H protein, the smaller size of the peptide substrate
allows for facile detection of octanoyl, lipoyl, and 6-mercaptooctanoyl
peptides by LC–MS without prior liberation of the modification.
A kinetic analysis of the LS reaction using 300 μM peptide 1 and 200 μM LS is shown in Figure A. Formation of lipoyl product (black triangles) and decay
of the octanoyl substrate (blue circles) follow biphasic behavior,
exhibiting the following kinetic parameters, respectively: A4 = 38 μM, k5= 1.1 min–1, A5 = 157
μM, k6 = 0.017 min–1 (lipoyl product); and A1 = 157 μM, k1 = 1.5 min–1, A2 = 132 μM, k2 = 0.014
min–1 (octanoyl substrate). The peptide substrate
is converted to the lipoyl product with a rate constant that is similar
to that observed in the presence of OHP; however, it supports nearly
a full equivalent of lipoyl product (0.9 equiv) after 150 min, significantly
higher than that supported by the OHP substrate (Figure A). The substrate peptide displays m/z 932.5 [M + H]+, and the addition of two sulfur
atoms (in the two-electron reduced state) results in a shift in m/z to 996.5 for the product peptide. A
third species (red squares), exhibiting m/z 964.5, forms and decays during the LS reaction with the
following kinetic parameters: A3 = 126
μM, k3 = 1.31 min–1, k4 = 0.005 min–1.
This mass corresponds to the addition of a single sulfur atom to the
octanoyl-peptide, demonstrating the catalytic competence of the mercapto-octanoyl
intermediate. As can be observed, the kinetics of the reaction are
complex. Both formation of the monothiolated species and loss of the
octanoyl substrate take place with similar rate constants and amplitudes
for the first phases of their kinetic profiles; however, rate constants
for decay of the monothiolated species and formation of the lipoyl
product do not match, as would be expected for a scenario in which
insertion of the first sulfur atom is much faster than insertion of
the second. The observation of a second, much slower, phase of octanoyl
substrate decay after nearly 1 equiv is expended in the first phase,
suggests that a portion of the enzyme can be reactivated after initial
turnover to perform the first step of the reaction during a second
turnover, which is consistent with the observation of a substantial
concentration of monothiolated intermediate at the completion of the
time course. This reactivation may take place as a consequence of
some Fe/S clusters being degraded as a result of turnover and the
liberated iron and sulfide being used to construct new clusters. Consistent
with this premise, this second phase of octanoyl substrate decay occurs
with a rate constant that is similar to that of the second, slower,
phase for formation of the lipoyl species. Another interesting aspect
of the time course is the small burst of lipoyl product (black triangles)
corresponding to ∼25% of the total enzyme concentration, which,
on this time scale, appears with kinetics similar to those for the
monothiolated intermediate. The source of the burst is presently unknown,
but it may derive from a fraction of the protein that is optimally
suited to react in both steps or perhaps slow protein monomer–dimer
interconversion, wherein only one of the two species allows for C8
insertion.

The formation of the lipoyl cofactor from the octanoyl-lysyl
substrate requires the expenditure of two molecules of SAM, which
are used to generate sequentially the 5′-dA• that abstract the C6 and C8 H• to allow for subsequent
sulfur insertion. Therefore, given the slow rate of insertion of the
second sulfur atom, use of only 1 equiv of SAM with respect to enzyme
concentration in a reaction with excess peptide substrate should result
in the formation of a cross-linked species that cannot proceed to
product. The cross-linked peptide can then be separated from unreacted
peptide substrate using a gel-filtration column, because the unreacted
peptide is retained in the column matrix. This strategy obviates the
need to use the labeled [8,8,8-2H3]-octanoyl
substrate, which essentially induces arrest of the reaction at the
intermediate stage, allowing the kinetic competence of the isolated
cross-linked species to be evaluated. Upon incubating Ec LS under turnover conditions in the presence of limiting SAM and
analyzing the reaction by LC–MS, approximately 0.9 equiv of
the cross-linked species (based on quantification of the monothiolated
peptide product) was obtained. Control reactions lacking either SAM
or dithionite did not contain significant amounts of peptide in the
protein fraction (&lt;0.06 equiv each after 10 min of incubation at
RT) (Table ), indicating that the octanoyl
peptide does not bind tightly to LS and is removed by gel-filtration
chromatography. When excess SAM and reductant were added back to the
intermediate complex, clean formation of the lipoyl product was observed,
which took place with a rate constant of ∼0.2 min–1 (Figure B), which is faster than that of
the slowest step in the overall LS reaction (0.04 min–1), indicating that the intermediate formed is both catalytically
and kinetically competent to proceed to product. Interestingly, however,
although the kinetics of product formation and loss of the intermediate
species fit nicely to single-exponential equations, only ∼50%
of the intermediate decayed to the product. We speculate that the
substoichiometric product yield may be due to an unproductive reaction
pathway, which involves the disassembly of the 3Fe-cluster and liberation
of Fe and the monothiolated intermediate into solution.

Retention of Substrate, Intermediate,
and Product by Size-Exclusion Chromatography in LS Reactions
sample	equiv intermediate
(before column)	equiv intermediate
(after column)	equiv substrate
(after column)	equiv product
(after column)	
complete reaction	0.87	0.60	0.03	0.01	
no dithionite	0.01	0.03	0.04	0.00	
no SAM	0.01	0.01	0.06	0.01	
The Chemically and Kinetically
Competent Intermediate Contains
a 3Fe-Cluster That Is Disassembled upon Product Formation
The experiments establishing the chemical and kinetic competence
of the cross-linked intermediate described in the previous section
set the stage to interrogate the configuration of the Fe/S clusters
in the intermediate species, as well as their fate upon completion
of the reaction, by Mössbauer spectroscopy. The 4.2-K/53-mT
Mössbauer spectrum of the anaerobically isolated Ec LS used in this experiment (Figure A, vertical
bars) reveals the presence of 1.8 [4Fe–4S]2+ clusters
(δ = 0.46 mm/s, ΔEQ = 1.16
mm/s, 95% of total Fe, Figure A, solid line).
The 4.2 K Mössbauer spectra recorded in external fields of
0 and 53 mT (Figure B,C, vertical bars) of
a sample, in which Ec LS was reacted with peptide 1, dithionite, and 1 equiv of SAM for 15 min, are virtually
identical to those of samples prepared by reacting Ec LS with excess peptide 2 under turnover conditions
(). The [0–53 mT] difference
spectrum (Figure D, vertical bars) demonstrates
the presence of 0.6 3Fe-clusters (27% of total Fe, as determined from
the amplitude of the experimental difference spectrum, Figure E, solid line). The analysis of the spectra according
to the method described above reveals that the sample also contains
0.4 site-differentiated [4Fe–4S]2+ clusters (24%
of total Fe) and 0.5 [4Fe–4S]2+ clusters (28% of
total Fe). We note that the presence of the site-differentiated [4Fe–4S]2+ cluster is unexpected, because under the reaction conditions
there is no excess SAM to bind to the RS cluster. We speculate that
binding of the coproduct, methionine, to the RS cluster may lead to
similar spectroscopic perturbations. Lastly, ∼12% of total
Fe is in the form of N/O-coordinated FeII (δ = 1.25
mm/s and ΔEQ = 3.2 mm/s). The remaining
Fe (9%) gives rise to broad features in the Mössbauer spectra.
A parallel EPR sample () reveals
the presence of a small amount (6% of total Fe) of reduced [4Fe–4S]
clusters, which accounts for the majority of the observed broad features.
The total yield of 0.6 3Fe-clusters is significant, albeit somewhat
less than that of the monothiolated species detected by LC–MS
in the analogous reaction (0.9 equiv).

Mössbauer spectroscopic
characterization of the reaction
of the Ec LS/peptide 1 complex with
varying amounts of SAM. 4.2-K/53-mT Mössbauer spectrum of Ec LS (A, vertical bars) and simulation thereof with parameters
quoted in the text (A, solid line). 4.2 K Mössbauer spectra
of the Ec LS/peptide 1 complex reacted
with dithionite and 1 equiv of SAM recorded in externally applied
magnetic fields of 0 mT (B, vertical bars) and 53-mT oriented parallel
to the γ beam (C, vertical bars). The solid black line in B
corresponds to the superposition of the features associated with the
3Fe-clusters (27%, red line), [4Fe–4S]2+ clusters
(28%, green line), site-differentiated [4Fe–4S]2+ clusters (24%, purple line, see below), and N/O-coordinated high-spin
FeII (12%, light blue line). The arrows in C indicate the
shoulders emanating from the spectral features of the site-differentiated
[4Fe–4S]2+ cluster (purple line). The [0–53
mT] difference spectrum (D, vertical bars) is similar to that observed
for Ec LS (D, solid line is experimental spectrum
shown in Figure E scaled by 0.53). 4.2 K/53
mT Mössbauer spectrum of the sample of the purified, monothiolated
intermediate reacted with dithionite and a second equivalent of SAM
(E, vertical bars). The solid black line in E corresponds to the superposition
of the features associated with the [4Fe–4S]2+ clusters
(41%, green line), site-differentiated [4Fe–4S]2+ clusters (12%, purple line), N/O-coordinated high-spin FeII (28%, light blue line), and S-coordinated high-spin FeII (8%, dark blue line).

The fate of the auxiliary cluster upon completion of the
reaction
was probed by Mössbauer spectroscopy on an identical sample
that was purified from excess reactants. Comparison of spectra recorded
before and after purification by gel-filtration chromatography reveals
that these two spectra are essentially identical (), demonstrating that purification does not lead
to decay of the cross-linked intermediate. Addition of a second equivalent
of SAM and reductant (dithionite) to the sample of the purified intermediate
is associated with significant Mössbauer spectroscopic changes.
Spectra collected at 4.2 K in a 53-mT field oriented parallel to the
γ beam (Figure E, vertical bars) and
zero field (, vertical bars) are
almost identical (see  for comparison),
thereby demonstrating that the 3Fe-clusters have decayed during the
second part of the reaction (we estimate an upper limit of ∼5%
of the 3Fe-clusters in this sample). Because the EPR spectrum of an
identical sample only reveals that approximately 3% of total Fe in
the sample is associated with Fe/S clusters with half-integer ground
state (), which is below the detection
limit in the Mössbauer spectra, we assign the features to quadrupole
doublets. The spectrum can be simulated as a superposition of the
spectral features of the regular (i.e., non-site-differentiated) [4Fe–4S]2+ cluster (41% of total Fe; 0.6 clusters per LS), site-differentiated
[4Fe–4S]2+ clusters (upper limit of 12% of total
Fe; 0.17 clusters per LS inferred from spectral subtractions), and
two (or more) broad quadrupole doublets with parameters characteristic
of high-spin FeII. Although a significant fraction of FeII has parameters typical of N/O-coordinated FeII (∼28% of total Fe, δ ∼1.25 mm/s and ΔEQ ∼2.9 mm/s), we also note a pronounced
shoulder at ∼ −1 mm/s, which is at a position expected
for a quadrupole doublet associated with an FeII–S4 site (∼8% of total Fe, δ ∼0.73 mm/s and
ΔEQ ∼3.3 mm/s). The [4Fe–4S]2+ cluster is
assigned to the RS cluster, whereas the various FeII complexes
are proposed to derive from the Fe sites of the auxiliary cluster,
which is (at least partially) disassembled during the reaction.

Discussion
The proposed mechanism of LS involves two reductive
cleavages of
SAM, each of which is followed by abstraction of an H• from the octanoyl-containing substrate by a 5′-dA• with subsequent sulfur insertion. Notably, the source of the inserted
sulfur atom has been suggested to be the auxiliary [4Fe–4S]
cluster of the protein, which would result in inactivation of the
enzyme after one complete turnover. In
support of this unusual and provocative role of an Fe/S cluster in
enzyme catalysis, studies by Miller et al. and Cicchillo et al. showed
that no exogenous source of sulfur is required for the reaction and
that both sulfur atoms derive from the same LS polypeptide., In one key study, in which [octanoyl-d15]-H protein was used as a substrate for the LS reaction, formation
of the lipoyl product was almost completely suppressed, whereas analyses
by mass spectrometry showed significant formation of a monothiolated
species, suggested to be an intermediate in the reaction. Subsequent studies, in which substrates specifically
labeled with deuterium at C6 or C8 were used, showed that deuterium
incorporation only at C8 results in significant suppression of lipoyl
product formation and that sulfur insertion at C6 always precedes
insertion at C8, even with an unlabeled substrate. These observations suggested a possible strategy to test
the provocative notion that an enzyme might sacrifice a required cofactor
during turnover by contributing a sulfur atom from one of its Fe/S
clusters. Indeed, if a suitable substrate containing deuterium only
at C8 of its octanoyl chain were used in LS reactions, then it might
permit trapping of an intermediate species in a way that would allow
for its spectroscopic characterization.

Our initial efforts
made use of the size of the OHP substrate to
show cross-link formation by SDS-PAGE. Ec LS and Ec HP form a fairly tight complex that will survive molecular
sieve chromatography but can be separated by anion-exchange chromatography,
wherein Ec LS adheres poorly to the resin, while Ec HP adheres tightly. When the two proteins were incubated
under turnover conditions and then applied to the column, a new band
exhibiting intermediate migratory properties and containing both proteins
was observed. The observation that the proteins in this band migrated
according to their native molecular masses rather than as the sum
of their molecular masses indicates that the bond that links them,
unlike a typical covalent bond, is unstable under conditions of SDS-PAGE.
Similar observations were made in studies in which the cross-link
was generated with small peptide substrates. In these instances, when
LS and the peptide substrate were combined and subjected to gel-filtration
chromatography, LS eluted cleanly in the fraction containing large
molecules, whereas the peptide substrate eluted cleanly in fractions
containing small molecules. However, when LS was incubated with a
peptide substrate containing an [8,8,8-d3]-octanoyl moiety or with only 1 equiv of SAM and a peptide substrate
containing an unlabeled octanoyl moiety, LS and the peptide substrate
eluted together in fractions containing large molecules. The peptide
was readily liberated from the protein under acidic conditions, and
analysis by mass spectrometry showed it to contain an inserted sulfur
atom. These characteristics are consistent with LS and either the
protein or peptide substrate being linked by an Fe/S cluster in the
isolated intermediate. Moreover, linkage of the two proteins or the
protein and peptide via a disulfide bond is unlikely, because the
presence of DTT in reaction buffers is expected to reduce any disulfide
bonds before the complexes are subjected to anion-exchange or molecular
sieve chromatography.

Further insight into the nature of the
cross-linked intermediate
was obtained from Mössbauer spectroscopy. All samples containing
this intermediate exhibit features of a 3Fe-cluster, with an electronic
structure similar to that of cuboidal [3Fe–4S]0 clusters,
namely, an S = 2 electron spin ground state emanating
from antiferromagnetic (AF) coupling between a high-spin FeIII center (S = 5/2) and a valence-delocalized Fe22.5+ unit (S = 9/2). We assign
the 3Fe-cluster to the partially disassembled auxiliary [4Fe–4S]
cluster. This cluster is proposed to form upon reaction of the putative
C6-centered substrate radical (R•) with one of the
cluster’s μ3-bridging sulfides, which would
yield the C6-monothiolated intermediate (RS–). Formally,
this reaction entails recombination of the substrate radical with
one electron of the lone pair of one of the μ3-sulfido
ligands of the [4Fe–4S]2+ cluster. The second electron
of the lone pair is formally donated to one of the Fe22.5+ pairs to yield an Fe2II pair. We
formally designate the resulting cluster as [4Fe–3S–1RS]2+ (Scheme ), in which we consider
formally the charges of the inorganic sulfide ligands (2– each), the monothiolated intermediate (1–), and
the formal oxidation states of the Fe ions (one Fe2II and one Fe22.5, i.e., 9+) (eq  and Scheme ). Loss of one
FeII (eq  and Scheme ) and one electron (eq  and Scheme ) would lead to the experimentally observed trinuclear
cluster, which we denote as [3Fe–3S–1RS]1+ and which is best described as consisting of a valence-delocalized
Fe22.5+ pair AF coupled to the FeIII site (i.e., a total of eight positive charges), bridged by three
sulfides and the monothiolated intermediate.

Schematic Representation
of the Auxiliary Cluster of LS during Turnover
We note that the reactions shown in eqs  and  are conceptually similar
to the well-known
oxidative disassembly of [4Fe–4S]2+ clusters to
the cuboidal [3Fe–4S]+ form upon loss of one FeII. Moreover, the electronic structure of the intermediate
[3Fe–3S–1RS]+ cluster is consistent with
a cuboidal geometry. Thus, this reaction would not require major structural
rearrangement of the cluster.

The second distinct spectroscopic
feature observed in samples of
the monothiolated intermediate are shoulders associated with the quadrupole
doublet features typical of a site-differentiated [4Fe–4S]2+ cluster. We tentatively assign this cluster to the RS [4Fe–4S]2+ cluster, of which the unique, non-cysteine-ligated Fe site
may be coordinated by SAM or methionine, a coproduct of reductive
SAM cleavage. Similar spectroscopic perturbations have been observed
in other RS enzymes,, (Table ). We also note that the RS [4Fe–4S]2+ cluster can be partially disassembled to the [3Fe–4S]0 form upon purification of the cross-linked intermediate in
the presence of excess reductant, because we observe 1.5 equiv of
3Fe-clusters. Loss of Fe from a [4Fe–4S] cluster to yield [3Fe–4S]
clusters has been reported for RS enzymes.,,

To assess whether the isolated complex
is competent to proceed
to product, Ec LS was incubated with an unlabeled
peptide substrate and 1 equiv of SAM under turnover conditions, reisolated
by molecular sieve chromatography, and then introduced into a second
reaction containing excess SAM, dithionite, and SAHN. Samples to be
analyzed by Mössbauer spectroscopy were also removed after
formation of the intermediate, after isolation of the intermediate
by molecular sieve chromatography, and after incubation of the intermediate
further under turnover conditions. Analysis of the reaction by LC–MS
showed that 0.9 equiv of the intermediate was formed and that ∼50%
of the intermediate decayed to the lipoyl product with a rate constant
that was faster than the overall rate constant for catalysis. The
substoichiometric amount of product may be a consequence of an unproductive
reaction pathway involving disassembly of the auxiliary cluster under
our nonphysiological reaction conditions and liberation of the cluster’s
3 Fe ions and the monothiolated intermediate into solution. While
it has been previously reported that the 6-mercapto-octanoyl species
is the stable intermediate generated by LS, one possible explanation for the substoichiometric product is that
LS generates both the 6-mercapto- and the 8-mercapto-octanoyl species,
but only one of these is competent to form product. However, when
the intermediate is cleaved from the peptide using lipoamidase from Enterococcus faecalis and subjected to reverse-phase
liquid chromatography, it is clear that only 6-MOA is present ().

The second step of the LS
reaction involves generation of the C8-centered
radical (R′•) by a second equivalent of 5′-dA•. The R′• can then attack
one of the remaining sulfido groups of the [3Fe–3S–1RS]+ auxiliary cluster of the monothiolated intermediate. Again,
this reaction formally entails recombination of the substrate radical
with one electron of the lone pair of the attacked sulfido ligand,
with the second electron of the lone pair being formally donated to
the Fe22.5+ unit of the [3Fe–3S–1RS]+ cluster, giving rise to a [3Fe–2S–1RS/1R′S]+ cluster (eq  and Scheme ), in which the RS/R′S moiety represents
the dianionic form of the reduced lipoyl product. We speculate that
dissociation of the lipoyl product will destabilize the remainder
of the disassembled cluster under our in vitro conditions,
resulting in loss of Fe (formally, two FeII and one FeIII ion) and sulfide to solution (eq  and Scheme ). Mössbauer analysis
of the sample of the complete reaction suggests that the intermediate’s
[3Fe–3S–1RS]+ auxiliary cluster is partially
or completely disassembled and reduced to multiple high-spin FeII complexes, including N/O-coordinated FeII (presumably
lost from the cluster into solution) and S-coordinated FeII (either Fe remaining in the partially disassembled site of the auxiliary
cluster or Fe in solution coordinated by the lipoyl product).

While it has been clear for some time
that the source of the inserted
sulfur atom in the LS reaction is LS itself, whether the auxiliary
iron sulfur cluster is the direct source has not been established.
Although the idea of using an Fe/S cluster as an activated source
of sulfur that recombines with an organic substrate radical is provocative,
significant evidence has been gathered for this role in biotin synthase,
which catalyzes similar sulfur insertion steps to form the thiolane
ring of the biotin cofactor.,,− By contrast, recent studies have provided evidence that in the methylthiotransferases,
RimO and MiaB, which attach methythio groups (−SCH3) at sp2- or sp3-hybridized carbon centers
and which also contain auxiliary [4Fe–4S] clusters, the sulfur
atom of the methylthio group does not derive from one of the μ3-sulfido ions of the cluster but more likely from a sulfide
ion that is attached externally to the cluster as a ligand.

Given that LS is inactivated during catalysis
because of cluster
destruction, it is likely that other cellular factors serve to rebuild
or replace the cluster to allow for multiple turnover. Proteins encoded
in the isc or suf operons, responsible
for building and inserting Fe/S clusters in Ec and
other organisms, are potential candidates for playing such roles.
Recently, two genes from the mitochondrial Fe/S cluster assembly system
in Saccharomyces cerevisiae (Sc), ISA1 and ISA2, were
identified as playing a role in the catalytic cycle of biotin synthase
but not in the de novo biosynthesis of the Fe/S clusters
of the protein. It was suggested that these proteins might function
in regeneration of the sacrificial [2Fe–2S] cluster of biotin
synthase. In a subsequent study, a third
gene, IBA57, that encodes a protein that interacts
with Isa1 and Isa2 was identified in Sc. Deletion of the IBA57 gene
prevented insertion of the Fe/S cluster of aconitase and homoaconitase
and also inhibited the in vivo functions of biotin
and lipoyl synthases. The same three genes have been identified in
humans (ISCA1, ISCA2, and IBA57), and defects are associated with severe disease and
premature death., Silencing of these genes in HeLa
cells by RNAi results in misformed mitochondria and decreased activity
of a subset of mitochondrial Fe/S proteins, including LS. Moreover, homologues of these proteins are also
found Ec, suggesting the importance of this pathway
in prokaryotes as well.

A second
set of human genes, NFU1 and BOLA3, have been characterized as having similar phenotypes., Defects in these genes cause decreases in protein lipoylation and
a corresponding low activity of lipoyl-dependent multienzyme complexes,
again leading to disease and premature death., NFU1 is postulated to be an alternative Fe/S scaffold, and BOLA3
is hypothesized to be a reductase that aids in the transfer of clusters
from the scaffold to the target protein. Interestingly, the role of NFU1 appears to be somewhat specific
for lipoyl synthase and succinate dehydrogenase given that the activities
of other mitochondrial Fe/S proteins were unaffected upon NFU1 knockdown
by RNAi. Whether these proteins act in de novo biosynthesis
of the Fe/S clusters in LS or cluster regeneration has not been determined.

In summary, we provide strong biochemical and structural evidence
for a key proposed intermediate in the biosynthesis of the lipoyl
cofactor that involves a covalent bond between the organic substrate
and a sulfur atom of a sacrificed [4Fe–4S] cluster. Although
the enzyme is inactivated upon turnover because of cluster destruction,
ongoing studies of Fe/S cluster biosynthesis in a number of different
organisms hint at the possibility of dedicated pathways for regeneration
of the auxiliary cluster of LS and other related enzymes, thus demonstrating
that the employment of an Fe/S cofactor as a source of sulfur during
the reaction of a LS may not be as limiting as initially thought.

Supporting Information Available
Figures
S1 (structure of peptide
2), S2 (extracted ion chromatograms of peptides), S3 (SDS-PAGE of
fractions from anion-exchange chromatography of a LipA–OHP
mixture), S4 (SDS-PAGE of fractions of anion-exchange chromatography
of large-scale EcLipA cross-linked with OHP), S5
(EPR spectra of EcLipA cross-linked with OHP), S6
(Mössbauer spectra of EcLipA cross-linked
with peptide 2), S7 (comparison of Mössbauer spectra
of EcLipA cross-link generated with 1 equiv of SAM
before and after gel-filtration chromatography), S8 (EPR spectra of EcLipA cross-link generated with 1 equiv of SAM), S9 (comparison
of Mössbauer spectra in zero-field and 53 mT field of EcLipA cross-link generated with 1 equiv of SAM and reacted
with excess SAM), and S10 (LC–MS analysis of 6-MOA and 8-MOA)
as well as methods (cleavage of 6-MOA and 8-MOA from peptides and
analysis by LC–MS). This material is available free of charge
via the Internet at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bi500432r_si_001.pdf

This work was
supported by NIH grants GM-63847 and GM-103268 (S.J.B.), the Dreyfus
Foundation (Teacher Scholar Award to C.K.), and the Beckman Foundation
(Young Investigator Award to C.K.).

The authors declare no
competing financial interest.

Abbreviations Used
5′-dA5′-deoxyadenosine

5′-dA•5′-deoxyadenosyl 5′-radical

AIas-isolated

BioBbiotin synthase

DTTdithiothreitol

EcEscherichia
coli

EPRelectron paramagnetic resonance

Fe/Siron–sulfur

HEPESN-(2-hydroxyethyl)piperazine-N′-2-ethanesulfonic acid

HPH protein

HPLChigh-performance liquid chromatography

ISinternal standard

LAlipoic acid

LCPlipoyl carrier protein

LHPlipoyl-H protein

LSlipoyl synthase

OHPoctanoyl-H protein

RSradical SAM

SAHNS-adenosylhomocysteine
nucleosidase

SAMS-adenosyl-l-methionine

SDS-PAGEsodium dodecyl sulfate–polyacrylamide
gel electrophoresis

SsSulfolobus solfataricus

TCAtrichloroacetic acid

TCEPtris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine

TtThermus thermophilus

UV–visultraviolet–visible

WTwild type

