Phytochromes are photoswitching
proteins found in plants, fungi, and bacteria.− In plants, phytochromes
sense the ratio of red to far-red light to modulate light-induced
responses such as seed germination, seedling establishment, flowering,
and senescence.− Phytochromes utilize heme-derived linear tetrapyrrole
(bilin) chromophores for light sensing. Photoexcitation initiates
a rapid photoisomerization reaction around the C15,16 double bond
of the bilin chromophore followed by a series of chromophore–protein
relaxation events on the ground-state surface leading to changes in
biological signaling activity. Phytochromes from cyanobacteria utilize
phycocyanobilin [PCB (Figure A)] as a chromophore,
while other phytochromes utilize phytochromobilin (PΦB) and
biliverdin (BV) chromophores.,

(A) Phycocyanobilin (PCB)
chromophore in 15Z and
15E states. (B) Pfr pump–probe
experiment with the 725 nm pump pulse spectrum (gray area) and Pfr (brown curve) spectrum compared. The spectrum of Pfr was computed to account for the residual absorbance of Pfr at photoequilibrium, and both Pr and Pfr spectra
represent equimolar concentrations of each state. Also, the decomposition
of the Pr spectrum (green) into fluorescent and photoactive
Pr populations (blue and red, respectively) based on SVD
analysis of temperature-dependent Pr absorbance bands is
shown. The empty circles show the simulated
Pr spectrum with fluorescent and photoactive Pr populations as bases.

The N-terminal PAS-GAF-PHY photosensory core module of the
full
length Cph1 protein (amino acids 1–514, here termed Cph1Δ)
from Synechocystis sp. PCC6803 has served as an excellent
model system for plant phytochromes because of its robust recombinant
expression and known crystal structure.− The full length Cph1
protein consists of Cph1Δ coupled to a C-terminal histidine
kinase domain, and both proteins exhibit nearly identical photodynamics. Red illumination of the dark-adapted 15ZPr state of Cph1Δ (Figure B, red curve) initiates forward photoconversion
(Pr to Pfr), generating the primary isomerized
Lumi-Rf intermediate. − Lumi-Rf thermally evolves via several intermediates to
generate the 15EPfr photoproduct
(Figure B, dark red curve) on a &gt;100 ms
timescale., The dark-stable 15ZPr state
can be regenerated from 15EPfr either rapidly by far-red light (∼700 nm) or via spontaneous
dark reversion on a very slow (&gt;24 h) timescale.,

Despite numerous reports that address the primary forward photodynamics
of Cph1Δ,,,, including multipulse transient absorption
studies,, the reverse
primary photodynamics (15EPfr to 15ZPr) are less well characterized.
The reverse excited-state photodynamics of Cph1Δ are appreciably
faster than those of the forward photoreaction,, as has been reported for other phytochromes.− Diller and co-workers resolved
the biphasic decay of the Pfr excited state of Cph1Δ
with lifetimes of 540 fs and 3.2 ps. More
recently, we resolved 260 fs and 2.8 ps decay lifetimes using broadband
transient absorption spectroscopy. On
the basis of the evidence that the Pfr ground state of
Cph1Δ is homogeneous,, we attributed these
components of Pfr excited state decay to the formation
and decay of a photochemically nonproductive vibrationally hot ground
state relaxing back to the Pfr ground state. Subsequent intermediates in reverse photoconversion
have been characterized via cryo-trapping methods,, but an equivalent study using time-resolved spectroscopy at physiological
temperature has not been reported for Cph1Δ.

More recently,
the circular dichroism (CD) spectra of phytochrome
Pfr states have been interpreted as arising from a heterogeneous
ground state. There is growing evidence
that observed multiphasic excited-state dynamics in phytochromes and
related PCB-incorporating GAF domains cyanobacteriochrome (CBCR) photosensors
arises due to ground-state heterogeneity.,, In recent temperature- and excitation wavelength-dependent
studies of forward photoconversion of Cph1Δ, we resolved five Pr* excited-state decay pathways
arising from photoactive (PhotoPr) and blue-shifted
fluorescent (FluorPr) subpopulations (Figure B, red and blue curves, respectively). PhotoPr productively formed the primary Lumi-RF photoproduct
on a 20 ps timescale, whereas FluorPr did not
yield Lumi-RF and exhibited longer excited-state lifetimes.
The spectral properties, low quantum yield, and long-lived excited
states of FluorPr were all remarkably similar
to the properties of Y176H variant Cph1Δ., The ground-state bleach bands observed in transient absorption studies
of the CBCRs NpR6012g4 from Nostoc punctiforme and
RcaE from Fremyella diplosiphon exhibited pronounced
excitation wavelength dependence., Ground-state
heterogeneity may thus be more widespread in the phytochrome and CBCR
family of photosensors than previously appreciated.,

We here extend our recent study of the ultrafast dynamics
of the
reverse reaction of Cph1Δ by using
a narrowband excitation pump system (Figure B and Figure S1 of the ) with an improved signal-to-noise ratio and greater temporal range
(7 ns vs 100 ps). The new narrowband excitation data resolve clear
multiphasic decay of the Pfr excited-state population,
demonstrating heterogeneity of the Pfr ground state. Measurement
up to 6 ns resolves multiphasic secondary photoproduct formation,
not previously observed. We interpret the Cph1Δ reverse reaction
as arising from the parallel evolution of two productive, kinetically
distinct Pfr subpopulations arising via ground-state heterogeneity.
Our studies also suggest that the Pfr photoreaction initially
produces the fluorescent FluorPr subpopulation,
which then slowly equilibrates with the photoactive PhotoPr population. This study thus illustrates the utility
of transient absorption techniques to elucidate the underlying ground-state
heterogeneity in photoreceptors.

Experimental Procedures
Protein
Purification
Cph1Δ protein was purified
after recombinant expression in Escherichia coli cells
engineered to produce phycocyanobilin (PCB) as described previously.,

Ultrafast Experimental Setup
The ultrafast laser source
consisted of an amplified Ti:sapphire laser system (Spectra Physics
Spitfire Pro) that delivered 800 nm pulses with a 2.3 mJ pulse energy
at a 1 kHz repetition rate and a 40 fs full width at half-maximum
(fwhm) pulse duration. The laser output
was split into two separate pathways for generating pump and probe
pulses. Broadband white light probe pulses were generated by focusing
the 800 nm pulses into a slowly translating 2 mm CaF2 crystal.
The resulting probe light was then focused onto the sample and dispersed
by a commercial spectrograph (Oriel MS125) to be detected with a linear
256-pixel photodiode array (Hamamatsu S3901 and C7884).

Excitation
pulses (Figure B, gray shape) were generated
by a two-stage home-built noncollinear optical parametric amplifier
(NOPA) that produced tunable visible excitation pulses. The first NOPA stage generated a seed beam that
was spectrally filtered (λcenter = 725 nm; 10 nm
bandwidth) and amplified by a second NOPA. This amplified light was
filtered again by a second interference filter of identical specifications.
An instrument response function (IRF) of 120 fs was estimated by the
rise time of the excited-state absorption (ESA) band of the pump–probe
signals of the IR-140 laser dye. The energy of the pump pulses was
900 nJ/pulse at the sample.

The pump beam was chopped at 500
Hz to generate difference spectra
with respect to the nonpumped probe spectrum. The probe beam was optically
delayed with respect to the pump pulse with a computer-controlled
linear motor stage (Newport IMS600LM), which allowed up to 6 ns temporal
separation. Pump pulses were linearly polarized and set to 54.7°
(magic angle) with respect to probe pulse polarization. Pump pulse
spot diameters of 250–360 μm were estimated using a micrometer
stage and a razor blade; the broadband probe pulses were focused to
∼50 μm. The appreciably greater pump pulse volume minimizes
artifactual contributions to the signals due to varying spatial overlap
between pump and probe beams. This minimization was confirmed by monitoring
the signal amplitude and spectral shape while dithering the pump beam
with respect to the probe beam.

The sample was passed continuously
in a closed circuit to ensure
fresh sample for each excitation pulse. The sample was continuously
illuminated with a red light-emitting diode (Epitex Inc., L650-66-60;
λcenter = 648 nm) through a quartz window to shift
the Pr ⇌ Pfr equilibrium to favor the
Pfr state in the sample cell. Because the 725 nm excitation
light is not resonant with the Pr spectrum (Figure ), no interfering Pr signals were observed
in the data. The path length of the quartz cuvette was 2 mm, and the
optical density at the red absorbance band was 0.4–0.5 at that
path length. All experiments were performed at room temperature.

Results
Biphasic Photodynamics of Pfr
Pfr to Pr primary transient absorption (TA) spectra at selected
times are contrasted in Figure . These spectra
can be decomposed into four overlapping contributions: (1) negative
ground-state bleach originating from the loss of ground-state population
due to the excitation pulse, (2) negative stimulated emission (SE)
signals arising from the probe pulse, (3) positive excited-state absorption
(ESA) signals arising from S1 → Sn transitions, and (4) positive photoproduct absorption that
arises from the S0 → S1 transition of
photoproduct or ground-state intermediates (GSI). The ground-state
bleach contribution is spectrally identical to the inverted ground-state
absorption in a homogeneous population. However, in a situation with
multiple ground-state subpopulations, the bleach is the sum of the
inverted ground-state absorptions from the fraction of each subpopulation
actually excited by the pump pulse. While both SE and ESA bands are
markers of excited-state Pfr* populations, interpretation
of the ESA is a simpler way of characterizing excited-state kinetics
due to less complicated overlap with photoproduct, bleach, and SE
bands.

Transient absorption spectra of the Pfr to Pr photoreaction in the &lt;100 ps time range (A) and &gt;100 ps to
6
ns time range (B). The asterisk in panel A refers to the water Raman
peak. The 100 ps transient spectrum (magenta) is shown in both panels.

At times of &lt;100 ps, transient
spectra (Figure A) are nearly identical to
the previously reported broadband
pump data (Figures S2 and S3 of the ), with a slight difference
in bleach amplitude attributed to differences in excitation overlap., The 100 fs transient spectrum (black curve) exhibits a broad ESA
band from 430 to 675 nm, a negative band arising from bleach and/or
SE beyond 675 nm, and a sharp water Raman peak at 580 nm. This spectrum
rapidly decays within 100 fs (Figure A), reflecting
the evolution of populations outside the Franck–Condon region. The 250 fs spectrum (Figure A, red curve) exhibits a broad positive band from 430 to 640
nm and a negative bleach and/or SE at &gt;640 nm. The 520 nm signal
(Figure A) exclusively tracks ESA and hence
reports the
decay of the excited-state population with biphasic relaxation kinetics
with a subpicosecond component and a slower ∼2 ps component.
The 520 nm kinetics are fit to both single- and double-exponential
decay functions convolved over a 120 fs IRF in Figure . The single-exponential fit extracts a 220 fs lifetime for
the best fit of the data, but the residual exhibits a systematic deviation
from the data. Such a deviation is not seen with a biexponential fit,
consisting of two lifetimes at 170 fs (94%) and 2 ps (6%). This may
indicate either a complex bifurcating excited-state potential energy
surface or the two Pfr* populations coexisting upon photoexcitation
with a 94%/6% occupation.

Kinetics traces of the Pfr to Pr reaction
at selected probe wavelengths as indicated. The vertical dashed line
marks the 100 ps probe time, which is the maximal probe time from
the previous experiment. The traces are
fit (red) with the target model in Figure A.

(A and B) Single- and double-exponential fitting
of the 520 nm
ESA kinetic traces, respectively. The fit is convoluted with a 120
fs IRF (gray area). The residual of each fit is plotted above with
the same y-axes for comparison of the single- and
double-exponential fits.

Other regions of the spectrum do not exhibit time scales
comparable
to that seen for the excited state at 520 nm (Figure B,C). At 625 nm, the amplitudes of the positive absorption
signals begin to increase at approximately 200 ps (Figure B), clearly indicating the appearance of a species
with absorption at shorter wavelengths on this time scale. The amplitude
of the ground-state bleach band peaking at 700 nm steadily decreases
until approximately 50 ps (Figure C). At later
times (&gt;200 ps), the amplitude of the bleach apparently increases
even in the absence of repeated photoexcitation. An isosbestic point
is observed at ∼660 nm (Figure B).
The 625 nm (Figure B) and 700 nm (Figure C) kinetic traces thus reveal secondary dynamics
at &gt;100 ps that were not resolved in the small time windows of
previous
studies.,

As a first step in interpreting the
apparent increasing ground-state
depletion at later times, we compared the evolution at 700 and 625
nm in more detail (Figure ). After ∼10
ps, both traces plateau to preterminal values that remain unchanged
to 200 ps (Figure A). The preterminal signal
amplitudes are 0.36 and −0.47 mOD at 625 and 700 nm, respectively,
after which the signals increase their respective amplitudes and mirror
each other, again reaching stable terminal plateau values with amplitudes
of 1.25 and −1.34 mOD, respectively. The ratios of the late
to early signal amplitudes are 3.47 and 2.85 at 625 and 700 nm, respectively.
Were these wavelengths reporting evolution of a homogeneous population
between two species, these ratios would be the same. The observed
discrepancy in these ratios is likely due to the presence of multiple
spectral species contributing to the negative band around 700 nm.
We therefore compared earlier and later probe time spectra (Figure B). Comparison of the experimental 5.6 ns spectrum
to the mean spectrum of the plateau region (10–100 ps) shows
good agreement in the positive absorption band peaking at 625 nm (Figure B, magenta and teal curves, respectively). However,
the bleach region peaking at 710 nm differs in amplitude, also shown
by the difference spectrum between the two curves (Figure B, black curve), which has a negative band peaking
around 720 nm. This difference spectrum is attributed to that of the
primary photoproduct Lumi-Ff (see below).

(A) Comparison of amplitudes between earlier and later probe time
ranges at 625 and 700 nm probe wavelengths (blue and red and left
and right y-axes, respectively). Horizontal bars
indicate plateaus; the earlier time was averaged from 10 to 100 ps,
and the later time was averaged from 4 to 6 ns. (B) Comparison between
5.6 ns and 10–100 ps spectra (magenta and dark cyan, respectively).
The 10–100 ps spectra are averaged and scaled 5-fold for review.
The difference between them is obtained (black).

The increasing magnitude of the ground-state bleach band
at later
times (Figure A, red circles) is not physically
possible in a photoinitiated system under continuous flow, as the
increased amplitude of the bleach signal indicates an increasing photoreaction
quantum yield at later times, as if the initially photoexcited but
nonproductive population becomes photoexcited again. Thus, this phenomenon
suggests the presence of an intermediate population with positive
absorption spectrally overlapping the Pfr ground-state
bleach. The bleach band is a primary contributor to the negative signal
in sub-10 ps dynamics (Figure C), and the
preterminal amplitude at 700 nm is a permanent bleach that cannot
increase its amplitude. Thus, as the spectrally overlapping population
decays, the permanent bleach is restored to give the mistaken impression
of a growing bleach. The rise of the 625 nm kinetics and an observed
isosbestic point at 660 nm (Figure B) thus
are consistent with evolution of Lumi-Ff into a blue-shifted
secondary photoproduct on a subnanosecond time scale.

Spectral Simulation
of Primary and Secondary Photoproducts
The spectral similarity
between the plateau region spectrum (10–100
ps) and the terminal spectrum (5.6 ns) on the 625 nm absorption band
(Figure B) and the presence of two photoproduct
generation phases (&lt;10 and &gt;100 ps) suggest parallel reactions
(i.e., two Lumi-Ff → the blue-shifted intermediate),
and reflects a heterogeneous Pfr* excited state with different
time scales. It appears that the plateau region spectrum contains
both Lumi-Ff and the blue-shifted intermediate, whereas
the terminal spectrum contains just the blue-shifted intermediate
(Figure B). To test this interpretation further
and facilitate global analysis of the data (see below), we conducted
a spectral decomposition of the data (Figure ). Spectra of the two photoproducts were estimated from the decomposition
of both narrowband and broadband excitation spectra. The preterminal
plateau spectrum is simulated from the 100 ps transient spectrum of
the broadband excitation data, which exhibits positive absorption
in both far-red and red regions (Figure A,
magenta curve). This spectrum was previously
assigned to the “Lumi-F” (distinct from Lumi-Ff) photoproduct under the assumption that Lumi-F has a broadened spectrum
with absorption to both the blue and the red of Pfr. A similar absorption band in the far-red spectral
region was also resolved in plant phytochrome reverse primary dynamics., However, absorption at 625 nm after 5.6 ns is similar to this band
(Figure B and Figure S5F of the ), and the red-shifted
component has decayed by this point as shown by recovery of the bleach
(Figure S4 of the ). Furthermore, the rise of the blue-shifted component occurs with
distinct kinetics, after decay of the excited state (Figure B). These data all suggest that the 100 ps spectrum
(or Lumi-F) consists of two photoproducts with a shared Pfr bleach.

Model simulations of &gt;100 ps transient spectra. (A and B) Spectral
decomposition of 100 ps and 5.6 ns transient absorption difference
spectra by Lumi-Ff, Lumi-Fr, and Pfr bleach spectra. Both Lumi-Ff and Lumi-Fr are
estimated as Gaussians with a λcenter values of 715
and 635 nm and Δλ values of 150 and 100 nm, respectively.
The Pfr bleach is the inverted Pfr spectra from
Figure B. (C) Species-associated spectra (SAS)
of Pfr (black), Lumi-Ff (red), and Lumi-Fr (blue). (D) Simulation of &gt;100 ps difference spectra with
three basis sets in panel C. The Pfr bleach is fixed.

We assumed that the Pfr bleach is an inverted Pfr spectrum (Figure B, dark red curve),
implying Pfr subpopulations exhibiting nearly identical
absorption spectra but different kinetics. The spectrum of the blue-shifted
intermediate was estimated from the inverted Pfr spectrum
and the 5.6 ns spectrum recorded after narrowband excitation (Figure B) because the red-shifted intermediate Lumi-Ff has largely decayed by 5.6 ns (Figure B) as shown by depletion of the negative band peaking at 720 nm.
Combination of a simple Gaussian with a center wavelength of 635 nm
and a 100 nm bandwidth (fwhm) and the fixed Pfr bleach
(Figure C, blue and black curves, respectively)
simulates the 5.6 ns transient spectrum well (Figure B, cyan and magenta). Following the nomenclature protocols
recently proposed for CBCRs (and also presented here), we designate the red-absorbing species at 635
nm as Meta-Fr, a secondary intermediate arising from far-red
illumination and absorbing red light. The
combination of Meta-Fr and Pfr bleach spectra
allowed extraction of the red-shifted primary photoproduct Lumi-Ff from the broadband excitation data; for simulation, Lumi-Ff was deduced by a simple Gaussian spectral shape (Figure A) with a center wavelength of 715 nm and a 150
nm bandwidth (fwhm).

The Gaussians used to simulate the Lumi-Ff and Meta-Fr intermediates are contrasted with
the Pfr ground-state
absorption spectra in Figure C. Combining
these two Gaussians allowed us to simulate difference spectra at varying
probe times for comparison to experiment (Figure D). A slight deviation from experiment was observed at approximately
100 ps, but excellent agreement was obtained at later probe times.
The simulated spectra also predicted the experimentally observed 660
nm isosbestic wavelength observed for the underlying two-population
kinetics (Figures  and D). The difference at 100 ps is likely to indicate that Lumi-Ff does not have a Gaussian line shape and hence could be more
similar to Pfr or Pr with a higher-energy vibronic
tail (Figure B).

Evolution between 100 ps
and 1 ms
Figure  contrasts 5.6 ns
and 1 ms transient spectra (orange and gray
curves, respectively). The previous broadband excitation (Figure S1
of the ) data, collected with a different probe window (450–740
nm), exhibit a positive photoproduct absorption band peaking around
730 nm at 100 ps that has decayed by the 1 ms spectrum (Figure S4B
of the , arrow).
This region of the spectrum is not detected in this study but is satisfactorily
modeled in the spectral decomposition (see above) and global analysis
(see below).

Comparison between the 6 ns and 1 ms difference spectra
(orange
and gray curves, respectively) in Pfr to Pr dynamics
and the Pr – Pfr difference spectra.
Three kinds of Pr – Pfr difference spectra
are constructed on the basis of fluorescent and photoactive Pr (blue and red, respectively) and complete Pr spectra
(green) represented in Figure B. The FluorPr – Pfr spectrum is scaled
to match the 5.6 ns spectrum. The PhotoPr –
Pfr and TotalPr – Pfr difference spectra used the same Pfr amplitude, and PhotoPr and TotalPr have the
same respective ratio to the FluorPr amplitude
in Figure B. The 1 ms spectrum is scaled to
the 5.6 ns spectrum.

Discrepancies among the Pr – Pfr difference
spectrum, the transient difference spectrum after 100 ps, and the
transient difference spectrum after 1 ms were previously interpreted
as evidence that evolution occurs after 100 ps for the Meta-F intermediate
to generate Pr. This interpretation
rests on the assumption that the Pr subpopulations are
spectrally similar, such that photoconversion of an ensemble of Pr subpopulations in the static difference spectrum will provide
an accurate comparison for transient difference spectra. However,
we have recently resolved spectrally distinct FluorPr and PhotoPr (Figure B) subpopulations of Pr in Cph1Δ. We therefore compared 5.6 ns and 1 ms spectra
with narrowband excitation to three Pr – Pfr difference spectra (Figure ): FluorPr – Pfr (blue curve; λpeak = 633 nm), PhotoPr – Pfr (red curve; λpeak = 663 nm), and TotalPr – Pfr (green curves; λpeak = 650 nm). Neither the TotalPr –
Pfr spectrum nor the PhotoPr –
Pfr difference spectrum is in good agreement with the observed
transient spectra. The FluorPr – Pfr difference spectrum is in better agreement with both transient
spectra, suggesting that the secondary photoproduct Meta-Fr formed upon photoexcitation of Pfr either is very similar
to the FluorPr subpopulation or is the same
species within the resolution of our data.

Global Analysis of Cph1Δ
Reverse Photoconversion
We analyzed the narrowband transient
signals using a global analysis
formalism to decompose the transient signals into the constituent
evolution of a finite number of species., Within this framework, transient difference spectra are described
by eq :where the change in absorption ΔA at probe
time t is the summation of n species
with distinct time-dependent concentrations, cl(t), and
fixed difference spectra, Δεl(λ). The time-dependent concentration of each species is given
by solution of the first-order linear differential equation shown
in eq :where c(t) is
the 1 × n vector describing the time-dependent
concentration of the respective lth species, K is the matrix describing the connectivity scheme among species
dictated by the chosen target model, Ipump(t) is the IRF of the pump pulse, and xl is the initial fractional occupation of lth species by the excitation pulse. This analysis extracts
the number of species, their connectivity scheme, and the extracted
spectra. If the model successfully describes the underlying sample
dynamics, then the extracted spectra, Δεl(λ), represent the true difference spectra of the constituent
transient populations and are called species-associated difference
spectra (SADS). If the analysis unsuccessfully models the data, then
the estimated spectra are linear combinations of the SADS.

In
constructing a target model, we first used a simpler scheme that describes
the transient signals as a sequential flow of spectral species with
single-exponential kinetics (i.e., species 1 → species 2 →
... → species n). The extracted difference
spectra from this analysis are termed sequential evolution-associated
difference spectra (EADS). This procedure
estimates experimentally observed time scales, the number of species
(n), and the general spectral evolution of the signals.
Sequential analysis also provides valuable model-independent constraints
for target model construction.,

Both narrowband
and broadband excitation data sets were initially
subjected to a sequential analysis (Figure S5 of the ), which give an excellent fit to the
respective signals (Figures S6 and S7 of the , respectively). The broadband excitation signals
have one less EADS (n = 5 vs n =
6) because these data were only collected to 100 ps and do not resolve
the second phase of Meta-Fr growth observed in the narrowband
excitation data. The estimated EADS lifetimes are consistent between
the two data sets at 60 fs, 180 fs, 770 fs, 2.8 ps, and 1.5 ns for
the first five EADS. EADS5 for the broadband excitation data is constrained
to a 1.5 ns lifetime to be consistent with the lifetime extracted
from narrowband excitation signals, while the narrowband EADS6 are
stable to the end of the experiment (τ = ∞). The EADS5
to EADS6 transition in the narrowband excitation signals corresponds
to the experimentally observed dynamics observed after 100 ps (Figure A).

Side-by-side comparison of the sequential
EADS for broadband and
narrowband excitation data shows good agreement (Figure S8 of the ), with a greater bleach
magnitude observed for broadband excitation data. This difference
is tentatively attributed to excitation wavelength-dependent dynamics,
which have been reported for the Cph1Δ Pr state and in CBCR systems., EADS6 estimated from the narrowband excitation signals is nearly
identical to the 1 ms spectrum, demonstrating negligible spectral
evolution from 6 ns to 1 ms (Figure S5E of the ). EADS6 of the narrowband excitation
signals is also comparable to EADS5 of the broadband signals, with
good spectral overlap at the 625 nm positive band (Figure S5F of the ).

The biphasic decay
of ESA, the sequential analysis described above,
and the simulation of Pfr CD spectra argue for the adoption of a parallel evolving target model
for interpreting the narrowband transient data (Figure A). By analogy to other
phytochrome and CBCR systems,,,,, we modeled this as arising because of an inhomogeneous ground state
rather than bifurcation on a homogeneous population on a excited-state
surface. In the absence of evidence to the contrary, we assumed that
the two subpopulations possess identical ground-state and excited-state
spectra. Kinetic analysis of the ESA band at 520 nm (Figure ) extracted fractional occupancies for the 1.90
ps and 180 fs components of 6 and 94%, respectively. These subpopulations
are termed Pfr I and Pfr II, respectively, using
the nomenclature adopted for CBCR systems. The overall quantum yield was set at ∼15% [15.4% for the
target model (Table )], based on the previously
reported quantum yield for reverse photoconversion of Cph1Δ. The low quantum yield indicates that nonproductive
regeneration of the Pfr ground state is the dominant route
for de-excitation of Pfr*. Branching between productive
and nonproductive Pfr* is posited to occur at progression
through the conical intersection and not during subsequent evolution
of the ground-state photoproducts (discussed below).

Global analysis of Pfr to Pr dynamics. (A)
Proposed target model with two Pfr subpopulations (Pfr I and Pfr II). Each spectral species is represented
in a box, and its apparent time constant is given in parentheses.
(B) Estimated SADS of the target model. FCPfr*, Pfr*, GSI1, GSI2, Lumi-Ff, and Meta-Fr from populations I and II have identical respective SADS.
(C) Comparison between Lumi-Ff SADS and the difference
spectra in Figure B. (D) Comparison between
Meta-Fr SADS (green) and FluorPr –
Pfr and PhotoPr – Pfr difference spectra (blue and red, respectively). (E) Concentration
profile of each constituent population. The color scheme is the same
as that in panel A, with population I represented by the dashed curves.

Kinetic Parameters
and Branching Ratios
of the Pfr* State Based on the Target Model from Figure A
 	initial occupancy
(%)	apparent τ	% (Pfr* to GSI)	% (Pfr* to Lumi-Fr)	Φ (Lumi-Fr) (%)	
Pfr* I	6	180 fs	27	73	4.4	
Pfr* II	94	1.9 ps	88	12	11	
The apparent τ is the observed
lifetime of the spectral species. % (Pfr* to GSI) is the
branching ratio of the respective Pfr* population to GSI1,
and % (Pfr* to Lumi-Fr) is the branching ratio
from Pfr* to Lumi-Fr. The addition of both parameters
makes up 100% for respective subpopulations. Φ (Lumi-Fr) is the final quantum yield of Lumi-Fr in reference to
the total (Pfr I + Pfr II) excited Pfr molecules.

The target
model includes branching between productive and nonproductive
components in each Pfr* population (Table ), with only the overall quantum yield constrained. The raw
data at 625 nm provide an independent estimate of the branching ratios.
Two phases of Meta-Fr photoproduct formation are clear
in the 625 nm kinetics: a fast formation phase completed by approximately
10 ps and a slower phase proceeding on a 1.5 ns timescale (Figure A). The difference in time scales results in steady
plateaus at 625 nm, allowing the ratio of absorption intensities for
the early and later plateau regions to be 0.36:1.25. Assuming that
Meta-Fr does not decay on the experimental timescale, the
ratio of Meta-Fr yield between the earlier and later formation
would thus be 0.36:0.89, which translates to absolute Φ values
of 4.3 and 10.7%, respectively, if total yield is 15%. Because the initial excited-state occupancy of Pfr I is only 6%, it cannot account for the slowly arising component
of the Meta-Fr yield, which requires at least 10.7% occupancy
at 100% quantum yield. Given the initial occupancies and absolute
Φ, we can set the branching ratio of the Pfr ground
state to photoproduct at ∼28:72 and ∼89:11 for Pfr I and Pfr II, respectively. The calculated values
derived from the target model (Table ) are
27:73 and 88:11 to be consistent with the experimental estimate.

In the target model, each of the two Pfr* populations
generates one component of Lumi-Ff that then decays into
Meta-Fr (Figure A). The extracted
Lumi-Ff SADS compares well with the difference spectrum
calculated from the 5.6 ns transient spectrum and the mean transient
spectrum from 10 to 100 ps (Figures B and C). The decay of Lumi-Ff after 100 ps
is thus sufficient to explain the spectral evolution observed in the
bleach region (Figure ). The Meta-Fr SADS is in reasonable agreement with the FluorPr – Pfr difference spectrum (Figure D) and is consistent with the final 5.6 ns and 1 ms spectrum
(Figure ). The concentration of each species
is plotted in Figure E (Pfr I in
dashed lines and Pfr II in solid lines). The final Lumi-Fr concentration associated with Pfr I is 4.4% and
with Pfr II is 11% (Table ), in
good agreement with the independent estimate derived from analysis
of spectral evolution at 625 nm (see above).

The sequential
EADS analysis estimated lifetimes of 60 fs, 180
fs, 770 fs, and 2.8 ps (Figure S7 of the ). The 60 fs component is assigned to Franck–Condon
relaxation as reported previously. The
180 fs EADS exhibits a clear ESA band peaking around 520 nm, indicating
the presence of Pfr*. Pfr* decay is biphasic
as discussed above, so the 2.8 ps component is likely to be a superposition
of Pfr* decay and subsequent dynamics. The 770 fs component
was not resolved in the previous broadband excitation data because
of the lower signal-to-noise ratio in this data set (compare Figures
S6 and S7 of the ); however, a spectrally similar component can be extracted from
these data using the current analysis (Figure S5D of the ). In the narrowband data,
this component is necessary to describe the &lt;1 ps dynamics (Figure B). The 770 fs component (EADS3) is spectrally distinct
from the Pfr* and HotPfr spectra
resolved in the previous study, which are also resolved here as EADS2
and EADS4 (Figure S5 of the ). In the current target model, the 770 fs component is assigned
as the first GSI population [GSI1 (Figure A)], with spectral features qualitatively similar to those of the
Meta-Fr photoproduct (Figure B,
magenta and green curves, respectively). Because this component appears
before the appearance of the primary Lumi-Ff photoproduct,
we assign the 770 fs component to a nonisomerized GSI (GSI1) that
adapts a structurally twisted, blue-shifted conformation.− The 2.8 ps component (EADS4) is spectrally and kinetically analogous
to the HotPfr GSI extracted from the previous
broadband data, with red-shifted product absorption (Figure S5C,D
of the ). We therefore
interpret this species as a second GSI species (GSI2) arising from
the earlier GSI1 via vibrational relaxation before decaying back to
the Pfr ground state.,

We tested
this interpretation by fitting the narrowband data to
a target model with just one GSI having a lifetime of 2.8 ps (Figure
S9 of the ). This
model does not accurately describe the &lt;1 ps dynamics (Figure S10B
of the ). By contrast,
including two GSI populations in the final target model (Figure A) allows a good fit to the 625 nm kinetic trace
(Figure B). The decay of nonproductive Pfr* back to the Pfr ground state is therefore postulated
to occur via two resolved ground-state intermediate (GSI) populations.− The final target model (Figure A) gives
good agreement with the narrowband data set on all time scales examined
(Figure ).

We next applied the heterogeneous
target model to the broadband
excitation signals (Figure S11 of the ), with excellent results (Figures S11 and S12 of
the ). Because the
broadband excitation signals were collected only up to 100 ps, the
1.5 ns Lumi-Ff II to Meta-Fr II evolution was
not modeled. The side-by-side comparison with respective SADS between
the narrowband and broadband excitation signals (Figure S11 of the ) shows consistencies in
Pfr* and two GSI populations, albeit with variation in
the bleach-band amplitude (∼700 nm). The initial Franck–Condon
relaxation FCPfr* SADS are expected to vary
between these data sets, because the location of the initially excited
wavepacket is strongly affected by the excitation energy. The Lumi-Ff and Meta-Fr SADS show the most notable discrepancy
(panels E and F, respectively, of Figure S11 of the ). Unfortunately, analysis of the broadband
excitation signals could not extract Lumi-Ff as a separate
component because of the limited time window, and the Meta-Fr SADS was the mixture of Lumi-Ff and Meta-Fr populations. The concentration of Meta-Fr at 100 ps (Figure E) is too low for separation of Lumi-Ff and Meta-Fr by global analysis.

Discussion
Our previous interpretation of Cph1Δ primary reverse reaction
dynamics was based on a homogeneous model that attributed a “broadened”
spectrum to the Lumi-F primary photoproduct in comparison with the
Pfr ground state. That study
neither considered nor excluded the possibility that the Lumi-F’s
broadened spectrum reflects simultaneous photogeneration of blue-
and red-absorbing photoproducts. The
main limitation of that study was the short temporal window examined.
In this study, we have extended the analysis to longer times and have
used a narrower excitation pulse, with a higher signal-to-noise ratio
in the transient spectra. This allowed us to observe spectral evolution
from the red-shifted Lumi-Ff primary photoproduct to a
blue-shifted Meta-Fr species, a process described well
by a target model with a heterogeneous Pfr ground state.
Resonance Raman intensity analysis of the Cph1Δ Pfr state supported a homogeneous Pfr ground state, consistent with characterization of Pfr by solid-state NMR but inconsistent
with a recent re-evaluation of Pfr CD spectra and with the transient absorption signals we
report here. In comparable analyses of the Cph1Δ Pr state, solid-state NMR and transient
absorption both revealed considerable
heterogeneity, consistent with an earlier analysis of temperature
and excitation wavelength effects but
at odds with resonance Raman intensity analysis. For Pfr, the two kinetically distinct phases
of Meta-Fr generation reported here strongly support the
presence of at least two subpopulations. Other transient absorption
studies of phytochromes and CBCRs have also reported multiphasic excited-state
relaxation, typically interpreted as arising from coevolving subpopulations.,,,, This is consistent with characterization
of other photoreceptor systems such as PYP and phototropin, which
also exhibit multiexponential kinetics attributed to inhomogeneity.,

An inverse correlation between excited-state lifetime and
quantum
yield for primary photoproduct formation of red/green CBCR has been
proposed, under the assumption that rapidly
decaying excited states will be less prone to competing reactions.
Two bacteriophytochromes from Rhodopseudomonas palustris also demonstrated an inverse correlation between excited-state lifetime
and isomerization efficiency. However,
Cph1Δ provides a counterexample to this trend, because Pfr* decays much more rapidly than Pr* despite comparable
quantum yields., Interestingly, the Cph1Δ
Pfr excited-state dynamics for the two subpopulations described
here demonstrate such a counterexample within a single reaction: Pfr* I exhibits a slower lifetime but a higher branching ratio
to the isomerized photoproduct when compared to Pfr* II
(Table ). It is not yet clear whether there
is a general physical interpretation for such correlations. 

In R. palustris bacteriophytochromes, excited-state
proton transfer was proposed as a nonproductive excited-state quenching
mechanism. For the forward reaction of
the red/green CBCR NpR6012g4, pump–dump–probe experiments
supported a twisted GSI population as the dominant pathway of excited-state
decay. Such failed attempts at photoisomerization
usually decay back to the original ground state, but the twisted GSI chromophore conformation in NpR6012g4
was shown to partition between the original ground state and the primary
photoproduct. Such second-chance mechanisms
would enhance quantum yield with no change in excited-state lifetime.
In the Cph1Δ Pfr state, which has a low quantum yield,
the need for two GSI populations in the target model (Figure A) suggests a rugged ground-state potential energy
surface and raises the possibility of unproductive depopulation of
the excited state to generate GSI species.

This study demonstrates
that the primary photoproduct is a mixture
of red-shifted Lumi-Ff species that decay to the secondary
intermediate Meta-Fr on vastly different time scales. Lumi-Ff exhibits a red-shifted absorption maximum at ∼715
nm (Figure C), consistent with the red-shifted
primary photoproducts seen in other phytochromes and CBCRs.,,,, The Lumi-Ff to Meta-Fr transition exhibits a significant blue shift from 715 to 635 nm,
suggesting a major structural rearrangement. A combination of cryo-trapping
and solid-state NMR allowed characterization of two intermediates
in the Cph1Δ reverse reaction, “Lumi-F” and “Meta-F”. The Lumi-F to Meta-F conversion triggered more
significant chemical shift changes than those observed for the Meta-F
to Pr conversion, especially for atoms associated with
the D-ring of the chromophore. These observations led to the conclusion
that Lumi-F possesses an isomerized 15Z configuration
but is structurally more constrained than Meta-F. Two intermediates
were also resolved in a temperature-scan crystallographic study of
Pfr to Pr photoconversion in a bacteriophytochrome
from Pseudomonas aeruginosa. The first intermediate exhibited D-ring isomerization, whereas the
second intermediate exhibited a more twisted chromophore conformation
but a more relaxed protein environment. These structural changes are
consistent with the blue shift observed upon the analogous transition
from Lumi-Ff to Meta-Fr in Cph1Δ.

In our previous study of the Cph1Δ reverse reaction photodynamics, the TotalPr spectrum was
used to calculate the static Pr – Pfr difference spectrum used as a comparison (Figure , green curve). Since then we resolved two spectrally distinct
subpopulations with the Cph1Δ Pr state, FluorPr and PhotoPr. We therefore compared the individual FluorPr – Pfr and PhotoPr – Pfr difference spectra both to the transient
spectra taken at 5.6 ns and 1 ms (Figure )
and to the Meta-Fr SADS (Figure D). Remarkably, the FluorPr – Pfr difference spectrum (blue curve) is the best match to the
experimental transient spectra. This is consistent with the lack of
major structural changes of the chromophore during the formation of
Pr from Meta-F in Cph1Δ,, so the Meta-Fr species resolved in this study seems to
be consistent with the Meta-F intermediate resolved by cryo-trapping.
The strong spectral similarity between Meta-Fr and FluorPr also suggests that reverse photoconversion
initially forms FluorPr and the regeneration
of the red-shifted, photoactive PhotoPr subpopulation
occurs on a slower timescale via thermal equilibration of the FluorPr and PhotoPr subpopulations.
This observation may also imply the existence of a short refractory
period within the Cph1Δ photocycle, during which newly regenerated
Pr cannot be photoconverted to Pfr because it
is in the less active FluorPr substate.

The schematic of the photocycle of Cph1Δ is demonstrated
in Figure , including both ultrafast and secondary
dynamics of the Pr and Pfr states. The dark-adapted
Pr state consists of two coexisting populations in thermal
equilibrium: FluorPr and PhotoPr. Upon red light excitation, only PhotoPr generates Lumi-R photoproduct, which then proceeds through Meta-Ra and Meta-Rc intermediates before forming the Pfr state. We have now demonstrated
that Pfr is also heterogeneous, with at least two subpopulations
that exhibit parallel primary and secondary dynamics upon far-red
light excitation. The red-shifted primary photoproduct Lumi-Ff undergoes further structural relaxation to generate the blue-shifted
Meta-Fr intermediate with relaxation time scales of 3 ps
and 1.5 ns for the two subpopulations. These time constants are much
faster than those observed for structural relaxations in forward photoconversion
of Cph1Δ and the related cyanobacterial phytochrome CphA., In contrast to the productive and nonproductive Pr subpopulations,
both Pfr subpopulations can generate Meta-Fr populations that strongly resemble the FluorPr subpopulation. In Cph1Δ, further evolution may involve formation
of an equilibrium with the photoactive PhotoPr subpopulation, but whether other phytochromes have similar Pr subpopulations is not yet clear. It will also be interesting
to probe the molecular details underlying the dynamics observed in
this study via transient CD and vibrational experiments to elucidate
the molecular nature of phytochrome inhomogeneity.

Scheme of the total Cph1Δ
photocycle including both forward
(Pr to Pfr) and reverse (Pfr to Pr). The spectrally and kinetically distinct fluorescent (FluorPr) and photoactive (PhotoPr) Pr subpopulations are in slow equilibrium (≫1
ms), which make up the overall Pr state. The light-activated
pathways are indicated by photoexcitation (yellow light sign) and
subsequent evolution via thermally activated steps (solid arrows).
The evolution of Pfr to Lumi-Ff to Lumi-Fr occurs via heterogeneous pathways with different reaction
kinetics and yields. Populations enclosed within black boxes indicate
inhomogeneous coexisting populations.

Supporting Information Available
Sequential EADS analysis
of
both narrowband and broadband excitation signals and extra target
model analysis. This material is available free of charge via the
Internet at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bi5005359_si_001.pdf

The authors
declare no
competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
Dr. Mikas Vengris from Light Conversion
Ltd. is acknowledged
for the donation of global and target analysis software package.

Abbreviations
Cph1ΔPAS-GAF-PHY photosensory
core module of Cph1

BVbiliverdin

CBCRcyanobacteriochrome

CDcircular dichroism

EADSevolution-associated difference spectrum

GSIground-state intermediate

ESAexcited-state absorption

SEstimulated emission

IRFinstrument response
function

NOPAnoncollinear
optical parametric amplifier

PCBphycocyanobilin

PΦBphytochromobilin

Prred-absorbing dark state of red/far-red phytochromes

Pfrfar-red-absorbing
photoproduct state of red/far-red phytochromes

FluorPfrnonphotoactive,
fluorescent Pr subpopulation

PhotoPfrphotoactive Pr subpopulation

Pfr*excited-state population(s) derived from photoexcitation
of Pfr

PYPphotoactive yellow protein

SADSspecies-associated difference spectra

SNRsignal-to-noise ratio

Φphotocycle quantum
yield.

For the nomenclature of phytochrome
photostates, in Lumi-Xy Lumi refers to
the primary intermediate formed within 10 ns of photoexcitation, the
uppercase X refers to the spectral range of the parent state (R for
Pr and F for Pfr), and lowercase subscript y refers to the spectral range of the intermediate-state
difference absorption peak. For the intermediates after 10 ns time
windows, the intermediate is termed Meta-Xy. The color code for the spectral range is v for violet (380–450
nm), b for blue (450–495 nm), g for green (495–570 nm),
y for yellow (570–590 nm), o for orange (590–620 nm),
r for red (620–710 nm), and fr for far-red (710–750
nm). More details can be found in the Supporting Information of reference ().

