The control of translation (mRNA-encoded
protein synthesis) is crucial for cell proliferation and differentiation.
More than 10 eukaryotic translation initiation factors are known to
be involved in the assembly of the 80S ribosome/RNA complex, allowing
placement of the initiator Met-tRNA at the correct start codon of
the mRNA. The dominant mechanism used
by cellular mRNAs, named cap-dependent translation, requires the recognition
of the 5′ m7G cap structure of the mRNA by the cap binding
complex eIF4F. The eIF4F complex is composed of cap-binding subunit
eIF4E, RNA helicase eukaryotic translation initiation factor 4A (eIF4A),
and scaffolding protein eukaryotic translation initiation factor 4G
(eIF4G).− Eukaryotic translation factor 4A (eIF4A) is the prototypic
member of the DEAD-box family of RNA helicases, a subfamily of superfamily 2 (SF2) of RNA helicases. ATP-dependent RNA helicase eIF4A unwinds secondary
structure in the 5′ untranslated region (UTR) of mRNAs to facilitate
40S ribosome binding and scanning for the start codon. eIF4A by itself
is a poor ATPase and helicase (kcat =
3 min–1). However, these
activities are stimulated when eIF4A is part of a multiprotein complex
including eIF4G, eIF4E, eIF4B, and/or eIF4H.−

eIF4G plays a crucial role in translation initiation,
serving as
a scaffolding protein that binds several initiation factors (the cap-binding
protein eIF4E, the RNA helicase eIF4A, and eIF3) and other proteins
[poly(A)-binding protein, eIF4E kinase, and Mnk]. Human eIF4G contains
three HEAT repeat domains in the C-terminal two-thirds of its sequence.
The first two, HEAT1 and HEAT2, contain binding sites for the ATP-dependent
RNA helicase eIF4A. It has been shown that the interaction with HEAT1
enhances the activity of eIF4A by 4-fold in solution.

In solution, eIF4A exists in a flexible, open conformation.
eIf4G-HEAT1
forms a soft clamp conferring a closed conformation upon eIF4A. The
enhancement in activity was generally attributed to this change from
the open to the closed, active conformation. Assuming the only reason for the enhancement in activity stems from
the binding of eIF4G and the accompanying change to the closed conformation,
no additional enhancement would be expected once eIf4A is in the closed
conformation. We have recently shown that macromolecular crowding
shifts the equilibrium toward the closed, active conformation of eIF4A.
However, additional enhancement of eIF4A activity is observed in the
presence of eIf4G-HEAT1. This additional
enhancement suggests that the conformational change is not the only
reason for the increase in activity.

The crystal structure of
eIF4GII-HEAT1 was determined using X-ray
crystallography; however, the structure of a 40-residue loop was not
resolved. The structure of free yeast
eIF4A was successfully determined, but
no structure for free full length human eIF4A is available. The two
recA-like domains are very similar among the DEAD-box helicases; however,
the interdomain angle varies greatly. A structure of the closed conformation
of human eIF4A in complex with PCDC4 is available and is very similar to the structure of yeast eIF4A in
complex with yeast eIF4GII-HEAT1. We
recently reported the low-resolution structures of human eIF4A and
its complex with eIF4G1-HEAT1 in buffer and a crowded environment
showing a significant structural difference.

Here we report the discovery of a low-affinity ATP binding
site
on eIF4GI-HEAT1 that is located just opposite the ATP-binding cleft
of eif4A. The sequence of this binding site does not resemble any
known ATP binding sites, which have much higher binding affinities.
This low-affinity ATP binding site might play a role in the enhancement
of eIF4A activity by regulating local ATP concentrations.

eIF4G-HEAT1
was expressed and purified as described previously.15N- and D-labeled eIF4G-HEAT1 was
expressed in minimal medium. ATP was purchased from Roche Molecular
Biochemicals. Poly(U) was purchased from Dharmacon. For nuclear magnetic
resonance (NMR) samples, the 15N- and D-labeled protein
was concentrated using Millipore (Bedford, MA) Centricons to a final
concentration of 0.4 mM in a buffer consisting of 10 mM sodium phosphate
(pH 6.5), 150 mM NaCl, 20 mM MgCl2, 2 mM DTT, and 0.5 mM
EDTA with increasing concentrations of ATP at ATP:eIF4G-HEAT1 ratios
of 0:1, 1:1, 15:1, and 25:1, with increasing poly(U) concentrations
at poly(U):eIF4G-HEAT1 ratios of 0:1, 0.5:1, 1:1, and 3:1, or with
a poly(U):ATP:eif4G-HEAT1 ratio of 15:1:1. 15N TROSY-HSQC
spectra were recorded at 298 K on a Bruker Avance DRX 600 MHz spectrometer
equipped with a TCI cryoprobe with a Z gradient and processed using
NMRPipe and NMRViewJ. The dimensions were set to 2048 (1H) and 400
(15N) points, respectively, corresponding to spectral widths
of 12 (1H) and 32 (15N) ppm, respectively. eIF4G-HEAT1
backbone assignment was performed as described previously. Unlabeled protein samples for X-ray absorption
near edge spectroscopy (XANES) were concentrated to final concentrations
of 0.3–0.7 mM. Each sample contained 300 μM MnCl2 and ATP in a buffer consisting of 20 mM MES (pH 6.5), 150
mM NaCl, 2 mM DTT, 10% glycerol, and increasing concentrations of
eIF4G-HEAT1 (0, 0.3, 0.5, and 0.7 mM). The sample components were
mixed at ∼0 °C and immediately frozen in copper sample
holders (10 mm × 5 mm × 0.5 mm) covered with Mylar using
liquid nitrogen. XANES data were collected at the National Synchroton
Light Source at beamline X3B of Brookhaven National Laboratory. Spectra
were recorded as described previously., Examination
of the samples for visual signs of photoreduction after each scan
and sodium dodecyl sulfate–polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis
gels after exposure revealed no signs of burn marks, radiation damage,
or protein degradation. Data were processed as described previously
using Athena X-ray absorption spectroscopy (XAS) data analysis software.

Binding of ATP to eIF4G-HEAT1 as determined by NMR. (a)
Titration
of ATP to 4GH1 monitored by 1H–15N TROSY-HSQC
spectra. The eIF4G-HEAT1:ATP ratio varied from 1:0 to 1:25 as indicated
by the color coding in the legend and shown for excerpts for selected
residues showing large chemical shift changes upon addition of ATP.
The full spectrum is shown in Figure S1 of the . (b) Overlay of 15N TROSY-HSQC
spectra of eIF4G-HEAT (black), eIF4G-HEAT with Mg2+ (blue),
eIF4G-HEAT1 with ATP (orange), and eIF4G-HEAT1 with Mg2+ and ATP (red).

We recorded 15N–1H TROSY-HSQC spectra
of [15N,D]eIf4G-HEAT1 with increasing concentrations of
ATP with ATP:eIF4G-HEAT ratios from 0:1 to 25:1 to determine whether
ATP binds to eIF4G-HEAT1. The overlay of these spectra for selected
residues is shown in Figure a. The entire
spectrum is shown in Figure S1 of the . Several peaks shifted upon addition of ATP, indicating
a binding event. Plotting the changes in chemical shifts versus residue
number (Figure S4 of the ) and mapping these changes on the structural model of eIF4G-HEAT1
(Figure S5 of the ) reveal a contiguous binding site in the N-terminal region, including
residues L926, K927, H929, D930, and E931. To confirm that Mg-ATP
is the binding partner and not just Mg2+, we measured TROSY-HSQC
spectra of eIF4G-HEAT1 alone, with Mg2+ only, with ATP
alone, and with Mg2+ and ATP (Figure b). Residues L926 and H929 show chemical shift changes after addition
of Mg2+ alone and ATP alone and an additional shift for
the combination of Mg2+ and ATP. These chages in chemical
shifts would suggest that both Mg2+ and ATP can bind alone
to eIF4G-HEAT but that binding of Mg-ATP leads to a change in chemical
shift greater than that of either alone. Residue 931 does not show
a chemical shift change after addition of Mg2+ alone, however,
but shows the same change for either ATP alone or Mg-ATP. This would
suggest that binding to E931 is not mediated by Mg2+ as
was observed for the other two residues. Figure S2 of the  shows the plot of chemical
shift change versus ATP concentration for residues showing the largest
chemical shift changes as well as other residues with little or no
change for comparison. This graph illustrates clearly that the binding
site is a low-affinity binding site as the curve does not show saturation
even at high ATP concentrations.

As the observed chemical shift
changes are relatively small, we
used X-ray absorption near edge spectroscopy (XANES) as an independent
method to confirm binding of ATP to eIF4G-HEAT1. XAS utilizes the
photoelectric effect in which an X-ray is absorbed and a core level
electron is promoted out of the atom. If the energy of the incident
X-ray is equal to that of the binding energy of a core level electron,
the absorption energy increases significantly. This increase in absorption
is called the absorption edge. The energy at which the edge occurs
varies on the basis of several characteristics such as the oxidation
state of the atom, coordination, and the distances as well as coordination
number and species of the atoms immediately surrounding the selected
element. ATP binding is mediated by Mg2+. However, probing
Mg using XAS is technically difficult, and we therefore substituted
Mn2+ for Mg2+. Mn2+ is used extensively
to substitute for the often spectroscopically silent Mg2+ because of the similarity of their properties, including similar constants for binding to ATP. In contrast to the NMR titration experiment
in which ATP is the titrant, for X-ray absorption the concentration
of Mn-ATP is constant. The absorption energy of Mn2+ as
the cofactor of ATP was measured
at increasing concentrations of eIF4G-HEAT1 ranging from 0 to 0.7
mM. The energy profiles of these samples are shown in Figure a. Figure b shows the plot
of the absorption edge versus eIF4G-HEAT1 concentration. The energy
increases with increasing concentration, and the curve shows the characteristics
of a typical binding curve. Binding is not saturated at 0.7 mM eIF4G-HEAT1;
however, eIF4G-HEAT1 is not stable at higher concentrations. Together
with the relatively small chemical shift changes and the inability
to determine the binding constant with surface plasmon resonance (data
not shown), this suggests that the binding site has a low affinity
for ATP.

eIF4G-HEAT is known to bind to RNA., Determination
of the binding site of RNA [poly(U)] reveals that the binding sites
for poly(U) and ATP do not overlap (see Figures S1–S3 of the ). Although binding sites
are distinct, binding of ATP to the eif4G-HEAT1 complex induces slight
chemical shift changes for the residues involved in RNA binding. Chemical
shifts for residues involved in ATP binding in these samples are slighlty
different as well compared to those of the eIF4G-HEAT/ATP complex
(see Figure S1 of the ), which might suggest that RNA and ATP are able to bind to eIF4G-HEAT1
at the same time, but additional experiments would be needed to confirm
this claim.

(a) Site-directed titration XANES analysis of the binding of eIF4G-HEAT1
to Mn-ATP. Each sample contained the same concentration of Mn-ATP
(300 μM) and increasing concentrations of eIF4G-HEAT1: 0 mM
(red), 0.3 mM (blue), 0.5 mM (black), and 0.7 mM (magenta). (b) Typical
binding curve whereby each point in this curve represents the maximal
amplitude value of each XANES spectrum vs ATP binding. Color coding
as in panel a.

eIF4A is an ATP-dependent
RNA helicase binding to eIF4G-HEAT1.
The activity of eIF4A is enhanced by binding of eIF4G-HEAT1. The accepted
mechanism for this enhancement was that in which eIF4G confers the
closed, active conformation on eIF4A upon binding. We recently showed
that the closed conformation of eIF4A is the preferred conformation
in a crowded environment mimicking the cellular environment. The ATPase activity of eIF4A is enhanced in
a crowded environment without binding to eIF4G, which can be attributed
to the conformational change. Binding of eIF4G-HEAT1 to eIF4A leads
to an additional increase in activity.

Comparison of the structure
of the complex in solution and in the
crowded environment showed a compaction of the latter. Mapping the
ATP binding site on eIF4GI-HEAT1 in a model of the eIF4GI-HEAT1/eIF4A
complex reveals that the binding site is located right at the entrance
to the binding cleft, opposite the ATP binding site on eIF4A (Figure ).

Mapping of the eIF4G-HEAT1 ATP binding site and helicase
motifs
on the model of the complex between eIF4G-HEAT1 and eIF4A. Helicase
motifs are color coded using the system described in ref ().

The rate-limiting step in solution of the catalytic cycle
of eIF4A
was shown to be the release of phosphate after ATP hydrolysis., This release is accelerated through interaction with eIF4G. We showed previously that rate of ATP hydrolysis
is increased in the presence of a crowding agent even without binding
of eIF4G, which can be attributed to the fact that the crowded environment
confers the closed, active conformation upon eIf4A. However, an additional enhancement by binding of eIF4G
to eIF4A is observed in a crowded environment, suggesting an additional
reason for the activity enhancement. The additional enhancement of
the activity of eIF4A by eIF4G could be explained by the presence
of the ATP binding site on eIF4G-HEAT1. Binding of ATP in the proximity
of the active site would not only increase the effective concentration
of ATP but also reduce the entropy of the substrate by removing solvent
molecules bound to ATP. However, additional experiments for studying
this hypothesis would be needed.

Supporting Information Available
NMR spectra of eIF4G-HEAT
titrations
with ATP and RNA, chemical shift perturbation plots, and ATP and RNA
epitope mapping on a model of eIF4G-HEAT1. This material is available
free of charge via the Internet at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bi500600m_si_001.pdf

S.R.A. is funded
by National Institutes of General Medical Sciences (NIGMS) Grant P01GM047467.
G.W. thanks the National Cancer Institute (NCI) and NIGMS for funding
this work: NCI Grant R01CA068262 and NIGMS Grant P01GM047467.

The
authors
declare no competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
Use of the
National Synchrotron Light Source, Brookhaven National
Laboratory, was supported by the U.S. Department of Energy, Office
of Science, Office of Basic Energy Sciences, under Contract DE-AC02-98CH10886.

