The accumulation and oxidation
of low-density lipoprotein (LDL) in the arterial intima might play
an important role in atherosclerosis. There
has been an enormous amount of work on the mechanisms by which LDL
might be oxidized, but no consensus has emerged. Possible mechanisms
involve iron, copper, caeruloplasmin, lipoxygenase, superoxide, peroxynitrite,
and myeloperoxidase.

There is evidence
that LDL can be modified by nonoxidative mechanisms
in the arterial wall so that it is endocytosed faster by macrophages.
These include modification by sphingomyelinase, secretory phospholipase A2, or cathepsin D. We have proposed
that nonoxidatively modified LDL might be taken up by macrophages
in atherosclerotic lesions and oxidized within lysosomes. Macrophages in culture were capable of taking
up acetylated or aggregated LDL and oxidizing it in lysosomes. Lysosomes are a source of redox-active iron, and iron is present at elevated levels in atherosclerotic
lesions. Lysosomal LDL oxidation may explain
why oxidized LDL is present within lesions despite the apparently
strong antioxidant protection within the arterial intima. Oxidized LDL formed within lysosomes might affect
cell function or be released from cells into the interstitial fluid,
both with potentially atherogenic consequences.

Oxidation of
LDL by copper at pH 7.4 has been extensively characterized, whereas little is known about the chemical composition
of LDL oxidized by iron under the acidic conditions present in lysosomes
(pH ∼4.5). We report here the chemical changes in LDL oxidized
by iron at lysosomal pH and the surprising effects of ferrous and
ferric iron, iron chelators, and α-tocopherol.

Materials and Methods
LDL Isolation
LDL (d = 1.019–1.063
g/mL) was isolated by sequential ultracentrifugation of pooled plasma
from four healthy adult volunteers.

Measurement of Conjugated Dienes
Conjugated diene formation
was monitored at 234 nm. LDL (50 μg
of protein/mL) was oxidized by freshly dissolved FeSO4 (5
μM) or FeCl3 (5 μM) at 37 °C in washed
Chelex-100-treated 150 mM NaCl/10 mM sodium acetate buffer (pH 4.5)
or 150 mM NaCl/10 mM 3-(N-morpholino)propanesulfonic
acid (MOPS) buffer (pH 7.4), in capped quartz cuvettes, in an automatic
six-position (Lambda 2) or eight-position (Lambda Bio 40) spectrophotometer
(Perkin-Elmer). The FeSO4 or FeCl3 stock solutions
for the experiments at pH 4.5 were dissolved in buffer at pH 4.5,
rather than in water, to prevent the rapid oxidation of ferrous ion
that occurs at higher pH values. The
change in attenuance at 234 nm was measured every minute at 37 °C,
against reference cuvettes lacking LDL. The attenuance at time zero
was subtracted from all values, except where stated.

Measurement of LDL Aggregation
LDL aggregation was
monitored by continuously measuring light scattering at 680 nm and 37 °C in the spectrophotometers mentioned
above.

LDL Oxidation for Compositional Analysis
LDL (250 μL
at a concentration of 2 mg of protein/mL) was oxidized with freshly
dissolved FeSO4 (50 μM) at 37 °C in NaCl/sodium
acetate buffer (pH 4.5). At various times over 48 h, the oxidation
was stopped by addition of butylated hydroxytoluene (BHT, final concentration
of 80 μM, from a 2 mM stock solution in ethanol) and EDTA (final
concentration of 4 mM).

Preparation of Lipid Hydroperoxide-Rich and Oxysterol-Rich LDL
Lipid hydroperoxide-rich LDL and oxysterol-rich LDL were produced
by oxidizing LDL with CuSO4 (10 μM) at 4 and 37 °C,
respectively, in 150 mM NaCl/10 mM MOPS buffer (pH 7.4), followed
by dialysis in the presence of EDTA overnight to remove copper.

Total Hydroperoxide Content
Hydroperoxides (ROOH) were
measured using a triiodide method.

Relative Electrophoretic Mobility
The relative electrophoretic
mobility (REM) of oxidized LDL was measured using a Paragon Lipogel
electrophoresis system (Beckman Instruments), according to the manufacturer’s
instructions, with 3 μL of LDL (2 mg of protein/mL) applied
to the origin and run at 100 V for 40 min. The distance that the samples
migrated was divided by the distance migrated by native LDL.

Thiobarbituric Acid Reactive Substances (TBARS)
TBARS
were assessed as described previously.

HPLC Analysis
Lipids were extracted from oxidized LDL
for HPLC analysis using methanol and hexane. The upper hexane layer was dried under a stream of nitrogen and
redissolved in 200 μL of an acetonitrile/2-propanol/water mixture
(44/54/2, by volume). Lipid species were separated by reverse phase
HPLC in a Capital C18 column (250 mm × 4.6 mm, 5 μm particle
size, 5 μm guard column) with a Perkin-Elmer 200 series HPLC
system. Cholesterol and cholesteryl esters were detected at 210 nm
using an acetonitrile/2-propanol/water mobile phase (44/54/2, by volume)
and a flow rate of 1.5 mL/min. 7-Ketocholesterol and cholesteryl linoleate
hydroperoxide were detected at 234 nm using an acetonitrile/2-propanol/water
mobile phase (50/48.8/1.2, by volume) and a flow rate of 1.2 mL/min.
The identities of the peaks were confirmed by mass spectrometry (data
not shown), and the lipids were quantified using commercially available
standards.

Enrichment of LDL with α-Tocopherol
Blood was
centrifuged at 1500g for 30 min at 4 °C in the
presence of 3 mM Na2EDTA. The plasma was incubated at 37
°C for 3 h with α-tocopherol (1 mM) dissolved in dimethyl
sulfoxide (1% of the plasma volume) or with dimethyl sulfoxide alone
(1% of the plasma volume). LDL was then
isolated from the plasma. The α-tocopherol
content of the LDL was measured by HPLC after extraction using methanol and hexane and drying the hexane using nitrogen. The extract was redissolved
in ethanol and injected into the column described above. The mobile
phase consisted of 99% methanol and 1% water (v/v), with a flow rate
of 1 mL/min and detection at 298 nm.

Statistical Analysis
The mean and the standard error
of the mean (SEM) of n independent experiments are
given. Where appropriate, results were evaluated using a paired t test or one-way ANOVA, with a Dunnett’s post-hoc
test.

Results
Oxidation of LDL by Ferrous Iron at pH 4.5
To compare
the oxidation of LDL by iron at lysosomal pH with the oxidation at
pH 7.4, LDL (50 μg of protein/mL) was oxidized in NaCl/sodium
acetate buffer (pH 4.5) or NaCl/MOPS buffer (pH 7.4) at 37 °C
in the presence of ferrous iron (FeSO4, 5 μM). The
oxidation was followed by measuring the formation of conjugated dienes,
which absorb UV radiation at 234 nm. In agreement with previous results, LDL was oxidized effectively at pH 4.5 and much
less so at pH 7.4 (Figure A). At pH 4.5, following
a lag phase, conjugated diene formation proceeded rapidly and then
more slowly. There was then a second rapid increase in attenuance
(absorbance of UV plus UV scattering) with rapid minor fluctuations,
consistent with UV scattering by aggregates, as the aggregates move
in and out of the UV beam. This was followed by a decrease in attenuance,
caused by the LDL aggregates, which were clearly visible by eye, sedimenting
below the beam of UV radiation. Inverting the cuvette gently to resuspend
the aggregates increased the attenuance. Light scattering was also
measured by continuously measuring the attenuance at 680 nm. Light
scattering increased rapidly at ∼200 min, corresponding with
the second rapid phase at 234 nm, and decreased at ∼500 min
(Figure B). There was no light scattering
in the absence of iron, showing that LDL aggregation and sedimentation
were due to LDL oxidation (Figure B).

Oxidation of
LDL by FeSO4 at pH 4.5 or 7.4. (A) LDL
(50 μg of protein/mL) in NaCl/sodium acetate buffer (pH 4.5)
or NaCl/MOPS buffer (pH 7.4) was incubated with 5 μM FeSO4 at 37 °C in quartz cuvettes, and oxidation was monitored
by measuring the change in attenuance at 234 nm against appropriate
reference cuvettes. (B) LDL (50 μg of protein/mL) in NaCl/sodium
acetate buffer (pH 4.5) was incubated with or without 5 μM FeSO4 at 37 °C in quartz cuvettes, and aggregation was monitored
by measuring light scattering at 680 nm against appropriate reference
cuvettes. Please note that the line without FeSO4 lies
over the abscissal axis. (C and D) Oxysterol-rich or lipid hydroperoxide
(LOOH)-rich oxidized LDL or native LDL (all 50 μg of protein/mL)
was incubated at 37 °C (in the absence of iron) in quartz cuvettes
in either NaCl/sodium acetate buffer (pH 4.5) (C) or NaCl/MOPS buffer
(pH 7.4) (D). Aggregation was monitored by measuring light scattering
at 680 nm against appropriate reference cuvettes. The lines for native
LDL and LOOH-rich LDL at pH 7.4 lie on top of each other. For the
sake of clarity, the attenuance at time zero was subtracted from the
data in panels A and B but not in panels C and D. These data are representative
examples of at least three independent experiments.

LDL Aggregation at pH 4.5
We tested if oxidized LDL
would spontaneously aggregate at pH 4.5, regardless of whether iron
was present. LDL that had previously been oxidized with CuSO4 to give a species rich in lipid hydroperoxides (LOOH) or oxysterols
followed by removal of the CuSO4 was incubated at pH 4.5 or 7.4 and 37 °C. Both oxidized forms
of LDL aggregated rapidly at pH 4.5, whereas native LDL did not (Figure C). Oxysterol-rich LDL aggregated even more rapidly
than LOOH-rich LDL, indicating that the extent to which the LDL was
oxidized affected its aggregation rate. In contrast, none of the lipoprotein
species aggregated at pH 7.4 (Figure D).

Oxidation of LDL by Ferrous or Ferric Iron
It has been
reported that phagolysosomes in macrophages contain ferrous iron and
probably ferric iron. Iron will cycle
between the two forms during LDL oxidation, and it was therefore of
interest to examine the oxidation of LDL with ferrous and ferric iron.
LDL was oxidized at pH 4.5 and 37 °C in the presence initially
of ferrous iron (5 μM FeSO4) or ferric iron (5 μM
FeCl3) (Figure A). The oxidation
reaction proceeded at a faster rate with ferrous iron than with ferric
iron. The time taken to reach an attenuance of 0.1 was 27 ± 6
min in the presence of ferrous iron compared with 79 ± 6 min
in the presence of ferric iron (p &lt; 0.05; paired t test; n = 9 independent experiments).
Increasing the concentration of ferrous iron to 10 or 20 μM
at the start of the oxidation caused an increase in attenuance attained
during the rapid phase (Figure B), whereas
increasing the concentration of ferric iron surprisingly had no effect
on the oxidation kinetics (Figure C).

Comparison
of the oxidation of LDL by FeSO4 and FeCl3 at
pH 4.5. (A) LDL (50 μg of protein/mL) in NaCl/sodium
acetate buffer (pH 4.5) was incubated with 5 μM FeSO4 (—) or 5 μM FeCl3 (---) at 37 °C in
quartz cuvettes. (B and C) LDL was incubated at pH 4.5 and 37 °C
with FeSO4 (B) or FeCl3 (C) at iron concentrations
of 5 (—), 10 (---), or 20 μM (···). (D)
LDL was incubated at pH 4.5 and 37 °C with 5 μM FeSO4 (thick solid line), and additional FeSO4 (to give
a final concentration of 10 μM) was added during the rapid oxidation
phase (thin solid line), during the slow oxidation phase (---), or
at the beginning of the aggregation phase (···), as
indicated by the arrows. (E) LDL was incubated at pH 4.5 and 37 °C
with 5 μM FeCl3 (thick solid line), and additional
FeCl3 (to give a final concentration of 10 μM) was
added at the start of the reaction (thin solid line), during the rapid
oxidation phase (---), or during the slow oxidation phase (···),
as indicated by the arrows. Oxidation was monitored by measuring the
change in attenuance at 234 nm against appropriate reference cuvettes.
These data are representative examples of at least three independent
experiments.

We postulated that the rapid phase of the oxidation
reaction with
ferrous iron was caused predominantly by ferrous iron and the slower
phase was caused when most of the ferrous iron had been converted
to ferric iron. This theory was investigated via addition of further
iron at different times during the oxidation reaction and examination
of the effects on the kinetics of LDL oxidation. When additional 5
μM ferrous iron was added to LDL oxidized by FeSO4 at various time points, there was an immediate rapid burst of oxidation
(Figure D). In contrast, adding additional
5 μM FeCl3 to LDL oxidized by ferric iron had little
effect on the rate of oxidation (Figure E).

Effects of Iron Chelators
To assess the dependency
of the various phases of the oxidation process on the presence of
iron, the iron chelators diethylenetriaminepentaacetic acid (DTPA)
and desferrioxamine were added during the different phases and the
effect on the attenuance was observed. DTPA (10 μM), added to
LDL at the start of the incubation or during the rapid phase, caused
almost complete inhibition of the oxidation (Figure A). Addition of DTPA during the slow phase of oxidation caused
the rate of oxidation to decrease, but the LDL was still able to aggregate
and later sediment. Adding DTPA during the aggregation phase did not
greatly affect the aggregation or sedimentation. These data suggest
that iron catalyzes oxidation of LDL during the lag, rapid, and slow
phases and that when LDL is oxidized sufficiently it is able to aggregate
in the absence of iron, which is consistent with the results shown
in Figure C.

Effect of the iron chelators DTPA and
desferrioxamine (both obtained
from Sigma-Aldrich) on oxidation of LDL by FeSO4 at pH
4.5. LDL (50 μg of protein/mL) in NaCl/sodium acetate buffer
(pH 4.5) was incubated with 5 μM FeSO4 at 37 °C
in quartz cuvettes. DTPA (A, final concentration of 10 μM) or
desferrioxamine (B, final concentration of 100 μM) was added
to the cuvettes at the start of the incubation (arrow 1), during the
rapid oxidation phase (arrow 2), during the slow oxidation phase (arrow
3), or during the aggregation phase (arrow 4). Oxidation and UV scattering
were monitored by measuring the change in attenuance at 234 nm against
appropriate reference cuvettes. These data are representative examples
of four independent experiments.

Unlike DTPA, addition of desferrioxamine (100 μM)
at the
start of the incubation or during the rapid phase partially inhibited
the oxidation but did not fully inhibit it (Figure B). Addition of desferrioxamine at the start of the slow phase
of oxidation caused the rate of the reaction to decrease, but the
LDL was able to aggregate and then sediment. Interestingly, adding
desferrioxamine at the start of the aggregation phase actually caused
a faster increase in attenuance (p &lt; 0.05; n = 3 independent experiments). These data agree with the
DTPA data in that the lag, slow, and rapid oxidation phases are dependent
on iron. It appears that desferrioxamine is less able than DTPA to
inhibit LDL oxidation and may actually promote LDL modification when
LDL is sufficiently oxidized.

Effect of α-Tocopherol Enrichment on the Oxidation of
LDL by Iron
α-Tocopherol can inhibit, or sometimes promote LDL oxidation.
We therefore investigated its effect on the oxidation of LDL by iron
at pH 4.5. LDL was enriched with α-tocopherol via addition of
α-tocopherol to plasma and isolation of the LDL. The α-tocopherol content was increased ∼4.5
times from 6.5 ± 4.4 to 29.5 ± 9.1 nmol/mg of protein (p &lt; 0.005; n = 6 independent experiments).
As expected, α-tocopherol enrichment increased the length of
the lag phase of oxidation of LDL by 5 μM CuSO4 at
pH 7.4 (Figure ). The time taken to increase
the attenuance at 234 nm by 0.1 increased from 37 ± 9 to 153
± 28 min (p &lt; 0.05; n =
4 independent experiments). Very different results were obtained when
5 μM FeSO4 at pH 4.5 was used. The oxidation of α-tocopherol-enriched
LDL started immediately with no lag period and was initially faster
than that of nonenriched LDL, which had a lag period followed by a
rapid phase of oxidation (Figure ). The oxidation
of the nonenriched LDL overtook the oxidation of the α-tocopherol-enriched
LDL later in the experiment.

Comparison of the oxidation of α-tocopherol-enriched
LDL
by FeSO4 at pH 4.5 and CuSO4 at pH 7.4. Control
LDL (50 μg of protein/mL) was incubated with NaCl/sodium acetate
buffer (pH 4.5) containing 5 μM FeSO4 (thick solid
line) or NaCl/MOPS buffer (pH 7.4) containing 5 μM CuSO4 (thin solid line) at 37 °C in quartz cuvettes. LDL enriched
with α-tocopherol was incubated in the same experiment with
NaCl/sodium acetate buffer (pH 4.5) containing 5 μM FeSO4 (···) or NaCl/MOPS buffer (pH 7.4) containing
5 μM CuSO4 (---). Oxidation was monitored by measuring
the change in attenuance at 234 nm against appropriate reference cuvettes.
These data are representative examples of at least three independent
experiments.

Chemical Characteristics of LDL Oxidized by Iron at pH 4.5
Establishing the lipid composition of LDL oxidized by iron at lysosomal
pH might help us to assess the atherogenicity of the oxidized LDL
formed in this manner. LDL (2 mg of protein/mL) was oxidized in the
presence of FeSO4 (50 μM) at 37 °C in NaCl/sodium
acetate buffer (concentrations of LDL and FeSO4 were higher
than those used for spectrophotometry because of sensitivity issues).
There was a trend for the nonesterified cholesterol levels measured
by HPLC to decline during the oxidation, but this was not statistically
significant (Figure A). The levels of the
major polyunsaturated cholesteryl esters in LDL, cholesteryl linoleate
(CL) and cholesteryl arachidonate (CA), declined greatly during oxidation
by iron (Figure C,D). As expected, the levels
of CA declined somewhat more rapidly than those of CL, which is probably
due to the increased number of double bonds making it more susceptible
to free radical attack.

Chemical characteristics
of LDL oxidized by FeSO4 at
pH 4.5. LDL (2 mg of protein/mL) was oxidized with FeSO4 (50 μM) at 37 °C in buffer at pH 4.5. At various time
points up to 48 h, LDL oxidation was stopped by addition of EDTA (4
mM) and BHT (80 μM). LDL was assayed by reverse-phase HPLC for
nonesterified cholesterol [Chol (A)], 7-ketocholesterol [7KC (B)],
cholesteryl linoleate [CL (C)], cholesteryl arachidonate [CA (D)],
and cholesteryl linoleate hydroperoxide [CLOOH (E)]. LDL was assayed
for total hydroperoxides by a triiodide assay [ROOH (F)], for thiobarbituric
acid-reactive substances [TBARS (G)], and for relative electrophoretic
mobility [REM (H); note the different time scale]. Graphs represent
the mean ± the SEM of at least three independent experiments.
Differences between values at each time point and the zero time point
were determined by ANOVA and a Dunnett’s post-hoc test. *p &lt; 0.05.

The level of the cholesterol oxidation product,
7-ketocholesterol,
increased greatly after a long lag period from 0.24 ± 0.14 to
101 ± 21 nmol/mg of LDL protein after oxidation for 48 h (Figure B). Cholesteryl linoleate hydroperoxide (CLOOH)
levels increased to 457 ± 86 nmol/mg of LDL protein after oxidation
for 24 h and then appeared to decrease during the next 24 h (Figure E). Total hydroperoxide levels, as determined using
a triiodide assay, peaked at 697 ± 91 nmol/mg of LDL protein
after oxidation for 24 h (Figure F). Hence,
at the peak level of hydroperoxides, cholesteryl linoleate hydroperoxide
accounted for most of the hydroperoxides. Other cholesteryl ester
hydroperoxides and phospholipid, triacylglycerol, and protein hydroperoxides
have not been measured here and may account for the remainder of the
total hydroperoxides. Interestingly, in contrast to apparent CLOOH
levels, total hydroperoxide levels did not decline much between 24
and 48 h.

The level of TBARS, which consist mainly of malondialdehyde, increased to 23.9 ± 2.9 nmol/mg of LDL
protein at 24 h and subsequently decreased at 48 h (Figure G).

The electronegativity of the oxidized
LDL was also assessed as
a measure of the extent of LDL protein oxidation (Figure H). The REM of the LDL, measured in agarose gels at pH 8.6,
increased slightly as the duration of oxidation increased, reaching
1.3 ± 0.07 after 6 h. LDL oxidized for ≥12 h could not
be loaded onto the gel effectively because the LDL was highly aggregated.

Discussion
Lysosomal iron is a candidate for catalyzing
the oxidation of LDL
in vivo. Redox-active iron has been shown to be present in lysosomes, probably because of the degradation of ferritin,
the turnover of iron-containing organelles or the phagocytosis of
erythrocytes. Most of the labile iron in cells is present in lysosomes, and the concentration of chelatable iron in
some endosomes/lysosomes is ∼16 μM. The concentration of redox-active iron in lysosomes is
therefore probably above 5 μM. We have used a concentration
of FeSO4 of 5 μM for the spectrophotometry studies
and 50 μM for the HPLC studies (as the LDL concentration needed
to be much higher for the HPLC studies, because of sensitivity issues,
and we therefore needed to increase the FeSO4 concentration,
as well). These concentrations of FeSO4 might be broadly
consistent with the concentrations of redox-active iron in lysosomes
(although the nature of the redox-active iron and its ligands in lysosomes
are unclear).

In agreement with work conducted previously in
this laboratory, LDL was oxidized effectively
by 5 μM FeSO4 at lysosomal pH (pH 4.5) but was not
oxidized effectively
at the pH of plasma or normal interstitial fluid (pH 7.4) (Figure A). In contrast, CuSO4 oxidized LDL effectively
at pH 7.4, but not so well at pH 4.5. Acidity increases the solubility of iron and should allow it to
oxidize LDL more effectively. Extracellular fluids have a high antioxidant
capacity, with the oxidation of LDL by transition metals being inhibited
greatly by just a few percent of serum or interstitial fluid. Oxidation of LDL by iron within lysosomes might
help to explain why LDL can be oxidized in atherosclerotic lesions
in the presence of strong antioxidant protection in the interstitial
fluid of the arterial intima.

The lipid composition of LDL oxidized
by iron at lysosomal pH over
time has been characterized (Figure ). The
levels of cholesteryl linoleate and arachidonate decreased greatly,
mainly because of the oxidation of their polyunsaturated fatty acid
(PUFA) moieties. PUFA are oxidized via
a free radical chain reaction, which is initiated by the abstraction
of a hydrogen atom by a free radical at a bisallylic methylene group.
As expected, cholesteryl arachidonate was oxidized somewhat more rapidly
than cholesteryl linoleate, because of its increased number of double
bonds. The levels of the cholesteryl linoleate oxidation product,
cholesteryl linoleate hydroperoxide (CLOOH), increased significantly
for periods of oxidation of ≤24 h and then appeared to decrease
again. The total level of hydroperoxides was measured using a triiodide
assay and also increased up to 24 h. It then decreased only slowly
over the next 24 h. During LDL oxidation, lipid hydroperoxides may
decompose to form aldehydes, such as malondialdehyde and epoxy lipids. This decomposition
probably accounted for the slow decrease in the total level of hydroperoxides
after oxidation for 24 h. The levels of CLOOH may have declined faster
after 24 h than the levels of total hydroperoxides because CLOOH might
have become oxidized also on its cholesterol moiety, causing its HPLC
retention time to change, although it may have retained the hydroperoxide
group on its fatty acyl moiety and been detected in the triiodide
assay.

When LDL is oxidized with copper at 37 °C and pH
7.4, lipid
hydroperoxides are formed during the propagation phase of oxidation
and then decompose fairly rapidly., In contrast,
when LDL is oxidized by iron at 37 °C at acidic pH, the net hydroperoxide
levels fall only slowly between 24 and 48 h (Figure F), in agreement with our previous work. The lipid composition of LDL oxidized by iron at pH 4.5
and 37 °C for 12 h (Figure ) was similar
to that of LDL oxidized by copper at pH 7.4 and 4 °C for 12 h, i.e., rich in hydroperoxides but low in oxysterols.
The high levels of lipid hydroperoxides present in LDL oxidized by
iron at lysosomal pH may confer atherogenic properties to the LDL,
which differ from those of copper-oxidized LDL. Kritharides et al. showed that treatment of murine peritoneal macrophages
with acetylated or aggregated LDL, subjected to mild oxidation, led
to a lysosomal or prelysosomal accumulation of CLOOH and CLOH, which
impaired the breakdown of cholesteryl esters. The accumulation of
lipid hydroperoxides within the lysosome might therefore compromise
lysosomal function. Furthermore, data presented here show that oxidized
LDL aggregates spontaneously and rapidly at lysosomal pH (Figure C). This may weaken the ability of lysosomal enzymes
to degrade it effectively. Atherosclerosis has previously been described
as having features of a lysosomal storage disorder, whereby engorgement
of lysosomes with lipids impairs their function, and our data lend further support to this concept.

A wide variety of aldehydes are formed from the decomposition of
lipid hydroperoxides. A major aldehyde formed is malondialdehyde. The levels of TBARS (mainly malondialdehyde)
increased after oxidation for ≤24 h by iron at pH 4.5 and then
decreased (Figure G). The decrease might be
explained by the further reaction of malondialdehyde with amino groups
of the lysyl residues of apolipoprotein B-100, which would abolish
the positive charge of these residues.

The level of the cholesterol oxidation product 7-ketocholesterol
remained very low for some time but then increased greatly (Figure B). The level of 7-ketocholesterol was also increased
in macrophages when they oxidized LDL in their lysosomes, and 7-ketocholesterol is present in much larger
amounts in human atherosclerotic lesions than in normal arteries.

A slight increase in REM at pH 8.6 was
detected after oxidation
for ≤6 h (Figure H). LDL oxidized for
≥12 h could not be loaded onto an agarose gel, because of its
high level of aggregation, but it is possible that the net negative
charge of LDL continued to increase. The isoelectric point of native
LDL has been reported to be 5.1–5.8,, so at pH 5.1–5.8, LDL will have no net charge. At pH 7.4
or 8.6 (the pH at which electrophoresis was conducted), LDL would
have a net negative charge, but at the pH of lysosomes, ∼4.5,
it would have a net positive charge. The LDL particles would therefore
repel each other; however, as oxidation proceeds and the net positive
charge becomes smaller (Figure H), the repulsion
would weaken, and this may favor the aggregation of the LDL particles.

Oxidation of LDL by ferrous iron at lysosomal pH proceeds with
lag, rapid oxidation, slow oxidation, aggregation, and sedimentation
phases (Figure A), in agreement with our earlier
findings. The pattern of oxidation with
ferric iron was similar to that with ferrous iron; however, there
was a decrease in the rates of the rapid and slow phases of oxidation
and aggregation (Figure A). Kuzuya et al. found that ferrous iron oxidized LDL faster
than did ferric iron in an unbuffered NaCl solution initially at pH
7.4. There is evidence that lysosomes contain cysteine and therefore
have a reducing environment (but this
is controversial), and this would favor
the ferrous oxidation state of iron. In fact, the phagolysosomes of
macrophages are known to contain ferrous (and probably ferric) iron.

Iron may be able to initiate the oxidation
of LDL by reacting with
preexisting lipid hydroperoxides in the LDL particle.Fe2+ is believed
to react faster with lipid hydroperoxides (reaction ) than does Fe3+ (reaction ), as the rate constant for the analogous reaction of Fe2+ with H2O2 is 68 M–1 s–1 whereas that for Fe3+ with H2O2 is ∼4 × 10–6 M–1 s–1. This may explain
why the oxidation of LDL is slower with Fe3+. Interestingly,
adding higher concentrations of Fe2+ shortened the lag
phase and increased the rates of the rapid, slow, and aggregation
phases (Figure B), but adding a higher concentration
of Fe3+ had little effect (Figure C). This suggests that it is the concentration of Fe2+, rather than Fe3+, that determines the rate-limiting
step in the oxidation of LDL. The results shown in panels D and E
of Figure  are consistent with this suggestion.
Adding extra Fe2+ at various times when the oxidation was
already underway caused an immediate rapid burst of oxidation, whereas
adding extra Fe3+ had little effect. These results suggest
that the rapid phase of oxidation is mediated by the reaction of Fe2+ with LDL and the slow phase occurs when the levels of Fe3+ predominate.

DTPA is a metal ion chelator with a high
affinity for iron and
is able to bind both ferrous and ferric iron. Adding this chelator at the start of the oxidation or during the
rapid oxidation phase caused great inhibition of LDL oxidation with
iron at pH 4.5 (Figure A). When DTPA was added
during the slower oxidation phase, the rate of change of attenuance
was decreased substantially, but the LDL was still able to aggregate,
as indicated by the aggregation and sedimentation phases. These data
suggest that the rapid and slower oxidation phases of LDL modification
are iron-dependent and that LDL is able to aggregate only after it
has been oxidized to a certain extent, corresponding to the slow oxidation
phase. The aggregation phase can proceed in the absence of iron.

Adding another iron chelator, desferrioxamine, at the start of
LDL oxidation or during the rapid or slow phases of oxidation caused
a partial inhibition of LDL oxidation but was less effective than
adding DTPA (Figure B). Desferrioxamine binds
Fe2+ within seconds or less above pH 7.0 but requires many
minutes at pH 4.5. Surprisingly, when
desferrioxamine was added at the beginning of the aggregation phase
of LDL modification, the rate of the modification was actually increased.
Pro-oxidant effects of desferrioxamine have been reported. It might be argued that desferrioxamine was
acting by pulling the equilibrium in eq  over
to the right, as it binds Fe3+ with a higher affinity than
Fe2+, and accelerating the
breakdown of LOOH. Arguing against this is the fact that there is
a rapid burst of LDL oxidation when Fe 2+ is added to partially
oxidized LDL in the absence of an added iron chelator (Figure D). The reason for the different behaviors of desferrioxamine
and DTPA is unknown but may be related to their different stability
constants for Fe2+ and Fe3+, their different
standard reduction potentials, or the
electron donating ability of desferrioxamine, which might reduce Fe3+ to Fe2+ and promote
reaction .

Desferrioxamine injections
inhibited atherosclerosis in cholesterol-fed
rabbits. Desferrioxamine inhibits intralysosomal
iron redox chemistry and inhibits the
lysosomal oxidation of LDL in macrophages. Targetting iron chelators to lysosomes might be a potential strategy
for slowing the lysosomal oxidation of LDL, if toxicity issues could
be overcome.

α-Tocopherol enrichment of LDL had complex
effects on the
oxidation of LDL by iron at pH 4.5, whereas its antioxidant effects
on oxidation of LDL by copper at pH 7.4 were as expected (Figure ). There was initially a pro-oxidant effect of α-tocopherol
enrichment on the oxidation of LDL by iron, followed by an antioxidant
effect. The initial pro-oxidant effect might possibly be explained
by tocopherol-mediated peroxidation, in which an α-tocopheroxyl
radical abstracts a hydrogen atom from a polyunsaturated fatty acyl
group. There may later have been a net
antioxidant effect of α-tocopherol enrichment. Large clinical
trials have shown that α-tocopherol supplementation does not
usually decrease the risk of cardiovascular disease., The absence of an initial antioxidant effect of α-tocopherol
enrichment on oxidation of LDL by iron at lysosomal pH might possibly
be relevant to this lack of protection.

These data lend support
to the finding that LDL can be oxidized
within lysosomes. High levels of lipid hydroperoxides and 7-ketocholesterol
can be formed in LDL by iron at lysosomal pH, and the LDL becomes
highly aggregated and may therefore be difficult to degrade with lysosomal
hydrolases. This suggests that lysosomal oxidation of LDL might lead
to lysosomal lipid engorgement and lysosomal dysfunction in atherosclerosis.

The
authors declare no
competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
We thank Ms. Helen A. Oakley and Ms. Jessica del Rio for skilfully
isolating LDL and the volunteer blood donors from the University of
Reading.

Abbreviations
CAcholesteryl
arachidonate

CLcholesteryl linoleate

CLOOHcholesteryl linoleate
hydroperoxide

DTPAdiethylenetriaminepentaacetic acid

HPLChigh-performance liquid chromatography

LDLlow-density lipoprotein

MOPS3-(N-morpholino)propanesulfonic acid

REMrelative electrophoretic mobility

TBARSthiobarbituric acid-reactive
substances.

