Chlorite dismutases (Clds, EC
1.13.11.49) are heme b-dependent oxidoreductases
that can convert chlorite into chloride and dioxygen. First, biochemical
characterizations of Clds demonstrated that Cld does not catalyze
a dismutation or disproportionation. Thus,
the name chlorite “dismutase” is misleading. The reduction
of chlorite to chloride has been proposed to occur in three steps,
starting with the addition of ClO2– to
the heme iron [PorFe(III)]+ to form a [PorFe(III)]+–ClO2– adduct (reaction ), immediately followed by the oxidation of the ferric
enzyme by chlorite to form Compound I {oxoiron(IV) porphyryl radical,
i.e., [Por•Fe(IV)=O]+} and HOCl/OCl– (reaction ). Finally, hypochlorite
rebinds to the ferryl oxygen of Compound I, and chloride and dioxygen
are released (reaction ). However, a classical Compound I spectrum typical for a
heme b enzyme that shows hypochromicity at the Soret
maximum could not be trapped upon mixing ferric Cld with chlorite.

Besides this mechanism that involves heterolytic cleavage
of chlorite
and the formation of Compound I (reactions  and ), density functional theory (DFT) calculations
of water-soluble model iron porphyrins, suggest the
formation of Compound II [oxoiron(IV), i.e., PorFe(IV)=O] and
chlorine monoxide (O–Cl•) through homolytic
cleavage of chlorite (reaction ). Chlorine
monoxide then recombines with Compound II forming Cl– and O2 to complete the cycle (reaction ).

Crystal structures
of functional (i.e., chlorite-degrading) Clds− demonstrated that a fully conserved
arginine [i.e., Arg173 in chlorite
dismutase from “Candidatus Nitrospira defluvii”
(NdCld)] is the only charged amino acid at the distal heme side. Extensive
characterization of Arg mutants demonstrated that the basic amino
acid is catalytically important but not essential for chlorite degradation.,, Crystal structures suggest that
the distal arginine is flexible and may adopt two main conformations
pointing either to the entry of the main access channel into the heme
cavity or directly to the heme iron. Principally, the guanidinium
group could participate in all five reactions depicted above and could
support substrate binding as well as potentially keep the postulated
reaction intermediate, hypochlorite (or O–Cl•), in the vicinity of the ferryl oxygen for the recombination step
and O2 formation. Recent mutational analysis indicated
that Arg173 might be more important in stabilizing the Compound I–hypochlorite
complex (reaction ) [or the Compound II–chlorine
monoxide complex (reaction )] rather than supporting
the binding of chlorite to the heme center.

Additionally, kinetic studies of Clds from different organisms,,−,− also demonstrated that these oxidoreductases are irreversibly inhibited
with time at higher chlorite concentrations. Their ability to convert
chlorite to chloride and dioxygen is limited, and an off pathway was
postulated on the basis of the formation of tryptophanyl radicals
on the proximal heme side of Clds. Later,
mutational studies of chlorite dismutases from Dechloromonas
aromatica (DaCld) and “Candidatus Nitrospira defluvii” showed that the exchange of those conserved tryptophan
residues on the proximal side did not prevent deactivation of Clds.
In the corresponding DaCld mutants, the heme binding properties and
the oligomerization state were impaired, whereas in the corresponding
NdCld mutants, the reduction potential of the Fe(III)/Fe(II) couple
was altered.

In this work, we aim
to elucidate the mechanism of irreversible
inhibition of chlorite-degrading Clds. We have analyzed the role of
the conserved distal arginine and demonstrate the significant impact
of traps of hypochlorite like methionine, monochlorodimedon (MCD),
and aminophenylfluorescein (APF) on catalysis. We compare the pH dependence
of the enzymatic activity and the inhibitory effect as well as analyze
heme bleaching and modifications of the protein by time-resolved UV–vis
and electron paramagnetic resonance (EPR) spectroscopy as well as
mass spectrometry. The data obtained are discussed with respect to
the available biochemical and physical properties of Cld and its known
high-resolution structure.

Materials and Methods
Expression and Purification
The expression and purification
of StrepII-tagged TEV-cleavable wild-type NdCld and its variants were
reported recently.,

Polarographic Oxygen Measurement
Chlorite dismutase-mediated
degradation of chlorite was monitored by measuring the release of
O2 using a Clark-type oxygen electrode (Oxygraph Plus,
Hansatech Instruments, Norfolk, U.K.) inserted into a stirred water
bath kept at 30 °C. We equilibrated the electrode to 100% O2 saturation by bubbling O2 through the reaction
mixture and to 0% saturation by bubbling with N2 until
plateaus were reached to derive an offset and calibration factor.
Reactions for testing the influence of methionine were conducted in
O2-free 50 mM phosphate buffer solutions at pH 5.5 and
7.0, with 25–800 μM NaClO2 added from a stock
made in the same buffer and eventually with 5.0 mM methionine. Reactions
were started by addition of 25 nM wild-type NdCld, 200 nM NdCld R173A,
and 200 nM NdCld R173K. It was important to only use the initial linear
phase (v0) for the calculation of rates
and Michaelis–Menten parameters, because with increasing chlorite
concentrations, irreversible inactivation of the enzyme occurred.
This was immediately evident as determined by inspection of the respective
time traces. Molecular oxygen production rates (micromolar O2 per second) were obtained from initial linear time traces (&lt;10%
substrate consumed) and plotted versus chlorite concentration for
the determination of catalytic parameters. Reactions were monitored
for approximately 2 min to determine the final amount of produced
oxygen. The influence of enzyme concentration was tested by starting
the reaction with 5–500 nM wild-type NdCld and a chlorite concentration
of 340 μM, and eventually adding 5.0 mM methionine. Reactions
for the pH dependence of NdCld were conducted in O2-free
50 mM buffer solutions from pH 4.3 (citrate phosphate) to pH 8.3 (phosphate),
with 10–1000 μM NaClO2 added from a stock
made in the same buffer. Reactions were started via the addition of
50 nM wild-type NdCld.

Spectrophotometric Monitoring of Chlorite
Degradation
The conversion of chlorite (ClO2–) into
chloride and dioxygen was monitored photometrically by following the
decrease in absorbance at 260 nm (ε260 = 155 M–1 s–1) on a Hitachi U-3900 spectrophotometer. Reactions were conducted
in 50 mM buffer solutions (pH 5.5 and 7.0). The chlorite concentration
was 340 μM, and reactions were started by the addition of the
enzyme.

Stopped-Flow UV–Visible Spectroscopy
The experiments
were conducted with a stopped-flow apparatus (model SX-18MV, Applied
Photophysics) equipped for both conventional and sequential measurements.
The optical quartz cell with a path length of 10 mm had a volume of
20 μL. The fastest time for mixing two solutions and recording
the first data point was 1 or 3 ms. All measurements were performed
at 25 °C. To study the impact of hypochlorite traps like methionine, or monochlorodimedone (MCD) on the
degradation of chlorite by Cld, the conventional stopped-flow mode
was used following the decrease in the absorbance of MCD at 290 nm
(ε290 = 19000 M–1 s–1). Simultaneously, the spectral changes
in the Soret region of NdCld were monitored. In a typical experiment,
one syringe contained 2 μM enzyme in 50 mM buffer and the second
syringe contained 0–1 mM chlorite and eventually a hypochlorite
trap (100 μM MCD or 5 mM methionine) in the same buffer. A minimum
of three measurements were performed for each substrate concentration,
and spectra were recorded for 20 s. To determine the amount of chlorinated
MCD by transiently produced HOCl, the difference between the starting
concentration and the end concentration of MCD of each measurement
was plotted versus chlorite concentration. The effect of HOCl traps
on chlorite degradation was also monitored by using the diode array
detector (Applied Photophysics), which allowed the synthesis of artificial
sets of time-dependent spectra as well as spectral analysis of enzyme
intermediates.

Trapping of Hypochlorous Acid with Aminophenylfluorescein
As a further method for detecting hypochlorous acid as an intermediate
in Cld catalysis, we used APF, which specifically detects hypohalous
acids but does not react with chlorite., Here the HOCl-derived
oxidation of APF was followed at 25 °C by measuring the fluorescence
intensity at 522 nm (excitation at 488 nm). The fluorescence spectrophotometer
(Hitachi F-7000) was equipped with a thermostatic cell holder for
quartz cuvettes with a path length of 10 mm. Instrumental parameters
were set as follows. The excitation wavelength was set to 488 nm;
excitation and emission bandwidths were set to 5 nm, and the PMT voltage
was set to 700 V. Wavelength scans were recorded from 495 to 600 nm
(scan speed of 60 nm min–1). In detail, 100 nM NdCld
was incubated with 0–750 μM chlorite in 50 mM phosphate
buffer (pH 7.0), eventually in the presence of 5 mM methionine. APF
(10 μM) was added to the reaction mixture and the mixture incubated
in the dark at room temperature for 30 min before measurement.

Mass Spectrometry
Mass spectrometry (MS) was used to
detect modifications on NdCld after treatment with either chlorite
(in absence and presence of methionine) or hypochlorite. In typical
experiments, 100 μM wild-type NdCld in 50 mM phosphate buffer
(pH 7.0) was mixed with 500 mM chlorite (in the absence or presence
of 25 mM methionine). For protein analysis, 3 μg of treated
or untreated wild-type NdCld was directly injected into the LC–MS
system, and for peptide analysis, 5 μg of trypsin-digested treated
or untreated NdCld was directly injected into the LC–MS system
(LC, Dionex Ultimate 3000 LC; MS, Bruker, Maxis 4G, equipped with
the standard ESI source). The protein was eluted by developing a linear
gradient from 15 to 70% acetonitrile over 42 min (Supelco Discovery
Bio Wide Pore C5 column, 50 mm × 0.32 mm, 3 μm packing).
Data were processed using Data Analysis 4.0 (Bruker), and spectra
were deconvoluted with MaxEnt.

Electron Spin Resonance
Spectroscopy
Electron paramagnetic
resonance (EPR) spectroscopy was used to determine the effect of chlorite
(in the presence or absence of methionine) as well as of HOCl on the
electronic structure of the heme iron. Typically, 100 μL samples
were prepared in 125 mM MES buffer (final concentration, pH 5.5) containing
30 μM wild-type NdCld, 0–400 mM chlorite (eventually
in the presence of 17.5 mM methionine), or 0–23 mM HOCl. After
at least 3 min had been allowed to pass (until the reaction was complete),
the samples were transferred into Wilmad quartz tubes (3 mm inner
diameter) and flash-frozen in liquid N2. Frozen samples
were kept frozen on dry ice, while the headspace above the sample
was flushed with argon. Oxygen-free samples were frozen at 77 K and
transferred into the resonator for 10 K measurements. Spectra were
recorded on a Bruker EMX continuous wave (cw) EPR spectrometer, operating
at X-band (9 GHz) frequencies, equipped with a high-sensitivity resonator
and an Oxford Instruments ESR900 cryostat. EPR spectra were recorded
under nonsaturating conditions using a microwave power of 2 mW, a
modulation frequency of 100 kHz, a modulation amplitude of 1 mT, a
conversion time of 41 ms, a time constant of 41 ms, and 2048 points.
Simulations of high-spin and low-spin Fe(III) forms were conducted
using EasySpin and consist of a weighted
sum of simulations of the individual high-spin and low-spin compounds.
The rhombicity was obtained from gxeff and gyeff, and the relative
intensities were calculated on the basis of the simulations.

Molecular
Dynamics Simulations
Molecular dynamics simulations
were performed with the chlorite dismutase crystal structure from
“Candidatus Nitrospira defluvii” (PDB
entry 3NN1). The GROMOS molecular dynamics simulation package was used in conjunction with the GROMOS 54A7
force field. Detailed simulation settings
and force field parameters for Compound I and hypochlorite were taken
from Sündermann et al. (paper submitted to Biochemistry).

Results
pH Dependence of Chlorite Degradation and
the Effect of Methionine
Chlorite dismutases efficiently
degrade chlorite to chloride and
molecular dioxygen with reported KM values
at pH 7.0 varying from 69 to 260 μM, kcat values varying from 43 to 7500 s–1, and kcat/KM values varying
from 6.2 × 105 to 3.5 × 107 M–1 s–1. Figure  shows the pH dependence of these
enzymatic parameters for NdCld obtained from polarographic measurements
of the release of O2. In contrast to KM (138 ± 20 μM at pH 7.0), kcat (83 ± 4 s–1 at pH 7.0) and
the catalytic efficiency (5.9 × 105 M–1 s–1 at pH 7.0) showed a clear pH dependence with
an optimum at pH 5.5. Figure D clearly depicts
that at the pH optimum both the initial rate of O2 release
and the total yield of produced dioxygen are highest. With an increase
in pH, both the initial reaction velocity (v0) and the yield of O2 (which corresponds to the
amount of degraded chlorite) were significantly decreased. The more
chlorite was added to 50 nM NdCld, the more pronounced was this effect
(Figure D). During the reaction, NdCld was
irreversibly inhibited. Desalting and buffer exchange did not result
in any recovery of enzymatic activity (not shown). The pH optima of
NdCld variants R173A and R173K are also in the acidic region around
pH 4.5 (Figure 1 of the ). As postulated in reactions  and , HOCl/–OCl is formed during turnover.
To test whether hypochlorite is involved in the irreversible inactivation
of NdCld, the polarographic measurements were also performed in the
presence of 5 mM methionine. The latter is known to react with HOCl
very fast (8.7 × 108 M–1 s–1) and efficiently, whereas chlorite
does not react with methionine. Panels
A and B of Figure  compare the effect of methionine
on the degradation of chlorite by wild-type NdCld (20 nM) measured
as the amount of O2 released after 120 s at the pH optimum
(i.e., pH 5.5) and pH 7.0. At low chlorite concentrations (&lt;50
μM), the effect of methionine was weak. However, at higher chlorite
concentrations in the presence of methionine, the yield of O2 increased and this effect was more pronounced at pH 7.0. These data
clearly demonstrate that (i) methionine is able to partially protect
NdCld from irreversible inhibition and (ii) the inhibition reaction
is boosted apart from the pH optimum.

pH dependence of enzymatic parameters
of wild-type NdCld. Influence
of pH on (A) KM values, (B) turnover number
(kcat), and (C) catalytic efficiency (kcat/KM). (D) Plot
of the initial rate (v0) of release of
molecular oxygen as a function of chlorite concentration at pH 4.3–8.3.

Influence of methionine on the generation of
O2 during
chlorite degradation mediated by wild-type (A and B) and mutant (C–F)
NdCld at pH 5.5 (A, C, and E) and pH 7.0 (B, D, and F). Insets depict
typical time traces of oxygen generation.

Next, we wanted to analyze the role of arginine 173 in the
inhibition
reaction at pH 5.5 and 7.0. Compared to wild-type NdCld (KM = 69 μM, kcat = 43
s–1, kcat/KM = 6.2 × 105 M–1 s–1), variants R173A and R173K exhibited KM values of 90 and 898 μM, kcat values of 2.8 and 14.0 s–1, and kcat/KM values of
3.1 × 104 and 1.5 × 104 M–1 s–1 (pH 7.0), respectively. In panels C and D of Figure  (200
nM NdCld R173A) and panels E and F of Figure  (200 nM NdCld R173K), the amount of produced O2 after
2 min at various chlorite concentrations in the absence and presence
(5 mM) of methionine at pH 5.5 and 7.0 is plotted. The data clearly
demonstrate that in the absence of the distal arginine 173 NdCld is
much more prone to inactivation (despite a 10-fold higher enzyme concentration
in the assays) at pH 5.5 and 7.0 ([O2]/[chlorite] ratio
decreases in the order wild-type NdCld ≫ R173K &gt; R173A)
and
that methionine can rescue also the variants at least to some extent.

Besides the amount of O2 produced, methionine also increased
the turnover number of wild-type NdCld, R173K, and R173A (Figure A), simply because it kept the number of active
enzyme molecules higher. This is evident upon degrading a defined
amount of chlorite (340 μM) with increasing enzyme concentrations.
Figure B depicts two representative time traces
following O2 release during degradation of 340 μM
chlorite by 25 nM NdCld ([chlorite]/[NdCld] ratio of 13600) and 100
nM NdCld ([chlorite]/[NdCld] ratio of 3400) in the absence and presence
of methionine (5 mM). In the presence of methionine with 100 nM enzyme,
all chlorite was degraded and the theoretical yield of O2 (340 μM) was achieved, whereas at lower enzyme concentrations
or in the absence of methionine, the yield of dioxygen was significantly
lower. This is summarized in Figure C. To
produce 340 μM O2 from 340 μM chlorite in the
absence of methionine, an enzyme concentration of ∼400 nM was
necessary ([chlorite]/[NdCl] ratio of 850), whereas in the presence
of 5 mM methionine, complete degradation of chlorite was already achieved
by ∼100 nM enzyme ([chlorite]/[NdCl] ratio of 3400).

Effect of methionine
on the kinetics (A) and extent of O2 release (B and C)
and chlorite degradation (D and E), varying the
enzyme concentration (B–E) and the pH (E).

Very similar results were obtained when the degradation of
chlorite
was monitored photometrically at 260 nm under identical conditions.
Figure D depicts two representative time traces
from photometric experiments following the decrease in absorbance
at 260 nm during degradation of 340 μM chlorite by 25 and 100
nM NdCld in the absence and presence of methionine (5 mM) at pH 7.0.
Figure E compares the extent of degradation
of 340 μM chlorite by 25, 100, and 400 nM NdCld at pH 5.5 and
7.0 in the absence and presence of 5 mM methionine. It demonstrates
that 25 nM NdCld ([chlorite]/[NdCld] ratio of 13600) can convert ∼21%
of the initial amount of chlorite in the absence and ∼45% of
the chlorite in the presence (5 mM) of methionine at pH 5.5. At pH
7.0, those numbers decrease to ∼16 and ∼36%, respectively.
When 100 nM NdCld ([chlorite]/[NdCl] ratio of 3400) was used, all
chlorite independent of the addition of methionine could be converted
at pH 5.5, in contrast to pH 7.0 where only in the presence of 5 mM
methionine was the entire initial amount of chlorite converted and
only ∼54% in the absence of methionine. At an enzyme concentration
of 400 nM NdCld ([chlorite]/[NdCl] ratio of 850), the entire amount
of chlorite was converted regardless of pH or the presence of methionine.

These data clearly demonstrate that (i) Cld is irreversibly inhibited
during chlorite degradation, (ii) inhibition is weakest at the pH
optimum of enzymatic activity, (iii) methionine can rescue the enzyme
from inhibition to some extent (depending on the [chlorite]/[NdCl]
ratio), and (iv) exchange of the distal arginine amplifies the inhibitory
effect.

Quantification of Hypochlorous Acid Released during Catalysis
Next, we aimed to trap hypochlorite with two molecules, namely,
MCD and 2-[6-(4-aminophenoxy)-3-oxo-3H-xanthen-9-yl]benzoic
acid (APF), that allow the rough calculation of the amount of released
hypochlorite by UV–vis and fluorescence spectroscopy.

In Figure A, the kinetics of MCD (55 μM) chlorination during NdCld
(100 nM)-mediated chlorite degradation is depicted at various substrate
concentrations at pH 5.5 (Figure A) and pH
7.0 (Figure B). During chlorination of MCD
to DCD (dichlorodimedone), the absorbance at 290 nm is lost. Chlorite
does not react with MCD. Upon plotting
the decrease in the absorbance of MCD versus chlorite concentration,
we observed a linear dependence at chlorite concentrations of &gt;50
μM at pH 5.5 and &gt;0 μM at pH 7.0 (Figure C). On the basis of the assumption that all released hypochlorite
reacted with MCD, it can be calculated from the slope of the linear
curves that at least ∼7.5 μM hypochlorite/mM chlorite
escaped from the reaction sphere at pH 5.5 and 7.0.

Trapping hypochlorite
by monochlorodimedone in wild-type NdCld
(A–C) at different pH values and mutant NdClds (D–F).

Similar reactions were performed
with 200 nM NdCld R173A (Figure D) and 200
nM NdCld R173K (Figure E) at pH 5.5. In contrast
to the behavior of the wild-type
enzyme, a linear dependence of formed DCD on chlorite concentration
was observed only over a small concentration range [0–10 μM
for R173A and 0–100 μM for R173K (Figure F)]. On the basis of the assumption that all released hypochlorite
reacted with MCD, it can be estimated that at least ∼68 and
∼31 μM hypochlorite/mM chlorite escaped from the reaction
sphere in R173A and R173K at pH 5.5, respectively. These findings
clearly suggest that in the absence of R173 the amount of hypochlorous
acid released from the reaction sphere is increased significantly.

A further hypochlorite trapping molecule is APF. Upon reaction
of –OCl with APF, the fluorescence intensity at
522 nm (excitation at 488 nm) is increased. Figure 2 of the  depicts the reaction of
100 nM NdCld at various chlorite concentrations at pH 7.0 followed
by fluorescence spectroscopy (10 μM APF). On the basis of a
calibration curve (Figure 2A,B of the ), the amount of hypochlorite trapped by APF was
estimated from its linear dependence of the concentration of chlorite
concentration (&lt;500 μM) at pH 7.0 (Figure 2D of the ). On the basis of the
assumption that all released hypochlorite reacted with APF, it can
be calculated that at least ∼4 μM hypochlorite/mM chlorite
escaped from the reaction sphere at pH 7.0.

Heme Bleaching during Chlorite
Degradation Monitored by EPR
and UV–Vis Spectroscopy
Both time-resolved UV–vis
spectroscopy and EPR spectroscopy revealed irreversible heme bleaching
in NdCld during degradation of chlorite or upon addition of hypochlorite.
EPR spectroscopy gives valuable information about the electronic architecture
of the paramagnetic ferric heme b center of NdCld.
Wild-type NdCld has spectral features that are composed of two high-spin
species at pH 5.5 (Figure A and Table 1 of
the ) and two high-spin
and two low-spin species at pH 7.0 (Figure B and Table 1 of the ). Simulation and spin quantification parameters of the experimental
spectra are listed in Table 1 of the . The overall high-spin spectrum resembles previously
published NdCld spectra. It is worth pointing
out that differences in buffer conditions and cryo conditions affect
the rhombicity in NdCld samples.

Protein deactivation
by chlorite followed by an intensity change
of the cw electron paramagnetic resonance high-spin spectra at (A)
pH 5.5 and (B) 7.0, detected at 10 K (black, experimental spectrum;
red, simulated spectrum).

The intensity of the high-spin signal of wild-type NdCld
decreases
in the presence of chlorite (Figure  and Figure
3 of the ). With
100 mM chlorite, the rhombic signal disappears almost completely but
part of the axial signal remains (Figure 3A of the ). This decrease in the intensity of
the high-spin signal with no concomitant formation of a low-spin signal
indicates a change in the paramagnetic oxidation state of Fe(III)
NdCld and hence an inactivation of the protein. With a large excess
of chlorite (∼2500-fold), protein radicals begin to form at
a g value of ∼2. As already observed in the
steady-state kinetic assays, methionine is able to protect NdCld (Figure
3B of the ). It disrupts
the heme environment of NdCld [indicated by slight changes in the
rhombicity in the spectra and a significant decrease in the intensity
of the high-spin ferric signal (see Figure A,B and Table 1 of the )], suggesting that it can enter the heme cavity and trap hypochlorite
at the site of its production. In the presence of methionine (17.5
mM), the remaining high-spin signal of NdCld (40 μM) incubated
with 100 mM chlorite still has a significant amount of rhombic high-spin
signal. The protective effect of methionine is more pronounced at
pH 7 than at pH 5.5 (see also the difference spectra depicted in Figure ).

Finally, NdCld was incubated directly with
hypochlorous acid (Figure
4 of the ). With
an increasing amount of hypochlorous acid, the rhombic high-spin compound
disappears and the intensity of a non-heme Fe(III) high-spin signal
(g = 4.3) representative of degraded protein increases
significantly. A small protein radical species is also observed. The
effect of HOCl on the deactivation and degradation of NdCld is much
more pronounced in this experiment then the effect of the experiment
in which HOCl is generated during chlorite turnover because of a much
higher HOCl concentration at the heme site.

Besides EPR, we
investigated the modification of the spectral signatures
of the prosthetic group during chlorite degradation by UV–vis
stopped-flow spectroscopy (Figure ). Figure A depicts the spectral changes, when 1 μM
wild-type NdCld is mixed with 1 mM chlorite at pH 5.5 in the conventional
stopped-flow modus. The ferric resting state with its Soret maximum
at 406 nm (green spectrum) is rapidly converted within 1 ms to an
intermediate with a Soret maximum of 414 nm and a prominent peak at
535 nm (black spectrum). During chlorite degradation, this species
dominated and was converted to the resting state within 10 s. The
resulting heme spectrum significantly lost Soret absorbance (maxima
at 408 and 545 nm), suggesting heme bleaching (red spectrum in Figure A). At pH 7.0, the loss of absorbance at the Soret
maximum was more pronounced and the rate and extent of chlorite degradation
were smaller (Figure 5 of the ). Performing the same reactions in the presence of 5 mM methionine
reveals a different outcome. The reaction rate is enhanced, chlorite
degradation complete, and heme bleaching less pronounced (Figure B and Figure 5D of the ).

Effect of methionine on the interconversion of redox intermediates
and heme bleaching in wild-type NdCld (A and B) and NdCld variants
(C–F). Insets depict representative time traces at the Soret
maximum.

Mixing 1 μM NdCld R173A
with 1 mM chlorite (same condition
as the wild-type protein) led to a complete loss of heme absorbance
within 2 s. Thus, the variant was mixed with only 50 μM chlorite
in the absence (Figure C) and presence (Figure D) of 5 mM methionine. In contrast to that of the
wild-type protein, the Soret maximum remained at 406 nm during chlorite
degradation and the effect of methionine on heme bleaching was weak.
Mutant R173K was more robust and could be mixed with 1 mM chlorite
(Figure E). The Soret maximum of ferric R173K
is at 410 nm and was recently described as a low-spin species. When R173K was mixed with chlorite, no spectral
shift occurs and more than 60% of the heme absorbance disappears (Figure F).

Mass Spectrometric Analyses of Heme and Protein
Modification
Furthermore, we analyzed the modifications of
the protein moiety
of NdCld incubated with chlorite in the presence and absence of methionine
by mass spectrometry. StrepII-tagged NdCld has a theoretical mass
of 29751.8 Da without the heme b cofactor (which
is lost during sample preparation for MS). Analysis of recombinant
NdCld revealed the presence of some heterogeneity at the N-terminus
in the region of the StrepII tag and the TEV cleavage site. Six different
variants were detected, with the full length protein having the highest
intensity (peak maximum at 29751.3 Da and two minor peaks at higher m/z values, reflecting possibly methylation
and acetylation) (Figure A). Truncated versions
start at Met–22, Phe–14, Phe–5, Gly–3,
Met–1, and Ala1 (data not shown). Upon treatment with a 5000-fold
stoichiometric excess of chlorite, the resulting spectrum (Figure B) shows two dominating species representing NdCld
oxidized two and three times in addition to other forms having been
oxidized up to approximately 10 times. A low-intensity peak at the
original mass is still detected, suggesting the presence of some unmodified
NdCld after the reaction with chlorite. In the presence of methionine,
the mass peak of the unmodified enzyme is still the most prominent
one (Figure C). Modified (oxidized one to
five times) NdCld was also detected in this sample (Figure C) but to a much lesser extent compared to the sample
from which methionine was absent.

Modification of the protein during NdCld-mediated
degradation of
chlorite. Wild-type NdCld (A) was treated with chlorite (B) and with
chlorite in the presence of methionine (C). MS2 spectrum of peptide
175–194 of wild-type NdCld upon treatment with chlorite. The
inset shows the amino acid sequence of NdCld, including the N-terminal
StrepII tag and TEV cleavage site (highlighted in gray).

Finally, to identify modified (oxidized) residues,
peptide analysis
of NdCld incubated with chlorite was performed. All methionines in
the protein are oxidized to a large degree. By contrast, tryptophan
and tyrosine (Y189) residues are marginally oxidized (Table ). Interestingly, two of seven tyrosines (Tyr56
and Tyr176) were found to be chlorinated, as was proven by MS/MS analysis
(Figure D). The corresponding peptides were
present as two species with a mass unit difference of 2 and a 3:1
ratio of intensities, reflecting the occurrence of the two chlorine
isotopes, 35Cl (75.8%) and 37Cl (24.2%). 3-Chlorotyrosines
are specific fingerprints for the action of hypochlorite.− Both modified tyrosine residues are in the core of the protein on
the distal side of the heme, where the hypochlorite is produced during
turnover (Figure ). They are located at rather
remote sites with respect to the cofactor but are connected with the
heme center by a tunnel as calculated with CAVER (Figure A).

Amino acids modified
during NdCld-mediated chlorite degradation.
(A) Ribbon representation of a single NdCld subunit. A possible pathway
of hypochlorite within the subunit toward modified tyrosine residues
is depicted as orange spheres and an orange ribbon. (B) All oxidized
methionines are colored red. (C) NdCld with a semitransparent surface.
Figures were generated using PyMOL (http://www.pymol.org/).

Digestion of 100
μM NdCld, Treated
with 500 mM Chlorite in the Absence and Presence of 25 mM Methionine,
by GluC/Trypsin and Analysis by LC–MS in 50 mM Phosphate Buffer
(pH 7.0)
 	 	NdCld
with chlorite	NdCld
with chlorite and methionine	 	
amino acids	peptide sequence	% Tyr-Cl	% total modification	% Tyr-Cl	% total modification	Δ%	
6–33	LLTESGVYGTFATFQMDHDWWDLPGESR	 	57.27	 	5.86	51.41	
34–41	VISVAEVK	 	no modification	 	no modification	 	
42–50	GLVEQWSGK	 	22.22	 	2.57	19.65	
51–59	ILVESYLLR	2.53	2.53	0.04	0.04	2.50	
60–70	GLSDHADLMFR	 	98.49	 	6.54	91.95	
75–90	TLSDTQQFLSAFMGTR	 	99.76	 	24.92	74.84	
94–106	HLTSGGLLHGVSK	 	no modification	 	no modification	 	
107–119	KPTYVAGFPESMK	 	96.75	 	18.86	77.90	
120–140	TELQVNGESGSRPYAIVIPIK	 	no modification	 	no modification	 	
142–153	DAEWWALDQEAR	 	20.79	 	1.78	19.01	
154–169	TALMQEHTQAALPYLK	 	85.43	 	16.74	68.69	
175–194	LYHSTGLDDVDFITYFETER	8.53	13.56	0.67	2.46	11.10	
195–203	LEDFHNLVR	 	no modification	 	no modification	 	
204–209	ALQQVK	 	no modification	 	no modification	 	
217–235	FGHPTLLGTMSPLDEILEK	 	99.88	 	14.34	85.54	
The addition of free methionine to the reaction
mixture significantly
reduced the percentage of modifications of methionine, tyrosine, and
tryptophan residues of NdCld (Table ). The
fact that methionine both at the surface and in the protein interior
is oxidized (Figure B,C) demonstrates that
hypochlorite escapes from the active site during the degradation of
chlorite.

Molecular Dynamics Simulation of the Movement of Hypochlorite
MD simulations support the finding that transiently produced hypochlorite
migrates away from the reaction sphere. In this setup, hypochlorite
is placed in silico to the distal side of the heme
in its Compound I state with Arg173 in an “in” conformation
(pointing to the heme iron and not toward the substrate channel).

In MD simulations, hypochlorite cannot further react to form chloride
and dioxygen. It leaves the active site rapidly in all five monomers
of NdCld. This is illustrated in Figure ,
where the positions of one hypochlorite molecule over time are shown
(every 5 ps) over a 20 ns simulation. Positions early in the simulation
are colored green, gradually changing to blue, yellow, orange, and
red (final position after simulation for 20 ns).

Molecular dynamics simulation
of the movement of hypochlorite.
A single NdCld monomer is shown, along with the position of one hypochlorite
molecule at different time points (0–20 ns; green, blue, yellow,
orange, and red spheres). Hypochlorite escapes the active site rapidly.
Compound I oxygen is depicted as a red sphere and Compound I heme
iron as an orange sphere. Catalytically important R173 is colored
cyan and points away from the active site, being unable to keep the
transiently produced hypochlorite in the reaction sphere. This figure
was generated using PyMOL (http://www.pymol.org/).

Discussion
Understanding
the inhibition mechanism of chlorite dismutase (Cld)
is fundamental for future enzymatic application of Cld in bioremediation
and biotechnology. The enzyme from “Candidatus Nitrospira defluvii” (NdCld) was chosen
as a model protein for inhibition studies because it has a high thermal
and conformational stability and thus
is the most promising candidate for biotechnological applications.

Chlorite reacts with a variety of different
heme-containing enzymes,
including methemoglobin or cytochrome
P450. Among heme peroxidases, chlorite
was shown to be utilized by cytochrome c peroxidase,
chloroperoxidase, and horseradish peroxidase (HRP). With HRP, it was demonstrated that chlorite mediates the
two-electron oxidation of ferric HRP to Compound I (similar to postulated
reaction  for Cld) but also serves as one-electron
reductant of both Compound I and Compound II. Thereby, HRP is inactivated with time. Importantly, upon being mixed
with chlorite, HRP produces a halogenating agent that reacts with
MCD and was postulated to be hypochlorite. By contrast, chlorite rapidly and irreversibly inactivates human
peroxidases, like myeloperoxidase (MPO) and lactoperoxidase, which belong to a different heme peroxidase
superfamily. However, the first heme
enzyme that was described to utilize chlorite as a natural substrate
and degrade it efficiently was Cld from perchlorate-respiring bacteria
that actually produce chlorite as a metabolic intermediate.

Both the overall fold and the heme cavity
architecture of heme
peroxidases like HRP or MPO are completely different compared to those
of Cld. In heme peroxidases, hydrogen peroxide is the natural oxidant
that mediates the two-electron oxidation of the ferric enzyme to Compound
I. A basic amino acid, typically histidine, is essential for acting
as a proton acceptor forming the anionic peroxide that binds to Fe(III).
The following heterolytic cleavage of H2O2 is
supported by a conserved arginine. Thus, Compound I formation in a
peroxidase typically depends on the pKa of the distal histidine.

In functional Cld, the only charged
amino acid in the distal heme
cavity is an arginine (Arg173 in NdCld). The natural oxidant [E°′(ClO2/ClO–)
= 1175 mV] is chlorite (at least most probably in those Clds found
in perchlorate-respiring bacteria), which is deprotonated (pKa = 1.97) in the biological pH range. Thus,
a proton acceptor is not necessary for binding to Fe(III) according
to reaction . This is reflected by the fact
that the calculated KM value is independent
of pH (Figure A). One might speculate about
the role of Arg173 in reaction . Exchange of
R173 with either alanine or glutamine has only a weak effect on the KM value (i.e., increase by a factor of 1.3 in
R173A and 1.9 in R173Q compared to that of the wild-type protein), suggesting that its role in substrate binding
is negligible.

In contrast to the KM, the kcat of NdCld shows a clear dependence
on pH.
Above the pH optimum of chlorite degradation (i.e., pH 5.5), the turnover
number decreases with an increase in pH (Figure B). This behavior could be related to a role of Arg173 in (i) the
heterolytic cleavage of chlorite (reaction ) and/or (ii) the recombination reaction between the (postulated)
transiently produced intermediate hypochlorite and Compound I (reaction ). The turnover number (kcat) for chlorite degradation is ∼6.5% (R173A) and 33% (R173Q)
of that of the wild-type enzyme. Thus, arginine is not fully essential
for catalysis. In its presence, the turnover number is increased and,
as demonstrated in this work, inactivation is significantly retarded
(see below).

It has been postulated that the pH dependence of
chlorite degradation
by Cld reflects the protonation state of the distal arginine, which
was reported to have its pKa at ∼pH
6.5 in D. aromatica Cld (DaCld). The high degree of similarity of (i) the hydrophobic distal
site architecture of NdCld7 and DaCld5 and (ii)
the pH dependence of chlorite degradation determined in this work
(Figure B) suggests a similar pKa for Arg173 in NdCld. At pH 5.5, the positively charged
guanidinium group of Arg173 is perfectly suited to keep the transiently
produced hypochlorite in place for the postulated rebound mechanism
of reaction . In the close vicinity to the
guanidinium group, the HOCl––OCl equilibrium
(pKa = 7.54) will be shifted to the anionic
conjugated base (i.e., hypochlorite). With an increase in pH, the
interaction between hypochlorite and Arg173 will gradually be weakened.
However, as demonstrated in this work, this behavior is emphasized
by the fact that Cld is irreversibly inactivated during catalysis.
This is the main reason why it is problematic to compare the published
catalytic properties, because the various enzymes were probed in different
chlorite concentration regimes and are differently susceptible to
inactivation.

This work shows that
the extent of degraded chlorite (which corresponds
to the yield of produced O2) is significantly smaller at
alkaline pH (Figure D) and that the presence
of millimolar methionine can increase both the extent of chlorite
degradation and the reaction rate. This was demonstrated both polarographically
and spectrophotometrically. The protecting effect of methionine clearly
suggests a role of hypochlorite in the inactivation reaction, because
it is able to trap the transiently formed intermediate but not the
substrate chlorite. Methionine easily can enter the relatively large
substrate channel as well as the active site of Cld., EPR demonstrated that methionine forms a six-coordinated complex
with Cld (Figure ). It does not inhibit the
reaction; quite the contrary, its presence increases the lifetime
of active Cld molecules. The favorable impact of methionine on catalysis
is more pronounced as conditions become more alkaline.

The fact
that transiently formed hypochlorite is able to react
with methionine suggests that reaction  is
slower than reaction  and that not all hypochlorite
generated in reaction  reacts with Compound
I. A small fraction escapes from the active site. The species formed
within 1 ms by mixing of Cld with chloride in the stopped-flow apparatus
with absorbance maxima at 414 and 535 nm most probably represents
{[Por•Fe(IV)=O]+···[O–Cl–]}. As long as chlorite is available and Cld is active,
its spectral signatures dominate. Note that a Compound I spectrum
{i.e., [Por•Fe(IV)=O]+, produced
by mixing Cld with peracetic acid} exhibits a blue-shifted and hypochromic
Soret band at 395 nm and further bands at 525, 550, 600, and 645 nm.

To further confirm the production and
release of hypochlorite,
two additional traps (MCD and APF,) were used. They allowed the rough calculation of the amount of
released hypochlorite by spectroscopic means. At the pH optimum (kcat ∼ 180 s–1) and
with a stoichiometric excess of chlorite of 500–1000-fold,
∼7.7 μM hypochlorite/mM chlorite could be trapped by
MCD. This is a minimal number because it is based on the assumption
that all released HOCl molecules reacted with MCD. In the absence
of the distal arginine, the amount of released hypochlorite is significantly
larger, i.e., 31 μM/mM chlorite (R173K) and 68 μM/mM chlorite
(R173A). With an increase in pH, the rate of turnover of Cld gradually
decreased in contrast to the amount of trapped HOCl. These findings
strongly indicate that (i) hypochlorite is formed during catalysis,
(ii) Arg173 helps to keep it in the reaction sphere for the recombination
reaction, and (iii) the decrease in the amount of degraded chlorite
(or released O2) is related to the promoted inhibition
of Cld by escaped HOCl under more alkaline conditions.

The question
about the target(s) and the inhibitory effect of hypochlorite
remains. Both UV–vis and EPR spectroscopy demonstrated that
the heme of Cld is severely modified during catalysis. The loss of
heme absorbance and the intensity of the high-spin signal together
with the release of free iron occurs. In the absence of Arg173 and
at higher pH values, these reactions are more pronounced, whereas
in the presence of HOCl traps, they are partially suppressed. Additionally,
the protein moiety is modified. Protein radicals are formed, and amino
acids, mostly methionine and a few tyrosines and tryptophans, were
oxidatively modified. Most importantly, 3-chlorotyrosine is produced,
which is a typical fingerprint for the action of hypochlorite.− Solvent-exposed tyrosines and tyrosines in the interface of pentameric
NdCld subunits did not show this modification, whereas two chlorinated
tyrosines in the core of the protein were found. Their molecular surface
accessibility is 0 Å2 (according to the WHATIF Web
server, http://swift.cmbi.ru.nl/servers/html/index.html), but they may be reached by HOCl by a small tunnel. On this path,
Tyr176 is the first target (8.5% chlorination) and Tyr56 the second
(2.5% chlorination). Importantly, all these modifications could be
significantly suppressed in the presence of methionine (Table ).

In summary, the data presented in this
work support the postulation
that degradation of chlorite by Cld follows reactions –. Upon reduction of chlorite,
hypochlorite is formed and kept in the reaction sphere for recombination
with the oxoiron(IV) group of Compound I. The guanidinium group of
a fully conserved arginine with a pKa of
∼6.5 supports this reaction. However, approximately one molecule
of HOCl per 100 full cycles escapes and reacts with both the prosthetic
group and the protein moiety. As a consequence, irreversible inactivation
of Cld is observed and this reaction is more pronounced with an increase
in pH. Importantly, HOCl traps like methionine can rescue the enzyme
from inactivation.

Supporting Information Available
pH dependence of the reaction
of NdCld variants with chlorite, hypochlorite trapping with APF, additional
EPR spectra of chlorite titrations, effect of methionine on heme bleaching,
and chlorite degradation at pH 7.0. This material is available free
of charge via the Internet at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bi500401k_si_001.pdf

The authors declare no
competing financial interest.

Abbreviations
Cldchlorite dismutase

NdCldchlorite dismutase
from “Candidatus Nitrospira defluvii”

DaCldchlorite dismutase
from D. aromatica

HRPhorseradish peroxidase

MPOmyeloperoxidase

MCDmonochlorodimedon

APF2-[6-(4-aminophenoxy)-3-oxo-3H-xanthen-9-yl]benzoic acid

MDmolecular dynamics

PDBProtein Data Bank.

