Glycosylation is an abundant
eukaryotic protein modification reaction, which modulates a variety
of cellular processes, including protein folding, trafficking, cell–cell
interactions, cell signaling, and the host immune response.− It is now recognized that selected bacteria also possess the machinery
necessary to glycosylate proteins, and there is evidence that this
modification may play an important role in bacterial fitness and pathogenicity.− In some bacterial protein glycosylation pathways, the glycan is
first assembled in a stepwise fashion onto a polyprenyl diphosphate-linked
carrier on the cytoplasmic face of the inner membrane prior to being
translocated to the periplasmic face of the same membrane in readiness
for transfer onto an acceptor protein. In this case, attachment of
bacterial glycans onto proteins is accomplished by oligosaccharyltransferase-mediated en bloc transfer onto asparagine (N-linked) or serine/threonine
(O-linked) residues., Protein glycosylation can also
occur in a stepwise manner with nucleotide-activated sugars by Leloir
glycosyltransferases. Highly modified bacterial sugars, including
2,4-diacetamido-2,4,6-trideoxy-d-glucose (N,N′-diacetylbacillosamine or diNAcBac) and
5,7-diacetamido-3,5,7,9-tetradeoxy-l-glycero-l-manno-nonulosonic
acid (pseudaminic acid or Pse), are prevalent features of bacterial
glycans, and in some cases, the presence of such sugars has been related
to pathogenicity., For example, diNAcBac is found
at the reducing end of glycans in N- and O-linked glycoproteins, and
Pse is featured in the O-linked glycans of flagellar proteins of significant
human pathogens.

The Campylobacter jejuni N-linked
protein glycosylation
(pgl) pathway, which affords a heptasaccharide for
transfer to proteins, is one of the best characterized bacterial glycosylation
pathways to date (Figure A). N-Linked glycans
resulting from this pathway have been identified on more than 65 C. jejuni proteins. An analogous O-linked pathway, found in Neisseria
gonorrhoeae, generates a trisaccharide (Figure B) that has been identified on 19 glycoproteins, including
the pilin protein PilE. In each pathway,
diNAcBac is first biosynthesized as the corresponding UDP-sugar from
UDP-N-acetylglucosamine (UDP-GlcNAc) and then diNAcBac
is assembled into a polyprenyl diphosphate-linked glycan for transfer
to acceptor proteins. In other pathways, further modification of diNAcBac
through a series of enzymes results in legionaminic acid, a nonulosonic
acid, which is structurally related to sialic acid (N-acetylneuraminic acid) (Figure ). Additionally,
an analogous pathway, which utilizes 2,4-diacetamido-2,4,6-trideoxy-l-altropyranose, an isomer of diNAcBac, produces pseudaminic
acid (Figure ). In contrast to the N- and
O-linked glycosylation pathways that incorporate diNAcBac as part
of a preassembled glycan, these elaborated 2,4-diacetamido-2,4,6-trideoxy-α-d-hexose (DATDH) derivatives are transferred directly from the
corresponding CMP derivatives to serine and threonine side chains
to afford O-linked glycoproteins. Legionaminic and pseudaminic acids
are essential for flagellar assembly in Campylobacter spp., Legionella pneumophila, and Helicobacter
pylori. The biosynthetic pathways
responsible for these unique sugars have recently been linked to bacterial
pathogenesis− and therefore may present novel targets for the development
of antivirulence agents, which could potentially complement current
efforts to develop new antibiotics to address the growing challenges
with antibiotic resistance.

(A) N-linked protein glycosylation pathway from C. jejuni showing the heptasaccharide glycan attached to
the PEB3 protein.
(B) O-linked protein glycosylation pathway from N. gonorrhoeae showing the trisaccharide glycan attached to the PilE protein. Both
pathways utilize the unique, bacterial sugar diNAcBac at the reducing
end of the glycan. Abbreviations: ATD, acetyltransferase domain; PGTD,
phosphoglycosyltransferase domain.

Structural comparison of modified carbohydrates found in bacteria
that are discussed in this review.

This review focuses on the pathways leading to diNAcBac and
pseudaminic
acid, which are two particularly important prokaryote-specific sugars.
UDP-diNAcBac is biosynthesized from UDP-GlcNAc using a series of three
conserved enzymes, including a dehydratase, an aminotransferase, and
an acetyltransferase (Figure ). These three
enzymes have been extensively studied in the Gram-negative bacterium C. jejuni.− Subsequent to the work
on the C. jejuni N-linked protein
glycosylation pathway, diNAcBac was also discovered in glycans, which
modify serine and threonine residues (O-linked) in other pathogenic
bacteria, including N. gonorrhoeae, and UDP-diNAcBac biosynthesis enzymes
have also been identified in the AYE strain of Acinetobacter
baumannii. Importantly, diNAcBac
and the related DATDH based on l-altropyranose, which is
isomeric at C4 and C5, serve as starting points for the biosynthesis
of legionaminic and pseudaminic acid. In this review, the enzymes
responsible for the biosynthesis of these unique bacterial carbohydrates
will be explored in detail. Our current understanding of the biosynthesis
and incorporation of these highly modified sugars into glycoprotein
virulence factors provides a strong motivation for future investigations
of the molecular basis of their roles in bacterial pathogenicity.

Biosynthetic
pathway for the conversion of UDP-GlcNAc into UDP-diNAcBac
in C. jejuni, N. gonorrhoeae, and A. baumannii (AYE strain).

N,N′-Diacetylbacillosamine
Discovery
and Characterization
The serendipitous discovery
of bacillosamine occurred in 1957 when Nathan Sharon was exploring
polypeptide biosynthesis in Bacillus licheniformis, a Gram-positive bacterium usually found in soil. In the course of these studies, an unknown amino sugar
component of a B. licheniformis polysaccharide
was detected by paper chromatography. Elemental and chemical analysis
of this sugar revealed the presence of two nitrogen atoms at positions
C2 and C4, with the latter site acetylated. The structure of this
carbohydrate was assigned as 4-acetamido-2-amino-2,4,6-trideoxyhexose
(4-N-acetylbacillosamine) based upon these initial
experiments., Final confirmation of the structure,
including the unambiguous stereochemical assignment, occurred 10 years
later through a 12-step chemical synthesis from d-glucosamine. More recently, undecaprenyl diphosphate-linked
di-N-acetylbacillosamine (diNAcBac) and diNAcBac-containing disaccharides have also been prepared by chemical synthesis. Since its
discovery, bacillosamine and the corresponding N-acetylated derivatives
have been found in the glycoconjugates of a variety of pathogenic
bacteria. For example, it is found as the reducing-end sugar in N-linked
(C. jejuni) and O-linked glycoproteins
(Neisseria spp.). Additionally, bacillosamine has
been identified in the O-antigen of Pseudomonas reactans() and Vibrio cholerae, the core region of the lipopolysaccharide
(LPS) in Francisella novicida, and the capsular polysaccharide (CPS) from Alteromonas sp. CMM155. The fundamental question
of why bacteria utilize bacillosamine is currently unanswered and
remains an important area of research, although some hypotheses suggest
that this sugar is not recognized by mammalian hosts and therefore
may serve as a decoy to host immune systems and glycan-degrading enzymes.

Biosynthesis in Bacterial Pathogens
Although the biosynthetic
route to bacillosamine was first suggested by Sharon in 1964, it took more than 40 years to verify the initial
proposal. Following genome sequencing of C. jejuni, an operon that was
distinct from the lipopolysaccharide cluster was identified, which
included several genes that were significantly homologous to previously
characterized protein glycosylation genes. Selected proteins encoded by the pgl (protein glycosylation)
locus were ultimately biochemically characterized and found to be
responsible for the biosynthesis of UDP-diNAcBac from UDP-GlcNAc.

Biochemical analysis of Cj1120c, later renamed PglF, resulted in
the identification of the first enzyme in the pgl pathway, a membrane-bound NAD+-dependent dehydratase. PglF catalyzes a transient NAD+-dependent
C4 oxidation of UDP-GlcNAc, which promotes elimination of water across
carbons C5 and C6 of the pyran ring. Reduction of the resultant α,β-unsaturated
system by hydride addition at C6 produces the UDP-4-keto sugar and
regenerates NAD+ (Figure ). Therefore,
PglF catalyzes a net overall dehydration reaction. One- and two-dimensional
NMR experiments confirmed the stereochemistry of this product to be
UDP-2-acetamido-4-keto-2,4,6-trideoxy-α-d-glucose. Unlike the pseudaminic acid dehydratase (Cj1293/PseB)
also found in C. jejuni (see below),
PglF does not catalyze C5 epimerization. Kinetic characterization
of PglF resulted in a kcat/Km of 17 M–1 s–1 for
UDP-GlcNAc, making this enzyme the least catalytically efficient on
the diNAcBac biosynthesis pathway and thus making this the rate-limiting
step. Further characterization of PglF
homologs in N. gonorrhoeae (PglD)
and A. baumannii (WeeK) has resulted
in similar kinetic parameters, lending support to the proposal that
the dehydratase enzymes may play the role of “gatekeeper”
in these pathways., The diNAcBac dehydratase enzymes
have yet to be structurally characterized, in part because of the
challenges associated with membrane protein crystallization.

The gene adjacent to pglF in the pgl locus, encoding Cj1121c/PglE, was defined as a pyridoxal 5′-phosphate
(PLP)-dependent aminotransferase that catalyzes the transfer of the
amino group from l-glutamate to the C4 position of the UDP-4-keto
sugar. The transformation occurs in two distinct steps that cycle
between the PLP and pyridoxamine 5′-phosphate (PMP) forms of
the coenzyme., Catalysis is initiated by the
formation of an imine involving the UDP-4-keto sugar and PMP. Following
isomerization to the external aldimine, the UDP-4-amino sugar product
is released via transimination of the catalytic lysine residue in
the active site. The internal aldimine resulting from this reaction
then reacts with l-glutamate to afford α-ketoglutarate,
regenerating PMP in the process. Although the preferred amino group
donor was determined to be glutamic acid, PglE has also been shown
to exhibit moderate activity with methionine, glutamine, alanine,
and cysteine. The UDP-4-amino sugar product
of this reaction was confirmed as UDP-2-acetamido-4-amino-2,4,6-trideoxy-α-d-glucose based upon NMR experiments, including nuclear Overhauser
effect (NOE) studies and J coupling constant analysis. Kinetically, PglE is a more efficient enzyme
than PglF when comparing UDP-sugar substrates (kcat/Km = 6600 M–1 s–1). The l-glutamic acid cosubstrate is weakly bound (Km = 11 mM), which is offset by the naturally high intracellular
concentrations of the amino acid. Studies
with the aminotransferase homologs in N. gonorrhoeae (PglC) and A. baumannii (WeeJ) again reveal a low binding affinity for l-glutamic
acid, and with respect to UDP-4-keto sugar turnover, both of these
enzymes were catalytically less active than PglE. Bacterial sugar
aminotransferases such as PglE form homodimers in solution following
previous observations with PseC (H. pylori) and WbpE (Pseudomonas aeruginosa)., Furthermore, the crystal structure of PglE supported solution state
studies revealing that the enzyme exists as a dimer in the asymmetric
unit (Figure A). The two active sites are located on opposite faces of the dimer
interface and are separated by ∼30 Å. At the bottom of
each binding pocket resides the PLP coenzyme necessary for the transamination
reaction. Structures of the apo and PLP-bound forms of PglE have been
determined, while attempts to crystallize the protein in the presence
of the UDP-sugar substrate or product have not yet proven to be successful,
although it is presumed that substrate binding generally resembles
that described in previous studies of related aminotransferases. However, because these proteins seem to be highly
specific for their cognate UDP-sugars, intriguing questions about
the molecular basis for the observed selectivity remain.

(A) C. jejuni PglE aminotransferase crystal structure
(PDB entry 1O61) bound to PLP depicted in ribbon and space-filling format (left).
The major interactions between PLP and the PglE active site are depicted
with dashed lines (right). The dimer is the biologically active unit,
and each protomer has been individually colored for the sake of clarity.
(B) Composite C. jejuni PglD acetyltransferase crystal
structure constructed from the UDP-4-amino-bound (PDB entry 3BSS) (brown) and AcCoA-bound
(PDB entry 3BSY) (gray) structures. For the sake of clarity, the two additional
binding pocket substrates have been removed and the protomers individually
colored. The biologically active unit is a trimer illustrated in ribbon
and space-filling format (left). Major interactions of the PglD active
site with AcCoA (center) and UDP-4-amino (right) are depicted with
dashed lines.

The final step of UDP-diNAcBac
biosynthesis relies on the acetyltransferase
PglD (Cj1123c), which acetylates the UDP-4-amino sugar in an acetyl
coenzyme A (AcCoA)-dependent reaction. Catalysis involves an active
site histidine that acts as a general base to abstract a proton from
the UDP-sugar C4 amine, thereby promoting nucleophilic attack on the
thioester of AcCoA. Utilizing a combination of radiolabel transfer
with [3H]AcCoA, ESI-MS, and NMR, the product was unequivocally
shown to be UDP-diNAcBac (UDP-2,4-diacetamido-2,4,6-trideoxy-α-d-glucose). The PglD acetyltransferase
exhibited the greatest catalytic efficiency among the pathway enzymes
for both the UDP-sugar (kcat/Km = 4.0 × 107 M–1 s–1) and AcCoA (kcat/Km = 5.5 × 107 M–1 s–1) substrates. Similar
catalytic efficiencies were also observed for the N. gonorrhoeae (PglB) and A. baumannii (WeeI) diNAcBac acetyltransferases. It is proposed that this enzyme efficiency may
create a pathway flux where rapid consumption of the UDP-4-amino sugar
drives the rate-limiting step of UDP-4-keto formation by PglF. Interestingly,
PglD shows a relaxed substrate specificity based upon its ability
to also acetylate UDP-4-amino-4,6-dideoxy-β-l-AltNAc,
an intermediate along the pseudaminic pathway, which may allow for cross-talk between the two pathways.
However, PglD does appear to be specific for sugar nucleotide substrates,
as it does not catalyze acetylation of aminoglycoside substrates. PglD forms a homotrimer in solution based upon
sedimentation velocity analytical ultracentrifugation (AUC) experiments. Structural analysis by X-ray crystallography
further supports the homotrimeric structure with the C-terminal left-handed
β-helix domain of adjacent protomers forming the AcCoA binding
site, whereas the N-terminal domain of each monomer contains a β–α–β–α–β
Rossmann fold motif to accommodate the UDP-4-amino substrate (Figure B).,

Connection to Pathogenicity
There is currently considerable
interest in identifying and targeting bacterial pathways that are
associated with virulence and pathogenicity because of the increasingly
frequent occurrence of resistance to currently available bacteriocidal
antibiotics. This approach is an attractive
option because strategies that target virulence, rather than survival,
would potentially circumvent the selective pressure to develop resistance
associated with many common antibiotics. With respect to virulence,
the C. jejuni N-linked protein glycosylation
pathway is of significant interest. This bacterial pathogen is a leading
cause of gastroenteritis and is also an associated antecedent infection
in the development of Guillain-Barré syndrome.− The pgl pathway produces a heptasaccharide containing
diNAcBac, which modifies a variety of proteins associated with virulence. Therefore, the enzymes responsible for the biosynthesis
of diNAcBac may represent appealing antivirulence targets because
they are specific only to prokaryotes. It is also noteworthy that C. jejuni has already exhibited increased
resistance toward front-line antibiotics, including the macrolides
and fluoroquinolones, which inhibit bacterial
protein synthesis and topoisomerase II, respectively.

Previous
studies have examined the importance of global N-linked protein glycosylation
in C. jejuni by disrupting the genes
responsible for diNAcBac biosynthesis (pglF, pglE, and pglD). Utilizing high-resolution magic angle spinning nuclear magnetic
resonance (HR-MAS NMR) and whole-cell lysate reactivity to the GalNAc-specific
SBA lectin, it was demonstrated that the loss of function in these
genes resulted in the weakened ability to produce the heptasaccharide-modified
proteins in C. jejuni. Additionally,
the ΔpglD and ΔpglE C. jejuni strains were examined for their ability
to colonize 1-day-old chicks. In both
cases, strongly attenuated bacterial colonization was detected following
inoculation because of the inactivation of the glycosylation pathway,
thereby validating these two gene products as targets in pathogenicity.
Transposon mutagenesis of C. jejuni verified these
results by identifying pglF and pglE as essential genes for colonization of the chick gastrointestinal
tract. In a related study, the C. jejuni pglE mutant impaired the invasion of intestinal
epithelial cells and colonization of intestinal tracts in mice.

Confirmation of the relationship between
pathogenicity and diNAcBac
biosynthesis has sharpened the focus on identifying the individual
glycoproteins responsible for cell invasion and colonization. The
glycoprotein VirB10, a structural component of the type IV secretion
system (TFSS), was previously identified in C. jejuni. Disruption of the pglE gene resulted in the conclusion that the pgl system
glycosylates VirB10 at two sites, N32 and N97. Deletion of the N97
glycosylation site produced a 10-fold decrease in natural competency
that could be rescued by complementing with wild-type VirB10. This
was the first example of N-linked glycosylation being directly attributed
to the stability and function of a known virulence factor. Recently,
16 N-linked glycoproteins were identified and found to be associated
with C. jejuni outer membrane vesicles (OMVs), including
the known antigenic PEB3 adhesin. Pathogens
employ OMVs to deliver bacterial proteins into host cells, making
this an important finding in the relationship between immunogenic
glycoproteins located in the periplasm and pathogenicity.

In
parallel with studies exploring the connection between N-linked
protein glycosylation and bacterial pathogenicity in C. jejuni, efforts have also focused on a comparable role for prokaryotic
O-linked glycosylation. Specifically, the association between O-linked
protein glycosylation and pathogenicity has been examined in N. gonorrhoeae. Studies have identified the PilE protein
in type IV pilin to be glycosylated with a trisaccharide, including
diNAcBac, at a single site (Ser-63). Further
experiments with the PilE glycoprotein in Neisseria spp. have shown that it is both immunogenic and antigenic. Mass spectrometry analysis following two-dimensional
gel electrophoresis and immunoblotting identified additional periplasmic
glycoproteins that are implicated in protein folding, solute uptake,
and respiration. Strains of N.
gonorrhoeae deficient in the ability to biosynthesize diNAcBac,
through disruption of the NAD+-dependent dehydratase gene
(pglD), exhibited decreased adherence and invasion
of primary human cervical epithelial (pex) cells. Similar to N. gonorrhoeae, Neisseria
meningitidis encodes a homologous O-linked protein glycosylation
pathway that results in modification of PilE with the same trisaccharide.− Recent studies have indicated that this pilin-linked glycan is essential
for the adherence of N. meningitidis to human bronchial
epithelial cells. Further work in an in vivo system is necessary to identify a link between pathogenicity
and glycoproteins biosynthesized from this pathway, but this is an
exciting and active area of research.

Derivatives of N,N′-Diacetylbacillosamine
Legionaminic
Acid
Sialic acid (Figure ) is a nine-carbon
α-keto sugar that is most commonly
found incorporated into mammalian cell surface glycoproteins, which
are responsible for intercellular interactions. Prokaryotes are now also recognized to display sialic acid
and related nonulosonic acid derivatives on their outer cell surfaces.
For example, selected bacteria produce legionaminic acid (5,7-diacetamido-3,5,7,9-tetradeoxy-d-glycero-d-galacto-nonulosonic acid), which shares
the stereochemistry of sialic
acid as established by total synthesis. It has been hypothesized that bacterial pathogens utilize legionaminic
acid as a molecular mimic of sialic acid, which is prominently presented
on mammalian cells and is an important factor in immune system regulation
and adhesion. Legionaminic acid was first
identified in a repeating homopolymer in the O-polysaccharide of LPS
in L. pneumophila, which is the causative agent of
Legionnaires’ disease. Recently,
legionaminic acid has been found in the glycoconjugates of a variety
of other pathogenic bacteria, where it is associated, for example,
with the glycoprotein flagella of Campylobacter coli() and the O-antigen of A. baumannii,,Cronobacter turicensis, and Escherichia coli. In fact, more than 20% of the 1000 microbial
genomes examined to date appear to contain the biosynthetic genes
for the legionaminic acid biosynthesis pathway, making this sugar
far more widespread than originally believed. Work on the O-antigen of Vibrio fischeri has illustrated
the importance of legionaminic acid in colonization of the natural
host of this bacterium. The disruption
of this O-antigen through a gene knockout of waaL, the ligase responsible for the assembly of the O-antigen onto the
LPS, resulted in a motility defect. Further studies indicate that
this O-antigen null strain has a significantly weakened ability to
colonize its natural host organism and cannot compete with wild-type V. fischeri in co-colonization assays. Although legionaminic acid is found in a number of known
bacterial glycoconjugate virulence factors, the relationship between
this sugar and host cell interactions remains poorly understood. Further
investigation is therefore warranted to determine whether disruption
of the biosynthesis of legionaminic acid has an effect on bacterial
pathogenicity.

The CMP-activated form of legionaminic acid was
originally shown to be biosynthesized in L. pneumophila from UDP-diNAcBac by a series of three enzymes (Figure )., These enzymes are necessary for
the assembly of functional flagella and show homology to the bacterial
sialic acid biosynthetic pathway enzymes NeuC, NeuB, and NeuA. Although
it has been hypothesized that sialic acid biosynthesis first emerged
in vertebrates and was laterally transferred to bacteria, the legionaminic
acid biosynthesis pathway is believed to have evolved convergently
from an ancestral nonulosonic acid biosynthesis pathway. Additionally, on the basis of a phylogenetic
study, it is proposed that sialic acid biosynthesis in pathogenic
bacteria may actually be the result of adaptation of an ancient bacterial
nonulosonic acid biosynthetic pathway rather than horizontal gene
transfer from a eukaryotic host organism. The first committed enzyme in the legionaminic acid pathway in L. pneumophila is a NeuC homolog, which affords 2,4-diacetamido-2,4,6-trideoxymannose
by an apparent nucleotide hydrolysis and C2 epimerization. In mechanistic
studies, a two-dimensional heteronuclear NMR experiment (HMQC) was
utilized to establish that the α-anomer is initially formed
with retention of stereochemistry at C1, and it was concluded that
the mechanism for the NeuC homolog proceeds through anti elimination of UDP followed by syn hydration of
the glycal double bond in a fashion similar to that of the homologous
enzyme in the bacterial sialic acid biosynthetic pathway.,, The kinetic parameters for this
reaction (kcat/Km = 1.6 × 106 M–1 s–1) suggest that UDP-diNAcBac is the physiological substrate. The inability
of the NeuC homolog to turn over UDP-GlcNAc, the natural substrate
for the sialic acid pathway, further supports these findings. Following
this, the NeuB homolog then utilizes phosphoenolpyruvate (PEP) to
condense a three-carbon unit onto 2,4-diacetamido-2,4,6-trideoxymannose
to yield N,N′-diacetyllegionaminic
acid. This reaction presumably proceeds through an oxocarbenium intermediate
following attack on the open chain aldehyde form of 2,4-diacetamido-2,4,6-trideoxymannose
by C3 of PEP. Addition of water to this intermediate results in the
displacement of phosphate and the formation of the α-keto acid.
In these studies, the NeuB homolog showed a rather low level of activity
that may be in part due to the assay conditions that were employed. The NeuB homolog exhibited no activity with
ManNAc, confirming that it is unlikely to be involved in a sialic
acid biosynthetic pathway. The final enzymatic step in the process,
accomplished by the NeuA homolog, activates the α-keto sugar
with CTP to yield CMP-N,N′-diacetyllegionaminic
acid. Because of the small amounts of substrate obtained from the
previous step, mass spectrometry was utilized to monitor generation
of the CMP-activated sugar product.

Steps
in the conversion of UDP-diNAcBac to CMP-legionaminic acid
in L. pneumophila.

The CMP-legionaminic acid biosynthesis pathway in C. coli VC167 has also been investigated utilizing a targeted
metabolomics
approach with mass spectrometry and NMR-based approaches. Interestingly, in this case, the pathway is
found to proceed through alternate intermediates compared to those
observed in L. pneumophila. In particular, it was
observed that inactivation of the UDP-diNAcBac pathway aminotransferase
enzyme PglE in C. coli did not affect the production
of CMP-legionaminic acid, and it was apparent in these studies that
the biosynthesis of legionaminic acid in C. coli did
not proceed through the intermediacy of UDP-diNAcBac. Further work
expanded the study of the Campylobacter pathways to C. jejuni where it was demonstrated
that the biosynthesis of CMP-legionaminic acid involved GDP rather
than UDP-activated sugar intermediates. Ultimately, the biosynthesis of CMP-legionaminic acid was shown
to occur through a series of enzyme-catalyzed steps that involved
conversion of fructose 6-phosphate to GDP-glucosamine (GDP-GlcN) with
the nucleotidyltransferase PtmE (Figure ).
For the following step, the N-acetyltransferase responsible
for acetylating the C2 amine of GDP-GlcN has not yet been identified;
therefore, the C. jejuni GlmU was utilized in the
study, and efforts to identify the actual
enzyme in the pathway are still ongoing. Natively, GlmU is the bifunctional
enzyme that first acetylates GlcN-1-P and then catalyzes uridinylation
of the sugar phosphate, resulting in the formation of UDP-GlcNAc in C. jejuni. The acetylated GDP-GlcNAc
in the C. jejuni pathway is then converted to GDP-diNAcBac
by a dehydratase (LegB), an aminotransferase (LegC), and an acetyltransferase
(LegH) (Figure ) in a fashion analogous to
that of the pgl pathway enzymes that biosynthesize
UDP-diNAcBac in C. jejuni. The final three enzymes
in the CMP-legionaminic acid pathway in Campylobacter, designated LegG, LegI, and LegF, are homologous to the corresponding
enzymes in L. pneumophila (Figure ). LegG catalyzes the conversion of GDP-diNAcBac to 2,4-diacetamido-2,4,6-trideoxymannose,
which is the same as the product from the S. pneumophila NeuC reaction. LegG does not efficiently use the UDP-sugar precursor
from the UDP-diNAcBac pathway, further reinforcing the specificity
for a GDP-activated sugar. Condensation of PEP with 2,4-diacetamido-2,4,6-trideoxymannose
proceeds through the synthase LegI, and activation of this sugar with
CTP is accomplished by LegF to yield CMP-legionaminic acid as the
final activated sugar for glycoconjugate biosynthesis. It is intriguing
that C. jejuni utilizes GDP-linked sugars for the
biosynthesis of CMP-legionaminic acid and UDP-linked sugars for the
biosynthesis of CMP-pseudaminic acid (used in flagellar O-linked glycosylation)
and UDP-diNAcBac in N-linked protein glycosylation. This apparent
dichotomy suggests that the alternative GDP-linked sugar pathway to
CMP-legionaminic acid may provide some advantage such as a means to
control flux through the different biosynthetic pathways.

Legionaminic
acid biosynthetic pathway in C. jejuni. The initial
steps in the pathway afford the GDP-GlcNAc intermediate
utilized in the formation of GDP-diNAcBac. The bifunctional GlmU*
was used as the acetyltransferase for the formation of GDP-GlcNAc
in these studies; however, the enzyme
responsible for this reaction in vivo has not been
characterized. The final three steps in the conversion of GDP-diNAcBac
into CMP-legionaminic acid are conducted by C. jejuni homologs of LegG, LegI, and LegF.

Pseudaminic Acid
Similar to legionaminic acid, pseudaminic
acid is a nine-carbon sialic acid analog that is found on flagellin
proteins in C. jejuni and H. pylori (Figure )., These glycoproteins
are essential for the proper assembly of functional flagella, and
consequently bacterial motility, making the pseudaminic acid biosynthesis
pathway a potentially important virulence target., Pseudaminic acid is an isomer of legionaminic acid that is biosynthesized
from UDP-GlcNAc through the intermediacy of UDP-2,4-diacetamido-2,4,6-trideoxy-β-l-altropyranose, which is a UDP-DATDH that has stereochemistry
at C4 and C5 inverted relative to that of UDP-diNAcBac (Figure ). The first enzyme in the pathway, PseB, is a member
of the short chain dehydrogenase/reductase (SDR) superfamily and lacks
the N-terminal transmembrane domain observed in the corresponding
enzyme from the C. jejuni pathway, PglF. PseB catalyzes both redox-dependent dehydratase
and C5 epimerase activities, to generate UDP-2-acetamido-2,6-dideoxy-β-l-arabino-4-hexulose through the action of
the catalytic triad of Ser (Thr), Tyr, and Lys in the active site., It is interesting to note that PseB utilizes NADP+ to
oxidize UDP-GlcNAc at C4 rather than NAD+, which is the
cofactor in the PglF dehydratase reaction on the diNAcBac pathway.,, PseB binds UDP-GlcNAc with a
much greater affinity (140-fold lower Km) with respect to the diNAcBac biosynthesis enzyme, PglF, resulting
in a higher catalytic efficiency (31-fold). Upon accumulation of the 4-keto sugar, PseB can also catalyze an
additional C5 epimerization to generate UDP-2-acetamido-4-keto-2,4,6-trideoxy-α-d-glucose, the UDP-4-keto sugar utilized in the diNAcBac pathway. This side reaction allows for cross talk between
the two pathways and potentially establishes another level of control
in the production of these sugars for the assembly of bacterial glycoconjugates,
with respect to their involvement in pathogenicity. Electron microscopy
and X-ray structural analysis of PseB from H. pylori revealed a hexameric assembly in the form of a compact doughnut-like
structure (Figure ). Each protomer is bilobal containing an N-terminal domain that binds
NADP+ and a smaller C-terminal lobe responsible for binding
UDP-GlcNAc. Site-directed mutagenesis of the active site lysine (K133M
and K133E) in PseB resulted in the attenuation of enzyme activity,
confirming the involvement of this residue in catalysis. Previous
crystallographic studies of the active site tyrosine in a homologous SDR also confirmed the importance of this
residue in catalysis. Further mutagenesis studies with the PseB homolog
in C. jejuni were confirmatory in nature, and Y135F
and K127A mutations resulted in severe attenuation of enzyme activity. The proposed PseB reaction mechanism can be
dissected into three distinct steps starting with oxidation at the
C4 position of UDP-GlcNAc through a catalytic base (Y141) and reduction
of NADP+. This is followed by abstraction of the C5 proton
(most likely by K133 acting as a general base), which results in the
elimination of water and formation of an enone intermediate. Finally,
the transfer of a hydride from NADPH to C6 and protonation of C5 on
the opposite face from the dehydration step result in the final UDP-4-keto
sugar with inversion of stereochemistry at C5 and regeneration of
NADP+. The keto sugar generated from PseB is utilized by
the aminotransferase PseC in a PLP-dependent reaction to form the
4-amino sugar product.,, The diNAcBac C. jejuni aminotransferase (PglE)
produces an isomer of this sugar that varies in the stereochemistry
at positions C4 and C5. Interestingly, PglE is a more efficient enzyme
with respect to PseC, showing a 44-fold increase in kcat/Km. The aminotransferases
from the pseudaminic and diNAcBac pathways display no cross talk with
their respective substrates, demonstrating the stereospecificity of
each enzyme. PseC forms a homodimer in the crystal structure with
each protomer containing two α/β/α domains (Figure A). This enzyme has
been crystallized in the apo form, as an internal aldimine with PLP,
and as an external aldimine between the UDP-sugar product and PLP. Interestingly, no significant conformational
changes are apparent among these PseC structures. The UDP-4-keto sugar
substrate binds to both protomers in the homodimer; however, few direct
interactions are observed between the sugar moiety and PseC, resulting
in the conclusion that flexibility at this position may be important
for catalysis. The PseC structure with an external aldimine between
PLP and the UDP-sugar product does not yet reveal how these aminotransferases
differentiate between UDP-4-keto substrates that vary in stereochemistry
only at position C5. However, a comparison between the external aldimine
structures of PseC and DesI from Streptomyces venezuelae led the authors to conclude that axial versus equatorial addition
of the amino group is the result of the different conformations in
which the substrates bind. A structure
of the C. jejuni PglE bound to either the substrate
or product UDP-sugar could address the question of how these enzymes
accomplish the transformations with complete substrate specificity.

H. pylori CMP-pseudaminic acid biosynthesis pathway
that proceeds through the intermediacy of UDP-2,4-diNAc-2,4,6-trideoxy-β-l-altropyranose.

(A) Ribbon representation of the H. pylori dehydratase
PseB biological hexamer unit with each protomer individually colored
for the sake of clarity. (B) Ribbon and space-filling representation
of the monomer bound to UDP-GlcNAc (gray) and NADP+ (brown)
(PDB entry 2GN6). (C) Major PseB active site interactions depicted as dashed lines
with NADP+ (left) and UDP-GFlcNAc (right).

(A) H. pylori aminotransferase PseC crystal
structure
(PDB entry 2FN6) represented in ribbon and space-filling format (left) with bound
PLP (gray). The major interactions between PLP and the PseC active
site are depicted with dashed lines (right). The biological unit is
a dimer with each subunit individually colored for the sake of clarity.
(B) C. jejuni UDP-sugar hydrolase PseG (PDB entry 3HBN) in ribbon and space-filling
format (left). The biological unit is a monomer consisting of two
domains that each include a Rossmann fold. PseG binds to UDP (gray)
between these two subunits. Major interactions of the PseG active
site with UDP are depicted as dashed lines (right).

The acetyltransferase PseH then acetylates the
4-amino sugar in
an AcCoA-dependent manner forming UDP-2,4-diacetamido-2,4,6-trideoxy-β-l-altropyranose. Although the PseH
crystal structure remains undetermined, sequence analysis reveals
that this enzyme belongs to the GCN5-related N-acetyltransferase
(GNAT) superfamily and bears no structural resemblance to their left-handed
β-helix counterparts in UDP-diNAcBac biosynthesis. Few bacterial acetyltransferases that adopt
a GNAT fold have been characterized; however, WecD from E.
coli is one example in which an apo structure and an AcCoA-bound
structure have been determined. It is
interesting that the Pse and diNAcBac pathway N-acetyltransferases
are completely divergent based upon their sequence and respective
folds, and it is likely that these biosynthetic pathways evolved independently.

The fourth step of the pathway relies on UDP hydrolysis by PseG,
resulting in 2,4-diacetamido-2,4,6-trideoxy-l-altropyranose.
Mechanistic studies of this enzyme established that the hydrolysis
of UDP-sugar proceeded in a concerted fashion with attack by a water
molecule at C1 and cleavage of the C–O anomeric bond. Additionally, apo and UDP-bound PseG crystal
structures allowed for the identification of His-17 as the general
base utilized for activating the nucleophilic water molecule. The C. jejuni UDP-sugar hydrolase
PseG is a monomer in solution and in the crystal structure, with the
enzyme exhibiting a GT-B fold that comprises two separate Rossmann
domains with UDP binding between these domains (Figure B). Although the UDP-sugar-bound PseG structure could not
be obtained, molecular dynamics studies suggested that the sugar conformation
adopts a 5S1 twist-boat conformation
in the enzyme active site.

The
PseI synthase catalyzes the condensation of PEP with 2,4-diacetamido-2,4,6-trideoxy-l-altrose, generating pseudaminic acid in a fashion similar
to that of C. jejuni LegI (the NeuB homolog) in the
legionaminic acid pathway. Analysis of
this enzyme revealed the requirement of a divalent metal ion for catalysis
and that the formation of pseudaminic acid proceeds through a tetrahedral
intermediate after attack of C3 from PEP on the open chain aldehyde
sugar. Following collapse of this intermediate, inorganic phosphate
is released followed by cyclization to the pyranose form of pseudaminic
acid. Although there is currently no known crystal structure of PseI,
the structure of the homologous enzyme from the sialic acid biosynthetic
pathway in N. meningitidis (NeuB) has been determined., This enzyme forms a homodimer with each protomer active site consisting
of an N-terminal TIM barrel domain that binds to the sugar substrate
in the open chain form.

The final step in the pathway, which
forms CMP-activated pseudaminic
acid, is catalyzed by PseF. This reaction
is dependent upon alkaline pH and Mg2+. In connection with
their studies on pseudaminic acid biosynthesis, Schoenhofen, Logan,
and co-workers also demonstrated that CMP-Pse can be produced by combining
all of the pathway enzymes in a “one-pot” biotransformation.
However, it was noted that the final CMP-Pse yield in this process
was severely reduced in the presence of all of the CMP-Pse enzymes
when compared to the yields of individual reactions in the pathway.
Further studies revealed that CMP-Pse acid was a potent inhibitor
of the first enzyme (PseB) in the pathway with a Ki(app) of 18.7 μM, allowing for negative feedback
inhibition of the biosynthesis of the final CMP-Pse product. A metabolomics approach, utilizing gene knockouts
and detection of nucleotide intermediates by capillary electrophoresis–electrospray
mass spectrometry, confirmed the direct involvement of the Pse proteins
in pseudaminic acid biosynthesis. Recently,
pseudaminic acid has been chemically synthesized from GlcNAc, which
will allow for more extensive studies for improving our understanding
of the relationship between this sugar and bacterial O-linked glycosylation
and pathogenicity. Although some of
the pathway enzymes described above have been examined in an in vitro biochemical setting, a comprehensive kinetic analysis
is still lacking. It is likely that such studies would aid in the
understanding of the interplay between substrates and enzymes and
will be important for developing these enzymes as potential antivirulence
targets.

The two best studied bacterial pathogens in terms of
flagellin
glycosylation with pseudaminic acid are C. jejuni and H. pylori; however, other species, including Clostridium botulinum and Aeromonas caviae, are also currently under investigation.− The C. jejuni flagellin protein, FlaA, is glycosylated
at 19 serine/threonine residues, with eight of these sites making
a major contribution to motility and autoagglutination of the bacteria., Disruption of the pseudaminic acid biosynthesis genes pseB and pseC resulted in nonglycosylated flagellin,
confirming their essentiality in the bacterial flagellum assembly.
Studies with pseF, pseG, and pseH mutants were also conducted in C. jejuni to verify their role in pseudaminic acid production, and in each case, disruption of these genes
resulted in nonmotile phenotypes because of the lack of flagella filaments
and hook structures. These mutated strains also exhibited a reduction
in adherence to and invasion of intestinal epithelial cell layers.
Recent studies have demonstrated that flagellin proteins can undergo
spontaneous antigenic variation through O-dimethylglyceric
acid derivatives of pseudaminic acid., Although
the homopolymeric tract-containing Cj1295 gene is responsible for
this modification, the question of why this occurs remains unanswered.
This type of structural diversity, which is observed in variant pilin
glycoproteins in N. gonorrhoeae,, may be important for evading the host immune response during colonization. H. pylori has also been extensively studied, resulting in
the identification of the FlaA and FlaB flagellin proteins that are
modified with pseudaminic acid., It was previously
found that flagellar motility is a requirement for colonization in
both in vitro and in vivo model
systems., Insertional mutagenesis led
to the discovery of three genes (HP0326A, HP0326B, and HP0178) that
are directly involved in the biosynthesis of pseudaminic acid. Disruption of each gene resulted in nonmotile
phenotypes, a decreased level of flagellin glycoprotein, and accumulation
of UDP-sugar nucleotide precursors. H. pylori is
also able to regulate pathogen motility through deglycosylation of
pseudaminic acid on FlaA through the HP0518 protein. The HP0518 knockout mutant exhibited hypermotility and
a superior ability to colonize C57BL/6 mice in vivo, confirming the role that H. pylori flagella play
in pathogen–host interactions. A comprehensive effort has led
to the identification of two flagellin proteins (FlaA and FlaB) that
play a role in pathogenesis; however, the glycome of H. pylori is still poorly understood. Recently, glycan metabolic labeling
coupled with mass spectrometry analysis has resulted in the identification
of 125 O-linked glycoproteins, many of which are linked to pathogenesis. Work still remains on the characterization
of these putative glycoproteins and the role glycosylation plays in H. pylori pathogenesis.

Conclusions
The
ever-increasing resistance toward present-day antibiotics has
resulted in the search for novel agents to address this challenge.
Bacterial protein glycosylation, using highly modified carbohydrates,
as it relates to pathogenicity may represent an important area of
future focus because of the absence of these unique building blocks
in eukaryotes and the decrease in pathogenicity when their biosynthesis
is disrupted. It has been fewer than 15 years since the discovery
that N-linked protein glycosylation, once thought to be exclusive
to eukaryotes, also occurs in bacteria. The biochemical characterization
of the C. jejuni pgl N-linked pathway has dramatically
improved our understanding of bacterial glycosylation at the molecular
level. Furthermore, the biosynthetic protein glycosylation machinery
is also present as an O-linked system for example in Neisseria spp. Although these pathways glycosylate diverse proteins with different
glycans, the one remaining constant is the reducing-end sugar diNAcBac.
This highly modified bacterial sugar is biosynthesized by a series
of three enzymes that are conserved in these pathogens. The presence
of diNAcBac has been shown to be of utmost importance to the formation
of the fully assembled glycan as disruption of the genes leading to
its biosynthesis in the native hosts results in the significant attenuation
of protein glycosylation. Importantly, some of the protein targets
of this pathway are known virulence factors that play a key role in
pathogenicity. For example, disrupting glycosylation of VirB10 from
the type IV secretion system in C. jejuni and PilE
from type IV pilin in Neisseria spp. leads to decreases
in competency and cell adherence, respectively. What is still unknown
is why bacteria utilize diNAcBac in N- and O-linked glycosylation
as well as in the O-antigen and core region of LPS. In contrast, eukaryotes
feature GlcNAc as the reducing-end sugar in N-linked glycosylation.
One possibility is that diNAcBac acts as a decoy to avoid detection
and hydrolysis in eukaryotic hosts. However, this is just one possibility,
and clearly, further investigation into understanding the precise
role of diNAcBac is warranted.

The importance of carbohydrates
such as diNAcBac and related stereoisomers
in bacterial pathogenicity has been further underscored by the characterization
of O-linked legionaminic and pseudaminic acid biosynthetic pathways.
These nine-carbon α-keto sugars are molecular mimics of sialic
acid, a carbohydrate found predominately on the exterior of mammalian
cells that is essential for cell–cell communication and adhesion.
CMP-legionaminic acid is produced from nucleotide-activated (UDP or
GDP) diNAcBac by the actions of three enzymes that hydrolyze the nucleotide
diphosphate, invert the stereochemistry at the C2 position, and condense
a three-carbon unit from PEP onto the sugar. The final enzymatic step
activates legionaminic acid through CTP, forming the CMP-sugar. Although
experimental evidence has pointed to the presence of legionaminic
acid in flagella and the O-antigen of LPS, in vivo validation of the essentiality of the sugar is still lacking. Future
studies are needed to elucidate the role that legionaminic acid plays
in the assembly of these virulence factors and in bacterial pathogenicity.
Pseudaminic acid is produced by a series of enzymes, which are homologous
to those in the legionaminic acid pathway and utilize the DATDH isomer
2,4-diacetamido-2,4,6-trideoxy-l-altropyranose as an intermediate.
Pseudaminic acid is found on multiple sites in flagellar proteins,
and disruption of the genes responsible for the biosynthesis of this
sugar has adverse effects on motility, adherence, and invasion. Further
investigation into the glycome of these pathogenic bacteria in the
context of pseudaminic acid glycosylation is still necessary.

Although each of the diNAcBac-related pathways utilizes similar
starting substrates, the question of how pathogenic bacteria elicit
control over these systems and under what circumstances remains. Similarly,
there appears to be a high level of cross talk between some of the
homologous enzymes that act on different substrates responsible for
pathogenicity. Is this an evolutionary remnant that is controlled
by segregation of pathways in the host organisms, or is this an additional
mechanism whereby bacteria can elicit a level of control based upon
selective pressures in the environment? In conclusion, great strides
have been made in understanding the biosynthesis of unique, bacterial
sugars in the context of pathogenicity. A tremendous amount of work
still remains to validate the pathway enzymes of bacterial sugars
as true antivirulence targets; however, we are ever closer to understanding
the biological context of protein glycosylation in relationship to
pathogenicity.

The authors declare no
competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
We thank Dr. Angelyn
Larkin, Dr. Meredith Hartley, and Austin
Travis for critical reading of the manuscript.

Abbreviations
AcCoAacetyl-coenzyme A

AUCanalytical ultracentrifugation

CMPcytidine monophosphate

CTPcytidine triphosphate

DATDH2,4-diacetamido-2,4,6-trideoxy-α-d-hexose

DiNAcBacN,N′-diacetylbacillosamine

ESI-MSelectrospray
ionization mass spectrometry

Galgalactose

GalNAcN-acetylgalactosamine

GDPguanosine diphosphate

Glcglucose

GlcNAcN-acetylglucosamine

legionaminic acid5,7-diacetamido-3,5,7,9-tetradeoxy-d-glycero-d-galacto-nonulosonic acid

GNATGCN5-related N-acetyltransferase

LPSlipopolysaccharide

N-linkedasparagine-linked

NAD+nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide

NADP+nicotinamide
adenine dinucleotide phosphate

NMRnuclear magnetic resonance

NOEnuclear Overhauser effect

O-linkedserine- or threonine-linked

OMVouter membrane
vesicle

PDBProtein
Data Bank

PEPphosphoenolpyruvate

Pglprotein glycosylation

PglB-ATDacetyltransferase
domain of PglB

PglB-PGTDphosphoglycosyltransferase domain of PglB

Pse or pseudaminic acid5,7-diacetamido-3,5,7,9-tetradeoxy-l-glycero-l-manno-nonulosonic acid

PLPpyridoxal 5′-phosphate

PMPpyridoxamine 5′-phosphate

SDRshort chain dehydrogenase/reductase

sialic acidN-acetylneuraminic acid

TFSStype IV secretion system

UDPuridine diphosphate

UDP-4-aminoUDP-2-acetamido-4-amino-2,4,6-trideoxy-α-d-glucose

UDP-4-ketoUDP-2-acetamido-4-keto-2,4,6-trideoxy-α-d-glucose

UDP-diNAcBacUDP-N,N′-diacetylbacillosamine or UDP-2,4-diacetamido-2,4,6-trideoxy-α-d-glucose

Und-Pundecaprenyl phosphate

Und-PPundecaprenyl diphosphate.

