Proteome
diversity is regulated
in part through the alternative splicing of exons and introns within
large precursor mRNA (pre-mRNA) transcripts. The choice of splice-sites
critical for cellular function occurs in the spliceosome, a macromolecular
assembly of five snRNPs (U1–6) and over 100 protein constituents., In the latter category, the SR proteins are essential factors that
guide assembly of spliceosomal components from early steps involving
splice-site selection to late steps involving the transesterification
reactions. SR proteins constitute a group of 12 proteins that are
so named owing to a C-terminal domain rich in arginine–serine
dipeptide repeats (RS domain). The SRPK
family of protein kinases phosphorylates these RS domains at numerous
sites, a process that enhances interactions with an SR-specific transporter
(TRN-SR) and directs SR proteins from the cytoplasm to the nucleus
where they can engage the splicing machinery., SRPKs
are also associated physically with the spliceosome so they are likely
to serve additional, SR-directed functions in the nucleus. Phosphorylation has been shown to regulate interactions
of SR proteins with early components of the spliceosome including
U1 and U2AF35 that bind near the 5′ and 3′
ends of exon–intron pairs., Varying levels
of bulk phosphorylation cause changes in gene splicing suggesting
that phosphorylation status is linked not only to subcellular localization
but also to splice-site choice.− Despite this precedence, there
has been a lack of detail on the connection between region-specific
phosphorylation in SR proteins and splicing outcomes. This problem
is deeply confounded by the inherent complexity of the RS domains
in SR proteins. Both the sizes (∼50–300 residues) and
arginine–serine contents of RS domains differ significantly,
raising the question of how SRPKs recognize and process such a diverse
family of SR proteins.

Much of what we know about SR protein
phosphorylation has come
from studies on SRPK1 and its prototype SR protein substrate SRSF1
(aka ASF/SF2). SRSF1 contains two RNA binding motifs [RRMs] that are
essential for the recognition of pre-mRNA. The RS domain of SRSF1
(∼50 residues) contains many arginine–serine dipeptides
clustered in both short and long repeats (Figure A). Footprinting experiments indicate that SRPK1 rapidly phosphorylates
the N-terminal serines in the RS domain (RS1) using a directional
(C-to-N-terminal) mechanism in which serines are sequentially fed
from a docking groove to the active site− (Figure B). Immunocytochemical experiments indicate that phosphorylation
of these arginine–serine dipeptides is essential for the SRPK1-dependent
transport of SRSF1 to the nucleus. Thus,
both in vitro and cell-based analyses define the RS1 segment as both
the critical consensus site for SRPK1 phosphorylation and the functional
region for kinase-directed SRSF1 transport. Although SRPK1 rapidly
phosphorylates RS1, its primary site, it can also modify the shorter
arginine–serine dipeptide repeats in RS2 but only at a very
slow rate. Detailed kinetic experiments
indicate that the rate of RS2 phosphorylation is more than 100-fold
slower than that for RS1. In addition
to the difficulty of this C-terminal phosphorylation reaction, there
is currently no data linking SRPK1-dependent phosphorylation of RS2
with a biological function. The CLK family of nuclear kinases is capable
of efficiently phosphorylating RS2, thereby altering the subnuclear
localization of SRSF1. However, for cytoplasmic–nuclear
localization, the current data suggest that serines in RS2 may serve
only a spectator function with regard to SRPK1 phosphorylation activity.

C-terminal
residues in the RS domain increase SRSF1 turnover. (A)
Wild-type and mutant forms of the SR protein SRSF1. Residues 204–248
of the RS domain are shown, and the RRMs (RRM1 and RRM2) are omitted.
(B) Structure of SRPK1 in complex with SRSF1. The two lobes of the
kinase domain [subdomains I–VI (N-lobe) and VII–XI (C-lobe)]
are shown in gray. SRPK1 lacks its N-terminus (dotted red line) and
most of the SID with the exception of helix Sα1 (red). SRSF1
was crystallized without RRM1 and residues 220–248 (RS2). Disordered
residues 211–219 (part of RS1) and 197–200 (linker between
RRM2 and RS domain) are shown as dotted green lines. Residues 201–210
(N-terminus of RS1) are visible in the docking groove in the C-lobe
of the kinase domain. (C) Plot of initial velocity versus SRSF1 (●),
SR(1–226) (○), SR(ΔRS2) (▲), SR(RA1) (△),
SR(RA2) (■), SR(RA12) (□). Data fits are included in
Table . (D) Bar graph showing turnover numbers
(kcat) for each substrate.

Steady-State Kinetic Parameters for
Wild-Type and Mutant Forms of SRSF1
substrate	enzyme	kcat (s–1)	KSR (nM)	KATP (μM)	
SRSF1	SRPK1	1.0 ± 0.05	110 ± 20	11 ± 2	
SR(1–226)	SRPK1	0.4 ± 0.04	70 ± 17	 	
SR(ΔRS2)	SRPK1	0.30 ± 0.01	25 ± 5	16 ± 2	
SR(ΔRS2)	SRPK1(ΔN)	0.10 ± 0.01	110 ± 39	 	
SR(ΔRS2)	SRPK1(ΔS)	0.13 ± 0.01	30 ± 13	9 ± 3	
SR(RA1)	SRPK1	0.74 ± 0.06	140 ± 40	 	
SR(RA2)	SRPK1	0.54 ± 0.06	180 ± 70	 	
SR(RA12)	SRPK1	0.33 ± 0.02	300 ± 70	 	
SRPKs represent a highly
distinctive family of protein kinases
based on unique sequence elements outside the conserved kinase domain.
All SRPKs possess an N-terminal extension and a large spacer insert
domain (SID) that bifurcates the kinase domain near the interface
between the N- and C-lobes (Figure B). The
SID is similar in size to the kinase domain (∼270 aa) and plays
an essential role in regulating cytoplasmic–nuclear transport
of SRPK1. Although SRPK1 can be found both in the cytoplasm and in
the nucleus, removal of the SID causes large movements of the kinase
to the nucleus. Epidermal growth factor
(EGF) signaling has been shown to regulate this translocation through
Akt-induced changes in the binding of several chaperones to the SID., Although the SID is mostly unfolded, a small region at the N-terminal
edge adopts a helical conformation (Sα1) that interacts with
the ATP-binding N-lobe of the kinase domain (Figure B). Some recent studies now suggest that this helix may interact
with the N-terminus in SRPK1. The SID has been shown to protect backbone
amides in the N-terminus from solvent deuterium exchange suggestive
of a physical interaction. Furthermore,
it has been shown that this coupling of sequences in the N-terminus
and SID is important for SRPK1 activity regulation. Deletion analyses
indicate that helix Sα1 and the N-terminus work cooperatively
to facilitate rapid SRSF1 phosphorylation through an increase in ADP
release (10-fold), the rate-limiting step for RS domain phosphorylation. Overall, these two regions, external to the
kinase domain and separated in primary structure, act as a nucleotide
release factor [NRF] that up-regulates SRSF1 phosphorylation.

Despite many advances in understanding the mechanism of SR protein
phosphorylation, very little is known about how these lengthy RS domains
interact with SRPKs. The current X-ray structure for SRPK1 and its
substrate SRSF1 lacks electron density for RS1 residues in the active
site and contains no RS2 sequences (Figure B). Only a short 10-residue stretch of RS1 (residues 201–210)
is visible in a docking groove in the large C-lobe of the kinase domain.
Whether residues outside RS1 make contacts with the kinase and impact
SR protein phosphorylation is not known. To address this, we studied
the effects of deletion and block mutations on the kinetic mechanism
of RS1 phosphorylation. Using rapid quench flow and viscosometric
experiments, we found that RS2 enhances SRSF1 phosphorylation by up-regulating
ADP dissociation rates. The phosphorylation of an SRSF1 deletion construct
lacking RS2 is increased by the addition of an RS2 peptide, suggesting
that the C-terminal end of the RS domain binds outside the active
site. RS2-dependent activation of substrate phosphorylation occurs
only in the presence of a functioning NRF. The combined data indicate
that the RS2 segment is not a passive element in the RS domain as
once thought but rather plays an active role in controlling SR protein
phosphorylation. Although the NRF asserts a basal level of activation
through enhancements in ADP release, full activation is achieved through
an NRF–RS2 connection. These studies help clarify how regions
in the RS domain that are not part of the immediate consensus sequence
and not characterized by structural analyses interact with SRPK1.
These new findings raise the possibility that other SR proteins with
much larger and more diverse RS domains could also interact with the
NRF of SRPK1 regulating consensus arginine–serine phosphorylation
sites.

Material and Methods
Materials
Adenosine triphosphate
(ATP), 3-(N-morpholino)propanesulfonic acid (Mops),
tris(hydroxymethyl)
aminomethane (Tris), MgCl2, NaCl, EDTA, glycerol, sucrose,
acetic acid, Phenix imaging film, BSA, Whatman P81 grade filter paper,
and liquid scintillant were obtained from Fisher Scientific. [γ-32P]ATP was obtained from NEN Products, a division of PerkinElmer
Life Sciences.

Expression and Purification of Recombinant
Proteins
All wild-type and deletion forms of SRPK1 were expressed
from a pRSETb
vector containing a 6xHis Tag at the N terminus. SRPK1(ΔN), SRPK1(ΔS), SRPK1(ΔSINT), and SRPK1(ΔSα1) were made by deleting residues 1–73,
224–492, 248–483, and 224–249, respectively,
and were previously described., SRSF1 was expressed
from a pET19b vector containing a 10xHis Tag at the N terminus. All charge-to-alanine mutations in SRSF1 were
generated by sequential polymerase chain reactions using the QuikChange
mutagenesis kit and relevant primers (Stratagene, La Jolla, CA) and
were previously described. SR(ΔRS2)
was expressed in pET28a vector containing a C-terminal His tag and
was previously described. The plasmids
for SRSF1 and SRPK1 were transformed into the BL21 (DE3) Escherichia
coli strain, and the cells were then grown at 37 °C
in LB broth supplemented with 100 mg/mL ampicillin or 50 mg/mL kanamycin
depending on the type of plasmid vector. Protein expression was induced
with 0.4 mM IPTG at room temperature for 5 h for SRSF1 and 12 h for
SRPK constructs. All SRPK1 constructs were purified by Ni-resin affinity
chromatography using a published procedure. SRSF1 was refolded and purified using a previously published protocol.

Phosphorylation Reactions
The phosphorylation
of wild-type
and mutant forms of SRSF1 by wild-type and mutant forms of SRPK1 were
carried out in the presence of 100 mM Mops (pH 7.4), 10 mM free Mg2+, and 5 mg/mL of BSA at 23 °C according to previously
published procedures. All reactions were
initiated with the addition of enzyme and were carried out in a total
reaction volume of 10 μL and quenched with 10 μL of SDS-PAGE
loading buffer. Competition reactions were carried out using fixed
amounts of SR(ΔRS2) or SRSF1 (50 nM) as a substrate and varying
concentrations of the competitor SR(RS2). Phosphorylated SR protein
was separated from unreacted [γ-32P]ATP by loading
the quenched reaction on an SDS-PAGE gel (16%) and running at 170
V for 1 h. Protein bands corresponding to phosphorylated SR protein
were cut from the dried SDS-PAGE gel and quantitated on the 32P channel in liquid scintillant. The total amount of phosphoproduct
was then determined by considering the specific activity (cpm) of
the reaction mixture and the background retention of [γ-32P]ATP in the absence of enzyme.

Rapid Quench Flow Experiments
Phosphorylation of SRSF1
and SR(ΔRS2) by SRPK1 was monitored using a KinTek Corporation
model RGF-3 quench flow apparatus. The apparatus consists of three
syringes driven by a stepping motor. Typical experiments were performed
by mixing equal volumes of the SRPK1–SRSF1 complex in one reaction
loop and 32P-ATP (5000–15000 cpm/pmol) in the second
reaction loop in 100 mM Mops (pH 7.4), 10 mM free Mg2+,
and 5 mg/mL BSA. All enzyme and ligand concentrations are those in
the mixing chamber unless otherwise noted. The reactions were quenched
with 30% acetic acid in the third syringe, and phosphorylated SRSF1
was separated from unreacted ATP by a filter-binding assay where a
portion of each quenched reaction (50 μL) was spotted onto a
phosphocellulose filter disk and was washed three times with 0.5%
phosphoric acid. The filter disks were
rinsed with acetone, dried, and counted on the 32P channel
in liquid scintillant. The total amount of phosphate incorporated
into the substrate was then determined as described above. Full retention
of the phosphorylated product on the filters was confirmed by running
quenched reaction samples on SDS-PAGE and counting the bands.

Viscosity
Experiments
SR(ΔRS2) phosphorylation
was monitored using the filter binding assay as described above in
the presence of 0–30% sucrose. The relative solvent viscosity
(ηrel) of the buffer (100 mM Mops, pH 7.4) containing
0–30% sucrose was measured using an Ostwald viscometer and
a previously published protocol. Values
of 1.44, 1.83, 2.32, and 3.43 for ηrel were measured
for buffers containing 10%, 20%, 25%, and 30% sucrose at 23 °C,
respectively.

Data Analysis
The amount of phosphoproduct
was determined
from the specific activity of 32P-ATP and the cpm of excised
bands corrected for background. The initial velocity data were fit
to the Michaelis–Menten equation to obtain Km and Vmax. The Vmax values were converted to kcat using the total enzyme concentration determined from a Bradford
assay (kcat = Vmax/Etot). In pre-steady-state kinetic experiments,
the reaction product ([P]) as a function of time was fit to eq :where α, kb, kL, and Eo are the
amplitude of the “burst” phase, the rate constant
for the “burst” phase, the rate constant for the linear
phase, and the total enzyme concentration, respectively. The dissociation
constant (KI) for SR(RS2) to SRPK1 using
fixed amounts of SRSF1 was measured using eq :where vi/vo is the relative
initial velocity (ratio of v in the presence and
absence of inhibitor), KSR is the Km for SRSF1, and
[I] is the SR(RS2) concentration. The activation constant (KA) for SR(RS2) to SRPK1 using fixed amounts
of SR(ΔRS2) ([S]) was determined using eq :whereγ is the change in kcat for SR(ΔRS2) phosphorylation in the presence
of SR(RS2) in the activation site, KSR is the Km for SR(ΔRS2), and [A]
is the concentration of SR(RS2).

Results
C-Terminal
Sequences in the RS Domain Regulate SRSF1 Turnover
Although
SRPK1 rapidly phosphorylates a patch of N-terminal serines
(RS1) in SRSF1 (Figure A), very little is
known about how or whether the full RS domain interacts with the kinase.
Large portions of the RS domain are not part of the cocrystal or have
poor electron density (Figure B). To determine
whether residues in the RS2 segment play any role in controlling RS1
phosphorylation by SRPK1, we studied the steady-state kinetic properties
of five forms of SRSF1 that contain modifications to RS2 (Figure A). All mutants displayed reduced maximal velocities
relative to the wild-type SR protein (Figure C). Deletions in the RS2 segment [SR(ΔRS2) and SR(1–226)]
resulted in about 2–3-fold reductions in kcat compared with that for the wild-type substrate (Figure D and Table ). Although
the substrate Km (KSR) was mostly unaffected for SR(1–226), that for SR(ΔRS2)
showed a 4-fold decrease (Table ). Removal
of RS2 sequences does not affect the apparent affinity of ATP (Table ). Based on MALDI-TOF analyses, both deletion mutants
displayed reductions in total phosphoryl content that are consistent
with the reduced numbers of serines (Suppl. Figure S1, ). To evaluate whether
the reductions in kcat are due to electrostatic
residues, we made three arginine-to-alanine block mutations in RS2.
Removing all arginines in SR(RA12) leads to a 3-fold reduction in kcat similar to that for SR(ΔRS2) suggesting
that charges in RS2 are important for controlling substrate turnover
(Figure D and Table ). Partial removal of arginines in SR(RA1) and SR(RA2) leads to intermediate
effects on kcat suggesting that numerous
positive charges throughout RS2 are associated with regulating substrate
turnover. The phosphoryl contents of the arginine-to-alanine mutants
were similar to that for SRSF1 (Suppl. Figure S1, ). Overall, the kinetic data indicate
that residues outside RS1 control the maximum rate of SRSF1 phosphorylation.

RS2 Up-Regulates SRSF1 Phosphorylation by Accelerating ADP Release
In a prior study, we showed that SRSF1 phosphorylation by SRPK1
is limited by ADP release. We also showed
that the RRMs play no role in controlling this rate-limiting step
suggesting that any potential regulation through the substrate is
likely to come from within the RS domain. To determine whether sequences outside RS1 affect product release,
we initially assessed the role of viscosogenic agents on substrate
phosphorylation.,, For these studies, we focused on SR(ΔRS2) since it displayed
the largest decrease in kcat (Figure D). In plots of initial velocity versus ATP using
saturating SR(ΔRS2), we found that increasing glycerol leads
to decreases in kcat and kcat/KATP (Figure A). The data are interpreted using Scheme  where k1 is the ATP
association step, k2 is the viscosity-independent
phosphoryl transfer step, and k3 is the
viscosity-dependent, net rate constant for product release. A slope
of one is obtained in plots of relative kcat versus relative solvent viscosity implying that k2 is at least 3 s–1 and is not rate-limiting
for this parameter (Figure B and Table ). In contrast, this maximum slope implies that k3 is fully rate-limiting for kcat. We observed a slope close to one for kcat/KATP indicating that k1 limits this kinetic parameter (Figure B and Table ). To further
support these findings, we performed pre-steady-state kinetic experiments
and showed that SR(ΔRS2) phosphorylation observes “burst”
kinetics similar to that for the wild-type substrate and consistent
with a fast, observed rate of phosphoryl transfer (kb ≈ 10–20 s–1) in the
active site (Figure C). Although the observed
errors preclude a detailed comparison, the data show definitively
that the phosphoryl transfer step is not rate-limiting for SRSF1 and
SR(ΔRS2). In contrast to phosphoryl transfer, the linear phase
rate constant (kL) for SRSF1 phosphorylation
is very well-defined and is 3-fold faster than that for SR(ΔRS2)
in keeping with the steady-state kinetic results (Table ). Overall, these data imply that the decline in kcat for SR(ΔRS2) is not the result of slow phosphoryl
transfer but is rather consistent with a reduction in the release
rate for one or both of the reaction products [ADP or phospho-SR(ΔRS2)].

Values of Individual Steps in Schemes  and  for SRSF1 and SR(ΔRS2)
Phosphorylation Using Viscosity and CATTRAP Methods
substrate	method	k1 (mM–1 s–1)	k2 (s–1)	k3 (s–1)	koff (s–1)	
SRSF1	viscosity	91	≥10	1.0		
SRSF1	CATTRAP		30	1.0	1.1	
SR(ΔRS2)	viscosity	19	≥3	0.3		
SR(ΔRS2)	CATTRAP		18	0.3	0.3	
Data were taken from ref ().

Not determined.

RS2 controls the release rate for ADP. (A) Glycerol effects
on
SR(ΔRS2) phosphorylation. Plots of initial velocity versus ATP
at 0% (●), 10% (○), 25% (▲), and 30% (△)
sucrose. (B) Relative kcat and kcat/KATP (ratios
in the absence and presence of sucrose) versus relative solvent viscosity
for the data in panel A. Slopes of 1.0 and 1.2 are obtained for relative kcat and kcat/KATP. Dotted lines represent theoretical slope
values of 0 and 1. (C) Pre-steady-state kinetic transients for SR(ΔRS2)
(●) and SRSF1 (▲) phosphorylation. SRPK1 (0.25 μM)
is mixed with SR protein (0.5 μM) and ATP (600 μM) in
the rapid quench flow machine. The data are fit to eq  to obtain values of 0.23 ± 0.02 μM, 12 ±
3 s–1, and 0.28 ± 0.01 s–1 for α, kb, and kL, respectively, for SR(ΔRS2) and values of 0.22
± 0.03 μM, 19 ± 8 s–1, and 1.0 ±
0.01 s–1 for α, kb, and kL, respectively, for SRSF1. (D)
CATTRAP experiment. SRPK1 is preincubated with
SR(ΔRS2) in the absence (●) and presence (▲) of
120 μM ADP in one syringe (60 μM in reaction) of the rapid
quench machine and then mixed with ATP (600 μM in reaction)
to start the reaction. The data in panel D are simulated using DynaFit and the mechanism in Scheme  to obtain values of 0.3 s–1, 18 s–1, and 0.3 s–1 for koff, k2, and k3, respectively (solid lines). A value of 19 mM–1 s–1 for the k1 was
used for both simulations. Additional simulations in the presence
of ADP are displayed in which koff is
increased to values of 0.37 s–1 (···),
0.45 s–1 (−–−), and 0.6 s–1 (— - —).

To determine whether the rate-limiting, viscosity-dependent
step
for SR(ΔRS2) phosphorylation is ADP release, we employed catalytic
trapping (CATTRAP) methods., In the CATTRAP experiment, SRPK1 is pre-equilibrated
with saturating ADP and SR(ΔRS2) and then mixed with excess
ATP in the rapid quench flow machine (Scheme ). We found that the “burst” phase disappeared in the
presence of ADP and was replaced by a small lag prior to the linear,
steady-state phase (Figure D). The observed
rate of the linear phase in the absence and presence of ADP is the
same implying that sufficient ATP is used to trap the kinase and prevent
ADP rebinding. The data were initially simulated in the absence of
ADP using Scheme  and the program DynaFit to obtain rate constants for the phosphoryl
transfer step (k2) of 18 s–1 and net product release (k3) of 0.3
s–1 (Figure D and Table ). For these simulations, we used kcat/KATP as the association
rate constant for ATP (k1) based on the
viscosity data. In the presence of ADP pre-equilibration, the data
were simulated with these fixed rate constants (k1, k2, and k3) to obtain the dissociation rate constant for ADP (koff) of 0.3 s–1 (Figure D and Table ). We could
show in comparative simulations that the CATTRAP method is highly sensitive to very small differences in koff. In Figure D, we
present additional simulations where koff is elevated by 20–100%. The data become progressively sigmoidal
as koff increases and even at 0.37 s–1 poorly simulate the observed kinetic transient. These
findings show that the rate-limiting step for SR(ΔRS2) turnover
is ADP rather than pSRSF1 release and that the RS2 segment controls
this step. Furthermore, these experiments reveal that RS2 plays a
positive role in regulating the rate-limiting step for RS1 phosphorylation.

RS2 Activates SRPK1 by Binding Outside the Active Site
Owing
to its impact on catalysis, we speculated that the RS2 segment
might bind somewhere outside the active site providing a mechanism
for SRSF1 phosphorylation enhancement. To address this possibility,
we expressed a C-terminal His-tagged form of the substrate that contains
only RS2 residues [SR(RS2)] (Figure A). We
showed that SR(RS2) is a substrate for SRPK1 displaying a KSR of 340 nM, a value about 3-fold higher than
that for the full-length substrate (Figure B). To estimate its true affinity, we performed a competition experiment
in which increasing amounts of SR(RS2) are added to SRPK1 in the presence
of a fixed amount of full-length SRSF1. Owing to differences in substrate sizes, SRSF1 phosphorylation can
be monitored independently by SDS-PAGE and SR(RS2) can then be treated
as a reversible inhibitor in this experiment.,, As expected, increasing SR(RS2) decreased
the relative initial velocity for SRSF1 phosphorylation consistent
with active-site-directed inhibition (Figure C). The data were fit to eq  using the KSR for SRSF1 to obtain a KI of 200 nM for SR(RS2). In prior experiments, we showed that
the KI value for SRSF1 is about 100 nM. These findings indicate that SR(RS2) is a substrate
for SRPK1 although it displays somewhat weaker affinity for the active
site of SRPK1 compared with SRSF1.

RS2 activates SRPK1 by binding outside
the active site. (A) SRSF1
constructs. (B) SR(RS2) is a substrate for SRPK1. Initial velocity
data for SR(RS2) phosphorylation are collected using 5 μM ATP
and fit to KSR and kcat values of 340 ± 100 nM and 0.9 ± 0.1 min–1. (C) Competition with SR(RS2). The relative initial
velocities for the phosphorylation of 50 nM SRSF1 (▲) or SR(ΔRS2)
(●) are monitored using 5 μM ATP and varying amounts
of SR(RS2) (0–2000 nM). For SRSF1, the data are fit to eq  to obtain a KI of 200
± 20 nM for SR(RS2) using a fixed value for KSR of 110 nM (Table ). For SR(ΔRS2)
phosphorylation, the data are fit to eq  to
obtain KA of 330 ± 70 nM, KI of 320 ± 90 nM, and γ of 5 ±
0.8 for SR(RS2) using a fixed value for KSR (25 nM). (D) Initial velocity kinetics for SR(ΔRS2) phosphorylation
in the absence (▲) and presence (●) of 200 nM SR(RS2).
Values for kcat and KSR are 0.33 ± 0.05 s–1 and 30 ±
9 nM in the absence and 1.3 ± 0.21 s–1 and
28 ± 11 nM in the presence of SR(RS2) and 100 μM ATP.

When the competition experiment
was performed using SR(ΔRS2)
as the fixed substrate rather than the full-length SRSF1, a significant
departure in the inhibition curve was detected. Surprisingly, catalytic
activation was observed at lower SR(RS2) concentrations (50–300
nM) prior to inhibition at higher concentrations (Figure C). These results are consistent with a two-site
mechanism in which one molecule of SR(RS2) freely binds outside the
active site causing activation of SR(ΔRS2) phosphorylation and
a second molecule binds in the active site causing inhibition (Scheme ). To ensure that activation occurs by discretely
enhancing turnover, we showed that a low, fixed amount of SR(RS2)
(200 nM) increased kcat (∼4-fold)
without affecting KSR (Figure D). Thus, adding the RS2 fragment back to the phosphorylation
reaction with SR(ΔRS2) raises kcat to a level similar to that for the full-length SR protein (Table ). This not only supports the activation data in
Figure C but also demonstrates that SR(RS2)
and SR(ΔRS2) do not influence each other’s binding. Using
the mechanism in Scheme  and eq , we can quantitatively assess both the activation and inhibition
of SR(ΔRS2) phosphorylation by RS2 (Figure C). By inserting KSR for SR(219)
(Table ) into eq ,
we can establish the binding constant for SR(RS2) to the activating
(KA = 330 nM) and inhibitory sites (KI = 320 nM). Although SR(RS2) binds equivalently
to both sites, strong activation is observed at low concentrations
since the active site is occupied by SR(ΔRS2) whereas the activating
site is free using this truncated substrate. Finally, this analytical
solution to the data also implies that SR(RS2) increases kcat by about 5-fold (γ), a value in line with the
observed effects in plots of velocity versus substrate (Figure D). Overall, these data indicate that in addition
to binding in the active site, RS2 can bind outside the active site
enhancing substrate turnover.

RS2-Dependent Activation
Is Mediated through Both the N-Terminus
and SID
To establish whether sequences inside or outside
the kinase domain are important for RS2-dependent activation, we investigated
how SR(RS2) affects the phosphorylation of SR(ΔRS2) using several
truncated forms of SRPK1. In these studies, we expressed and purified
two kinase versions that lack either the N-terminus [SRPK1(ΔN)]
or the SID [SRPK1(ΔS)] (Figure A). While
SR(RS2) is a substrate for both kinases, the binding affinity is reduced
compared with the wild-type kinase since we were unable to saturate
the kinases in plots of initial velocity versus substrate (Figure B). In comparison, KSR for SR(ΔRS2) to SRPK1(ΔS) was unaffected and only 4-fold
higher for SRPK1(ΔN) compared with the wild-type kinase (Table ). Using fixed amounts of SR(ΔRS2), we found
that the addition of SR(RS2) to SRPK1(ΔN) or SRPK1(ΔS),
unlike the wild-type kinase, caused no activation of SR(ΔRS2)
phosphorylation (Figure C). SR(RS2) caused
some inhibition at higher concentrations using SRPK1(ΔS) whereas
none was observed with SRPK1(ΔN) within the detection limits
of the experiment. Using KSR for SR(ΔRS2)
(Table ) and eq  we
can estimate a KI of 1300 nM for SR(RS2)
indicating that removal of the entire SID weakens affinity in the
active site. Overall, these findings suggest that sequences in both
the SID and the N-terminus are critical for RS2-dependent enhancements
in SRSF1 turnover.

Nucleotide release sequences regulate RS2-dependent activation
of SRPK1. (A) SRPK1 deletion constructs. Helix Sα1 in the SID
is shown in striped red. (B) SR(RS2) is a substrate for SRPK1(ΔN)
(▲) and SRPK1(ΔS) (●). Initial velocity data are
collected using 5 μM ATP and fit to a kcat/KSR value of 0.66 ± 0.05
μM–1 min–1 for SRPK1(ΔS)
and 0.25 ± 0.07 μM–1min–1 for SRPK1(ΔN). (C) Competition data. The relative initial
velocities for SR(ΔRS2) phosphorylation using SRPK1(ΔS)
(▲) and SRPK1(ΔN) (●) are plotted as a function
of SR(RS2). The data for SRPK1(ΔS) were fit to eq  using a KSR of 110 nM to obtain
a KI of 1300 ± 100 nM. (D–F)
Plots of initial velocity for SR(ΔRS2) phosphorylation using
SRPK1(ΔN) (▲,△), SRPK1(ΔS) (●,○),
SRPK1(ΔSINT) (■,□), and SRPK1(ΔSα1)
(▼,▽) in the absence (filled symbols) and presence (open
symbols) of 200 nM SR(RS2). The kinetic parameters are displayed in
Table 

Steady-State Kinetic Parameters for
SR(ΔRS2) Phosphorylation in the Absence and Presence of SR(RS2)
enzyme	[SR(RS2)] (nM)	kcat (s–1)	KSR (nM)	
SRPK1	0	0.33 ± 0.04	30 ± 9	
SRPK1	200	1.4 ± 0.20	28 ± 11	
SRPK1(ΔN)	0	0.07 ± 0.02	63 ± 16	
SRPK1(ΔN)	200	0.06 ± 0.01	72 ± 19	
SRPK1(ΔS)	0	0.15 ± 0.02	26 ± 12	
SRPK1(ΔS)	200	0.12 ± 0.01	25 ± 8	
SRPK1(ΔSINT)	0	0.40 ± 0.04	57 ± 20	
SRPK1(ΔSINT)	200	1.5 ± 0.13	66 ± 13	
SRPK1(ΔSα1)	0	0.40 ± 0.04	48 ± 10	
SRPK1(ΔSα1)	200	0.36 ± 0.03	55 ± 12	
Nucleotide Release Factor
Enables RS2-Dependent Activation
In a previous study, we
showed that the N-terminus and a helix
(Sα1) at the N-terminal edge of the SID (Figure B) act together as a nucleotide release factor [NRF] enhancing
SR protein phosphorylation by causing a 10-fold increase in the ADP
dissociation rate. To evaluate whether
the RS2 segment functions as a molecular trigger for activation through
the NRF or possibly through other sequences in the SID, we investigated
SR(RS2)-dependent changes in the phosphorylation of SR(ΔRS2)
using several truncated forms of SRPK1 (Figure A). We initially showed that SR(RS2) did not increase the maximal
velocity of SRPK1(ΔN) or SRPK1(ΔS) consistent with the
idea that RS2 enhances catalysis through sequences in the N-terminus
and SID (Figure D and Table ). A small level of inhibition was observed for SRPK1(ΔN)
suggesting that some SR(RS2) is occupying the active site at these
levels. We next wished to assess whether sequences in the SID that
are not part of helix Sα1 play a role in controlling SRPK1 activation.
SRPK1(ΔSINT) removes the majority of the residues
in the SID except for those corresponding to helix Sα1 and a
short segment that serves as a linker between the helix and the C-terminal
lobe of the kinase (Figure A). The addition
of SR(RS2) increased kcat for SR(ΔRS2)
phosphorylation by about 4-fold, a level similar to that for the wild-type
SR protein (Figure E and Table ). To confirm that helix Sα1 is essential for the activation
process, we studied a kinase form [SRPK1(ΔSα1)] lacking
only residues in this helix (Figure A). The
addition of SR(RS2) did not increase kcat for SR(ΔRS2) phosphorylation but instead caused a small amount
of inhibition (Figure F and Table ). Taken together, these data imply that RS2 sequences
enhance SR protein phosphorylation through the N-terminus and helix
Sα1 in the SID, both core elements of the NRF.

Discussion
The RS domains of SR proteins differ substantially in overall length
(∼50–300 residues) and arginine–serine content.
Although some RS domains contain long arginine–serine stretches
(&gt;6 repeats), others contain numerous, short stretches of four
or
fewer dipeptide repeats. How these diverse stretches are modified
and what role they play in SR protein function is not well understood.
In prior studies, we showed that the 50-residue RS domain of the prototype
SR protein SRSF1 can be divided into two functional subdomains, RS1
and RS2 (Figure A). SRPK1 efficiently phosphorylates
the eight arginine–serine repeats in RS1 driving SRSF1 into
the nucleus for subsequent splicing function., In the nucleus, the CLK kinases phosphorylate RS2 and alter subnuclear
localization. The strong preference of
SRPK1 for RS1 over RS2 appears to be the result of the juxtaposition
of a docking groove and active site that supports the stable binding
and multisite phosphorylation of longer arginine–serine stretches, (Figure B). These findings now raise the
question of whether some regions of an RS domain may be dispensable
for the SRPK1 reaction. We addressed this issue for one SR protein
SRSF1 and found that the nonconsensus region in its RS domain (RS2)
is not a silent element with regard to SRPK phosphorylation as originally
thought but rather plays an active role in controlling SRSF1 phosphorylation
efficiency.

RS Domain Modulates ADP Release Rates through the NRF
Using a combination of deletion and charge-to-alanine mutations,
we showed that the RS2 segment is important for facilitating SRSF1
phosphorylation by enhancing the rate of ADP release, the rate-limiting
step for SR protein phosphorylation. Interestingly,
we also showed that the RS2 segment can be physically detached from
the full RS domain and then used to activate a substrate form lacking
these residues [SR(ΔRS2)]. This is consistent with a secondary
binding site for RS2 that becomes engaged while RS1 is poised for
phosphorylation in the active site of SRPK1. RS2-dependent activation
is not due to effects on the cooperative binding of RS1 and RS2 but
is due to an enhancement in maximum turnover. This suggests that RS2
exerts its effect by exclusively increasing the rate of ADP release.
This modulatory phenomenon is entirely dependent on a functioning
NRF composed of sequences outside the kinase domain. Such findings
indicate that SRPK1 incorporates a structural relay switch that connects
the RS domain and the nucleotide pocket.

NRF-RS Domain Interactions
Enhance Phosphorylation Efficiency
The kinetic analyses presented
herein indicate that surfaces outside
the active site and docking groove of SRPK1 are important for SRSF1
phosphorylation. Presently, it is not certain whether RS2 directly
encounters the NRF or whether it acts indirectly to modulate NRF function.
The X-ray structure with SRSF1 bound lacks many portions of the RS
domain making it difficult to ascertain exactly its location on SRPK1.
Nonetheless, given the expected proximities of the N-terminus, helix
Sα1, and C-terminal sequences of the RS domain within the N-lobe
(Figure B), RS2 may associate with the NRF
and provide a direct route for SR protein phosphorylation enhancement
through the modulation of nucleotide exchange rates (Figure ). In such a mechanism, the rate of ADP release
is modulated by two principal factors. First, the NRF provides a 3-fold,
basal level of rate enhancement in the absence of RS2 (step 1; Figure ). This value is known from the differences in kcat for SR(ΔRS2) using SRPK1 and SRPK1(ΔN),
a construct lacking a functioning NRF (Table ). In a previous study we showed that kcat for the full-length SRSF1 using SRPK1(ΔN) is the same as that
for SR(ΔRS2) in the present study indicating that RS2 does not
enhance ADP release without the NRF. Second,
the basal ADP release rate with the NRF is further enhanced by an
additional 3-fold in the presence of RS2 and a functioning NRF (step
2; Figure ). This value is estimated from
a comparison of kcat for SRSF1 and SR(ΔRS2)
using SRPK1 (Table ). Overall, these studies
show that the net 10-fold increase in SR protein phosphorylation rate
is the result of functional interactions between the NRF and RS2.
Finally, it is possible that RS2 does not directly contact the NRF
and binds at a different region in SRPK1. In this scenario, RS2 and
the NRF might be allosterically related with no direct physical connection.
Regardless, whether RS2 interacts directly or indirectly with the
NRF, the data presented herein indicate that a functioning NRF is
necessary for RS2-dependent activation of SRPK1.

Model for RS2-dependent
activation of SRPK1. The SRPK1–SRSF1
complex undergoes fast phosphoryl transfer followed by rate-limiting
ADP dissociation (nucleotide release). Translocation reflects movement
of the RS domain in the docking groove and active site and ATP binding
for the delivery of subsequent phosphates. A 10-fold enhancement in
net SR protein phosphorylation is achieved in a two-step process where
step 1 involves a 3-fold increase resulting from the effect of the
NRF on the nucleotide pocket and step 2 involves an additional 3-fold
increase in ADP release resulting from NRF–RS2 modulatory interactions.

Conclusions
SR
proteins represent a group of 12 essential factors that regulate
alternative gene splicing. Although SRPKs
phosphorylate these factors and control splice-site choice, there
is still no clear understanding of their substrate specificities and
how various parts of the SR protein interact with the kinase and regulate
phosphorylation levels. In a prior study, we showed that a structural
module outside the kinase domain of SRPK1 increases the phosphorylation
rate of the prototype SR protein SRSF1 by regulating ADP release rates. We now show that sequences within the RS domain
that are not part of the immediate consensus sequence and not considered
important for SRPK1-directed subcellular control play an important
role in regulating this module. We showed that the RS2 segment in
SRSF1 interacts either directly or indirectly with the NRF. While
the NRF is capable of increasing RS1 phosphorylation by a basal level,
the RS2 segment further enhances this reaction (Figure ). These studies identify a “molecular trigger”
that links RS domain sequences with nucleotide exchange and raises
the possibility that other SR proteins with larger, more complex RS
domains may cause NRF-dependent changes in ADP release.

Supporting Information Available
MALDI-TOF spectra of
SR protein
substrates in the absence and presence of SRPK1 and ATP. This material
is available free of charge via the Internet at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bi500483m_si_001.pdf

The authors declare no
competing financial interest.

Abbreviations
ESEexonic splicing enhancer

CATTRAPcatalytic trapping

NRFnucleotide release
factor

RRMRNA recognition
motif

RS domaindomain rich in arginine–serine repeats

SIDspacer insert domain

SR proteinsplicing
factor containing arginine–serine repeats

SRPK1SR-specific protein kinase 1

SRSF1SR protein splicing
factor 1 (aka ASF/SF2)

