Fatty acids, particularly polyunsaturated
fatty acids, have been reported to affect the functions of many types
of ion channels., For example, arachidonic acid
(C20:4) increases the rate of inactivation of delayed rectifier potassium
channels; similar effects are seen with linoleic acid (C18:2), with
oleic acid (C18:1) having a slightly weaker effect but stearic acid
(C18:0) having no effect. Similarly, arachidonic
acid and a variety of other fatty acids, including the saturated fatty
acid myristic acid, inhibit the Ca2+-activated K+ channel hIK1.,

In principle, fatty acids
could bind to a number of different types of sites on an ion channel
to affect function, and it is possible that more than one mechanism
will be required to explain the range of observed effects. The functions
of many membrane proteins have been shown to depend on the structures
of the lipid molecules in the lipid annulus., Because
most annular lipid binding sites show little structural specificity,
a fatty acid molecule present in the lipid bilayer could replace a
lipid molecule at an annular site and lead to changes in function. Additional binding sites for phospholipids and
other hydrophobic molecules have been suggested to be buried within
a membrane protein, at protein–protein interfaces in oligomeric
membrane proteins, or between transmembrane α-helices; these
sites have been termed nonannular sites to distinguish them from the
annular lipid binding sites. A clear example
is provided by the homotetrameric potassium channel KcsA that has
been crystallized with one molecule of the anionic phospholipid phosphatidylglycerol
bound at each protein–protein interface. Occupation of the site by anionic lipid molecules has been
shown to be important for the function of KcsA., Binding
of the anionic lipid at the nonannular site was shown to be relatively
weak, but the structural specificity of
the site has not previously been explored in detail. It is important
to realize that that even relatively low association constants for
fatty acids at annular or nonannular sites can give rise to relatively
high occupancies on the channel protein because of the high local
concentration of a fatty acid partitioned into a membrane.

A
feature of KcsA and other ion channels is the marked hydrophobicity
of the residues lining the central cavity, a feature thought to be
important in ensuring a rapid flow of K+ ions through the
channel. This hydrophobic lining provides,
of course, potential binding sites for small hydrophobic molecules,
and indeed, ions such as the tetrabutylammonium ion have been shown
to bind to the cavity wall with one ion binding per tetramer close
to the entrance to the selectivity filter, blocking entrance of ions
to the filter., Inhibition of hIK1 and Kv1.1
potassium channels by polyunsaturated fatty acids has also been attributed
to binding to the central cavity., Decher et
al. found that mutations in just one
of the four subunits making up the tetrameric Kv structure were sufficient
to block the effect of the fatty acids, suggesting a single fatty
acid binding site per channel.

Our aim here is to characterize
binding of a fatty acid to KcsA. We have shown that relative lipid
binding constants at annular and nonannular sites on KcsA can be determined
using fluorescence quenching approaches., Quenching
of Trp fluorescence by brominated lipid molecules is short-range,
so that only those molecules bound close to a Trp residue will quench
its fluorescence, quenching efficiency showing a sixth power dependence
on the distance of separation. Because
the time for two lipid molecules to exchange between the bulk phase
and a binding site on a protein is much greater than the Trp fluorescence
lifetime,, the level of fluorescence quenching observed
for a protein reconstituted in a mixture of a normal lipid X and a
lipid Y containing brominated fatty acyl chains will be proportional
to the fraction of binding sites occupied by lipid Y and so will depend
on the binding constant of lipid Y compared with that for lipid X.
KcsA contains five Trp residues per monomer. Three of the Trp residues,
Trp-26, Trp-87, and Trp-113, are exposed to the lipid bilayer and
so can be quenched by brominated molecules binding to the annular
sites but are too far from the nonannular sites to be quenched by
a brominated molecule bound to a nonannular site., The
two remaining Trp residues, Trp-67 and Trp-68, are part of the central
P-loop and are too far from the annular sites to be quenched by brominated
molecules bound at such sites. However, each Trp-67 residue is close
to a nonannular lipid binding site, and binding of a brominated molecule
results in very efficient quenching, allowing the determination of
binding constants at the nonannular sites.

Efficiencies of quenching can be estimated for a brominated
lipid binding in the central cavity of KcsA. A key residue in binding
of polyunsaturated fatty acids and other hydrophobic molecules to
IKCa1 is Val-275,, equivalent to Ile-100 in KcsA
(Figure ), and the corresponding residue in
Kv1.1, Val-505, has also been shown to be important in fatty acid
binding. The distances between Ile-100
in KcsA and Trp-67 and Trp-68 in the same subunit are both ∼15
Å,
with distances between Ile-100 and Trp-67 and Trp-68 in adjacent subunits
of ∼25 Å and even greater distances to the lipid-exposed
Trp residues. A brominated fatty acid such as 9,10-dibromostearic
acid (BrSA) bound to the central cavity of KcsA, in a position similar
to that suggested for arachidonic acid in Kv1.1, would therefore result in inefficient quenching of Trp
residues. As a consequence, Trp fluorescence quenching by brominated
fatty acids will report just on binding to annular and nonannular
sites.

Structure of KcsA. A cross-sectional view in schematic representation
showing two of the monomers making up the homotetrameric structure
and showing, in space-fill representation, the location of Ile-100
in the central pore and the two bands of Trp residues at the extracellular
(top) and intracellular (bottom) sides. The coordinates were from
Protein Data Bank entry 1K4C.

To study possible binding of fatty acids to the
central cavity of KcsA, we have adopted an alternative approach. EPR
spectra of nitroxide-labeled lipids are sensitive to molecular mobility
and provide a way of distinguishing between lipid molecules in the
bulk lipid bilayer component of a membrane and lipid molecules associated
directly with membrane proteins. Here
we show the presence of a yet more strongly immobilized component
in the EPR spectra of 14-nitroxystearic acid bound to KcsA and suggest
that this corresponds to fatty acid bound in the channel cavity.

Experimental Procedures
Dioleoylphosphatidylcholine
(DOPC) was obtained from Avanti Polar Lipids (Alabaster, AL) and brominated
as described previouslyto give bis(9,10-dibromostearoyl)phosphatidylcholine
(BrPC). Oleic acid, methyl oleate, and oleyl alcohol were obtained
from Sigma and were brominated similarly to give BrSA, 9,10-dibromomethylstearate,
and 9,10-dibromostearoyl alcohol, respectively. The spin-labeled stearic
acid, 14-(4,4-dimethyloxazolidinyl-N-oxyl)stearic
acid (14-SASL), and the corresponding phosphatidylcholine, 1-acyl-2-[14-(4,4-dimethyloxazolidinyl-N-oxyl)stearoyl]-sn-glycero-3-phosphocholine
(14-PCSL), were synthesized as described by Marsh.

Mutagenesis and Reconstitution of KcsA
Site-directed
mutagenesis was performed using the QuikChange protocol from Stratagene
(La Jolla, CA). In the mutant W67,68, the Trp residues at positions
26, 87, and 113 were replaced with Leu, leaving just the Trp residues
at positions 67 and 68. The mutant W67,68R64,89L in which Arg residues
at positions 64 and 89 of mutant W67,68 were replaced with Leu was
produced. The mutations were confirmed by DNA sequencing.

KcsA
and the mutants were purified as described by Marius et al. For fluorescence experiments, KcsA was reconstituted
into lipid bilayers by mixing lipid and KcsA in cholate followed by
dilution into buffer [20 mM Hepes and 100 mM KCl (pH 7.2)] to decrease
the concentration of cholate below its critical micelle concentration
and re-form membranes. For EPR measurements,
samples were reconstituted in a similar way, followed by dialysis
to remove detergent and then pelleting in a benchtop centrifuge.

Fluorescence and EPR Measurements
Fluorescence was
recorded on a model 8000C fluorimeter (SLM, Urbana, IL) with excitation
at 290 nm, at 25 °C. Fluorescence emission spectra were corrected
for light scatter by subtracting a blank consisting of lipid alone
in buffer. The reported fluorescence intensities represent averages
of triplicate measurements from two or three separate reconstitutions.
For experiments with mixtures of DOPC and 9,10-dibromomethylstearate
or 9,10-dibromostearoyl alcohol, the components were mixed in the
required proportions in organic solvent, dried, and resuspended in
cholate before reconstitution with KcsA. Because of its significant
aqueous solubility, BrSA in a small volume of methanol was added to
the sample after reconstitution; the volume of added methanol never
exceeded 4% of the total volume, at which level it had no measurable
effect on fluorescence intensity. Fluorescence quenching by BrSA was
corrected for the small decrease in fluorescence intensity observed
upon addition of an equal concentration of oleic acid.

EPR spectra
were recorded on a 9 GHz Varian Century-Line EPR spectrometer with
temperature control by thermostated nitrogen gas flow. 14-SASL was
incorporated into reconstituted KcsA samples with the required lipid:KcsA
molar ratio, at a 14-SASL:lipid ratio of 0.5 mol %, by addition of
a concentrated solution of 14-SASL in ethanol. Samples were transferred
to 50 μL glass capillaries and placed in a standard 4 mm quartz
sample tube. EPR spectra were analyzed by spectral addition or subtraction,
as described previously., In the spectral addition
procedure, spectra were fitted by the weighted sums of two spectral
components chosen from a set of spectra for 14-SASL in DOPC and for
14-SASL bound to bovine serum albumin, recorded at 3 °C intervals
over the temperature range of 0–37 °C. In fitting a particular
experimental spectrum, we first chose an immobile component by matching
the observed maximal hyperfine splittings and then used a least-squares
procedure to choose the mobile component giving the best fit to the
experimental spectrum in the low-field region, where the separation
between the mobile and immobile components is most clear. The choice
of the immobile component was then checked by repeating the fitting
procedure with a range of immobile components close to that chosen
initially. Finally, the calculated composite spectrum was compared
to the experimental spectrum to ensure that all features of the spectrum
were reproduced faithfully. The reported fractions of mobile and immobile
components are the averages of two separate reconstitutions, and the
error bars represent the range of values giving acceptable fits to
the experimental data.

Analysis of Fluorescence Quenching Data
Fluorescence
quenching in a mixture of a brominated phospholipid with its corresponding
nonbrominated
phospholipid can be described in the simplest case of a single Trp
residue and a single type of lipid binding site by the equationwhere Fo and Fmin are the fluorescence intensities in nonbrominated
and brominated lipid, respectively, F is the fluorescence
intensity in the phospholipid mixture when the mole fraction of brominated
lipid is xBr, and n is
the number of lipid binding sites from which the fluorescence of the
Trp residue can be quenched., Fitting the experimental
quenching data for a chosen phospholipid to eq  gives the value of n for that phospholipid.

In a mixture of two different lipid molecules, A and B, equilibrium
will be established at each annular lipid binding site:where P·A and P·B are sites occupied
by lipids A and B, respectively, and the binding constant K for lipid B relative to lipid A is given bywhere the concentrations are in mole fraction
units, x, within the membrane. Fluorescence quenching
at the annular sites is then described by the equationwhere fBr, the
fraction of sites occupied by brominated lipid, is given from eq  bywhere K is the association
constant for lipid B relative to lipid A. The value of K can therefore be determined from quenching plots if the value of n is known.

Analysis of the fluorescence quenching
results in this way for the mutant W67,68 gives values for n and K for binding at nonannular sites
on KcsA, because with this mutant quenching of Trp fluorescence occurs
only as a result of binding at the nonannular sites. For wild-type
KcsA, quenching will result from binding at both the annular and the
nonannular
sites. Assuming that all Trp residues have equal unquenched fluorescence
intensities and that the three lipid-exposed Trp residues are equivalent, the fluorescence intensity can be written aswhere FAmin and FNAmin are the minimal fluorescence values for the three lipid-exposed
Trp residues and Trp-67, respectively, fABr and fNABr are
the fractional occupancies by brominated lipids of the annular and
nonannular
sites, respectively, and nA and nNA are the values for n describing
quenching at the annular and nonannular sites, respectively.

The experimental data were fit to eqs – using the nonlinear least-squares routine in SigmaPlot
(SPSS Inc., Chicago, IL).

Analysis of Binding of 14-SASL to KcsA
As described
in , EPR spectra for 14-SASL in the
presence of KcsA are consistent with fatty acid binding to a single
site in the central pore of KcsA. The EPR experiments were performed
at a DOPC concentration of ∼85 mM and a total mole fraction
of 14-SASL with respect to DOPC (XFA)
of 0.005, conditions under which all the 14-SASL will be in the lipid
bilayer or bound to KcsA, as described below. Binding of 14-SASL to
its binding site on KcsA can then be described by the equilibriumwhere FAL and P·FA are fatty
acid in the lipid bilayer and bound to protein sites, respectively.
The association constant KA for binding
of 14-SASL to a single site on KcsA is given from eq  bywhere concentrations are again expressed as
mole fractions, x, within the membrane. Total mole
fractions are denoted with the uppercase X, whereas
those of bound or “free” species are denoted with the
lowercase x. The mole fraction, xP·FA, of protein-bound fatty acid (P·FA) is
given according to eq  bywhere XP is the total mole fraction of the KcsA tetramer (approximates
the tetramer:lipid mole ratio) and ns is
the number of binding sites per KcsA tetramer.

Results
Partitioning of Fatty Acids into the Lipid Bilayer
The significant water solubility of the fatty acids means that only
at high lipid concentrations will most of the added fatty acid be
in the lipid bilayer. As shown in Figure S1 of the , partitioning of BrSA into bilayers
of DOPC is almost complete (&gt;95%) at lipid concentrations of ≥300
μM. Fluorescence quenching experiments to determine the binding
constants for KcsA were therefore performed at lipid concentrations
of ≥300 μM.

Binding to Nonannular Lipid Binding Sites on KcsA
The
W67,68 mutant was used to determine binding constants at the nonannular
sites on KcsA. Addition of BrSA to W67,68 reconstituted with DOPC
resulted in a marked decrease in fluorescence intensity (Figure A), demonstrating binding of fatty acids at the
nonannular
sites. The observed level of quenching depends on the number of binding
sites (n) for BrSA close enough to the Trp residues
in W67,68 to cause quenching and on the fractional occupancy of these
sites by BrSA (eq ). Normally, the value for n would be determined from quenching plots of a mixture
of a brominated lipid and its nonbrominated analogue (eq ), but the value of n for BrSA cannot be
determined in this way because fatty acids alone do not form bilayers.
However, values for n can be obtained from studies
of the quenching of KcsA fluorescence in mixtures of oleic acid, BrSA,
and DOPC, which do form bilayers, with the mole fraction of total
fatty acid (oleic acid and BrSA) being fixed but the ratio of oleic
acid to 9,10-dibromostearic acid being varied. If the fraction of
sites on KcsA occupied by total fatty acid is fFA and the fraction of the total fatty acid molecules that
is BrSA is xBrFA, the fraction of sites
occupied by brominated fatty acid fBrFA isThe fluorescence intensity, by analogy with
eq , becomesValues of n and K for BrSA can then be determined by iterative fitting of data sets,
fitting quenching data in DOPC/oleic acid/BrSA mixtures to eq  and in DOPC/BrSA mixtures to eqs  and . Because any proportional error
in the value of fFA will be smallest when
the value of fFA is close to 1, the experiments with DOPC/oleic acid/BrSA
mixtures were performed at a high mole fraction of total fatty acid.

Quenching
of the fluorescence of the mutant W67,68 by BrSA. (A) W67,68 was reconstituted
into mixtures of DOPC and BrSA, and fluorescence intensities were
expressed as F/Fo, where Fo is the fluorescence intensity in DOPC and F is the fluorescence intensity at the given mole fraction
of BrSA (○). Fluorescence intensities (○) have been
corrected for the decrease in fluorescence intensity observed upon
addition of oleic acid (□). Fluorescence intensities (△)
are also shown for the mutant W67,68R64,89L. (B) W67,68 was reconstituted
into mixtures of DOPC and fatty acid (BrSA and oleic acid) at a total
fatty acid:DOPC molar ratio of 2:1, varying the mole fraction of BrSA
in the fatty acid mixture (○). The solid lines in panels A
and B show fits to the competition model for binding (eqs , , and )
giving values for n and K1 of 0.91 ± 0.24 and 0.87 ± 0.08, respectively. The dashed
line in panel A shows the best fit to the simple binding model (eq ) as described in the text. The DOPC:KcsA monomer
molar ratio was 400:1, and the concentrations of KcsA monomer and
DOPC were 0.75 and 300 μM, respectively.

Quenching in mixtures of DOPC, oleic acid, and
BrSA as a function of BrSA content at a fixed mole fraction of total
fatty acid was close to linear (Figure B),
showing that the value of n was close to 1. The quenching
data fit to a competitive binding model in which binding of a molecule
of fatty acid displaced a molecule of DOPC from the site; an iterative
fit of the two sets of data to the competitive binding model (eqs  and ) gave values for n and the relative association constant K1 of 0.91 ± 0.24 and 0.87 ± 0.08, respectively
(Figure ). The value for Fmin of 0.43 ± 0.03 is consistent with the expected
extensive quenching of Trp-67 with little quenching of Trp-68.

An alternative to a competitive model for binding of BrSA to the
nonannular
sites is a simple binding model in which lipid A (DOPC) does not bind
significantly to the nonannular sites. In this case, binding of lipid
B (BrSA) could be described by a simple binding equationThe equilibrium constant describing competitive
binding (eq ) has no units, whereas the association
constant describing the simple binding reaction (eq ) will have units of reciprocal mole fraction. The two models
are related as follows when the competitive binding constant K &gt; 1. The fraction f1 of
nonannular
sites occupied by lipid B in a mixture of lipids A and B for the competitive
binding model is (see eq )where K1 is the
association constant for lipid B relative to lipid A and xB is the mole fraction of lipid B in the membrane. The
fraction f2 of nonannular sites occupied
by lipid B in a mixture of lipids A and B for the simple binding model
iswhere K2 is the
association constant for lipid B. Now consider the functionThis shows that scaling f2 by the factor (1 + K2)/K2 gives a function of the same form as f1 (eq ) but with K1 replaced by 1 + K2. The scaling factor accounts for the fact that in the competitive
binding model the nonannular site will be fully occupied by lipid
B at a mole fraction xB of 1, whereas
this will not be true in the simple binding model where the site might
be only partially filled, depending on the value of K2. The above relationship between the competitive and
simple binding models is valid only when K1 &gt; 1 because by necessity K2 &gt;
0 and K1 = 1 + K2. When K1 &lt; 1, the function f1 (eq ) does not have
the shape of a simple binding curve.

It was not possible to
obtain a good fit of the data shown in Figure  to a simple binding model in which the site was either occupied
by fatty acid or empty (eqs  and ). A free fit of the data in Figure A to eq  with a value for n of 0.91 resulted in a value for binding constant K2 of 0.03 ± 0.15 mole fraction–1 with a physically impossible negative value for Fmin (−16.7), the large negative value for Fmin being required to give strong quenching
when the value for K2 is so low that the
binding site is largely empty. Fixing Fmin at 0.5 (corresponding to the quenching of just Trp-67) resulted
in a very poor fit to the data with a value for binding constant K2 of 0.2 ± 0.3 mole fraction–1 (dashed line, Figure A).

Addition
of 9,10-dibromomethylstearate or 9,10-dibromostearoyl alcohol resulted
in only low levels of quenching of the fluorescence of W67,68 (Figure ), showing very weak binding to the nonannular sites
on KcsA.

Quenching of the fluorescence of wild-type KcsA and mutant W67,68
by 9,10-dibromostearoyl alcohol (A) and 9,10-dibromomethylstearate
(B). Wild-type KcsA (□) and mutant W67,68 (○) were reconstituted
into mixtures of DOPC and 9,10-dibromostearoyl alcohol (A) and 9,10-dibromomethylstearate
(B), at the given mole fractions of the brominated molecule.

Binding to Annular Lipid Binding Sites on KcsA
Quenching
data for wild-type KcsA were analyzed by using the parameters for
binding at the nonannular sites determined above to obtain relative
binding constants at the annular lipid binding sites. The data fit
well to eq , giving values of n and K for the annular sites of 4.6 ± 0.2 and
0.67 ± 0.04, respectively, with a value of FAmin for the three lipid-exposed Trp residues
of 0.27 ± 0.01 (Figure ). As observed
with the W67,68 mutants, the presence of 9,10-dibromostearoyl alcohol
resulted in little quenching of the fluorescence of wild-type KcsA
(Figure A), showing very weak binding at the
annular lipid binding sites. With 9,10-dibromomethylstearate, quenching
was more marked at the annular sites than for 9,10-dibromostearoyl
alcohol, but unlike the case with BrSA, quenching leveled off at a
mole fraction of ∼0.3, which could reflect the miscibility
limit of 9,10-dibromomethylstearate in the lipid bilayer.

Quenching of
the fluorescence of wild-type KcsA by BrSA. (A) KcsA was reconstituted
into mixtures of DOPC and BrSA, and fluorescence intensities were
expressed as F/Fo, where Fo is the fluorescence intensity in DOPC and F is the fluorescence intensity at the given mole fraction
of BrSA (○). Fluorescence intensities were corrected for the
decrease in fluorescence intensity observed upon addition of oleic
acid. (B) KcsA was reconstituted into mixtures of DOPC and fatty acid
(BrSA and oleic acid) at a total fatty acid:DOPC molar ratio of 2:1,
varying the mole fraction of BrSA in the total fatty acid mixture
(○). The solid lines show fits to the competition model for
binding (eqs  and )
with values of n and K for the nonannular
sites of 0.91 and 0.87, respectively, giving values of n and K for the annular sites of 4.6 ± 0.2 and
0.67 ± 0.04, respectively. The DOPC:KcsA monomer molar ratio
was 400:1, and the concentrations of KcsA monomer and DOPC were 0.75
and 300 μM, respectively.

Effect of Arg-64 and -89 on Binding to the Nonannular Sites
Close to each nonannular binding site at the monomer–monomer
interfaces in KcsA are two Arg residues, Arg-64 and Arg-89. Because
these are the only charged residues close to the nonannular binding
sites, they could contribute to fatty acid binding at these sites.
However, fluorescence quenching by BrSA is the same for W67,68 and
for the mutant W67,68R64,89L in which the Arg residues at positions
64 and 89 have been replaced with Leu residues (Figure A). These two Arg residues are therefore unlikely to contribute
to binding of the fatty acid to the nonannular sites.

EPR Studies of 14-SASL Binding
EPR spectra for the
spin-labeled
fatty acid 14-SASL in the presence of a wide range of membrane proteins
contain two components, a broad component corresponding to lipids
bound at annular sites and a sharp component corresponding to the
fluid bilayer regions of the membrane. With the possible exception
of the nicotinic acetylcholine receptor, the broad component from the spin-labeled fatty acid is very similar
to that observed with spin-labeled phospholipids., However, the EPR spectra obtained for 14-SASL and 14-PCSL in the
presence of KcsA are very different (Figure ). The spectrum for 14-SASL is dominated by an immobile component
with a maximal hyperfine splitting of 64.6 G, compared to a smaller
immobile component for 14-PCSL with a maximal splitting of 60.7 G.
The spectrum of the immobile component seen with 14-SASL is very similar
to that for 14-SASL bound to bovine serum albumin (Figure ). Both the outer splitting and the line widths
indicate that the fatty acid is more strongly immobilized than the
phospholipids that are motionally restricted in the annular sites
surrounding the protein (see, for example, refs () and ()).

EPR spectra of spin-labeled
phosphatidylcholine and spin-labeled fatty acid in the presence of
KcsA. (A and B) EPR spectra of 14-PCSL and 14-SASL, respectively,
in the presence of KcsA at a DOPC:KcsA tetramer molar ratio of 60:1,
at pH 7.2 and 25 °C. (C) Corresponding spectrum for 14-SASL but
at pH 3.9. The vertical lines indicate the location of the outer peaks
in the 14-PCSL and 14-SASL spectra. The maximal splitting for 14-SASL
in KcsA matches that in a sample of 14-SASL bound to BSA at 6 °C
(D). For the samples containing 14-SASL, the DOPC:KcsA tetramer molar
ratio was 60:1 and the mole fraction of 14-SASL was 0.005, giving
a 14-SASL:KcsA tetramer molar ratio of 0.3:1. The first-derivative
EPR spectra have all been normalized to equal double-integrated area.

Figure  shows EPR spectra
for 14-SASL as a function of the DOPC:KcsA channel mole ratio at a
fixed mole fraction of 14-SASL in the membrane of 0.005. In all cases,
the spectra are dominated by the immobile component. The spectra were
fit with a sum of two components by using a library of spectra for
14-SASL bound to BSA recorded over the temperature range of 0–37
°C
to represent the immobile component, and a library of spectra for
14-PCSL in DOPC over the same temperature range to represent the mobile
component, as described in .

EPR spectra of 14-SASL in the presence of KcsA as a function of DOPC:KcsA
tetramer molar ratio, at 25 °C. The outer peaks of the immobile
component are shown by the arrows and dashed lines. The first-derivative
EPR spectra have all been normalized to equal double-integrated area.

Figure  shows the concentration
of the immobile EPR component obtained from the fitting procedure,
expressed in terms of the mole fraction of immobilized 14-SASL in
the membrane, plotted as a function of the DOPC:KcsA tetramer mole
ratio. The proportion of 14-SASL in the immobile component varied
from 74 to 90% over the range of DOPC:KcsA tetramer mole ratios from
100:1 to 30:1. Binding of 14-SASL to KcsA was characterized by an
association constant KA for binding of
14-SASL to KcsA from the DOPC bilayer (eq ).
The high fraction of bound 14-SASL meant that it was not possible
to determine separately both the number of binding sites per channel
(ns) and the affinity of the site (KA). The data in Figure  were therefore fit to eq  by assuming an ns value of 1, giving a value for the association
constant KA of 440 ± 17. A fit for
an ns of 4 is also included in Figure , for comparison; the fitted KA value of 82 ± 3 is correspondingly lower.

Mole fraction of 14-SASL
bound to KcsA as a function of lipid:KcsA tetramer molar ratio. The
experimental data (◼) for the bound concentration of 14-SASL
were obtained by fitting the spectra for 14-SASL shown in Figure  and are expressed in terms of the mole fraction
of immobilized 14-SASL relative to total lipid in the membrane. The
total mole fraction of 14-SASL in the membrane was constant at 0.005.
The data were fit by eq  with a value for the
number of binding sites per channel (ns) of 1, giving an association constant (KA) of 440 ± 17 (—), or with an ns of 4 giving a KA of 82 ±
3 (---). The inset (—) shows the experimental EPR spectrum
for 14-SASL bound to KcsA at a lipid:KcsA molar ratio of 100:1; the
dashed line shows the best fit spectrum, with an immobile fraction
of 0.738. The horizontal line above the EPR spectrum shows the region
of the spectrum where the separation between the mobile and immobile
components is most clear.

When the pH was changed from 7.2 to 3.9, the immobile
component of 14-SASL decreased very markedly in intensity and changed
in line shape, with a concomitant increase in the intensity of the
mobile component (Figure ). This might conceivably
reflect a change in the conformation of KcsA. However, the pKa for lipid-bound fatty acid is ∼7,, so that at pH 3.9 bound 14-SASL will be present largely in the protonated,
uncharged form. This would immediately result in a loss of intensity
for the immobile component, if, as is likely, the protonated form
of the fatty acid binds only weakly to the site on KcsA to which the
charged form binds with high affinity, the fatty acid then being located
primarily in the lipid bilayer.

Trp Fluorescence Quenching by 14-SASL
It is possible
to compare the results of the EPR studies with 14-SASL and the fluorescence
quenching studies with BrSA by making use of the ability of nitroxide
spin-labels to quench Trp fluorescence. London and Feigenson have shown that spin-labels quench Trp fluorescence
by a contact mechanism with a critical distance of ∼11 Å.
Figure A compares the quenching of the fluorescence
of the Trp analogue N-palmitoyl-l-tryptophan n-hexyl ester (NPTH) in bilayers of DOPC by BrSA and by
14-SASL, showing very similar concentration dependencies for quenching
by the two quenchers, but with slightly more efficient quenching with
14-SASL. Quenching of the Trp fluorescence of wild-type KcsA and of
W67,68 by 14-SASL is also slightly more marked than quenching by BrSA
(Figure ), but again with a very similar concentration
dependence.

Fluorescence quenching by 14-SASL. Fluorescence intensities are
plotted for the Trp analogue NPTH (A), wild-type KcsA (B), and W67,68
(C) in the presence of the given mole fractions of 14-SASL (○)
or BrSA (□). Fluorescence intensities are expressed as F/Fo, where Fo is the fluorescence intensity in the absence of fatty
acid, and in panels B and C, the data have been corrected for the
decrease in fluorescence intensity observed upon addition of oleic
acid. For all samples, the concentration of DOPC was 600 μM.
For panel A, the DOPC:NPTH molar ratio was 300:1. For panel B, the
DOPC:KcsA tetramer molar ratio was 4000:1. For panel C, the DOPC:W67,68
tetramer molar ratio was 1600:1. The dashed line in panel C corresponds
to the quenching curve that would be observed if the high-affinity
14-SASL binding detected in the EPR experiments corresponded to binding
to the nonannular sites, as described in the text.

These fluorescence quenching experiments suggest
that 14-SASL and BrSA have similar affinities for the annular sites
and nonannular sites. In particular, there is no evidence of a site
with a very high affinity for 14-SASL on KcsA as detected by the EPR
experiments. For example, if the high-affinity binding observed in
the EPR experiments corresponded to binding at the four nonannular
sites per KcsA channel, the corresponding value of KA would be ∼82 (see eq  and
Figure ), and assuming for the sake of simplicity
that the quenching efficiencies of 14-SASL and BrSA are equal, the
quenching curve (Figure C, dashed line) would
show extensive quenching at low 14-SASL concentrations, which is not
observed experimentally. We conclude therefore that the high-affinity
binding observed for 14-SASL in the EPR experiments does not correspond
to binding to either the annular or nonannular binding sites and must
correspond to binding to a site too distant from the Trp residues
in KcsA to result in any fluorescence quenching.

Discussion
Annular and Nonannular Binding Sites
The results presented
here show that fatty acids bind to a variety of sites on KcsA. Binding
of phospholipids to the annular sites on KcsA shows limited selectivity
with, for example, a binding constant for phosphatidic acid relative
to DOPC of ∼2.0. Quenching of
the fluorescence of the lipid-exposed Trp residues in wild-type KcsA
by BrSA (Figure ) shows that BrSA can also
bind to these sites with a binding constant relative to DOPC of 0.67
± 0.04.

The value of n describing the
average number of two-chain lipid molecules binding close enough to
a Trp residue in wild-type KcsA to result in quenching (eq ) varies with phospholipid structure between 1.7
and 2.5; the value of n for BrSA, 4.6 ± 0.2, suggests that two fatty acid molecules
will bind to KcsA at the annular sites in exchange for one two-chain
phospholipid. An alternative way to describe binding at the annular
sites is to express concentrations in the membrane on a chain basis,
accounting for the fact that BrSA contains just one chain whereas
DOPC contains two. With concentrations expressed in this way, occupancy
of the binding sites by fatty acid is still described by eq  but with K replaced by 2K. The binding constant for BrSA relative to DOPC then becomes
1.34, similar to the binding constant for phosphatidic acid relative
to DOPC.

Quenching studies with
the KcsA mutant W67,68 (Figure ) show that
BrSA can also bind to the nonannular sites on KcsA located one at
each protein–protein interface in the homotetrameric structure.
These sites show a preference for anionic lipid, and the presence
of anionic lipid leads to an increased probability of the channel
being in a conducting state., The binding constant
for BrSA relative to DOPC was determined to be 0.87 ± 0.09 (Figure ), which can be compared to a binding constant for
dioleoylphosphatidylglycerol relative to DOPC of 3.33 ± 0.35
calculated from the data of Marius et al. The value of n for quenching of W67,68 fluorescence
by BrSA was 0.91 ± 0.24 (Figure ), consistent
with the crystal structure of KcsA that shows that just one of the
two chains of the bound phosphatidylglycerol molecule penetrates into
the cleft between adjacent monomers, with the second chain adopting
a more peripheral location.

Two
Arg residues, Arg-64 and Arg-89, located close to the nonannular binding
site probably contribute to the preferential binding of anionic lipid
to the nonannular site, and indeed, molecular
dynamics simulations show the bound phosphatidylglycerol molecule
hydrogen bonding to these two Arg residues. However, mutation of these two Arg residues to Leu resulted in no
change in binding of BrSA to the nonannular sites (Figure ), suggesting that they are not involved in direct
interaction with the carboxyl group of the fatty acid. An alternative
possibility could be hydrogen bonding to the NH group of the peptide
bond between Thr-85 and Leu-86.

Uncharged analogues of BrSA
such as 9,10-dibromostearoyl alcohol and 9,10-dibromomethylstearate
show very weak binding at the nonannular sites on KcsA (Figure ). The level of quenching of wild-type KcsA by 9,10-dibromostearoyl
alcohol was also low, suggesting limited binding to the annular sites,
but for 9,10-dibromomethylstearate, quenching at low mole fractions
was more comparable to that seen with BrSA, although quenching leveled
off at a mole fraction of ∼0.3 (Figure B). These results could reflect weak interactions of these molecules
with the annular and nonannular sites but could also reflect their
mixing properties with the DOPC bilayer. Smaby and Brockman reported miscibility limits for methyl oleate
and oleyl alcohol with 1-palmitoyl-2-oleoylphosphatidylcholine (POPC)
in monolayers of ∼1:4 and ∼1:1, respectively. They also
report formation of a complex between methyl oleate and oleyl alcohol
and POPC with the formation of condensed complexes with areas smaller
than the sums of the areas of the two components. Limited binding of 9,10-dibromostearoyl alcohol and 9,10-dibromomethylstearate
to sites on KcsA could therefore be in part due to strong interaction
of these molecules with the phospholipid component of the membrane,
competing with binding to the protein. Limited binding would also
result if the condensed complexes formed separate domains within the
membrane, as suggested for oleyl alcohol, and KcsA partitioned preferentially into the domains enriched with
DOPC.

The level of occupancy of the annular and nonannular binding
sites by oleic acid can be calculated for a given aqueous concentration
of oleic acid from the relative binding constants determined above
and the dissociation constant of 17 μM describing binding of oleic acid to a lipid bilayer. For example,
at an aqueous concentration of oleic acid of 17 μM, 40% of the
annular sites and 47% of the nonannular sites will be occupied by
oleic acid.

Binding to the Central Cavity
The lining of the central
cavity of potassium channels (Figure ) has
been shown to be hydrophobic and provide a binding site for the tetrabutylammonium
ion and its derivatives, and for the drug clotrimazole. Increasing the length of the alkyl chains in
a tetraalkylammonium ion increases its binding affinity, consistent
with hydrophobic interactions being important in binding.It has been suggested, on the basis of mutagenesis
studies, that fatty acids can also bind to this central hydrophobic
cavity, and binding of tetraalkylammonium ions and
fatty acids is competitive.

Binding
of BrSA to the central cavity of KcsA would not be detected by fluorescence
quenching because the site is too distant from the Trp residues in
KcsA to result in quenching. EPR with spin-labeled fatty acids was
therefore used to detect binding to the cavity, making use of the
sensitivity of EPR spectra of spin-labeled molecules to rotational
immobilization. The EPR spectrum for 14-SASL bound to KcsA shows a
maximal hyperfine splitting greater than that observed for the spin-labeled
phosphatidylcholine 14-PCSL in the presence of KcsA (Figure ). The maximal splitting observed for 14-SASL bound
to KcsA is comparable to that for 14-SASL bound to BSA, and because
fatty acids bind to serum albumin in a number of deep pockets within
the structure, this implies a buried
site for binding of 14-SASL on KcsA.

The proportion of bound
14-SASL registered by the EPR spectra is very high (Figures  and ). It is not possible
to obtain estimates for both the number of binding sites and their
affinity, but if it is assumed that there is just one binding site
per KcsA tetramer, the data fit to an association constant KA for binding of 14-SASL to KcsA from the lipid
phase (eq ) of 440 ± 17 (Figure ). Fluorescence quenching studies with 14-SASL confirm
that this high-affinity binding site does not correspond to either
the annular or nonannular binding sites detected by fluorescence quenching
with BrSA (Figure ). The presence of the nitroxy
group on 14-SASL is unlikely to have a major effect on the type of
site to which 14-SASL can bind, so that the most likely binding site
for 14-SASL is therefore a fatty acid binding site in the central
cavity of the potassium channel.

The fatty acid–protein
associations studied here are all confined to the membrane, where
the appropriate unit of concentration is mole fraction (approximated
by mole ratio with respect to lipid). In conventional ligand binding
experiments, on the other hand, affinities are expressed by the dissociation
constant Kd, with concentrations in moles
per liter of the total aqueous volume. These constants are related,
as follows. The mole fraction of ligand-free protein, for example,
is given bywhere brackets denote molar concentrations
in water for each species and [Lt] is the total lipid concentration.
Expressed in terms of aqueous molar concentrations, eq  for the fatty acid association constant therefore becomeswhere [Lt] is the total lipid concentration
in moles per liter.

The conventional binding experiment is described
by the equilibrium between protein-bound 14-SASL and 14-SASL in the
aqueous mediumwhere FAw is free fatty acid in
water. From eq , the aqueous dissociation
constant is thuswhere brackets again denote molar concentrations
in water for each species. From eqs  and , the conventional dissociation constant is related
to the association constant determined in the EPR experiment byThe quotient [FAL]/[FAw] in eq  represents enrichment of the fatty
acid in the membrane by favorable partitioning from the aqueous phase,
the extent of which depends directly on the total aqueous lipid concentration,
[Lt].

The partition coefficient Kp of the fatty acid between lipid and water is defined
as the ratio of the concentration of fatty acid in the lipid phase,
given in units of moles per liter of lipid, to that in the aqueous
phase, given in units of moles per liter of water (i.e., [FAw]). If both concentrations are expressed in terms of moles per liter
of water, the partition coefficient is then given bywhere ML is the
molecular weight of the lipid and v̅L (milliliters per gram) is the lipid partial specific volume. The
latter, together with the total aqueous lipid concentration [Lt], is needed to convert the concentration of FAL from moles per liter of water (i.e., [FAL]) to moles
per liter of lipid. Via combination of eqs  and , the relation among the aqueous dissociation
constant, the intramembrane association constant, and the lipid/water
partition coefficient isIf the fatty acid partition coefficient, Kp, is known, the conventional dissociation constant
can then be obtained from the EPR binding results by using eq .

A Kpv̅L value of ≈3 × 103 mL/g at pH 7.2 can be calculated for 14-SASL from direct EPR measurements
of the partitioning of spin-labeled myristic acid into lipid bilayers,, as described in the . Electrophoresis measurements and fluorescence
quenching studies give Kpv̅L values of ≈1.3
× 104 and 2 × 104 mL/g, respectively.
Calculated values of Kd then vary between
∼0.1
and ∼1 μM depending on the value assumed for the partition
coefficient. These estimates can be compared with the concentrations
of arachidonic acid required for the effects on eukaryotic potassium
channels, which vary between ∼1 and ∼30 μM;, it has been estimated that free cytosolic concentrations of arachidonic
acid are probably approximately ≤10 μM under normal conditions
but could rise to &gt;50 μM because of the local action of phospholipases.

Effects of nonpolyunsaturated fatty acids
vary markedly between channels, with no observed effects on some channels,, although, for example, the saturated fatty acid myristic acid at
3 μM results in major block of the hIK1 channel. These differences presumably reflect differences in the
residues lining the central cavity. Binding could be favored by the
presence of multiple cis double bonds in the fatty
acyl chain because potential energy wells for rotation about C–C
bonds adjacent to a double bond are low. Further, a molecular dynamics simulation of the interaction of rhodopsin
with lipids containing polyunsaturated fatty acyl chains showed the
chains penetrating deeply into the protein core, modifying helix–helix
interactions, and similar interactions
might occur for a polyunsaturated fatty acid bound to the cavity of
a potassium channel.

Supporting Information Available
Information about partitioning of fatty acid into lipid bilayers
and evidence that partitioning of BrSA is complete at lipid concentrations
of &gt;300 μM. This material is available free of charge via
the Internet at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bi300153v_si_001.pdf

The authors
declare no competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
We thank Dr. Phedra Marius for the gift of KcsA mutants and
for helpful advice.

Abbreviations
BrSA9,10-dibromostearic
acid

DOPCdioleoylphosphatidylcholine

POPC1-palmitoyl-2-oleoylphosphatidylcholine

BrPCbis(9,10-dibromostearoyl)phosphatidylcholine

14-SASL14-(4,4-dimethyloxazolidinyl-N-oxyl)stearic acid

14-PCSL1-acyl-2-[14-(4,4-dimethyloxazolidinyl-N-oxyl)stearoyl]-sn-glycero-3-phosphocholine.

