Acetylcholinesterase (AChE,
EC 3.1.1.7) and butyrylcholinesterase (BuChE, EC 3.1.1.8) are serine
hydrolase enzymes that catalyze the hydrolysis of acetylcholine. X-ray crystallography analysis of these cholinesterases, has established that catalysis involves a triad of amino acid residues,
serine, histidine, and glutamate, located near the bottom of a 20
Å deep gorge (Figure ). This region of
the gorge has been denoted the acylation or A-site in AChE., The efficiency of this A-site in the catalytic process has been
shown to be influenced by events occurring at amino acid residues
some distance away in the gorge. For example, a tryptophan residue
(W86 in AChE, W82 in BuChE) near the A-site is known to facilitate
catalysis by forming π-cation interactions with substrates helping
align these molecules with the catalytic serine. This tryptophan residue
is linked through a polypeptide segment (Ω loop) with an anionic
aspartate residue (D74 in AChE; D70 in BuChE) that is one of the components
of a peripheral site (P-site) that interacts with cationic substrates.
At high substrate levels, the activity of AChE is decreased, while that of BuChE is increased. This
phenomenon of substrate inhibition of AChE is thought to occur through
steric block of product release that results from the binding of a
substrate molecule to the P-site. Substrate
activation of BuChE may be mediated by the binding of a second substrate
molecule to a P-site that triggers a conformational change extending
to the region near the catalytic triad in the active site. In addition, this catalytic enhancement may be
facilitated by stabilization of the tetrahedral intermediate. Such substrate activation has also been observed
for certain substrates with AChE. Mutation
of the P-site aspartate residue, D74 in AChE and D70 in BuChE, to
an uncharged glycine residue largely eliminates substrate inhibition
in AChE and substrate activation of BuChE., In
addition to this anionic aspartate residue, other amino acid residues,
especially those with aryl side chains in AChE, have been found to
contribute to catalysis through interactions at the gorge periphery.

Active
site gorge with homologous residues shown for acetylcholinesterase
(AChE) and butyrylcholinesterase (BuChE). The crystal structures of
human AChE (PDB ID: 1B41) and BuChE (PDB ID: 1POI) were obtained from the Protein Data Bank, and PyMol was employed to
delete all amino acids save for those selected residues found in the
active site.

The P-site of AChE has been well mapped using mutant
studies, as well as by X-ray crystallography of the
enzyme bound to inhibitors that interact with various components of
this site.,, The inhibitors
propidium and thioflavin T bind to the P-site of AChE while edrophonium
binds to W86 and Y337, thus interfering with access to the A-site.
X-ray crystallography studies corroborate a kinetic approach that
determined binding site competition between these inhibitors, thereby
helping to define details of the AChE P-site.

Studies with a series of N-10-carbonyl derivatives
of phenothiazine− as well as N-10-alkyl phenothiazines such as ethopropazine also indicate the relevance of aryl residues
close to the mouth of the active site gorge of BuChE that are contiguous
with the catalytic triad glutamate through the E-helix. This helix (E325-Y332) includes tyrosine and
phenylalanine residues (F329, Y332 in BuChE) whose side chains project
into the active site gorge. The residue Y332 has been implicated in
the binding of substrates and inhibitors to BuChE suggesting that
this amino acid residue is part of the P-site of this enzyme.− Inhibitors binding to this region may function by blocking substrate
access to the active site and/or by altering hydrolytic efficiency
through a conformational change that extends to the catalytic triad.

The P-site of BuChE has not been explored to the extent of the
comparable AChE site. Although mutant studies have provided valuable
insights, lack of X-ray crystallographic
data has hampered definition of BuChE P-site details. Since inhibitor
binding site competition analysis and mutant studies were successful
in mapping AChE P-site components, a similar approach was made to
probe the BuChE P-site. To that end, studies were undertaken using
wild-type and mutant BuChE species and the enzyme inhibitors thioflavin
T, propidium, edrophonium and two synthetic phenothiazine derivatives.

Experimental Procedures
Materials
Thioflavin T (1), propidium
iodide (2), edrophonium chloride (3), and
purified recombinant human AChE (∼1500, units as determined
by the supplier) were purchased from Sigma Aldrich (St. Louis, USA).
AChE concentration was calculated using the assumption of 450 units/nmol
(4.8 ΔA412/[min × nM]).N-[2-(N′,N′-Diisopropylamino)ethyl]-10H-phenothiazine-10-carboxamide
(4) and anthracen-9-yl(10H-phenothiazine-10-yl)
methanone (5) were synthesized as described previously., Purified human plasma wild-type BuChE and its mutants D70G, A328Y,
F329A, and Y332A were a gift from Dr. Oksana Lockridge (University
of Nebraska Medical Center, USA). BuChE concentration was calculated
using the assumption of 62.5 unit/nmol (0.94 ΔA412/[min × nM]). As
defined previously, 0.1 unit is the amount of BuChE that gives a ΔA/min of 1.0 in the presence of 1.6 × 10–4 M butyrylthiocholine in a 1.5 mL assay.

Inhibition Constant Determination
Inhibition constants
of inhibitors for AChE or BuChE were determined using a modification
of a described method. Briefly, varying
amounts of inhibitor (in 50 μL of 50% CH3CN(aq)) were added to 1.60 mL of buffer (0.09 M phosphate buffer, pH 8.0),
5,5′-dithio-bis(2-nitrobenzoic acid) (0.32 mM), and either
acetylthiocholine (5 μM, for AChE) or butyrylthiocholine (5
μM, for BuChE) in a quartz cuvette of 1 cm path length, and
the mixture was zeroed at 412 nm. The reaction was initiated by the
addition of 50 μL of AChE (to 1 nM) or BuChE (to 1 nM), in 0.1%
aqueous gelatin. Assays were conducted at 23 °C. The rate of
change of absorbance (ΔA/min), reflecting the
rate of hydrolysis of the substrate, was recorded every 2 s for 1
min, using an Ultraspec 2100 pro UV–visible spectrophotometer
(Fisher Scientific) equipped with Swift II application software. The
molar extinction coefficient for the Ellman product, 5-thio-2-nitrobenzoic
acid, used to convert the change in absorbance at λ = 412 nm
to moles of product, was 14150 M–1 cm–1. The second order hydrolysis rate constant (kE) was determined at low initial substrate concentration ([S]0) (i.e., [S]0 ≤ ∼0.2 Kapp, where Kapp is the apparent Michaelis constant) according to eq , where [S] is the concentration
of substrate remaining at time (t) in the presence
of the enzyme ([E]tot). Alternatively, kE can be determined according to eq  where A412 is absorbance, kobs = kE[E]tot,
and where ΔA412 = A412(final) – A412(t=0). Values of kE calculated
using eq  or eq  were
comparable. The ratio of kE without and
with inhibitor, described by eq , was plotted against inhibitor concentration,
and the data were fitted to solve for the inhibition constant (KI) as well as for the ratio of the relative
acylation rate constant to the relative affinity of the ligands in
the ternary complex (α). All experiments were performed at least
in triplicate and the values were averaged. Data fitting by nonlinear
regression was conducted with Excel Solver program and errors calculated
using the Solver Statistics Macro. ()

Inhibitor Competition Determination
When a single inhibitor
binds to cholinesterase, the rate of substrate hydrolysis is reduced.
If a second inhibitor targets the same site as the first, competition
between the two inhibitors will ensue and this will result in a further
alteration in substrate hydrolysis rate. Determining the change in
the rate of substrate hydrolysis in the presence of two inhibitors
provides information as to whether these are interacting with the
same or different enzyme binding sites. On the basis of this principle, assays were conducted as described
above in the presence of a fixed concentration of one inhibitor [I1],
here being one of propidium iodide (2), edrophonium chloride
(3), N-[2-(N′,N′-diisopropylamino)ethyl]-10H-phenothiazine-10-carboxamide
(4), or anthracen-9-yl(10H-phenothiazine-10-yl)
methanone (5) and varying concentrations of a second
inhibitor [I2], namely, thioflavin T (1). The ratio of kE in the presence of a fixed concentration of
inhibitor, [I1], and varying concentrations of another inhibitor,
[I2], to kE in the presence of only I1
was plotted against [I2] and fitted to eq  with
Excel Solver as described above. In this equation, K1 and K2 are the known equilibrium
dissociation constants for the inhibitors I1 and I2 with enzyme, respectively,
having been determined as KI values with
eq  as detailed above. K12 is the fitted equilibrium dissociation constant for I1 with
the binary complex of enzyme and I2. The ratio [I1]/K12 reflects whether the two inhibitors are interacting
with the same or different enzyme binding sites. Thus, as this ratio
approaches zero, it signifies that the inhibitors are in competition
for a common binding site on the enzyme. By setting this ratio to
zero, a theoretical data set representing complete competition between
the inhibitors was generated with eq . The
curve for this theoretical data set along with that for the fitted
data set was graphed using GraphPad Prism (California, USA). A numeric
value for such competition was calculated as the ratio of K12/K1 where a value
of ∼1 indicates no binding competition and values ≫1
indicate competition between the inhibitors.

Butyrylcholinesterase Mutant Inhibition Studies
Inhibitor
potency toward wild type BuChE and toward each of the BuChE mutants,
D70G, A328Y, F329A, and Y332A, was determined. The esterase activity
was determined by a modification of the
Ellman spectrophotometric method. Briefly,
one of the inhibitors (compounds 1–5) or blank (in 50 μL of 50% CH3CN(aq)) was added to 1.35 mL of buffer (0.09 M phosphate buffer, pH 8.0),
5,5′-dithio-bis(2-nitrobenzoic acid) (0.32 mM), and BuChE (∼0.035
units) in 0.1% aqueous gelatin in a stoppered cuvette of 1 cm path
length. The mixture was zeroed at 412 nm, and the reaction was initiated
by the addition of 50 μL of butyrylthiocholine in an aqueous
solution at a final concentration of 1.6 × 10–4 M. The reactions were performed at 23 °C. The rate of change
of absorbance (ΔA/min), reflecting the rate
of hydrolysis of butyrylthiocholine, was recorded every 5 s for 1
min, using a Milton-Roy 1201 UV–vis spectrophotometer (Milton-Roy,
Ivyland, PA) set at λ = 412 nm. The amount of activity with
and without inhibitor was determined for wild type BuChE and the BuChE
mutants.

Results and Discussion
In AChE, in addition to the
anionic residue D74, there are several amino acid residues that constitute
the P-site.,− Of the substrate and inhibitor binding sites
at the BuChE active site gorge, D70 has previously been determined
to be part of the P-site. () The present
work was undertaken to determine whether, in addition to D70, BuChE
has other amino acid residues that constitute this site. Determining
the P-site of BuChE will facilitate elucidation of the role of these
components in the functioning of the enzyme and aid in development
of inhibitors that might have therapeutic value. To that end, several
compounds (1–5) (Figure ) were evaluated using both inhibitor competition and BuChE
mutant studies to identify amino acid residues that may contribute
to P-site function in BuChE.

Structures of cholinesterase inhibitors used.

Inhibition Constants
The affinity constants (KI values) for the cholinesterase inhibitors
used in this study are summarized in Table . Plots of the ratio of second-order hydrolysis rates (kE[I]=0/kE+I, eq ) demonstrated a linear relationship with increasing inhibitor
concentrations, indicating that the constant α in eq  assumed a value close to zero as observed previously
for rapidly hydrolyzed substrates such
as acetylthiocholine and butyrylthiocholine. Examples of such plots
for thioflavin T (1) and propidium (2) are
presented in Figure . Edrophonium (3) and the phenothiazine urea (4) and amide (5) also showed similar linear relationships. Thioflavin T (1), the known AChE P-site inhibitor, was
observed to also inhibit BuChE with comparable potency (Table ). This fluorescent inhibitor probe has been shown
in earlier kinetic and X-ray crystallographic studies to bind to the
P-site of the AChE active site gorge.,

Plots of average second-order
substrate hydrolysis ratios by BuChE in the absence (kE[I]=0) and presence (kE+I) of thioflavin T (1) or propidium (2).
These plots show a linear relationship between the reciprocal of the second-order hydrolysis
rate and inhibitor concentration.

Inhibition Constants (KI) for AChE and BuChE; Binding Site Competition Ratios
(K12/K1) for
AChE and BuChE for Each Inhibitor in the Presence of Thioflavin T
 	 	AChE	BuChE	
 	compound	KI (μM)	K12/K1	KI (μM)	K12/K1	
1	thioflavin T	4.99 ± 0.13	 	3.62 ± 0.18	 	
2	propidium	9.73 ± 0.04	93 (C)	2.03 ± 0.30	1.1 (NC)	
3	edrophonium	1.01 ± 0.10	1.5 (NC)	198 ± 1	1.6 (NC)	
4	N-[2-(N′,N′-diisopropylamino)ethyl]-10H-phenothiazine-10-carboxamide	1.64 ± 0.10	70 (C)	0.021 ± 0.004	72 (C)	
5	anthracen-9-yl(10H-phenothiazine-10-yl) methanone	no inhibition	 	0.016 ± 0.006	1.1 (NC)	
A K12/K1 ratio of ∼1 indicates no competition
at binding sites (NC), whereas values ≫1 denotes competition
at the same binding site (C).

Another fluorescent inhibitor probe, propidium (2), also interacts with the AChE P-site, but it is thought to be able to enter the larger active
site gorge of BuChE and bind closer to the catalytic triad., In the present study, propidium (2) inhibited BuChE
with about 5-fold higher potency than for AChE (Table ). Edrophonium (3), which interacts with the
catalytic site of AChE, was about 200-fold
weaker as an inhibitor of BuChE (Table ),
consistent with results described previously.

As observed earlier, the phenothiazine
urea derivative (4) was 80-fold more potent as an inhibitor
of BuChE relative to AChE (Table ). Similarly,
the phenothiazine amide derivative (5) was a robust inhibitor of BuChE (Table ) but did not inhibit AChE under the same conditions. Evidence
was presented earlier, that phenothiazines interact
with residues such as Y332 near the periphery of the BuChE active
site gorge. It may be significant that such aryl residues are part
of a polypeptide segment (E-helix, Figure ) that also contains the glutamate (E325) of the catalytic triad
and thus may influence the catalytic activity of the enzyme. No X-ray
crystallographic analyses are yet available to establish the peripheral
binding sites of inhibitors to BuChE. However, indirect kinetic evidence,
as with the phenothiazine derivatives cited above and propidium,, provide some reference for determining binding site locations from
inhibitor competition studies.

Thioflavin T (1)
was chosen as the reference inhibitor for competition studies because
of its known binding to the P-site of AChE and because it also inhibits
BuChE with comparable potency (KI, Table ). The other inhibitors (compounds 2–5, Figure ) were chosen
to test for inhibitor competition with thioflavin T (1) because of their varied putative sites of interaction with BuChE.

Inhibition Competition Studies
The results of competition
studies between thioflavin T (1) and compounds 2–5 are summarized in Table  and related plots are presented in Figure . Competition between thioflavin T (1) and propidium
(2) with AChE confirmed the earlier observation that
these two compounds bind to the same site of this enzyme. () In contrast, the lack of competition between
thioflavin T (1) and propidium (2) with
BuChE indicates that these inhibitors bind at different sites on this
enzyme. Propidium has been suggested to bind closer to the catalytic
triad in the BuChE active site, implying
that thioflavin T (1) may bind to a more peripheral region
of the enzyme active site gorge. Consistent with a previous observation, competition studies between thioflavin T (1) and edrophonium (3) with AChE (Table , Figure ) indicated different
binding sites for these inhibitors. Both observations are in keeping
with earlier conclusions that edrophonium (3) binds at
the A-site of AChE, while thioflavin T (1) binds at the P-site. With BuChE, competition
studies between thioflavin T (1) and edrophonium (3) (Table , Figure ) suggest that these two inhibitors bind at different sites
on this enzyme as well. Similar experiments using thioflavin T (1) and the cationic phenothiazine urea derivative (4), which is thought to interact with the E-helix and D70, demonstrate overlapping binding sites. In contrast,
lack of competition between thioflavin T and the neutral phenothiazine
amide derivative (5) with BuChE (Table , Figure ) suggests that this phenothiazine
derivative has a binding site distinct from that of thioflavin T (1) on this enzyme.

Plots of second-order substrate hydrolysis rates
by BuChE or AChE with thioflavin T and in the presence (triangle)
or absence (circle) of another inhibitor with lines fitted or calculated
according to eq . Dotted lines represent the
theoretical plot that denotes complete competition between the inhibitor
and thioflavin T for that enzyme. For example, for BuChE, propidium
and thioflavin T do not compete as exemplified by overlap in the plots
with and without propidium. In contrast, for AChE, propidium competes
with thioflavin T as indicated by absence of overlap in the plots
with and without propidium, and overlap between the presence of propidium
and complete competition plots.

In these inhibitor studies with BuChE, lack of
competition between thioflavin T (1) and inhibitors that
are thought to bind near the catalytic triad in the active site, such
as propidium (2) and edrophonium (3), suggests
that thioflavin T (1) binds to a P-site of this enzyme.
This conclusion is further supported by the observation that thioflavin
T (1) competes with inhibitors such as the phenothiazine
urea (4), which has multiple binding sites on the enzyme,
but not with the phenothiazine amide (5), that is thought
to bind to the E-helix of the active site gorge. ()

Butyrylcholinesterase Mutant Studies
The extent of
inhibition by compounds 1–5 (Figure ) was determined for wild type BuChE and BuChE mutants
D70G, A328Y, F329A, and Y332A (Figure ). Although
some caution is required to interpret the results from mutation studies
because of potential complex indirect effects on the conformation
of the active site gorge, such studies do provide insights into the
importance of a particular amino acid residues in ligand binding.,, For thioflavin T (1), replacement of the peripheral anionic site residue D70 with the
neutral residue glycine in the BuChE D70G mutant reduced inhibition
by this compound compared to wild type and other mutants (Figure ). The similar inhibition constants for AChE and
BuChE and the attenuated inhibition toward BuChE D70G suggest that
thioflavin T (1) binds to D70 in the P-site of BuChE
to effect inhibition. Although thioflavin T (1) inhibition
of the corresponding AChE mutants has not been studied, these results
are unexpected based on the X-ray crystal structure of the thioflavin
T–AChE complex. This structure
shows no direct interaction between thioflavin T (1)
and D74 and close contacts of this ligand with the residues corresponding
to Y337 (A328 in BuChE) and Y341 (Y332 in BuChE). The P-site localization
of thioflavin T (1) in BuChE thus may differ somewhat
from that of thioflavin T (1) in AChE.

Enzyme activity of wild
type BuChE and its mutants in the absence and presence of compounds 1–5. The % residual enzyme activity indicates
the activity in the presence of inhibitor relative to the activity
in the absence of inhibitor for each mutant. Note that D70 mediates,
in part, inhibition by all cationic inhibitors (compounds 1–4). In addition, residues of the E-helix, F329
and Y332, are involved in ligand binding (compounds 2–5). Thus, D70, Y332, and F329 are components
of the P-site of BuChE.

Propidium (2) had reduced inhibition
potency for all BuChE mutants D70G, A328Y, F329A, and Y332A compared
to wild type (Figure ). This indicates that
propidium (2) interacts with D70 and its inhibitory action
is influenced by aryl residues on the E-helix, F329 and Y332, in BuChE.
Thus, even though this inhibitor may compete with substrate at the
active site, residues located above the
catalytic triad toward the periphery of the active site gorge (D70,
F329, and Y332) influence the inhibitory mechanism, perhaps through
multipronged electrostatic and π–π interactions
in the active site gorge. The apparent disruption of the propidium
(2) inhibition by the AChE-like mutation A328Y (Figure ) also supports the notion of propidium (2) interaction with the E-helix.

Edrophonium (3) is a potent inhibitor of AChE compared to its effect on BuChE (Table ). () This has been attributed
to the ability of the compound to interact with Y337 in AChE, which
is an alanine residue (A328) in BuChE. This was confirmed here (Figure ) by the greatly increased inhibition of BuChE mutant
A328Y over wild type BuChE and by the lack of competition between
edrophonium (3) and thioflavin T (1) for
both AChE and BuChE (Table ). Similar to propidium
(2), the D70G BuChE mutant is more resistant to edrophonium
(3) inhibition compared to wild type (Figure ). This signifies that, for cationic ligands, binding
to D70 partially mediates inhibition potency. Also, replacing F329
with alanine increases inhibition for this mutant over wild type BuChE,
suggesting that this aryl residue normally interferes with edrophonium
binding to some other residue, such as W82, that now becomes available.

N-[2-(N′,N′-Diisopropylamino)ethyl]-10H-phenothiazine-10-carboxamide
(4) inhibition was decreased with the D70G, F329, and
Y332A BuChE mutants compared to wild type BuChE, as previously reported. It has been suggested that the cationic nitrogen
of this compound, present at pH 8.0, spans the gorge between BuChE
E-helix residues and D70 and contributes to the high potency of this
compound to disrupt substrate hydrolysis.

Anthracen-9-yl(10H-phenothiazine-10-yl) methanone
(5) inhibition was significantly decreased only by the
Y332A BuChE mutant. This neutral phenothiazine derivative, unlike
the cationic amino urea (4), would not be expected to
bind to the anionic D70. Thus, both these phenothiazine derivatives
(4 and 5) associate with the E-helix, contributing
to their inhibitor potency.

Conclusion
Determination of inhibition constants, binding
site competition values and mutant studies suggest that D70, F329,
and Y332 are amino acid residues important for binding inhibitors
at the P-site of BuChE.

The authors declare no competing
financial interest.

Acknowledgments
Andrew Reid for technical advice.

Abbreviations
AChEacetylcholinesterase

BuChEbutyrylcholinesterase

(α)ratio of
the relative acylation rate constant to the relative affinity of the
ligands in the ternary complex

kEsecond order hydrolysis
rate constant

KIinhibition constant

This paper published ASAP on August 27, 2012. A correction was made to Figure  caption and the revised version was reposted on August 29, 2012.

