Membrane protein isolation and
purification requires solubilization of the proteins in detergent
micelles. Structure determination by solid state NMR in a native-like
lipid bilayer requires the removal of these detergents during reconstitution
into liposomes. The membrane protein bilayer or proteoliposome samples
can be very sensitive to the presence of residual detergent. To date,
a systematic detergent screen has not been described for the reconstitution
of small helical membrane protein samples into lipid environments
for solid state NMR.

Solid state NMR is responsible for the
majority of helical membrane
protein structures characterized in lipid bilayers.− Both oriented sample (OS) and magic angle spinning (MAS) samples
are sensitive to the detergent used in purification and reconstitution.
For OS solid state NMR, mechanically aligned samples rely on planar
lipid bilayers, and consequently, the induced curvature from residual
detergent molecules can be significant. Alternative bicelle samples are very sensitive to the ratio of short
to long chain lipids in the sample, and
an unintended detergent from a purification protocol would alter the
phase behavior of bicelles. For MAS, the influence of residual detergent
may not be immediately detectable in the spectra. However, recent
studies have shown that sensitivity and resolution are both dependent
on lipid type and require the complete
removal of detergent. In addition, we
have found that residual detergent significantly reduces the stability
and hence lifetime of the samples. As the technique is applied to
proteins with more than one or two helices, the affinity of detergent
for liposomes and for the protein itself must be considered in the
preparation of samples. Multispan helical membrane proteins are likely
to have more detergent binding capacity in the hydrophobic region
of the membrane than single helix membrane proteins. It is beneficial then to have a distinct set of experiments
by which to optimize the detergent choice for solid state NMR sample
preparation.

Many detergent based screens have been performed
in the context
of membrane protein structural biology. Here, we focus on the use
of detergents for reconstitution of purified proteins into liposomes.
It is worthwhile noting that different considerations are applicable
when solubilizing protein from cells, and these have been discussed
in detail. Crystallization screens for
X-ray− and electron, diffraction have focused
on stabilizing proteins in 3D or 2D detergent and lipid lattices.
Solution NMR efforts focus on achieving isotropic correlation times
in detergent micelle preparations.− In all cases, there should be an emphasis on achieving a fully functional
state for the membrane protein, a parameter that can vary greatly
depending on the solubilizing conditions used.− Unfortunately,
for many membrane proteins, such as ion channels, functional assays
require a bilayer preparation. Lipid bilayer and preoliposome samples
for solid state NMR permits both structural studies and functional
assays in a native-like environment. However, it is often unclear
if a residual detergent is present and if present whether or not it
interferes with the protein structure and function., One of the distinguishing characteristics between detergents and
lipids is the high monomer concentration of detergents in the presence
of micelles that can lead to detergent binding in non-native locations,
such as between helices, or at the aqueous surface, which could explain the loss of function for
proteins in detergent environments. Therefore,
based on the potential impact on sample preparation and protein structure
and function, we have developed a protocol to eliminate the residual
detergent from the samples used for solid state NMR spectroscopy.

There have been studies of detergent affinity for liposomes− and of the kinetics of detergent insertion into liposomes. Pure liposomes can be prepared with no residual
detergent, but the introduction of detergent-bound
protein into a solution of liposomes can modify the detergent affinity
for the liposomes and the kinetics for the detergent removal from
the liposomes as a result of the known affinity of detergents for
protein molecules. While both long and
short acyl chain detergents have stabilized a variety of membrane
protein structures, long acyl chain detergents provide a better hydrophobic
environment., Unfortunately, detergents, of
a given headgroup structure, with longer acyl chains have greater
affinity for and increased partitioning into liposomes than those
with shorter acyl chains. Therefore,
a general theme for reconstitution based detergent screens would be
to decrease the acyl chain length as much as possible to minimize
the residual detergent in the final proteoliposome sample.

Here,
we devise a detergent screen that aims to improve the sample
quality for solid state NMR. The samples can be used for either OS
solid state NMR of mechanically aligned lipid bilayers or MAS solid
state NMR of proteoliposomes. Traditional batch purification with detergent exchange is used to transfer the protein into a new detergent. This can be
followed by size exclusion chromatography and circular dichroism (CD)
spectroscopy to initially evaluate the protein structure in the new
environment. Continued characterization can be achieved with HPLC
using evaporative light scattering detection (ELSD) for assessing
the residual detergent in the proteoliposomes. We apply the screen
here to a small three helix membrane protein, Rv1861 from M. tuberculosis, that hydrolyzes nucleotides when reconstituted
into proteoliposomes and participates in the regulation of transglycosylase
activity. OS solid state NMR spectra of this protein have been published
for samples prepared using two different detergents., The results of this work indicate that a detergent with moderate
affinity for liposomes can sufficiently solubilize the protein and
be completely removed during reconstitution allowing for increased
sensitivity in the solid state NMR samples. On the basis of the results
presented here, we expect that many more helical membrane proteins
can be readily prepared in liposomes for solid state NMR studies.

Experimental
Procedures
Protein Expression and Batch Purification
The Rv1861
gene from M. tuberculosis strain H37Rv was cloned
into a modified pET-16b vector (Novagen, Inc.) modified to include
a His6 N-terminal purification tag. The plasmid was transformed
into E. coli BL21-RP-Codon Plus cells (Stratagene,
Inc.) for expression. Cells were grown in LB media (Ameresco, Inc.)
at 37 °C to an OD600 of 1.0 before expression was
induced by adding IPTG to 0.4 mM. Cells were harvested, and 10 mL
of lysis buffer (75 mM sodium phosphate, pH 7.5, and 500 mM sodium
chloride) per unit of OD600 absorbance was added to resuspend
the cells. Lysozyme was added to 0.25 mg/mL along with 4 μL
benzonase nuclease and cells incubated at room temperature for 30
min prior to French Press at 10,000 PSI three times. Ten milliliters
of lysate was centrifuged at 18,000g for 60 min to
isolate the inclusion bodies from other cellular components. Six milliliters
of solubilization buffer (40 mM sodium phosphate, pH 7.5, 300 mM sodium
chloride, 108 mM Empigen-BB) was used to resuspend each pellet, which
was then incubated at 4 °C with gentle rocking for 4 h. The suspension
was centrifuged at 18,000g for 30 min to remove insoluble
material.

Eight purification tests were prepared by adding 700
μL of the supernatant to 100 μL of Qiagen Ni-NTA resin
equilibrated with equilibration buffer (40 mM sodium phosphate, pH
7.5, 300 mM sodium chloride, and 25 mM Empigen-BB) in a 1.5 mL Eppendorf
tube. The mixtures were incubated at room temperature for 4 h to allow
the proteins to bind resin. The tubes were centrifuged at 1,000g for 1 min, and the supernatant was removed without disturbing
the resin. Then 500 μL of equilibration buffer was added to
each Eppendorf tube and the mixture incubated at room temperature
with gentle rocking for 5 min. Next, 500 μL of wash buffer (equilibration
buffer with 20 mM imidazole) was added and the tubes incubated and
centrifuged as before. The processes was repeated twice more, once
with wash buffer, then once with exchange buffer (20 mM sodium phosphate
at pH 7.5 with a quantity of detergent expected to yield 0.4 mM concentration
of micelles (Tables  and )). Protein was eluted from the resin by repeating the process
three more times with elution buffer (exchange buffer with 500 mM
imidazole.)

Detergent Concentrations Used for
the Batch Purification Assay
detergent	concn (mM)	
sodium dodecylsulfate	33	
Empigen-BB	25	
dodecylphosphocholine	19	
sodium
dodecylsarcosine	41	
decyldimethylglycine	43	
Anzergent 3–10	55	
Anzergent 3–8	414	
nonylglucoside	12	
nonylmaltoside	39	
Detergent Parameters in Aqueous Solution
detergent	molecular weight
(Da)	CMC (mM)	aggregation number	micelle mass (kDa)	acyl chain	headgroup
charge	
SDS	289	7–10 (0.5)	62	18	12	negative	
Empigen-BB	272	1.6–2.1	*	*	12	zwitterionic	
DPC	351	1.5	54	19	12	zwitterionic	
Sarco	293	14.4	*	*	12	negative	
DM	483	1.8	69	33	10	polar	
DDGly	243	19	*	*	10	zwitterionic	
A3–10	308	39	41	13	10	zwitterionic	
NM	469	6	25	12	9	polar	
NG	306	6.5	133	41	9	polar	
OG	292	18–20	27–100	8–29	8	polar	
A3–8	280	390	*	*	8	zwitterionic	
An asterisk indicates that data
was not available.

Values
obtained from Sigma-Aldrich,
Inc.

Values obtained from
Anatrace/Affymetrix,
Inc.

SDS–CMC in the
presence of
proteins is reduced to ∼0.5 mM.

Empigen-BB is primarily
12 carbon
but contains 10–16 carbon molecules.

Size Exclusion Chromatography
A Hi-Prep Sephacryl S200
(16/60) 120 mL column (GE Lifesciences, Inc.) and AKTA Xpress (GE
Lifesciences, Inc.) system were used to perform size exclusion chromatography
at room temperature. For each detergent, ∼20 μL of eluted
protein was diluted to 500 μL with exchange buffer (see  section for buffer contents) and concentrated to ∼100 μL using
a 3.5 kDa spin column (Millipore, Inc.). The dilution and concentration
procedure was repeated once more before harvesting the solubilized
protein and diluting it to 5 mL to remove imidazole from the solution
that would interfere with the UV detection of the protein and to prepare
the sample for injection. The column was equilibrated with two column
volumes of size exclusion buffer (20 mM sodium phosphate at pH 7.5,
with detergent at the critical micelle concentration (CMC); see Table ). The protein sample was then injected onto the
column, followed by a 5 mL wash with exchange buffer to ensure that
the entire sample was removed from the injection loop. The column
was run at 0.5 mL/min for 140 mL.

CD Spectroscopy
Purified protein was rinsed three times
in 500 μL, 3.5 kDa spin filters (Millipore, Inc.) with 25 mM
sodium phosphate at pH 7.5 and a concentration of 1 CMC of the appropriate
detergent (Table ) to remove imidazole. The
protein was diluted to between 5 and 10 μM for CD experiments
depending on the detergent used. The samples were desalted with data
acquired in a 300 μL, 1 mm, Starna quartz cell on an AVIV 202
CD spectrometer. Three sweeps of the 180–260 nm wavelength
range in 1.0 nm increments were averaged, and the buffer signal was
subtracted from the protein signal before converting the raw data
into residual molar ellipticity. The deconvolution of the CD curves
was performed in CD-PRO (http://lamar.colostate.edu/∼sreeram/CDPro/main.html) using a basis set of 43 soluble and 13 membrane proteins. The CD
data were deposited in the PDCDB with codes CD0004475000, CD0004476000,
CD0004477000, CD0004478000, and CD0004479000.

Proteoliposome Preparation
For the reconstitution test
and the OS solid state NMR samples, a liposome suspension was prepared
by dissolving 50 mg of 1,2-dimyristoyl-sn-glycero-3-phosphocholine/1,2-dimyristoyl-sn-glycero-3-phospho-(1′-rac-glycerol) (DMPC/DMPG)
powder at a 4:1 weight ratio in 2 mL of 10 mM HEPES buffer at pH 7.5,
in a glass test tube. The mixture was bath sonicated for 30–60
min until the solution became clear indicating the formation of small
unilamellar vesicles, which was confirmed by electron microscopy (Figure
1, ). The detergent
was added to the solution until it was optically clear (0 absorbance
at 0.1 cm path length over 300–700 nm), and all lipid vesicles
were solubilized into mixed micelles (69 mM for sodium dodecyl sulfate
(SDS) and 103 mM for decyl-N,N-dimethylglycine
(DDGly)). Then, 4.2 mg (SDS) or 10.5 mg (DDGly) of detergent solubilized
protein was added to the lipid detergent solution and the volume adjusted
with 10 mM HEPES at pH 7.5 to a final volume of 8 mL. The detergent
was added to make concentrations of 69 mM and 82 mM for SDS and DDGly,
respectively, and the final lipid concentration was 9 mM. The mixture
was incubated at 37 °C for 12 h. During incubation, the solution
was mixed by gentle inversion three times at 4 h intervals. The solutions
were placed in 6–8 kDa MWCO dialysis tubing and dialyzed against
2 L of 10 mM HEPES at pH 7.5 and 35 °C with daily buffer changes.
Proteoliposomes were harvested after 10 d (SDS) or 6 d (DDGly) of
dialysis by centrifugation at 228,000g for 1.5 h.
The supernatant was discarded and the pellet resuspended with 10 mM
HEPES at pH 7.5 to a final volume of 1.2 mL.

For magic angle
spinning samples, the same reconstitution procedure was used except
the lipid mass was reduced to 20 mg. The protein-to-lipid ratio remained
the same for each detergent (1.8 mg for SDS and 4.2 mg for DDGly).
After dialysis, the proteoliposomes were was pelleted at 228,000g for 2 h in 3.2 mL thickwall polycarbonate ultracentrifuge
tubes (Beckman Coulter, Inc.)

Evaporative Light Scattering
Detection
The detergents
were separated using HPLC and an Acclaim Surfactant Plus 3.0 μm
column (Thermo Scientific, Inc.). An AB linear gradient elution was
used (30 °C, 70 to 15% eluent B over 10 min at a flow rate of
0.9 mL/min). Eluent A was HPLC grade acetonitrile, and eluent B was
0.1 M ammonium acetate at pH 5.0. The presence of the detergent was
assessed using an ELSD380 system (Agilent Technologies, Inc.). After
each daily dialysis buffer change, an aliquot of the detergent–proteoliposome
mixture was removed from the dialysis bag. The aliquots were not diluted
prior to each 25 μL injection. The N2 flow rate was
1.6 L/min, the nebulizer was 50 °C, the evaporator was 75 °C,
and the photomultiplier tube gain was set at 2.5 to ensure a noise
level of &lt;0.2 mV peak–peak based on manufacturer recommendations.

Oriented Sample Solid State NMR Samples and Spectroscopy
Proteoliposome solution was deposited on 40 5.7 mm × 12 mm ×
60 μm glass slides (35 μL per slide). The slides were
dehydrated in a sealed 98% relative humidity chamber at 22 °C
for approximately 12 h or until bulk water was visibly removed from
the slides. Two microliters of deionized water was added to the center
of each slide before stacking 30 of them on top of each other. The
stack was incubated at 98% relative humidity at 37 °C for 4 d
to remove bulk water and to let the proteoliposome solution between
the glass slides become homogenously hydrated. The stack was then
inserted into a 5.7 mm × 5.7 mm × 20 mm glass cell and sealed
with beeswax after inserting a plastic plug. SAMPI4 experiments for measuring 15N chemical shift anisotropy and 1H–15N dipolar couplings were performed on a 21.1 T 105 mm bore
magnet using a home-built Low-E 1H-X static probe at 310 K. A 4 μs 1H pulse was
used, and rf fields were 62.5 kHz on both channels
for cross-polarization and 1H decoupling. Thirty-two t1 points were acquired with
2048 or 4096 transients averaged for DDGly and SDS, respectively.
A 5 s recycle delay was used for both experiments.

Magic Angle
Spinning Solid State NMR Samples and Spectroscopy
Proteoliposome
pellets were dehydrated at 37 °C and 16% relative
humidity for several hours until the sample was approximately 40%
w/w water before packing into a 3.2 mm thin walled rotor (Revolution
NMR, Inc.). The detailed packing procedure is described in ref (). Dipolar assisted rotational
resonance (DARR), experiments were performed on
a 14.1 T 89 mm bore magnet using a home-built, Low-E, 1H-13C-15N triple resonance probe with 10 kHz MAS at 243 K. One hundred kilo hertz
of irradiation on the 1H channel was used for the 90°
pulse and SPINAL-64 decoupling. During
cross-polarization, the 13C rf field was
50 kHz with a ±10% linear 1H ramp. The 13C 90° pulse was 50 kHz. Sixty-four and 128 transients were averaged
for each of the 512 t1 points for DDGly and SDS, respectively. Recycle delay was set at
1.5 s.

Results
Detergent Choice
It is important to distinguish between
detergents used for isolation and purification and those used for
reconstitution. When a preparation of purified protein solubilized
in detergent is of interest, the detergent most amenable to the experiment
being performed is often chosen. For example, the Rv1861 protein is
easily purified in detergents with 12 carbon acyl chains (SDS and
DPC) with SDS being the most suitable for solution NMR studies of
this protein. However, when the protein
is reconstituted into liposomes attention must be paid to the detergent
affinity for liposomes and protein. Ideally, this affinity should
be minimized. The detergent can be exchanged on-column during the
purification process once impurities have been removed., Rv1861 has been studied by OS solid state NMR in DMPC/DMPG lipid
bilayers. The first samples were prepared using SDS mediated reconstitution. The highest protein-to-lipid molar ratio (P/L)
that could be used to prepare high quality mechanically aligned bilayer
samples was 1:200. With less lipid per protein, the reconstitutions
were incomplete, and the resuspended proteoliposome pellet was too
viscous for NMR sample preparation. On the basis of this, we proposed
that residual SDS was present in the samples, preventing high quality
proteoliposome preparation. The most likely detergent characteristics
to induce increased affinity for the proteoliposomes are acyl chain
length and headgroup charge. More mild detergents lacking charge and
containing shorter acyl chains, such as DM and OG, failed to stabilize
the protein long enough for reconstitution into proteoliposomes. The
detergent acyl chain length modulates the CMC for a given detergent
headgroup and is important during dialysis
because only detergent monomers exchange with buffer. A higher CMC
provides a greater concentration gradient and drives the detergent
out of the proteoliposome and into the buffer. Furthermore, acyl chain
length also determines relative affinity of the detergents for liposomes and dictates how much detergent dissociates
from the liposomes during dialysis. On the basis of the structure
of SDS, we selected detergents with reduced acyl chain length (9–10
carbons) or a reduction in headgroup hydrophilicity under the premise
that such detergents might stabilize the protein adequately and also
be readily removed during reconstitution. The commercially available
detergents selected for Rv1861 are shown in Figure  and Table .

Detergents used in the
purification screen for Rv1861. Decreasing
the acyl chain length for a given headgroup increases the relative
CMC and decreases relative detergent affinity for liposomes. The dashed
line is meant to suggest the approximate interface between hydrophilic
and hydrophobic moieties for these amphipathic molecules. Molecular
structures were drawn with ChemSketch (ACD/Laboratories, Inc.).

Batch Purification Assay
A batch purification assay
was performed using the new detergents (Figure ). Inclusion body fractions were solubilized with the industrial
detergent Empigen-BB, bound to a Ni2+ affinity column,
and washed in Empigen-BB followed by detergent exchange with the desired
detergent and elution at a high concentration of imidazole. While
SDS eluted the most protein, the other 8, 9, 10, and 12 carbon detergents
eluted considerable protein. The 10 and 12 carbon detergents stabilized
the protein for over 2 weeks, while the 8 and 9 carbon detergents
all showed visible signs of precipitation within the same period.
It is important to note that the &gt;15 kDa bands visible in the InVision
stained gel (Figure B) are most likely not
the Rv1861 protein. The smaller molecular weight band around 16 kDa
is not a dimer of Rv1861 whose molecular weight is 11.4 kDa. Also,
both bands elute in either the flow through or wash fractions, indicating
that these molecules do not have significant affinity for the Ni2+ column. Finally, the detergent A3–8 shows signs of
protein precipitation or severe protein aggregation at the top of
the gels as well as slightly increased molecular weight for the monomer
(Figure A).

Batch purification assay. SDS eluted the
most protein, while other
detergents eluted slightly less protein. The dashed line indicates
detergents that failed to stabilize the protein for longer than two
weeks. (A) Coomassie and (B) a UV sensitive poly histidine dye (InVision)
were used to stain the gels. Inclusion Body is the resuspended pellet
after spinning the lysate at 18,000g, Insoluble is
the 18,000g pellet after incubation with the Empigen-BB
detergent, Load is the supernatant from the insoluble pellet, Flow
Through is the elute from the column with no imidazole present, Wash
is the elute from the column with 40 mM imidazole, and all other lanes
are the elutes from the column with 250 mM imidazole containing the
detergent named at the top of each lane.

Oligomeric State in Micelles
Gel filtration chromatography
was performed to assess sample homogeneity and to detect oligomeric
states for the protein in the various detergent environments (Figure ). The data are interpreted based on the standards
provided by the manufacturer and the average micellar weight for each
detergent. When no data were available for a detergent aggregation
number, the value was estimated using data for similar detergents.
Here, the detergents tested have micelle sizes spanning ∼7–20
kDa. It should be noted that the detergent contribution to molecular
weight per protein molecule for oligomeric complexes can be expected
to be somewhat less than that of a monomeric state; therefore, the
influence from the detergent is not linear. The SDS sample eluted
near the void volume of the column corresponding to a complex of ∼160
kDa. Note that the sample is heterogeneous with small peaks at 85
and 105 mL elution volumes. The DPC sample also eluted primarily as
a large oligomeric complex of ∼100 kDa, although there is a
small amount of a larger complex for this sample. The A3–10
sample elutes even later from the column and suggests a smaller complex
of ∼60 kDa. There is a slight heterogeneity in the sample eluting
at ∼55 mL. The DDGly solubilized protein eluted near the column
volume (120 mL) and shows a homogeneous sample. This represents a
monomeric complex (∼15–20 kDa) based on column standards
and the molecular weight of Rv1861 (11.4 kDa). The SDS–PAGE
results suggest monomeric states for Rv1861, while the SE results
appear to show various oligomeric complexes for SDS, DPC, and A3–10.
While the SDS–PAGE samples were not boiled, the higher concentration
of SDS in the sample buffer could affect the protein conformation
and oligomeric state.

Size exclusion elution profiles for selected detergents.
SDS and
DPC indicate the presence of a large oligomeric complex. A3–10
indicates the presence of an intermediate sized oligomeric complex,
while DDGly most likely represents a monomeric complex. All detergents
except DDGly have some heterogeneity in the sample. The detergent
contribution to the molecular weight is most likely similar for all
detergents, 7–20 kDa.

Alpha Helical Content in Micelles
CD spectroscopy was
performed on the protein solubilized in detergents to assess helical
content in the different environments. Helical prediction from the
amino acid sequence using the TMHMM program indicates the protein should be roughly 60% helical. The CD spectra
all exhibit highly helical profiles (Figure ) in agreement with TMHMM prediction and published OS solid state
NMR data., The 12 carbon detergents exhibited similar
secondary structure content. However, DDGly stabilized slightly more
structures presenting slightly less unordered content, while A3–10
stabilized less α-helical content with a marked increase in
the β-strand, turn, and unordered content.

(A) CD profiles for Rv1861
stabilized in various detergents. (B)
Secondary structure content analysis of the CD data based on a database
of 43 soluble and 13 membrane proteins.

Detergent Removal
Side-by-side reconstitution was performed
into DMPC/DMPG lipid bilayers using protein stabilized in SDS or DDGly.
Detergent was removed by dialysis with daily buffer changes. Figure A shows SDS–PAGE gels monitoring the reconstitution
process. For the SDS mediated reconstitution, both detergent solubilized
protein and proteoliposomes are present in the sample after extensive
dialysis, although the amount of detergent solubilized protein is
a small fraction of the total protein shown in Figure A. Lanes 1–3 are before dialysis and lanes 4–6
after dialysis with lane 4 being the supernatant after pelleting the
proteoliposomes. Lanes 5 and 6 represent the proteoliposome pellet.
There must be residual detergent in the sample to solubilize the hydrophobic
membrane protein in the supernatant (lane 4). Conversely, the DDGly
reconstitution does not show detergent solubilized protein in the
supernatant after only three days of dialysis (Figure A, lane 4). This suggests that for DDGly virtually all of
the detergent is removed by dialysis, while this is not true for SDS.
For DDGly, the sample starts with a volume of 8 mL containing ∼80
mM DDGly and is equilibrated with 2 L of buffer for dialysis. After
the first buffer change, there should be ∼0.3 mM DDGly remaining
in the sample if complete equilibration occurs. By the third dilution,
there should only be ∼5 nM of detergent left in the sample.
Likewise, for SDS, the sample has an 8 mL volume with ∼70 mM
detergent and is dialyzed in 2 L of buffer. Again, after three days
the detergent concentration should be ∼5 nM if equilibrium
is achieved. In the sample, the protein concentration is ∼0.1
mM, and the lipid concentration is ∼22 mM; therefore, if the
detergent is equilibrated with each 2 L buffer change the remaining
nanomolar concentration of detergent after 3 days should have no effect
on the proteoliposomes because it is so dilute. The presence of detergent
during dialysis was monitored by HPLC using an ELSD as shown in Figure B. Missing data points for SDS indicate the detector
was saturated by large signals resulting from high concentrations
of detergent. DDGly is undetectable after the third day of dialysis
indicating the concentration is below the limit of detection (a few
nanomolar) which verifies that the DDGly completely equilibrates with
the buffer within 24 h. SDS, however, was still detected after 10
d indicating that the SDS did not equilibrate completely with buffer
in 24 h since it was detectable even after the 10th buffer change.
This result and the presence of solubilized protein in the supernatant
from the ultracentrifugation suggest that a significant concentration
of SDS remains in the sample.

(A) SDS–PAGE gels monitor the reconstitution
process for
Rv1861 in SDS and DDGly detergents show the residual soluble protein
for the SDS sample. Lane 1 is purified protein in detergent micelles.
Lanes 2 and 3 are detergent solubilized protein mixed with proteoliposomes
before and after incubation at 37 °C, respectively. Lane 4–6
are samples after extensive dialysis and centrifugation. Lane 4 is
the supernatant, and lanes 5 and 6 are the resuspended proteoliposome
pellets before and after the removal of any precipitate. (B) Integrated
peak volume for the detergent detected by evaporative light scattering
as a function of dialysis time. The buffer with a 250-fold larger
volume than the sample was changed daily. DDGly (squares) is readily
removed but SDS (diamonds) persists in the sample after 10 daily buffer
changes. SDS signals saturated the detector until day 6 due to high
concentrations of the detergent. DDGly saturates the detector on day
0, but the sample was diluted. Measurement errors are ±5%.

Solid State NMR Sample
Quality
OS solid state NMR samples
prepared from SDS could only be made at 1:200 P/L, while DDGly can
be prepared up to 1:80. The uniformly 15N-labeled SAMPI4
2D spectrum for each liposome preparation is shown in Figure . The highly congested spectrum is consistent with
a three helix membrane protein. A similar
intensity pattern, such as the hole at 175 ppm chemical shift and
3.0 kHz dipolar coupling, indicates the protein has similar structure
in each sample. However, in the boxed region of the spectrum there
are resonances in the SDS spectrum not present in the DDGly sample
(Figure ). The exact structural changes cannot
be determined with these spectra. Regardless, the higher P/L ratio
available when using DDGly resulted in equivalent signal-to-noise
with half of the signal averaging compared to that of the SDS sample.

SAMPI4
spectra of uniformly 15N-labeled Rv1861 in DMPC/DMPG
lipid bilayers prepared using DDGly (A) and SDS (B). The spectra present
similar intensity profiles indicating similar helical structure and
orientation for both samples. The DDGly detergent allowed higher protein
to lipid ratios to be used, which halved the signal averaging time
for equivalent signal-to-noise. Contours are drawn at 1.1σ and
1.2σ with the factor between levels set to 1.1 for DDGly and
SDS, respectively.

13C–13C magic angle spinning solid
state NMR correlation spectra for Rv1861 proteoliposomes prepared
using DDGly and SDS are shown in Figure .
Because of the high content of hydrophobic amino acids, the resonances
from these sites are not well resolved. However, both preparations
give similar resonance envelopes for valine, leucine, and isoleucine,
which are characteristic of helical membrane proteins. Importantly, there are significant differences
in the spectra. The SDS spectrum has missing threonine and tryptophan
Cα/Cβ cross-peaks (Figure , red arrows), and the DDGly spectrum has increased
resolution (Figure , green arrows). The 1D
slices shown in Figure C and D show narrower
lineshapes, twice the signal-to-noise, and extra peaks for the DDGly
sample.

13C–13C DARR spectra (30 ms) for Rv1861
prepared from DDGly (A and C) and SDS (B and D) at 10 kHz MAS and
243 K. The SDS spectrum averaged twice as many transients as the DDGly
spectrum but results in less signal. Red arrows indicate resonances
missing from the SDS spectrum, and green arrows indicate cross-peaks
for threonine, valine, and alanine that are better resolved for DDGly.
Contours are drawn at 3.7σ and 7.8σ with the factor between
levels set to 1.3 for DDGly and SDS, respectively.

Discussion
Although a given detergent
may stabilize a membrane protein, it
does not mean that the detergent is the best candidate for the preparation
of proteoliposome samples, as exemplified here with Rv1861. Detergents
were screened based on the fact that short acyl chain detergents are
easily removed from liposomes, while long acyl chain detergents are
more difficult to remove from and have more affinity for protein molecules.
For Rv1861, we show that reducing the acyl chain length from 12 to
10 allows for a doubling of the protein incorporated into liposomes
while forming homogeneous samples without residual detergent. Furthermore,
these preparations have been used for the first high resolution structural
characterization of the transmembrane domain for a three helix membrane
protein using OS and MAS solid state NMR (Murray et al., unpublished results). On the basis of the set of
experiments presented here, detergents can be screened for their effective
removal leading to optimal samples of membrane protein drug targets
for structural characterization by solid state NMR.

Every membrane
protein interacts differently with each detergent.
While some membrane proteins are solubilized very well in long, 12
carbon, acyl chain detergents,− others favor shorter, 8–10
carbon acyl chain detergents., In general, detergents
with acyl chains containing &lt;10 carbons are more easily removed
unless there is a highly specific interaction with the protein. However, in general, longer, 12 carbon acyl
chain detergents are effective for stabilizing membrane proteins., A directed approach that is aimed at producing a native conformation
in a native-like environment for solid state NMR is favored over stabilizing
the greatest quantity of protein. As new membrane protein drug targets
are studied by solid state NMR, the approach presented here represents
an efficient strategy to begin structural characterization efforts.
The lipid choice for the reconstitution of a specific protein is dependent
on the successful results of a functional assay for each protein.
For Rv1861, a GTP hydrolysis assay was used to show the protein is
functional in DMPC/DMPG proteoliposomes.

It is completely plausible
that the protein under study may be
stabilized by a detergent in an inactive state with the wrong tertiary
structure. Indeed, some proteins are completely inactivated by short
exposure to detergents while remaining soluble,,, and other proteins require cholesterol or
specific lipids to achieve a similar activity in micelles as in liposomes, and still others form nonfunctional oligomeric
states. The focus here is on identifying
a detergent that will stabilize the protein for long enough to incorporate
it into a native-like liposome environment while also allowing virtually
all of the detergent to be removed by dialysis. The intended result
is to obtain liposomes for solid state NMR with a high concentration
of natively folded protein. It should be stressed that the screen
applies to a variety of lipid combinations that can be tailored to
the specific needs of a given protein and that the reconstituted proteins
can be easily used in a variety of functional assays to validate the
native-like character of the sample.

The experiments presented
here provide a rapid method to screen
detergents to optimize the incorporation of membrane proteins into
liposomes. With the advent of solid state NMR technology as a primary
technique for investigating membrane protein structure in a native-like
environment, these experiments pave the way for many of these important
drug targets to be characterized. Through this screening approach,
many more membrane protein drug targets will become available for
structural characterization.

Supporting Information Available
Electron
micrographs of the
proteoliposome preparations obtained using SDS and DDGly mediated
reconstitution. This material is available free of charge via the
Internet at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bi500144h_si_001.pdf

The work
was
made possible by grants from the National Institute of Allergy and
Infectious Diseases (R01-AI073891 and P01-AI074805) and the use of
the National High Magnetic Field Laboratory, funded by a cooperative
agreement between the State of Florida and the National Science Foundation
(DMR-1157490).

The authors
declare no
competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
We thank
Dr. Claudius Mondoma from the FSU Physical Biochemistry
Facility, Institute for Molecular Biophysics for help with the CD
experiments. Dr. Huajun Qin assisted with cloning and expression of
the Rv1861 protein. Dr. Riqiang Fu, Dr. Bill Brey, and Peter Gor’kov
from the NHMFL assisted with the NMR experiments and NMR probe technology.

Abbreviations
A3–8Anzergent 3–8

A3–10Anzergent 3–10

CDcircular dichroism

CMCcritical micelle
concentration

DARRdipolar assisted rotational resonance

DMPC1,2-dimyristoyl-sn-glycero-3-phosphocholine

DDGlydecyl-N,N-dimethylglycine

DMPG1,2-dimyristoyl-sn-glycero-3-phospho-(1′-rac-glycerol)

DPCn-dodecylphosphocholine

EmpEmpigen-BB

ELSDevaporative light scattering
detection

HPLChigh
pressure liquid chromatography

MASmagic angle spinning

NMn-nonly-β-d-glucopyranoside and n-nonly-β-d-maltropyranoside

OGn-octyl-β-d-glucopyranoside

OSoriented sample

Sarcon-dodecanoyl
sarcosine

SDSsodium
dodecyl sulfate

