The IκB
kinase (IKK) complex
responds to a host of proinflammatory cell stimuli by switching to
a state of high catalytic activity. The prototypical IKK complex contains
three subunits: IKK1/IKKα, IKK2/IKKβ, and NEMO/IKKγ.
IKK1 and -2 are closely related kinase domain-containing polypeptides,
whereas NEMO is an obligate scaffolding subunit.− The essential
nature of NEMO in IKK activation is illustrated by the observation
that NEMO–/– MEF cells are insensitive to
canonical inducers of NF-κB activity, including TNF-α,
LPS, and IL-1.

Activation of IKK1
and -2 results from the phosphorylation of two
activation loop serines: S176 and S180 for IKK1 and S177 and S181
for IKK2. Several upstream IKK kinases,
including TAK1, MEKK3, and IRAK1, have been reported.− No single upstream kinase, however, is required for IKK activation
under all conditions of signaling and across all cell types. Furthermore,
several viral gene products such as HTLV Tax and KSHV v-FLIP trigger
IKK activation independent of upstream signaling by directly binding
to NEMO.− Additionally, it has been demonstrated in yeast and insect cells
that overexpressed recombinant human IKK1 and -2 subunits can become
activated without NEMO or any specific upstream kinase., Finally, the addition of free polyubiquitin chains was shown to
be sufficient to activate purified IKK1 and -2 in an in vitro reconstitution of IKK activation, suggesting that activation of
these kinase subunits may result from trans autophosphorylation.

Although active IKK recognizes and phosphorylates
a number of diverse
cellular substrates, including FOXO3a, p65/RelA, SNAP-23, and TSC1,
its best understood function is phosphorylation of the transcription
factor NF-κB inhibitor protein IκBα on two N-terminal
serine residues, S32 and S36.− This signal-dependent phosphorylation
of IκBα occurs in the cytoplasm and quickly leads to its
ubiquitinylation and 26S proteasome-mediated degradation. The newly
freed NF-κB then migrates to the nucleus where it elevates the
expression of target genes. Mouse knockout studies clearly revealed
that the IKK2 subunit is primarily responsible for this N-terminal
phosphorylation of IκBα in response to proinflammatory
NF-κB-inducing stimuli such as TNF-α or IL-1.,

Recent X-ray crystal structure analyses have revealed that
IKK2
contains three distinct domains: an N-terminal kinase domain (KD)
followed by a ubiquitin-like domain (ULD) and a C-terminal scaffold
dimerization domain (SDD).− Dimerization of IKK2 subunits
is mediated entirely by the SDD. Moreover, flexibility within this
elongated α-helical domain facilitates opening of the otherwise
rigid IKK2 dimer (Figure ). In their open
conformation, IKK2 dimers can associate with one another to form higher-order
oligomers that project their KD in a manner that supports KD–KD
interactions. Introduction of mutations within surfaces that mediate
these higher-order interactions disrupts IKK2 activation in transfected
cells, suggesting that they facilitate IKK2 trans autophosphorylation. Previous studies have also shown that IKK2 constructs
that contain only the KD–ULD function in vitro as kinases toward their IκBα substrates. However, these
proteins engineered to lack the entire SDD direct phosphorylation
of serine and threonine residues within the C-terminus of IκBα,
and they fail to phosphorylate S32 and S36 altogether., Taken together, these observations suggest that both activation
and N-terminal IκBα substrate specificity of IKK2 require
its C-terminal SDD.

Interactions between individual IKK2 subunits. (A) As
revealed
by X-ray crystallography, a single IKK2 subunit contains three domains:
the amino-terminal kinase domain (KD), a central ubiquitin-like domain
(ULD), and a carboxy-terminal scaffold dimerization domain (SDD).
The proximal portion of the SDD lies adjacent to the KD and ULD opposite
the distal end. (B) Human IKK2 dimer in its open conformation, as
it appears in X-ray crystal structures. Dimerization is mediated by
distal portions of the SDD. (C) In their open dimeric conformation,
individual IKK2 subunits can associate through an extensive V-shaped
interface involving residues from the KD, ULD, and SDD. (D) Association
through the V-shaped interface supports KD–KD interactions
through which IKK2 can become active via activation loop trans autophosphorylation.

In this study, we employed structure-based
design to engineer an
IKK2 subunit polypeptide that is incapable of dimerization by removal
of the more distal portions of its SDD. Expression and purification
of this stable monomeric version enables the study of IKK2 trans autophosphorylation
and specificity toward its IκBα substrate independent
of dimerization. We find that the N-terminal IκBα substrate
specificity requires KD proximal portions of the SDD but is not dependent
upon IKK2 dimerization in our in vitro kinase assays.
In contrast, disruption of dimerization severely impairs IKK2 trans
autophosphorylation in vitro. Monomeric IKK2 is observed
to undergo trans autophosphorylation at elevated concentrations only,
and this forced interaction is dependent upon the surfaces that mediate
oligomerization of open IKK2 dimers in the X-ray crystal structure.

Experimental
Procedures
IKK2 Monomer Design and Preparation of Plasmids
Preparation
of IKK2(1–420) was described previously. IKK2mono was designed from the IKK2 X-ray crystal
structure and consists of human IKK2 amino acids 11–477 joined
through a Gly-Gly linker to amino acids 526–637. The IKK2(11–669)pFastBacHTb
plasmid starting material was modified via a QuikChange mutagenesis
protocol with the primers

IKK2Δ(477–526)Fwd:

5′-GAATTCCATGGCTTCCATGTCTGGAGGAGAGAACGAAGTGAAACTCCTGG-3′

IKK2Δ(477–526)Rev:

5′-CCAGGAGTTTCACTTCGTTCTCTCCTCCAGACATGGAAGCCATGGAATTC-3′

to replace
IKK2 amino acids 478–525 with two glycine codons
(underlined above). A stop codon (underlined below) was then introduced
after residue 637 via mutagenesis using the following pair of primers

IKK2(637–stop)Fwd:

5′-GGAAGAGGTGGTGAGCTTAATGAATTGAGAGGATGAGAAGACTGTTGTCCG-3′

IKK2(637–stop)Rev:

5′-CGGACAACAGTCTTCTCATCCTCTCAATTCATTAAGCTCACCACCTCTTCC-3′

For mutagenesis of the activation loop serines 177 and 181 to phosphomimetic
glutamic acid residues, the following primers were used (mutations
underlined)

IKK2EE Fwd:

5′-GAGCTGGATCAGGGCGAGCTTTGCACAGAATTCGTGGGGACCC-3′

IKK2EE Rev:

5′-GGGTCCCCACGAATTCTGTGCAAAGCTCGCCCTGATCCAGCTC-3′

Mutations were also introduced to change serines 177 and 181 to
alanines to generate an inactivatable IKK2 protein as well as to mutate
the aspartic acid catalytic base residue 145 to asparagine to create
a kinase dead variant. The following primers were used (mutations
are underlined)

IKK2AA Fwd:

5′-GAGCTGGATCAGGGCGCTCTTTGCACAGCATTCGTGGGGACCC-3′

IKK2AA Rev:

5′-GGGTCCCCACGAATGCTGTGCAAAGAGCGCCCTGATCCAGCTC-3′

IKK2D145N Fwd:

5′-CAGAATCATCCATCGGAATCTAAAGCCAGAAAACATC-3′

IKK2D145N
Rev:

5′-GATGTTTTCTGGCTTTAGATTCCGATGGATGATTCTG-3′

Additionally, on the
basis of the V-shaped and KD–KD interface
mutants that exhibited the most defective IKK2 activation in transfected
HEK293T cells, the following primers
were used to introduce these mutations in the context of IKK2mono (mutations are underlined)

IKK2I413A/L414A Fwd:

5′-CAACCTGAAAGTGTCAGCTGTGCTGCTCAAGAGCCCAAGAGGAATCTC-3′

IKK2I413A/L414A
Rev:

5′-GAGATTCCTCTTGGGCTCTTGAGCAGCACAGCTGACACTTTCAGGTTG-3′

IKK2 V229A/H232A
Fwd:

5′-CCCCAACTGGCAGCCCGCGCAGTGGGCTTCAAAAGTGCGGCAGAAG-3′

IKK2 V229A/H232A Rev:

5′-CTTCTGCCGCACTTTTGAAGCCCACTGCGCGGGCTGCCAGTTGGGG-3′

Preparation of Recombinant Baculoviruses
Production
and titering of recombinant baculoviruses were carried out using a
modified version of the standard Bac-to-Bac protocol (Invitrogen).
This has been detailed previously.

Protein Expression and Purification
Sf9 suspension
cultures at a cell density of 2 × 106 cells/mL were
infected with recombinant baculovirus encoding IKK2mono for 48–72 h at 26 °C. Cells from 1 L cultures were harvested
by centrifugation and lysed in 100 mL of lysis buffer (25 mM Tris-HCl,
pH 8.0, 200 mM NaCl, 10 mM imidazole, 10% w/v glycerol, 5 mM β-mercaptoethanol,
and 1× Sigma protease inhibitor cocktail) by two 30 s cycles
of sonication at a duty cycle of 40% and a power output setting of
4 using a Branson Sonifier 450. One-hundred microliters of 200 mM
PMSF was added immediately before each cycle. The lysate was clarified
by centrifugation at 14 000 rpm (Sorvall; SS-34 rotor) for
45 min at 4 °C and passed through a 0.8 μm syringe filter.
Pre-equilibrated Ni Sepharose Fast Flow resin (GE Life Sciences) was
added at a ratio of 1 mL of resin slurry/liter of lysed cell culture.
The mixture was allowed to incubate at 4 °C on a rotator for
1.5 h. The Ni resin was then pelleted at 1000 rpm for 10 min in a
swinging bucket rotor centrifuge. Supernatant was carefully decanted,
and the protein-bound resin was resuspended with an equal volume of
lysis buffer and allowed to incubate at 4 °C on a rotator for
an additional 15 min. The Ni resin was pelleted again, supernatant
was decanted (wash 1), and an equal volume of wash buffer (lysis buffer
containing 500 mM NaCl and 30 mM imidazole) was added. This Ni resin/wash
buffer mixture was allowed to incubate on a rotator for an additional
15 min, at which point the resin was pelleted and the wash buffer
was decanted. The washed resin was then transferred to a 5 mL gravity
column casing, and the resin was allowed to settle. Elution buffer
(lysis buffer containing 250 mM imidazole) was added, and eluted fractions
were collected. Peak fractions containing IKK2 were pooled and loaded
onto a preparative Superdex200 16/60 size-exclusion column connected
to an ÄKTA Basic chromatography system (GE Life Sciences) equilibrated
with 20 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.0, 150 mM NaCl, 5 mM DTT, and 5–10%
glycerol. Peak fractions were concentrated by centrifugation using
a 30 kDa cutoff membrane concentrator unit to 5–10 mg/mL. Protein
concentration was determined by Bio-Rad Protein Assay, and protein
was flash frozen in liquid N2 and stored at −80
°C.

Circular Dichroism Spectroscopy
IKK2EE(11–669)
homodimers and IKK2EEmono were dialyzed separately with
Slide-a-Lyzers (Pierce; 10 000 MWCO) into 20 mM sodium phosphate
buffer (pH 7.4), filtered through 0.2 μm syringe filters (Millipore)
and then further diluted to 0.6 mg/mL. Far-UV CD spectra were collected
for 250 μL samples in a nitrogen-purged 0.1 mm quartz cuvette
on an Aviv-420 spectropolarimeter operated at 1.0 nm bandwidth in
1 nm steps from 260 to 185 nm. Two spectra were averaged for each
final readout. For secondary-structure assignment, the mdeg data files
were converted into molar ellipticity per residue and submitted through
DichroWeb for analysis by SELCON3 prediction software using reference
file no. 7.−

Size-Exclusion Chromatography–Multiangle
Laser Light
Scattering (SEC–MALLS)
Twenty microliters of purified
IKK2mono was injected into a pre-equilibrated (20 mM Tris-HCl,
pH 8, 150 mM NaCl, and 5% w/v glycerol) Zenix SEC-300, 7.8 ×
300 mm column (Sepax Technologies, Inc.) at 1 mL/min. Elution of the
protein was monitored by UV–vis (Shimadzu SPD-10A VP) and refractive
index (Hitachi L-2490) detectors. Light scattering was monitored with
a Dawn-Helios multiangle detector (Wyatt technology). Astra VI software
(Wyatt Technology) was used to analyze light scattering data. Figures
were prepared in Excel.

In Vitro Kinase Assay
In vitro kinase assays were conducted in 20 μL
reactions using purified
IKK2 (20–600 ng) with or without purified substrate (2 μg)
or kinase dead D145N IKK2 (0.5–1 μg) and a reaction buffer
consisting of 20 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.5, 15 mM MgCl2, 50 mM
KCl, 1 mM DTT, 1 mM Na3VO4, 20 mM β-glycerophosphate,
10 mM NaF, and 20 μM ATP. To these reactions, was added 0.5
μCi of γ-32P ATP (PerkinElmer), and the reactions
were mixed and incubated at room temperature for the indicated time
points up to 1 h. After incubation, 7 μL of Laemmli buffer was
added to quench the reaction, and 10 μL of the mixture was loaded
and resolved on a 10% SDS PAGE gel. The gel was subsequently dried
on no. 3 Whatman filter paper and then exposed to autoradiography
film for approximately 12–16 h prior to developing.

Western
Blot
Standard semidry western blotting protocols
were employed. All samples were separated by 10% SDS-PAGE before being
transferred to nitrocellulose. A 0.2% w/v I-Block solution (Applied
Biosystems) was used as a blocking agent. Monoclonal mouse penta-His
antibody (Qiagen) was diluted 1:4000 and used for primary detection
of His-tagged proteins. Rabbit monoclonal 16A6 (Cell Signaling Technology)
was employed at a 1:1500 dilution to monitor IKK2 activation loop
phosphorylation status.

Results
Design and Engineering
of an IKK2 Monomer
Comparative
analysis of the Xenopus and human IKK2
X-ray crystal structures revealed that individual IKK2 dimers exhibit
various degrees of opening. The Xenopus IKK2 structure adopts a relatively closed conformation in which
two subunits of the dimer associate through the entire length of the
SDD. A closed conformation is also observed
for the IKK-related TBK1 enzyme. In TBK1, however, the KD from each
protomer also contacts the SDD of its dimer-forming partner, resulting
in an even more compact dimer., Two recently published
crystal structures of human IKK2 reveal that the dimer can adopt significantly
more open conformations in which the KD–ULD swing away from
one another, suggesting that dimerization is mediated entirely through
portions of the SDD that are distal to the KD.,

The SDD of IKK2 and TBK1 is effectively an elongated three-helix
bundle in which two parallel α-helices of roughly 115 Å
in length (α2s and α6s) are connected by an equally long
antiparallel stretch containing three shorter helices (α3s−α5s).
The open conformations observed for the human IKK2 models suggest
that the SDD mediates flexibility. Indeed, superposition of Xenopus and human IKK2 models that display differing
degrees of openness reveals that the structures are all roughly equivalent
within either the KD–ULD–proximal SDD portions or the
distal SDD but differ to a significantly greater degree for the entire
subunits (Table ). For example, overlaying
the distal portion of the SDD (a discontinuous segment consisting
of amino acids 477–526 and 638–666) from each of the Xenopus IKK2 subunits upon the same portion of the
human IKK2 protomers (PDB code 4E3C) results in an average root-mean-squared
deviation (rmsd) for Cα atoms of 1.64 Å. Superposition
of the remaining portions of the same IKK2 subunits (amino acids 1–477
and 526–637) yields an average rmsd of 1.70 Å. However,
when full IKK2 subunits are superimposed, the average rmsd for Cα
atoms measures 2.67 Å. This suggests that the structural changes
that lead to the different degrees to which IKK2 adopts its open conformation
are focused at a position around Gly525 between SDD helices α3s
and α4s. It also suggests that, other than this hinge point,
the remaining portions of the kinase are relatively rigid.

Average rmsd for IKK2 Subunits
entire IKK2 subunit (all amino acids)	
 	3QA8	4E3C	4KIK	
3QA8	1.30 ± 0.29	2.67 ± 0.22	3.15 ± 0.35	
4E3C	 	1.17 ± 0.18	2.08 ± 0.20	
4KIK	 	 	1.54	
IKK2 monomer (amino acids 1–477 and 526–637)	
 	3QA8	4E3C	4KIK	
3QA8	0.44 ± 0.08	1.70 ± 0.08	2.28 ± 0.09	
4E3C	 	0.68 ± 0.10	1.74 ± 0.15	
4KIK	 	 	1.06	
IKK2 distal SDD (amino acids 477–526 and 638–666)	
 	3QA8	4E3C	4KIK	
3QA8	0.48 ± 0.13	1.64 ± 0.08	1.32 ± 0.08	
4E3C	 	1.13 ± 0.27	1.66 ± 0.15	
4KIK	 	 	0.21	
Units are in angstroms. Values are
calculated as the average of the rmsd values for Cα positions
after superposition of individual IKK2 subunit models from three published
IKK2 X-ray crystal structures: Xenopus laevis (3QA8) and
human (4E3C and 4KIK).− 95% confidence
level.

Only one measurement
available (chain
A vs chain B).

We tested
this hypothesis by designing, expressing, and purifying
an IKK2 construct that lacks its distal SDD region (Figure ). The distal portion of the SDD was removed by
replacing residues 477–526 (from α2s and α3s) with
a Gly-Gly linker and inserting a stop codon after residue 637 in α6s
(Figure A,B). Recombinant baculoviruses encoding
for this protein were generated and used to infect Sf9 insect cell
suspension cultures. Purification by Ni affinity and size-exclusion
chromatography yielded a pure protein, as judged by Coomassie-stained
SDS PAGE (Figure C). Its elution volume on
size-exclusion chromatography is consistent with the deletion protein
behaving as a monomer in solution (Figure D). Therefore, we have dubbed this engineered enzyme IKK2mono.

Engineered monomeric IKK2 (IKK2mono). (A) Schematic
diagram of the domain organization of the IKK2 subunit (above) and
IKK2mono (below). Coloring and abbreviations are shown
as in Figure . Numbers correspond to the domain
borders in the human IKK2 subunit, and GG refers to the diglycine
linker joining SDD helices α2s and α4s. (B) Ribbon diagram
model of the expected IKK2mono structure on the basis of
the X-ray crystal structure of human IKK2EE(11–669). (C) Coomassie-stained
10% SDS-PAGE analysis monitoring IKK2mono purification
by Ni affinity (lanes 2–6) and size-exclusion (lanes 7–9)
chromatography and the final concentrated protein (lane 10). (D) Representative
chromatogram of size-exclusion chromatography on IKK2mono.

Circular Dichroism Spectroscopy
of IKK2mono
To confirm that deletion of the residues
in question does not severely
alter protein secondary structure, we carried out far-UV circular
dichroism (CD) spectroscopy on IKK2EE(11–669) dimers and IKK2EEmono proteins in solution. Both spectra exhibit strong troughs
at 208 and 222 nm that are characteristic of proteins with significant
α-helical character (Figure ). Analysis
of the spectra using DichroWeb estimates the degree of α-helical
content in IKK2EE(11–669) to be 45%. This agrees remarkably well with values calculated from Ramachandran
angles of the refined crystallographic model that suggest the protein
is 46% α-helical. CD recognizes IKK2EEmono as 35%
α-helical. Although this is slightly lower than the 43% α-helical
content calculated from a theoretical model created from simply removing
residues from the IKK2EE(11–669) X-ray crystal structure, it
is significantly higher than the 18% α-helix contributed by
the KD alone. Moreover, the difference in measured α-helicity
of IKK2 monomer and dimer is accounted for primarily by an increase
in turns in the monomer, the β-sheet and disordered portions
calculated from the CD spectra remain unchanged. Therefore, we conclude
that the truncated SDD of our IKK2mono proteins remains
predominantly α-helical after removal of three α-helical
passes that mediate dimerization.

Circular dichroism spectroscopy of purified
IKK2 proteins. The
mean residue molar ellipticity for IKK2EEmono (black line)
and IKK2EE(11–669) (gray line) is plotted as a function of
wavelength. Both samples show strong α-helical signals, with
the monomer showing a slight decrease, as predicted because of the
removal of three largely α-helical passes at the dimer interface.

IKK2mono Retains
Specificity for N-Terminal Serine
Phosphorylation Sites of IκBα
It was previously
demonstrated that C-terminal truncations of IKK2 that eliminate the
SDD entirely result in a kinase defective in its ability to recognize
S32 and S36 of IκBα in vitro. These shortened
versions instead direct phosphorylation toward serine and threonine
residues contained within the IκBα C-terminal PEST-like
region., The Xenopus and human IKK2 X-ray crystal structures reveal that the KD, ULD,
and SDD participate in extensive interdomain interactions. The introduction
of point mutations to destabilize IKK2 domain–domain interfaces
was shown to measurably reduce the activity of full-length IKK2 toward
IκBα in vitro. IKK2mono maintains each of these critical interdomain
interactions.

Four different versions of the human IKK2 subunit
expressed and purified from baculovirus infected Sf9 insect cell suspensions
were incubated independently with five different purified IκBα
substrate proteins and Mg/γ-32P-ATP to observe the
specificity of IκBα phosphorylation in vitro (Figure ). Both the full-length IKK2 and
the IKK2(11–669) protein that was previously employed for X-ray
crystal structure determination phosphorylated IκBα exclusively
on S32 and S36 (Figure ; lanes 1–11).
Both of these enzymes contained the S177E and S181E activation loop
mutations that render the enzyme constitutively active. To test whether
this pair of activation loop Glu mutations alone is sufficient to
direct substrate specificity toward the N-terminal region of IκBα,
we next prepared a human IKK2(1–420) that lacks its entire
C-terminal SDD but still bears the S177E and S181E mutations (Figure ; lanes 12–16). Just as we observed previously
when assaying a similar protein construct with an activation loop
of native (S177 and S181) sequence, the enzyme lacking its SDD functioned
as an efficient catalyst to phosphorylate C-terminal residues of IκBα
and completely failed to recognize IκBα substrate residues
S32 and S36.

IKK2mono is
specific for IκBα residues S32
and S36. In vitro kinase assays were performed with
full-length human IKK2EE (lanes 1–6), IKK2EE(11–669)
(lanes 7–11), IKK2EE(1–420) (lanes 12–16), and
IKK2mono (lanes 17–21) against both native sequence
or S32A/S36A (AA) GST–IκBα(1–54) substrates
as well as native, S32A/S36A, or C-terminal S283E/S288E/T291E/S293E/T296E/T299E
(E6) mutant full-length IκBα substrates. Two-hundred nanograms
of kinase was used in each assay except for the IKK2EE(1–420)
reactions, which contained 400 ng of enzyme each. Substrate specificity
is revealed by autoradiography (top panels) and Coomassie-stained
SDS-PAGE substrate loading controls (bottom panels).

Our newly engineered IKK2mono displayed
identical specificity in vitro as the full-length
kinase. That is, it phosphorylated
IκBα exclusively at S32 and S36 (Figure ; lanes 17–21). This observation confirms that portions
of the SDD proximal to and in contact with the KD–ULD are required
for the phosphorylation event that results in induction of NF-κB
transcriptional activity in response to proinflammatory signaling
in mammalian cells.

Solution Behavior of Engineered IKK2 Monomers
It has
been shown previously that IKK2 dimerization is required for its efficient
activation. For example, mutation of
residues that mediate dimer contacts within the distal portion of
the SDD yields an IKK2 enzyme that exhibits significantly lower in vitro catalytic activity after purification from baculovirus-infected
insect cells or transfected human cells., The level of phosphorylation activity by IKK2mono in
our in vitro assay was reasonably high, which is
interesting considering that its activation loop serines were not
mutated to constitutively activating glutamic acid residues. This
suggests that, even though the IKK2mono protein purifies
as a monomer in solution, it might be capable of becoming activated
by trans autophosphorylation in vitro.

Our
previous structure-based biochemical investigations into the mechanism
of IKK2 activation led to the conclusion that low-affinity interactions
between IKK2 dimers through their so-called V-shaped interface stabilizes
the kinase domains in a conformation that supports KD–KD interactions
and promotes activation by trans autophosphorylation (Figure ). Under this model, the principal activating signal
required immediately upstream of IKK2 activation is a simple increase
in the effective concentration of IKK2. This is likely a function
carried out in vivo by the scaffolding protein NEMO
via a process that depends upon its interaction with polyubiquitin
chains.

To observe its propensity
for self-association in solution, we
next determined the shape-independent molecular weight of IKK2mono at different concentrations by SEC–MALLS. We first
compared IKK2mono directly with full-length IKK2 and IKK2EE(11–669),
the construct that was previously employed successfully for X-ray
crystallography. As suggested by size-exclusion chromatography during
purification, SEC–MALLS clearly reveals that IKK2mono exists exclusively as a monomer in solution, whereas full-length
IKK2 and IKK2EE(11–669) are dimers (Figure A). We next analyzed IKK2mono at increasing concentrations
and observed that it remains a monomer even at a concentration of
187 μM (Figure B). These observations
further support the hypothesis that IKK2 dimerization is mediated
entirely by the distal portion of the SDD. Furthermore, it suggests
that other additional IKK2 oligomeric binding events, such as association
through the V-shaped interface that was demonstrated to promote trans
autophosphorylation, are of considerably low affinity.

IKK2 oligomerization
state in solution. (A) Full-length IKK2 (black
line) and IKK2EE(11–669) (dark gray) are both dimers in solution,
as revealed by multiangle laser light scattering following size-exclusion
chromatography (SEC–MALLS). IKK2mono (light gray)
is a monomer. (B) Increasing the IKK2mono concentration
to as high as 187 μM does not significantly affect its profile
as a monomer in solution.

Activation Loop Phosphorylation by IKK2 Monomers
We
previously reported that when IKK2 V-shaped interface residues I413
and L414 were both mutated to alanine and then expressed by transfection
in HEK293 cells the resulting kinase was seriously impaired in its
ability to become active through activation loop phosphorylation.
Similarly, double mutation of residues V229 and H232, which are positioned
to mediate KD–KD interactions during trans autophosphorylation,
to alanine exhibited an even more severe defect. In the case of both
mutants, versions in which activation loop serines 177 and 181 were
also mutated to glutamic acid displayed in vitro kinase
activity equal to constitutively active versions of the wild-type
IKK2 sequence.

Oligomerization
of two IKK2 subunits through their V-shaped interface involves surface
residues from the KD, ULD, and a proximal portion of the SDD but does
not necessarily require dimerization through the distal end of the
SDD. Therefore, as part of our effort to characterize oligomerization-dependent
trans autophosphorylation in vitro, we employed our
Sf9 insect cell expression capabilities to overexpress and purify
mutant versions of IKK2mono in which key amino acid residues
were mutated. Both the IKK2mono I413A/L414A and V229A/H232A
mutant proteins express to similar levels and purify as monomers,
suggesting that they are folded similarly to the IKK2mono wild-type sequence.

It has been shown previously that overexpression
of IKK2 absent
NEMO in Sf9 and yeast cell cultures yields active IKK2.,, In agreement with this observation,
we detect phosphorylation of activation loop serine 181 by immunoblot
of overexpressed and purified IKK2 prior to the addition of ATP (Figure A; lanes 1–4). This zero time point S181
phosphorylation is also observed for the full-length IKK2 bearing
the I413A/L414A V-shaped interface mutations, suggesting that disruption
of this interface is not sufficient to impede activation loop phosphorylation
when IKK2 is overexpressed in Sf9 insect cells (Figure A; lanes 5–8). Interestingly, S181 phosphorylation
could also be detected in the engineered monomeric IKK2mono (Figure A; lanes 9–12). This indicates
that dimerization is not an absolute requirement for IKK2 trans autophosphorylation.
However, when both the distal SDD dimerization region and V-shaped
interface are compromised, we failed to observe activation loop phosphorylation
either before or after incubation with ATP (Figure A; lanes 12–16). This observation suggests that both
dimerization through the distal SDD and oligomerization via the V-shaped
interface contribute to spontaneous kinase activation when IKK2 is
expressed in insect cells.

Activation loop phosphorylation activity of
IKK2 dimers and monomers.
(A) Western blot analysis with an anti-phospho-S181 antibody on recombinant
human IKK2 proteins purified from baculovirus-infected Sf9 insect
cells before and after treatment with Mg/ATP (top). Only IKK2mono in which V-shaped interface residues I413 and L414 are
both mutated to alanine fails to be recognized by the antibody (lanes
13–16). Western with anti-His antibody confirms the level of
protein in each reaction (bottom). (B) Catalytically inactive version
of full-length IKK2 in which catalytic base D145 is mutated to Asn
permits direct detection of activation loop trans autophosphorylation.
Western blot reveals that constitutively active versions of both dimeric
and monomeric IKK2 bearing the S177E/S181E mutations (EE) phosphorylate
the IKK2D145N substrate in vitro (lanes 21 and 22).

We have hypothesized that the
observed S181 phosphorylation is
a consequence of IKK2 trans autophosphorylation because of the relatively
high kinase concentrations obtained upon Sf9 cell infection. To test
if IKK2mono is, in fact, capable of catalyzing phosphorylation
of IKK2 activation loop in trans, serines 177 and 181 of the IKK2mono were mutated to glutamic acid residues to produce a constitutively
active version (referred to as IKK2EEmono). In
vitro kinase reactions were then carried out using a catalytically
inactive version of the full-length IKK2, in which the catalytic D145
residue was mutated to asparagine (IKK2D145N), as substrate and probed
by immunoblot for S181 phosphorylation (Figure B). The crystallized IKK2EE(11–669) and, albeit to a lesser
extent, the IKK2EEmono enzymes both were found to be capable
of phosphorylating S181 of full-length IKK2D145N.

Activation
of IκB Kinase Activity in Monomeric IKK2
We next assessed
whether oligomerization-dependent trans autophosphorylation
was sufficient to activate IKK2 independent of its ability to form
dimers. Relative to the engineered IKK2mono enzyme of native
sequence, purified IKK2mono enzymes that harbored mutations
at their V-shaped (I413A/L414A) and KD–KD (V229/H232A) interface
surfaces were severely compromised in their ability to phosphorylate
the GST–IκBα(1–54) substrate in γ-32P-ATP in vitro kinase assays (Figure A; lanes 1–3). The introduction of activation
loop S177E/S181E mutations against these IKK2mono interfacial
mutants resulted in significant recovery of in vitro catalytic activity toward GST–IκBα(1–54)
(Figure A; lanes 4–5). This suggests
that the incapability of the IKK2mono I413A/L414A and V229A/H232A
mutants to function as IκB kinases results from their inability
to support activation via trans autophosphorylation.

Role of trans autophosphorylation
in activation of IKK2mono. (A) Autoradiography of in vitro kinase assays
with GST–IκBα(1–54) as substrate and various
versions of IKK2mono as enzymes (top). Both mutation of
the V-shaped (I413A/L414A) and KD–KD (V229A/H232A) interfaces
yields IKK2mono proteins that almost completely lack kinase
activity toward GST–IκBα(1–54) substrate
(lanes 1–3). Conversion of both activation loop residues S177
and S181 to phosphomimetic glutamic acids (EE) results in IKK2mono enzymes that display significantly higher kinase activity.
Coomassie-stained SDS PAGE substrate and anti-His western blot enzyme
loading controls are shown below. (B) Western blot with anti-phospho-S181
antibody reveals that only native sequence IKK2mono is
capable of activation loop autophosphorylation (compare lanes 6, 8,
and 9; above). Anti-His western blot loading control (bottom).

To test this hypothesis further,
we next used immunodetection to
probe the phosphorylation state of activation loop S181 in native
sequence and interfacial mutant IKK2mono enzymes after
incubation with Mg and ATP. Only IKK2mono containing the
native sequence activation segment (S177 and S181) could be recognized
by antibodies specific for IKK2 phosphoserine-181 (Figure B). As controls, we also tested the IKK2mono proteins that contained activating S177E/S181E activation loop mutations.
As expected, these proteins failed to react with the anti-IKK2 pSer181
antibody.

Oligomerization-Dependent Trans Autophosphorylation of IKK2
Our in vitro experiments with the engineered monomeric
IKK2 enzyme reveal that its ability to become activated via trans
autophosphorylation on its activation loop serines is impaired. Moreover,
although after activation it retains its specificity for S32 and S36
of IκBα, IKK2mono displays measurably lower
catalytic activity toward its namesake substrate. These observations
support many previously reported studies that have concluded that
IKK2 dimerization plays an integral role in its activation and consequently
its ability to function as an IκB kinase.,, However, our observations also suggest that
IKK2mono harbors all of the residues necessary to mediate
activation and substrate specificity.

To test the hypothesis
that the V-shaped and KD–KD oligomerization interfaces observed
in our X-ray crystal structure are sufficient to support IKK2 activation
via trans autophosphorylation, we performed a time-course experiment
in which the ability of various IKK2 dimers and monomers to phosphorylate
S181 of the inactive IKK2D145N mutant was monitored by western blot
(Figure ). All of the active kinases in this
experiment harbored the activating S177E/S181E mutations. At a concentration
of 150 nM enzyme/300nM substrate, we observed that the dimeric IKK2EE(11–669)
could turn over product, whereas various IKK2mono mutant
proteins did not display activity (Figure ; lanes 1–8). After increasing the enzyme concentration to
300 nM, however, significant phosphorylation of the inactive IKK2D145N
substrate could be detected (Figure ; lanes
9–16). The IKK2mono I413A/L414A mutant that harbors
mutations targeting the V-shaped interface showed significantly less
activity, although activity could be detected at an enzyme concentration
of 450 nM (Figure ; lanes 17–24). Mutation
of the KD–KD residues V229 and H232 yielded an IKK2mono enzyme that failed to produce detectable amounts of S181 phosphorylation
at all of the concentrations tested. This experiment supports the
hypothesis that activation loop phosphorylation in trans is mediated
by IKK2 oligomerization interfaces in addition to dimerization.

Activation
loop trans autophosphorylation by mutant IKK2mono enzymes
can be partially recovered at high concentration. The activation
loop phosphorylation state of the inactive IKK2D145N mutant is monitored
via western blot with anti-phospho-S181 antibody. Enzyme concentrations
are given; IKK2D145N was 300 nM in each reaction. Dimeric and constitutively
active IKK2EE(11–669) readily phosphorylates activation loop
S181 (lanes 1 and 2). IK2EEmono also phosphorylates the
inactive IKK2D145N substrate, although a higher concentration of enzyme
is required to observe comparable levels of phosphorylation (compare
lanes 3 and 4, 11 and 12, and 19 and 20). Mutation of V-shaped interface
residues I413 and L414 to alanine yields an IKK2EEmono enzyme
that is even more defective in trans autophosphorylation of IKK2D145N in vitro. Mutation of KD–KD interaction residues
V229 and H232 to alanine yields an IKK2EEmono enzyme that
fails to trans autophosphorylate even when provided in molar excess
to the IKK2D145N substrate protein.

Discussion
Protein kinases share a conserved domain
structure and catalytic
mechanism for phosphoryl transfer from ATP to protein substrate. What distinguishes one protein kinase from another,
therefore, is their ability to act upon select substrates and their
mechanisms for regulating catalytic activity., IKK is unique on both fronts. IKK was first cloned biochemically
because it was the only kinase activity detected in TNF-α-treated
HeLa cells that could specifically phosphorylate serines 32 and 36
of the NF-κB inhibitor protein IκBα.,, Despite numerous studies aimed
at uncovering a basis for this substrate specificity, it is still
not perfectly clear how IKK only facilitates this chemistry. The field
of regulation of IKK activity has received significantly more attention,
with literally thousands of published studies. These efforts have
led to many seminal discoveries, including the fundamental role of
ubiquitin as an activating component of cell signaling complexes., Nevertheless, basic questions surrounding the regulatory control
of IKK persist. Among these, does IKK activation require any upstream
kinase? How does interaction with polyubiquitin promote kinase activity?
Are the extremely rapid kinetics of IKK activation observed in cells
suggestive of a relatively simple activation mechanism?

We have
previously shown that a version of IKK2 containing only
the amino-terminal KD and ULD recognizes and phosphorylates its IκBα
substrate in vitro. However, this IKK2(1–420)
fragment directs its activity toward serine and threonine residues
contained within the C-terminal PEST-like region of IκBα
and fails to recognize S32 and S36 altogether. This surprising observation could be explained by one of
three different factors. First, it is possible that the activation
loop of IKK2(1–420) fails to become phosphorylated in the absence
of its C-terminal SDD, and in its unphosphorylated state, the kinase
displays altered specificity toward IκBα. A second possibility
arises from the fact the that the shortened IKK2(1–420) is
a monomer in solution. Therefore, it is possible that dimerization
through the SDD somehow directs specificity toward S32 and S36 of
IκBα. The third possibility is that elements from the
SDD itself are directly involved in docking and/or presenting the
IκBα substrate such that S32 and S36 can be targeted.
We tested a version of the IKK2(1–420) construct in which activation
loop residues S177 and S181 are mutated to phosphomimetic glutamic
acid residues and found that this enzyme displays the same specificity
toward the C-terminal residues of IκBα, effectively disproving
the hypothesis that activation loop phosphorylation status dictates
specificity (Figure ; lanes 17–21).

Recent success in X-ray crystallography of nearly full-length IKK2
homodimers has revealed the domain organization and arrangement of
individual subunits in the functioning dimer.− The observation
that these IKK2 homodimers can exhibit varying degrees of opening
has allowed identification of the dimerization interface within the
portion of the SDD distal to the KD–ULD. In the present study,
we have engineered a minimal IKK2 that lacks the distal portion of
the SDD and consequently purifies as a stable monomer. This IKKmono protein displays ideal solution behavior. Furthermore,
kinase assays reveal that IKKmono faithfully reconstitutes
S32 and S36 phosphorylation of IκBα in vitro. We conclude that elements within the proximal portion of the SDD
are necessary for directing specificity of IKK2 toward IκBα
S32 and S36, independent of the dimerization status of the enzyme.
The IKK2 X-ray crystal structures reveal that this portion of the
SDD contacts both the KD and ULD, and mutations introduced to disrupt
these interdomain interactions were previously shown to interfere
with catalytic activity. It is likely that the proximal SDD functions
either through direct contact with the IκBα substrate
and/or through allosteric action on the KD to direct the specificity
of IKK2 toward IκBα residues S32 and S36. In support of
this hypothesis, Liu et al., when analyzing their recently published
2.8 Å X-ray crystal structure of an asymmetric dimer of human
IKK2, identified a possible substrate peptide binding pocket within
a crevice created by the KD and proximal SDD. Future studies aimed an understanding how this domain arrangement
affects substrate specificity and its potential as a target for drug
development are underway.

We recently published experimental
data, based on our own X-ray
crystal structure of active human IKK2, in support of a regulatory
model through which raising the local concentration of the enzyme
promotes its spontaneous activation via oligomerization-dependent
trans autophosphorylation. Central to
this hypothesis are the interactions observed between IKK2 dimers
in the crystal. The open IKK2 dimer conformation permits interaction
between neighboring dimers through a V-shaped interface involving
portions of the KD, ULD, and proximal SDD. This interaction, in turn,
stabilizes IKK2 in a conformation that can support KD–KD interactions
and presumably trans autophosphorylation (Figure ). As IKK2 dimerization relies exclusively on the distal SDD,
generation of the stable, catalytically active IKK2mono enzyme has enabled further validation of this IKK2 activation mechanism.

Dimerization of IKK2 has been shown to be an absolute requirement
for its activity in cells.,, What is not clear from these studies, however, is whether blocking
dimerization abolishes the potential for IKK2 to become active or
whether it simply decreases the effective IKK2 concentration and consequently
the probability of trans autophosphorylation. The involvement of V-shaped
and KD–KD interfaces in IKK2 activation suggests that IKK2mono, which maintains these regions intact, should support
trans autophosphorylation in vitro. In this study,
we observe that this is, in fact, the case. We observe that the IKK2mono activation loop becomes phosphorylated spontaneously when
expressed and purified from baculovirus-infected Sf9 insect cell suspensions.
This is also true of dimeric IKK2 enzymes, suggesting that either
the infected Sf9 cell environment or the level of IKK2 overexpression
is sufficient to support its activation via trans autophosphorylation.
Strikingly, when residues that mediate the V-shaped or KD–KD
interfaces are mutated, there is a complete loss of activation loop
phosphorylation signal and consequently minimal activity toward IκBα.
This loss in IKK2 trans autophosphorylation potential can then be
partially recovered by increasing the concentration of the mutated
IKK2 monomers.

Taken together, these experiments with an engineered
monomeric
IKK2 enzyme support an IKK2 activation mechanism in which the principal
upstream event is to effectively increase the local concentration
of IKK2 dimers. IKK2 dimers can then rapidly associate through V-shaped
and KD–KD interfaces and become active via trans autophosphorylation.
Under standard activation conditions, polyubiquitin chains induce
IKK2 proximity through their noncovalent interaction with the NEMO
subunit of IKK. However, this regulated process can be circumvented
by other cellular events that drive IKK2 oligomerization.

Author Present Address
§ (J.D.S.) Novartis Institutes for Biomedical
Research, 4560 Horton
Street, Emeryville, California 94608, United States.

This research
was supported by NIH/NCI grant R01 CA141722 to G.G. and American Cancer
Society grant RSG-08-287-01-GMC to T.H. A.V.H. is an Arne N. Wick
predoctoral fellowship recipient. Biochemistry research at SDSU is
supported in part by the California Metabolic Research Foundation.

The authors declare
no
competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
We thank M. P. Thompson
and N. C. Gianneschi for SEC-MALLS,
M. E. Lokensgard and J. J. Love for CD spectroscopy, S. Polley for
helpful discussion, and V. Cardova for critical reading of the manuscript.

Abbreviations Used
CDcircular dichroism

IκBinhibitor of NF-κB

IKKIκB kinase

HTLVhuman T-lymphotropic
virus

IL-1interleukin-1

KSHVKaposi’s
sarcoma-associated herpesvirus

LPSlipopolysaccharide

NF-κBnuclear factor of κ light chain
gene enhancer in B cells

SEC–MALLSsize-exclusion chromatography–multiangle laser light
scattering

TNF-αtumor necrosis factor α

