Amyloid formation is a characteristic
feature of many human diseases, including Alzheimer’s disease,
Parkinson’s disease, and type 2 diabetes., Human
islet amyloid polypeptide (IAPP or amylin) is a polypeptide hormone
that forms extracellular fibrillar amyloid deposits in the pancreatic
islets of Langerhans in type 2 diabetes., IAPP helps
regulate gastric emptying, suppression of food intake, and glucose
homeostasis,− but formation of islet amyloid contributes
to β-cell dysfunction in type 2 diabetes and is associated with
the decrease in β-cell mass associated with the disease., Islet amyloid also makes important contributions to the failure
of islet transplantation., The polypeptide is
produced with insulin in the β-cells as a proform, stored in
the insulin secretory granule, and cosecreted with insulin. Protein
levels are maintained at an ∼1:100
IAPP:insulin ratio in the secretory granule of healthy β-cells,
but the concentration of IAPP in the granule is still much higher
than that required to promote rapid amyloid formation in vitro, suggesting that there are factors that inhibit its aggregation
in the secretory granule. Interactions with insulin have been proposed
to play such a role in vivo and have been shown to
inhibit IAPP amyloid formation in vitro.−

The mechanisms of islet amyloid formation in type 2 diabetes
are
still not understood, although impairment of the prohormone processing
machinery has been thought to play an important role in the initiation
and progression of this process.− IAPP is synthesized as an 89-residue
precursor, preproIAPP.
Removal of the signal sequence generates the 67-residue prohormone,
proIAPP, which is further processed by cleavage at two conserved dibasic
sites by the same prohormone convertases that process proinsulin. The C-terminal prosequence is removed in either
the trans-Golgi network or secretory granule, preferentially by the
prohormone convertase PC(1/3). The remaining dibasic residues at the
C-terminus are cleaved by carboxypeptidase E (CPE), and amidation is conducted by the peptidyl amidating monooxygenase
complex (PAM) with a conserved glycine residue acting as the nitrogen
donor. Cleavage of the prosequence at
the N-terminus by convertase PC2 gives the 37-residue mature IAPP. Additional posttranslational modifications include
the formation of a disulfide between Cys2 and Cys7 (Figure ).

Processing pathway of
human proIAPP. The N-terminal and C-terminal
flanking regions of proIAPP are colored red. Cleavage of proIAPP occurs
at the two dibasic sites denoted with blue arrows. The C-terminal
region of proIAPP is removed preferentially by PC(1/3), and the remaining
dibasic residues are removed by CPE. Final processing of the C-terminus
includes removal of the remaining Gly and amidation of the Tyr by
PAM, leading to the processing intermediate proIAPP1–48. The N-terminal region is removed by PC2. There is an intramolecular
disulfide bond in proIAPP1–48 and in mature IAPP.

Unprocessed proinsulin and incompletely
processed intermediates
of proinsulin are present in the early phase of type 2 diabetes, and the same is true for IAPP. Immunohistochemical studies indicate the presence of the
N-terminal prosequence of proIAPP in islet amyloid in vivo, but not the C-terminal region., This suggests
that incomplete processing results in secretion of an intermediate
peptide with the N-terminal flanking region of proIAPP, proIAPP1–48, which corresponds to the first 48 residues of
proIAPP (Figure ).

Two models have been
proposed for how incorrectly processed IAPP
might contribute to islet amyloid formation. One hypothesis is that
the proIAPP processing intermediate forms intragranular amyloid that
causes cell death and results in the release of amyloid that can seed
extracellular formation of amyloid by secreted mature IAPP. In an alternative model, release of proIAPP1–48 leads to enhanced extracellular amyloid formation
by promoting
interactions with the glycosaminoglycan (GAG) components of heparan
sulfate proteoglycans (HSPGs) of the extracellular matrix., The HSPG perlecan is found in islet amyloid deposits isolated from
patients with type 2 diabetes, and HSPGs
are associated with nearly all types of amyloid plaques.− The model GAG, heparan sulfate (HS), accelerates the formation of
amyloid by both IAPP and proIAPP1–48in
vitro., In addition,
the amyloid fibrils formed by proIAPP1–48 in the
presence of HS have been shown to seed the formation
of amyloid by IAPP in vitro, supporting the hypothesis
that proIAPP1–48 may play a role in initiating amyloid
formation.

It is not known whether
islet amyloid originates intracellularly
or extracellularly, and this is a controversial question. Studies
with transgenic animals that overexpress IAPP suggest an intracellular
origin, but other studies with islets have shown that amyloid deposition
is linked with secretion.− In either case, interactions
with insulin could be important for inhibiting amyloid formation in vivo, either in the granule or immediately after release
when the local concentration of IAPP and insulin is high. Insulin
is known to be an effective inhibitor of the formation of amyloid
by IAPP in vitro; however, its effect on the formation
of amyloid by proIAPP1–48 has not been investigated,
and it is possible that less effective
inhibition of aggregation by the pro form could play a role in promoting
islet amyloid. In addition, the effects of HSPGs or GAGs on the ability
of insulin to inhibit IAPP or ProIAPP1–48 amyloid
formation have not been examined. Indeed, there have
been very few studies that have examined the effectiveness of IAPP
inhibitors in the presence of sulfated proteoglycans or their GAG
components. Here we compare the ability of insulin to inhibit the
formation of amyloid by mature IAPP and the incompletely processed
intermediate proIAPP1–48. We also compare the effect
of insulin on the formation of
amyloid by the two peptides in the presence of the model GAG, HS.

Materials
and Methods
Peptide Synthesis and Purification
Peptides were synthesized
on a 0.25 mmol scale with an Applied Biosystems model 433A peptide
synthesizer and on a 0.1 mmol scale with a CEM microwave peptide synthesizer
utilizing 9-fluoronylmethoxycarbonyl (Fmoc) chemistry. Solvents were
ACS-grade. 5-(4′-Fmoc-aminomethyl-3′,5-dimethoxyphenol)valeric
acid (PAL-PEG) resin was used to form an amidated C-terminus. Fmoc-protected
pseudoproline (oxazolidine) dipeptide derivatives were used as previously
described., Standard Fmoc reaction cycles
were used. The first residue attached to the resin, all β-branched
residues, the residues directly following a β-branched residue,
all pseudoproline dipeptide derivatives, and the residues directly
following pseudoproline dipeptide derivatives were double-coupled
for the synthesis with the Applied Biosystems model 433A peptide synthesizer.
The microwave-assisted synthesis was performed as previously described. The peptides were cleaved from the resin through
the use of standard trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) methods. Crude peptides
were oxidized with dimethyl sulfoxide at room temperature. The peptides were purified via reverse-phase
high-performance liquid chromatography (RP-HPLC) using a Vydac C18
preparative column. Analytical HPLC was used to check the purity of
the peptides before each experiment. The masses of the pure peptides
were confirmed by ionization time-of-flight mass spectrometry: wild-type
IAPP, 3902.9 (expected) and 3902.7 (observed); proIAPP1–48, 5208.7 (expected) and 5209.4 (observed).

Sample Preparation
Peptide stock solutions were dissolved
in 100% hexafluoro-2-proponal (HFIP) at 1.6 mM. Human insulin (recombinant,
catalog no. I2643) was purchased from Sigma. Stock solutions of insulin
were first prepared by dissolving insulin in 20 mM Tris-HCl buffer
(pH 2) and then adding dilute NaOH to adjust the pH to 7.4. Insulin
solutions were freshly made before each experiment. High-molecular
weight heparan sulfate (10000–14000 Da) was purchased from
Sigma. Heparan sulfate stock solutions were
prepared by dissolving HS in 20 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.4) at a concentration
of 2.2 mg/mL.

Fluorescence Assays
Amyloid formation
was monitored
by thioflavin-T binding assays without stirring at 25 °C. Fluorescence
measurements were performed using a Beckman Coulter
DTX 880 plate reader with a multimode detector with 430 nm excitation
and 485 nm emission. For experiments conducted in the presence of
2% HFIP, solutions were prepared by diluting filtered stock solutions
of peptides (0.45 μM Acrodisc syringe filter with GHP membrane)
in Tris-HCl buffer and a thioflavin-T solution immediately before
the measurement. For experiments conducted without HFIP, filtered
stock solutions were first lyophilized for 22 h and then the dry peptide
was dissolved into Tris-HCl buffer and
a thioflavin-T solution immediately before the measurement. The inhibition
experiments were performed by first diluting peptide stock solutions
(assays with HFIP) or dissolving dry peptides (assays without HFIP)
in the buffer, followed by the addition of insulin. HS, when present,
was added last. The final conditions were 16 μM peptide and
32 μM thioflavin-T in 20 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.4). HS, when present,
was at
a concentration of 1.3 μM.

Circular Dichroism (CD)
Far-UV CD experiments were
performed at 25 °C on an Applied Photophysics Chirascan CD spectrophotometer.
Aliquots
from the kinetic experiments were removed at the end of each experiment,
and the spectra were recorded. Spectra were the average of three repeats
recorded over a range of 190–260 nm, at 1 nm intervals. A 0.1
cm quartz cuvette was used, and a background
spectrum was subtracted from the data.

Transmission Electron Microscopy
(TEM)
TEM images were
collected at the Life Science Microscopy Center at the State University
of New York at Stony Brook. Aliquots (15 μL) of the samples
used for the kinetic studies
were removed at the end of each experiment, placed on a carbon-coated
300 mesh copper grid for 1 min, and then negatively stained with saturated
uranyl acetate for 1 min.

Results and Discussion
Insulin
Inhibits the Formation of Amyloid by IAPP and ProIAPP1–48 in a Concentration-Dependent Manner
The ability of
insulin to inhibit the formation of amyloid by IAPP and proIAPP1–48 was tested using fluorescence-detected thioflavin-T
binding
assays. These studies were conducted by diluting solutions of the
peptides solubilized in HFIP in buffer. This is a commonly employed
approach for biophysical studies of IAPP. Additional experiments were
conducted in the absence of HFIP. Thioflavin-T experiences a significant
increase in its quantum yield upon binding to amyloid fibrils and
provides a convenient probe for monitoring the time course of fibril
formation. We first examined the formation of amyloid by different
mixtures of IAPP and insulin and observed significant effects of insulin
on the formation of amyloid by IAPP at substoichiometric concentrations.
This is consistent
with prior studies conducted in the presence of low percentages of
HFIP. The results, shown in Figure , confirm that insulin is an effective inhibitor
of the formation of amyloid by IAPP. The data are plotted as time
normalized by the T50 value of IAPP in
the absence of insulin, where T50 is the
time required for the amyloid reaction to reach 50% of the final fluorescence
intensity. The unnormalized data are included in the . Insulin was still able to inhibit
amyloid formation, albeit weakly, when IAPP was in 100-fold excess,
as indicated by a 1.7-fold longer T50.
The effects of insulin became more significant as the concentration
of insulin increased. In a mixture of IAPP and insulin at a 20:1 ratio
(IAPP in 20-fold excess), T50 was increased
by a factor
of 23 under the conditions used in these studies. TEM images and CD
spectra confirmed the existence of fibrils with typical amyloid morphology
and β-sheet structure at the end of each reaction. This excluded
the possibility of false positives from the thioflavin-T binding assays
(Figure  and ). Control experiments conducted with
insulin alone confirm that insulin did not form amyloid in the time
course of these experiments, as judged by thioflavin-T assays and
TEM (Figure ).

Inhibition of the formation
of IAPP amyloid by insulin. (A) The
results of thioflavin-T binding assays are displayed. The data are
plotted as time normalized by the T50 value
of IAPP in the absence of insulin: black, IAPP; red, IAPP and insulin
in a 20:1 ratio; green, IAPP and insulin in a 40:1 ratio; blue, IAPP
and insulin in a 60:1 ratio; pink, IAPP and insulin in an 80:1 ratio;
cyan, IAPP and insulin in a 100:1 ratio; brown, insulin alone at 0.8
μM. (B) TEM image of IAPP. (C) TEM image of a 20:1 mixture of
IAPP and insulin. IAPP is in 20-fold excess. (D) TEM image of insulin
alone at 0.8 μM. Aliquots were removed at the end of each reaction
for TEM analysis. Scale bars represent 100 nm. The kinetic experiments
were conducted in 20 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.4) and 2% (v/v) HFIP without
stirring at 25 °C. The IAPP concentration was 16 μM.

The effect of insulin on the formation
of amyloid
by proIAPP1–48 was also studied using this approach.
An increase in T50 was observed for all
proIAPP1–48:insulin ratios tested, and the inhibitory
effect of insulin
was dose-dependent. However, insulin was less effective at inhibiting
the formation of amyloid by the processing intermediate proIAPP1–48 than by mature IAPP under these conditions (Figure ). For example, when the IAPP:insulin or proIAPP1–48:insulin ratio was 20:1, the T50 of the formation of amyloid by proIAPP1–48 was
increased 8.3-fold, while the T50 of the
formation of amyloid by IAPP was increased by a factor of 23. TEM
images and CD spectra confirmed the existence of typical fibril structure
at the end of each reaction (Figure  and ).

Inhibition of the formation of proIAPP1–48 amyloid
by insulin. (A) The results of thioflavin-T binding assays are displayed.
The data are plotted as time normalized by the T50 value of proIAPP1–48 in the absence of
insulin: black, proIAPP1–48; red, proIAPP1–48 and insulin in a 20:1 ratio; green, proIAPP1–48 and insulin in a 40:1 ratio; blue, proIAPP1–48 and insulin in a 60:1 ratio; pink, proIAPP1–48 and insulin in an 80:1 ratio; cyan, proIAPP1–48 and insulin in a 100:1 ratio. (B) TEM image of proIAPP1–48. (C) TEM image of a 20:1 mixture of proIAPP1–48 and insulin. proIAPP1–48 is in 20-fold excess.
Aliquots were removed at the end of each reaction for TEM analysis.
Scale bars represent 100 nm. The kinetic experiments were conducted
in 20 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.4) and 2% (v/v) HFIP without stirring at 25
°C. The proIAPP1–48 concentration was 16 μM.

Insulin Is a Significantly
Less Effective Inhibitor in the Presence
of Heparan Sulfate
We next conducted inhibition experiments
in the presence of the model glycosaminoglycan, HS. As expected, the
formation of amyloid by IAPP was greatly enhanced in the presence
of HS, consistent with prior reports., IAPP formed
amyloid immediately after the reaction was initiated in the presence
of HS, and no lag time was observed (Figure A). TEM images confirmed the presence of amyloid fibrils, and the
fibrils formed in the presence of HS had a morphology very similar
to the morphology of those formed in the absence of HS (Figure ). CD confirmed that β-sheet structure was
formed ().

Effects of insulin on the formation of amyloid by IAPP
in the presence
of HS. (A) The results of thioflavin-T binding assays are displayed.
The data are plotted as time normalized by the T50 value of IAPP in the presence of HS, but in the absence
of insulin: black, IAPP in the presence of HS; red, IAPP and insulin
in a 20:1 ratio in the presence of HS; green, IAPP and insulin in
a 5:1 ratio in the presence of HS; blue, IAPP and insulin in a 1:1
ratio in the presence of HS; pink, IAPP and insulin in a 1:5 ratio
in the presence of HS; brown, a mixture of 80 μM insulin and
1.3 μM HS. (B) Expansion of the first five time units of panel
A. The same color coding is used. (C) TEM image of IAPP in the presence
of HS. (D) TEM image of a 1:5 mixture of IAPP and insulin in the presence
of HS. Insulin is in 5-fold excess. (E) TEM image of the insulin/HS
mixture. Aliquots were removed at the end of each reaction for TEM
analysis. Scale bars represent 100 nm. The kinetic experiments were
conducted in 20 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.4) and 2% (v/v) HFIP without stirring
at 25 °C. The IAPP concentration was 16 μM. The HS concentration
was 1.3 μM.

Insulin was a much less
effective inhibitor when
HS was present, although there were modest effects on the time required
to complete amyloid formation, and the effects of insulin were dose-dependent.
However, even at a 1:5 IAPP:insulin ratio, IAPP formed amyloid without
an apparent lag phase in the presence of HS (Figure A). A rapid initial rise in fluorescence intensity was observed
followed by a more gradual rise to the final value. Although no significant
lag phase was observed, even with relatively high concentrations of
insulin (1:1 and 1:5 IAPP:insulin ratios), amyloid formation required
several hours to reach completion after the initial rapid increase
in the thioflavin-T fluorescence intensity. TEM images revealed the
presence of fibrils at the end of each experiment (Figure  and ). Similar behavior has
been observed in experiments using other inhibitors in the presence
of HS and has been proposed to be due to the rapid formation of a
GAG–peptide intermediate. CD spectra
of mixtures with a low concentration of insulin showed typical β-sheet
structure, while those from samples with a higher concentration of
insulin (1:1 and 1:5 IAPP:insulin ratios) exhibited a broad peak centered
at 219 nm, likely due to contributions from the insulin α-helical
structure (). Interestingly,
in the
presence of HS, the CD signal of either IAPP or mixtures of IAPP and
insulin appears to be more intense than in the absence of HS (). This may be caused by the fact that
HS has a solubilizing effect on the aggregates formed so they are
less prone to bind to the walls of the microplates or segregate to
the air–water interface or pellet. The exact reason for the
differencies in the intensity of the CD spectra is not clear, but
the shape of the spectrum reports on the secondary structure of the
soluble aggregates.

Insulin is also much less effective at inhibiting
the formation
of amyloid by proIAPP1–48 in the presence of HS
(Figure ). Insulin
barely showed any inhibitory effect at 20:1 and 5:1 proIAPP1–48:insulin ratios in the presence of HS. Increasing the amount
of insulin to a ratio of 1:1 and 1:5 slightly increased the time required
to complete amyloid formation, but no lag time was observed. TEM images
and CD spectra confirmed the results of thioflavin-T fluorescence
and showed that amyloid was formed ().

Effects of insulin on the formation of amyloid by proIAPP1–48 in the presence of HS. (A) The results of thioflavin-T
binding assays
are displayed. The data are plotted as time normalized by the T50 value of proIAPP1–48 in
the presence of HS, but in the absence of insulin: black, proIAPP1–48 in the presence of HS; red, proIAPP1–48 and insulin in a 20:1 ratio in the presence of HS; green, proIAPP1–48 and insulin in a 5:1 ratio in the presence of HS;
blue, proIAPP1–48 and insulin in a 1:1 ratio in
the presence of HS; pink, proIAPP1–48 and insulin
in a 1:5 ratio in the presence of HS. (B) Expansion of the first five
time units of panel A. The same color coding is used. (C) TEM image
of proIAPP1–48 in the presence of HS. (D) TEM image
of a 1:5 mixture of proIAPP1–48 and insulin in the
presence of HS. Insulin is in 5-fold excess. Aliquots were removed
at the end of each reaction for TEM analysis. Scale bars represent
100 nm. The kinetic experiments were conducted in 20 mM Tris-HCl (pH
7.4) and 2% (v/v) HFIP without stirring at 25 °C. The proIAPP1–48 concentration was 16 μM. The HS concentration
was 1.3 μM.

Insulin is able to aggregate;
thus, to exclude
the possibility that the results discussed above were caused by interactions
of insulin with HS, we monitored the thioflavin-T fluorescence of
a mixture of insulin and HS. No increase in fluorescence was observed
during the time course of the study (Figure A), and TEM showed that no fibrils were formed (Figure E). The CD spectrum revealed helical structure that is similar
to that observed from insulin samples that did not contain HS ().

The Observed Effects Are
Not Due to the Presence of Organic Cosolvents
The results
outlined above were collected using assays
with 2% HFIP by volume as a cosolvent. Even this low percentage of
organic solvent accelerates the kinetics
of the formation of amyloid by IAPP significantly., Initial kinetic studies of the effects of insulin on IAPP amyloid
formation made use of HFIP as a cosolvent, and subsequent studies showed that
similar relative effects were obtained in the absence of HFIP in many
cases. We compared the ability of
insulin to inhibit the formation of amyloid by both IAPP and proIAPP1–48 in the absence and presence of HS using a different
assay
that avoided the use of HFIP to exclude the possibility that our results
were a consequence of the conditions used. Control experiments conducted
with insulin in the absence of HFIP or IAPP showed that it did not
form amyloid under these conditions during the time course of the
experiments (). The
results showed that
in the absence of HFIP, at a 1:20 ratio (IAPP is in 20-fold excess),
insulin increased the T50 of
the formation of amyloid by IAPP by a factor of 3.3 in a homogeneous
solution (Figure A). For comparison, insulin
at the same ratio increased the T50 of
the formation of amyloid by IAPP by a factor of 23 in the presence
of HFIP. The reason for the proportionally larger effect in HFIP is
not clear but may reflect the acquisition of structure in HFIP that
facilitates interactions of IAPP with insulin. Peptide mapping studies
have suggested that the region corresponding to residues 7–19
of IAPP interacts with insulin. This segment of IAPP has been proposed
to form a transient helical structure during amyloid formation,− and even low levels of HFIP can promote helical structure.

Inhibition
by insulin of the formation of amyloid by IAPP in the
presence and absence of HS in buffer without HFIP. (A) Inhibition
in the absence of HS monitored by thioflavin-T assays: black, IAPP;
red, IAPP and insulin in a 20:1 ratio. Data are plotted as time normalized
by the T50 value of IAPP in the absence
of insulin. (B) Inhibition in the presence of HS monitored by thioflavin-T
assays. Data are plotted as time normalized by the T50 value of IAPP in the presence of HS, but in the absence
of insulin. The same color coding is used here as in panel A. (C)
TEM image of IAPP in the absence of HS. (D) TEM image of a 20:1 mixture
of IAPP and insulin in the absence of HS (IAPP was in 20-fold excess).
(E) TEM image of IAPP in the presence of HS. (F) TEM image of a 20:1
mixture of IAPP and insulin in the presence of HS (IAPP was in 20-fold
excess). Scale bars represent 100 nm. Aliquots were removed at the
end of each experiment for TEM analysis. The kinetic experiments were
conducted in 20 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.4) without stirring at 25 °C.
The IAPP concentration was 16 μM. The HS concentration was 1.3
μM (when present).

When HS was present, the formation of amyloid
by IAPP was greatly accelerated, as indicated by the lack of a lag
phase. In addition, insulin was a much less effective inhibitor of
the formation of amyloid by IAPP in the presence of HS (Figure B). At a 20:1 IAPP:insulin ratio, the time required
to complete the formation of amyloid by IAPP was increased by a factor
of only 1.3 when HS was in the mixture. These results are consistent
with the trends observed in the presence of HFIP and indicate that
the observations are not an artifact caused by residual HFIP. TEM
images were collected at the end of each experiment and confirmed
that amyloid was formed (Figure ).

Very
similar results were obtained with proIAPP1–48.
In the absence of HFIP, insulin increased the T50 of the formation of amyloid by proIAPP1–48 by 2.7-fold when proIAPP1–48 and insulin were
in a 20:1 ratio in a homogeneous solution (Figure A). In contrast, at the
same proIAPP1–48:insulin ratio, T50 was increased
by a factor of 8.3 in the presence of HFIP.

Inhibition by insulin
of the formation of amyloid by proIAPP1–48 in the
presence and absence of HS in buffer without
HFIP. (A) Inhibition in the absence of HS monitored by thioflavin-T
assays. Data are plotted as time normalized by the T50 value of proIAPP1–48 in the absence
of insulin: black, proIAPP1–48; red, proIAPP1–48 and insulin in a 20:1 ratio. (B) Inhibition in
the presence of HS monitored by thioflavin-T assays. Data are plotted
as time normalized by the T50 value of
proIAPP1–48 in the presence of HS, but in the absence
of insulin. The same color coding is used here as in panel A. (C)
TEM image of proIAPP1–48 in the absence of HS. (D)
TEM image of a 20:1 mixture of proIAPP1–48 and insulin
in the absence of HS. (E) TEM image of proIAPP1–48 in the presence of HS. (F) TEM image of a 20:1 mixture of proIAPP1–48 and insulin in the presence of HS. Scale bars represent
100 nm. Aliquots were removed at the end of each experiment for TEM
analysis. The kinetic experiments were conducted in 20 mM Tris-HCl
(pH 7.4) without stirring at 25 °C. The proIAPP1–48 concentration was 16 μM. The HS concentration was 1.3 μM
(when present).

We also tested the ability
of insulin to inhibit
the formation of amyloid by proIAPP1–48 in the presence
of HS, but in the absence of HFIP. Insulin
is a much less effective inhibitor of the formation of amyloid by
proIAPP1–48 when HS is present. In the presence
of HS, proIAPP1–48 immediately aggregated to form
amyloid fibrils without any
observable lag phase. The time required to complete the formation
of amyloid by proIAPP1–48 in the presence of insulin
is nearly the same as that without insulin (Figure B). TEM images were collected at the end of each experiment
and confirmed that amyloid was formed (Figure ).

Conclusions
The data show that insulin is a potent
amyloid inhibitor for both
IAPP and the proIAPP1–48 processing intermediate
in homogeneous solutions. Figure  shows a
comparison of the ability of insulin to
inhibit the formation of amyloid by IAPP and proIAPP1–48 as judged by the T50 values in the presence
of HFIP. Insulin, at relatively high concentrations, is more potent
in slowing the formation of amyloid by IAPP than by proIAPP1–48, and the inhibition of the formation of IAPP amyloid by insulin
is more sensitive to changes in the insulin level than is the inhibition
of the formation of amyloid by proIAPP1–48. For
example, a 5-fold change in insulin concentration in the mixture (IAPP:insulin
ratio
ranging from 100:1 to 20:1) led to a significant increase in the T50 of the formation of amyloid by IAPP, from
1.7- to 23-fold relative to that with IAPP alone. In contrast, increasing
the insulin ratio by the same amount had a smaller effect on proIAPP1–48; T50 increased from
2.7- to 8.3-fold
relative to that with proIAPP1–48 alone. However,
insulin is still an effective inhibitor, arguing
that interactions between proIAPP1–48 and insulin
that are weaker than those between IAPP and insulin
are unlikely to account for islet amyloid formation in vivo.

Bar graph comparing the T50 values
for the formation of amyloid by IAPP and proIAPP1–48 in the presence of 2% HFIP at different ratios of IAPP or proIAPP1–48 to insulin: black bars, mixtures of IAPP and insulin;
gray bars, mixtures of proIAPP1–48 and insulin.
Values of T50 were derived from the kinetic
curves shown in Figures  and . Data are plotted as T50 normalized
by the value of T50 of either IAPP or
proIAPP1–48 in the absence of insulin. Experiments
were conducted in 20 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.4) and 2% (v/v) HFIP without
stirring at 25 °C. The IAPP or proIAPP1–48 concentration
was 16 μM.

The effects of insulin
on the formation of amyloid by IAPP and
proIAPP1–48 in the presence of HS are quantitatively
compared in terms
of T50 in Figure . The ability of insulin to inhibit amyloid formation is greatly
weakened in the presence of HS for both peptides. When peptide and
insulin are combined at a 20:1 ratio, the T50 for the formation of amyloid by IAPP is increased by a factor of
only 1.6, and no obvious increase in T50 is observed for proIAPP1–48. Even at the highest
concentrations of insulin (1:1 and 1:5
ratios of IAPP or proIAPP1–48 to insulin), T50 is increased
by &lt;3-fold for both peptides in the presence of HS. The formation
of amyloid by IAPP is slightly more effectively inhibited than is
the formation of amyloid by proIAPP1–48 in the presence
of HS. However, insulin is clearly a significantly
worse inhibitor of the formation of amyloid by either peptide in the
presence of HS.

Bar graph comparing the T50 values
for amyloid formation in buffer with HFIP for mixtures of IAPP with
insulin and for mixtures of proIAPP1–48 with insulin
in the presence of HS. Values are plotted for different ratios of
IAPP or proIAPP1–48 to insulin: black bars, mixtures
of IAPP and insulin in the presence of HS; gray bars, mixtures of
proIAPP1–48 and insulin in the presence of HS. The
data are plotted as T50 normalized by
the T50 value of either IAPP or proIAPP1–48 in the presence of HS, but in the absence of insulin.
Values of T50 were derived from the kinetic
curves in Figures  and . Experiments were conducted in 20 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.4) and 2% (v/v)
HFIP without stirring at 25 °C. The IAPP or proIAPP1–48 concentration was 16 μM. The HS concentration was 1.3 μM.

Our control experiments show that
the results are not due to the
presence of HFIP. Insulin is a much less effective inhibitor of amyloid
formation in the presence of HS even in the absence of HFIP. The results
are summarized in Figure . The T50 for the formation of amyloid by IAPP and proIAPP1–48 in the absence of HFIP is increased by 3.3- and
2.7-fold,
respectively, at a 20:1 ratio of IAPP or proIAPP1–48 to insulin in a homogeneous solution. However, in the presence
of HS, insulin, at the same ratio, increased the time required for
the formation of amyloid by IAPP by a factor of only 1.3, while the
kinetics of the formation of amyloid by proIAPP1–48 was virtually unaltered. No lag phase was observed for the formation
of amyloid by either IAPP or proIAPP1–48 even at
a 20:1 ratio of IAPP or proIAPP1–48 to insulin.

Bar
graph comparing the T50 values
for the formation of amyloid by mixtures of IAPP with insulin and
mixtures of proIAPP1–48 with insulin in the absence
of HFIP. (A) HS is absent in the assay. The data are plotted as T50 normalized by the T50 value of IAPP or proIAPP1–48 in the absence
of insulin. (B) HS is present in the assay. The data are plotted as T50 normalized by the T50 value of IAPP or proIAPP1–48 in the presence
of HS without insulin. The ratio of IAPP or proIAPP1–48 to insulin was 20:1. Both panels: black bars, mixtures of IAPP and
insulin; gray bars, mixtures of proIAPP1–48 and
insulin. Values of T50 were derived from
the kinetic curves in Figures  and . The kinetic experiments were conducted in 20 mM
Tris-HCl (pH 7.4) without stirring at 25 °C. The IAPP or proIAPP1–48 concentration was 16 μM. The HS concentration
was 1.3 μM (when present).

HS is not the only factor that can accelerate the formation
of
amyloid by IAPP. Anionic vesicles also catalyze the formation of amyloid
by IAPP. Insulin still inhibits the process in the presence of anionic
model membranes;, however, insulin is noticeably
less effective. Those studies together
with this work highlight the importance of considering the role of
the heterogeneous environment in amyloid formation. The deleterious
effects of HS on insulin’s ability to act as an amyloid inhibitor
could be due to stronger interactions of IAPP or proIAPP1–48 with HS than with insulin. Alternatively, HS might bind to
insulin and sequester the inhibitor, or both effects could play a
role. The data presented here clearly show that HS accelerates the
formation of amyloid by proIAPP1–48 and IAPP, and
this has been established to occur via direct
interactions between the peptides and the GAG., These observations, along with the fact that HS did not induce the
formation of amyloid by insulin under the conditions used in our studies,
suggest that interactions between IAPP or proIAPP1–48 and HS outcompete interactions between insulin and IAPP or
proIAPP1–48.

Our observations suggest another
mechanism by which HS can promote
amyloid formation. Proteoglycans can accelerate amyloid formation
by direct interactions with proIAPP1–48 or IAPP
and can also significantly reduce the inhibitory effects
of insulin.

Supporting Information Available
TEM images and CD spectra
of mixtures of IAPP and insulin at different ratios of IAPP to insulin
in the absence and presence of HS, TEM images and CD spectra of mixtures
of proIAPP1–48 and insulin at different ratios of
proIAPP1–48 to insulin in the absence and presence
of HS, CD spectrum
of insulin in the absence of HS, CD spectrum of a mixture of insulin
and HS, plots of unnormalized kinetic data, and thioflavin-T curves
and TEM images of insulin control in the presence and absence of HS
without HFIP. This material is available free of charge via the Internet
at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bi4015488_si_001.pdf

The authors declare
no competing
financial interest.

Acknowledgments
We thank Dr. Fanling Meng
for helpful discussions.

Abbreviations
IAPPislet amyloid polypeptide

CPEcarboxypeptidase E

PAMpeptidyl amidating
monooxygenase complex

HSheparan sulfate

Fmoc9-fluoronylmethoxycarbonyl

PAL-PEG5-(4′-fmoc-aminomethyl-3′,5-dimethoxyphenol)valeric
acid

TFAtrifluoroacetic
acid

RP-HPLCreverse-phase
high-performance liquid chromatography

HFIPhexafluoro-2-proponal

CDcircular dichroism

TEMtransmission electron microscopy.

