Vitamin K-dependent γ-glutamyl
carboxylase (GGCX) is a 758-amino acid integral membrane glycoprotein with five transmembrane domains and a disulfide
bond between residues 99 and 450., Topological
studies reveal that each transmembrane domain passes through the endoplasmic
reticulum (ER) with the N-terminus of the protein in the cytoplasm
and C-terminus in the lumen. In the presence
of co-substrates—vitamin K hydroquinone (KH2), oxygen,
and carbon dioxide—GGCX modifies select glutamic acid (Glu)
residues to γ-carboxy glutamic acid (Gla) in vitamin K-dependent
(VKD) proteins. Concomitant with VKD carboxylation and the formation
of vitamin K 2,3-epoxide (KO) is the catalytic regeneration of KH2 involving vitamin K epoxide reductase (VKOR). As a result
of the interdependence of proteins in the vitamin K cycle, depletion
of KH2 and consequently reduced carboxylation are shown
to result when VKOR is inhibited by Warfarin, a commonly used anticoagulant.

GGCX recognizes VKD protein substrates
through an 18-amino acid
region, termed the propeptide. An alignment of multiple propeptide
sequences is illustrated in  where the height of stacked amino
acids indicates the frequency of that amino acid at a particular position., If one of the highly conserved amino acid residues (phenylalanine
at −16, alanine at −10, or leucine at −6) is
mutated, substrate carboxylation is diminished or eliminated, under
most circumstances., Despite the high degree of propeptide
sequence homology, substrate binding affinity to GGCX varies over
100-fold with the consensus and factor X propeptides showing the highest
affinity (lowest Kd) and prothrombin the
lowest affinity. The explanation for this
variability is not yet known; however, the binding of a VKD protein
to GGCX is concluded to be a cooperative event between the propeptide
and the Gla domain.

Current understanding
suggests the propeptide region tightly binds
GGCX between residues 495–513, initiating
a structural reorientation by which the Gla domain of the VKD substrate
(approximately 45 amino acids)− is positioned at the catalytic
active site of GGCX. In the presence of KH2, select glutamic
acid residues in the Gla domain are carboxylated to γ-carboxy
glutamic acid. Carboxylation of the VKD protein continues in a processive
manner whereby all impending carboxylations for a given Gla domain
take place in a single binding event., Once GGCX
converts the selected Glu residues in the VKD protein to Gla residues,
the propeptide is proteolytically excised and the protein is secreted
from the cell. In the presence of calcium,
the mature VKD protein undergoes a conformational reorientation allowing
association with phospholipids on the membrane surface near damaged
vascular tissue. An elegant theory explaining the mechanism of carboxylation
using a base amplification chemical model was proposed by Dowd and
colleagues. That work spawned decades
of mutational studies,− and quantum modeling− in search of potential GGCX active site residues
shown to affect enzymatic activity.

Important clues concerning
the location of the glutamate binding
site in GGCX have come from a naturally occurring mutant form of GGCX
with a point mutation at position 394 (L394R)., Patients with this mutation exhibit decreased coagulation activity
of VKD clotting factors resulting in bleeding diathesis. In
vitro substitutions of L394 and neighboring residues Y395
and W399 resulted in defective glutamate binding and significant inhibition
of carboxylation. That work provided
evidence that glutamate recognition is the primary function of the
highly conserved domain between residues 393–404 in GGCX. In
addition to playing a major role in the binding of the glutamate substrate,
L394R and W399A were also shown to be involved in the propeptide binding.

Extensive research has been conducted
on the biochemistry of GGCX,
as described above, yet unraveling the structural associations of
protein complexes in the vitamin K cycle has been severely limited
due to complexities in sample preparation including protein aggregation,
oligomerization, or precipitation in solution. To surmount the challenges
of investigating the structural characterization of GGCX, hydrogen
exchange mass spectrometry (HX MS) of membrane protein-embedded nanodiscs
has recently been reported. Formation
of nanodiscs is an empirical process that, when optimized, promotes
stabilization of a target membrane protein into a nanoscale phospholipid
bilayer encompassed by an amphipathic membrane scaffold protein (MSP).
Previous studies investigating membrane proteins by HX MS have been
reported using lipid vesicles or detergent micelles.− The use of nanodiscs, however, enables selective labeling methods
such as hydrogen exchange to occur within an environment that mimics
native membrane conditions. In this paper, we report nanodisc–HX
of GGCX as compared with nanodisc–HX of GGCX–propeptide
complexes. Comparing deuterium uptake signatures for GGCX with and
without the presence of propeptide provides a dynamic visual mapping
of localized structural fluctuations upon binding to the substrate.
Utilizing HX MS to investigate membrane protein–ligand interactions
in controlled single-molecule nanodisc environments uniquely enables
investigation of conformational changes in membrane proteins induced
by substrate, drug, or protein interactions.

Experimental Procedures
GGCX Purification
Wild-type human GGCX with a carboxyl-terminal
12-amino acid epitope tag (EDQVDPRLIDGK) was isolated
from Sf9 cells, as previously described. Solubilized GGCX microsomes were purified using
a calcium-dependent HPC4 antibody resin (Dr. Charles T. Esmon, Cardiovascular
Biology Research Program, Oklahoma Medical Research Foundation, Oklahoma
City, OK) and eluted in 25 mM MOPS pH
7.5, 0.1 M NaCl, 15% glycerol, 0.5% CHAPS, 0.2% 1,2-dioleoyl-sn-glycero-3-phosphocholine (DOPC), and 10 mM EDTA, stabilized
by a protease inhibitor cocktail (aprotinin, leupeptin, pepstatin,
and phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride). DOPC phospholipid was purchased
from Avanti Polar Lipids (Alabaster, AL), and protease inhibitors
were from Roche Applied Science (Indianapolis, IN). Purified protein
was stored at −80°C. Protein concentration and purity
were determined by enzymatic activity assay measurements and SDS-PAGE.

Membrane Scaffold Protein (MSP1D1) Expression and Purification
MSP1D1 expression and purification were performed as previously
described. Briefly, the MSP1D1 plasmid
with a polyhistidine tag (Addgene plasmid 20061) was expressed in Escherichia coli BL21 Codon Plus (DE3) cells. The protein
was isolated by Ni-NTA Agarose (QIAGEN, Valencia, CA) affinity purification,
and purity was confirmed by polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (PAGE).
Fractions containing MSP1D1 were pooled and dialyzed against standard
buffer (20 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.4, 0.1 M NaCl, 0.5 mM EDTA, and 0.01%
NaN3). Purified protein was lyophilized and stored at −20°C.
Protein concentration was determined by absorbance at 280 nm using
calculated extinction coefficients (ε280nm = 21000 M–1 cm–1 for MSP1D1).

Self-Assembly
of Nanodiscs
Self-assembly of GGCX-nanodiscs
was initiated as previously reported. Phospholipid stock solutions were prepared in chloroform, and the
concentration was determined by phosphate analysis., A DOPC/deoxycholate (2:1) solubilized mixture was added to the purified
microsomal GGCX target protein. The equilibrated mixture was added
to an excess of purified MSP1D1 and 50 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.4, 0.15 M
NaCl, and 0.02% NaN3 (TBS) buffer. Samples were incubated
at 4°C. Self-assembly was initiated upon detergent removal during
a 2 h gentle rotation with damp SM-2 BioBeads (BioRad, Hercules, CA).
For GGCX-nanodisc preparations in the presence of consensus propeptide
[pCon] (AVFLSREQANQVLQRRRR) or fluorescein-labeled
consensus propeptide [FpCon] (Fl-AVFLSREQANQVLQRRRR),
the reaction mixture was first incubated with a 10-fold excess of
propeptide for 45 min at 4°C prior to the addition of solubilized
phospholipid.

Nanodisc preparations were purified by size-exclusion
chromatography (SEC) monitoring the absorbance of the sample eluent
at 280 nm. Separation was completed on a Tosoh TSKgel BioAssist G3SWXL 7.8 × 300 mm (5 μm particles, 250 Å) column
using 50 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.0, 0.15 M NaCl, 0.02% NaN3 (TBS)
mobile phase at 0.5 mL/min. Fractions containing purified GGCX-nanodiscs
were isolated and concentrated by Millipore (Bedford, MA) Microcon
YM-30 centrifugal filters. Purified nanodiscs were stored at 4°C
for up to one month. Protein concentration and purity were determined
by enzymatic activity assay measurements and SDS-PAGE.

SDS-PAGE
Purified nanodiscs were analyzed by SDS-PAGE
on NuPAGE Novex 4–12% Bis–Tris gradient gels (Invitrogen
Life Sciences, Grand Island, NY). SDS-PAGE buffers were prepared according
to a protocol derived from Invitrogen Life Sciences including a 4×
SDS-PAGE loading buffer and a 20× MES running buffer. PAGE gels
were stained using SYPRO Ruby stain (Invitrogen Life Sciences) and
imaged using a 300 nm blue light UV transilluminator (Alpha Innotech
AlphaImager 2200) with interference wavelength filtering. For protein
molecular weight referencing, the Mark 12 unstained protein ladder
(Invitrogen Life Sciences) was loaded on each gel.

In
Vitro Carboxylation
GGCX in vitro activity was determined by measuring the carboxylation
of a synthetic pentapeptide substrate FLEEL (Phe-Leu-Glu-Glu-Leu)
in the presence of excess factor IX propeptide [pFIX] (TVFLDHENANKILNRPKR)
or incorporated consensus propeptide [pCon] (AVFLSREQANQVLQRRRR)
and co-substrates KH2, oxygen, and radiolabeled CO2 in the form of NaH14CO3 (specific activity
55 mCi/mmol; MP Biomedicals, Solon, OH). Vitamin K1(25) phylloquinone, detergent-stabilized emulsion (Hospira Incorporated,
Lake Forest, IL), or vitamin K3 menadione, water-soluble
sodium bisulfite analogue, (Sigma Aldrich, St. Louis, MO) was utilized
in reaction mixtures containing microsomal GGCX or GGCX-embedded nanodiscs,
respectively. Vitamin K was reduced to KH2 by overnight
incubation with buffer containing 25 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.5, 0.5 M NaCl,
and 0.2 M dithiothreitol at 37°C.

The reagent mixture (25
mM MOPS pH 7.5, 0.50 M NaCl, CHAPS, DOPC, 30 mM FLEEL, and 2.4 μM
pFIX) was allowed to incubate with microsomal GGCX or GGCX-nanodiscs
for 30 min on ice. The concentration of CHAPS and DOPC in the assay
reaction mixture was modified to optimize conditions for sample carboxylation
such that 0.16% CHAPS/DOPC was incorporated into the assay reconstitution
mixture for microsomal GGCX, and no additional CHAPS/DOPC was included
for assays evaluating GGCX-nanodiscs. An excess of 222 μM (5.5
mM stock) KH2 phylloquinone or 111 μM (2.75 mM stock)
KH2 menadione with 5 μL of an 18.4 mM NaH14CO3 stock solution was added to the reaction mixture for
a final volume of 125 μL. The carboxylation assay was allowed
to proceed for 120 min at 20°C. The carboxylated product was
precipitated with 5% trichloroacetic acid and boiled to remove excess 14CO2. The radioactivity was determined by scintillation
counting (Beckman LS5000TD).

Hydrogen Exchange Mass Spectrometry
Deuterium exchange
of GGCX-embedded nanodiscs was carried out as described previously. A total of 50 pmol of GGCX-nanodiscs (100 pmol
of MSP1D1; 6 nmol of DOPC) was diluted 10-fold in 99% deuterium oxide
buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl, 0.15 M NaCl, 0.02% NaN3, D2O, pD 7.0) at room temperature. At times ranging from 10 s
to 4 h after the introduction of D2O, the sample was quenched
to pH 2.5 by the addition of formic acid and placed on ice. To retain
the deuterium that exchanged into the protein, the sample was maintained
under quench conditions (pH 2.5; 0°C) for all sample handling
steps prior to analysis by mass spectrometry. Upon quenching, nanodiscs were immediately disassembled with the
addition of 25:1 sodium cholate/DOPC. Digestion was completed for
5 min on ice with porcine pepsin-immobilized Poros 20AL resin (Applied
Biosystems, Carlsbad, CA). In the last
minute of digestion, 3 mg of ZrO2-coated silica resin was
added to the digestion mixture to remove DOPC phospholipids. The sample
was passed across a chilled filter (0.45 μm cellulose acetate)
by centrifugation at 4°C for 1 min and loaded immediately onto
a refrigerated UPLC-MS system for chromatography and mass spectral
analysis. Empty nanodiscs and GGCX-pCon-nanodiscs were analyzed in
a similar manner. For purified propeptide, 25 μL of a 2 μM
solution was used in the continuous labeling HX reaction. The digestion
protocol followed that of the nanodisc procedure as outlined above.

Chromatography was completed on a Waters nanoAcquity UPLC system
(Milford, Massachusetts) designed for HX MS. The peptic peptides were trapped on a Waters VanGuard column packed
with 1.7 μm C18 particles (2.1 mm × 5.0 mm) and desalted
with 0.1% formic acid in water for 5 min at 100 μL/min. The
trap column was placed in line with a lipid trap column (Waters VanGuard;
1.7 μm C18 particles, 2.1 mm × 5.0 mm) directly connected
to the analytical column (Waters BEH 1.7 μm C18 particles, 1.0
mm × 100 mm). The peptides were eluted with an 8–40% gradient
of acetonitrile in 0.05% formic acid (pH 2.5) over 12 min at a flow
rate of 40 μL/min.

Mass spectral analyses were carried
out on a Waters QToF Premier
equipped with a standard ESI source and lock mass calibration using
[Glu1]-fibrinopeptide B (200 fmol/μL). The mass spectrometer
was operated with a capillary voltage of 3.5 kV, a cone voltage of
40 V, a source temperature of 80°C, a desolvation temperature
of 175°C, and desolvation gas at 600 L/h. Each 0.5 s scan spanned m/z 200–2000 with an interscan delay
time of 0.05 s. Spectra were collected in positive ion mode and processed
with MassLynx software. Undeuterated sample controls for both GGCX-nanodiscs
and empty nanodiscs were analyzed in triplicate using a Waters MSE acquisition method. Identification of peptic peptides from
MSE data was performed using ProteinLynx Global Server
2.4 processing software operated with a custom protein sequence library
and nonspecific enzyme digestion specificity. Relative deuterium uptake
curves were generated using HX-Express software for peptides identified in two out of three replicate injections.
Deuterium incorporation was not corrected for back-exchange, representing
relative, rather than absolute changes in deuterium levels. The error between biological replicates with
this experimental system was characterized previously, and similarly here did not exceed ±0.15 Da at each time point.
For this work, differences in the relative deuterium level between
propeptide-bound and unbound GGCX greater than ±1.0 Da were reported
as having a distinguishable change in protein conformation. Relative
deuterium uptake curves for all identified GGCX peptides are reported
in  for sample conditions with and without the incorporation of consensus
propeptide.

Results
Formation of GGCX-pCon-Nanodiscs
GGCX-nanodiscs and GGCX-pCon-nanodisc
complexes were prepared
using a 1200:20:1 ratio of DOPC/MSP1D1/GGCX protein. The consensus
propeptide (Kd = 0.083 ± 0.005 nM
at 4°C) was chosen as a target substrate
based on its high binding affinity for GGCX. Homogenous self-assembly
of GGCX-pCon-nanodiscs was evaluated by size-exclusion chromatography
(Figure ) where propeptide-bound GGCX-nanodiscs
(peak II) were isolated from an unassociated aggregate (peak I) and
empty nanodiscs (peak III). Purified protein standards for GGCX (∼94
kDa, lane A) and MSP1D1 (24 kDa, lane B) were provided to identify
protein components in concentrated size-exclusion fractions (Figure , gel inset). A fluorescently labeled consensus
propeptide analogue (FpCon; 2.6 kDa) was used to demonstrate incorporation
of pCon into GGCX-nanodiscs. A comparison of chromatographic features
between the visible spectrum at 492 nm (orange) and an overlaid absorbance
spectrum at 280 nm (blue) revealed that the high affinity fluorescently
labeled substrate selectively incorporates into GGCX-nanodiscs (peak
II) with only a small fraction shown to aggregate in an unassociated
complex at the void volume of the chromatographic separation (peak
I).

Size-exclusion chromatograms (SEC) overlaying self-assembled GGCX-FpCon-nanodiscs
at 280 nm (blue) and 492 nm (orange). Chromatographic peaks labeled
(I), (II), (III) correspond to labeled SDS-PAGE gel lanes (inset).
GGCX (∼94 kDa) and MSP1D1 (24 kDa) purified protein standards
are in gel lanes (A) and (B), respectively.

Fluorescence anisotropy was used to determine the stoichiometric
ratio of pCon to GGCX in embedded nanodiscs. In the absence of a buffer solution containing detergent or excess
phospholipid, the titration of purified GGCX-nanodiscs against a constant
concentration of FpCon followed an analogous stoichiometric anisotropy
profile to that of microsomal GGCX, suggesting one propeptide molecule
is incorporated into one active GGCX-nanodisc (data not shown). The
ability to incorporate and isolate monoisotopic GGCX-pCon-nanodiscs
provides a sophisticated near-native working environment for elucidating
dynamic conformational changes of GGCX and co-substrate interactions
involved in the vitamin K cycle. For the remainder of the work presented,
GGCX-nanodiscs were prepared with the non-fluorescein-labeled consensus
propeptide (pCon).

Modifications to In Vitro GGCX Activity Assay
GGCX-nanodisc catalytic functionality
was confirmed by monitoring
carboxylation of the pentapeptide substrate FLEEL after protein incubation
at 25°C for up to 24 h (Figure ). For
microsomal GGCX, the assay was carried out with optimized ratios of
lipid, detergent, and detergent-solubilized KH2 phylloquinone
to maximize catalytic efficiency. The formation of GGCX-nanodiscs,
however, provides a water-soluble environment no longer stable in
the presence of excess detergent. As
a result, the water-soluble KH2 menadione analogue was
utilized in the absence of excess lipid and detergent to improve catalytic
efficiencies by increasing the solubility and reactivity with the
active domain of the nanodisc-embedded GGCX. While GGCX microsomes
lose catalytic functionality almost immediately upon exposure to ambient
conditions, GGCX-nanodiscs remain in a protected environment preventing
loss of activity for several hours at 25°C (Figure ). In both microsomal and GGCX-nanodisc samples, incorporation
of the high-affinity pCon substrate maximized levels of carboxylation
activity at 25°C.

GGCX stability at 25°C monitored by catalytic activity.
Activity
was measured by the incorporation of radiolabeled 14C as
GGCX carboxylates a small pentapeptide substrate FLEEL in the presence
of propeptide, KH2, oxygen, and NaH14CO3. In all sample systems, the 100% active control is recorded
at time zero. Stability is compared between microsomal GGCX (red)
and GGCX-embedded nanodiscs (blue) with (◊) and without (⧫)
pCon. The fractionated proteins from the 24-h time point at 25°C
are represented by SDS-PAGE for each sample.

Gel electrophoresis protein banding patterns of microsomal
GGCX
at the 24-h time point (Figure , lane 1) indicates
that enzymatic inactivation coincides with the formation of high molecular
weight protein aggregates in the absence of protein stabilization
(nanodisc or propeptide). Incorporation of GGCX into nanodiscs, however,
overcomes many of the inherent complications notorious for microsome
assemblies, enabling monomeric solubilization and conservation of
catalytic activity with and without pCon (lanes 2 and 4, respectively).
Nanodiscs thus provide a platform in which to study the structural
and functional recognition of membrane protein complexes in a catalytically
active and structurally protected phospholipid environment. To maintain
optimal GGCX activity and limit the formation of oligomers, all HX
labeling experiments were performed within 4 h of nanodisc assembly.

Hydrogen Exchange Mass Spectrometry Analysis of GGCX-Nanodiscs
The continuous labeling nanodisc–HX MS workflow, as previously
reported, was optimized to include cholate
disassembly of the nanodiscs, ZrO2 removal of sample phospholipid,
and temperature-controlled UPLC separation. In the current work, the
nanodisc–HX MS platform was used to characterize protein–substrate
interactions by measuring local changes in HX (i.e., deuterium uptake)
for the GGCX-pCon-nanodisc complex relative to GGCX-embedded nanodiscs
in the absence of pCon. Time-resolved deuterium incorporation into
GGCX was monitored for duplicate biological preparations of GGCX-nanodisc
complexes. Forty-nine peptic peptides were unambiguously identified
in GGCX with quality MS deuterium profiles for all time points in
both sample forms (see ), constituting a linear sequence coverage
of 42% (see Figure ). Overlapping peptides
were identified in multiple regions, providing additional support
for uptake trends in small sequence intervals. Signature peptic profiles
of the membrane scaffold protein (MSP1D1) were monitored to provide a system control for evaluating experimental
performance and distinguishing peptides unique to the embedded protein,
in this case GGCX (data not shown).

Sequence coverage plotted on the predicted
topology map of GGCX.
With the exception of six colored peptides of interest, sequence coverage
is indicated by amino acids colored in dark gray. Amino acids in white
were not observed in these experiments. A single disulfide bond is
indicated between amino acid residues cysteine 99 and cysteine 450.
Glycosylation sites are highlighted in light blue. Deuterium uptake
curves are provided for six representative peptic peptides where the
highlighted color of the peptide sequence is matched to the color
of the box surrounding the curve. The average deuterium incorporation
from duplicate biological replicates is shown for GGCX-nanodiscs without
(blue) and with (orange) pCon.

Among the GGCX peptides identified, six noteworthy regions
(Figure , colored amino acid residues) were
evaluated to
assess changes in solvent accessibility and/or hydrogen bonding resulting
from GGCX–pCon association. Comparing the magnitude and rate
of deuterium exchange into the same peptide under two different conditions
(in this case with and without pCon) highlights local changes in protein
conformation and dynamics as a result of that binding. Whereas some
regions of GGCX (e.g., residues 8–21) are shown to have a nearly
indistinguishable difference (&lt;1.0 Da) in deuterium uptake after
interaction with propeptide, other regions have subtle, yet important
changes in deuteration at early (e.g., residues 643–660) or
late (e.g., residues 701–713) labeling times throughout the
analysis.

Peptic peptides from the predicted transmembrane helices
within
the phospholipid bilayer were identified. The GGCX peptide LFLPYSHF
(residues 375–382) is located in the exit region of the fifth
transmembrane domain. Consistent with structural predictions, the
representative transmembrane domain peptide displays little exchange,
indicative of a solvent-protected environment and a stable α-helical
structure that spans the lipid membrane. Small changes in deuteration
between free and pCon-associated-GGCX were cumulatively below the
experimental cutoff (&lt;1.0 Da) and thus classified as a nonimportant
change in the context of this work (see  for explanation of experimental cutoff).

In
the presence of propeptide, GGCX residues 395–401 display
a modest, yet reproducible decrease in deuterium uptake, indicating
a more solvent-protected conformation in this region across all time
points. The substrate-induced reconfiguration of GGCX as measured
by HX MS indicates either a direct or indirect propeptide contact.
These findings correlate well with previous reports, implicating the involvement of GGCX residues within the 393–404
sequence region in both glutamate and propeptide substrate binding.

The most noteworthy change in GGCX HX upon pCon association was
found for peptides spanning GGCX residues 491–507. This region
had relatively high levels of deuteration in the unbound state, but
upon addition of propeptide there was a 66% decrease in deuterium
uptake at the 10 s time point. Despite evidence of a more solvent-protected
environment in the pCon-associated GGCX complex, a steady increase
in deuterium content toward the unbound protein form was shown at
longer labeling times, suggesting flexibility in the propeptide-bound
conformation.

The topology diagrams in Figure  were compiled
to provide a visualization of conformation changes between free and
pCon-bound GGCX-nanodiscs over a continuous labeling experiment (10
s to 4 h). GGCX peptides are denoted by color in each diagram to represent
a difference in the magnitude of deuterium exchange between each condition.
Differences are classified as major (&gt;2.0 Da), minor (1.0–2.0 Da), and no distinguishable
change (&lt;1.0 Da) where larger values represent greater
protection from exchange in the propeptide-bound state. At the 10
s and 1 min time points, binding of the propeptide to GGCX results
in many minor conformational changes. By the 5 min time interval,
residues 180–186, 328–342, 395–401, 423–431,
484–490, 491–507, 507–516, 532–543, and
717–730 each continue to be characterized by a minor (1.0–2.0 Da) difference in deuterium incorporation. As the
labeling experiment progressed, the uptake in deuterium for the majority
of identified peptides leveled off to a steady-state value similar
to that of the unbound form of the protein. This trend can most notably
be seen as the topology coloration shifts from an abundance of minor deuterium differences (yellow) at the early labeling
time-points to a population occupied mostly by changes in deuteration
below our threshold for differentiation (gray) at the 30 min and 4
h time points. The exception to this trend is for GGCX peptide 491–507,
which appears highly protected throughout the entirety of the deuterium
labeling experiment. Thus, in addition to the known propeptide binding
domain, these experiments support the notion that many regions within
GGCX are influenced by the binding of the propeptide.

Deuterium difference
diagrams illustrating GGCX topology images
at consecutive HX labeling intervals from 10 s to 4 h. The difference
in deuterium incorporation for each GGCX peptide was calculated at
individual labeling time points by subtracting the deuterium level
for the pCon-bound GGCX from the deuterium level of unbound GGCX.
The change in deuterium incorporation is plotted on the predicted
topology map of GGCX where a major (&gt;2.0 Da), minor (1.0–2.0 Da), and no distinguishable
change (&lt;1.0 Da) corresponds to the colors red, yellow,
and gray, respectively. Residues in white were not observed with confidence
in duplicate biological and sample preparations for both experimental
conditions (with or without propeptide). Neighboring and overlapping
peptides were used for deuterium uptake pattern validation (see also ). Glycosylation sites are highlighted in light blue.

Hydrogen Exchange Mass Spectrometry Analysis
of the Consensus
Propeptide
The deuterium uptake of the propeptide itself
was also shown to change upon binding to GGCX of embedded nanodiscs.
Figure A overlays a peptide isotopic distribution
profile for the pCon substrate (green) and GGCX-pCon-nanodiscs (orange)
as a function of deuteration time. The centroid mass value at each
time point for both experimental conditions provides a graphical comparison
between the unbound and bound forms of the peptide (Figure B). Variants (&lt;0.5% peptide content) of the pCon
sequence (additions, deletions, and single amino acid replacements
as measured by amino acid analysis) were monitored. No evidence for
binding or structural protection of these variants was identified
in HX MS experiments, ruling out the potential for false contributions
to GGCX deuterium uptake patterns.

Mass spectra (A) during the HX time course
for the pCon substrate
(green) and GGCX-pCon-nanodiscs (orange). At each time point interval
from 10 s to 4 h, the isotopic centroided mass of the peptide distribution
was determined to create the deuterium uptake plot (B). The y-axis maximum represents the total possible exchangeable
backbone amide hydrogens in the consensus propeptide sequence.

In the free form, pCon demonstrated
high levels of deuterium incorporation
indicating little protection from the solvent. This finding was further
confirmed by circular dichroism (data not shown), which indicated
that the consensus propeptide exhibits little or no secondary structural
features. Upon association with GGCX-embedded nanodiscs, deuterium
incorporation of the pCon peptide changes from that of an unstructured
form to one that is protected from exchange, indicating the formation
of new backbone amide hydrogen bonds or shielding from solvent of
amide hydrogens in the propeptide upon binding to GGCX. While characterized
by decreased deuteration in the protein-bound form, deuterium uptake
increased at longer labeling times, indicating that the GGCX–pCon
association remains flexible and fluid. Future investigation of deuterium
uptake profiles for propeptide incorporation may provide a conformational
comparison of structural changes that occur in GGCX in the presence
of different propeptide substrates and under conditions in which other
co-substrates are added to the GGCX-nanodisc platform.

Discussion
This study of GGCX-pCon-nanodiscs demonstrates the application
of HX MS for the investigation of membrane protein–ligand interactions
in a nanodisc phospholipid environment. Despite the urgent need for
detailed structural information of membrane proteins, biophysical
characterization is severely limited by sample incompatibilities with
analytical methods, the scarcity of nonperturbing model membrane systems,
and the difficulties of crystal structure determination of protein–lipid
samples. Nanodisc technology provides a controlled assembly mechanism
in which membrane proteins are incorporated as single molecules into
a near-native phospholipid environment, optimized for a given transmembrane
protein of interest. By utilizing nanodisc bilayers to supply a native-like
membrane environment, HX MS can provide an analytical platform to
investigate dynamic structural changes of membrane proteins in response
to natural fluctuations or environmental stimuli in solution. The
methodology was described in a previous report and continues to be recognized as an emerging technology
in the advancement of membrane proteins with HX MS methods.

Modeling
GGCX–VKD protein interactions is of particular
interest toward understanding of the complex biochemical mechanism
of the vitamin K cycle. In the present study, we attempted to elucidate
localized changes in GGCX protein dynamics of potential catalytic
domains over a continuous deuterium-labeling experiment as a means
to study structural changes that occur in GGCX upon the binding of
propeptide. Our results are consistent with previous observations
regarding the location of propeptide interaction with GGCX, while
providing additional information on cooperative structural influences
in other regions within GGCX.

To convey confidence in our model
system, we specifically sought
details to evaluate the binding of a propeptide to GGCX. Results indicated
that the GGCX–pCon complex was successfully incorporated into
nanodiscs (Figure ). These assembled complexes
were structurally stable and catalytically active over extended time
periods thereby providing an advantage over traditional microsomal
solubilization methods (Figure ). Confirming
propeptide specificity for GGCX-nanodiscs and extended stability of
the protein complex affirmed that the conformational information derived
from deuterium labeling was highly reflective of the active complex in vivo. Nanodisc analysis by HX MS thus provides conformational
characterization of transmembrane protein complexes that is otherwise
extremely difficult to obtain by other methods.

Changes in deuterium
exchange are represented as time-dependent
uptake plots constructed for individual peptides of GGCX (Figure ; ) and the pCon substrate (Figure ). Deuterium uptake curves were subsequently used to compile
a topology map of GGCX while maintaining strict guidance to reproducibility
in matched identifications (±0.15 Da) for duplicate biological
sample preparations with and without pCon. Despite limited GGCX sequence
coverage (42%), differential topology diagrams (Figure ) provide a tremendous amount of information on protein conformation
between free and pCon-bound GGCX-nanodiscs over the continuous labeling
experiment. Ongoing improvements to the HX MS nanodisc technology,
including improved sample preparation, chromatographic separation,
MS sensitivity, ion mobility, and dynamic range will further increase
peptide coverage and provide more information regarding protein dynamics
for large transmembrane systems like GGCX.

In the absence of
a three-dimensional protein structure, differential
topology maps of individual GGCX peptides obtained periodically over
a continuous labeling time course yields a dynamic viewpoint of substrate
binding on GGCX conformation. In all experiments, the addition of
pCon resulted in decreased protein flexibility (increased solvent
protection or hydrogen bonding) in many regions of GGCX as indicated
by a decrease in the level of deuterium uptake. For all GGCX peptides
identified, 61% were characterized by changes in deuteration levels &gt;1.0
Da for a single time point in the continuous labeling reaction. The
most pronounced enhancement in deuterium exchange was primarily located
around the known glutamate binding site (393–404), and the propeptide binding region (495–513)., Within these domains, two GGCX peptic peptides, residues 395–401
(maximum Δ+1.5 Da) and 491–507 (maximum Δ+5.6 Da),
revealed extensive protection from deuterium incorporation when the
pCon substrate was present. For the 491–507 peptide, and neighboring
peptides 484–490 and 507–516, pronounced changes in
deuteration over longer time intervals are consistent with direct
binding and sustained alteration of local solvent accessibility or
hydrogen bonding networks, indicating
little variability in the GGCX–pCon-bound conformation. Interestingly,
the appearance of important and major protection
at a distance from the known propeptide binding site, namely, in the
glutamate binding site (residues 393–404), provides direct
biophysical evidence for the relationship between the anchoring of
the VKD propeptide and the catalytic carboxylation of glutamic acid
residues. This observation is likely due to either a close proximity
of these two parts of the protein or an allosteric mechanism that
connects them.,, Evaluation of the rate and magnitude of change in GGCX deuteration
upon propeptide binding provides evidence of conformational changes
that modify solvent exposure or hydrogen bonding interactions as the
protein adopts a catalytically stable structural state.

While
the propeptide and Gla binding domains in GGCX have been
extensively characterized, several subtle differences in GGCX structure
were noted at varying deuteration time points, enabling predictions
of associated peptide proximities within the three-dimensional structure. Major (&gt;2.0 Da) changes in deuterium uptake upon propeptide
binding are observed for peptides 257–272, 643–660,
and 717–730 at the 10 s and 1 min labeling times points. While
the C-terminal peptides 643–660 and 717–730 are accepted
to be distal from the carboxylation active site, a recent report identified
carboxylation of glutamic acid residues in GGCX peptides 625–647
and 729–758 in the presence of vitamin K. Although it is unlikely that C-terminal carboxylated Glas
are required for catalysis, the present
HX MS data suggest substrate-induced reorientation of GGCX peptides
643–660 and 717–730 conform to a more solvent-protected
environment at initial labeling time points. Peptide 728–758,
however, measured a difference in deuterium uptake below the ±1.0
Da threshold for peptide structural differentiation. Future investigations
of this system in the presence of additional co-substrates (e.g.,
vitamin K) and a full-length VKD protein may provide information supporting
the mechanism linking the location of the GGCX Gla domain in the ER
lumen to enzymatic function in VKD protein carboxylation.

A
quantum model reported by Wu et al. proposes
the relative orientation of GGCX and VKOR transmembrane
proteins as a heterodimer colocalized in the ER membrane allowing
efficient oxidation and reduction of vitamin K during the vitamin
K cycle. In accordance with predictions of transmembrane helix unit
topologies for GGCX and VKOR, compatibility of the heterodimer proposed
model was validated using previous biochemical and mutational data.
In this system, the relative orientation of carboxylation-dependent
GGCX residues L394, W501, G537, G558, and T591 are located
in close proximity to the C-terminus of GGCX and the N-terminus of
VKOR. In correlation with this proposed
structure, GGCX peptides 395–401, 491–507, 532–543,
and 554–568, as identified in our HX MS experiments, exhibited
structural reorientation in the form of diminished solvent exposure
and/or hydrogen bonding upon the incorporation of propeptide substrate.
While peptides with known involvement in glutamate (395–401)
and propeptide (491–507) binding are represented by changes
in deuteration over longer time periods, peptides 532–543 and
554–568 reveal changes in deuteration at shorter time intervals
indicating temporary alterations of the local solvent accessibility
upon the binding of propeptide.

On the opposing side of the
heterodimer complex, GGCX residues
W157, H160, and K218 are predicted to reside in
close proximity to the napthoquinone unit of vitamin K and the surface
of the membrane in the ER lumen. This
placement is shown to be consistent with models implicating H160 and
K218 as critical residues in the deprotonation of vitamin K hydroquinone
and the initiation of the carboxylation reaction.,, The close proximity of these residues to
the hydrophobic transmembrane domain, however, results in minimal
recovery of peptic peptides within these regions and limits evaluations
by HX MS. Improvements to sample denaturation and digestion may enhance
peptide recovery of potentially informative regions of GGCX.

Bridging the gap between experimental data and theoretical predictions,
HX MS allows comparisons of relative deuterium incorporation for specific
peptides across the GGCX polypeptide backbone, thereby providing both
spatial and temporal information on structural influences and conformational
changes induced by substrate introduction in previously difficult-to-explore
regions of the GGCX structure. Similar to the T591K and W157R mutations,
D31N is an inherited VKD coagulation factor autosomal recessive bleeding
disorder associated with defects in either GGCX or VKOR. While wild-type GGCX activity was exhibited
for the D31N mutation, W157R and T591K activities were 8% and 0% that
of wild-type GGCX, respectively. Located
on the opposite side of the membrane where propeptide binding occurs,
peptide 25–40 undergoes minor (1.0–2.0
Da) changes in deuterium incorporation at the 10 s and 1 min labeling
time points. Although D31 may not be directly involved in propeptide
binding, HX MS data support a structural dependence on substrate association.
A similar phenomenon of indirect cooperative structural influences
on GGCX structure upon propeptide binding is observed for GGCX residues
180–186, 257–272, 328–342, 423–431, 685–692,
and 701–713. For the majority of these peptides, a decrease
in deuterium incorporation occurs at the early labeling time points.
At longer time intervals, these peptides showed an eventual loss of
protection consistent with long-range changes affecting the flexibility
and dynamics of the entire protein. Visualization of protein dynamics
through time-resolved topology maps not only provides a profile of
GGCX protein dynamics over time, but also aids in understanding the
mechanism by which GGCX domains cooperate to create a stable three-dimensional
structure for VKD carboxylation.

In the absence of a fully resolved
crystal structure for GGCX,
the analysis of changes in deuterium uptake upon propeptide binding
yields a structural storyline uniting conformational organization
in GGCX and functional roles involving substrate binding for carboxylation.
Improvements in HX MS technology will lead to the desire to analyze
larger and more complex proteins and multiprotein systems. In this
work, we expand upon this methodology to include an investigation
of membrane protein–ligand interactions by HX MS. The investigation
of the transmembrane protein GGCX aims to target the structural relationship
between GGCX and co-substrates involved in the vitamin K cycle as
a means to develop therapeutics for blood coagulation disorders. Using
the nanodisc–HX MS platform, this study represents the first
application, to our knowledge, of this strategy for investigating
specific conformational changes in propeptide-bound GGCX. Future experiments
aimed to improve sample throughput will not only provide a universal
methodology for membrane protein investigation but also will reveal
information in the mostly uncharted territory of membrane protein
dynamics.

Supporting Information Available
Supplemental
Figures S1 and
S2. This material is available free of charge via the Internet at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bi401536m_si_001.pdf

Author Present Address
# (C.R.M.)
Genzyme, A Sanofi Company, 1 The Mountain Road, Framingham,
MA 01701.

Author Present Address
⊥ (K.D.R.)
Department of Pharmacy, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen,
Denmark.

The authors
declare no competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
We gratefully acknowledge
Mark M. Ross at the U.S. Food and
Drug Administration and David L. Straight at the University of North
Carolina at Chapel Hill, Department of Biology, for useful discussions.
The MSP1D1 plasmid was graciously provided by the Sligar laboratory
through Addgene plasmid 20061.

