Myosin binding
protein-C (MyBP-C)
was first discovered by Offer, who found
that it was the next most common protein after myosin in crude preparations
of skeletal myosin and that it could be separated from myosin by ion
exchange chromatography. He and his colleagues also showed that antibodies
to MyBP-C formed nine 43 nm striations on each side of the A bands
of muscle fibers. A similar distribution of MyBP-C has also recently
been demonstrated in cardiac muscle labeled with anti-cMyBP-C antibodies. Although it was thought that MyBP-C was a component
of the thick filament, possibly having a structural role as a trimeric
collar to strengthen the thick filament, soon after its discovery,
MyBP-C was also shown to bind to the I band in myofibrils and to bind
to actin and inhibit the actin activation of myosin ATP hydrolysis in vitro., The ability to bind both actin
and myosin suggested that MyBP-C might form cross-links between the
thick and thin filaments of striated muscle fibers, but it was unclear
what, if any, physiological significance these cross-links might have.
Since then, there has been increased interest in MyBP-C, especially
over the past 18 years following the discovery that mutations in the
gene encoding the cardiac isoform of MyBP-C (cMyBP-C) are a common
cause of inherited cardiomyopathies., Subsequently,
187 mutations have been identified that result in cMyBP-C cardiomyopathies. This is second only to the number of mutations
of the β-cardiac myosin heavy chain linked to cardiomyopathy.

The primary sequence of mammalian cMyBP-C
indicates that it has
a structure composed of 8 IgG and 3 fibronectin-like domains, as shown
in Figure . C-Terminal domains C7–C10
bind to 9 locations on each half of the myosin thick filament,, and there is evidence that N-terminal domains of cMyBP-C bind to
the S2 region of myosin., However, the same N-terminal
domains also bind to actin and the thin filament, as shown by solution
binding studies, electron microscopy, and low-angle X-ray scattering.− Multiple actin binding sites, present as individual subdomains (e.g.,
C0, C1, C2, and the m-domain), may bind stoichiometrically (one subdomain
per actin subunit).− Although there are some differences in the details
of the binding geometries, all show binding modes that suggest overlap
with the site of myosin binding to actin and are likely to interfere
with the position of tropomyosin in the inhibited form of the thin
filament. These data thus suggest an explanation for the apparently
contradictory observations that cMyBP-C inhibits actomyosin activity
by competing with myosin-ADP-Pi binding to actin and that it activates the thin filament by promoting
the active conformation of tropomyosin.,

Domain structure
of intact and internal domains of cMyBP-C. (Top)
cMyBP-C is composed of repeating IgG-like domains (ovals) and fibronectin-like
domains (squares), numbered C0–C10 beginning at the N-terminus
of the protein. A proline–alanine-rich sequence (small oval)
links the C0 and C1 domains. PKA phosphorylation sites occur in the
m-linker domain. (Bottom) Schematics showing domain organization of
the recombinant proteins used in this study: C0C1, C0C2, and C1C2.

The goal of the present study
was to directly test the ability
of the N-terminal domains of cMyBP-C to activate or inhibit steady-state
myosin ATPase rates by either F-actin alone or by native thin filaments
in the presence of high and low calcium. Both human and mouse recombinant
cMyBP-C proteins were used because species-specific differences in
the behaviors of mouse and human cMyBP-C have been reported. Effects of phosphorylation of the m-linker of
human C0C2 were also determined. Results are consistent with a model
in which the N-terminal domains of cMyBP-C bind specifically to actin
and activate the thin filament in a manner analogous to the way in
which myosin S1 binds to the thin filament to activate contraction.

Materials
and Methods
Protein Preparation
Rabbit skeletal actin, native porcine
cardiac thin filaments, N-terminal subdomains of cMyBP-C, and the
A1 subfraction of skeletal myosin-S1 were prepared by previously published
methods.− SDS PAGE of these proteins are shown in Figures S2 and S3. In some
experiments, the hexa-His tag encoded at the N-terminus of recombinant
protein sequences (included to facilitate protein purification) was
removed using the Tagzyme enzyme according to the manufacturer’s
instructions (Qiagen). Phosphorylation of recombinant cMyBP-C proteins
was done using the catalytic subunit of bovine PKA according to published
methods, which has been shown to fully
phosphorylate 4 sites on recombinant human and mouse C0C2.

Steady-State ATPase Measurements
Steady-state ATP hydrolysis
rates were measured by colorimetric measurement of phosphate production
as described previously., Experimental conditions:
ionic strength (50 mM), temperature (30 °C), and myosin-S1 (rabbit
skeletal), actin, and thin filament concentrations were chosen to
produce steady-state ATP hydrolysis rates that could be readily measured.
Preliminary experiments determined that rates were proportional to
the concentration of myosin-S1 (i.e., the activation was not dependent
upon the ratio of S1 to actin or thin filament concentrations), and
the amount of myosin-S1 used in individual experiments was adjusted
so that between 0.25 and 0.5 of the ATP was hydrolyzed. Steady-state
rate data (kobs) for the inhibition of
F-actin-activated ATP hydrolysis by N-terminal cMyBP-C domains were
fit to eq  using simplex fitting routines in
the Scientist graphics software package (Micromath Corp, St. Louis,
MO), where Vo is the rate in the absence
of cMyBP-C, [C] is the concentration of cMyBP-C recombinant
protein, ko is the ATP hydrolysis rate
at saturating cMyBP-C protein concentration, Ki is the concentration of cMyBP-C protein required for 50%
inhibition, and n is the Hill coefficient.

A more complex steady-state
relationship
(eq ) was required to account for the biphasic
kinetics observed with thin filaments in which the hydrolysis rate
is increased by low concentrations of cMyBP-C and inhibited at higher
concentrations. Additional terms in eq  are Va, the increase in ATPase rate by cMyBP-C; Ka is the apparent affinity of the activation
by cMyBP-C, and n is the Hill coefficient.

Results
Effects of cMyBP-C N-Terminal Domains C1C2
and C0C2 on the Steady-State
Activation of Myosin ATP Hydrolysis by Actin and Native Cardiac Thin
Filaments
The dependence of the steady-state rate of myosin
ATP hydrolysis on actin and the N-terminal domains of human cardiac
MyBP-C are shown in Figure . Steady-state
myosin-S1 ATPase rates (kobs) increased
with increasing concentrations of F-actin, as expected, from 2 to
10 μM. However, ATP hydrolysis rates decreased with the addition
of increasing concentrations of either N-terminal domain of human
cMyBP-C (huC0C2 and huC1C2). These inhibitory effects are consistent
with the inhibition of actomyosin ATP hydrolysis by native full-length
skeletal MyBP-C previously reported by Moos and colleagues, suggesting that binding of N-terminal domains
to the actin filament is sufficiently strong to compete effectively
with the binding of M-ADP-Pi. The data are poorly fit by
a simple binding equation (n = 1 eq ) but are fit by Ki of ∼2
μM and Hill coefficients of ∼3–4, as shown in . The Hill coefficient &gt; 1 suggests
cooperative
binding of the N-terminal domains huC0C2 and huC1C2 of cMyBP-C to
actin.

Effect of human C0C2 and C1C2 on the actin activation of ATP hydrolysis
by myosin-S1. ATP hydrolysis was measured by colorimetric determination
of phosphate as described in . (A, B) Data were fit to eq  using the parameters
listed in . Experimental conditions:
0.25–1.0 μM myosin-S1, F-actin and cMyBP-C at the indicated
concentrations, 10 mM MOPS, 50 mM KAc, 3 mM MgCl2, pH 7.0.

We next investigated the effects
of cMyBP-C N-terminal domains
on the steady-state rate of myosin ATP hydrolysis activated by native
porcine cardiac thin filaments (NTF) at either high (pCa = 4) or low (pCa &gt; 8)
calcium.
Figure  shows that at pCa = 4 steady-state ATP hydrolysis rates were initially activated
up to 50% by 1 molecule of huC0C2 per 5–10 actin subunits in
the thin filament (panel A). However, with increasing concentrations
of huC0C2, the ATPase was inhibited with an apparent Ki of approximately 2–4 μM, similar to the
apparent affinity measured for the inhibition of F-actin-activated
ATP hydrolysis shown in Figure . Additional
experiments using the huC1C2 domains of cMyBP-C (panel B) showed a
similar concentration dependence of the inhibition by huC0C2 and huC1C2,
indicating little, if any, additional contribution of the C0 and proline–alanine
segments at pCa &lt; 4.

Effect of huC0C2 and
huC1C2 on native thin filament activation
of ATP hydrolysis by myosin-S1. ATP hydrolysis was measured by colorimetric
determination of phosphate as described in . Data were fit to eq  using
the parameters listed in . Experimental
conditions: 0.25–1.0 μM myosin-S1, native cardiac thin
filaments and MyBP-C at the indicated concentrations, 10 mM MOPS,
50 mM KAc, 3 mM MgCl2, pH 7.0, 30 °C, and either 0.1
mM CaCl2 (A, B) or 1 mM EGTA (C, D).

At low calcium (pCa &gt; 8) and
in the
absence of N-terminal domains of cMyBP-C, native cardiac thin filaments
(2–10 μM) only weakly (∼20%) activated the steady-state
rates of myosin S1 ATP hydrolysis. However, when N-terminal domains
of cMyBP-C were also added (e.g., 2.5 μM huC0C2), ATPase rates
were activated up to an additional 5-fold (Figure C,D). Effects were biphasic such that higher concentrations
of huC0C2 and huC1C2 inhibited the observed rate of ATP hydrolysis
with an apparent Ki of approximately 4
(huC0C2) and 8 μM (huC1C2). Similar biphasic patterns of activation
and inhibition to those obtained for human C0C2 and C1C2 were also
obtained with mouse C0C2 and C1C2 ().

Species-Specific Effects of C0C1
We next compared effects
of the C0C1 domains of mouse and human cMyBP-C on the activation of
steady-state ATP hydrolysis by native cardiac thin filaments. Maximum
activation of myosin-S1 ATP hydrolysis by huC0C1 at pCa = 4 and pCa &gt; 8 (Figure A,C) were similar to those observed for human huC0C2
and huC1C2, although higher concentrations of huC0C1 were required
for both activation and inhibition. Thus, the apparent binding affinities
of the human N-terminal domains at pCa &gt; 8 are in the order huC0C2 ∼ huC1C2 &gt; huC0C1. These
results
are similar to the observed effectiveness of N-terminal domains cMyBP-C
at increasing the calcium sensitivity of force production in skinned
cardiac fibers from mice. By contrast,
the effect of mouse C0C1 (muC0C1) on the steady-state ATPase rates
was considerably diminished compared to that of the huC0C1 N-terminal
domains at both low and high calcium (Figure B,D). We used centrifuge binding experiments to make a direct comparison
of the binding affinity of muC0C1 and huC0C1 to that of native cardiac
thin filaments at pCa = 4 and pCa &gt; 8 (Figure S4).The affinities of mouse
and
human C0C1 were identical, 2.2 ± 0.2 μM at pCa = 4 and pCa &gt; 8, within
experimental error and did not correlate with the large differences
in the apparent affinities measured by the activation of ATP hydrolysis
measured in Figure . These results were surprising
and suggest that the activation of the thin filament by C0C1 occurs
subsequent to binding and results from a more specific interaction
with C0C1 that leads to activation of the thin filament.

Comparison
of the effects of muC0C1 and huC0C1 on native thin filament-activated
ATP hydrolysis by myosin-S1. ATP hydrolysis was measured by colorimetric
determination of phosphate as described in . Data were fit to eq . Experimental
conditions: 0.25 to 1.0 μM myosin S1, native cardiac thin filaments
and muC0C1 or huC0C1 at the indicated concentrations, 10 mM MOPS,
50 mM KAc, 3 mM MgCl2, pH 7.0, 30 °C, and either 0.1
mM CaCl2 (A, B) or 1 mM EGTA (C, D).

Because actin is a notoriously “sticky” protein
with
a negatively charged exterior that facilitates binding to positively
charged proteins including myosin and the N-terminal domains of cMyBP-C,
we wanted to investigate the influence of charge on the specificity
of the interactions between the N-terminal domains of cMyBP-C and
the thin filaments. In particular, we wanted to investigate whether
the removal of positive charges added to the N-terminus of recombinant
proteins via expression of a hexa-His tag affects the observed rates
of thin filament activated myosin-S1 ATP hydrolysis. Comparison of
the results in Figures A and A demonstrates that removal of the His tag sequence had only
modest effects on rates of ATP hydrolysis at pCa = 4 and that the overall pattern of activation and inhibition
of cMyBP-C proteins on ATP hydrolysis by native cardiac thin filaments
was similar before and after removal of the six His residues. A comparison
of the results at pCa &gt;8, Figures B and C, shows a less than
2-fold increase in apparent Ki after removal
of the His tag. Thus, the observed binding is not an artifact produced
by the His-tag, but the increase in positive charge does appear to
contribute slightly to the binding affinity.

Effect of removal of
the hexa-His N-terminal tag and phosphorylation
of the m-linker of N-terminal C0C2 domains of human cMyBP-C on native
thin filament-activated ATP hydrolysis by myosin-S1. ATP hydrolysis
was measured by colorimetric determination of phosphate as described
in . Experimental conditions:
0.25 to 1.0 μM myosin-S1, native cardiac thin filaments and
cMyBP-C at the indicated concentrations, 10 mM MOPS, 50 mM KAc, 3
mM MgCl2, pH 7.0, 30 °C, and either 0.1 mM CaCl2 (A, C) or 1 mM EGTA (B, D).

Phosphorylation of the regulatory m-domain has also been
suggested
as a primary means of regulating cMyBP-C interactions with either
myosin S2 or with actin via the introduction of negative charges that
disrupt electrostatic binding interactions.,, Consistent with this idea, as shown in Figure B,D, higher concentrations of phosphorylated huC0C2
were required to obtain the same extent of activation of ATP hydrolysis
(Figure D) as that required by the nonphosphorylated
huC0C2 (Figure B) at low Ca2+ (pCa &gt; 8). These results are in good agreement
with conclusions that specific electrostatic charge interactions with
the m-linker domain contribute to the binding and activating effects
of the N-terminal domains of cMyBP-C with actin, as reported previously., However, as shown in Figure A,C, at pCa = 4 there are only modest effects of phosphorylation
on thin filament activation by huC0C2.

Discussion
We
have shown that the N-terminal domains of cMyBP-C are sufficient
to inhibit steady-state actin-activated ATP hydrolysis by a mechanism
similar to that previously shown by Moos for intact skeletal MyBP-C. Furthermore, N-terminal domains of human cMyBP-C,
C0C2, C1C2, and C0C1, all produce biphasic activating and inhibitory
effects on thin filament-activated ATPase activity when native cardiac
thin filaments (F-actin plus regulatory proteins, troponin, and tropomyosin)
are used to activate myosin ATPase activity. That is, steady-state
ATPase is activated by low concentrations of N-terminal cMyBP-C domains
in the presence of thin filaments at low Ca2+, whereas
higher concentrations of the N-terminal proteins inhibit ATPase activity
at both low and high Ca2+ (pCa &gt; 8 or = 4, respectively). The biphasic behavior strongly suggests
a mechanism in which the low occupancy binding of N-terminal domains
of cMyBP-C activates the thin filaments by a mechanism similar to
the activation of the thin filament by rigor S1 heads and NEM-S1,
which shifts the position of tropomyosin from the inactive to active
position at low ratios of S1 to actin., Higher concentrations
of cMyBP-C binding compete with the less strongly binding M-ADP-Pi for actin sites in the thin filament. We similarly observe
here that higher concentrations of N-terminal domains of cMyBP-C function
as competitive inhibitors by blocking M-ADP-Pi binding
to actin. Alternatively, N-terminal domains of cMyBP-C could potentially
bind to and interfere with the inhibitory function of troponin. However,
because activation of contraction was still achieved using N-terminal
domains of cMyBP-C in permeabilized myocytes following extraction
of TnC, a mechanism involving troponin
is unlikely to account for all of the activating effects of cMyBP-C.
Other interactions with troponin are also possible. For instance,
it is an intriguing possibility that cMyBP-C interactions with the
thin filament could mediate coordinated signaling between thin and
thick filaments during activation and relaxation.,

The idea that N-terminal domains can both activate and inhibit
interactions of the thin filament with myosin is supported by electron
microscopy of complexes of N-terminal domains of cMyBP-C and actin,
which indicate that the binding site of the N-terminal domains of
cMyBP-C overlaps with both the inhibitory position of tropomyosin
on the thin filament and the binding site of myosin on actin., Strikingly, the extent of activation of myosin-S1 ATPase by N-terminal
domains of cMyBP-C measured in this work is similar to that produced
by rigor S1 activation of native cardiac thin filaments under similar
conditions, further supporting the premise
that the N-terminal domains of cMyBP-C interact in a highly specific
manner with the thin filament.

Table  compares the charges on the constituent
domains and linkers of the N-terminal subdomains of mouse and human
cMyBP-C. The overall similarity observed for functional effects of
mouse and human C1C2 is not surprising considering the 94% sequence
similarity, with most of the changes being conservative. The net charge
(+3) and the total number of positive (+44) and negatively (−41)
charged amino acids are the same in the human and mouse C1C2 sequences
(Table ). Results from this study (Figures – and ) also showed that both mouse and human C0C2
or C1C2 sequences were equally effective at activation of native cardiac
thin filaments but that muC0C1 is much less effective than huC0C1.
These results thus agree with similar observations reported previously
using motility assays and indicate that
species-specific sequences contribute to functional differences of
cMyBP-C. The findings reported here reconcile differences between
different lab groups that have used either human or mouse N-terminal
constructs of cMyBP-C.,

Charged
Amino Acids in N-Terminal
cMyBP-C Domains
 	C0	PA	C1	m	C2	C0C2	C0C1	C1C2	
mouse pKI	9.26	3.76	7.99	9.10	6.77	6.21	5.59	8.54	
glu + asp	14	10	11	18	12	65	35	41	
lys + arg	17	1	12	20	12	62	30	44	
net charge	+3	–9	+1	+2	0	–3	–5	+3	
human pKI	9.30	3.77	8.75	8.26	6.64	7.63	6.91	8.48	
glu + asp	13	6	10	19	12	60	29	41	
lys + arg	16	1	12	20	12	61	29	44	
net charge	+3	–5	+2	+1	0	+1	0	+3	
Net charge on the individual domains
was calculated from (lys + arg) – (glu + asp).

Although the human and mouse C0
and C1 domains share ∼80
and 90% sequence identity, respectively, the proline–alanine-rich
region shares only ∼40% identity across the two species. Sequence differences in the PA region (possibly
the 4 additional negative charges in the PA linker of muC0C1) are
likely to be responsible for its reduced ability to activate the thin
filament. Myosin-ADP-Pi binding to actin is enhanced by
a favorable ionic interaction between negatively charged side chains
on the actin and positively charged side chains on the myosin in the
actomyosin binding site, even though the charge of both proteins is
negative at physiological pH., It is therefore likely
that similar local charged interactions are a component of N-terminal
cMyBP-C binding to actin and that the net negative charge in the PA
sequence is responsible for the reduced ability of muC0C1 relative
to huC0C1 to activate thin filaments.

Crystal and NMR structures
of cardiac C0, C1, and C2 domains show
that the charges are fairly uniformly distributed on the surfaces
of all 3 domains.− These data suggest that all of the domains in human
cardiac myosin binding protein C0C2 contribute to the activation of
cardiac thin filaments and increase the binding affinity, whereas
the increased negative charge in the PA region of the N-terminal domains
of mouse myosin binding protein C reduces the ability of muC0C1 to
activate the thin filament.

It is important to note that the
activating and inhibitory effects
of the N-terminal domains of cMyBP-C reported here cannot be attributed
to interactions with the S2 segment of myosin. This is because the
work reported here was all done using chymotryptic myosin-S1, which
does not contain the S2 segment of myosin and thus avoids the possibility
that interactions between MyBP-C and S2 are responsible for the increase
in the actomyosin ATP hydrolysis rate observed in Figures –. While our data
does not provide evidence for or against an interaction between the
S2 region of myosin and cMyBP-C, it does show that such interactions
are not required for the activation of the thin filament by cMyBP-C
N-terminal domains, as observed in this work.

Physiological Significance
The physiological significance
of the activating and inhibitory effects of cMyBP-C are not completely
understood, but a role for activating effects to prime the thin filament,
to contribute to cooperative activation, and/or to counteract deactivation
of the thin filament during muscle shortening are all possibilities.
Conversely, inhibitory effects of cMyBP-C may contribute to cardiac
contractile reserve where reversal of cMyBP-C inhibition by phosphorylation
augments contractile activity in response to inotropic stimuli. However,
the dual effects of cMyBP-C at different concentrations described
here could provide an explanation for the puzzling occurrence of cMyBP-C
in sarcomeres at limited stoichiometry relative to myosin because
the cooperative activating effects of cMyBP-C would be expected to
predominate while competition with myosin S1 heads should be minimized.
This is because there is approximately one cMyBP-C/actin troponin/tropomyosin
repeat in the C-zone, which comprises approximately 60% of the myosin
filament-containing cross-bridges. A cartoon of the geometry of the
actin and myosin filaments with the MyBP-C cross-links in striated
muscle in Figure  illustrates that there is
one MyBP-C per thin filament in the C-zone. The 43 nm distance between
the MyBP-C repeats is just slightly longer than the 7 actin subunit
repeat of the troponin tropomyosin. Thus, the stoichiometry of one
cMyBP-C per 8 actin subunits in the C-zone is similar to that which
we have observed here as being required to obtain maximal activation
of myosin S1 hydrolysis by native cardiac thin filaments in solution,
but it is not present at a sufficiently high concentration to compete
with M-ADP-Pi for a significant fraction of the actin subunits.

Cartoon
of the cross-sectional geometry of a myofibrillar lattice
through the 43 nm MyBP-C repeat showing the geometry of the actin
and myosin filaments and MyBP-C cross-links. Arrows indicate variability
in the position of the MyBP-C cross-links relative to the thin filaments.

Supporting Information Available
Tabulated fitting parameters
for kinetic data in Figures 2 and 3 (Table S5); additional kinetic
data using mouse N-terminal domains (Figure S1); acrylamide gels of
the proteins used in this work (Figures S2 and S3); measurement of
the affinity of mouse and human cMyBP-C C0C1 to thin filaments by
centrifuge binding experiments (Figure S4). This material is available
free of charge via the Internet at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bi500787f_si_001.pdf

This work was
supported by HL080367 (S.P.H.), HL84604 and a grant in aid from the
Mid-Atlantic affiliate of the AHA (H.D.W.).

The authors declare no
competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
We thank Elaine Hoye
for advice in establishing the expression
of cMyBP-C N-terminal domains in H. White’s laboratory.

Abbreviations
MyBP-Cmyosin
binding protein C

cMyBP-Ccardiac myosing binding
protein C

myosin-S1myosin subfragment1

huhuman

mumouse

C0C1N-terminal domains
C0, the proline/alanine rich linker, and C1 of myosin binding protein
C

C1C2N-terminal
domains C1, the M-domain linker, and C2 of myosin binding protein
C

C0C2N-terminal
domains C0, the proline/alanine rich linker, C1, the M-domain linker,
and C2 of myosin binding protein C

M-ADP-Pimyosin ADP and Pi bound
to active site

N-terminalamino terminal

