Recent cellular
research revealed
that G-quadruplexes formed in promoter regions of cancer-related genes
regulate their expression.− Formation of this structure is often linked to inhibition of transcription,
but stimulation of promoter activity was also demonstrated.,− A G-quadruplex is assembled from two or more G-quartets with compact
square structure, in which four guanines from different positions
in a G-rich strand are held together by Hoogsteen hydrogen bonding
(Figure ). The G-quadruplexes differ by folding
pattern, number of tetrads, size of nontetrad loops, and orientation
of the strands in the quadruplex. In addition, whereas most reports
show the structure core formed by guanines from G runs (two or more
consecutive Gs), unprecedented and bulged G-quadruplexes were also
reported with an isolated guanine involved in G-tetrad core formation., The DNA sequence can adopt this non-B configuration when complementary
strands are separated in the DNA duplex during transcription and replication.
The genomic regions prone to adopt this structure are rich in G residues,
and include telomeres and gene promoters. In the case of promoters,
multiple Sp1-binding motifs arranged in tandem are often indicated
by computational analyses to form G-quadruplexes, and promoters of
cancer-related genes were shown to form this structure in Sp1 binding
regions.,−

Guanine-rich
sequence of the HIV-1 U3 region of the provirus and
in the RNA genome might fold into a G-quadruplex. According to QGRS
Mapper, runs of G residues (shaded) in three Sp1 binding sites (in
bold) in the virus promoter are capable of forming a G-quadruplex.
Four guanines are connected through hydrogen bonding to form a single
G-quartet stabilized by a monovalent cation (left). Layering of two
or more G-quartets forms a G-quadruplex (right).

For RNA sequences, G-quadruplexes were detected in coding
and noncoding
regions of mRNA, and found to regulate protein synthesis.− Formation of this structure in introns was suggested to influence
alternative splicing.− In HIV-1, sequences prone to adopt G-quadruplex structure are in
a region of gag near DIS and in the central part
of the genome near the cPPT.− In both locations, G-quadruplex formation was associated with dimerization
of the homologous templates and increased rate of primer-strand transfers
during reverse transcription, suggesting that in vivo the structure contributes to dimerization of the viral genomes that
promotes recombination.

The ability of the proviral DNA U3 region
to adopt G-quadruplexes
was recently reported by Perrone and co-workers, who described two
parallel-like intramolecular G-quadruplexes, and showed that G-rich
sequences of an NF-κB site together with G runs of Sp1 sites
are involved in the quadruplex structure. Going beyond this work, we explored the relationship between the
formation of G-quadruplex structure in the U3 DNA Sp1 transcription
factor binding site region and binding of Sp1. Our native gel analyses,
c-kit2 antibody binding analyses, and CD spectra show that the region
fully transforms into different forms of intramolecular G-quadruplexes,
which likely include a mixture of parallel/antiparallel and/or hybrid
configurations that constitute the Sp1 binding site. Additionally,
we investigated whether G-quadruplex formation in U3 RNA promotes
viral recombination and the implications for a general viral recombination
mechanism mediated by periodically spaced genome linkages including
those that occur in U3 together with previously reported linkages
in the gag and cPPT regions.−,

Experimental Procedures
Materials
DNA
oligonucleotides and the HPLC purified
RNA strand used for CD spectra analyses were purchased from Integrated
DNA Technologies, Inc. (Coralville, IA). HIV-1 NC (55 amino acids)
was generously provided by Dr. Robert J. Gorelick (NCI, Frederick,
MD). HIV-1 reverse transcriptase (p66/p51 heterodimer) (RT) was purified
as described previously. The [γ-32P]ATP was purchased from PerkinElmer Life Sciences. Recombinant
Sp1 protein was purchased from Active Motif (Carlsbad, CA). Sp1 polyclonal
antibodies and antirabbit IgG, HRP-linked antibodies were purchased
from Cell Signaling Technology, Inc. (Danvers, MA). The promoter sequences
of viruses are from the HIV database (www.hiv.lanl.gov).

Preparation of RNA Templates
RNA molecules were transcribed in vitro (Ambion T7-MEGAshortscript kit; Applied Biosystems)
from DNA templates amplified by PCR using Vent DNA
polymerase (New England BioLabs, Inc.) and two overlapping oligomers
with the sequence of the desired region. The following RNA strands
were used in our studies: (a) For the reverse transcription assay,
the RNA template with the region of three Sp1 binding sites (8960–9051
in the RNA genome) of NL4–3 HIV-1 was made from a DNA template
synthesized with the oligomer pair 1/2. (b) For affinity selection
analysis, the nontagged RNAs and poly(A) tagged RNAs were made from
DNA generated using oligomers 1/3 and 1/4 representing the U3 region
(8960–9037) of NL4–3 HIV-1, 5/6 and 5/7 representing
the cPPT region (4309–4396) of NL4–3 HIV-1, 8/9 and
8/10 representing the gag region (290–403)
of NL4–3 HIV-1, and 11/12 and 11/13 representing the gag region (303–415) of MAL HIV-1. (c) For the analysis
of dimerization in a native gel, the RNA template of the U3 region
(8960–9037) in NL4–3 HIV-1 was made from DNA generated
using oligomers 1/3. (d) For strand transfer assays, the donor and
acceptor templates representing the U3 region (8960–9051 and
8961–9033) of NL4–3 HIV-1 were made from DNA generated
using oligomers 1/2 and 14/15, respectively. After transcription in vitro, the RNA templates were purified by polyacrylamide/urea
gel electrophoresis and resuspended in water. RNAs were quantitated
by UV absorption using a GeneQuant II from Amersham Biosciences.

DNA and RNA Oligonucleotides
Sequences of oligonucleotides
are in Table S1 ().

Preparation of the 5′-Radiolabeled RNA Template and DNA
Primer
DNA oligomers (16, a–e, c-kit, TBA, and TEL)
were labeled at the 5′ end using T4 polynucleotide kinase (New
England BioLab) and [γ-32P]ATP (6000 Ci/mmol). Preparation
of the 5′-radiolabeled RNA template was performed as follows:
The gel-cleaned RNA template was treated with shrimp alkaline phosphatase
(SAP, Fermentas) at 37 °C for 60 min and then incubated at 65
°C for 25 min to inactivate the enzyme. Following cooling on
ice, the reaction mixture was treated with [γ-32P]ATP
(6000 Ci/mmol), 10× PNK buffer, and T4 polynucleotide kinase
(New England BioLab). After incubation for 1 h at 37 °C, the
radiolabeled RNA and DNA primers were separated from unincorporated
radionucleotides using a Micro Bio-Spin column (Bio-Rad).

Reverse Transcriptase
(RT) Progression Assay
The assay
was performed in two steps (1) folding/annealing, and (2) primer extension.
For folding/annealing, the RNA or DNA templates (2 pmol) were mixed
with 5′ end labeled primer DNA (2 pmol) in the presence of
0.5 M salt (KCl or LiCl) and 50 mM of Tris HCl (pH 8.0) in a volume
of 20 μL. The mixtures were heated to 95 °C for 5 min and
cooled slowly to room temperature. The RNA template with three Sp1
binding sites was synthesized from the PCR product primed with oligomers
1 and 2 (see above). As a DNA template with three Sp1 binding sites,
we used oligomer 15. After the annealing/folding step, 2 μL
of the mixture was taken for the RT-catalyzed primer extension reaction
carried out in 25 μL at a final concentration of 50 mM Tris-HCl
(pH 8.0), 50 mM KCl or LiCl, 1 mM DTT, 1 mM EDTA, 32 nM HIV-1 RT,
6 mM MgCl2, and 50 μM dNTPs. After 30 min of incubation
at 37 °C, reactions were stopped with 1 volume of termination
buffer (10 mM EDTA, pH 8.0, 90% formamide (v/v), and 0.1% each xylene
cyanole and bromophenol blue). Extension products were resolved on
a 6% polyacrylamide–8 M urea gel and analyzed using a PhosphorImager
(GE Healthcare). Sizes of DNA products were estimated by using a 5′-radiolabeled
10 bp DNA ladder (Invitrogen).

Native Gel Analysis of
Monomer G-Quadruplexes
A mixture
of the 5′ end 32P-labeled (about 300,000 cpm) and
unlabeled DNA oligonucleotides (a–e, c-kit, TBA, TEL) at a
concentration of 4 μM and in a final volume of 25 μL was
heated to 95 °C for 3 min, chilled, and incubated for 20 h at
room temperature in a buffer containing 10 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.5, 1
mM EDTA, and 100 mM KCl. Samples were subsequently mixed with one
volume of loading buffer (30% glycerol in Tris-EDTA buffer) and applied
onto a 15% nondenaturing gel with 0.5× TBE, 10 mM KCl, and 1.5%
glycerol, and run at 4 °C at 6.5 V/cm for 18 h. The gel was dried
onto Whatman 3MM Ch paper and analyzed using a PhosphorImager (GE
Healthcare).

Circular Dichroism
CD spectra were
obtained at 25 °C
over a wavelength range of 210–340 nm using an AVIV Circular
Dichroism Spectrometer, Model 202. The RNA (oligomers 17 and 23) and
DNA (oligomers a–e) samples were at a concentration of 4 or
20 μM, in 10 mM Tris HCl, pH 7.5, 0.3 mM EDTA, and 100 mM KCl.
Before analysis, the samples were heated to 90 °C for 10 min
and gently cooled at a rate of 1 °C/5 min, and incubated at 4
°C overnight. Spectra were recorded using a quartz cell of 1
mm optical path length, with data collected every nanometer at a bandwidth
of 1 nm. Each spectrum was recorded three times and baseline-corrected
for signal contributions from the buffer. The data were processed
with AVIV Biomedical Inc. software and reported as ellipticity (mdeg)
versus wavelength (nm).

Production of Phage Displaying hf2 scFv
The plasmid
pIT2 with hf2 sequence was generously provided by Dr. Shankar Balasubramanian. The hf2 phagemid was used to produce phages
displaying the scFv after infection as previously described except that the VCS M13 helper phage (Agilent)
was used instead of the KM13 helper. The phages were isolated from
the culture supernatants by PEG precipitation and resuspended in 50
mM K2HPO4 at pH 7.4 and 100 mM KCl containing
3% BSA.

Phage ELISA
The 10 μM stock solutions of biotinylated
oligos b–e (20, 24, 25, and 26), single stranded DNA control
(27), and c-kit2 were prepared in 10 mM Tris-HCl at pH 7.4 and 100
mM KCl. The samples were heated to 95 °C for 10 min and annealed
over 14 h (o/n) at a rate of 0.1 °C/min down to room temperature
in a buffer of 10 mM Tris-HCl at pH 7.4 and 100 mM KCl. In order to
form a double stranded DNA, oligos 28 and 29 were mixed in a buffer
of 10 mM Tris-HCl at pH 7.4 and 100 mM KCl, then heated at 95 °C
for 10 min and cooled to room temperature at a rate of 1 °C/min.
For phage ELISA, samples were diluted to 50 nM in 10 mM Tris-HCl at
pH 7.4 and 100 mM KCl. The standard ELISA protocol was followed, but
50 mM K2HPO4 at pH 7.4 and 100 mM KCl (ELISA
buffer) instead of PBS was used to maintain the G-quadruplex conformation.
Pierce Streptavidin coated high binding capacity (HBC) strips were
coated with biotinylated oligonucleotides for 1 h, then washed three
times with ELISA buffer. Wells were blocked (3% BSA in ELISA buffer)
for 1 h and then incubated with 50 μL of 2-fold serial dilutions
of phages for 1 h. The transductional titer (ampicillin resistance)
of the phages was about 7 × 10e11 transducing units/mL. After
6 washes (ELISA buffer), wells were incubated with a 1:3,000 dilution
of anti-M13-HRP antibody (GE Healthcare) in ELISA buffer + 3% BSA
for 1 h. After three washes (ELISA buffer), the ELISA was developed
with the substrate TMB. Color development was terminated after 5–10
min with acid, and the absorbance at 450 nm was measured with a plate
reader (Tecan).

Pull-Down of Sp1 and Western Blotting
The Sp1 was selected
with biotinylated oligonucleotides and streptavidin-coated magnetic
beads (Promega). The beads were washed three times with 0.5 mL of
0.5 × SSC buffer and three times with buffer A (25 mM HEPES at
pH 7.5, 12.5 mM MgCl2, 20% v/v glycerol, 0.1% v/v Nonidet
P-40, 1 mM dithiothreitol, and 100 mM KCl) containing 3% of BSA. Before
the binding of biotinylated DNA to the beads, oligomers c (20) and
c-kit (18) were incubated overnight in buffer A to form the G-quadruplex
structure. In order to form dsDNA for protein selection, the pairs
of oligomers 18/19 and 20/21 were incubated in buffer A in a ratio
of 1:3. Biotinylated DNA (200 μL) samples (1 μM) were
incubated with the beads for 30 min at room temperature. Beads were
then washed three times with 500 μL of buffer A containing 3%
of BSA and blocked with the same buffer for 30 min. All subsequent
procedures were performed at 4 °C. Sp1 protein (80 ng from Active
Motif) was added to 500 μL of buffer A with 3% of BSA. The mixture
was added to the beads and incubated for 20 min, followed by washing
six times with 200 μL of buffer A. The beads were resuspended
in 20 μL of Laemmli buffer and boiled for 2 min. After removing
the beads, the samples were separated on a 4–12% gradient Tris–Glycine
polyacrylamide gel (BioRad) and transferred to a PVDF membrane. SP1
was identified by immunoblotting using a rabbit polyclonal antibody
diluted 1:5000. A goat antirabbit secondary antibody linked with HRP
was used for chemiluminescent detection. For competition binding with
Sp1, oligomer c and a nonspecific sequence (oligomer 22) were first
incubated under G-quadruplex forming conditions (see above) and mixed
with biotinylated dsDNA samples before incubation with buffers containing
Sp1.

Affinity Selection with Oligo d(T)25 Magnetic Beads
About 40 pmol of poly(A)-tagged RNA and nontagged RNA templates
were mixed (ratio 1:1) in the presence of 50 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.0),
200 mM KCl, and 1 mM EDTA in a final volume of 20 μL. The mixtures
were heated to 95 °C for 3 min, then chilled on ice and incubated
at room temperature for 2 h. Before using oligo d(T)25 magnetic
beads (New England BioLabs), the suspension of 50 μL was washed
once with binding buffer (20 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.5, 500 mM KCl, and
1 mM EDTA), resuspended in 180 μL of binding buffer, and added
to the RNA. The mixture was agitated at room temperature for 10 min
and then placed in a magnetic rack to separate the magnetic beads
from solution. The beads were washed once with binding buffer and
three times with wash buffer (20 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.5, 200 mM KCl,
and 1 mM EDTA), each time for 1 min with gentle agitation. In order
to elute the RNA, the beads were resuspended in 15 μL of elution
buffer (20 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.5, and 1 mM EDTA), incubated for 3 min
in 95 °C, and placed in a magnetic rack to separate the magnetic
beads from solution. One volume of loading buffer (10 mM EDTA, pH
8.0, 90% formamide (v/v), and 0.1% each of xylene cyanole and bromophenol
blue) was added to the eluted solution, and the products were resolved
in 6% polyacrylamide–8 M urea gels. The gels were stained with
ethidium bromide.

Cation-Dependent Dimerization and Thermal
Dissociation Analysis
Dimerization and melting experiments
with RNA dimers of the U3
region were conducted in parallel for each reaction setting. The samples
contained a mixture of 5′ end 32P-labeled (about
500,000 cpm) and unlabeled RNA at a concentration of 4 μM and
a final volume of 6 μL. To form a dimer, the RNA was heated
to 95 °C for 3 min, chilled, and incubated for 60 min at room
temperature in a buffer containing 10 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.5, 1 mM EDTA,
and one of three different salts (KCl, NaCl, or LiCl), each at 1 M.
After incubation, the mixtures were placed on ice, and one volume
of 2× Tris-EDTA buffer was added. Aliquots of 15 μL were
transferred to new tubes and incubated for 8 min at a specific temperature
between 30 and 90 °C, then returned to the ice. Samples were
mixed with one volume of loading dye (30% glycerol in 1× Tris-EDTA
buffer and relevant dyes), and loaded onto 6% nondenaturing gels run
at 4 °C at 7 V/cm for 3–4 h. All gels were dried onto
Whatman 3MM Chr paper and analyzed using a PhosphorImager (GE Healthcare).

Strand Transfer Assay
The 5′ end labeled DNA
primer 16 was heat-annealed to donor RNA by incubation at 95 °C
for 5 min and slow cooling to 37 °C. The acceptor template was
also present in the mixture. NC at 200% polymer substrate-coating
level (100% NC is 7 nt of the polymer substrate per NC molecule) was
added and incubated for 3 min. Next, the RT was added to the mixture
and incubated for another 4 min to prebind the RT with the substrates,
before reactions were initiated with MgCl2 and dNTPs. Primer,
donor, and acceptor strands were mixed at a ratio of 2:1:1. The final
reaction contained 50 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.0), 50 mM KCl, 1 mM DTT, 1
mM EDTA, 32 nM HIV-1 RT, 6 mM MgCl2, 50 μM dNTPs,
16 nM donor RNA, 16 nM acceptor RNA, and 32 nM primer. For reactions
in the presence of lithium ions, KCl was replaced with 50 mM of LiCl.
Reactions were incubated at 37 °C, and terminated after 1, 5,
15, and 30 min with 1 volume of termination dye (10 mM EDTA, pH 8.0,
90% formamide (v/v), and 0.1% each xylene cyanole and bromophenol
blue). Products were then resolved by 6% polyacrylamide–8 M
urea gels and analyzed using a PhosphorImager (GE Healthcare) and
ImageQuant software (version 2.1). Sizes of DNA products were estimated
by using a 5′-radiolabeled 10 bp DNA ladder (Invitrogen).

Results
G-Rich Sequences Capable of Forming G-Quadruplex Structure Are
Present in the U3 Regions of Various HIV Species
Intensive
research on G-quadruplexes showed that genomic regions prone to adopt
this structure correlate particularly with gene promoters and telomeres,
both rich in G residues. More importantly, cellular research revealed
that G-quadruplexes in promoter regions of cancer-related genes regulate
their expression.− Since sequences capable of forming G-quadruplexes were previously
found in the HIV-1 genome, we wanted to determine whether this structure
might also be formed in the viral promoter.−, Our computational analyses with a software program
designed to predict the formation of G-quadruplexes (QGRS Mapper) revealed that the promoter sequence in HIV-1
NL4–3 U3 between −80 and −48 (+1 refers to transcription
start site at the beginning of R), has a high probability of adopting
different forms of G-quadruplex structure (Figure ). The same region was also predicted to form G-quadruplexes
in the genomes of various isolates of HIV-1 (A, B, C, D, F, G, H,
U, N, and O), HIV-2, and several SIV species closely related to HIV-1
(Table ). This region shows a higher variation
in primary sequence among different viruses than the protein coding
regions. Yet, the region from all of these viruses retains the ability
to form G-quadruplex structure as indicated by QGRS Mapper. This suggests
that the G-rich part of the promoter is prone to adopt G-quadruplex
structure and that the structure regulates viral expression. The G-rich
promoter sequence in HIV-1 contains from five to seven G runs and
contains three Sp1 binding sites. Some of these G runs are composed
of only two guanines, suggesting that the putative G-quadruplex is
composed of only two G-quartets. However, single G residues near G
runs might also be included in a structure, which is called the bulged
G-quadruplex. An extra G tetrad in a core formed with an isolated
G residue (not a part of G run) will produce a bulge with non-G residue
between tetrads. Since in retroviruses
the U3 is present in both the proviral LTRs, the Sp1 binding sites
should be also capable of forming a G-quadruplex at the 3′
end of the RNA genome (8996–9028 in RNA HIV-1 NL4–3).

G-Rich Sequences in the Sp1 Binding
Region in Different Immunodeficiency Viruses
Numbers indicate
locations with
reference to the transcription start site. G runs are shown in gray
boxes.

G-Rich Sequences in U3
of HIV-1 RNA and Single Stranded DNA
Form G-Quadruplex Structure
The distinctive signature of
cation-dependent pauses during RT progression serves as a simple test
to verify whether the G-rich region in a template sequence can form
G-quadruplex structure.,, In the presence of K+ or Na+, the G-quadruplex
structure is formed in the template, and it pauses RT during cDNA
synthesis. In the presence of lithium ions, the structure is not formed,
so G-quadruplex pausing does not occur. With lithium, higher salt
and template concentration can also induce G-quadruplex formation.
The RT progression assay is performed in a low salt (50 mM) and template
concentration (16 nM) so that ion type-dependent pausing is clearly
evident. Pausing caused by hairpin structures occurs with either ion,
allowing it to be readily distinguished.

In order to assess
G-quadruplex formation in HIV-1 U3 RNA, a 92-nt long U3 sequence (8960–9051
in the RNA genome) was synthesized by transcription in vitro. For analysis of G-quadruplex formation, in the corresponding single
stranded DNA we made an oligonucleotide with the sequence of the region
from −116 to −25 in the HIV-1 promoter. HIV-1 RT-directed
cDNA synthesis on these RNA and DNA strands was performed in the presence
of K+ or Li+, and results in Figure  show that cation-dependent pauses of RT were observed
on both templates. Two strong pauses of RT were produced solely in
the presence of potassium on the RNA molecule. The first pause is
located between marker 20nt and 30nt. In the sequence, this region
roughly corresponds to the first G run, which is at position 24. The
second strong pause is observed close to marker 30nt and roughly corresponds
to the second G run, which starts at 29 indicated on the sequence.
A weaker third RT pause is also observed between marker 30nt and 40nt
and might correspond to the third G run, which starts at 34 on the
sequence. Since these RT pauses are not observed in the presence of
lithium ions, they must be caused by a structure formed in the presence
of potassium but not lithium. Such a structure is a G-quadruplex.
The RT pause profiles for RNA and DNA look similar except for an additional
pause site at the first G run encountered in the RNA template. The
cation-independent RT pauses occurring in reactions done with either
potassium and lithium ions likely result from hairpin structures.
Hairpins are known to pause RT, and their formation is dependent on
ionic strength but not the identity of the ions.

RT progression assay determining G-quartet formation in the Sp1
binding region. Cation-dependent pausing of reverse transcription
at the guanine-rich elements in the U3 region was analyzed with RNA
and DNA templates. A fragment of the RNA/DNA sequence of the Sp1 binding
region is shown (top) with G-rich elements (shaded). Strong pauses
of the RT near G-rich elements were observed in the presence of 50
mM of KCl, but not LiCl, indicating that these elements are involved
in the formation of structure, which is stabilized by potassium ions
but destabilized by lithium ions. This is indicative of a G-quadruplex.
The cation-independent RT pauses are likely caused by hairpin structures.
DNA primer, P; DNA marker, M; KCl, K+;
LiCl, Li+.

To further confirm the formation of G-quadruplex structure
in the
HIV-1 U3 region, we analyzed the folding of RNA and DNA sequences
by circular dichroism (CD) spectroscopy. CD spectroscopy is widely
used to determine G-quadruplex formation in RNA and DNA. The CD spectrum
of the sequence folded into a G-quadruplex with a parallel configuration
has a positive peak near 263 nm and a negative peak at 241 nm. Similar
peaks appear near 295 and 260 nm, respectively, for antiparallel G-quadruplexes,
with an additional peak around 240 nm. The parallel configuration
refers to the structure in which the 5′–3′ direction
of all the strands that form G-quartets is the same. If one or more
strands have a 5′–3′ direction opposite to the
other strands forming G-quartets, the G-quadruplex is said to have
adopted an antiparallel topology. However, G-quadruplexes are highly
polymorphic, and more complicated forms can be adopted displaying
altered CD profiles. CD spectra with two positive peaks around 295
and 263 nm, might indicate that the sequence adopts parallel and antiparallel
G-quadruplexes. However, bulged G-quadruplexes and hybrid configurations
with strands in parallel and antiparallel in the single G-quadruplex
also display a similar profile., Different configurations
are seen for G-quadruplexes folded by DNA molecules, but for RNA sequences,
all G-quadruplexes described so far exhibit parallel topology.

Our CD structural analysis of a 35-nt long RNA with the sequence
of HIV-1 U3 (8995–9029) in 100 mM KCl showed a typical profile
of a parallel G-quadruplex, with a positive and negative ellipticity
at 263 and 241 nm, respectively (Figure ).
However, the CD spectrum of the DNA sequence showed a positive peak
around 295 and a negative peak around 260 nm indicating a G-quadruplex
with antiparallel topology, although it is possible that the structure
is a hybrid with strands in antiparallel and parallel orientations
since a peak at 240 nm is not clearly seen. These results confirm that both RNA and single stranded DNA of the
HIV-1 U3 region containing the Sp1 binding elements form G-quadruplexes
but with different configurations.

CD spectral analysis of the RNA and single
stranded DNA with Sp1
binding sites in HIV-1. CD spectra indicate the formation of the parallel
G-quadruplex for the RNA template and an antiparallel or hybrid G-quadruplex
for single stranded DNA. For reference, a profile of the G-rich sequence
(50% of Gs; GGGGGGAUUGUG UGGUACAGUGCAGAGA), which is unable
to adopt G-quadruplex structure, is shown in gray.

Single Stranded DNA Containing the Three
HIV-1 Sp1 Sites Adopts
Different Monomer G-Quadruplex Configurations
Our cation-dependent
RT progression analysis and CD spectra show that a G-quadruplex is
formed by the HIV-1 promoter single stranded DNA template. This implies
that the DNA sequence adopts a G-quadruplex configuration when complementary
strands are separated in the DNA duplex during transcription. The
G-rich sequences in promoters of cancer-related genes have been shown
to form monomer quadruplex structures.,,,− Since the G-quadruplex monomer is expected to have a biological
significance in the HIV-1 promoter, we used native gel analysis to
determine how efficiently it is formed over dimers and tetramers,
which are intermolecular forms of G-quadruplex that do not require
multiple G runs. In this approach, the 32P-labeled strand
is first incubated under G-quadruplex folding conditions and then
loaded into a native gel to separate monomers, dimers, and tetramers
from nonfolded molecules. The gel contains KCl at a concentration
of at least 10 mM to maintain the integrity of folded structures.
The monomer G-quadruplex appears in the gel as the fastest migrating
band, then the nonfolded sequence, whereas dimers and tetramers are
slower migrating forms.

Because the Sp1 binding elements of
the HIV-1 promoter have seven G runs, to gain information on their
individual roles in a G-quadruplex formation, we analyzed several
DNA oligonucleotides covering different sets of four G runs. The sequences
of the c-kit promoter (Sp1 site), altered
thrombin aptamer (TBA), and telomere
(TEL), had been confirmed to fold into
monomer G-quadruplexes and so were used as positive controls. Results
in Figure A show that the single stranded
DNAs with Sp1 binding elements migrate faster than expected when incubated
in the G-quadruplex folding condition. Formation of G-quadruplex by
shorter sequences (b–e) indicates that each of the seven G
runs can be involved in the formation of a G tetrad. The nonfolded
samples, which are samples incubated in the absence of salt, do not
migrate according to their sizes and appear as smear bands for oligomers
d, e, and c-kit indicating that 10 mM KCl in a gel is sufficient to
induce their folding into G-quadruplex during electrophoresis. The
10 mM KCl is sufficient to induce G-quadruplex folding in RNA and
single stranded DNA.,, In addition to monomers, oligomers d and e can also form dimers.

Single
stranded DNA of the HIV-1 promoter with Sp1 binding sites
folds completely into different G-quadruplex monomers, and each of
seven G runs participates in the formation of G-quartets. (A) Native
gel analysis showing that the three Sp1 sites adopt monomer G-quadruplexes
with different sets of G runs (oligomers b–e). A sequence folded
into a monomer G-quadruplex (F) migrates faster than expected for
its size. The nonfolded (U) controls of the b, c, d, e, and c-kit
also migrate faster and appear as smear bands indicating that 10 mM
KCl in the gel induced their folding into G-quadruplex during electrophoresis.
The sequences of the c-kit promoter, altered thrombin aptamer (TBA)
and telomere (TEL), were confirmed to fold into monomer G-quadruplexes
and were used as positive controls. Dimeric G-quadruplexes (D) were
observed for oligomers d and e. F, samples incubated in the presence
of 100 mM KCl; F2, sample incubated in the presence of 250 mM KCl;
and U, samples incubated in the absence of KCl. (B) CD spectra for
shorter sequences b–e. Oligomers b and e display a profile
known for mixed G-quadruplexes with either parallel or antiparallel
configuration and also known for bulged and hybrid G-quadruplexes.
CD profiles for oligomers c and d are similar to profiles of G-quadruplexes
with antiparallel topology and hybrid or basket-type configuration,
respectively.

The CD spectral analysis
confirms the formation of G-quadruplexes
for sequences b, c, and e (Figure B); however,
the profiles differ for each sequence indicating that they exhibit
different configurations. The CD spectra for oligomers b and e have
two peaks around 295 and 260 nm, which might represent a mixture of
parallel and antiparallel G-quadruplexes. However, such profiles are also described for hybrid (3 + 1) and
bulged G-quadruplexes., The profile for oligomer d has
a strong maximum around 295 nm and a minimum around 250 nm, and such
a profile is generally not observed for G-quadruplex structures, although
few reports attributed these spectral characteristics to hybrid conformations
containing a mixture of both parallel and antiparallel strand orientations
and basket-type G-quadruplexes., Other techniques, like
NMR spectroscopy would need to be used to determine what structure
is formed by oligomer d. The CD spectrum for oligomer c is similar
to the profile describing G-quadruplexes with antiparallel configuration.
These results indicate that the Sp1 binding region can easily and
fully adopt different monomer G-quadruplexes. The ability of the sequence
to adopt different G-quadruplex configurations was previously reported
and might reflect that G-quadruplexes with different topology could
have different functions.

hf2 Antibody
Recognizes Two G-Quadruplexes Formed in the Sp1
Binding Region of the HIV-1 Promoter
Engineered proteins,
such as single-chain antibodies and the Gq1 zinc finger protein, have
been previously generated as molecular probes to study G-quadruplex
structures., Using phage display technology,
Fernando and co-workers generated an hf2 antibody with high binding
affinity to the G-quadruplex formed by c-kit2 found in the promoter
of the c-kit proto-oncogene. Recent studies determined that this antibody also has binding affinity
to G-quadruplexes formed in other genomic regions. In order to determine whether hf2 would bind to structures
formed in the Sp1 binding sites of HIV-1, we produced phages displaying
hf2 antibodies on their surface and performed a phage ELISA against
structures formed by oligomers b–e. Results showed that the
hf2 displaying phage binds to G-quadruplexes formed by two HIV-1 sequences,
the oligomers b and c (Figure A). Serial dilutions
of phages showed that the highest affinity of hf2 antibody was seen
for the G-quadruplex formed by the c-kit2 sequence, as expected (Figure B). A lower affinity was observed for structures
formed by sequences of oligomers b and c, indicating that these G-quadruplexes
must contain some structural features similar to those of the G-quadruplex
formed by the c-kit2 sequence. A very weak binding affinity was detected
for the structure formed by oligomer d, whereas no binding was detected
for oligomer e and two controls, single stranded and double stranded
DNA. As an additional control, we performed a phage ELISA for phages
displaying unrelated antibodies. No binding was observed for all analyzed
sequences (data not shown). In summary, our results show that the
hf2 antibody is able to recognize and bind to two G-quadruplex structures
of the Sp1 binding region in HIV-1 promoter. This directly proves
that oligomers b and c adopt G-quadruplex configurations. The lack
of interactions between antibody hf2 and oligomers d and e suggest
that both sequences do not form G-quadruplexes. However, although
the hf2 antibody displayed ability to recognize different G-quadruplexes,
likely they do not recognize all configurations. Thus, other methods
would have to be used to provide direct evidence that oligomers d
and e adopt this structure.

Interactions between phages displaying the hf2
scFv and G-quadruplexes
formed in the HIV-1 Sp1 sites. (A) Phage ELISA shows that the c-kit2
G-quadruplex-specific antibody recognizes two of four G-quadruplexes
formed by sequences of the HIV-1 Sp1 sites. (B) Binding curves of
hf2-DNA interactions with serial dilutions of phages show that bindings
of hf2 to oligomers b and c have lower affinities when compared to
binding with the c-kit2 G-quadruplex. No significant interactions
were observed for oligomer d, and no binding was seen for oligomer
e and two controls, single stranded (ssDNA), and double stranded DNA
(dsDNA).

Sp1 Protein Binds to a
G-Quadruplex Formed in the HIV-1 Promoter
Recent studies
showed that the Sp1 binding sites of the c-kit promoter
fold into a G-quadruplex that is recognized and bound by Sp1 protein. The G-rich sequence of the c-kit Sp1 site and
distribution of G runs are different from Sp1 sites in HIV-1. In order
to determine whether Sp1 can also bind to an HIV-1 sequence folded
into a G-quadruplex, we used a previously described affinity selection
approach. In this method, the pull-down
of protein is performed with the 3′-biotinylated oligonucleotide
with the sequence folded into G-quadruplex and immobilized to streptavidin-coated
magnetic beads. The Sp1 protein used for affinity selection is at
a concentration of 1.98 nM.

As indicated above, the three Sp1
sites have the ability to adopt different G-quadruplex configurations,
in which different sets of G runs participate in the formation of
a G-quartet. However, for some configurations, the folding might involve
G runs of two Sp1 binding sites leaving one site unfolded. To ensure
that only one Sp1 site is available for protein binding in a pull-down
of Sp1 and that it is folded, we used as bait a 21-nt sequence of
oligomer c with the Sp1 site II surrounded by two G runs from Sp1
sites I and III (Figure ). The native gel
analysis shows that this sequence transforms completely into a monomer
G-quadruplex (Figure A), and CD spectra indicate
that the G-quadruplex is likely in an antiparallel configuration (Figure B).

In assessing Sp1 binding to a G-quadruplex
in the HIV-1 promoter,
we used, as a positive control, an oligonucleotide with the sequence
of the c-kit promoter for which the binding of Sp1 to its site folded
as a G-quadruplex had been confirmed. As a negative control, selection of Sp1 protein was done with beads
not coupled to any DNA. As seen in the Western blots in Figure A, the Sp1 protein was pulled down with the HIV-1
Sp1 binding site II folded into a G-quadruplex with the same efficiency
as with a G-quadruplex of the c-kit promoter. When the dsDNA of this
sequence was used for Sp1 selection, the interaction of protein with
the DNA was disrupted by the presence of the 3 and 6 molar excess
of oligomer c with the Sp1 site II folded into a G-quadruplex (Figure B). This indicates that the Sp1 site in a G-quadruplex
form competes efficiently with dsDNA for binding with Sp1. Importantly,
the interaction of Sp1 with dsDNA was not affected by the presence
of a 6 molar excess of the nonspecific sequence (T15CTA;
ds/ss line in Figure B). In summary, these
results confirm that Sp1 protein can recognize and bind to its binding
element in the HIV-1 promoter folded into a G-quadruplex configuration.

Sp1 binds
to a G-quadruplex in the HIV-1 promoter. (A) Sp1 is selected
by a G-quadruplex (ss-GQ) with the sequence of the Sp1 site II of
the HIV-1 promoter (top) with the same efficiency as that selected
by a G-quadruplex with the sequence of the c-kit promoter. Sp1 is
also selected with the same efficiency by these sequences in dsDNA
form. (B) Three and six molar excess of oligomer c with Sp1 site II
(top) folded into a G-quadruplex competes efficiently with dsDNA sequence
for binding with Sp1. Sp1 binding to the dsDNA is not affected in
the presence of 6 molar excess of a nonspecific 18-nt sequence (T)15CTA.

Dimerization of RNA Strands
in the HIV-1 U3 Region
Since the two copies of the HIV-1
RNA genomes are held together at
DIS, the ability of the RNA strands to fold into a G-quadruplex configuration
raises the possibility that multiple G-quadruplex structures formed
between the two viral RNA genomes support additional dimer contacts
during reverse transcription. In order to determine whether an intermolecular
G-quadruplex in the U3 region can be formed between two RNA strands,
we first used our previously developed affinity selection approach
to test if two homologous sequences of U3 can interact. In this method, the RNA strands tagged with
poly(A) tail are incubated with nontagged RNA molecules, and then
the mixture is subjected to affinity selection with magnetic beads
conjugated with oligo-d(T)25. The interaction between nucleic
acids is measured by analyzing selected RNA molecules. The interacting
partners are distinguished by their size in a denaturing gel stained
with ethidium bromide. The quantity of selected nontagged template
is expected to be lower since interactions will also occur between
two tagged RNAs and two nontagged RNAs. In addition, the formation
of an intermolecular G-quadruplex between two templates likely competes
with the formation of intramolecular G-quadruplexes in both templates.

The RNA strands corresponding to positions 8960–9037 of
the HIV-1 NL4–3 RNA genome were synthesized with poly(A) tails
and were then coincubated with equivalent RNA strands but devoid of
a poly(A) sequence. Because the gag regions near
DIS from HIV-1 MAL and NL4–3, and the cPPT region in NL4–3
were shown to form G-quadruplex dimers, we used RNA strands of these
regions as positive controls.−, The RNA strands with gag sequences (303–415
in HIV-1 MAL and 290–403 in HIV-1 NL4–3) did not include
the DIS region. The RNA partners were combined and incubated to allow
dimerization, and subsequently used for affinity selection with magnetic
beads. As shown in Figure , the nontagged
RNA strands of the U3 region were coselected with corresponding poly(A)
tagged RNAs, similar to results with the gag and
cPPT regions with which dimeric G-quadruplex formation was previously
reported. The slower migration rate for tagged RNA of U3 region results
from a longer poly(A) tag used for this template. Nontagged RNA with
the U3 region sequence was not selected by magnetic beads in the absence
of the poly(A) tagged partner, demonstrating that observed interactions
are not resulting from nonspecific binding to the magnetic beads.

Affinity
selection of HIV-1 RNAs enriched in G residues. Poly(A)
tagged RNA templates are sequences elongated at the 3′ end
with a poly(A) tag in order to select them with oligo(dT)25 magnetic beads. After incubation and affinity selection, the samples
were analyzed in a denaturing gel stained with ethidium bromide. The
nontagged RNAs (faster migrating species) of the gag region (RNA genomic sequence 303–415 of the MAL isolate and
290–403 of the NL4-3), cPPT region (4309–4396 of NL4-3),
and U3 region (8960–9037 of NL4-3) were selected with corresponding
poly(A) tagged RNA partners. No U3 region RNA was selected in the
absence of a poly(A) tagged partner (lane C).

In order to determine whether RNA interactions in U3 have
characteristics
of intermolecular G-quadruplexes, the interactions were also investigated
by native gel analysis. Previous studies showed that the ability of
a test sequence to form a dimer through intermolecular G-quadruplex
increased with template and salt concentration; however, the yield
of RNA dimers correlated inversely with the size of monovalent cation
(i.e., Li+ &gt; Na+ &gt; K+).,, Thus, G-quadruplex RNA dimers
can form more efficiently in the presence of a high concentration
of LiCl, than KCl, although complexes are less stable. To compare
the cation-dependent association and thermal stability profiles of
complexes formed by the G-rich U3 region, we used radiolabeled RNA
templates and analyzed complexes in a native gel. A 78-nt HIV-1 fragment
of the U3 region (8960–9037) at a concentration of 4 μM
in buffer containing 1 M of KCl, NaCl, or LiCl was heated to 95 °C,
chilled on ice, and subsequently incubated for 1 h at room temperature.
A 1 M concentration of salt was used to provide optimal conditions
for the G-quadruplex folding in the presence of lithium ions. The
mixtures were then exposed for 8 min to different temperatures, and
the stability of the complexes was analyzed in a native gel. The results
in Figure A show that dimer complexes were
formed more efficiently in the presence of LiCl and NaCl, than in
the presence of KCl. This observation is consistent with results obtained
in previous studies for regions of gag and cPPT in
HIV-1.,, With higher
temperature, all complexes were less stable, but the rate of dissociation
was higher for complexes formed in the presence of lithium ions. For
example, about 77% of complexes formed in the presence of potassium
ions were still present at 70 °C, whereas about 1/3 of complexes
formed in the presence of sodium and about a half of those formed
in the presence of lithium ions had dissociated at this temperature.
The low level of RNA G-quadruplex dimers formed in the presence of
potassium ions resulted from a slower rate of folding, and up to 50%
yield of complexes could be achieved after 24 h of incubation at lower
salt concentration (0.2 or 0.5 M) (Figure B). These results demonstrate that dimeric complexes formed by the
RNA template of the U3 region display characteristics expected for
intermolecular RNA G-quadruplex structures.

Cation-dependent association
and thermal stability of the RNA dimer
formed by a sequence with the Sp1 sites of HIV-1 U3. (A) RNA dimers
were allowed to form for 1 h at a template concentration of 4 μM
in buffers containing 1 M KCl, NaCl, or LiCl. One volume of Tris-EDTA
buffer was added, and 15-μL aliquots were incubated at the indicated
temperatures for 8 min. Thermal stabilities of RNA dimers were measured
by analyzing samples in nondenaturing gels run at 4 °C. Higher
yield of RNA dimers formed in the presence of 1 M LiCl and their lower
thermal stability are characteristics of complexes formed through
intermolecular G-quadruplexes. (B) The yield of RNA dimers increases
after overnight incubation in the presence of potassium ions and at
a lower salt concentration (0.2 and 0.5 M).

G-Quadruplex in RNA Facilitates RT in Switching Templates during
Reverse Transcription
The folding of an RNA sequence into
a structure that can pause RT is linked to an increased rate of viral
recombination. Our previous studies showed that under conditions that
encourage the formation of G-quadruplex structure, the rate of template
switching during reverse transcription increased for the G-rich regions
in gag and near the cPPT, suggesting that the structure
increases the efficiency of recombination., These observations are in agreement with studies in vivo on the distribution of recombination breakpoints in the HIV-1 genome,
which show a higher recombination rate in these two regions.− The U3 region of the RNA genome is also a site of frequent recombination
events, which generally occur upstream of the Sp1 binding sites. Significantly, studies revealed that efficient
crossovers in U3 rely on the presence of the 150-nt long sequence
at the 3′ end of U3, containing the G-rich elements of the
Sp1 binding sites.

In order to
evaluate the influence of G-quadruplex formation on strand transfer
efficiency (the recombination reaction), we used a reconstituted system
consisting of HIV-1 RT, HIV-1 nucleocapsid protein (NC), a primer
(DNA oligonucleotide), and two RNA templates representing the two
copies of the HIV-1 RNA genome (Figure A).
To initiate the reaction, a 32P-labeled DNA primer was
annealed to the RNA template (HIV-1 genome sequence 8960–9054),
denoted here as donor RNA. The second RNA template, denoted as acceptor
RNA, had the HIV-1 sequence 8961–9033 and shared homology with
the donor RNA over 72-nt of the Sp1 binding region. The 5′
end of the acceptor RNA was elongated with GGAAAAAAAAAA so that
transfer products (TP) could be separated and distinguished on a denaturing
gel from DNA fully extended on the donor RNA (DE). End transfer of
the DE was prevented because our acceptor RNA did not share homology
with two nucleotides at the 5′ end of the donor RNA (a circle
in Figure A). Thus, all transfers to the acceptor
RNA originated only from internal regions of the donor template, as
they do in vivo during reverse transcription over
the U3 region.

Formation of the structure stabilized by potassium ions
in the
HIV-1 U3 region facilitates RT template switching during reverse transcription.
(A) Reconstituted system to analyze the influence of G-rich elements
on strand transfer during HIV-1 minus strand DNA synthesis in vitro. Donor and acceptor RNA templates represent two
copies of the viral RNA genome; in which reverse transcription is
initiated from a 32P-labeled DNA primer annealed to the
donor RNA. The acceptor RNA does not share a homology (circle) with
two nucleotides at the 5′ end of the donor RNA. TP, transfer
product; DE, donor extension product; and P, DNA primer. (B) A time
course of strand transfer reactions performed in the presence of potassium
and lithium ions. Samples were collected at 1, 5, 15, and 30 min after
the reaction was initiated. Formation of a potassium-dependent structure,
anticipated to be a G-quadruplex, in the RNA template paused the RT
during minus strand DNA synthesis and influenced the yield of the
final products. The transfer efficiency decreased about 37% in reactions
with lithium ions, presumably because the templates could not form
a G-quadruplex.

The strand transfer assays
were performed in the presence of a
low concentration of either K+ or Li+. The monovalent
cations added to the reaction do not significantly affect the enzymatic
activity of RT., The major cation-dependent pause
sites of RT synthesis were clearly visible within the G-rich region
in the presence of K+ but not Li+ (Figure B). A nonion-dependent RT pause, likely resulting
from a hairpin structure, was visible. The strong pauses in potassium,
presumed to result from G-quadruplex formation, evidently caused dissociation
of the RT since fewer final products were made when compared with
that in reactions in lithium, where no RT pauses were seen in the
G-rich region. The transfer efficiency of reactions was calculated
by comparison of values of donor extension products and transfer products
using the following formula: transfer efficiency = 100 × TP/(TP
+ DE). As expected, the elimination of ion-dependent RT pauses by
lithium caused a drop in transfer efficiency of about 37%. Since ion-dependent
RT pauses are associated with G-quadruplex formation, the effect of
increased template switching likely resulted from RT encountering
G-quadruplex. This is consistent with a general observation that a
structure capable of pausing the RT also facilitates transfer reactions;
however, the effect observed here is less striking than for two other
G-quadruplex forming sequences in a region of gag and cPPT., In summary, these results show
that G-quadruplex(es) formed at the 3′ end of the viral RNA
genome are likely contributors to the increased recombination rate
in the U3 region.

Discussion
Many promoters have multiple
runs of G-residues, including those
with several G-rich Sp-1 transcription factor binding motifs in tandem.
Using genome-wide computational analysis, it has been suggested that
such tandem Sp1 binding sites form G-quadruplex structures., Direct evidence that Sp1 binding elements form G-quadruplexes that
regulate gene expression has already be derived from studies of the c-myc promoter.,,− The HIV-1 promoter has three Sp1 binding elements,
and our analysis of the region in U3 revealed that the sequence readily
adopts different G-quadruplex configurations within both its RNA and
single stranded DNA forms. These results predict that during viral
infection the G-quadruplex structure forms in both the RNA genome
and in the promoter of the HIV-1 provirus, and presumably has important
biological functions in both environments. In fact, recently Perrone
and co-workers published results showing that HIV-1 promoter activity
is impaired in the presence of a G-quadruplex binding ligand, indicating
that indeed the structures have a role in regulating virus expression. The group also demonstrated that different G-quadruplexes
are formed in the U3 region of DNA and that some of them involve G
runs of Sp1 sites together with a G run in the NF-κB site, which
was not a subject of our studies. However, these and our results together
show that the entire G-rich transcription factor binding region in
the HIV-1 proximal promoter adopts different forms of G-quadruplex
structure.

The variation of genomic sequence among various viral
species is
higher for the U3 region having Sp1 binding sites than for the protein
coding regions. However, according to our computational analysis,
the sequence variants all retain the ability of the Sp1 binding sites
to form G-quadruplex structure. This observation additionally supports
the conclusion that G-quadruplex structure is an important element
of the HIV-1 promoter region that is maintained by a strong evolutionary
pressure.

Because the G-quadruplex structure forms in the Sp1
transcription
factor binding region, it is likely that it participates in the regulation
of promoter function. Recent studies of the c-kit promoter showed
that Sp1 protein can bind to its sequence folded into a G-quadruplex. The sequence and G run distribution in HIV-1
Sp1 sites differ from those of the Sp1 binding region in the c-kit
promoter. However, our results also show Sp1-G-quadruplex interactions,
indicating that Sp1 could regulate HIV-1 promoter activity through
binding dsDNA or G-quadruplex structure and that these binding characteristics
might be linked with different functions of Sp1. Moreover, we found
that the G-rich HIV-1 sequence with three Sp1 binding sites can adopt
alternative configuration G-quadruplexes with different interacting
sets of G runs and that antibodies specific to the c-kit2 G-quadruplex
recognize two of these forms. Such diversity suggests that the G-rich
Sp1 binding region uses its ability to adopt several non-B DNA configurations
as a complex switching mechanism involving subtle Sp1 interaction
differences to fine-tune transcriptional output.

Why might such
complex alternative protein–DNA interactions
be necessary? Sp1 is a strong activator of HIV-1 expression, but Sp1
activity is also associated with maintaining virus latency., Importantly, the Sp1 binding elements are within a region of the
HIV-1 promoter that remains nucleosome-free despite hypermethylation
of two CpG islands that flank the HIV-1 transcription start site., As a result, the region remains accessible to transcription regulators,
any of which might act through G-quadruplex structure. G-quadruplex
binding agents and proteins were shown to suppress cellular promoter
activity by stabilizing a G-quadruplex formed in the Sp1 binding region,
but unwinding of the structure reactivated gene expression.,− Interestingly, stimulation of cellular promoter activity through
G-quadruplex structure was recently also demonstrated., However, recently published results by Perrone and co-workers indicate
that G-quadruplexes formed in HIV-1 promoter have a rather inhibitory
effect on viral transcription.

Formation of G-quadruplexes in the HIV-1 RNA genome has previously
been demonstrated in gag near the RNA 5′ end
and recently in the central region of the genome near the cPPT.−, Significantly, both sequences
can form dimer complexes through intermolecular G-quadruplex structure,
indicating that G-quartets might be formed that link the two RNA genomes.
Our results show that short RNA molecules with HIV-1 sequences containing
the Sp1 binding sites can also dimerize and that their interactions
have characteristics of the intermolecular G-quadruplex. This suggests
that the U3 region is an additional point of contact in a multiply
linked genome dimer and together with G-rich sequences in gag and cPPT helps to maintain interaction of the HIV-1
genomes along their whole sequence. Apart from dimerization through
the DIS region, additional interactions through intermolecular G-quadruplexes
would explain the ability of viral RNA genomes to maintain a dimeric
configuration when binding-disruptive mutations are introduced in
DIS., Moreover, additional contacts would also
be necessary to keep the two 9kb-long RNA sequences in proximity for
efficient reverse transcription and the observed widely distributed
hot spots for recombination. The ability of the G-rich sequence in
U3 to form a dimer also means that a contact point at the 3′
end provides equal accessibility of either of the 3′ ends of
the copackaged RNA genomes for minus strong stop DNA transfer. Indeed,
studies showed that transfers of the minus strand DNA primer occur
with the same frequency to each 3′ genomic end.

Consistent with these expectations, our
results demonstrate that
the G-quadruplex formed by the Sp1 binding sites is likely a structural
element contributing to the increased recombination rate in U3. Detailed
measurements of strand transfers at the ends of HIV-1 showed that
11 of 86 analyzed clones (12%) underwent homologous recombination
in the U3 region, and all crossovers occurred upstream of the G-rich
region of the Sp1 binding sites. Other
results showed that recombination in U3 dropped significantly in tests
conducted with a template construct missing a 150-nt long sequence
containing the putative dimerization site at the 3′ end, suggesting
the existence of sequence elements in this region that are crucial
for efficient homologous recombination in this region.

Our analysis of minus strand transfer
using a reconstituted system
shows that the transfer is cation-dependent and that transfer efficiency
decreases in the presence of lithium ions, which destabilize G-quadruplex
structure, although the effect is less dramatic than observed for
G-rich regions of gag and cPPT. This suggests that
G-quadruplex(es) formed in the region of Sp1 binding sites are one
of the factors causing increased recombination in U3. The correlation
between potential G-quadruplex formation and hot spots for recombination
was also found in the gag and cPPT regions and is
in an agreement with previous analyses in vitro showing
that G-quadruplexes facilitate RT template switching during reverse
transcription.,,

In summary, our current studies, combined with previous work,
show
that G-rich sequences in the HIV-1 genome are capable of forming G-quadruplexes
in both RNA and DNA forms of the genome. The distribution of recombination
hot spots correlates with the sites where G-quadruplexes are formed,
and reconstituted systems confirm that these structures facilitate
strand transfers. The concept of G-quadruplexes regulating the activity
of the HIV-1 promoter is new, and determining how and when G-quadruplexes
regulate HIV-1 transcription would enhance our understanding of HIV-1
latency and reactivation, which might help to identify a new molecular
target for therapeutic reactivation of virus replication.

Supporting Information Available
DNA
and RNA oligonucleotides.
This material is available free of charge via the Internet at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bi4016692_si_001.pdf

This work was
supported by the National Institutes of Health (NIH) [GM049573 to
R.A.B. and GM097334 to G.S.]. We received additional support from
the University of Rochester Developmental Center for AIDS Research
grant P30 AI078498 (National Institutes of Health/National Institute
of Allergy and Infectious Diseases) and the University of Rochester
School of Medicine and Dentistry. Funding for open access charge:
National Institutes of Health.

The authors
declare no competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
We are
grateful to Dr. Robert J. Gorelick, of the National
Cancer Institute, for the NC used in these studies. We thank Dr. Shankar
Balasubramanian for sharing with us the pIT2 plasmid construct with
hf2 sequence.

Abbreviations
DISdimer initiation site

cPPTcentral polypurine tract

NCnucleocapsid protein

TPtransfer product

DEdonor extension
product

ntnucleotide(s)

