Diphtheria
toxin enters the
cell via the endosomal pathway. A key
step in cell infection is the translocation of the catalytic domain
from the endosome into the cytosol, accomplished by a conformational
change of the translocation (T) domain. Many bacterial pore-forming proteins exist in both water-soluble
and integral-membrane forms. Structural rearrangements from water-soluble
to membrane proteins occur via multistep processes that include pH-dependent
structural refolding; these steps enable the proteins to insert into
lipid bilayers. Under the acidic conditions
in the endosome, the T domain undergoes a series of conformational
rearrangements that permit its insertion into the endosomal membrane
to form an open-channel state that translocates the toxin’s
catalytic (C) domain across the membrane into the cytosol. Once in
the cytoplasm, the C domain catalyzes the transfer of the ADP-ribosyl
group of NAD+ to elongation factor 2, blocking protein
synthesis and killing the mammalian cell. The acid-induced membrane
insertion of the T domain proceeds through two conformational transitions
with staggered pH-dependencies: (1) formation
of a membrane-competent state in bulk solution and (2) formation of
an insertion-competent state at the membrane surface.

The crystallographic
structure of water-soluble diphtheria toxin
at neutral pH shows that the T domain consists of nine α-helices,
with two of the most hydrophobic α-helical hairpins TH8 and
TH9 forming a core that is covered by two layers of amphipathic helices
to form a “sandwich-like” structure., Owing
to the coexistence of multiple conformations along the translocation
pathway, however, it is impossible to
get a high resolution structure for T domain in the course of pH-induced
refolding. Although numerous biophysical studies have been devoted
to the structure and function of the T domain,,− a detailed characterization of conformational changes and dynamics
at molecular level still has not been achieved.

Hydrogen−deuterium
exchange coupled to mass spectrometry
(HDX MS) has emerged as a powerful tool for probing protein dynamics.− A fast amide hydrogen exchange rate indicates structural flexibility,
whereas a slow exchange rate indicates that the amide is part of a
relatively rigid, H-bonded structure. Changes in protein dynamics
are often related to specific protein conformational changes induced
by ligand binding, protein–protein
interactions, changes in pH and salt
concentrations, and formation of oligomers. Forest and co-workers demonstrated the use of differential HDX MS to study accessibility
changes within the T domain by comparing the HDX results of the native
state (pH 8) and a molten globule state (pH 4). However, the structural
rearrangements during formation of the W+-state are likely
to be subtle, and it is likely that the
two pH points selected in this early study (pH 8 and 4) are insufficient
for characterizing a detailed picture of low pH-induced structural
change of the T domain. In addition, the earlier study probably misidentified
a molten globule state, formed at pH &lt; 5, as a main membrane-binding
species.

Our study, which builds on Forest’s work, addresses
the
conformational dynamics of water-soluble diphtheria toxin T domain
as a function of pH (7.5–5.0) in the absence of a membrane
by hydrogen–deuterium exchange mass spectrometry (HDX MS).
The changes in HDX dynamics from a standard state (7.5) to five lower
pH states (7.0, 6.5, 6.0, 5.5, and 5.0) provide detailed information
on the kinetics of conformational transition of T domain as well as
the structural rearrangements accompanying each transition. In fact,
we identified the pH range of structural transition and mapped the
regions involved in the pH-induced conformational transitions onto
the crystal structure of soluble T domain. In addition, we also identified
the regions involved in oligomerization at low pH in the absence of
the membrane. Knowledge of how the water-soluble protein refolds and
crosses lipid bilayers should not only provide insight into the T-domain
transitions, but also uncover general principles of protein transportation
across biological membranes and demonstrate new approaches to study
the transport.

Materials and Methods
Materials
All
chemicals, proteases, and solvents were
purchased from Sigma-Aldrich (St. Louis, MO) unless otherwise stated.
Deuterium oxide was purchased from Cambridge Isotope Laboratories
Inc. (Andover, MA). The POROS 20 AL beads used to pack immobilized
porcine pepsin columns were purchased from Applied Biosystems (Grand
Island, NY).

Purification of Diphtheria Toxin T Domain
Diphteria
toxin T domain was prepared as described previously. Briefly, BL23DELysS cells transformed using a pET15b plasmid-containing
T domain gene were grown to OD600 = 0.6, induced with 0.8
mM IPTG, and grown overnight at 24 °C. After harvesting, the
cells were lysed by sonification, cell debris was spun down, and soluble
DTT was bound to Ni-NTA (Qiagen, MA). After several washes, the protein
was eluted from the resin with 0.5 M imidazole in the binding buffer
and additionally purified by size-exclusion FPLC on a Superose 12
column in 50 mM sodium-phosphate buffer, pH 8. T domain-containing
fractions were stored at −80 °C until further use.

pH-Dependent
Hydrogen/Deuterium Exchange Mass Spectrometry
To perform
pH-dependent HDX, the pHs of various DTT solutions were
adjusted to 7.5, 7.0, 6.5, 6.0, 5.5, and 5.0 by mixing appropriately
50 mM sodium phosphate buffer (pH 7.5) with 50 mM sodium acetate buffer
(pH 4). All pH values were corrected (pD = pHread + 0.4) from the actual pH readings of a SevenEasy pH
meter (Mettler Toledo, Columbus, OH). The HDX was initiated by mixing
1 μL of DTT protein solution (75 uM) with 19 μL of D2O exchange buffer (final D2O content was 95%, final
protein concentration was 3.75 μM in labeling solution), or
H2O buffer for t0 samples,
and incubated for a predetermined set of times under each pH condition
(Table ) at 4 °C. Following a specific
incubation time, 30 μL of ice-cold 3 M urea/1% (v/v) trifluoroacetic
acid (TFA) was rapidly added to 20 μL of the incubated protein
solution to quench the HDX reaction and denature the protein structure.
The quenched protein mixture was immediately passed through a custom-built,
immobilized pepsin column (2 mm × 2 cm) at a flow rate of 200
μL/min, and the resulting peptic peptides were captured on a
C8 cartridge (2.1 mm × 1.5 cm, Agilent, Santa Clara,
CA) for desalting; the total time for digestion and desalting was
3 min. Peptides were than separated by using a C18 HPLC
column (1.9 μm Hypersil Gold, Thermo Fisher, Waltham, MA) over
a 5 min linear gradient (4–40% CH3CN, 0.1% (v/v)
formic acid). Valves, columns, and tubing for protein digestion and
peptide separation were submerged in an ice–water bath to minimize
back-exchange. Mass analysis was performed with an Orbitrap mass spectrometer
(LTQ Orbitrap XL, Thermo Fisher, Waltham, MA) equipped with an electrospray
ionization source operated at a capillary temperature of 225 °C
and a spray voltage of 3.5 kV. Each measurement was made in triplicate.

Hydrogen Deuterium Exchange Reaction
Time Table
 	HDX
reaction time under various pH conditions	
exchange time corrected
to standard condition
(pH 7.5, 4 °C)	pH 7.5 (Standard)	pH 7.0
(× 100.5)	pH 6.5 (×
101)	pH 6.0 (× 101.5)	pH 5.5 (× 102)	pH 5.0 (× 102.5)	
3 s	--	10 s	32 s	100 s	5 min 16 s	16 min 40 s	
10 s	10 s	32 s	100 s	5 min 16 s	16 min 40 s	52 min 42 s	
30 s	30 s	1 min 35 s	5 min	15 min 49 s	50 min	2 h  38 min	
1 min	1 min	3 min 10 s	10 min	31 min 37 s	1 h 40 min	5 h 16 min	
2 min	2 min	6 min 19 s	20 min	1 h 3 min	3 h 20 min	10 h 32 min	
6 min	6 min	18 min 58 s	1 h	3 h 9 min	10 h	1 d 7 h	
15 min	15 min	47 min 26 s	2 h 30 min	7 h 54 min	1 d 1 h	3 d 7 h	
1 h	1 h	3 h 9 min	10 h	31 h 37 min	4 d 4 h	--	
The
exchange times are corrected
to standard condition at pH 7.5 and 4 °C shown in the first column
of the table. The numbers in the brackets in columns 2 to 7 are the
time conversion factors for corresponding pH conditions.

Fungal XIII Digestion
In addition
to digesting the
protein with pepsin, digestion with Fungal XIII was performed in solution
to increase sequence coverage. Briefly, 20 μL of protein solution
after HDX was mixed with 30 μL of Fungal XIII solution (1 mg/mL,
in 0.1% formic acid, 0 °C) and held at 4 °C for 2 min before
conducting the peptide separation and MS analysis described above.

Peptide Identification and HDX Data Analysis
LC-MS/MS
analysis to identify the peptides from digestion was performed in
a data-dependent mode of an Orbitrap mass spectrometer, and the top
six most abundant ions were selected for CID fragmentation. MS/MS
product-ion spectra were submitted to Mascot (Matrix Science, London,
UK) for peptide identification. Peptide spectra with a Mascot score
of 20 or greater and with no ambiguous hits in a decoy (reversed sequence)
database were manually inspected, and the verified peptides were selected
as the HDX peptide set. HDX spectra were processed with HDX Workbench
software. All HDX data were normalized
to 100% deuterium content, and no correction was made for back exchange
because relative trends provided the needed information. To compare
the difference in HDX at various pH conditions, the averaged deuterium
uptake percentage at standard buffer condition (pH 7.5) was calculated
following 10 s, 30 s, and 1, 2, 6, and 15 min of HDX incubation, and
the deuterium uptake percentages at other pHs following adjusted incubation
times were calculated and subtracted from those at the standard condition.

pH Dependence of Amide Hydrogen–Deuterium Exchange Rate
Determining the pH dependence of the amide hydrogen exchange rate
was previously described by a time-window expansion method to deconvolve
the pH effect from protein conformational changes according to eq ()where A is the frequency
factor, and Ea is the activation energy
of the dominate base-catalyzed amide hydrogen exchange reaction in
the range of pH 5–10. When the temperature was constant, a
simple equation (eq ) can be derived from eq  to calculate the ratio of amide hydrogen exchange
rate constants that are applicable to two pH conditions:According to eq , the
intrinsic HDX rate decreases 107.5–x-fold when decreasing the pH from pH 7.5 to pH x (x = 7.0, 6.5, 6.0, 5.5, 5.0). Thus, to have the
same amount of amide hydrogen exchanged at all pH conditions, one
needs to deconvolve this effect by converting the exchange times referenced
to a standard condition (pH 7.5, 4 °C) as shown in Table . After time conversion, the HDX time points at
all conditions were converted to 0 s, 3 s, 10 s, 30 s, 1 min, 2 min,
6 min, 15 min, and 1 h.

Results and Discussion
HDX Dynamics of Diphtheria
Toxin T Domain at Neutral pH
We first investigated the dynamics
of native diphtheria toxin by
performing HDX experiments at neutral pH (pH 7.5). Under these conditions,
the protein is in membrane-incompetent conformation, which corresponds
to the one existing prior to endosomal acidification. HDX provides
useful insight into protein structure because the rate of HDX is affected
by hydrogen bonding and solvent accessibility of the backbone amides., In this study, HDX and peptic digestion yielded 123 peptides covering
100% of the T domain sequence across all pH conditions and all on-exchange
times. The large number of peptides generated from online pepsin digestion
results in multiple overlapping peptides covering most T-domain regions,
providing additional information for HDX over small sequence intervals.
The only exception is found in region TH2 and the loop connecting
TH2 and TH3 (residue 221–241), where only one long peptide
spanning the entire region was generated by pepsin digestion. The
resistance to pepsin digestion may be due to the locally low hydrophobicity
and the tendency of pepsin to cleave after bulky hydrophobic amino
acid residues. Interestingly, a previous circular dichroism (CD) and
molecular dynamics (MD) study suggested that formation of a water-competent
state at low pH is accompanied by partial loss of secondary structure
owing to unfolding of helices TH1 and TH2. Thus, it is necessary to obtain localized HDX information for TH2.
To this end, we carried out a complementary set of HDX experiments
using Fungal protease type XIII, an acidic protease that was previously
demonstrated to improve digestion efficiency. Fortunately, protease type XIII digestion successfully generated
11 overlapping peptides covering region 221–241.

We selected
the relative extents of HDX for a combination of 41 peptic peptides
and 11 protease XIII digested peptides as representative peptides;
the basis for selection is to obtain sufficient short and overlapping
peptides to cover most of the protein sequence. HDX at specific incubation
times are then mapped onto the crystal structure of T domain, as shown in Figure .
The X-ray crystal structure shows that the T domain is composed of
three layers of α-helices and flexible surface loops connecting
the helices. As expected, we found rapid
HDX for the regions that are dynamic and lack structure (loops), whereas
regions with highly defined secondary structures (helices) are less
solvent-exposed and more H-bonded, generally exchanging slowly (&lt;50%
after 1 h of incubation) and showing a higher degree of protection.
Regions that are most protected from HDX are the C-terminal TH8 (residues
328–335) and TH9 (residues 360−367) located in the center
core of T domain, where less than 5% of exchange occurs during the
entire time course of the experiment. Moreover, helices in close contact
with the hydrophobic core of the T domain (e.g., TH3 (residues 241–249,
250–255) and TH5 (residues 281−284)) are also highly
protected from exchange, and the maximal exchange is less than 5%
after 1 h of incubation. In addition, peptides derived from the helices
remote to the center core of T domain (TH4, residues 261–273;
TH6, residues 298−304; TH7, residues 305−315), despite
having secondary structure, are very dynamic and must frequently undergo
local unfolding. As a result, TH4 and TH6 exchange much more rapidly
than TH3, 5, and TH8–9, with over 50% of amide hydrogens exchanged
after 1 h of incubation.

HDX dynamics of monomeric DTT at physiological
pH condition (pH
7.5). The ribbon diagrams are colored according to the relative percentage
of deuterium uptake of peptides mapped onto the structure of T domain (PDB: 1MDT). Histidine residues are shown as spheres. Each color-coded
structure corresponds to a selected on-exchange time at pH 7.5. The
color code is shown at the bottom of the figure. Sequences that could
not be detected by HDX are colored in gray. All time points were corrected
to standard condition at pH 7.5 and 4 °C.

pH-Dependent HDX Analysis of T Domain Reveals Two Conformational
Transitions
The X-ray crystal structure of the water-soluble
T domain at physiological pH provides a starting point for studying
its low pH-induced conformational change. To get a detailed picture
of how pH mediates the conformational switching of the T domain, we
performed a comprehensive pH-dependent HDX analysis of the T domain
at six pHs ranging from pH 7.5 to 5.0 with an interval of 0.5. These
pH values were selected to be associated with the pH range in the
endosome. Because the intrinsic HDX rate also changes with pH, we
need to deconvolve the pH effect by converting the on-exchange times
at low pH conditions into those at a standard condition, as first
demonstrated by Humaro, and elaborated
later by Griffin. Owing to the wide range
of pHs and, thus, the large time–conversion factor used in
this study, the longest incubation time at pH 7.5 was restricted to
1 h, and the corresponding incubation time (13 d, 4 h) at pH 5.0 was
eliminated because the T domain monomer is vulnerable to long-term
storage in solution and is prone to aggregate, as shown in Table .

The shifts in the centroid mass of isotopic
patterns of peptic peptides at all on-exchange time points under six
pH conditions were measured, and the deuterium incorporation percentage
was plotted as a function of incubation time (after applying the pH-dependent
time correction). A complete set of deuterium incorporation plots
are shown in , and selected deuterium incorporation plots are shown in Figure . Upon close inspection of the selected pH-dependent
deuterium incorporation plots, we found three distinct HDX patterns:
(1) N-terminal and middle region helices TH1–8 (Figure a–h,j–k), (2) C-terminal interhelical
loop TL8–9 and hydrophobic TH9 (Figure l–n), and (3) unstructured loops TL7–8 and TL9 (Figure i and o). For the first pattern, all helices remain
folded in their native state (W-state) between pH 7.5 and pH 6.5 (blue,
cyan, and green curves), but become flexible and undergo two conformational
transitions at pH 6.0 (yellow curve) and pH 5.5 (orange curves), characterized
by two major increases in HDX. Other studies reported that, between
pH 7.5 and pH 6.0, the T domain undergoes conformational rearrangement
into a more solvent-exposed membrane competent (W+) state,,, and our results are consistent
with those outcomes. Interestingly, the transition midpoint between
the native and the membrane-competent state was calculated to be pH
6.2,,, a pH condition
close to one used in this study (pH 6.0). Thus, one may infer that
the extent of HDX represents the combined structural dynamics of both
native conformation (W) and the membrane-competent (W+)
conformation.

HDX kinetic curves of peptides HDX under all pH conditions.
HDX
kinetic curves show three characteristic patterns: (1) Low D% at pH ≥ 6.5, high D% at pH ≤
5.5, and intermediate D% at pH 6, (a–h, j–k);
(2) no differences for all pH conditions, (i,o); (3) increase in D% when increasing pH to 6.5, protection in HDX at pH ≤
5.5, (l–n). All time points were corrected to standard condition
at pH 7.5 and 4 °C. Secondary features were added to all kinetic
curves: for example, a) TH1 represents helix1 in T domain; (i) solid
line represents loop between helix 7 and 8.

To investigate this possibility, we carefully inspected the
mass
spectra of peptides across the entire T domain sequences at pH 6.
No HDX pattern shows a bimodal distribution, suggesting that the majority
of the T domain has already transitioned into the membrane-competent
state at pH 6.0. At pH 5.5, the transition into the membrane-competent
state is complete, and the N-terminal helices unfold more (show less
protection to HDX), further exposing the hydrophobic core and allowing
formation of oligomer. The direct evidence for the oligomer is found
in the second pattern of HDX kinetics observed in the C-terminal interhelical
loop TL8–9 and TH9, which undergoes a similar conformational
transition at pH 6.0, but then shows HDX protection at pH 5.5 and
pH 5.0, presumably owing to subsequent formation of oligomers. Unlike
the structured helices, the third type of HDX was found for most interhelical
loops. Owing to the fast HDX for flexible loops and the lack of structural
protection from adjacent helices, the HDX kinetics curves in most
interhelical loops reach plateaus at early time points at pH 7.5 and
do not change at low pH when the structure unfolds.

To elucidate
the structural transition at each lower pH, we compared
the time-averaged deuterium uptake percentage in the same peptide
between the standard pH and the low pH of seven exchange time points.
The differences in averaged deuterium uptake percentage of selected
peptides were mapped onto the crystal structure of the T domain, as
shown in Figure . In general, a positive value
represents an increase in deuterium exchange (less protected) in that
region of the T domain at low pH, whereas a negative value represents
a decrease in deuterium exchange (increase in protection). Previous
studies demonstrated that the acid-induced conformational rearrangement
and the insertion of T domain occur in two steps of protonation., The initial protonation occurs in bulk solution, which results in the structural conversion from a native
state (W) to a membrane-competent state (W+).

Averaged deuterium
uptake differences between a low pH state and
standard state (pH 7.5)mapped onto crystal structure of DTT (PDB: 1MDT). The color code
(see legend) represents the differential HDX between a low pH condition
and the standard pH condition; the regions in the crystal structure
colored in white are not detected by HDX. Protonation of histidine
residues (shown as spheres) is implicated in modulating pH-dependent
refolding of the T-domain.

There have been many structural and biological studies addressing
the important role of histidine protonation in the formation of a
membrane-competent state (W+),,,,, a critical step in inducing membrane binding at pH
6. As expected, after decreasing the pH to 6.0, a modest increase
in HDX occurs mainly in the interface between N-terminal TH1–4
and C-terminal hydrophobic TH8–9, corresponding to the partial
unfolding of N-terminal layer triggered by the repulsive electrostatic
forces between protonated histidine residues (shown as spheres in
Figure  and Figure ), and the initial separation between the N- and C- segments. In
addition, the decrease in HDX protection may also be due to the loss
of secondary structure, measured by CD and, based upon MD simulations,
a loss that may be due to unfolding of TH1 and TH2. In the presence of the membrane, the second protonation
step would promote the insertion of the TH8–9 helical hairpin
into lipid bilayers. In the absence of the membrane, however, the
T domain aggregates easily and forms high oligomers at pH ≤
5.5, as shown by size-exclusion chromatography and UV-absorbance measurements
(). Note
that the chromatography experiments were carried out at a higher protein
concentration (∼20–30 μM), which would explain
the formation of the dimer already at pH 6, while the first signs
of oligomerization by HDX were not observed until pH 5.5, as described
in the next section. Indeed, our HDX results reveal a significant
decrease in HDX for the C-terminal TH9 after decreasing the pH to
5.5, indicating the formation of an oligomer. The strong increase
in deuterium uptake in TH 1–4 suggests the N-terminal region
further unfolds and releases the initially buried hydrophobic C-terminal
TH8–9. The increase in deuterium exchange for TH 8 is possibly
due to the loss of contact from nearby N-terminal helices.

In
summary, we are able to demonstrate that the structural destabilization
in the N-terminal segment of the T domain likely unpacks the overall
folded structure, leading to separation between the N-terminal and
C-terminal segments at pH 6.0, as previously suggested on the basis
of fluorescence experiments and MD simulations. At pH 5.5, the T domain further unfolds, resulting in the
exposure of its initially buried C-terminal hydrophobic helices (TH8–9)
and subsequent oligomerization.

Formation of the Oligomerization
Interface T Domain at pH 5.5
Careful analysis of the data
presented in Figure i–n indicates that
the T domain forms an oligomer at
pH 5.5, and suggests the likely interface that leads to this process.
Specifically, the exchange of the outside helix TH9 appears to be
lower than that of the internal helix TH8. This apparent contradiction
can be rationalized by assuming that the additional protection for
TH9 is coming from the interaction with another TH9 helix, belonging
to another T domain molecule in the oligomer. Many previous studies
have suggested that the most hydrophobic helices TH8 and TH9 form
a transmembrane structure upon insertion into the membrane bilayer;,, thus, it is not surprising that,
in the absence of the membranes, these helixes will nucleate oligomerization
via a hydrophobic effect. To examine the dimerization interface of
the T domain dimer formed at pH 5.5, we compared HDX of the T domain
between pH 7.5 and pH 5.5. As shown in Figure , TH9 (residues 360–367) and the interhelical loop (residues
351–355 and 356–360) undergo slower HDX at pH 5.5 and
pH 5.0, indicating formation of a new structural feature involving
these regions. That feature is likely oligomer formation.

Unexpectedly,
TH8, despite its hydrophobic features and involvement in membrane
insertion, does not show any protection in HDX kinetics at pH 5.5.
A careful inspection of the mass spectra, however, reveals a distinct
HDX pattern for TH 8, as is shown in Figure . Unlike peptides 351–355 (loop), 356–360 (loop), and
360–367 (TH9), TH8 (residues 333–338, and residues 338–350)
after 2 min (adjust time) of exposure to the deuterated buffer showed
bimodal distributions in their mass spectra at pH 5.5 and pH 5.0.
The major higher mass distribution in TH 8 (residues 333–338
and 338–350) suggests that the majority of T domain further
unfolds at pH 5.5, whereas the minor lower mass distribution corresponds
to a small population of the T domain that shows HDX protection at
pH 5.5, indicating the involvement of oligomerization. In addition,
the relative population of the lower mass distribution increases when
the pH was dropped to 5.0, where the acidic pH further induces the
formation of the oligomer.

Selected mass spectra of peptides in the aggregation
interface
after 2 min (adjusted time) exposure to deuterated buffer at pH 7.5
(blue), pH 6.0 (yellow), pH 5.5 (orange), and pH 5.0 (red).

In this way, we are able to demonstrate
that, at pH 5.5, the T
domain further unfolds, allowing the C-terminal hydrophobic hairpin
(TH 8, residues 333–350; TH 9, residues 360–367) and
the interhelical loop TL8–9 (residues 351–360) to be
exposed to aqueous environment, creating a hydrophobic interface for
T domain aggregation in the absence of membranes. Our conclusion is
consistent with previous reports that showed acid-induced aggregation
at or below pH 5.,,

Although the usual explanation for bimodal behavior in HDX
is an
EX1 regime for exchange, we do not consider the bimodal distribution
seen for peptides covering residues 333 to 350 to be due to EX1 behavior.
If EX1 exchange were occurring, we would expect the abundance of the
low mass component of the distribution to decrease as pH decreases.
Instead, the low mass component of the bimodal distribution increases,
consistent with an alternate explanation that the increasing protection
is due to oligomerization.

Conclusions
In
this study, we demonstrated the use of HDX MS to gain insight
into the pH-dependent conformational changes of diphtheria toxin T
domain. Effects of pH on intrinsic HDX rates were deconvolved by converting
the on-exchange times at low pH conditions into times under our “standard
condition” (pH 7.5). The results from this solution-based study
extend our understanding from the high-resolution static crystal structures
by providing a more detailed picture of the pH-dependent structural
rearrangement that precedes membrane insertion. As illustrated in
Figure , when the solution pH reaches 6, the
T domain undergoes a conformational refolding into a membrane-competent
state (W+), triggered by the protonation of histidine residues.
The repulsive electrostatic static interaction between these protonated
histidine resides results in the loss of contact between N- and C-terminal
segments, and the exposure of the hydrophobic hairpin (TH8–9)
to the aqueous environment. At pH 5.5, the T domain further unfolds
to expose the C-terminal hydrophobic hairpin (TH 8, residues 333–350;
TH 9, residues 360–367) and the interhelical loop (TL 8–9),
providing a hydrophobic surface for subsequent oligomerization.

Cartoon illustration
of pH-dependent conformational change of DTT
in aqueous solution. N-terminal region, middle region, and C-terminal
region are shown in green, blue, and red, respectively.

Although pH-dependent studies of HDX at varying
pHs are not common,
this approach can be readily applied to the analysis of other proteins
that change conformation with pH. In the future, we plan to test the
applicability of fast photochemical oxidation of proteins (FPOP), with and without lipids to provide even more detailed insights on
this important phenomenon. We expect that FPOP will be less sensitive
to pH than HDX. We also plan to study mutants to uncover the role
of His protonation on the pH-induced structural changes of T domain
in diphtheria toxin T domain.

Supporting Information Available
HDX kinetic curves of all peptic
peptides and size-exclusion chromatograph. This material is available
free of charge via the Internet at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bi500893y_si_001.pdf

Funding was
provided by the National Institutes of Health, NIGMS 8 P41 GM103422–35
to M.L.G. and GM069783 to A.S.L.

The authors declare no
competing financial interest.

