Muscle contraction− causes a left ventricle of a heart muscle to squeeze blood into
an aorta and a right ventricle to squeeze blood into a pulmonary artery.
The afterloads imposed by aorta and artery are different, implying
that mechanical requirements of the two ventricles should be different.
In fact, differences have been observed in the contractile performance
between left and right ventricular myocytes in dilated cardiomyopathy and congestive heart failure. Differences were observed in energy usage of healthy LVs
and RVs., Samarel showed an increased level of fractional
synthesis and degradation of myosin heavy chain and light chains,
but not actin, in the left compared to the right ventricular free
wall. Sordahl observed that mitochondria isolated from the right ventricles had
rates of phosphorylation of respiration lower than those of left ventricular
mitochondria. The proteomic differences between LVs and RVs have recently
been observed. However, Wikman-Coffelt
and her collaborators found no differences
in stress development, twitch duration, work performance, or power
among LVs and RVs in dogs. The two ventricular muscles are morphologically
identical. To the best of our knowledge, the issue of mechanical differences
between LV and RV muscles has not been resolved.

This report
shows that on a mesoscopic scale (when only a few molecules
are studied) the two ventricular muscles are different. Specifically,
the probability distribution of spatial orientations of actin in the
thin filaments, as well as the cross-bridge cycle, is different in
LVs and RVs. We were motivated to study a few molecules by the fact
that the mean values of a sufficiently large number of independent
random measurements, each with a well-defined expected value and well-defined
variance, will be approximately normally distributed. Therefore, when whole ventricles are studied, containing
at least 1018 molecules of actin or myosin (the left ventricle
of a B6 mouse typically weighs 30 mg), there is no hope of observing
differences between distributions of molecules within ventricles.
With regard to kinetics, an argument that a small number of molecules
must be studied can also be made. Force-generating molecules are unsynchronized,
and macroscopic measurements generate only the average values. The
process of averaging large assemblies removes individual contributions,
and information about the kinetics is lost., In contrast, when only a few molecules are studied, the value of
a variable is affected by fluctuations around the average. Fluctuations are caused by chemical reaction, and when the number of observed molecules is
small, fluctuations can be very large. The relative size of fluctuations
depends on the number of molecules under observation N as √N/N. In our experiments,
there were typically three to six molecules, and the corresponding
fluctuations were ∼5–41%. In contrast, if we are dealing
with an N on the order of 1018 molecules
of actin or myosin, the relative fluctuation of a signal is only 0.0000001%,
much too small to be detected.

Actin molecules in thin filaments
were significantly less well
ordered in rigor LVs than RVs. Kinetic analysis revealed that cross-bridges
from RVs as compared to LVs displayed a 2-fold decrease in the rate
of execution of a power stroke and a 36% decrease in the rate of dissociation
from thin filaments. The fact that an increase in macroscopic tension
has not been observed earlier suggests that two effects cancel each
other. We speculate that the differences between ventricles arise
because of the variation of external load between LVs and RVs.

Materials
and Methods
Chemicals and Solutions
All chemicals were from Sigma-Aldrich
(St. Louis, MO). Alexa633-labeled phalloidin (AP) and unlabeled phalloidin
(UP) were from Molecular Probes (Eugene, OR). The chemical skinning
solution contained 50% glycerol, 1% Triton X-100, 10–8 M Ca2+, 3.5 mM free Mg2+, 7 mM EGTA, 2.5 mM
Mg-ATP2–, 20 mM Tris (pH 7.0), 15 mM creatine phosphate,
and 15 units/mL phosphocreatine kinase. The contracting solution contained
50 mM KCl, 10 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.5), 5 mM MgCl2, 0.1 mM
CaCl2, 5 mM ATP, 20 mM creatine phosphate, and 10 units
of 1 mg/mL creatine kinase/mL. The relaxing solution was the same
as the contracting solution, but Ca2+ was replaced with
2 mM EGTA. The Ca rigor solution contained 50 mM KCl, 10 mM Tris-HCl
(pH 7.5), 2 mM MgCl2, and 0.1 mM CaCl2.

Preparation
of Ventricles
Whole hearts of healthy 6-month-old
female C57BL/6 mice were stored for a few weeks at −80 °C
[gift of N. Sumien, Department of Pharmacology, University of North
Texas Health Science Center (UNTHSC); fresh hearts were provided by
R. Berg, Department of Cell Biology and Immunology, UNTHSC]. Hearts
were washed with a cold dissecting solution (50 mM KCl, 5 mM MgEGTA,
and 15% glycerol) to wash out ATP without causing contraction. Right
and left ventricles were dissected in the dissecting solution in the
cold room. They were then chemically skinned by being placed in a
skinning solution [15% glycerol, 3.5 mM MgCl2, 20 mM Tris
(pH 7.0), 1% Triton X-100, 7 mM EGTA, 2.5 mM ATP, 15 mM creatine phosphate,
and 15 units/mL phosphocreatine kinase] for 24 h at 4 °C. After
Triton had been washed out, they were either used immediately or stored
for up to 3 weeks at −80 °C.

Preparation of Myofibrils
Ventricles were washed three
times for 0.5 h with an ice-cold EDTA rigor solution [50 mM KCl, 10
mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.5), and 5 mM EDTA] for 30 min to wash out ATP present
in the skinning solution without causing contraction. They were then
washed thoroughly with the Ca rigor solution and homogenized in the
Cole-Palmer LabGen 125 homogenizer for 10 s followed by homogenization
for a further 10 s after a cooling period of 30 s.

Cross-Linking
To inhibit shortening, 1 mg/mL myofibrils
were incubated for 20 min at room temperature with 20 mM water-soluble
cross-linker 1-ethyl-3-[3-(dimethylamino)propyl]carbodiimide (EDC).− The reaction was stopped by adding 20 mM DTT. The pH of the solution
remained unchanged at 7.5 throughout the time course of reaction.
The absence of shortening was verified by observing myofibrils irrigated
with the contraction solution in a Nomarski microscope.

Labeling of
Thin Filaments
AP (10 nM) was mixed with
10 μM UP and the mixture added to 1 mg/mL myofibrils for 10
min at room temperature. Figure 1S of the  shows a typical image of a ventricular myofibril.
Phalloidin is known to impose a higher stiffness on thin filaments but does not alter their function.,

Number of Observed Myosin Molecules
To determine the
number of Alexa-labeled phalloidin molecules under observation, the
instrument was calibrated to determine the fluorescence intensity
caused by a known number of molecules of Alexa-labeled phalloidin.
This number was determined by fluorescence correlation spectroscopy
(FCS). At delay time zero, the autocorrelation function (ACF) of fluctuations
caused by diffusion of free AP is equal to the inverse of the number
of molecules contributing to the fluctuations [N =
1/ACF(0)].,, A calibration was made by plotting the number of AP molecules versus
the rate of photon arrival. It indicated that the number of photons
collected in a second from a single Alexa633-labeled phalloidin molecule
illuminated with ∼1 μW of laser power was 1200. An example
of the fluorescent signal is shown in Figure 2S of the . Typically, there were
three to six molecules in the observational volume (OV). The OV (1.7
μm3) was estimated by measuring the fwhm of axial
and lateral dimensions of an image of 20 nm fluorescent beads and
then making a three-dimensional (3D) Gaussian approximation However, it must be emphasized that as long
as the number of molecules is mesoscopic, the exact number does not
matter; i.e., three molecules should give the same result as 30 molecules,
etc.

Each experiment lasted 20 s and included 2 million experimental
data points. Because a characteristic lifetime of one fluctuation
is on the order of milliseconds, each
data set was binned (smoothed) to contain 20000 fluctuations. If X is the number of fluctuations detected, the precision
of the measurement is approximately equal to 1/√X. Hence, the precision of our experiment is ∼0.5%.

Time-Resolved
Anisotropy Measurements
To ascertain
whether the phalloidin probe is immobilized so that the transition
dipole of the fluorophore reflects the orientation of the protein,
we measured the decay of anisotropy of AP inserted into myofibrils.
Anisotropy is defined as r = (I∥ – I⊥)/(I∥ + 2I⊥). The fluorescence anisotropy was measured by the time domain technique
using a FluoTime 200 fluorometer (PicoQuant, Inc.) at room temperature.
The excitation was provided by a 635 nm pulsed diode laser, and the
observation was conducted through a 670 nm monochromator with a supporting
650 nm long pass filter. The full width at half-maximum (fwhm) of
the pulse response function was &lt;100 ps, and the time resolution
was &lt;10 ps. The intensity decays were analyzed by a multiexponential
model using FluoFit (PicoQuant, Inc.).

Data Collection
The myofibrils were placed on a scanning
stage of a PicoQuant MT 200 inverse time-resolved fluorescence instrument
coupled to an Olympus IX 71 microscope. The stage was rotated to align
vertically a myofibril under observation. Before each experiment,
the fluorescence of an isotropic solution of a small dye with a long
fluorescence lifetime (rhodamine 700, which has zero anisotropy) was
measured to make sure that the parallel (∥) and perpendicular
(⊥) channels received an equal amount of emitted light. A 640
nm laser beam modulated at 20 MHz was focused by an Olympus 60×,
NA 1.2 water immersion objective to the diffraction limit on the fluorescent
part of a myofibril. The power delivered to each half-sarcomere was
adjusted within a range of 1–2 μW to obtain a similar
photon rate for each myofibril. If the power is not equal, the differences
between data sets become statistically interpretable; ∼25–50
myofibrils were examined. We measured the polarization of fluorescence
(PF) rather than steady-state anisotropy (R). The
PF is the normalized ratio of the difference between ∥ and
⊥ components of the fluorescent light emitted by the dye. The
relation between the two is PF = R/(2 + R). Dos Remedios, Morales, and others have shown that PF is a sensitive
indicator of the conformation of the transition dipole of the fluorophore.,,−

Statistical Analysis
The rate constants
were measured
from the slope of the autocorrelation function. A typical ACF was
a single rectangular hyperbola that was linearized as shown in Figure
3S of the . The slope
was determined by the best square fit by Origin (version 8.6, OriginLab
Corp., Northampton, MA). Comparisons between groups were performed
using an unpaired Student’s t test (Sigma
Plot 11, Systat Software, Inc., San Jose, CA). The differences were
deemed significant when P &lt; 0.05. SigmaPlot 11
was used to compute histograms. Origin was used to compute autocorrelation
functions.

Results
Distribution of Actin Orientations
Experiments were
conducted in rigor. Rigor XBs are rigidly attached to actin monomers.
Therefore, their fluorescence transition dipoles are mostly immobilized,
and their steady-state anisotropy (SSA) values are high (Figure b). Deviations of polarization values from the mean
arise from the fact that not all rigor bonds are precisely the same.

The probability distribution of polarized fluorescence data is
best represented in the form of a histogram, a plot of polarization
versus probability of it occurring within a given experiment. Examples
of histograms of the experiments on LVs and RVs are shown in the top
and bottom panels, respectively, of Figure . The degree of actin disorder is best expressed by the value of
the full width at half-maximum of a histogram (fwhm). It measures
the width of the distribution at the point where the maximal probability
is the largest. All data are summarized in
Table .

Examples of distributions of polarization
values of actin transition
dipoles in rigor.

Widths
of Angular Distributions of
Actin Transition Dipoles in Rigor LVs and RVs
 	fwhm	polarization	counts/ms	
LV	0.438 ± 0.069	–0.416 ± 0.057	8.756 ± 2.774	
RV	0.339 ± 0.144	–0.762 ± 0.276	6.171 ± 2.029	
The results
are averages of 25
experiments on different LVs and RVs. Errors are standard deviations.

fwhm values of actins of RVs
were significantly narrower (better
ordered) than those of LVs. The difference between LVs and RVs is
statistically significant (two-tailed t = 2.986; P = 0.004, with 42 degrees of freedom). The 95% confidence
interval of this difference ranged from 0.03210 to 0.16590. The difference
in the polarization values was extremely statistically significant
(the two-tailed P value is &lt;0.0001 with 42 degrees
of freedom). The 95% confidence interval of this difference ranged
from 0.22968 to 0.46232. The difference in counts per millisecond
(fluorescence intensity) was statistically insignificant.

We
report the fluorescence intensity of the signal because in static
experiments it is crucial that the mean fluorescence intensity be
taken into account. This is because the fwhm of the Gaussian distribution
of polarizations depends not only on the properties of muscle but
also on the strength of the signal. Strong Gaussian signals give small
fwhms, and weak signals give large fwhms. Importantly, in our experiments,
the difference between intensities of LV and RV signals was insignificant.

Another way to characterize differences between LVs and RVs is
to measure their skewness and kurtosis (Table ). Skewness is a measure of the lack of symmetry of a distribution.
The skewness of an ideal Gaussian distribution is 0. Kurtosis is a
measure of whether the data are peaked or flat relative to the normal
distribution. High-kurtosis histograms have a distinct peak near the
mean. Conversely, low-kurtosis histograms have a flat top near the
mean rather than a sharp peak. The kurtosis of an ideal Gaussian distribution
is 0.

Skewness and Kurtosis of the Distribution
of Actin Orientations
 	skewness	excess kurtosis	
rigor LV	1.141 ± 0.172	0.785 ± 0.467	
rigor RV	2.187 ± 0.655	3.599 ± 2.491	
From 25 experiments
on different
LVs and RVs. Errors are standard deviations.

The difference in skewness was extremely statistically
significant
(t = 5.589; P &lt; 0.0001, with
42 degrees of freedom). The 95% confidence interval of this difference
ranges from −1.05619 to −0.49581. The difference in
kurtosis was also extremely statistically significant (t = 5.501; P &lt; 0.0001, with 42 degrees of freedom).
The 95% confidence interval for the difference in means ranges from
−4.233 to −1.959.

The fact that kurtosis of rigor
distributions of RV muscles is
high suggests that XBs bind to actin predominantly in a single orientation;
i.e., binding is stereospecific. This seems not to be the case in
LVs. The point is further argued in the .

Relaxation as a Negative Control
During relaxation,
XBs do not make contact with actin filaments, which results in a disorder., We expected histograms of the polarization of fluorescence of actin
to be the same for both ventricles. This was indeed the case. The
examples of distributions of actin in relaxation are shown in Figure
4S of the . Data
are summarized in Table .

Widths of Angular Distributions of
Actin Transition Dipoles in Relaxed LVs and RVs
 	fwhm	counts/ms	polarization	skewness	kurtosis	
LV	0.414 ± 0.075	6.476 ± 1.849	–0.631 ± 0.223	1.743 ± 0.567	2.256 ± 2.575	
RV	0.416 ± 0.266	6.791 ± 1.923	–0.822 ± 0.698	1.790 ± 0.571	2.344 ± 3.435	
The results
are averages of 22
experiments with different LVs and RVs. Errors are standard deviations.

None of the differences were
statistically significant. The −0.00216
difference in fwhm was not statistically significant
(t = −0.0359; P = 0.971,
with 42 degrees of freedom). The 95% confidence interval for the difference
in means ranges from −0.124 to 0.119. The −0.315 difference
in the rate of photon arrival was not statistically
significant (t = −0.552; P = 0.584, with 42 degrees of freedom). The 95% confidence interval
for the difference in means ranges from −1.465 to 0.835. The
0.191 difference in polarization was not statistically
significant (t = 1.198; P = 0.237,
with 42 degrees of freedom). The 95% confidence interval for the difference
in means ranges from −0.131 to 0.513. The −0.0463 difference
in skewness was not statistically significant (t = −0.269; P = 0.789, with 42 degrees
of freedom). The 95% confidence interval for the difference in means
ranges from −0.393 to 0.300. The −0.0888 difference
in kurtosis was not statistically significant (t = −0.0963; P = 0.924, with 42
degrees of freedom). The 95% confidence interval for the difference
in means ranges from −1.950 to 1.773.

Kinetics
Kinetics
is extracted from the analysis of
fluctuations., The fluctuations occur because
the transition dipole of actin changes during contraction, with myosin
XBs constantly binding to and dissociating from the thin filaments.
While most of these interactions have no effect on polarization (because
only 1 in 1000 actin monomers is fluorescent), sometimes they do have
an effect (explained in more detail in Figure ). Figure  explains why the fluctations of
the transition dipoles of the few labeled actin molecules provide
insight into the mechanical cycle of XBs. Figure  shows representative examples of autocorrelation functions
of myofibrils from a typical ventricle.

Examples of ACFs of contracting
ventricular myofibrils. The decays
were fit (red line) by a model shown in Figure . This model allows calculation of the rate of the power stroke (k2) and the rate of dissociation of XBs from
thin filaments (k3). Red lines are the
best fits from the model of Mettikola et al., reproduced here in Figure 5S of the . This model includes the rate of binding of XB
to thin filaments (k1), but we were not
able to resolve; it is probably too rapid. We present only averages
of rates k2 and k3. The horizontal axes are on a logarithmic scale. Figure 3S
of the  explains
how the rate constants are calculated after converting a log scale
to a linear scale.

The results of fits to
27 experiments are summarized in Table . A
good measure of the goodness of fit is adjusted R2 (AR2) because it accounts for the
number of degrees of freedom. The best fit gives a value of 1. The
AR2 for the ACF fit was significantly better for the average
value of k3 than that of k2 (t = 4.086; P &lt;
0.001, with 41 degrees of freedom).

Mean Values and Standard
Deviations
of Rate Constants from 27 Experiments
contracting
ventricle	k2 (s-1)	k3 (s-1)	AR2 for k2	AR2 for k3	
LV	0.159 ± 0.086	0.061 ± 0.026	0.639 ± 0.236	0.920 ± 0.103	
RV	0.085 ± 0.035	0.0492 ± 0.008	0.629 ± 0.188	0.972 ± 0.022	
The difference in k2 between
LVs and
RVs was highly statistically significant (t = 4.275; P &lt; 0.001, with 46 degrees of freedom). The 95% confidence
interval for the difference in means ranges from 0.123 to 0.0441.
The difference in k3 was statistically
significant (t = −2.239; P = 0.030, with 51 degrees of freedom). The 95% confidence interval
for the difference in means ranges from 0.0346 to 0.00189.

Discussion
Distribution
of Actin Orientations
This report shows
that on a mesoscopic scale the spatial distribution of actin monomers
(and therefore the degree of order) within thin filaments in LVs and
RVs is different. However, because there have been no confirmed reports
of any amino acid or conformational differences in LVs and RVs of
myosin heavy or light chains, it is commonly believed that the right
and left ventricular muscles responsible for contraction are identical,
yet the afterloads imposed on the LV and RV by aortic and pulmonary
artery pressures cause different mechanical requirements of the two
ventricles. As mentioned above, the whole ventricles contain at least
1018 molecules of actin or myosin. If one makes a sufficiently
large number of independent random measurements, each with a well-defined
expected value and well-defined variance, the distribution will be
approximately normal. Therefore, when
whole ventricles are studied, there is no hope of observing differences
between distributions of polarization of fluorescence (or any other
property) of molecules within ventricles. Via the limitation of the
number of observed molecules in ex vivo ventricles,
it was possible to detect differences in the degree of order. The
fwhm (of polarized fluorescence or any other property of observed
molecules) can be significantly affected only when an individual molecule
makes a substantial contribution to the overall signal. When the number
is small, the orientations that are the most likely to appear first
are the most probable. Less probable ones (those contained in the
outliers of distributions) are less likely to appear. As a consequence,
the histograms of a distribution of a few molecules are mostly populated
by the most likely orientations, lacking the outliers of the distribution.
The lack of outliers magnifies the differences in fwhms. The fact
that kurtosis of rigor distributions of the RV is high indicates that
the data are peaked relative to the normal distribution. This implies
that there is a well-defined orientation of the transition dipole
of actin and therefore of XB that affects this monomer and suggests
that the binding of XBs to actin in RV is stereospecific.

Kinetics
There are three requirements for making kinetic
measurements. First, the data must be obtained ex vivo, not from isolated molecules in vitro. An ensemble
of myosin molecules in muscle cannot be viewed as a collection of
independent motors because individual motors interact mechanically
by accelerating ADP release and increasing the reach of the XBs when
attached. Second, it must be recognized
that in contracting muscle the force-generating molecules act in an
unsynchronized fashion. Thus, to obtain kinetic information, the molecules
have to be synchronized by applying transients or white noise. The alternative is to collect data from a small
assembly of force generators. We chose this alternative, because the
other approaches are difficult to apply in vivo.
Measurements from large assemblies are averages, containing no kinetic
information from all molecules. In contrast, the average of a small
assembly does contain kinetic information in the form of large fluctuations
from the average., Third, ex vivo information must be obtained with a millisecond time resolution,
because XBs are expected to rotate rapidly. Super-resolution microscopy using single molecules in vivo is a conceivable method but has a limited time resolution. We have achieved the necessary time resolution by
sampling a small volume of muscle containing only a few labeled molecules.

We now explain why observing the orientation of actin dipoles provides
information about the kinetics of a XB. As mentioned above, the polarized
fluorescence of the transition dipole of actin fluctuates because
myosin XBs are constantly binding to and dissociating from actin.
While most of these interactions have no effect on polarization (because
only 1 in 1000 actin monomers is fluorescent), sometimes they do have
an effect. This is illustrated in Figure . Fourteen actin monomers
are connected by the tropomyosin double helix that acts as a cooperative
unit.− Each interaction of the myosin head (mostly with the unlabeled actin)
results in no change in the dipole orientation of labeled actin (e.g.,
XBs 2 and 3) because it occurs too far from the labeled actin monomer,
but the few XBs that bind within the cooperative unit (e.g., XB 1)
will cause a change in the orientation of the actin dipole.

Sparse labeling
of myofibrils. Thin filaments are irrigated with
a 0.1% mixture of Alexa633-labeled phalloidin and unlabeled phalloidin.
As a result, only 1 in 1000 actins is labeled (red) and 999 are not
(yellow). The dipole moment of rhodamine is indicated by the black
line. Only XB 1 affects the direction of the actin dipole. The myofibril
is illuminated with 640 nm light. The detector sees only the volume
equivalent to the transparent green ellipsoid of revolution (not drawn
to scale).

The changes in those dipole moments
that are affected by interactions
with myosin heads do reflect the XB cycle (remembering that labeled
actins that are too far from the interacting myosin head and unlabeled
actins do not contribute to the change in signal). The basic cycle
is shown in Figure . In this scheme, based on models of Lymn and Taylor, Coureux, Sweeney, and Houdusse, and Spudich, starting from
panel c, the myosin head (blue) containing products of hydrolysis
is not attached to the thin filament and rotates nearly freely in
the myofilament space as does the transition dipole of Alexa633-labeled
phalloidin (green arrow). The closest labeled actin protomer (red
sphere) also rotates rapidly because it is not restrained by a XB.
Its steady-state anisotropy (SSA) is small (0.041, inset in panel
c). In the next step (panel a), myosin binds to actin with a rate k1. At the same time, the SSA of actin increases
to 0.180 (inset of panel a). The next step (panel b) involves the
release of phosphate and ADP (not necessarily in that order), during
which a XB executes a power stroke with a rate constant k2 to bind strongly to actin. Actin rotation now becomes
restricted [SSA = 0.265 (inset of panel b)]. This is followed by XB
binding of a fresh molecule of ATP and dissociation of myosin from
actin at a rate k3. Actin rotation now
becomes more free [SSA = 0.133 (inset of panel d)]. It is a pseudo-first-order
reaction because the concentration of ATP is much greater than the
myosin concentration (i.e., the ATP concentration is constant). Hydrolysis
of ATP with a rate k4 reverses the power
stroke and reprimes the head. This conformational change is not recorded.

Conventional
model of XB action showing that the steady-state orientation
of labeled actin [red sphere; the orientation of phalloidin (its fluorescent
transition dipole) is indicated by a green arrow] is different in
different intermediate states (0.1 mg/mL myofibrils labeled with 0.01
μM AP and 10 μM UP). ATP is T, ADP D, and Pi P.

Observing Actin Rather
Than Myosin XBs
This approach
has several important advantages. First, in mesoscopic measurements,
it is crucial to be able to label a small number of molecules and
to know precisely how many molecules are labeled. Irrigating myofibrils
with the exact ratio of labeled and unlabeled phalloidin allows one
to accomplish this. Second, it avoids measuring the rate of repriming
(back stroke). Omitting it considerably simplifies the analysis. An
autocorrelation function of the four-state cycle is very complex, whereas the three-state cycle proved to be manageable. Third, labeling of actin with phalloidin is
very reproducible because labeling of
actin involves only gentle irrigation of myofibrils with the protein
at room temperature, whereas direct labeling of myosin involves labeling
light chain 1 (LC1) and exchanging it with myofibrillar LC1 under
harsh conditions (0.5 h at 37 °C in the presence of trifluoroperazine). However, there are disadvantages of labeling
actin. Labeling myosin directly with bifunctional rhodamine is well-understood., Part of a XB that undergoes the most prominent rotation, its regulatory
light chain, is probed directly, and in contrast to XB labeled with
Alexa633-labeled phalloidin, the dipole moment of bifunctional rhodamine
in rigor is 100% immobilized by thin filaments.

Conclusions
Summarizing Data about the Distribution of
Actin Orientations
Statistical analysis of rigor muscle revealed
that all static parameters
were different in rigor LVs and RVs. In particular, the fwhm of RV
muscle was significantly smaller than that of LV muscle. This may
reflect the stereospecific character of rigor bond in the RV.

Summarizing Kinetic Data
The rate
of power stroke (k2) of XBs was significantly
higher in the LV
than in the RV. This would have led to the development of more tension.
The rate of dissociation from the thin filament (k3) was also significantly higher in LV muscle. Faster
dissociation would have led to the development of less tension, because
XBs would spend less time in the tension-generating state. The fact
that an increase in macroscopic tension has not been observed suggests
that two effects offset each other. Myosin molecules from left and
right ventricular muscles may be different as a result of differences
in force requirements that could lead to epigenetic changes in DNA.
One possible mechanism is histone deacetylation followed by oxidation
and phosphorylation, to cause histone deacetylases (HDACs) to exit
the nucleus and cause observed differences between ventricles. It
is conceivable that this hypothesis could be tested by knocking out
genes encoding HDACs.

The detection of a few myosin molecules
in an ex vivo ventricle with a millisecond time resolution
is not technically easy. The main problem is that the signals are
weak. Weak Gaussian signals with a low signal-to-noise ratio have
an intrinsically large relative error. This also applies to the ratio
of these signals, as shown by Midde et al. It is thus remarkable that we were able to measure the fwhm and
kinetic constant with relatively high accuracy, in spite of the nonuniform
incorporation of AP into sarcomeres (Figure 1S of the ), differing degrees of
phosphorylation of myofibrils, a relatively
low steady-state anisotropy of AP, and consequently relatively small
differences in anisotropy between different mechanochemical steps.
The photobleaching and light scattering from a sample add to the degree
of error of the results.

More work is required to address the
issues mentioned above and
to determine whether the observed differences between the XBs of mouse
left and right ventricles are characteristic of all mammalian muscles
or whether they are specific for the hearts of small rodents. Further,
it should be mentioned that phosphorylation levels of myosin binding
protein C (MBP-C) may influence the distribution and kinetics of XBs
in ventricles. MBP-C binds to both actin and myosin heads through
the N-terminus. It is believed to stabilize
the binding of the myosin head to the core of the thick filament.
Any of the three sites for phosphorylation of cardiac MBP-C can be
phosphorylated by a variety of kinases. Phosphorylation at some of
these sites causes myosin heads to be released from the core of the
thick filament and become disordered. It is possible that protein
C acts as a signaling molecule, reporting changes in cross-bridges
to actin. Indeed, recent data suggest that MyBP-C may alter the interaction
between cross-bridges and actin.

Supporting Information Available
Figures 1S–5S. This
material is available free of charge via the Internet at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bi501175s_si_001.pdf

Author Contributions
This work
was supported, in whole or in part, by National Institutes of Health
Grants R01 HL071778, R01 AR048622 (to J.B.) ,and R01HL090786 (to J.B.
and Dr. D. Szczesna-Cordary).

The authors declare no
competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
We thank Dr. Nathalie Sumien, Dr. Rance
Berg, and Dr. Irina
Akopova for supplying and dissecting mouse hearts.

Abbreviations
ACFautocorrelation function

APAlexa633-labeled phalloidin

EDCethyl-3-[3-(dimethylamino)propyl]carbodiimide

FCSfluorescence correlation
spectroscopy

fwhmfull width at half-maximum

LVleft ventricle

OVobservational volume

PFpolarization of fluorescence

RVright ventricle

SDstandard deviation

UPunlabeled phalloidin

XBmyosin cross-bridge.

If the distributions
were perfectly
normal, fwhm would equal 2(2 ln 2)1/2 = 2.355 SD (standard
deviation).

Achieving such
a time resolution is
impossible using super-resolution microscopes.− The unsurpassed
spatial resolution of these microscopes is achieved at the expense
of time resolution. Even structured illumination, using a sCMOS cameras
such as a DeltaVision OMX instrument, needs 2 s to image a single slice of a 3D stack. Rapid super-resolution
imaging in live cells can be achieved by analog image processing, but it is unlikely that they can reach the millisecond
time resolution required to follow the conformational changes of myosin
XBs.

