The development
of cell-permeable
synthetic chemical compounds that directly and specifically antagonize
or agonize a biological entity of interest has been hugely beneficial
as they have become tools for probing the mechanism of action of small
molecules, proteins, and organelles. These chemical probes (also known
as tool compounds) are commonly employed in dynamic perturbation contexts
that cannot be mimicked genetically, to modulate both the timing and
the extent of target inhibition and/or activation., Such
contexts are usually essential for unraveling the most proximal biochemical
mechanisms of action for a target of interest within cells and tissues. The specificity of the chemical–target
interaction thus becomes a defining feature for productive tool compounds.
The presence of multiple cellular targets for a chemical probe, especially
if they are unrecognized and mechanistically diverse, can obviously
severely confound interpretation of biological observations associated
with that probe. As such, careful consideration of alternate mechanisms
of action of tool compounds is essential for the constructive application
of chemical probes to biological investigation.,

The thiadiazoleacrylamide XCT 790 is the first potent and selective
inhibitor of estrogen-related receptor α (ERRα)., Its development was motivated by the recognition of ERRα as
a key participant in the regulation of cell differentiation, energy
homeostasis, and metabolic syndromes. The mechanism of inhibition
appears to be the disruption of ERRα–coactivator complexes
upon binding of XCT 790 to the inferred ligand-binding domain of ERRα.− As such, it has since been extensively employed as a tool compound
to directly evaluate the participation of ERRα in numerous cell
biological processes.

From an investigation employing XCT 790
to help elaborate the contribution
of ERRα to oncogenic transformation, we unexpectedly discovered
abrupt and potent activity against mitochondrial energy production.
This activity occurred within minutes in all cell lines tested, and
at doses &gt;25-fold lower than those commonly employed to inhibit
ERRα.
Notably, this activity was completely independent of the expression
of ERRα, the only known target of XCT 790. Measurements of mitochondrial
membrane potential, oxygen consumption, and extracellular acidification
rates indicated acute and dose-dependent uncoupling of oxidation from
phosphorylation in mitochondria by XCT 790, most likely through direct
action as a proton ionophore.

Materials and Methods
Materials
XCT 790, rapamycin, and Compound C were purchased
from Sigma-Aldrich. U0126 was purchased from Cell Signaling Technology.
AICAR was purchased from Toronto Research Chemicals. The following
antibodies were used: phospho-AMPKα (Thr172), AMPKα, phospho-p70
S6 kinase (Thr389), p70 S6 kinase, phospho-mTOR (Ser2448), phospho-LKB1
(Ser428), LKB1, phospho-Raptor (Ser792), phospho-ACC (Ser79), ACC,
phospho-ULK1 (Ser555), COX IV, phospho-p44/42 MAPK (ERK1/2) (Thr202/Tyr204),
and p44/42 MAPK (ERK1/2) from Cell Signaling Technology; ERRα
(V19), VDAC1/2/3 (FL-283), cytochrome c (7H8), BCL2
(C2), and TOM20 (FL-145) from Santa Cruz Biotechnology; and ACTB from
Sigma-Aldrich.

Cell Culture
Human colonic epithelial
cells, HCEC 1CT,
were immortalized by ectopically expressing cyclin-dependent kinase
4 (CDK4) and the catalytic component of human telomerase (hTERT). HCEC 1CTR and HCEC 1CTRP cells were generated
by ectopically expressing KRASV12 and KRASV12 together
with shRNA against P53, respectively. HCEC
growth medium and culture conditions have been described previously. HCT116 and DLD1 colon cancer cell lines were
maintained in DMEM supplemented with 10% FBS and assayed in HCEC medium.
Neonatal human epidermal melanocytes from a lightly pigmented donor
(HEMn-LP) were purchased from Invitrogen and immortalized by ectopically
expressing hTERT and human papilloma virus, HPV16 E6/E7 protein. HEMn-LP
(E6/E7, hTERT) cells were cultured in Medium 254 supplemented with
human melanocyte growth supplement (HMGS) purchased from Invitrogen
with penicillin (100 units/mL) and streptomycin (0.1 mg/mL) from Invitrogen.
MNT1, YUSIT1, A375, YUMAC, YUSIT1, and C8161 human melanoma cell lines
were cultured in Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s medium
(DMEM) from Invitrogen (catalog no. 12430) with 10% FBS from Atlanta
Biologicals and with penicillin (100 units/mL) and streptomycin (0.1
mg/mL). Human bronchial epithelial cells, HBEC3, -30, and -34, were
isolated from three patients and were immortalized by ectopically
expressing CDK4 and hTERT. HBECs were
cultured in Keratinocyte-SFM medium and supplements from Invitrogen
and with penicillin (100 units/mL) and streptomycin (0.1 mg/mL). U2OS
GFP-LC3 cells were cultured in DMEM, 10% FBS, penicillin (100 units/mL),
streptomycin (0.1 mg/mL), 1 mg/mL G418, and 5 μg/mL blasticidin.

Cell Viability Assays
Cells were plated in 96-well
plates and treated with either DMSO (0.5%) or XCT 790 for 72 h. CellTiter-Glo
reagent (Promega) was added and mixed for 2 min on a plate shaker
followed by incubation for 10 min at room temperature. Luminescence
was determined using an EnVision multilabel plate reader.

Immunoblotting
and Pathway Analysis
Cells were lysed
in 50 mM Tris (pH 6.8), 2% sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS), and 10% glycerol.
Samples were separated on SDS–polyacrylamide gels and transferred
to polyvinylidene difluoride (PVDF) membranes for immunoblotting.
AMP kinase (AMPK) activation was assessed by the accumulation of phosphorylated
AMPK at Thr170 and AMPK substrates: phosphorylated Raptor (S792), phosphorylated ULK1 (S555), and phosphorylated ACC (S79). Additionally, Raptor phosphorylation by AMPK inhibits mTOR activation,
leading to decreased mTOR and p70 S6 kinase phosphorylation (Figures D,E and A).

Selective viability and
signaling perturbations by XCT 790. (A)
Normalized cell viability of immortalized human colonic epithelial
cells and colon cancer cell lines or (B) immortalized human melanocytes
and melanoma cell lines 72 h after exposure to XCT 790 at the indicated
doses. Bars indicate means ± the standard deviation (N = 3). (C) Doubling of the populations of HEMn-LP, HEMn-LP
(CDK4/hTERT), and HEMn-LP (E6/E7/hTERT) cells for the indicated times.
(D and E) Whole cell lysates of MNT1 cells, exposed to XCT 790 for
24 (D) or 1 h (E), were assessed for the accumulation of indicated
phosphorylated proteins.

siRNA Transfections
Cells were reverse transfected
using siRNAs targeting LONRF1 (negative control) and ERRα (Dharmacon,
GE Life Sciences). siRNAs were used in pools, each pool containing
four different oligos targeting a specific gene. Seventy-two hours
after being transfected, cells were treated with XCT 790 for the indicated
periods of time followed by immunoblotting or mitochondrial membrane
potential or respiration assays.

Mitochondrial Respiration
and Glycolysis
Oxygen consumption
rates (OCRs) and extracellular acidification rates (ECARs) were measured
with an XF-24 Extracellular Flux Analyzer (Seahorse Bioscience). Cells
were plated at 30K per well density and cultured for 48 h and then
assayed as described previously.

Mitochondrial
Membrane Potential and Mass Analyses
Cells were treated with
either DMSO (0.5%) or XCT 790 (10, 25, or
40 μM) for 15 min, and then the growth medium was removed and
replaced with growth medium containing either DMSO (0.5%) or XCT 790
(10, 25, or 40 μM) with MitoTracker CMXRos and MitoTracker Green
FM probes from Invitrogen and incubated for an additional 15 min.
Cells were then washed with warm growth medium, trypsinized, spun
down, washed with cold PBS, and resuspended in either FACS buffer
[0.1% BSA, 10 mM HEPES (pH 7.4), penicillin (100 units/mL), and streptomycin
(0.1 mg/mL) in Leibowitz’s L15 medium] or PI/RNASE staining
buffer from Invitrogen and immediately processed for fluorescence-activated
cell sorting (FACS) using FACSCalibur (BD Biosciences) and analyzed
with FlowJo.

Results
Estrogen-related receptor
α (ERRα) has recently been
reported to be necessary for enhanced metabolic capacity and anchorage-independent
growth of oncogenic Ras transformed mouse embryonic fibroblasts. To begin to investigate the commonality of ERRα
addiction in RAS- and RAF-driven human tumors, we tested the relative
toxicity of the ERRα inhibitor XCT 790 in a small panel of colon
cancer cell lines, melanoma cell lines, telomerase-immortalized colonocytes,, and melanocytes (Figure A–C). Interestingly, we identified a significant sensitivity
window between tumor-derived cell lines and colonocytes and also found
oncogenic KRAS expression was sufficient to sensitize colonocytes
to XCT 790 (Figure A). However, melanocytes
and melanoma cells were indiscriminately sensitive to doses of XCT
790 10-fold lower than those required to affect the colorectal cancer
cell lines (Figure B). A distributive analysis
of baseline oncogenic pathway activity upon exposure of MNT1 cells
to XCT 790 revealed potent inactivation of the mechanistic target
of rapamycin complex 1 (mTORC1) signaling together with the accumulation
of active AMP kinase (AMPK) as indicated by T172 phosphorylation status
(Figure D). These alterations occurred within
1 h and were uncoupled from the accumulation of ERRα (Figure E). AMPK activation by a low micromolar concentration
of XCT 790 was observed in all cell lines tested, including multiple
melanoma lines (Figure A), telomerase-immortalized
human melanocytes (Figure B), and bronchial
epithelial cells from three different patients (Figure C).

Abrupt AMPK activation
is a common response to XCT 790 in both
normal and cancer cell lines. (A–C) Whole cell lysates from
melanoma cells (A), immortalized human melanocytes (B), and human
bronchial epithelial cells (C) were assessed for the accumulation
of phosphorylated AMPK and AMPK substrates (phosphorylated Raptor
at Ser792 and ACC at Ser79) following exposure to the indicated concentrations
of XCT 790.

Time and dose response
analyses indicated AMPK pathway activation
occurred within 5 min of XCT 790 exposure (Figure A) at concentrations
as low as 390 nM (Figure B). Importantly,
siRNA-mediated ablation of ERRα had no effect on this response,
indicating the participation of an alternate target of XCT 790 (Figure C). A decrease in the ATP concentration, as measured
by a luciferin/luciferase coupled assay, occurred within 20 min of
XCT 790 exposure (Figure D), suggesting that
the observed AMPK activation may be secondary to deregulation of energy
production. To examine this directly, we tested the consequence of
XCT 790 exposure on mitochondrial respiratory potential through measurements
of oxygen consumption and extracellular acidification. We observed
a substantial increase in oxygen consumption rates (OCRs) as soon
as 8 min after XCT 790 exposure (Figure A),
concomitant with an increase in the level of extracellular acidification
(ECAR) (Figure B). An elevated OCR was persistent
at the smallest doses tested but eroded over time in a dose-dependent
fashion (Figure A). The XCT 790-induced OCR
was insensitive to the ATP synthase inhibitor oligomycin or to the
proton ionophore FCCP but collapsed in the presence of the complex
1 inhibitor rotenone (Figure C). These mitochondrial
electron transport chain inhibitors also did not further increase
the ECAR above levels observed with XCT 790 alone (Figure D), suggesting that XCT 790 had induced the maximal
adaptive lactate production downstream of mitochondrial respiratory
defects. Taken together, these observations suggest XCT 790 rapidly
uncouples oxygen consumption from ATP production in intact mitochondria
(Figure A,C). Importantly, these effects were
completely independent of ERRα (Figure E,F) expression or overt alterations in the concentration of mitochondrial
proteins over the time course of the experiment (Figure G).

XCT 790 activates AMPK in a dose-dependent and ERRα-independent
manner. (A) Whole cell lysates from MNT1 cells, exposed to XCT 790
for the indicated periods of time, were assessed for the accumulation
of the indicated phosphorylated proteins by immunoblotting. (B) AMPK
activation was visualized as in panel A following exposure to the
indicated concentrations of XCT 790. (C) The AMPK response to XCT
790 was assessed 72 h after transfection with siRNAs targeting LONRF1
(negative control) or ERRα. (D) Normalized ATP levels in MNT1
cells, exposed to XCT 790 for the indicated periods of time, as measured
by ATP-coupled luciferase assays. Bars indicate means ± the standard
deviation (N = 3).

ERRα-independent perturbation of mitochondrial respiration
by XCT 790. (A–D) OCR (A and C) and ECAR (B and D) were measured
in MNT1 cells, exposed to XCT 790 at the indicated concentrations
8 min before the assay, in the absence (A and B) or presence (C and
D) of mitochondrial electron transport chain inhibitors. (E and F)
OCR (E) and ECAR (F) were measured starting 8 min after XCT 790 exposure
at the indicated doses. Cells were assayed 72 h after transfection
with the indicated siRNAs. Bars indicate means ± the standard
error of the mean (N = 3). (G) Whole cell lysates
from cells treated as described for panels E and F were assessed for
ERRα and representative mitochondrial protein expression by
immunoblotting.

These observations, together
with the capacity of FCCP to mimic
XCT 790 activation of AMPK (Figure A) and
to decrease ATP levels (Figure B) with similar
timing and potency, strongly suggest XCT 790 is a chemical uncoupler
of mitochondrial membrane potential that is independent of the interaction
with ERRα. Direct measurements of Δψ, using MitoTracker
CMXRos, demonstrated a dose-dependent inhibition of mitochondrial
membrane potential (Figure C) by XCT 790 in
the absence of effects on mitochondrial mass (Figure D). The consequent defect in cellular ATP production was evident
as a dramatic inhibition of autophagolysosomal maturation, which requires
a high rate of ATP consumption to fuel lysosomal acidification (Figure E).

XCT 790 is a mitochondrial uncoupler. (A) Result of FCCP
exposure
on AMPK pathway activation measured as described for panels A and
B of Figure . (B) Normalized ATP levels in
MNT1 cells, exposed to FCCP for the indicated periods of time, as
measured by ATP-coupled luciferase assays. Bars indicate means ±
the standard deviation (N = 3). (C and D) Mitochondrial
membrane potential (C) and mass (D) measured by FACS in MNT1 cells,
treated with XCT 790 for 30 min, using mitochondrial dyes MitoTracker
CMXRos and MitoTracker Green FM, respectively. Bar graphs indicate
the means ± the standard deviation of triplicate measurements.
(E) Representative micrographs of U2OS-GFP-LC3 cells treated with
XCT 790 or a carrier at the indicated concentrations for 24 h.

Discussion
Here we find that the
thiadiazoleacrylamide XCT 790, developed
as an ERRα inverse agonist, is a potent mitochondrial uncoupler.
This activity leads to the rapid depletion of cellular ATP pools,
which in turn activates AMPK, a master regulator of metabolic homeostasis.
Importantly, these effects are completely independent of ERRα
activity. ERRα depletion neither mimicked nor rescued the effects
of XCT 790 measured here. XCT 790 is commonly used at concentrations
of 1–20 μM for 8–24 h to examine the biological
significance of ERRα activity in cells.− Rapid XCT 790-induced perturbations of energy production and energy
sensing pathways occurred at much smaller doses. Thus, most, if not
all, reported biological responses to XCT 790 are in the context of
combinatorial inhibition of ERRα and mitochondrial respiratory
activity and should be interpreted accordingly.

The biochemical
phenotype, timing, and dose sensitivity of the
cellular response to XCT 790 are identical to those of the well-studied
proton ionophore, carbonyl cyanide-4-(trifluoromethoxy)phenylhydrazone
(FCCP). This molecule and the closely
related carbonyl cyanide m-chlorophenyl hydrazone
(CCCP) disrupt mitochondrial transmembrane electrochemical gradients
by directly facilitating proton transport across the lipid membrane
barrier., All three chemicals are amphipathic nitriles,
which in the case of FCCP and CCCP is a structural feature that facilitates
discharge of the mitochondrial pH gradient. Thus, it is highly likely
that XCT 790 is also a proton ionophore with a consequent direct mechanism
of action against mitochondrial respiration.

There is considerable
genetic, molecular, and biochemical evidence
that ERRα is a bona fide regulator of energy homeostasis in
cells and tissue. Through interactions with PGC-1α and PGC-1β,
ERRα can directly induce the expression of genes that support
oxidative phosphorylation and mitochondrial biogenesis in response
to changes in energy demand.− Furthermore, XCT 790 can clearly interfere with this activity by
directly dissociating ERRα from its protein cofactors. Thus,
the potent and rapid destruction of mitochondrial membrane potential
by XCT 790, in a manner independent of ERRα activity, is a particularly
confounding phenotype associated with use of this tool compound for
the exploration of ERRα biology.

This work was
supported by the National Institutes of Health (CA71443), the Welch
Foundation (I-1414), and CPRIT (RP110708).

The authors declare no
competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
We thank Ugur Eskiocak and Jerry Shay for providing the colonocytes
used in this study.

