Tau fibrils,
deposited in the
interior of nerve cells, are a defining hallmark of Alzheimer’s
disease (AD) and other fatal neurodegenerative disorders., Fibrillar Tau species can transfer between cells and then recruit
endogenous Tau proteins onto their ends. Multiple lines of evidence indicate that this mechanism could be
responsible for the intracerebral spreading of Tau pathology.− The template-assisted conversion of Tau monomers into fibrils is
reminiscent of the conversion of prions in transmissible spongiform
encephalopathies. Little, though, is known
about the efficiency of this process.

A unique feature of Tau
is that it occurs in six different isoforms. These range between 352 and 441 amino acids in
size and can be classified into two principle groups based on the
number of microtubule binding repeats. Three-repeat (3R) Tau possesses
three semiconserved repeats. Four-repeat (4R) Tau possesses four repeats.
The repeat region comprises ∼90–120 amino acids and
constitutes the core of the Tau fibrils,, whereas the remaining residues form an unstructured fuzzy coat., Fibrils composed of a single Tau isoform can form distinct conformers.− In a templated reaction, a single conformer may propagate indefinitely,
providing a possible explanation for the phenotypic diversity of human
tauopathies. The template-assisted reaction,
as originally described for brain-derived fibrils, offers a powerful tool to investigate the structure of
Tau fibrils. However, the need of large quantities of brain tissue
and elaborate protocols to isolate the fibrils have limited its use.
For prions, it was shown that repetitive cycles of shearing and growth
could amplify the misfolded form, PrPSc. This procedure, which is further potentiated by the inclusion
of anionic cofactors, is generally referred
to as protein misfolding cyclic amplification (PMCA). It is unknown
whether a similar protocol could be adapted for the amplification
of Tau fibrils. Different from the prion protein, which has a distinct
fold, Tau protein is intrinsically disordered., Furthermore, Tau fibrils are significantly less stable in GdnHCl
than PrPSc, and require cofactors for assembly. Despite these differences, we demonstrate that
minute quantities of synthetic Tau fibrils can be amplified in vitro and in crude brain extracts of AD tissue.

Materials
and Methods
Protein Expression and Purification
Four constructs
of Tau were used in this study: K18, K19, htau40, and htau23. The truncated versions of Tau were chosen to
represent only the core of the fibril (K18 for 4R Tau and K19 for
3R Tau). All Tau proteins were expressed
and purified according to previously described protocols., Specifically, cultures of pET28-containing BL21 (DE3) Escherichia coli bacteria in Miller LB broth with
20 μg/mL kanamycin were incubated at 37 °C under agitation
for 16–17 h. This was then diluted 1:100 into fresh medium,
and incubation was continued until the optical density of the solution
reached ∼0.8 at 600 nm. One millimolar isopropyl-β-d-thiogalactopyranoside (IPTG, Gold Biotechnology) was added
to induce protein expression, which continued at 37 °C for 3.5–4
h. The cells were pelleted at 3000g and resuspended
in buffer (20 mM piperazine-N,N′-bis(2-ethanesulfonic acid) (PIPES,
J.T. Baker), pH 6.5, 500 mM NaCl, 1 mM ethylenediaminetetraacetic
acid (EDTA, J.T. Baker), and 50 mM β-mercaptoethanol (MP Biomedicals)).
Resuspended bacteria were stored at −80 °C until purification.

Cells were heated at 80 °C for 20 min and then sonicated to
fracture the cell walls. Cellular debris was removed by centrifugation
at 15 000g for 30 min, after which the supernatant
was added to 55% w/v ammonium sulfate. Tau precipitated during room
temperature incubation for 1 h and was isolated by centrifugation
at 15 000g for 10 min. Pellets were resuspended
in water with 2 mM dithiothreitol (DTT, Gold Biotechnology). Samples
were passed through a 0.45 μm Acrodisc GxF/GHP filter (Pall
Life Sciences) before application onto a Mono S cation exchange column
(GE Healthcare). Protein was eluted via a linear salt gradient (50–1000
mM NaCl, 20 mM PIPES, pH 6.5, 2 mM DTT). Fractions containing the
highest concentration of protein were determined by SDS-PAGE and combined.
The pooled fractions were applied onto a Superdex 200 gel filtration
column (GE Healthcare) and eluted with 20 mM Tris, 100 mM NaCl, 1
mM EDTA, and 2 mM DTT buffer at pH 7.4. Pure Tau was precipitated
at 4 °C overnight by addition of an excess of acetone (K18 and
K19) or methanol (htau23 and htau40). Protein was pelleted at 15 000g and stored in 2 mM DTT acetone at −80 °C.

Tau was monomerized by dissolving the protein pellets in 200 μL
of 8 M guanidine hydrochloride (Thermo Scientific). This was passed
over a PD-10 column (GE Healthcare) to remove denaturant. Protein
was eluted with 10 mM 4-(2-hydroxyethyl)-1-piperazineethanesulfonic
acid (HEPES, J.T. Baker), 100 mM NaCl, and 1 mM NaN3 buffer
at pH 7.4, and concentrations were determined using a bicinchoninic
(BCA) assay (Pierce).

Brain Homogenate Preparation
The
brain tissues used
in this project (AD and tangle-free control) were provided by the
University of California Alzheimer’s Disease Research Center
(UCI-ADRC) and the Institute for Memory Impairments and Neurological
Disorders. Brain tissue was diluted 5-fold with a solution of 5 mM
EDTA and 10 mM HEPES buffer at pH 7.4. The mixture was homogenized
in a Potter–Elvehjem tissue grinder at 250 rpm using SteadyStir
Digital (Fisher Scientific) for 5 min, followed by centrifugation
for 20 min at 16 500g. Supernatant was removed,
and the pellet was resuspended in 2-fold buffer volume. The mixture
was homogenized again with the same settings. All steps were performed
at 4 °C. Protein concentration of total brain homogenate was
determined using a BCA assay. Aliquots were flash frozen and stored
at −80 °C until used.

Amplification of Synthetic
Tau Fibrils
Sonication cycles
(the number of cycles depended on experiment and is specified in the  section) were achieved using a bath sonicator
in which a water-filled microplate horn was coupled to an ultrasonic
processor (QSonica). A single cycle consisted of 5 s sonication pulses
at 5% amplitude. The water temperature was held constant at 37 °C
using a recirculating chiller for the incubation cycles, which were
30 min. The reactions were contained within Nunclon 96-well plates
(Thermo Scientific) and were covered with BioDot Microplate sealing
tape (Dot Scientific). Each well in the microplate corresponded to
an individual experiment. Thioflavin T (ThT, Sigma) was used as the
fluorescent indicator of fibril growth. The following were added to
each well: 10 μM Tau monomer (htau40 or htau23), 40 μM
heparin (Celsus, average MW = 5000), 5 μM ThT, appropriate concentration
of seeds, and additional buffer (100 mM NaCl, 10 mM HEPES, pH 7.4)
to make the total sample volume 200 μL.

Control wells
were run alongside each experiment. A monomer control contained all
components except seeds to show that aggregation of the reaction wells
occurred through amplification, not through spontaneous nucleation.
A ThT-only control was also run to determine the background fluorescent
signal of the dye. This background was subtracted from the experimental
signal. Seeds were formed from K18 and K19 by stirring 25 μM
monomer with 12.5 μM heparin for 3 days at room temperature.
Htau40 and htau23 were formed analogously but were stirred for 8 days
because fibril growth is slower for full-length Tau. All microplate
experiments involved diluting the initial seeds, which was done using
buffer and 40 μM heparin to ensure fibrils remained intact.
Seeds were added to reactions prior to incubation or sonication cycling
and were present according to the molar percentage of seed per monomeric
Tau, 10 μM for all experiments.

Buoyant bulbs were attached
to either side of the microplates to
prevent sinking into the sonicator bath. Following amplification,
the plate was centrifuged at 1650g for 2 min to remove
condensation from the sealing tape. Fluorescence was immediately measured
using a Tecan Infinite M1000 microplate reader. ThT was excited at
440 nm, and spectra were collected by scanning emission from 450–530
nm in 5 nm steps. The Z position of the plate within
the reader was kept constant. Quantification of Tau aggregation was
determined by ThT emission at 480 nm.

In addition to ThT as
a fluorescent readout, fibrils were sedimented
and analyzed on an SDS-PAGE gel to monitor amplification over successive
cycles. Experiments were performed by preparing four microplate wells
with the same components. Following ThT measurement, these wells were
pooled and centrifuged at 100 000g for 30
min at 10 °C. Pellets were washed with 1 mL of buffer, dissolved
in 75 μL of 1× SDS-PAGE sample buffer, and run on a corresponding
gel.

Using the techniques outlined here, htau40 proceeded ∼60
cycles before spontaneous monomer growth, as indicated by control
experiments in which fibril seeds were excluded. Htau23, which grew
less efficiently than htau40, could undergo ∼80 cycles before
spontaneous monomer growth.

Amplification of Tau Fibrils from Brain Homogenate
Experimental parameters were altered for use on brain tissue to
account
for interference from extracellular components. Reactions were carried
out with 5 μM htau40 and 20 μM heparin in buffer (100
mM NaCL, 10 mM HEPES, pH 7.4). Brain tissue homogenate was prepared
for amplification by creating a 10% dilution using reaction buffer
followed by the addition of 0.1% Triton X-100. The homogenate was
then sonified in the bath sonicator at 5% amplitude for 60 s. A total
weight of 20 μg of brain tissue (protein mass) was added to
each 200 μL final reaction volume. Using the same power settings
as those with recombinant material, 20 cycles of sonication and incubation
were performed.

Negative Stain Transmission Electron Microscopy
200-mesh
carbon-coated copper grids were placed for 1 min onto 10 μL
drops of sample (5 μM of fibrils based on monomer concentration)
and then for 30 s onto 10 μL drops of 2% uranyl acetate. The
grids were air-dried on filter paper. Images were taken with a Philips/FEI
Tecnai-12 electron transmission microscope at 80 keV, equipped with
a Gatan CCD camera.

Variability in Amplification
Identical
reactions performed
in multiple wells in the microplate displayed varying amounts of ThT
fluorescence, as reflected by error bars. Emission spectra indicate
that the variability in amplification can arise, sometimes deviating
due to a single reaction. It is possible that this variability originates
due to an uneven force distribution in the bath, a finding that was
suggested previously. Slight variability
was also seen in the power output of different bath sonicators.

Results
Amplification of Tau Fibrils through Cycles of Seeding and Growth
In a first set of experiments, we tested the effect of seed concentration
on fibril growth. Specifically, htau40 (the largest isoform of Tau)
was seeded with sonicated fibrils composed of K18. Fibril growth was
monitored by ThT fluorescence. As expected,
ThT displayed decreasing fluorescence with decreasing seed concentration,
indicating diminished formation of fibrils (Figure ). Importantly, incubation of monomers without the addition
of seeds produced no fibrils. At the lowest seed concentration of
0.1% (monomer equivalents), fibril elongation is extremely inefficient
(Figure ). We therefore examined if inclusion
of regular sonication steps during incubation could amplify fibrils
at this seed concentration. The rationale for employing cycles of
sonication is to provide a larger number of fibril ends per unit mass.
The increase in Tau fibril ends through fragmentation has been recognized
as the main effect of sonication. Repetitive
cycles of shearing and growth could thus increase the number of monomers
converted (Figure A). To suppress self-nucleation
of Tau monomers, which is accelerated by the formation of intermolecular
disulfide bonds,,, in these and all other experiments, Tau constructs were used with
natural cysteines replaced by serines (one cysteine in 3R Tau and
two cysteines in 4R Tau). Amplification was monitored by ThT fluorescence
over 10 cycles (a single cycle consists of 5 s of sonication followed
by 30 min of incubation at 37 °C). Amplification was monitored
every two cycles, during which ThT fluorescence steadily increased
with additional cycles (Figure B). Using sedimentation,
the amplified htau40 fibrils were also visualized on an SDS-PAGE gel
(Figure C). The gel corroborates the ThT results
showing consistent amplification with increasing cycles. The total
5 h incubation time for 10 cycles demonstrates considerable fibril
amplification onto 0.1% seeds compared to 6 h of incubation following
a single sonication step (Figure ). Seeds
of 3R Tau (K19) were also amplified using htau23 (Figure S1 of the ), although this process
was consistently less efficient, requiring additional cycles of sonication
and growth.

Seeding of Tau monomer with varying seed concentrations. Various
concentrations of K18 fibril seeds were added to recruit monomeric
Tau. Monomeric htau40 (10 μM) was incubated with seeds and 5
μM ThT for 6 h. Fluorescence emission was measured at 480 nm,
with excitation at 440 nm. Heparin was included in all reactions at
a concentration of 40 μM. All values represent mean ± SEM
(n = 4).

Amplification of Tau fibrils. (A) Flowchart. Green arrows represent
β-strands in the original fibril. Red arrows represent β-strands
of newly incorporated monomers. A single cycle involves consecutive
steps of fibril fracture and growth. (B) 0.1% K18 seeds were added
to htau40 and amplified over 10 cycles of sonication and growth. The
degree of amplification was monitored by ThT fluorescence and (C)
visualized by Coomassie-staining following fibril sedimentation. M
= monomer control subjected to 10 cycles of shearing and growth. Values
represent mean ± SEM (n = 8).

Sensitivity of Tau Amplification
The amplification
protocol shows significant enhancement in fibril concentration over
incubation alone for 0.1% initial seeds. The initial seeds were further
diluted to characterize the sensitivity of this technique. Htau40
monomer was added to K18 seeds ranging from 0.1 to 0.00001% of the
monomer concentration, and 40 cycles of shearing were applied. Amplification
decreased proportionately with seed concentration (Figure A), showing no fibril growth from the monomer alone.
Similar amplification was seen using these concentrations of htau40
seeds added to htau40 monomer (Figure B).
To ensure fibrillar structure was the source of increased ThT fluorescence,
fibrils grown from 0.1% seeds following 40 shearing cycles were visualized
by EM (Figure C,D). PMCA has been shown to
be a remarkably sensitive technique for the amplification of PrPSc, and we have demonstrated here
that a high sensitivity can also be achieved for Tau fibrils. The
lowest seed concentration amplified in Figure A,B corresponds to 1 pM protein. It is expected that additional improvements
in the assay could enhance the sensitivity further.

Sensitivity of amplification.
Initial seeds were diluted and amplified
with htau40 using 40 cycles of shearing and growth. The degree of
amplification decreases linearly with decreasing seed concentration
for both K18 seeds (A) and htau40 seeds (B). EM images show the extended
htau40 fibrils formed using 0.1% K18 seeds (C) and 0.1% htau40 seeds
(D). Scale bars = 500 nm. M = monomer control subjected to 40 cycles
of shearing and growth. Values in panels A and B represent mean ±
SEM (n = 8).

K19 and htau23 seeds could also be diluted and amplified
with htau23
using the same experimental parameters as were used for htau40. The
extent of amplification at low seed concentrations, however, was decreased
for htau23 compared to that for htau40 (Figure S2 of the ). This could reflect a
lower stability of the htau23 fibrils and underscores the reduced
efficiency of htau23 amplification.

Amplification of Tau Fibrils
from AD-Derived Brain Tissue
One of the greatest strengths
of PMCA is the ability to amplify
protein aggregates from biological samples. To demonstrate this feature
using Tau protein, AD brain and tangle-free control brain were homogenized,
diluted, and then added to recombinant htau40. Next, the samples were
subjected to 20 cycles of amplification, with each cycle consisting
of 5 s of sonication and 30 min of incubation at 37 °C. ThT could
not be used for detection because it interacts with RNA, DNA, and
other cellular components in the brain homogenate. We therefore visualized
Tau amplification by sedimentation using SDS-PAGE. Only the sample
that contained AD extract was able to template growth (Figure A, lane 5). Importantly, spontaneous nucleation
could be excluded, as neither htau40 alone nor htau40 in the presence
of control brain caused aggregation (Figure A, lanes 1 and 4). Furthermore, both AD brain and tangle-free control
brain showed similar banding patterns (Figure A, lanes 2 and 3), highlighting the overall analogous protein compositions.
The fibrillar nature of the amplified protein aggregates was verified
by EM (Figure B). Importantly, AD brain extract
alone, i.e., in the absence of recombinant Tau, did not show any fibrils
(Figure C). Combined, the findings indicate
that Tau fibrils can be selectively amplified from Tau seeds inherent
in the crude AD brain extract.

Seeding of Tau monomers with brain extract.
(A) 5 μM htau40
and 20 μg of brain extract were combined as indicated (total
volume = 200 μL). All combinations were carried through 20 cycles
of shearing and growth. The proteins were then sedimented and analyzed
by SDS-PAGE and Coomassie staining. Only monomers that were seeded
with AD extract produced htau40 aggregates, as indicated by the dark
band in lane 5. (B) EM image of htau40 fibrils seeded with AD brain
extract. (C) EM image of AD brain extract in the absence of recombinant
Tau. Scale bars = 500 nm.

Discussion
In Alzheimer’s disease and related
neurodegenerative disorders,
Tau protein is deposited in the form of large neurofibrillary tangles.
These are bundles of long, unbranched filaments that are poor candidates
for disease propagation. Our findings demonstrate that repetitive
cycles of shearing and growth dramatically enhance the conversion
of monomeric Tau into fibrils. Fibril fragmentation may be the central
mechanism in this procedure. However, other secondary pathways, such as branching or heterogeneous
nucleation from the fibril surface, may also contribute
to enhanced aggregation. If latter processes were operative, then
they would be expected to add to the conformational heterogeneity
of Tau fibril populations.

The
biological mechanisms that produce smaller Tau aggregates in
the cell are not understood. Such mechanisms, however, must exist.
Only small aggregates possess the capacity to be taken up by cells. Similarly, only fibrils that are released from
the cell will be able to act in trans-cellular propagation. Once taken up by the target cell, fibrils have
to fracture to provide new surface area for monomer recruitment to
the fibril ends. Efficient replication could hence depend on the facility
of these fibrils to break. Interestingly, a correlation between aggregate
brittleness and strain propagation has been observed for yeast prions,
where more fragile conformers (or strains) have a selective advantage. In these organisms, the molecular chaperone,
HSP104, in conjunction with additional factors, is thought to provide
the mechanical force that fractures the fibrils and allows segregation
of smaller aggregates into daughter cells. A homologue of HSP104, however, does not exist in mammalian cells.
Whether molecular chaperones mediate the breakage of Tau fibrils is
unknown. It is possible that another clearance-related mechanism could
cause fracture or that multiple mechanisms operate in parallel. Regardless
of the molecular details of these processes, fibril fracture appears
to be a critical part of replication. The herein developed in vitro assay offers a powerful new tool for amplifying
Tau fibrils from crude brain extract and investigating their conformations.
Further enhancements in sensitivity could transform this assay into
a potentially valuable diagnostic tool.

Supporting Information Available
Amplification of 3R Tau fibrils
and sensitivity of amplification for htau23 grown onto K19 and htau23
seeds. This material is available free of charge via the Internet
at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bi501050g_si_001.pdf

Author Contributions
† V.M. and P.D.D. contributed equally to this work.

This
project
was supported by NIH/NINDS grant no. R01NS076619 (to M.M.). The UCI-ADRC,
which provided brain samples for this project, is funded by NIH/NIA
grant no. P50 AG16573.

The authors
declare no competing financial interest.

