Integrins
make up a family of
transmembrane heterodimeric receptors with crucial roles in a wide
variety of cellular functions, including adhesion, migration, mechanotransduction,
growth, and survival. The integrin family
contains 18 α-subunits and eight β-subunits, whose αβ
pairings determine ligand specificity and influence intracellular
adhesion complex formation and subsequent signaling. Each integrin
heterodimer consists of a large multidomain extracellular region that
interacts with extracellular matrix (ECM) ligands, two single-pass
transmembrane helices (one in each subunit), and short (typically
20–70 amino acids) α- and β-subunit cytoplasmic
tails that mediate interactions with intracellular cytoskeletal and
signaling proteins. Integrins thus provide a physical connection between
the ECM and the actin cytoskeleton and participate in bidirectional
signaling across the plasma membrane. Binding of cytoplasmic proteins
to integrin cytoplasmic tails can trigger a change in integrin affinity
for extracellular ligand (inside-out signaling/activation), and ECM
ligand binding can promote downstream intracellular signaling (outside-in
signaling). The structural and biochemical basis for binding of integrin
to ECM ligands is increasingly well understood, as are the conformational rearrangements in the extracellular
and transmembrane domains associated with integrin activation., The tissue-specific distribution of integrin subunits, and of their
cytosolic binding partners, allows for fine-tuning of interactomes
and consequent signaling. In this review, we discuss the advances
in our understanding of how various integrin cytoplasmic interactions
contribute to diverse molecular signals and biological functions.
We review the rapidly growing list of intracellular proteins that
directly interact with integrin cytoplasmic tails, to
regulate integrin activation, surface expression and localization,
cytoskeletal remodeling, mechanotransduction, and downstream signaling
cascades.

Integrin Cytoplasmic Tails
Cytoplasmic tails are essential
for integrin function, and their
mutation or deletion, especially in the β-subunit, alters integrin
affinity for extracellular ligands and perturbs intracellular signaling
cascades. Nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR)
and X-ray crystallographic studies have shown integrin tails to be
conformationally flexible; depending on their interaction partner,
tails can form α-helices (e.g., in the context of integrin heterodimers−) or β-strands (e.g., when in complex with talin or filamin,). Integrin tails bind to a functionally diverse set of intracellular
proteins to promote downstream signaling,, and
at least 40 direct interactors have been reported with many more,
potentially indirect, partners recently identified in proteomic screens. With only tens of amino acids per tail and substantially
more interactors, access of cytoplasmic binding partners to the integrin
tail must be finely tuned and carefully regulated., This
seems to occur primarily through competition among proteins for similar
binding sites and post-translational modifications of the tail that
impact affinity for interactors. In addition,
hidden or cryptic integrin tail-binding sites in partners can be exposed
by mechanical force, proteolysis, or phosphorylation, and the local
concentration of binding partners can be regulated by membrane or
other subcellular localization signals.,,

Aside from a conserved membrane-proximal GFFKR
motif, integrin
α-tails have little similarity to one another. In contrast,
most integrin β-tails are fairly well conserved and are thus
subject to similar modes of regulation (Figure ). Perhaps this explains why β-tail interactions are generally
better understood than α-tail interactions. Most β-tails
contain two NPxY motifs, and as discussed below, numerous proteins
compete to interact with these sites. As such, the Tyr residues of
NPxY motifs are key regulatory sites on the integrin tail. For example,
NPxY motif tyrosine phosphorylation by Src family kinases (SFK) may
positively or negatively regulate interactions with phosphotyrosine-binding
(PTB) domain-containing proteins [e.g., talin and Dok1 (Figure , top)]. Tyrosine phosphorylation
of NPxY motifs can also protect integrin tails from calpain cleavage,
as has been shown for β3, providing another means of regulating
integrin tail availability for cytoplasmic interactions. A serine/threonine-rich motif located between
the NPxY motifs serves as an additional regulatory point, as phosphorylation
of these residues by an unidentified kinase inhibits filamin binding
but promotes 14-3-3 binding. Integrin
tail phosphorylation has been carefully reviewed elsewhere, but the continued identification and characterization
of regulatory kinases are crucial to a thorough understanding of adhesion
dynamics and the role of post-translational modifications in the regulation
of the affinity of integrin for the extracellular ligand.

Direct integrin
cytoplasmic tail interactors. Interactions between
integrin cytoplasmic tails and intracellular proteins regulate integrin
activity, surface expression, and downstream signaling. Here we depict
known direct integrin interactors, their sites of interaction on α-
or β-tails, and their functional role by color, as indicated
in the legend. Conserved tail residues are displayed in uppercase
letters; highly conserved residues are shown in bold.

Regulation of integrin activation. Integrin activation
may be regulated
by post-translational modifications of the tail (e.g., phosphorylation)
and through competition between activators and inhibitors for binding
the β-tail. Inhibitors of integrin activation may be competed
off integrin tails by other intracellular proteins (e.g., migfilin–filamin
and Krit1–ICAP1 binding).

Integrin Activators
Activation is the process by which integrins
switch from conformations
with relatively low affinity for ECM to those with high ligand binding
affinity. Tight regulation of integrin activation is essential for
a variety of developmental and physiological processes, and while integrins can be activated and clustered
by ECM itself, here we focus on cytoplasmic interactions that allosterically
drive receptor–ligand engagement.

Direct binding of the
cytoskeletal protein talin to integrin β-tails
is now recognized as the key final step in integrin activation and has been extensively reviewed elsewhere.,, The central role of talin in
integrin activation is supported by talin knock-down, knock-out, and
knock-in phenotypes and can be reconstituted in vitro. Talin is composed
of an N-terminal atypical, four-subdomain (F0–F3) FERM (4.1
band, ezrin, radixin, moesin) domain (the talin head), and a C-terminal
rod consisting of 13 helical bundle repeats. Briefly, direct binding of the talin head to integrin β-tails
disrupts an inhibitory association between the membrane-proximal portions
of α- and β-tails, changing the tilt of integrin transmembrane
domains and triggering activation. Talin
binds the membrane-proximal NPxY motif in integrin β1−β3,
β5, and β7 tails and probably also in β6 tails., As β4 and β8 tails lack this motif, the activation of
αvβ8 and α6β4 integrins is likely to be talin-independent.

Talin–integrin interactions are regulated in a variety of
ways. Upstream, GTP-bound Rap1 triggers
integrin activation via its effector, Rap1-interacting adaptor molecule
(RIAM). Rap1 targets a Rap1–RIAM–talin complex to the
plasma membrane to promote talin–integrin binding. Recent reports
indicate that while RIAM recruits talin to nascent adhesions, binding
of vinculin to talin then displaces RIAM, stabilizing active integrins
within focal adhesions (FAs)., Conformational rearrangement
of talin provides another means of regulating activation. The integrin-binding
site within the talin F3 subdomain is normally masked by an intramolecular
interaction with a portion of the C-terminal talin rod.− Phosphatidylinositol 4,5-bisphosphate [PI(4,5)P2] binding
to the F3 subdomain helps displace the rod, unmasking the integrin-binding
site. Additional lipid-binding sites throughout the talin head are
important for talin-mediated integrin activation, presumably because
they help target talin to the membrane and properly orient it to increase
the affinity for the β-integrin cytoplasmic tail.,, In this way, interactions of
talin with PIPs allow for efficient talin-mediated integrin activation.
Finally, phosphorylation of the talin FERM domain by cyclin-dependent
kinase 5 (Cdk5) protects talin from smurf1-mediated ubiquitinylation
and proteosomal degradation, positively contributing to adhesion stability.

While talin binding is central to integrin
activation, other integrin-binding
proteins have also been implicated. Chief among these are the members
of the recently reviewed kindlin family of proteins.,,− Kindlin, like
the talin head, is composed of an atypical FERM domain but also includes
a nested, lipid-binding pleckstrin homology (PH) domain. Kindlins
bind to the membrane-distal NPxY motif and a S/T-containing motif
that lies between the two tyrosines on β-integrins (Figure ). While all three kindlin isoforms bind β1,
β2, and β3 integrins, it was recently shown that β6
tails preferentially bind kindlin-1 over kindlin-2. This impacts kindlin isoform localization in keratinocytes,
but whether it has a consequence on β6 integrin activation remains
to be determined.

Overexpression, knock-out, knock-down, and
disease mutations clearly
establish kindlins as regulators of integrin activation, integrin
surface expression levels, and integrin signaling. At least one kindlin
isoform (kindlin-1) was identified as a phosphoprotein, but the functional relevance of this phosphorylation
remains to be determined. While the exact mechanisms of effects of
kindlin on activation are unknown, direct binding to the integrin
β-tail is required, and scaffolding of additional integrin-associated,
kindlin-binding proteins, migfilin and integrin-linked kinase (ILK),
may be involved. Kindlin regulates the dynamics of recruitment of
migfilin to adhesions,, which may be important as migfilin
can enhance talin-mediated activation by competing away filamin, a
suppressor of integrin activation (Figure , middle).,− ILK was first
identified as an integrin β-tail-binding protein and is also thought to regulate β1 and
β3 integrin activation,, so it is conceivable
that effects of kindlin on integrin activation may at least in part
be ILK-mediated.

Although integrin activation is often described
as increasing the
ligand binding affinity of a single receptor, activated receptors
also cluster, resulting in an increased avidity for ECM ligand. Talin
binding clearly enhances monomeric affinity,, but overexpression of the talin head also increases the level of
clustering of αVβ3 integrins, a process that requires
binding of PI(4,5)P2 to talin. Most notably, a recent paper reports that kindlin works by clustering
talin-activated αIIbβ3 integrins while having no impact
on monomeric affinity. Consistent with
this, kindlin has been implicated in the clustering of hematopoetic
integrins. While little is known about
exactly how integrin microclusters form or are stabilized, kindlins
may serve as adaptors that recruit proteins to support clustering.
The kindlin-binding protein, ILK, has also been implicated in enhancing
clustering and the connection to the cytoskeleton.

Talin and kindlin are well-established integrin activators,
but
others have been proposed, including the β-tail-binding proteins,
β3-endonexin and cytohesin, and α-tail binders, CIB1 (calcium-
and integrin-binding protein 1) and RapL., However,
the true role of these proteins in integrin function remains unclear,
as there are little recent data to suggest they are direct activators.
Two other adhesion proteins, Zasp (Z-band alternatively spliced PDZ
motif-containing protein) and vinculin, have been shown to enhance
talin-mediated integrin activation,,, but it is likely that neither requires direct interactions
with integrin cytoplasmic tails.

Suppressors of Integrin
Activation
Proper integrin function requires careful temporal
and spatial
regulation of integrin activation. It is now recognized that, in addition
to direct integrin activators, both α- and β-tail-binding
proteins can suppress integrin activation., Thus, integrin regulation occurs through competition between inhibitory
and activating proteins for binding to cytoplasmic tails and may be
further controlled by phosphorylation of inhibitor- or activator-binding
motifs within tails as well as the inhibitors or activators themselves.

Filamin, a large actin-cross-linking protein important for the
regulation of cell spreading and migration, is among the best characterized integrin inhibitors. It contains
an actin-binding domain as well as a series of 24 tandem immunoglobulin
(Ig)-like repeats, the last of which allows for homodimerization. Filamin binds the first NPxY motif and the subsequent
threonine-rich region in the integrin β-tail (Figure ). This overlaps with the talin- and kindlin-binding
sites, thus suppressing integrin activation.,, As noted above, migfilin can compete with
β-tails for filamin, relieving inhibition and enhancing integrin
activation (Figure , middle)., Kinases also modulate filamin interactions and hence integrin activation,
as phosphorylation of β2 integrin tails at T758 inhibits filamin
binding but promotes binding of the scaffolding protein 14-3-3, thereby
regulating T-cell adhesion. A similar
phosphoswitch may exist for β1 and β3, given that filamin
and 14-3-3 also interact with these integrins. Further, molecular dynamics studies suggest that, in the presence
of force, Ser2152 phosphorylation of filamin A Ig repeat 20 regulates
the exposure of the cryptic integrin-binding site.

Another talin competitor specifically regulated by
phosphorylation
of the β-tail is Dok1, a PTB domain-containing scaffolding protein
shown to bind β2, β3, β5, and β7 integrin
tails. SFK-mediated phosphorylation of
the talin-binding NPxY motif in β-tails inhibits talin binding
and favors Dok1 binding, suppressing activation. Surprisingly, despite the apparent importance of tyrosine
phosphorylation of NPxY motifs, mice carrying knock-in phospho-blocking
β1 integrin Y/F mutations are largely normal, and are still susceptible to Src-mediated and focal adhesion kinase
(FAK)-mediated tumorigenesis.

Most
recently, a mechanism that regulates another PTB domain-containing
integrin inhibitor, ICAP1 (integrin cytoplasmic domain-associated
protein 1), has been elucidated. By binding
to the β1 tail at the distal NPxY motif, ICAP1 occupies the
kindlin-binding site and sterically hinders talin binding. Much like the effect of migfilin on filamin-mediated
β-integrin suppression, Krit-1 (Krev/Rap1 interaction trapped-1)
can compete with β1 for ICAP1 binding, thus increasing the level
of integrin activation (Figure , bottom). Calcium/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase
type II (CaMKII), a kinase implicated in regulation of integrin-mediated
adhesion, phosphorylates ICAP1 on Thr38, enhancing binding of ICAP1
to β1 tails, reducing the level of activation, and downregulating
focal adhesion assembly. Other β-tail-binding
proteins may also act as integrin inhibitors, but their mechanisms
of action require further study. For example, the actin-binding protein
α-actinin has been reported to suppress αIIbβ3 activation,
presumably through competition with talin, but α-actinin is
also reported to enhance the binding of talin to β1, increasing
the level of integrin activation.,

Finally,
in addition to β-tail-binding inhibitors, a growing
body of work has explored the roles of α-tail-binding integrin
suppressors. These proteins, which include Nischarin, MDGI (mammary-derived
growth inhibitor), and SHARPIN (SHANK-associated RH domain-interacting
protein), have been thoroughly reviewed elsewhere., Typically, they bind the conserved GFFKR region of the α-tail,
either directly stabilizing the inhibitory α-tail−β-tail
association or indirectly preventing binding of talin to the β-tail.

Regulators
of Integrin Surface Expression and Localization
In addition
to modulating integrin activation, cells regulate adhesion
by controlling the availability of integrins at the cell surface and
within adhesive structures. Integrin turnover determines the direction
and speed of cell migration and, if misregulated, contributes to metastasis
and invasion. While considerable effort
has been devoted to developing therapeutics that inhibit integrin-ligand
interactions, there is also recent interest in modulating integrin
trafficking. Here we will focus on endocytic
and recycling proteins that directly interact with integrin cytoplasmic
tails to spatially and temporally regulate the delivery of integrin
to the plasma membrane and turnover within adhesions.

Endocytosis
of integrins occurs via both clathrin-dependent and
-independent pathways and has been extensively reviewed elsewhere.− Microtubule-mediated focal adhesion (FA) disassembly is a clathrin-
and dynamin-dependent process. Dynamin
deficiency results in increased cell surface integrin levels, enlarged
FAs, and impaired endothelial branching morphogenesis with accumulation
of integrin at sites of failed angiogenic sprouting. Two clathrin adaptors, disabled-2 (DAB2) and Numb, bind
NPxY motifs in β3 and β5 tails via their PTB domains. DAB2 colocalizes in FAs with clathrin, the primary
clathrin adaptor AP-2, and dynamin-2 to facilitate β1 integrin
internalization and FA disassembly. Numb
also localizes at adhesions, and its binding to integrin is regulated
by phosphorylation of Numb by atypical protein kinase C. More recently, the NPxY motif-containing protein
Opo was shown to regulate epithelial morphogenesis by regulating integrin
endocytosis through sequestration of Numb or NumbL. It has yet to be determined whether other clathrin adaptors
that bind NPxY motifs and are important for integrin internalization
(e.g., autosomal recessive hypercholesterolemia) also directly bind
β-integrin tails. Integrins also
undergo endocytosis in clathrin-independent ways, and although our
understanding of these mechanisms is much more limited, binding of
Rab21 to the conserved membrane-proximal portion of integrin α-tails
is known to promote clathrin-independent internalization of some β1
heterodimers.,

Following internalization,
integrins typically face one of two
fates: recycling back to the plasma membrane or degradation in lysosomes.
Recycling may occur via rapid “short-loop” or slower
“long-loop” Rab GTPase-dependent recycling pathways
(Figure )., αVβ3
integrins recycle though the Rab4 short-loop pathway, in which integrins
are returned to the plasma membrane directly from Rab4-enriched early
endosomes. This pathway is important
for directional migration and requires protein kinase D1 (PKD1) binding
to the 15 C-terminal amino acids of the β3 tail., β3–PKD1 association requires PKD1 Ser916 autophosphorylation,
which occurs downstream of growth factor stimulation. PKD1 also interacts
with β1, making it possible that PKD1 similarly regulates β1
internalization.

Integrin interactors
involved in sorting and surface expression.
Integrin surface expression is carefully regulated by clathrin-dependent
and -independent endocytosis, short-loop Rab4-dependent sorting, and
long-loop Rab11-dependent sorting. Direct integrin interactors have
been implicated as regulators throughout these pathways, as indicated
by thick rectangular outlines.

In long-loop recycling, integrins are transported to ADP
ribosylation
factor 6 (Arf6) and Rab11-enriched vesicles of the perinuclear recycling
compartment before returning to the membrane. Rab25, another GTPase
that localizes to recycling endosomes as well as late endosomes, directly
interacts with β1 integrin and has recently been shown to sort
active α5β1 integrins to late endosomes and lysosomes., In the presence of chloride intracellular channel 3 (CLIC3), these
integrins are recycled to the plasma membrane, but in the absence
of CLIC3, Rab25 leads to lysosomal degradation of the integrin. In addition to mediating β1 integrin endocytosis,
Rab21 also controls β1 integrin recycling. This is regulated
by competition between Rab21 and p120RasGAP for binding to the membrane-proximal
portion of integrin α-tails. p120RasGAP
normally promotes the recycling of integrin to the plasma membrane,
and in its absence, the Rab21-bound integrins are retained in endosomes.

While it is well-established that components of the endocytic machinery
are crucial to integrin recycling, integrin activators themselves,
such as talin and kindlin, also contribute to this dynamic process.
Talin-1 depletion, or mutagenesis of the membrane-proximal NPxY motif
in the β1 tail, reduces the level of α5β1 internalization,
but not recycling. Kindlin-2 depletion,
or mutagenesis of the β1 membrane-distal NPxY motif, promotes
degradation of α5β1, suggesting a role for kindlin-2 in
protecting integrins from degradation. Interestingly, it was recently found that sorting nexin 17 (SNX17),
a FERM domain-containing protein important for recycling cargo to
the plasma membrane, binds the β1 membrane-distal NPxY motif,
probably following kindlin dissociation, protecting β1 from
lysosomal degradation., How competition between kindlin
and SNX17 for β integrin is regulated has yet to be elucidated.

Cytoskeletal
Linkages and Mechanotransduction
Complex cellular processes
often require integration of multiple
signaling cascades, sensing and transduction of mechanical force,
and cytoskeletal reorganization. As well as providing a physical connection
to the ECM, integrins transmit chemical and mechanical cues that spatially
and temporally regulate cytoskeletal dynamics.− Here we highlight
integrin tail-binding proteins that transmit signals from integrins
to the cytoskeleton and back again.

The most direct link between
integrins and the cytoskeleton is
through direct actin-binding proteins, such as talin, filamin, tensin,
and α-actinin (Figures  and ). Talin binds actin via a C-terminal domain but can also indirectly associate with actin
through vinculin. Forces transmitted to talin result in repeated talin
stretching and expose otherwise buried vinculin-binding sites in the
talin rod.,, This is important for force-dependent reinforcement of integrin–cytoskeletal
bonds and for transduction of mechanical
information during force sensing.

Integrin–cytoskeletal
connections. The dynamic connection
between integrins and the cytoskeleton is mediated by a host of adhesion
proteins. Here, we show how integrin-binding proteins contribute to
the integrin–cytoskeletal connection to orchestrate directed
migration.

Integrin interactions and downstream signaling.
In the top panel,
β-integrin interactions are highly interconnected and play important
roles when signaling to the cytoskeleton. Orange proteins indicate
direct actin binders. In the bottom panel, many integrin-binding proteins
impact the spatial and temporal regulation of Rho family GTPases to
affect cytoskeletal organization.

Filamin is another mechanosensitive protein that directly
binds
integrins and actin. Notably, the integrin-binding
site in filamin is partially obscured by an adjacent Ig-like repeat
domain, and force applied to filamin
can expose this site and enhance integrin binding., Strain on the filamin–actin network also releases filaminA-associated
Rho GTPase activating protein (FilGAP), a Rac inactivator, from filamin, providing another means to mechanically modulate
cytoskeletal dynamics (Figure ).

The
direct association of the actin-bundling protein, α-actinin,
with integrins provides another link to the cytoskeleton. One recent model suggests that α-actinin
displaces talin from integrins in nascent β3-rich adhesions,
triggering focal adhesion (FA) maturation and leaving α-actinin
as the main force transducer between adhesions and the cytoskeleton. α-Actinin also interacts with the mechanosensor
zyxin, and both α-actinin and zyxin become post-translationally
modified and relocalize to stress fibers in response to mechanical
stress., α-Actinin then cooperates with zyxin
to recruit Ena/VASP (vasodilator-stimulated phosphoprotein) to strengthen
stress fibers (Figure ).,

Finally, the FA protein, tensin, can also potentially directly
link integrins to actin. Though the level
of tensin phosphorylation increases as cells contact ECM or in response
to oncogenes, the functional consequence
of that phosphorylation is not clear. All tensin isoforms bind integrins
via a PTB domain. Three of the four tensin isoforms directly bind
actin and may act to stabilize stress fibers, anchoring them to β1-
and β3-rich FAs. The fourth isoform
(cten or tensin4) does not bind actin, and in more migratory cell
lines, its expression is upregulated in response to growth factor
stimulation. Concomitantly, tensin3
expression is downregulated; stress fibers disassemble, and there
are fewer FAs., Therefore, one tensin isoform
may act to interrupt the transmission of force between FAs and the
actin cytoskeleton while others can act to preserve it.

Integrin
can also be indirectly linked to actin-binding proteins.
One of the best examples of this is vinculin, which is recruited to
adhesions via mechanically activated talin (Figure )., A recent model based on structure
and adhesion dynamics suggests the Rap effector, RIAM, initially activates
talin, which then activates integrins in nascent adhesions. There,
applied forces inhibit RIAM binding, freeing the vinculin-binding
site on talin and triggering FA maturation., Vinculin itself also transmits force at adhesions; studies have
quantified the force applied to vinculin during cell migration. This underscores the central role of vinculin
in the “molecular clutch” that governs coupling between
adhesions and actin filaments and therefore traction force, adhesion
strengthening, and cell motility., Notably,
vinculin also binds α-actinin, and molecular dynamics modeling
suggests that mechanical force is required to expose the vinculin-binding
site on α-actinin. Thus, α-actinin
may also provide a mechanosensitive route for vinculin recruitment.

ILK provides another potential indirect link to actin that has
been extensively reviewed elsewhere.− Yeast two-hybrid data
suggest that this pseudokinase directly interacts with integrin β-tails
and functions as an adaptor to regulate downstream cytoskeletal dynamics
as well as cell polarity and migration. ILK does not directly bind
actin, and the cytoskeletal linkage is likely to require its obligate
binding partners PINCH and parvin. Of
these, the calponin homology domain-containing protein, parvin, may
directly bind F-actin. ILK may also
impact microtubule polarity by interacting
with IQGAP1 to localize it to nascent adhesions, stabilizing microtubule
cytoskeletal dynamics. ILK may also
indirectly impact cytoskeletal dynamics via RhoA signaling and has
been implicated in regulating cell contractility., Indirect integrin–actin links may also pass through kindlin,
which binds ILK, or via an integrin–kindlin–migfilin–filamin
linkage.,

In addition to the links to actin
discussed above, integrins can
impact cytoskeletal dynamics, organization, cell contractility, and
force sensing by altering spatiotemporal regulation of Rho family
GTPases. Arp2/3 complex-mediated actin nucleation and polymerization
take place downstream of GTP-bound Rac or Cdc42, forming lamellipodia
or filopodia. GTP-bound RhoA activates Rho kinase (ROCK) and inactivates
myosin light chain phosphatase. This promotes phosphorylation of myosin
light chain (MLCP), enhancing acto-myosin contractility and FA and
stress fiber formation. Rho family GTPase
signaling is triggered by complex, interconnected pathways beyond
the scope of this review., Here we limit our
discussion to direct tail-binding proteins that influence Rho signaling.

As noted above, filamin can inhibit Rac through FilGAP (Figure ) or via a filamin–IQGAP1–RacGAP1
complex. Kindlins also regulate actin
dynamics and cell spreading, presumably
though an indirect regulation of Rho, Rac, and Cdc42. How this occurs remains to be shown. Finally, binding of
paxillin to α4 integrin tails inhibits the formation of lamellipodia
by recruiting ArfGAP to reduce Arf activity and thereby block Rac. This is regulated by protein kinase A-mediated
α4 tail phosphorylation, which occurs at the leading edge, locally
inhibiting paxillin-mediated Rac inactivation and restricting the
formation of lamellipodia to the front of migrating cells.

Integrin Adhesion Signaling
Following
adhesion to the ECM, integrins participate in a multitude
of signaling cascades mediated by interactions with cytoplasmic proteins. Typically termed outside-in signaling, these
cascades regulate growth, survival, cytoskeletal dynamics, and motility
and are required for normal cellular responses to the local environment.
While numerous integrin-mediated signaling pathways have been described,
there are still considerable gaps between initial adhesion events
and the effects on downstream molecules. Here we limit the discussion
to a few adhesion-related signaling molecules proximal to the integrin
cytoplasmic tail.

Focal adhesion kinase (FAK) is one of the
best-characterized adhesion-related
signaling molecules, known to be activated downstream of integrin-mediated
adhesion and strongly expressed in numerous cancers. FAK is a cytoplasmic tyrosine kinase, and while it has
been reported to interact directly with β1 tails, it is thought to be recruited via interactions
with paxillin or talin. However, FAK
can be recruited to nascent adhesions by an unknown mechanism and
in turn help in the recruitment of talin. Integrin engagement triggers FAK autophosphorylation on tyrosine
397, creating a binding site for the SH2 (Src homology 2) domain of
Src, allowing for further tyrosine phosphorylation of FAK by Src,
and initiation of numerous growth and survival pathways via Rac1,
paxillin, and β-Pix, among others. In addition to their roles in FAK signaling, SFKs can directly bind
integrin cytoplasmic tails, resulting in activation of SFK activity
and cell spreading. As discussed previously,
SFKs also phosphorylate tyrosines on β-integrin tails, thus
regulating interactions with cytoplasmic signaling molecules.

In addition to FAK and Src, a number of
other kinases (and phosphatases)
are known to interact with integrins, ultimately effecting Rac1- and
Cdc42-regulated cytoskeletal remodeling, as well as kinase-regulated
growth pathways. β1 integrin has recently been shown to interact
directly with Arg kinase, activating p190RhoGAP, which inactivates
RhoA GTPase. Direct phosphorylation-independent
engagement of integrin β-tails by the SH2 domain of Syk and
Zap70 kinases leads to kinase activation. Members of the p21-activated kinase (PAK) family are also activated
downstream of integrin-mediated adhesion, and PAK4, which is activated
following αVβ5-mediated adhesion to vitronectin and implicated
in regulation of integrin turnover, forms a complex with β5
integrin tails. However, a direct in vitro interaction between PAKs and integrins has yet
to be established. Phosphatase 2A (PP2A), which dephosphorylates serine/threonine
residues, binds to the KVGFFKR sequence of αIIb to block downstream
ERK (extracellular signal-regulated kinase) signaling. Additional studies will be necessary to fully
understand the requisite interactions of integrin with kinases and
phosphatases and their ultimate downstream effects.

Integrin
signaling often occurs in concert with other receptors,
including growth factor receptors, G-protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs),
and even other integrins. Integrins and growth factor receptors have
been shown to independently and collaboratively activate the same
pathways, such as FAK and Src-mediated signaling, though varied evidence
exists for whether integrins interact directly with growth factor
receptors. A growing list of GPCR-related
proteins have been reported to interact directly with β-integrin
tails, including the cytohesin family of guanine nucleotide exchange
factors (GEFs) and, more recently, the
G-protein Gα13, also implicated in the activation of Src family
kinase signaling. Signaling downstream
of integrins may also be regulated by other integrins, as is evidenced
by trans-dominant effects on β1 by β3 cytoplasmic tails.

Conclusion and Future Perspectives
Though integrin cytoplasmic tails are typically short, they mediate
a host of critical interactions. These direct interactions thus regulate
cytoskeletal dynamics, response to growth factor signals, transcriptional
regulation, and integrin activation, localization, and surface expression.
Our understanding of the importance of tail-binding proteins in a
variety of signaling pathways is rapidly growing, but there are still
many unanswered questions, including the general applicability of
findings to specific integrins and cell types. Furthermore, while
we know many key players, the structural basis for integrin binding
or its functional significance often remains to be determined. Our
growing body of knowledge facilitates a more precise examination of
how aberrant integrin signaling contributes to disease, pointing the
field toward elements of the “integrin cytoplasmic interactome”
that might serve as therapeutic targets to modulate integrin activity
or signaling. In the future, innovative technologies (like super-resolution
imaging or genomic editing in situ) combined with
more interdisciplinary approaches are likely to drive adhesion research.
While once each aspect of integrin regulation and function was examined
in isolation (activation, recycling, localization, signal transduction,
etc.), we can now begin synthesizing information from diverse research
fields to generate more holistic models of dynamic integrin signaling
in cell and tissue homeostasis.

Author Contributions
E.M.M. and
N.N.B. contributed equally to this work.

This work was
funded in whole or in part by National Institutes of Health Grants
T32 GM-007223 and RO1 GM-068600, by American Cancer Society Grant
RSG-12-053-01, and by National Science Foundation Graduate Research
Fellowship DGE-1122492.

The authors declare no
competing financial interest.

Abbreviations
ArfADP ribosylation factor

Arp2/3actin-related proteins
2 and 3

CaMKIIcalcium/calmodulin-dependent
protein kinase type II

Cdk5cyclin-dependent kinase 5

CHcalponin homology

CIB1calcium and integrin-binding protein 1

DAB2disabled-2

ECMextracellular matrix

ERKextracellular signal-regulated
kinase

FAfocal
adhesion

F-actinfilamentous actin

FAKfocal adhesion kinase

FERM4.1 protein, ezrin, radixin, moesin

FilGAPfilaminA-associated Rho GTPase
activating protein

GAPGTPase activating protein

GEFguanine nucleotide exchange factor

GPCRG-protein-coupled receptor

GTPaseguanosine triphosphate
hydrolase

ICAPintegrin
cytoplasmic domain-associated protein 1

Igimmunoglobulin G

ILKintegrin-linked kinase

IQGAP1IQ motif containing GTPase activating
protein isoform 1

Krit1Krev/Rap1 interaction trapped-1

MDGImammary-derived growth inhibitor

MHCmyosin heavy chain

MLCmyosin light chain

MLCKmyosin light chain
kinase

NMRnuclear
magnetic resonance

PHpleckstrin homology

PI(4,5)P2phosphatidylinositol 4,5-bisphosphate

PKD1protein kinase D1

PP2Aphosphatase 2A

PTBphosphotyrosine-binding

RIAMRap1-interacting
adaptor molecule

ROCKRho kinase

SFKSrc family kinase

SH2Src homology 2

SHARPINSHANK-associated RH domain-interacting protein

VASPvasodilator-stimulated
phosphoprotein

ZaspZ-band alternatively spliced PDZ motif-containing protein.

