Eukaryotic
circadian oscillators
are comprised of interlocked autoregulatory feedback loops that control
gene expression at the levels of transcription and translation., Despite the evolutionary distance, the molecular mechanism of the
circadian oscillator of the filamentous fungus Neurospora
crassa is remarkably similar to those of higher eukaryotes.− The asexual spore formation of Neurospora is governed
by the circadian clock; therefore, Neurospora circadian
rhythms are readily monitored. Recently,
a bioluminescence reporter has been established to monitor circadian
behavior of various promoters. In addition,
the availability of a whole genome knockout collection of Neurospora has made this fungus as an outstanding model
organism for research on the molecular architecture of eukaryotic
circadian clocks.

FREQUENCY (FRQ)
is a central component of the Neurospora circadian
oscillator like PERIOD (PER) in animals. FRQ forms FFC
(FRQ-FRH complex) with its partner FRQ-interacting RNA helicase (FRH)
and functions as the negative limb in the core circadian negative
feedback loop., The transcription of the frq gene is activated by the positive element, WHITE COLLAR
complex (WCC), which is formed by the interaction of two PER-ARNT-SIM
(PAS) domain-containing transcription factors WC-1 and WC-2, like
CLOCK and BMAL1 in animals. WCC binds rhythmically to the promoter
of frq to induce transcription.− To close the negative feedback loop, FFC inhibits
the activity of WCC. After FRQ is synthesized, it is subjected to
progressive post-translational modifications by phosphorylations that
lead to its degradation by the ubiquitin/proteasome pathway.− When the amount of FRQ drops below a certain level, WCC is reactivated
and a new cycle begins. As a result of this negative feedback loop, frq mRNA and FRQ protein exhibit robust rhythms with a period
close to 24 h. The core negative feedback loop is interlocked with
positive feedback loops to maintain robust rhythmicity., This review will focus on the recent progress in understanding the
molecular network governing the expression and activity of FRQ.

Molecular
Architecture of the Neurospora Circadian
Clock
Identification of clock components has been central
to our understanding
of the clock mechanisms. Since the cloning of the frq gene, more than 20 Neurospora clock components that regulate FRQ expression, function, and stability
at various levels have been identified (Table ). These components form the network that is important for the control
of the clock (Figure ).

Model describing the
core circadian negative feedback loop of Neurospora. In the activation phase, CATP reduces the histone
occupancy on the frq promoter, which promotes WCC
binding and activation of frq transcription. After
transcription of frq mRNA, the nonoptimal codons
in frq mRNA regulate translation speed to allow proper
cotranslational folding of FRQ. The resulting FRQ protein is stabilized
by its interaction with FRH to form the FFC complex. In the repression
phase, FFC recruits casein kinases to phosphorylate PKA-primed WCs
and promotes degradation of frq mRNA by the exosome.
Phosphorylation of WCC inhibits its DNA binding activity and sequesters
it in the cytoplasm. FRQ is progressively phosphorylated by casein
kinases and degraded by the ubiquitin/proteasome system, a process
that is counterbalanced by the actions of PKA, PP1, and PP4. CSW-1
relocates nucleosomes to suppress frq activation,
whereas RCO-1 and CHD1 suppress WC-independent frq transcription to permit WCC-regulated frq transcription.
Dephosphorylation of WCC by PP2A and PP4 reactivates WCC to allow
reactivation of frq transcription.

Components of the Neurospora Circadian Clock
protein (complex)	functions	
FRQ (component of core loop)	forms a complex with FRH,
recruits CKs to phosphorylate itself and WCC	
FRH (component of core loop)	interacts with FRQ to form
FFC, which stabilizes FRQ protein and recruits exosome to regulate frq mRNA stability	
WC-1 (component of core
loop)	forms WCC with
WC-2; WCC
activates frq and clock-controlled genes	
WC-2 (component of
core
loop)	forms WCC with
WC-1; WCC
activates frq and clock-controlled genes	
CKI (CK-1a)	phosphorylates FRQ and WCC	
CKII	phosphorylates FRQ and WCC	
PKA	phosphorylates FRQ and WCC	
CAMK-1	phosphorylates FRQ	
CHK2	phosphorylates FRQ	
PP1	dephosphorylates (to stabilize)
FRQ	
PP2A	dephosphorylates WCC	
PP4	dephosphorylates (to stabilize)
FRQ, dephosphorylates WCC	
FWD-1	part of SCFFWD-1, the E3 ligase responsible for
FRQ ubiquitination	
COP-9 signalosome	regulates the stability
of SCFFWD-1	
CSW-1	tegulates chromatin structure,
changes DNase sensitivity of the frq promoter	
CHD1	enhances DNA methylation
on frq locus and regulates frq transcription	
CATP	regulates histone occupancy
of the frq locus and enhances WCC binding	
Not1–Ccr4 complex	stabilizes WCC	
RCO-1	part of a transcription
repressor complex that suppresses WC-independent transcription of frq	
SET1	histone H3K4
methyltransferase;
regulates frq transcription	
During the early subjective day in
the constant darkness, WCC activates frq transcription
by binding to the clock box (c-box) in
the frq promoter; this binding is essential for the
circadian transcription of frq as well as other clock-controlled
genes.,, Transcriptional
activation is followed by an increase in levels of FRQ protein, which
forms a homodimer that interacts with FRH to form FFC.− The FRQ–FRH interaction is important for maintaining the
steady-state levels and proper structure of FRQ.− In the absence of FRH, FRQ is unstable. FFC interacts
with WCC and promotes phosphorylation of WCs. This phosphorylation
inhibits WCC activity, resulting in a decrease in the level of frq transcription.,− In addition, there is WC-independent transcription of frq that is suppressed by a mechanism that involves the RCO-1 repressor
complex. In addition, FFC recruits the
RNA exosome complex to the frq mRNA to regulate its
half-life.

After its synthesis,
FRQ is progressively phosphorylated by casein
kinases (CKI and CKII) and other kinases through the subjective day
and evening, leading to its degradation by the ubiquitin/proteasome
pathway.−,− FWD-1 is the E3 ubiquitin ligase
responsible for FRQ ubiquitination, and the COP9 signalosome regulates
FRQ stability by modulating the activity and stability of the SCFFWD-1 complex that is critical for FRQ degradation.
In contrast to the role of casein kinases in promoting the degradation
of FRQ, protein kinase A (PKA) phosphorylates and stabilizes FRQ.
The roles of these kinases are countered by multiple protein phosphatases,
including PP1, PP2A, and PP4.,, Thus, the phosphorylation of FRQ is fine-tuned by a series of regulators
to determine its stability and the period length of the clock., Degradation of FRQ to a certain level releases the inhibition of
FRQ on WCC and results in its dephosphorylation and reactivation,
a process that involves PP2A and PP4.,, The reactivated WCC is transported to the nucleus,
binds to the frq c-box with the help of chromatin
modulating factors, and drives the next cycle of frq transcription.,,, The resulting rhythms of the abundance of frq mRNA and FRQ protein and the phosphorylation profile
of FRQ are the hallmarks of the Neurospora circadian
oscillation.

In addition to its role in inhibiting WCC activity,
FRQ also positively
regulates the expression of both WC-1 and WC-2.,,, The detailed
mechanisms are still unknown, but FRQ regulates WC-1 expression at
the post-transcriptional level, in a manner independent of WC-2. FRQ
also enhances wc-2 transcription. These positive
feedback loops are interlocked with the core negative feedback loop,
a feature that is shared in animal clocks.,

Transcriptional Regulation of frq
Post-translational
Regulations of the WCC: Stability, Activity,
and Localization
Transcriptional regulation of frq is mainly achieved by post-translational regulation of its activator,
WCC. Because FRQ represses its own expression, it has been proposed
that FRQ can regulate WCC activity by physical interactions alone.,, However, the concentration of
nuclear FFC is much lower than that of the nuclear WCC. Thus, the
amount of nuclear FRQ is not sufficient to inhibit nuclear WCC through
a direct interaction alone,,,,− suggesting
that FFC may behave like an enzyme to inhibit the WCC. Both biochemical
purification and genetic analyses identified CKI and CKII as FRQ-interacting
kinases that inhibit WCC through phosphorylation. FFC acts as a substrate-recruiting subunit of CKs and mediates
phosphorylation by a physical interaction with WCC. Phosphorylation
of WCC occurs sequentially at multiple residues: first by PKA, which
functions in a manner independent of FRQ, and then by the FRQ-recruited
CKs.,, The phosphorylation
of WCs can be reversed by phosphatases PP2A and PP4 to counterbalance
the actions of kinases.,,

Phosphorylation of clock proteins is also critical to the
negative feedback mechanisms in the animal circadian systems. PER-dependent
rhythms of CLK phosphorylation and E-box binding were shown in Drosophila, and PER-DBT (doubletime kinase)
interaction is required for the transcriptional repression process., On the other hand, it was proposed that the 1:1 PER–CLK interaction
in Drosophila can sequester CLK from DNA to mediate
the feedback process, but it is not clear
whether the interaction alone is sufficient. In mammals, CK2α
was shown to phosphorylate BMAL1 in vitro and in vivo to regulate its nuclear accumulation and clock function,
and furthermore, hyperphosphorylated CLOCK in the repressed phase
displayed less binding to E-box., These findings
suggest the conservation of the negative feedback mechanisms in eukaryotic
clocks, although the exact mechanism in each system may differ.

On the basis of the finding that the frq-null
strain as well as FRQ kinase mutants shows low levels of WCC, it has
been proposed that the phosphorylation of WCC stabilizes the WC proteins.,,,,, Consistent
with this notion, VIVID (VVD), a small photoreceptor protein, can
physically interact with the light-activated WCC, inhibiting its activity
and degradation., Therefore, FFC and VVD independently
and cooperatively regulate the stability of WCC by distinct mechanisms.
In addition, the CCR4–Not complex, conserved among all eukaryotes,
interacts with WC-1 and stabilizes it, probably by affecting its phosphorylation
status. These findings suggest that the
phosphorylation of WCC plays a role in the stability of WCs and ensures
the timely activation of the complex.

Biochemical analyses also
showed that dephosphorylation of WCC
enhances its DNA binding activity in vitro. In mutants
in which the level of FFC-mediated WCC phosphorylation is reduced,
higher WCC occupancy on the frq promoter is observed.,,, In contrast, hyperphosphorylated WCC and a reduced level of binding
of WCC to the c-box of frq promoter were observed
in the phosphatase mutants.,, Therefore, the PKA-primed and FFC-mediated sequential phosphorylations
of WCC can remove the complex from the frq promoter,
resulting in the repression of frq transcription
and, at the same time, stabilization of WCC.

Furthermore, the
FFC-mediated phosphorylation of WCC also sequesters
the WCs in the cytoplasm.,, The ratio of nuclear to cytoplasmic WCC changes in a circadian manner:
when WCC is hyperphosphorylated, more WCC is present in the cytoplasm;
the nuclear level increases when the complex is hypophosphorylated.
In strains with a defective PP2A or disrupted pp4 gene, significantly less WCC is found in accompanying nuclei, and
there are decreased levels of WC DNA binding and reduced frq transcription relative to wild-type levels. These studies suggest
that there are multiple regulators of WC phosphorylation that control
its activity, stability, and subcellular localization.

Chromatin Modulations
at the frq Locus
The nucleosome is the basic
unit of the eukaryotic chromosome. Nucleosomes
are assembled from histone octamers bound to DNA strands. Post-translational
modifications of histones, including H3 and H4 acetylation and methylation,
are known to be the basis of epigenetic regulation that control transcription. Nucleosome depletion or exchange at the promoter
can modulate accessibility of DNA to transcription factors. It has
been shown that many clock-controlled and core clock genes exhibit
rhythmic histone modifications, which oscillate in accordance with
RNA polymerase II occupancies at those loci.−

In Neurospora, rhythmic nucleosome
occupancy and DNase hypersensitive regions are observed on the frq promoter.,, Two homologues of ATP-dependent chromatin-remodeling factors, CLOCKSWITCH
(CSW-1) and chromodomain helicase DNA-binding-1 (CHD1), as well as
a homologue of a bromodomain-containing ATPase called Clock ATPase
(CAPT) are involved in clock function through regulation of frq transcription. These proteins function by regulating
the chromatin status of the frq locus through distinct
mechanisms. CSW-1 and CATP affect WCC occupancy on the frq promoter in opposite ways: CSW-1 appears to promote nucleosome compaction
because the csw-1-null mutant has a relatively open
chromatin structure. In contrast, CATP may be involved in the histone
eviction process, and the catp mutants have a histone
occupancy on the frq promoter higher than that of
wild-type cells. Consistent with this notion, homologues of CATP interact
with histones to activate transcription.− Furthermore, rhythmic changes
in H3K14 acetylation on the frq promoter are lost
in the catp-null strain, suggesting that additional
histone modifiers, including acetyltransferases and deacetylases,
are also involved in the control of frq transcription.

The helicase CHD1 probably regulates frq transcription
by modulating DNA structure at the frq locus. The chd1-null strain exhibits hypermethylation at the frq locus and dampened FRQ oscillation. The molecular mechanism
through which DNA methylation regulates frq transcription
is still not clear. A histone H3K4 methyltransferase SET1 is also
required for normal circadian rhythms and normal WCC binding at the frq promoter. Together, these
findings emphasize the importance of epigenetic regulations in the
function of the Neurospora circadian clock.

WC-Independent
Transcription of frq
The rhythmic transcriptional
activation by WCC is essential for rhythmic frq expression.
Because the levels of frq mRNA are extremely low
in wc-1 and wc-2 mutants, WCC was thought to be the
only transcriptional regulator of frq transcription.
Recently, however, transcriptional repressor RCO-1 was shown to be
an essential clock component that represses WC-independent frq transcription. RCO-1 is
a homologue of yeast Tup1p. RCO-1 interacts with Csp1 to regulate
the expression of clock-controlled genes implicated in metabolism., In the rco-1-null strain, frq mRNA
and FRQ protein levels are constantly high, and conidiation and molecular
rhythms are abolished. More interestingly, in the wc rco-1 double mutants, near wild-type amounts of frq mRNA
are observed, indicating that the suppression of WC-independent transcription
of frq is essential for rhythmicity. Such an elevation
of the level of frq transcription is also observed
in the wc-1 chd1 double mutant, suggesting that CHD1
mediates the repression of WC-independent frq transcription
by regulating chromatin structure. The conserved RCO-1 complex is
also known to participate in clock regulation in plants. In plants,
the TOPLESS/TOPLESS RELATED (TPL/TPR) complex cooperates with pseudoresponse
regulators, the major players of the plant circadian feedback loops,
to repress the transcription of clock genes.

Role of frq Codon Usage in the Control of FRQ
Expression and Function
There are 61 genetic codes for the
20 different translated amino
acids, and thus, most amino acids (except for methionine and tryptophan)
are coded by two to six synonymous codons. Different genomes have
preferences for certain synonymous codons over others; this phenomenon
is called codon usage bias. Codon usage bias impacts protein expression
in prokaryotes and eukaryotes.,− Codon optimization is used in research and industrial laboratories
to achieve optimal protein expression. Recently, codon usage has been proposed to play a role in regulating
protein folding and activity;− however, its in vivo relevance has not been demonstrated.

Selection for codons
that ensure efficient translation is thought
to be the major cause of codon usage bias in different organisms.
Highly expressed genes are encoded predominantly by codons that correspond
to highly abundant tRNAs. This codon usage bias is thought to allow
highly expressed genes to be rapidly translated with high fidelity., In contrast, the core clock genes such as frq in Neurospora and kaiBC in cyanobacteria have
nonoptimal codons in their open reading frames.,

We showed recently that N-terminal codon optimization of frq in Neurospora not only results in higher
FRQ expression levels but also abolishes circadian clock function. Several lines of biochemical evidence suggested
that codon optimization impairs FRQ function in both circadian negative
and positive feedback loops and alters FRQ structure. The effect of
nonoptimal codon usage was partially reversed by growing Neurospora at low temperatures, suggesting that the codon optimization accelerates
translation and affects the cotranslational folding of the FRQ protein.
Furthermore, codon optimization of the central region of FRQ, containing
the CKI-interacting domains, alters the FRQ phosphorylation profile
and stabilizes the protein. These results suggest that the nonoptimal
codons in frq are evolutionarily selected to ensure
that the pace of translation in these regions allows proper folding.

Nonoptimal codon usage of clock components also plays an important
role in cyanobacteria. The nonoptimal codon usage in the kaiBC gene in cyanobacteria enhances organismal fitness at cool temperatures. This is an example of how natural selection
resulted in the use of nonoptimal codons so that the organism can
properly grow under different environmental conditions. These in vivo studies in Neurospora and cyanobacteria
suggest that codon usage is an important mechanism that can regulate
both protein expression and protein structures, previously thought
to be controlled mainly by transcriptional and post-translational
mechanisms, respectively.

Post-translational Regulation of FRQ
Similar to its animal homologue PER, FRQ is progressively phosphorylated
as soon as it is made and becomes extensively phosphorylated before
degradation. Mass spectrometry (MS) analyses
of recombinant peptides phosphorylated in vitro by
the casein kinases and of FRQ protein purified from Neurospora led to the identification of more than 100 phosphorylation sites
in the 989-amino acid protein., The comparison of in vitro and in vivo sites confirmed that
CKI and CKII are responsible for most of the phosphorylation events.
FRQ phosphorylation is known to promote its degradation through the
ubiquitin/proteasome pathway mediated by the ubiquitin E3 ligase-containing
complex SCFFWD-1.,, FWD-1 acts as the substrate-recruiting subunit of
the E3 ligase that recognizes and binds phosphorylated FRQ through
its WD-40 domain. It is known that the mammalian FWD-1 homologue β-TRCP
recognizes a DpSGϕXpS (ϕ is any hydrophobic residue) motif
in the substrates. The substrate-recognizing
domain of β-TRCP is conserved in FWD-1, but the target motif
is not found in any of the phosphorylated regions of FRQ. This suggests
that FWD-1 may not recognize phosphorylated FRQ through a single high-affinity
binding site. Instead, it may sense a conformational change of FRQ
that results from extensive phosphorylations. The presence of multiple
low-affinity binding sites in FRQ may result in high-affinity binding
to FWD-1. This model predicts that multiple FRQ phosphorylation events
contribute to FRQ stability. Indeed, systematic mutagenesis of identified
phosphorylation sites showed that mutation of many phosphorylation
sites affects FRQ stability., In addition, although
most FRQ phosphorylation events promote its degradation, phosphorylation
of the C-terminal region of FRQ results in its stabilization, suggesting
the importance of interdomain interactions to FRQ stability.

Unlike most kinase substrates, FRQ forms a stable complex with
CK-1a through two separate motifs on FRQ.,, Both motifs are required for the FRQ–CK1-a
interaction and CK-1a-dependent phosphorylation of FRQ and WCs. Biochemical
analyses suggest that these two motifs may interact with each other
and mediate the CK-1a interaction and the subsequent phosphorylation
may trigger a change in FRQ conformation that facilitates the degradation
of FRQ by the ubiquitin/proteasome pathway.

Although FRQ nuclear localization is essential for its function
in the circadian clock, most FRQ is found in the cytoplasm.,,, An SV-40-like nuclear localization signal located downstream of
the coiled-coil domain is required and sufficient for the nuclear
localization of FRQ, suggesting that the FRQ cellular distribution
profile is regulated by an active nuclear export process. A study
using a FRQ–FRB fusion protein showed that there is rapid nuclear–cytoplasmic
shuttling of FRQ, suggesting that the phosphorylation of FRQ inhibits
its nuclear import. However, we showed
in a later analysis that the nuclear to cytoplasmic ratio of the FRQ
protein does not significantly change during the circadian cycle despite
differences in phosphorylation status. In addition, mutations in FRQ kinases, phosphatases, and FWD-1,
which all have severe effects on FRQ phosphorylation profiles, do
not significantly alter the nuclear to cytoplasmic ratios of FRQ relative
to that of the wild-type strain. Furthermore, period-changing mutations
of FRQ-phosphorylated residues do not significantly alter the subcellular
localization. These results argue against the role of FRQ phosphorylation
in the cellular localization of FRQ.

What then is the function
of FRQ phosphorylation in addition to
its effect on FRQ stability? Biochemical analyses suggest that the
ability of FRQ to interact with its partners changes during a circadian
cycle., When FRQ is hypophosphorylated in the subjective
early day, it interacts with WCs and CK-1a. When FRQ becomes hyperphosphorylated
in the subjective evening, however, its interaction with WC-2 is weakened.
High levels of hyperphosphorylated FRQ accumulate in the fwd-1-null strain because of the inability of the phosphorylated FRQ to
be ubiquitinated and degraded through the proteasome pathway. This
hyperphosphorylated FRQ is not functional in the negative feedback
loop: It does not repress the transcription of frq. Furthermore, the levels of FRQ–WC
and FRQ–CK-1a interaction are dramatically reduced in the fwd-1-null mutant. These results indicate that the phosphorylation
of FRQ regulates FRQ activity in the negative feedback loop by affecting
its ability to interact with WCs and CK-1a. Thus, the rhythmic FRQ
phosphorylation profile alone can lead to rhythmic FRQ activity, so
rhythm generation may not be totally dependent on the amount of FRQ.

Conclusion
During the past two decades, Neurospora has been
an excellent model organism for studying the molecular mechanisms
of eukaryotic circadian clocks. Studies of Neurospora have uncovered mechanisms that are critical for circadian clock
functions. These mechanisms operate at the transcriptional, post-transcriptional,
cotranslational, and post-translational levels to regulate frq expression, FRQ activity, and stability. These analyses
not only established the FRQ-based negative feedback loop as the core
of the circadian machinery but also provided an explanation of how
circadian period length and clock entrainment are determined at the
molecular level.

This work was
supported by grants from the National Institutes of Health and the
Welch Foundation (I-1560) to Y.L.

The authors declare no
competing financial interest.

