Post-translational
modifications
provide a mechanism for
regulating protein structure and function. Among these modifications,
acetylation is widespread. Recent evidence shows lysine acetylation
regulates the function of many proteins and is conserved evolutionarily., In prokaryotes, acetylation coordinates metabolic flux,, so it is no surprise that metabolic and mitochondrial proteins are
over-represented in the human acetylome., Targeted studies
show that acetylation regulates mitochondrial function
in mammals, where the activities of enoyl-CoA hydratase, malate dehydrogenase,
and long chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase all are regulated by acetylation.

However, less is known regarding the regulation
of the human mitochondrial
acetylome or the effects of acetylation on the function of mitochondrial
proteins. A variety of changes in functional and proteomic aspects
of mitochondria are associated with insulin resistance,− so a more detailed analysis of acetylation of mitochondrial proteins
would be useful in this context. Therefore, one reason for undertaking
this study was to identify acetylation sites in proteins from mitochondria
isolated from skeletal muscle biopsies taken from healthy, nondiabetic
volunteers with a range of insulin sensitivity, to test the hypothesis
that acetylation of mitochondrial proteins is associated with insulin
sensitivity. To accomplish this, we combined euglycemic, hyperinsulinemic
clamps and muscle biopsies together with mass spectrometry approaches
to show that the mitochondrial acetylome is positively correlated
with insulin sensitivity in human muscle. Among the proteins found
to be acetylated extensively was adenine nucleotide translocase 1
(ANT1), which was consistently acetylated at lysines 10, 23, and 92.
We used molecular modeling simulations to show that acetylation of
lysine 23 (Lys23) was sufficient to lower the affinity of ANT1 for
ADP; acetylation at other sites had no effect. In turn, these ADP
binding affinities were used to adjust the parameter values of a computational
model of ANT1 kinetics to explore the
potential functional consequences of the acetylation of Lys23 on adenine
nucleotide flux through ANT1.

Experimental Procedures
Study A
A total
of 16 (eight lean and eight obese) normoglycemic volunteers took part
in study A (relationship between acetylation of mitochondrial proteins
and insulin action), which was approved by the Institutional Review
Board of Arizona State University (ASU). All 16 of the subjects had
euglycemic clamp studies with basal muscle biopsies
(characteristics of the subjects in study A are listed in Table ). Studies were conducted at the Clinical Research
Unit at ASU. Informed consent was obtained from all subjects. The
subjects were sedentary, did not engage in regular exercise, and reported
no change in body weight for at least 6 months. Subjects were instructed
not to exercise for 48 h before studies and to maintain their usual
diet. A medical history,
physical examination, 12-lead electrocardiogram, and complete chemistry
panel were obtained. A 75 g oral glucose tolerance test was performed
to ensure normoglycemia (American Diabetes Association criteria).
No one was taking any medication affecting glucose metabolism. Some in vivo data for the subjects have been reported.

Characteristics of
Subjects in Study
A
 	lean	obese	
gender
(female/male)	4/4	4/4	
age (years)	39.8 ± 4.8	41.0 ± 4.1	
BMI (kg/m2)	23.5 ± 1.4	36.6 ± 1.5	
insulin-stimulated glucose
disposal [mg (kg of FFM)−1 min–1]	13.4 ± 1.1	6.15 ± 0.58	
Hba1c (%)	5.26 ± 0.10	5.74 ± 0.10	
total cholesterol (mg/dL)	160 ± 13	187 ± 15	
plasma triglycerides (mg/dL)	63 ± 5	120 ± 29	
fasting plasma glucose (mg/dL)	82 ± 2	94 ± 3	
fasting plasma insulin (microunits/mL)	3.3 ± 0.2	13.7 ± 3.0	
Data are given as means ± SEM.

P &lt; 0.01.

Study B
A total of three lean and two overweight/obese
normoglycemic subjects took part in study B (changes in protein acetylation
after exercise), which was approved by the Institutional Review Board
of ASU. As in study A, all of these subjects had euglycemic clamp
studies with basal muscle biopsies (characteristics of the subjects
in study B are listed in Table ). Studies
were conducted at the Clinical Research Unit at ASU. Subjects were
prepared for study as described for study A. All subjects received
a hyperglycemic, euglycemic clamp to assess insulin sensitivity, as
described below. The exercise bout was conducted on a separate day
after determination of VO2peak and at least 1 week before
or after the euglycemic clamp. The design of the exercise bout was
previously described. Subjects reported
to the Clinical Research Unit at 7
a.m. after fasting overnight and exercised on a stationary bicycle,
alternating between 70% (8 min) and 90% (2 min) of heart rate corresponding
to that at VO2peak, for a
total of four sets of exercise, with a 2 min rest between sets. After completing exercise, the subject was discharged
and returned the following morning after an overnight fast for a biopsy
of the vastus lateralis muscle, 24 h after the end
of exercise. Peak aerobic capacity (VO2peak) was determined
on a separate day in these six subjects as described previously.

Characteristics of
Subjects in Study
B
gender (female/male)	2/3	
age (years)	33 ± 5	
BMI (kg/m2)	26.2 ± 1.3	
insulin-stimulated glucose
disposal [mg (kg of FFM)−1 min–1]	10.1 ± 1.3	
total cholesterol (mg/dL)	177 ± 12	
plasma triglycerides (mg/dL)	118 ± 35	
fasting plasma glucose (mg/dL)	89 ± 2	
fasting plasma insulin
(microunits/mL)	6.5 ± 1.3	
VO2peak [mL
(kg
of FFM)−1 min–1]	44.5 ± 4.8	
heart rate max exercise
(BPM, predicted, actual)	187 ± 5, 187 ± 4	
heart rate 70%
max exercise
(BPM, predicted, actual)	131 ± 3, 139 ± 6	
heart rate 90%
max exercise
(BPM, predicted, actual)	168 ± 3, 166 ± 5	
Muscle Biopsy and Hyperinsulinemic,
Euglycemic Clamps
Euglycemic clamps and muscle biopsies were
performed in all subjects
as described previously. After an overnight
fast, at 7–8 a.m., a percutaneous biopsy of the vastus
lateralis muscle was obtained with a Bergstrom cannula under
local anesthesia 1 h before starting the insulin infusion. Infusion
of [6,6-2H]glucose was used to trace glucose metabolism,
and the insulin infusion
rate was 80 milliunits
m–2 min–1. Enrichment of deuterated
glucose was determined using gas
chromatography and mass spectrometry as described previously, and steady state equations were used to calculate
rates
of glucose disposal.

Mass Spectrometry
Whole muscle lysates
were processed
as described previously. Mitochondria
were isolated from freshly obtained muscle
biopsies as described previously. Muscle
lysate or mitochondrial proteins were resolved
by one-dimensional SDS–PAGE. No deacetylase inhibitors were
added, so the reported acetylation sites can be taken as a minimum
estimate. Because the deacetylases for these sites have not been identified,
use of specific inhibitors could introduce biases. For analysis of
ANT1, the band corresponding to the molecular weight of ANT1 was excised,
prepared, and analyzed using a Thermo HPLC-nanospray LTQ-FTICR hybrid
mass spectrometer, as described previously.

Data Analysis and Bioinformatics
Tandem mass spectra
were assigned charge states and searched against the IPI_HUMAN_v3.59
database (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/IPI/). Search parameters were as described previously with the addition of acetylation as a modification
and allowing for three miscleavages. The false discovery rate was
determined using a decoy randomized database. The following search
parameters were used: mass tolerance of 10 ppm for precursor ion mass
and 0.5 Da for product ion mass, digestion with trypsin, maximum of
three missed tryptic cleavages, fixed modification of carboamidomethylation,
and variable modifications of oxidation of methionine, acetylation
of lysine, and phosphorylation of serine, threonine, and tyrosine.
Probability assessment of peptide assignments and protein identifications
were done using Scaffold (version Scaffold_2_00_06, Proteome Software
Inc., Portland, OR). Only peptides with ≥95% probability were
considered. All acetylation sites were identified
in a data-dependent manner and verified visually using tandem mass
spectrometry spectra., Site-specific acetylation of lysines
10, 23, and 92 was quantified
using normalized spectral abundance factors,− and ANT1 abundance
was used for normalization. Spectral
abundance factor quantification is based on the notion that the abundance
of a protein is proportional to the number of spectra observed for
peptides derived from that protein, normalized to the length of the
protein and the total number of spectra in the complex digest (like
a loading control). These methods have previously
been described more completely.

Molecular
Modeling
Because the crystal structure of
human ANT1 is not known, a human ANT1 homology model was created on
the basis of the crystal structure of bovine ANT1 [Protein Data Bank
(PDB) entry 1OKC], using Modeler and VMD with the multiseq
plugin of VMD and
the STAMP algorithm. The sequence of
bovine ANT1 is highly similar with that
of human ANT1.

Molecular Dynamics Simulations
All-atom
simulations
were performed with the NAMDsimulation
package (version 2.8). The VMD psfgen plugin was used to create an
Xplor protein structure file (psf) of the human ANT1 structure using
the CHARMM22 topology for proteins and
lipids with CMAP correction. Bulk water molecules were then added
with the Solvate program using a minimal water shell thickness of
6 Å and eight gaussians to define the solvent boundary.

To insert
the protein into a lipid bilayer, water molecules that were within
a 30 Å slice centered on the transmembrane axis of the protein
were trimmed
away. A 90 Å ×
90 Å palmitoyloleoylphosphatidylcholine (POPC) bilayer
was constructed with the VMD membrane builder plugin. The protein
was then centered in the membrane by translating its center of mass,
and lipid molecules within 3 Å of the protein were removed. Finally,
the prepared membrane/protein
system was fully solvated in a 90 Å × 90 Å × 90
Å water box
with 18 chloride counterions to neutralize the net protein charge.

The solvated ANT1/membrane system was equilibrated via a four-stage
process. (1) The membrane was “melted” by performing
a 0.5 ns simulation in which only the lipid tails
were permitted to move. (2) With the protein constrained with a harmonic
energy function, the entire system was subjected to 1000 steps of
minimization followed by equilibration for 0.5 ns at 310 K. (3) Equilibration
for an additional 0.5 ns was performed without
protein constraints to further equilibrate the entire system. (4)
Finally, equilibration for an additional 25 ns was performed while
holding the area of the lipid patch constant. Equilibration of the
system over this lengthy trajectory was validated by plotting the
root-mean-square deviation of the system and observing a convergence.

We refer to the end point of this wild-type equilibration as the
“equilibrated
reference system”, as it served as a common input structure
to all of our computational
experiments. Using the acetyllysine patch on this system (see below),
we prepared a series of three acetylated systems at lysines 10, 23,
and 92. In each of these acetylated systems, the furthest chloride
ion from the channel was deleted to reneutralize the net charge. The
wild type (WT) and three modified systems (Lys10,
Lys23, and Lys92) were then subjected to reminimization, independent
equilibration for 10 ns,
and finally full MD simulation for 30 ns in the isothermal–isobaric
(NPT) ensemble. These four systems lacked the presence
of ADP and are thus hereafter termed “apo-ANT1” simulations.

Electrostatics Analysis
The VMD PMEPOT plugin was used to compute the electrostatic potentials
of the assembled ANT1 systems and simulation results. To compare the
functional effects of lysine acetylation, potentials were computed
on the static protein after the application of an acetyllysine patch
to the Lys10, Lys23, and Lys92 residues. Isosurfaces of the potential
were visualized in VMD. To produce two-dimensional (2D) slices and
line-profile plots of the potential, we used the Python GridDataFormats
library to import the OpenDX files exported from PMEPOT. Profiles
were calculated by interpolating along a line drawn through the lumen
of the channel. The origin of the system was taken as the geometric
center of the α-carbon atoms belonging to the three proline
hinge residues (Pro28, Pro133, and Pro230) that define the gate of
the transporter. 2D slices were rendered with the matplotlib Python
library.

Ensemble Docking
Autodock4 was used to perform docking of ADP to an ensemble of protein conformations
derived from 1500 equidistant snapshots from each of our four apo-ANT1
systems of MD simulations. A custom TCL script was written to convert
the NAMD dcd trajectory files. For each simulation snapshot, the protein
was aligned with the equilibrated reference system and the protein
structure was written to a separate file.

Instead of assigning
partial charges via the Gasteiger method implemented in Autodock tools,
we preserved the partial charge assignments previously defined from
the CHARMM22 topology files used for all-atom simulations. To export
these partial charges explicitly, PQR files were exported from the
NAMD trajectories. The prepare\_receptor4.py script from Autodock
Tools (ADT) was then used to convert the PQR files to the native Autodock
PDBQT format. We manually validated that protein snapshots from wild-type
and acetylated systems had net charges of
+18 and +17, respectively.

Autogrid4 was invoked with a default
grid spacing of 0.375 Å. The bounding box was created for the
lower pocket of the channel,
positioned at the center of mass of the protein. An XYZ grid size
of 40 × 40
× 40 points was used. Docking was then performed
on each ANT1MD snapshot conformation with a Lamarckian genetic algorithm.
A population
of 256 was used, with 2500000 maximal energy evaluations and 27000
maximal generations. We adjusted these parameters extensively but
arrived at similar distributions for each experiment. The ADP ligand
was exported from VMD into PQR format and prepared manually with Autodock
Tools. Nonpolar hydrogens were merged, and nine active torsions were
defined by default. The net charge of ADP was reported to be −3.
After docking, binding energies and estimated binding constants
were parsed from results files with the Unix programs egrep, awk,
and sort.

In addition to ensemble docking, we also docked ADP
to the static
equilibrated wild-type system. The docked pose was similar to the
best poses found in docking of the ensemble to the apo-ANT1 ensembles.
The docked ligand was subsequently incorporated into the ANT1 structure,
and two additional MD simulations were performed on both the wild-type
(WT) and acetylated Lys23 systems. These bound “ANT1/ADP”
simulations were subsequently analyzed and subjected to independent
rounds of ensemble docking.

Finally, the physiological relevance
of acetylation was assessed
by converting these binding energies to ADP dissociation constants
(Kd): Kb =
e–(ΔG)/(RT) and Kd = 1/Kb, where Kb is the equilibrium binding
constant.

Computational
Model of ANT Flux
The velocity of ATP–ADP
exchange by ANT1 was modeled using the complete kinetic description
developed by Metelkin et al. Because the
exchange of ATP4– for ADP3– by
ANT involves the translocation of one charge, ATP–ADP
antiport is energetically driven by the sum of electrical and chemical
potentials:where F is the Faraday constant,
ΔΨ is the electrical potential across the inner membrane, R is the gas constant, T is absolute temperature,
and o denotes the cytosolic and i the matrix spaces. Metelkin et al. have developed
a bi-bi random kinetic model of ANT, which takes into account these
electrochemical driving forces and their impact on kinetic binding
and rate constants. For ANT flux simulations, we used the data of
Glancy et al. obtained from
isolated skeletal muscle mitochondria respiring at five experimentally
maintained levels of ATP free energy (see Table ). These data included steady state values of ATP and ADP concentrations
in the extramitochondrial (cytosolic) space, ΔΨ, oxygen
consumption rates, and ATP production rates. To estimate the matrix
ATP and ADP concentrations at each of the five steady states, we used
the ANT rate equation. Briefly, because
the matrix total adenine nucleotide
pool is constant (we used a value of 10 mM), the matrix ATP and ADP
concentrations can be calculated when other values in the rate equation
(ATP flux, ΔΨ, and cytosolic ATP and ADP concentrations)
are known. Because Glancy et al. observed
a KmADP for respiration of 43 μM, the baseline value for the ANT1 dissociation
constant
in the rate equation was equal to this value. All other parameter
values were taken from ref ().

Results
Acetylated Proteins Are
Abundant in Human Skeletal Muscle and
Mitochondria
To assess the extent and sites of lysine acetylation
in skeletal muscle proteins, portions of whole muscle biopsies from
three of the lean control subjects were lysed. Proteins were resolved
by one-dimensional SDS–PAGE. Samples were processed, and mass
spectrometry analysis was performed as described previously., Acetylated proteins and specific sites of acetylation in whole muscle
are listed in Table . To obtain better proteomic
coverage of mitochondrial proteins, mitochondria were isolated from
freshly obtained skeletal muscle biopsies from the same three lean
volunteers, and lysates of these mitochondria were processed in the
same way as whole muscle lysates. Acetylated mitochondrial proteins
are listed in Table . Pathways represented
included shuttle activity (aspartate aminotransferase), fatty acid
metabolism (hydroxyacyl-coenzyme A dehydrogenase), citric acid cycle
(malate dehydrogenase), NADP-dependent isocitrate dehydrogenase, ATP
synthesis (ATP synthase subunits b, d, and O), reactive oxygen species
metabolism (Mn-superoxide dismutase), and adenine nucleotide translocase
activity (ANT1).

Acetylation Sites in Whole Muscle
Homogenates
protein	acetylated
amino acid sequence	
myosin-2	773AGLLGLLEEM(ox)RDDK(ac)786	
myosin-7	146K(ac)RSEAPPHIFSISDNAYQYM(ox)LTDR169	
myosin light chain 3	124NK(ac)DTGTYEDFVEGLR138	
γ-enolase	202DATNVGDEGGFAPNILENSEALELVK(ac)227	
histone H3.2	19KQLATK(ac)AAR27	
voltage-dependent anion-selective
channel protein 1	35SENGLEFTSSGSANTETTK(ac)VTGSLETK61	
transitional endoplasmic
reticulum ATPase	2ASGADSK(ac)GDDLSTAILK18	
cytochrome b–c1 complex subunit 2, mitochondrial	353AAYNQVK(ac)TIAQGNLSNTDVQAAK375	
tubulin β-2C chain	319GRMSMK(ac)EVDEQMLNVQNK336	
myoglobin	65HGATVLTALGGILK(ac)K79	
 	33LFK(ac)GHPETLEK43	
isoform 1 of myomesin-1	372YK(ac)GEFDETRFHAGASTM(ac)PLSFGVTPYGYASR402	
isoform 2 of l-lactate
dehydrogenase A chain	2ATLK(ac)DQLIYNLLK14	
trifunctional enzyme subunit
α, mitochondrial	494K(ac)MGLVDQLVEPLGPGLK516	
 	213VIGM(ox)HYFSPVDK(ac)M(ox)QLLEIITTEK230	
Acetylation sites are denoted K(ac);
methionine oxidation is denoted M(ox).

Acetylation Sites in Isolated Human
Muscle Mitochondria
mitochondrial
protein	acetylated
amino acid sequence	
ADP/ATP translocase 1	2GDHAWSFLK(ac)DFLAGGVAAAVSK23	
 	8DFLAGGVAAAVSK(ac)TAVAPIER31	
 	81YFPTQALNFAFK(ac)DK94	
trifunctional enzyme subunit β	292LK(ac)PAFIKPYGTVTAANSSFLTDGASAM(ox)LIM(ox)AEEK325	
trifunctional enzyme subunit α	214K(ac)M(ox)GLVDQLVEPLGPGLKPPEER235	
 	494VIGM(ox)HYFSPVDK(ac)M(ox)QLLEIITTEK516	
aspartate aminotransferase	82K(ac)AEAQIAAK90	
 	356TQLVSNLK(ac)K364	
 	394LIK(ac)EFSIYM(ox)TK404	
 	397EFSIYM(ox)TK(ac)DGR407	
 	410VAGVTSSNVGYLAHAIHQVTK(ac)430	
hydroxyacyl-CoA dehydrogenase	166FAGLHFFNPVPVM(ox)K(ac)LVEVIK179	
isoform 1	254GDASK(ac)EDIDTAM(ox)K266	
malate dehydrogenase	53LTLYDIAHTPGVAADLSHIEK(ac)AAVK78	
 	177ANTFVAELK(ac)GLDPAR191	
 	298GIEK(ac)NLGIGK307	
 	302NLGIGK(ac)VSSFEEK314	
 	329K(ac)GEDFVK355	
Mn-superoxide dismutase	54HHAAYVNNLNVTEEK(ac)YQEALAK75	
 	115GELLEAIK(ac)R123	
ATP synthase subunit d	59ANVAK(ac)AGLVDDFEKK73	
 	112IVEYEK(ac)EM(ox)EK121	
isocitrate dehydrogenase
(NADP)	46VAK(ac)PVVEM(ox)DGDEM(ox)TR60	
mitochondrial	70LILPHVDIQLK(ac)YFDLGLPNR89	
 	81YFDLGLPNRDQTDDQVTIDSALATQK(ac)YSVAVK112	
 	173HAHGDQYK(ac)ATDFVADR188	
 	383GK(ac)LDGNQDLIR393	
ATP synthase subunit b	155SQQALVQK(ac)R163	
ATP synthase subunit O	58QNKLEQVEK(ac)ELLR64	
 	159TVLK(ac)SFLSQGQVLK172	
 	163SFLSQGQVLKLEAK(ac)176	
 	189IGEK(ac)YVDMSVK199	
Acetylation
of Mitochondrial Proteins Is Related to Insulin
Sensitivity (study A)
To determine whether the extent of
acetylation of mitochondrial proteins overall is associated with insulin
sensitivity, normalized spectral abundance factor (NSAF) quantification
was performed using a total of 16 nondiabetic, healthy volunteers
(eight lean and eight obese), summing results for all sites that were
found in all mitochondrial proteins listed in Table . The overall acetylation state of mitochondrial proteins
was positively correlated with insulin-stimulated glucose disposal
[r = 0.60; P &lt; 0.01 (Figure )]. Total acetylation
also was correlated positively with BMI (r = 0.55; P &lt; 0.05) but not with fasting plasma insulin (r = 0.43; P = NS).
Analyzed as groups, the levels of total mitochondrial protein acetylation
were higher in lean [(3.23 ± 0.32) × 10–6 NSAF unit] than obese volunteers [(2.24 ± 0.31) × 10–6 NSAF unit] (P &lt; 0.05).

Estimated Binding Energies of ADP
with Unacetylated and Lys23-Acetylated ANT1
 	unacetylated	Lys23	
binding energy (mean) (kcal/mol)	–7.7	–5.816	
Kd (of mean energy) (μM)	3.66	79.4	
binding energy
(SD) (kcal/mol)	0.78	1.28	
binding energy range (±1
SD) (kcal/mol)	–8.49
to −6.93	–7.09 to −4.53	
corresponding Kd range (μM)	1.02–13.04	9.94–634	
Means of
binding energies were obtained
through fitting the normal distribution to histograms of binding energies
from ensemble docking experiments. The estimated standard deviations
were used to consider a range of binding energies of 1σ to either
side of the mean. Dissociation constants (Kd) were calculated from these estimated mean binding energies.

Acetylation of mitochondrial proteins is correlated
with insulin
action. The number of total spectra assigned to all acetylated peptides
derived from mitochondrial proteins was normalized to the total number
of spectra for mitochondrial proteins (NSAF), using mitochondria isolated
from subjects described in Table . Empty circles
represent data for individuals with a BMI of &lt;25.0 and filled circles
data for individuals with a BMI of &gt;30.0. N =
16;
*P &lt; 0.05.

Adenine Nucleotide Translocase 1 (ANT1) Contains Multiple Acetylation
Sites
Among the mitochondrial proteins we identified, ANT1
was observed to be present at a high level (based on spectral abundance)
and acetylated in all individuals tested (based on the presence of
spectra for acetylated peptides) in the initial screen of three subjects
at lysines 10, 23, and 92. Because ANT1 has significant control of
mitochondrial respiration under physiological conditions, we performed
more detailed studies of regulation of acetylation of this protein. The amino acid sequence of human ANT1, with
verified
acetylation sites highlighted, is shown in Figure A. The yeast sequence also is shown to illustrate the homology
of acetylation sites. The crystal structure of ANT1, in the “c”
conformation (open to the intermembrane space), complexed with the
inhibitor carboxyatractyloside, is shown
in panels B and C of Figure . The human ANT1
homology model was prepared and inserted into a POPC membrane for
simulation (Figure D). NSAF analysis showed
that ANT1 abundance, expressed relative to total mitochondrial proteins,
did not differ between lean [(7.15 ± 0.92) × 10–7 NSAF unit] and obese subjects [(7.27 ± 0.63) × 10–7 NSAF unit] (n = 16). Moreover, ANT1
acetylation at Lys23 was unaltered by obesity
(7.15257 × 10–7 ± 9.17958 × 10–8 NSAF unit vs 6.33032 × 10–7 ± 6.27261 × 10–8 NSAF unit, normalized
to ANT1 abundance). ANT1 acetylation, overall or Lys23,
was not correlated with insulin-stimulated glucose disposal, BMI,
or fasting plasma insulin levels.

(A) Sequence alignment of human ANT1 and
yeast AAC2. For the human
sequence, yellow and green highlighting represent mass spectrometry
coverage and observed lysine acetylations, respectively. For the yeast
sequence, red highlighting indicates residues required for ADP transport.
Arrows indicate residues that bind ADP phosphates in our modeling
experiments. This sequence alignment was drawn with ESPript. (B) Top-down and (C) side cut-away views of
bovine ANT1 complexed with the inhibitor carboxyatractyloside. Acetylated
lysines (10, 23, and 92) are colored blue. (D) Human ANT1 homology
model inserted into a POPC membrane for modeling experiments.

Acetylation of Lys23 of
ANT1 Changes after Exercise, Depending
on Insulin Sensitivity (study B)
We reasoned that if acetylation
of mitochondrial proteins were regulated in a physiological manner,
exercise and its attendant increases in ATP production rates and changes
in mitochondrial redox state would be a prime candidate to cause changes.
To assess this, an acute exercise protocol that we had previously
used to show that insulin resistant muscle is also exercise resistant
was employed. Biopsies taken in the resting
state and 24 h after exercise were subjected to analysis of ANT1 Lys23
acetylation.
Overall, there was a significant reduction in Lys23 acetylation that
was highly dependent on insulin sensitivity (Figure ; r = 0.90; P &lt; 0.05).

Change
in acetylation of ANT1 at lysine 23 that is inversely correlated
with insulin sensitivity. Subjects with a range of insulin sensitivities,
as measured by glucose disposal (milligrams per kilogram of FFM per
minute) during a euglycemic clamp had a single exercise bout with
resting and 24 h post-exercise muscle biopsies. Lysine 23 acetylation
was assessed as described in  and expressed here as a percent change from basal (negative percent
change indicating a decrease in acetylation). r =
0.90; P &lt; 0.05.

Acetylation Affects the Electrostatic Properties of ANT1
To assess the functional significance of lysine acetylation that
results in the loss of positive charge, we analyzed the electrostatic
properties of unacetylated and acetylated (Lys10, Lys23, and Lys92)
ANT1. We produced 2D slices (Figure A) of
the electrostatic potential using transverse sections through the
region of ANT1 with the highest charge, where ANT1 exhibited a strong
electrostatic potential at the bottom of the cavity, probably directing
the binding of negatively charged ADP. The potential was highest near
the side chain of Lys23 (Figure B). To visualize
the changes to the positions and shapes of the isopotential after
acetylation, we interpolated the potentials along a line drawn through
the axis of the channel (Figure B). The electrostatic
potential of these plots near the binding pocket experienced a rapid
decline with distance “upward” through the channel opening,
toward
the intermembrane space or cytosol (Figure C). The potential
at the binding pocket was reduced with acetylation of only Lys23,
suggesting that acetylation specifically at this site could affect
ADP binding affinity.

ANT1 has a +18 charge and acts as a funnel to attract
ADP. (A)
2D slices of the electrostatic potential. (B) To visualize the electrostatic
profile along a hypothetical reaction coordinate in which ADP would
translocate, the potential was interpolated along a 30 Å line
(orange) drawn in the vertical axis. The origin was defined as the
geometric center of the proline hinge α-carbon atoms. The three
mitochondrial carrier motif gate helices are colored purple. The electrostatic
potential is greatest at a site near the side chain of Lys23 (red
sphere). In the profile plots (C), this potential maximum is clearly
visible and substantially reduced in the Lys23 acetylated system.

Modeling of Apo-ANT1
All-atom molecular dynamics (MD)
simulations were performed for 30 ns using unacetylated and acetylated
(Lys10, Lys23, and Lys92) ANT1 systems. Simulations were performed
without ADP (apo-ANT1 simulations) to test whether lysine acetylation
affects the structure
or dynamics of apo-ANT1. Fluctuation values [root-mean-square fluctuation
(rmsf)] for the protein
were plotted versus sequence position. A broad increase was seen near
hydrophobic residues 76–87 (midpoint of the second transmembrane
helix) in the acetylated Lys23
simulation (Figure A), representing the side
chain of acetylated Lys23 drifting away from the binding pocket. Rather
than strong electrostatic interactions of Lys23 with Glu30 in the
salt bridge network observed in simulations of unacetylated ANT1,
the hydrophobic part of the side chain of acetylated Lys23 interacted
with residues Tyr81 and Asn77, pulling the second transmembrane helix
inward toward the channel lumen. In the three other simulations, deacetylated
Lys23 remained localized to the binding pocket due to electrostatic
interactions with Glu30 (refer to Figure A
for positions of residues).

To investigate the consequences
of acetylation on ADP binding, we used an ensemble docking approach.
Docking of ADP was focused to the binding pocket of the channel. Docking
of ADP to the acetylated Lys10 and Lys92 systems replicated the unacetylated
system. ADP adopted similar docking poses in all three acetylated
systems. The two phosphate groups were arranged in a vertical orientation
near the center of the pocket, preferentially interacting with four
basic residues: Arg80, Arg280, Arg236, and Lys23. Despite no differences
in the conformation of bound ADP, there were differences in binding
affinity. The distributions of the estimated binding energies were
similar among the unacetylated, Lys10-acetylated, and Lys92-acetylated
systems. However, acetylating Lys23 resulted in a large shift in the
total binding energy of ADP from −3 to approximately −1
kcal/mol (Figure B).

(A) rmsf profiles of
the four apo-ANT1 simulations. A broad perturbation
can be seen between residues 76 and 87 in the acetylated Lys23 simulation.
(B) Acetylated Lys23 is observed departing the binding pocket (bottom
left) and participating in hydrophobic interactions with the sidewall
of the channel. These interactions pull the second transmembrane helix
slightly inward over the course of a 30 ns simulation. (C) Binding
energy distributions obtained from ensemble docking of the four simulated
systems.

Modeling of ANT1 with ADP
Bound
In the apo-ANT1 system,
docking experiments might yield weak binding affinities, because the
binding pocket is unable to rearrange to more favorably accommodate
the absent ligand. To allow such rearrangements, we conducted molecular
dynamics experiments with ADP docked to the binding pocket. We performed
docking of ADP to the static equilibrated unacetylated structure and
used this system as an input for two further simulations. Wild-type-bound
(unacetylated/ADP) and acetylated Lys23-bound (acetylated Lys23/ADP)
systems were prepared and simulated as before for 30 ns. The charged
residues within the binding pocket rapidly reorganized. Using unacetylated
ANT1, Arg80, Arg280, Arg236, and Lys23 rearranged to form tight hydrogen
bonds with the negatively charged ADP phosphate groups. Figure B shows superimposed
structures of the unacetylated and Lys23-acetylated simulations with
ADP bound. Both systems had the same initial configuration, in which
critical residues of the binding pocket interacted with charged residues
at the periphery. After simulation for 30 ns, the side chains of these
residues rearranged to a more centralized conformation to bind the
ADP phosphates (Figure B). In both systems,
the final side chain conformations were similar for each charged residue,
with the exception of acetylated Lys23, which drifted away from the
binding pocket (Figure B). The location of
the docked ADP within the unacetylated ANT1 after simulation for 30
ns is illustrated in Figure C. The terminal
phosphates of ADP interacted primarily with four basic residues, one
of which is Lys23, the others being arginines 80, 236, and 280.

(A) Overlaid
binding pocket regions of both unacetylated and acetylated
Lys23 systems before ADP is docked. The acetyl group atoms in the
acetylated system are colored red (oxygen) and teal (carbon). (B)
The overlaid binding pockets for both systems after ADP is docked
at the systems are simulated for 30 ns. From the overlay, we see that
all charged residues have similar ending conformations except acetylated
Lys23, which drifts away from ADP. Only the phosphates of ADP are
shown for the sake of clarity. Dark blue side chains interact the
strongest with ADP and are homologues of critical yeast mutants (Figure A). Lightly colored residues form the underlying
salt bridge network. (C) Location of the ADP binding pocket in ANT1.
ADP is shown bound after docking and MD simulation for 30 ns. (D)
We measured the radial distance of basic side chains in the binding
pocket in the apo and bound simulations. The dramatic stabilization
after ADP insertion demonstrates an induced fit. (E) Distribution
of binding energies obtained from ensemble docking experiments for
the unacetylated/ADP and Lys23/ADP simulations.

Next, we analyzed the radial positions of the conserved critical
residues in the binding pocket (Lys23, Arg80, Arg280, Lys33, Arg138,
Arg235, and Arg236) as a function of time. From the unacetylated system
simulation, we computed the average position of the terminal phosphorus
atom of ADP. Side chain distances were calculated from this position
to the NZ atoms of Lys23 and Lys33 and the CZ atoms of Arg80, Arg138,
Arg235, Arg236, and Arg280 for the 25 ns unbound (unacetylated) equilibration
and the 30 ns bound simulation (unacetylated/ADP). Time evolution
of these distances, which indirectly measures the interaction of ADP
with these conserved residues critical for binding, showed a substantial
increase in binding pocket stability at the transition of the equilibration
and bound simulations (Figure D).

We
hypothesized that this induced fit strengthens ADP binding and
re-evaluated binding affinities of ADP for unacetylated and acetylated
Lys23 ANT using ensemble docking. We conducted an independent set
of docking experiments on snapshots from the two bound ANT1/ADP simulations
and fit normal distributions to the binding energy histograms obtained
from these experiments (Figure E). Binding
energies increased dramatically compared to those of the apo-ANT1
docking experiments (Figure C). The ADP binding
affinity of the unacetylated ANT1 increased from −3 kcal/mol
in the apo-ANT1 ensemble to −7.7 kcal/mol for the ADP-bound
unacetylated structure (unacetylated/ADP).
For the acetylated Lys23 system, ADP bound with an estimated energy
of −5.8 kcal/mol to the bound (Lys23/ADP) ensemble, confirming
and emphasizing
how Lys23 acetylation reduces the affinity of ANT1 for ADP.

We used the range of binding energies, from one standard deviation
to the left and right of the estimated means, to calculate KdADP values (Table ). These calculations
clearly show the dramatic impact of Lys23 acetylation on the binding
affinity of ANT1 for ADP. Mean binding energies gave KdADP values of 3.66 and 79.4 μM for
unacetylated and acetylated Lys23, respectively (Table ). Thus, MD modeling predicts that Lys23 acetylation causes
large increases in KdADP, at values that
reflect the physiological
range of ADP concentrations in vertebrate skeletal muscle.

Modeling
of ANT1 Function with Changes in KdADP
To explore potential consequences
of such KdADP changes on ANT1 function,
ANT1 flux (JANT in nanomoles of ATP per
minute per milligram
of mitochondrial protein) was simulated using the kinetic model of
Metelkin et al. at three values
of KdADP: 43.0, 79.4, and 3.66 μM.
The “baseline”
condition, KdADP of 43.0 μM, was
based on the data
of Glancy et al. and was used to calculate matrix ATP/ADP. The other
two values represent
modeling-derived estimates for ANT1 with Lys23 acetylated (79.4 μM)
or unacetylated (3.66 μM). As reported in Table  and illustrated in Figure , model
output predicts that increasing the KdADP from 43.0 to 79.4 μM due to ANT1
Lys23 acetylation would result in a dramatic decrease in mitochondrial
ATP export. Moreover, this decline in ANT flux would occur across
the entire aerobic scope of the mitochondrion. A KdADP of 3.66 μM obviously implies near
saturation of ANT at ADP concentrations in the range often observed
in resting skeletal muscle. In this case, the model of Metelkin et
al. not surprisingly
predicted near-maximal flux at very low ADP concentrations.

Data reported
in Table  are graphically
illustrated here. The rate of export of mitochondrial ATP by ANT (JANT) is simulated with the kinetic model of
Metelkin et al. at KdADP values of 3.66, 43.0, and 79.4 μM. These KdADP values correspond to deacetylated ANT1,
the observed data of Glancy et al. in
isolated mitochondria, and ANT1 acetylated at Lys23, respectively.
See the text for further discussion.

ANT Fluxes (JANT) Simulated with the Kinetic Model
of Metelkin et al.
 	 	 	matrix	cyto	matrix	cyto	JANT (nmol min–1 mg–1)	
JO2 (nmol min–1 mg–1)	JATP (nmol
min–1 mg–1)	ΔΨ
(mV)	ATP/ADP	[ADP] (mM)	[ATP]
(mM)	[ADP] (μM)	[ATP] (mM)	KdADP = 43.0 μM	KdADP = 79.4 μM	KdADP = 3.66 μM	
123	664	201	0.39	299	7.22	2.78	16.7	4.98	665	469	1932	
151	815	200	0.31	224	7.65	2.35	22.2	4.98	815	586	1941	
191	1031	198	0.21	149	8.27	1.74	33.3	4.97	1031	768	1740	
225	1215	197	0.17	112	8.58	1.43	44.4	4.96	1214	929	1608	
261	1409	195	0.11	74	8.98	1.02	66.7	4.93	1410	1134	1284	
The rate of export of mitochondrial
ATP by ANT (JANT) was simulated with the
kinetic model of Metelkin et al. All
model kinetic parameters were taken from ref (), except for ADP affinity.
The data of Glancy et al. from isolated
mitochondria respiring at five steady state levels of ATP free energy
provided values for O2 consumption rate (JO2), ATP production rate (JATP), membrane potential (ΔΨ), and the cytosolic
(i.e., extramitochondrial) concentrations of ADP and ATP, at an observed KMADP for respiration of 43.0 μM. This
ADP affinity was inserted into the model to calculate the apparent
matrix ADP and ATP concentrations. This
procedure yielded excellent matching of model output JANT to the experimentally observed JATP at reasonable matrix ATP/ADP ratios. Next, the functional
consequences of ANT1 Lys23 acetylation were explored by running model
simulations with a step increase in KdADP to 79.4 μM. This resulted in dramatic reductions in ANT
flux. Finally, deacetylation, and the corresponding decrease in KdADP to 3.66 μM, resulted in very high JANT values even at very low cytosolic ADP concentrations.

Discussion
This
study was undertaken in part to identify and quantify acetylation
sites in proteins from skeletal muscle from humans with a wide range
of insulin sensitivity, focusing on mitochondrial and other proteins
involved in metabolism. To accomplish this, we used euglycemic clamps
to quantify insulin sensitivity on groups of lean and obese individuals,
and muscle biopsies together with mitochondrial fractionation and
a proteomics approach to identify lysine acetylation sites in mitochondrial
and other proteins in skeletal muscle. Because we did not specifically
enrich acetylated peptides, our acetylome likely represents the most
with the highest levels of acetylation. Many of the acetylated proteins
we observed are involved in metabolism. Employing isolated mitochondria to enrich the preparation
identified a number of additional sites in mitochondrial proteins.
Our analyses showed that overall, when total acetylation was measured,
it was found to be positively associated with insulin sensitivity
in resting muscle. That is, total protein acetylation was higher in
individuals whose skeletal muscle was the most sensitive to insulin,
as assessed by the euglycemic clamp technique, suggesting that a balance
between acetylation and deacetylation favoring acetylation characterizes
insulin sensitive skeletal muscle, specifically under basal, resting
conditions. However, because alterations in mitochondrial function
have been associated with insulin resistance,− in addition
to the overall protein acetylation state, acetylation
of individual mitochondrial proteins also should be assessed within
the context of insulin sensitivity and the potential affects of acetylation
on the function of specific proteins.

Among the acetylated mitochondrial
proteins we identified, the
adenine nucleotide translocase ANT1 (SLC25A4) stood out because of
its multiple acetylation sites, its importance in physiologic control
of respiration, and its major role in
proton leak in skeletal muscle mitochondria. Lysine residues contribute to the net positive charge
of ANT1 that is critical for transport of ADP/ATP, and acetylation
of these residues could affect the function of the protein by altering
charge-based interactions. We identified
three lysine acetylation sites in ANT1,
namely, lysines 10, 23, and 92. Moreover, we also showed that lysine
23 acetylation of ANT1 is regulated by an acute bout of exercise in
an insulin-dependent manner.

Given the evidence that ANT1 is
a central point of control for
oxidative metabolism and that mutations in ANT1 in yeast and humans can
cause profound dysfunction, we focused on characterizing the biophysical
mechanisms by which ANT1 function might be altered by acetylation
of these charged residues. Acetylation of critical positively charged
residues of ANT1 could affect the electrostatic properties and inhibit
the
initial capture or binding of ADP or could perturb its structure or
dynamics, possibly changing the shape of its binding pocket or altering
molecular dynamics that facilitate ligand recognition or channel opening.
To capture and transport ADP, ANT1 relies upon a substantial +18 charge
to attract negatively charged ADP molecules. Wang et al. showed that
this charge is high in comparison to those of most mitochondrial proteins,
so it is critical to understand the effects of acetylation on the
electrostatic properties of ANT1. Of the lysine residues we identified
to be acetylated in our study, Lys23 is uniquely positioned at the
binding pocket where the electrostatic potential is highest.

After initial ADP capture and binding, ANT1 undergoes a conformational
change leading to channel opening and passage of ADP into the mitochondrial
matrix. ANT1 is characterized by three mitochondrial carrier motifs,
PX(D/E)XX(K/R). The motifs colocalize in the structure
of bovine ANT1 to form a triple-helix gate at the
matrix side of the channel. The proline residues form kinks in the
α-helices, allowing a hinge motion to occur during opening and
closing of the channel. The two charged D/E and K/R residues
of each helix form salt bridges that bind the neighboring helices
together in a closed conformation. Channel opening may require disruption
of this salt bridge network, presumably by the binding of ADP to the
three basic residues located on these helices. ANT1 may undergo a
conformational switch between a cytosol-facing c state and a matrix-facing
m state, in which either ADP or ATP is bound and translocated in alternating
order. We postulated that a perturbation of these dynamics by lysine
acetylation could influence the function of the channel. A large structural
difference in the channel occurred when Lys23 was acetylated, manifested
by the second transmembrane helix (residues 76–87) being perturbed
due to interactions with acetylated Lys23. The results
suggest that channel narrowing may be a structural consequence of
Lys23 acetylation that might affect ADP transport. Parenthetically,
although phosphorylated tyrosine residues, particularly Tyr191 and
Tyr195, may participate in the passage of ADP through ANT1, this model did not test their involvement with
acetylation
at Lys23. In some cases, we did observe phosphorylation at these residues
in human ANT1.

With regard to ADP capture and binding, two previous
studies simulated
the early capture and translocation events of ADP using all-atom molecular
dynamics techniques., Both studies focused on the strong
electrostatic properties of ANT1
to act as “funnel” that captures ADP molecules from
the intermembrane space and transports them to the binding pocket.
In these simulations,
ADP became trapped in various locations and orientations for extended
durations that we felt precluded the use of all-atom molecular dynamics
to simulate capture events for determining the effects of lysine acetylation.
Therefore, we focused on docking of ADP directly to the binding pocket
where Lys23 is located. Autodock has been employed successfully to
perform a screen of ATP binding sites on the matrix-facing surface
of ANT1, so we adopted similar methodologies
for ADP binding
in the cytosol-facing pocket. These experiments resulted in highly
reproducible bound conformations of ADP agreeing with all-atom molecular
dynamics
results and yielded estimates of binding
energies that indicate a single acetylation event at a crucial site
can have significant effects.

Molecular dynamics data provide
strong evidence that acetylation
of Lys23 profoundly reduces the affinity of ADP for ANT1. The ADP
dissociation constant (Kd; the concentration
of ADP required for half-occupancy
of ANT1), calculated from the binding energies from ensemble docking
experiments, was 3.66 μM in unacetylated ANT1 but increased
to 79.4 μM with the acetylation of Lys23. Human skeletal muscle
rests at a free cytosolic ADP concentration of roughly 10–20
μM, with an apparent KMADP for respiration
of 30–50
μM., These values fall between our estimates
of the binding
affinities of ADP for the unacetylated and Lys23-acetylated systems.
In human skeletal muscle contracting in the mild-to-moderate aerobic
metabolic range, ANT1 is the major locus of aerobic flux control and 31P NMR measurement of energy
phosphate concentrations has shown that simple Michaelis–Menten
kinetics provide a reasonable fit of the [ADP]:VO2 relationship, although higher-order models also have been
demonstrated. To gain insight into the
functional consequences
that
could result from Lys23 acetylation, ANT function was simulated using
a computational model. Metelkin et
al. assigned a value of 39 μM to the kinetic parameter
corresponding to ANT–ADP binding on the outside of de-energized
mitochondria, which is similar to the observed KMADP for respiration of intact muscle (above)
and isolated mitochondria, as reported by Glancy et al. Simulations run with the data of Glancy et al.,
including their observed KmADP of 43 μM, allowed the model to match observed ATP production
rates
by isolated mitochondria across five levels of ATP free energy. In
contrast, simulating acetylated Lys23 by increasing the model KdADP to 79.4 μM, with all other model
input variables held constant, dramatically reduced the mitochondrial
ATP output. This analysis does not necessarily imply that mitochondria
with ANT1 Lys23 acetylation would be catalytically incompetent to
match cellular ATP demand, but it does strongly suggest that acetylation
would require compensatory changes in other variables, and these changes
ultimately would be associated with a reduction in cytosolic energy
status. Important caveats obviously attend such hypothetical scenarios,
but the analysis nevertheless affords useful insight into the role
of ANT1 in the control of respiration and the profound impact of ANT1
acetylation. The observation that the apparent in vivoKMADP for respiration is intermediate
between
the Kd values of deacetylated and acetylated
ANT1 modeled here may reflect a mechanism that adjusts
mitochondrial sensitivity to the ADP respiratory signal geared to
metabolic demand. These computational simulations effectively are
tests of the immediate effect on ANT1 flux of a change in the acetylation
status of Lys23. In a single ANT1 molecule, acetylation of Lys23 would
abruptly increase KdADP from 43 to ∼79.4
μM, and
the ATP export/ADP import rate would fall, as shown in Figure . Presumably, a period of metabolic adjustment would
follow, in which matrix ATP concentration, cytosolic ADP concentration,
and ΔΨ would all increase to attempt to meet the rate
of ATP demand. However, the crossover at ANT implies that such a return
toward the initial turnover rate would necessarily require a new steady
state with a lower cytosolic ATP energy status (“downstream
of ANT”) and higher mitochondrial driving forces (protonmotive
force and
matrix redox, which are “upstream of ANT”). The former,
downstream, adjustment would tend to inhibit cytosolic
ATP-utilizing sites, while the latter, upstream, adjustment would
tend to impede fuel oxidation by substrate dehydrogenases and the
citric acid cycle. Thus, without compensatory activation from an external
effector, ATP turnover might not return to its initial rate, as formalized
in the connectivity property of metabolic control analysis. Moreover, the higher mitochondrial “pressures”
would tend to promote energy-dissipating processes, such as the
proton leak across the inner membrane and the electron leak along the respiratory chain, that is, superoxide
or ROS production.

Studies in yeast,
where the sequence of the AAC2 transporter is
highly similar to that of ANT1, have provided functional information
about the molecular mechanism of ADP/ATP transport by ANT1, showing
the importance of charged residues. Mutants
of AAC2 that affected ADP/ATP transport were
screened, and the results showed that one lysine and six arginines
were essential for growth on oxidative substrates. Of the six arginines
identified, three are part of the RRRMMM motif, characteristic of
all ADP/ATP transporters. Another two
mutant arginines in yeast correspond to
Arg80 and Arg280 in the human transporter, which bind ADP and flank
Lys23 in the bovine crystal structure. Finally, the single most critical
lysine in yeast, Lys38, is in a region with a sequence almost identical
to that of the regions surrounding Lys23 in human ANT1. When Lys38
in yeast AAC2 was mutated to alanine, the mutant yeast were incapable
of growth on nonfermentable carbon sources, indicating that mitochondria
from these yeast were
incapable of producing ATP. Biochemical
assays and all-atom molecular dynamics simulations
also have been used to characterize pathological mutants of ANT1 observed
in humans. Such mutations are linked
to fatigue, weakness, ptosis,
and exercise intolerance, confirming
that ANT1 is a point of flux control for
proper metabolism in muscle. Taken together, the data in yeast and
humans indicate the importance of charged residues in general, and
Lys23 in particular, with respect to the ability of ANT1 to translocate
adenine nucleotides. Although our modeling studies are consistent
with those results in yeast, and we showed other acetylation sites
(Lys10 and Lys92) to have little impact on modeled parameters, one
caveat is that these modeling results were derived from the crystal
structure of ANT1 in the so-called c state (open to the intermembrane
space) and might be different with ANT1 modeled in the as yet unsolved
m conformational state.

In summary, acetylation of mitochondrial
proteins, and in particular
the adenine nucleotide translocase ANT1, is abundant in human skeletal
muscle mitochondria and correlated with insulin sensitivity. The use
of simulations and docking experiments revealed that Lys23 is a critical
residue for controlling the affinity of ADP for ANT1, with the acetylated
system having a much lower binding affinity for ADP. Taking the modeling,
computational, and physiologic results as a whole, we conclude that
the positive charge at lysine 23 of ANT1 is critical for regulating
the KmADP for oxidative phosphorylation.
The ability of insulin sensitive individuals to reduce acetylation
at this site by exercise, hence decreasing the KmADP, would relieve the need for higher mitochondrial energetic
driving forces, and hence ROS production, to meet cellular ATP demand.
We found no difference between insulin sensitive and resistant sedentary
individuals for lysine 23 acetylation, when they were studied at rest,
at least 48 h after having done any voluntary exercise. However, 24
h
after an exercise bout, a decrease in lysine 23 acetylation was
evident. This suggests that this effect is transitory, like many of
the effects of exercise, and the deacetylation effect likely was even
more pronounced in the immediate post-exercise period. Ascertainment
of the mechanisms underlying this deacetylation event likely will
require the use of different models.

The authors declare no competing
financial interest.

Acknowledgments
We thank the participants who volunteered for this study and
gratefully acknowledge the editorial assistance of Irene Beauvais
from the Mayo Clinic. We also thank Dianne DeNardo, RN, from Arizona
State University for expert nursing assistance and Mark Mattern, MD,
from Arizona State University for medical oversight of the euglycemic
clamp experiments.

Abbreviations
AAC2ADP/ATP carrier

ANT1adenine nucleotide translocase
1

BPMbeats per
minute

LTQ-FTICRlinear triple-quadrupole Fourier transform ion cyclotron resonance

ROSreactive oxygen
species

SDstandard
deviation

SDS–PAGEsodium dodecyl sulfate–polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis

SEMstandard error
of the mean.

