Natural products have served
as a major source of pharmaceuticals and bioactive molecules for centuries
and continue to play key roles in guiding the development of new therapeutics
today. Among these are pseudooligosaccharides, such as the antidiabetic drug acarbose, the crop protectant validamycin
A, the antitumor agent cetoniacytone A, and the sunscreen mycosporin-like
amino acids that have similar core cyclitol structures (Figure A). The core cyclitols of these molecules are generated
from the pentose phosphate pathway intermediate sedoheptulose 7-phosphate
(SH7P) by one of three enzymes present in some bacteria and fungi
that allow SH7P to be used in secondary metabolism. The enzymes 2-epi-5-epi-valiolone
synthase (EEVS), 2-epi-valiolone synthase (EVS), and desmethyl-4-deoxygadosol
synthase (DDGS) each catalyze the cyclization of SH7P to a distinct
C7-cyclitol product (Figure B). These enzymes,
the first of which was identified ∼15 years ago, are known as SH7P cyclases (SH7PCs) and are a part of the sugar
phosphate cyclase (SPC) family of enzymes, all of which require NAD+ and a metal ion, either cobalt or zinc, as prosthetic groups.−

Reactions
catalyzed by known sugar phosphate cyclases. (A) Four
cyclitol-containing natural products are shown and labeled by name,
with their C7-cyclitol units made by SH7PCs highlighted in bold. (B)
The substrates (above) and products (below) of five sugar phosphate
cyclases are shown. A divalent metal cation is drawn next to the two
substrate hydroxyls seen (for DHQS and DOIS) to coordinate it. SH7PCs
and DHQS may utilize Zn2+ or Co2+ as the divalent
metal cation, but are shown here with Zn2+, the metal present in this structure of ValA and in structures
of AnDHQS. DOIS uses only Co2+ for catalysis and is depicted as such. Abbreviations for the
substrates and products are introduced, with each enzyme abbreviation
being that of its product followed by an additional S for “synthase”.
Because of resonance, DDG has an internal symmetry so the stereoconfiguration
at C5 of the product after it is released into solution is not uniquely
defined. We draw it here with the same stereochemistry as EEV, anticipating
the proposal we make in this work that the cyclization products of
EEVS and DDGS have the same C5 configuration.

The SH7PCs are structurally uncharacterized, and our current
understanding
of their enzyme mechanisms is based mostly on studies of two other
sugar phosphate cyclases: dehydroquinate synthase (DHQS) and 2-deoxy-scyllo-inosose synthase (DOIS). DHQS acts on the substrate
3-deoxy-d-arabinoheptulosonate 7-phosphate [DAHP (Figure B)] as part of aromatic amino acid biosynthesis
and has been well-studied because it is a target for antimicrobial
drug development. Numerous structures
of DHQS from bacteria, fungi, and plants have been determined under
a variety of conditions, including in the presence and absence of
carbaphosphonate (CBP), a substrate analogue inhibitor, and in the
presence or absence of NAD+.,− DOIS acts on the substrate glucose 6-phosphate [G6P (Figure B)] and is not as well studied, but structures of
it have been determined in the presence and absence of carbaglucose
6-phosphate (CG6P), a mechanism-based inhibitor.

Both DHQS and DOIS form homodimers. Each individual
subunit is
composed of two domains connected by a hinge, and in DHQS, the domains
move closer together upon substrate binding. The two domains are an
N-terminal NAD+-binding α/β-sandwich and a
C-terminal metal-binding α-helical domain. These same two domains
are found in class III metal-dependent polyol dehydrogenases (polyol-DHs),
which use NAD(P)+ and a bivalent metal to conduct chemistry
that is distinct but related to that of SPCs. Altogether, these enzymes form what is known as the DHQS-like superfamily. In descriptions of SPC structure, the NAD+-binding domain has been identified as a Rossmann fold,,, but it has been noted that this
assignment is not certain.

Extensive
studies, have established that in converting
DAHP to dehydroquinate (DHQ), the DHQS active site coordinates the
substrate at its active site metal via two hydroxyls (Figure B) and then catalyzes a remarkable five reactions:
alcohol oxidation by NAD+, phosphate β-elimination,
carbonyl reduction by the earlier formed NADH, ring opening, and intramolecular
aldol condensation. As is common among homologous enzyme pairs with
distinct but related chemistry, the first step of the reaction in
DHQS and the polyol-DH enzymes, NAD+-promoted oxidation
of an alcohol, is conserved. On the basis
of its crystal structures with and without substrate analogues, DOIS
is proposed to have a mechanism similar to that of DHQS, and analogous mechanisms involving the same five
steps have been proposed for EEVS, EVS, and DDGS. On the basis of comparisons of SH7PC sequences with those
of DHQS and DOIS, 14 putative active site residues were identified
in EEVS, EVS, and DDGS sequences that were mostly identical but showed
characteristic variations in each of the three SH7PC types. These patterns of variation, however, provided
no insight into how the active sites produce distinct products from
the same substrate, especially regarding the differing stereochemistry
at the C2 position of the EEVS and EVS products (Figure B); this remains a major unanswered question. Developing a
better understanding of the structure and function of SH7PCs will
provide a foundation for their use in generating new bioactive compounds
through synthetic biology and semisynthetic production.

Here, we present a crystal structure of
ValA, the EEVS from Streptomyces hygroscopicus 5008,
that is involved in the
biosynthetic pathway of the agricultural antifungal agent validamycin
A. This first structure of a SH7PC fortuitously
includes tightly bound Zn2+ and NAD+ cofactors
and provides an informative view of the residues lining the active
site. We combine sequence comparisons with the various SH7PC sequences
and structural comparisons with DHQS and DOIS substrate analogue complexes
and develop an unexpected hypothesis for how these different SH7PCs
can use the same substrate to generate different products.

Materials
and Methods
Expression, Purification, and Crystallization
Recombinant
ValA was expressed as previously described. For purification, at 4 °C, cell pellets from 100 mL cultures
were each resuspended in ∼5 mL of 40 mM HEPES and 300 mM NaCl
(pH 8.0) (buffer A) with 10 mM imidazole, sonicated (13 W, 4 ×
1 min), and centrifuged (14500 rpm for 30 min). The supernatant was
loaded onto a Ni-NTA resin column (5 mL of resin, 0.8 mL/min). After
being washed with 100 mL of buffer A with 20 mM imidazole, the protein
was eluted using a 200 mL gradient from 20 to 500 mM imidazole in
buffer A. Fractions (∼6 mL each) containing protein were combined
and dialyzed overnight against 2 L of 10 mM Tris-HCl, 300 mM NaCl,
and 5 mM imidazole (pH 8.0). A second phase of purification was conducted
similarly using a TALON column (∼40 mL run at a rate of 0.3
mL/min) in buffer B [20 mM Tris-HCl and 300 mM NaCl (pH 8.0)] with
5 mM imidazole for column equilibration, 10 mM imidazole for washing,
and a 200 mL gradient from 10 to 200 mM imidazole for elution. Fractions
(∼4 mL each) containing pure ValA as judged by sodium dodecyl
sulfate gel electrophoresis were combined and dialyzed against 2 L
of 10 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.5) (3 × 3 h). The protein solution was
concentrated by ultrafiltration (10K cutoff membrane) to 10 mg/mL,
flash-frozen in liquid nitrogen, and stored at −80 °C.

The enzyme was crystallized at 4 °C in hanging drops formed
from 4 μL of the protein stock and 1 μL of a 0.6 M succinic
acid reservoir solution (pH 6.5). The resulting crystals were rodlike
with dimensions of ∼50 μm × 50 μm × 200
μm.

X-ray Diffraction Data Collection
For diffraction data
collection (at −170 °C), crystals were briefly passed
through a solution containing 20% PEG 400 and then flash-frozen in
loops by being plunged into liquid nitrogen. Data were collected from
two crystals using λ = 1.0 Å X-rays and Δφ
= 1° steps at beamline 5.0.2 at the Advanced Light Source (Berkeley,
CA). From both crystals, 120 2.0 s images were collected at a detector
distance (d) of 250 mm, and from the second, an additional
200 2.0 s images were collected at a d of 350 mm.
All these images were integrated using Mosflm and merged using the CCP4 suite of programs, to obtain the data set used for structure solution and refinement.
The merged data set was usable out to 2.1 Å using a CC1/2 of ∼0.2 as the cutoff criterion (Table ), and a random 5% of reflections were marked for cross-validation.
In addition, a third crystal was used for a fluorescence scan and
to collect a data set at beamline 5.0.2 using λ = 1.282 Å
X-rays to maximize the anomalous signal from the bound zinc. This
data set included two sets of 60 Δφ = 1°, 4.0 s images
offset by Δφ = 90° to collect the bijovet pairs and
yielded data useful to 3.5 Å resolution (data not shown).

Data Collection and Refinement Statistics
(A) Data	
resolution limits (Å)	66.9–2.10 (2.21–2.10)	
no. of unique observations	20232 (2875)	
multiplicity	26.8 (19.3)	
completeness (%)	99.4 (98.9)	
average I/σ	11.2 (0.9)	
Rmeas (%)	38 (676)	
CC1/2 (%)	0.99 (0.22)	
(B) Refinement	
no. of residues	360	
no. of solvent atoms	188	
total no. of atoms	3004	
⟨B⟩ for protein (Å2)	48	
⟨B⟩ for
solvent (Å2)	56	
Rcryst (%)	17.9 (28.1)	
Rfree (%)	26.2 (34.7)	
rmsd for bonds (Å)	0.010	
rmsd for angles (deg)	1.28	
Numbers in parentheses correspond
to values in the highest-resolution bin.

Structure Determination
The phase problem was initially
solved by molecular replacement using MR-Rosetta with default settings. As search models, we tried both chain A of Vibrio cholerae DHQS [Protein Data Bank (PDB) entry 3OKF] and chain A of Helicobacter pylori DHQS (PDB entry 3CLH) that were the known
structures that a BLAST search of the PDB showed as having sequences
most similar to that of ValA (33 and 29% identical, respectively). V. cholerae DHQS did not yield a solution, but H.
pylori DHQS gave a result with R and Rfree values of 0.25 and 0.31, respectively,
at 2.1 Å resolution and 327 residues built. The electron density
map from this solution allowed us to build almost all the side chains,
the active site Zn2+, and the NAD+ prosthetic
group. In contrast, conventional molecular replacement approaches
yielded models with Rfree values near
50% and maps that were very difficult to interpret (data not shown).
All manual model building was conducted in Coot. Refinements at various stages were conducted using Phenix or Buster with
TLS refinement, with the final rounds being conducted using Phenix.
Water molecules were manually placed on the basis of typical criteria:
electron density of ≥3ρrms in Fo – Fc maps and ≥0.8ρrms in 2Fo – Fc maps and a reasonable potential H-bond partner. Three
regions at or near crystallographic 2-fold axes were challenging to
interpret. The first was a five-residue stretch, residues 46–50,
that was near and crossing over a crystallographic 2-fold axis that
was a nonphysiological crystal packing interaction. Into this weak
helix-like main chain electron density we eventually modeled a portion,
residues 48–50 and the side chain of Gln41, at 50% occupancy
sharing the space with the same segments from its symmetry mate. As
the program would not ignore contact of the side chain of Gln41 with
itself, this side chain position was not allowed to move in the final
refinement calculations. We conclude that the segment of only one
of the monomers is ordered at a time and that in solution this part
of the protein would be fairly dynamic. The second challenging region
centered on a few residues N-terminal to residue 26. These residues
had some positive density, but the electron density extended across
the same crystallographic 2-fold axis noted above and then weakened,
and we left this small section of density uninterpreted. The third
challenging region was a β-hairpin turn (residues 32 and 33)
located at the 2-fold axis generating the expected physiological dimer
interaction. This turn showed weak electron density, while the associated
β-strands showed strong and clear density. To follow the path
of the electron density with a single conformation, we modeled the
turn with an unfavorable cis-peptide bond before
Lys32. This model also has a very short nonbonded collision (&lt;2.5
Å) with its own symmetry mate, so we suspect that it does not
represent a true conformation but only approximates the average chain
path associated with a set of multiple conformations that allow reasonable
packing at the interface. The final R and Rfree values were 0.179 and 0.262, respectively,
with reasonable geometry (Table ).

Structural
Comparisons and Analyses
Secondary structure
assignments were made using DSSP,, and structure-based
sequence alignments were generated using the Dali server.

Results and Discussion
Overall Structure
The structure of recombinant ValA
from S. hygroscopicus 5008 presented a challenging
molecular replacement problem, as the most similar known structures
were only ∼30% identical in sequence. The structure determination
was greatly facilitated by the MR-Rosetta algorithm, which yielded solutions of a quality much higher than the
quality of conventional molecular replacement (see ). In addition to being aided by MR-Rosetta,
the quality of the solution was also enhanced by the inclusion of
weak high-resolution data that would have been discarded on the basis
of conventional high-resolution cutoff criteria. For the data set
used here, the conventional high-resolution cutoff criterion of an Rmeas of ∼60% or an ⟨I/σ⟩ of ∼2 would lead to a limit of 2.85 or 2.3
Å, respectively, whereas the more generous criterion (CC1/2 of ∼0.2), shown in recent work to produce better
refined models,− leads to a limit of 2.1 Å (Table ). To test how the inclusion of weak high-resolution data
impacted the molecular replacement calculations, we conducted MR-Rosetta
runs using these three justifiable resolution cutoffs. On the basis
of Rfree values, using the 2.1 Å
resolution cutoff yielded the best solution, with the 2.3 and 2.85
Å cutoffs being slightly worse and much worse, respectively (Table ). This example thus shows that weak high-resolution
data (out to CC1/2 ∼ 0.2 and ⟨I/σ⟩ ∼ 0.9 in this case) can help with challenging
molecular replacement solutions as well as produce better refined
models.

Resolution Dependence of MR-Rosetta
Results
resolution (Å)	R	Rfree	no.
of residues built	
2.85	0.30	0.40	306 (221)	
2.30	0.26	0.33	334 (318)	
2.10	0.25	0.31	327 (298)	
The total number of residues built
in backbone segments and, in parentheses, the number of these modeled
as specific residues in the sequence of the target structure.

Further refinement of the molecular
replacement solution yielded
a model for the one chain in the asymmetric unit with final R and Rfree values of 17.9 and
26.2%, respectively, to 2.1 Å resolution (Table ). The large majority of the main chain as well as an active
site NAD+ and Zn2+ are well ordered with strong
and clear density, and an absorption scan and anomalous difference
map clearly confirm the presence and placement of the active site
Zn2+ (Figure ). The final structure
includes 360 of the 414 expected residues, 188 waters, one PEG, one
Zn2+, and one NAD+. The missing residues (1–25,
46, 47, 58–62, 244–249, and 399–414) are not
modeled because of weak or unclear electron density. Additionally,
three sections, including the residues just N-terminal to residue
26, a β-hairpin turn at residues 32 and 33, and a weakly ordered
helix at residues 46–50, laid on or near crystallographic 2-fold
axes and had weak, ill-formed density, making them challenging to
model (see ). A crystallographic
2-fold axis brings two ValA chains together to form a dimer that,
according to the PISA server, buries
4220 Å2 of surface area (i.e., 2110 Å2 per monomer). This dimer (Figure A) is equivalent
to those observed for the homologous enzymes DHQS and DOIS,,,,,, and the dimer
interface is well-conserved, implying that it is the physiological
form of ValA.

Electron density map quality and active site structure.
Stereoview
of the ValA active site residues (purple carbons) and a water (red
sphere) that are near the NAD+ (gray carbons) and the Zn2+ (silver sphere) cofactors. Coordination bonds (black lines)
and select H-bonds (black dashes) are shown along with the 2Fo – Fc electron
density (orange, contoured at 1ρrms) and an anomalous
difference map (green, contoured at 12ρrms).

Overall structure and topology of ValA. (A)
Ribbon diagrams of
the two chains of the ValA dimer are shown in purple and green tones,
respectively, with the N-terminal NAD+-binding domains
in light hues and the C-terminal metal-binding domains in dark hues.
Dashed lines indicate internal unmodeled backbone segments. The NAD+ and the Zn2+ with its coordinating ligands are
shown (colored as in Figure ). Secondary structural
elements in each domain of one monomer are labeled. (B) Topology diagram
showing α-helices (cylinders), β-stands (arrows), 310-helices (triangular prisms), and π-helices (wider
cylinder) with their first and last residues given. The minimal length
α- and 310-helices (five and three residues, respectively)
are left out of the family secondary structure nomenclature. The domains
are colored light and dark purple as indicated, and helices (H) and
strands (β) common to the SPCs are named sequentially within
each domain. Dashed lines denote unmodeled backbone segments. The
three Zn2+-binding residues (red asterisks) and the glycine-rich
turn and acidic residues (green asterisks) important for NAD+ binding are indicated.

Each chain of ValA encompasses the expected N-terminal NAD+-binding domain and C-terminal metal-binding domain common
to the DHQS-like superfamily. We describe here the domain topologies
(Figure B) using a secondary structure nomenclature
that takes into account which elements are conserved among the SPCs
(Figure ). The NAD+-binding domain
has a core seven-strand β-sheet (with a 1-2-9-6-5-3-4 strand
order) surrounded by five α-helices, one β-hairpin (β7
and β8), and two short 310-helices. The metal-binding
domain is mainly α-helical and includes eight α-helices,
one 310-helix, and one β-hairpin. This domain contains
not only the Zn2+-binding residues but also, on the basis
of what has been seen in DHQS and DOIS, the majority of the residues
involved in substrate recognition and so has also been called the
substrate-binding domain. However, the
sugar phosphate substrate actually binds in a cleft between the two
domains, and its recognition involves residues from both domains.

Sequence
alignment of ValA with representative related enzymes.
The sequence of ValA is listed first, and its secondary structure
elements are schematically shown above the sequence. Other sequences
in descending order are AvDDGS (A. variabilis DDGS, Ava_3858), AmEVS (Ac. mirum EVS, Amir_2000), PDB entry 1DQS (As. nidulans DHQS), PDB entry 2D2X (B. circulans DOIS), and PDB entry 1JQ5 (B. stearothermophilus glycerol dehydrogenase).
For the structurally known proteins, the residues in β-strands
(yellow), α-helices (teal), 310-helices (blue), and
π-helices (orange) are highlighted. Residues involved in metal
binding (m), NAD+ binding (n), and substrate binding and/or
catalysis (∗) are denoted below the sequences, and active site
residues with notable variation (↓) are denoted above the sequences.

Relationships to Other
Structurally Known Proteins
A structural similarity search
performed using the DALI server showed
that ValA is most similar to assorted
DHQSs (rmsd of ∼2.2–2.6 Å, Z scores
of ∼35–45), followed by DOIS (rmsd of ∼2.2 Å, Z score of 34) and then various polyol-DHs (rmsd of ∼2.7–3.6
Å, Z scores of ∼23–28). Interestingly,
although the structures used as search models in molecular replacement
were the two PDB structures (PDB entries 3OKF and 3CLH) with sequences most similar to that
of ValA, in terms of structural similarity these rank only eighth
(Z score of 41) and twenty-first (Z score of 36), respectively. This underscores why it can be useful
to try all potential homologues in molecular replacement rather than
just the ones most similar in sequence. The DALI search further showed that there are no known protein structures
outside of the DHQS-like superfamily that share noteworthy structural
similarity to ValA or either of its individual domains.

On the
basis of these results, representative enzymes were chosen for a structure-based
sequence alignment (Figure ): Aspergillus
nidulans DHQS (AnDHQS, PDB entry 1DQS), the most well-studied
DHQS;Bacillus circulans DOIS (BcDOIS, PDB entry 2D2X), the only structurally known DOIS; and Bacillus stearothermophilus glycerol dehydrogenase (BsGlyDH, PDB entry 1JQ5), the most structurally
similar member of the polyol-DH family. Representatives from the two structurally unknown types of the SH7PCs
were also included in this sequence alignment: a DDGS from Anabaena variabilis (AvDDGS) and an EVS
from Actinosynnema mirum (AmEVS).
The structure-based alignment between ValA and DHQS is largely consistent
with alignments that led to the previously proposed putative active
site residues in ValA., The only change is that Lys356
in AnDHQS had been previously aligned with Pro370
in ValA, but the structure-based alignment identifies the equivalent
residue as His360.

Zinc and NAD+ Binding
Although zinc and
NAD+ were not added during sample preparation or crystallization,
the electron density maps showed their unambiguous presence in the
crystal structure (Figure ), presumably meaning
that they were bound by ValA already in the E. coli cytosol and carried along during the purification. The zinc and
NAD+ are both bound in a manner quite similar to what has
been described for DHQS and DOIS, so aside from some novel observations, we will
here only briefly summarize the features of the binding. All residues
in direct contact with zinc and NAD+ are designated in
Figure , and most are conserved among the
SPCs. The Zn2+ ion is coordinated by Glu213, His284, and
His300, all from the C-terminal metal-binding domain, and a water.
As inferred from the liganded structures of DHQS and DOIS, this active
site water will be displaced upon substrate binding.

The binding
of NAD+ includes characteristic residues conserved among
the SPCs such as Asp70 at the end of strand β3 that H-bonds
with the adenosine ribose O2′ hydroxyl, the glycine-rich turn
connecting β5 and H3 providing backbone amides that H-bond to
the pyrophosphate oxygens, and Glu101, Lys104, Lys180, and Asn181
that H-bond with the nicotinamide ribose hydroxyls. The nicotinamide
amide nitrogen donates H-bonds to the Asp138 side chain and the Lys171
backbone oxygen, and the oxygen forms H-bonds with surrounding waters
in this structure. A fascinating pair of interactions that is conserved
in known DHQS-like superfamily structures but has not been described
before places carboxylate oxygens from Asp138 and Asp165 each roughly
in the plane of the nicotinamide ring where they are in position to
accept weakly polar H-bonds from the nicotinamide C2 and C4 atoms,
respectively (see Figure ). We expect that
these interactions will preferentially stabilize the positive charge
on the oxidized form of the nicotinamide ring, which is distributed
among ring carbon atoms 2, 4, and 6 via resonance forms. These interactions
may help explain the high affinity of these enzymes for NAD+, and in particular, the interaction with the reactive nicotinamide
C4 position may play a role in modulating the nicotinamide redox properties
during the catalytic cycle.

ValA Sugar Phosphate-Binding Site
Although no substrate
or substrate analogue is bound in this crystal form of ValA, we can
still gain insight into its substrate binding by comparisons with
the ligand-bound structures of AnDHQS and BcDOIS (henceforth termed DHQS and DOIS, respectively).
For convenience, we refer to sequence differences between ValA and
DHQS as mutations or changes with respect to DHQS, even though ValA
did not evolve from a modern DHQS. As noted in the introductory section,
DHQS undergoes a conformational change from “open” in
the absence of a sugar phosphate ligand to “closed”
upon binding the substrate analogue CBP via a domain rotation of ∼12°
that brings the N- and C-terminal domains closer together. A recent structure of DHQS from Actinidia
chinensis reinforces the relevance of the closed conformation
seen, as the same closed conformation appears to be stabilized by
the binding of inorganic phosphate and glycine in a way that mimics
that of the substrate. DOIS, in contrast,
was reported to not undergo such a domain closure based on comparisons
of its structures with or without a substrate analogue.

A set of overlays of ValA with representative
liganded and unliganded forms of DHQS and DOIS show that our ValA
structure has a conformation between the open and closed DHQS forms
but much closer to the closed form, varying by only ∼2°
(Figure ). They further show that the unliganded
and liganded DOIS structures do indeed have minimal differences in
their domain orientations, but that the DOIS conformation is ∼10°
more open in chain A and ∼7.5° more open in chain B than
the DHQS closed structure (data not shown), suggesting that it might
not accurately represent the ligand-bound structure. Also supporting
this possibility is the fact that the DOIS-liganded structure was
obtained by soaking crystals of the unliganded enzyme with inhibitor,
during which some crystal cracking was observed. This implies that the enzyme could not undergo a complete
domain closure without compromising the integrity of the crystal.
For this reason, we focus in the following comparisons solely on the
DHQS·CBP complex, which on the basis of the all the evidence
accurately represents a true inhibitor-bound conformation.

ValA overlay
with closed and open DHQS structures. Shown are ribbon
diagrams of an unliganded, open DHQS (blue, PDB entry 1NRX), a CBP-bound, closed
DHQS (cyan, PDB entry 1DQS), and ValA (purple), all overlaid on the basis of
their NAD+-binding domains. Pale hues are used for the
NAD+-binding domains and NAD+ and dark hues
for the metal-binding domains. For the sake of clarity, only select
secondary structure elements of the metal-binding domain are shown
along with the three zinc-ligating residues (sticks) and the zinc
(gray sphere). The active site side chain that does not align well
between DHQS (Arg264) and ValA (Arg277) is colored green for both
structures, and the alternate equivalent ValA residue (Arg278) is
colored orange. The fact that other open DHQS structures, such as
those of TtDHQS (PDB entry 1UJN) and HpDHQS (PDB entry 3CLH), are up to 5° different in domain orientation compared with AnDHQS (PDB entry 1NRX) does not alter the conclusions of this analysis.

With only this unliganded structure
of ValA available, we cannot
make any claims about what ligand-induced conformational changes may
occur. However, the similarity of ValA to the closed conformation
of DHQS is fortunate as it means that the NAD+, the zinc,
and nearly all of the ValA residues equivalent to DHQS active site
residues align rather well (Figure ), giving
us confidence that this comparison provides an informative picture
of which ValA residues will play a role in substrate binding. Of the
ligand-binding residues in the DHQS complex, only one, Arg264, is
not in the proximity of its corresponding residue in ValA. The equivalent
residue in ValA is Arg277 (Figure ), and it
points in the opposite direction (see the green side chains in Figure ). Interestingly, Arg277 is not conserved among
EEVSs (data not shown), suggesting it is not a key residue for this
enzyme. Even more interestingly, because of a different nearby loop
conformation, the following residue in ValA, Arg278, has its side
chain close to that of DHQS Arg264 (Figure ) and is conserved among EEVSs, suggesting that it may be the functionally
equivalent residue. An important question then becomes whether the
different loop conformation is a robust difference between ValA and
DHQS or whether it may be simply due to the ValA structure not having
a ligand bound.

Comparing the ValA active site region with the DHQS·CBP
complex.
Stereoview of select active site residues in ValA (purple) overlaid
on the DHQS (cyan) in complex with CBP (white) shown in roughly the
same orientation as DAHP in Figure . H-Bonding
interactions in the DHQS active site (dashed lines) and coordination
bonds with Zn2+ (solid lines) are shown. A prime on a residue
number means it is from the other subunit of the dimer.

A closer look at the loop (residues 257–264
in DHQS and
residues 270–278 in ValA) identifies another key active site
position and confirms that the difference in loops is robust (Figure ). In both unliganded and liganded DHQS structures,
the loop wraps around the side chain of Asp257 that accepts multiple
backbone amide H-bonds to stabilize the conformation. The equivalent
residue in ValA, Asn270, is not compatible with the DHQS loop conformation
but plays an equally central role in stabilizing the alternate less
compact loop path (Figure ).

Active site loop difference
that relates to the presence of Asp257
in DHQS vs Asn270 in ValA. Shown are residues 269–278 of ValA
(purple) and residues 256–264 of DHQS (cyan, PDB entry 1DQS) after the proteins
have been overlaid as in Figure . H-Bonding
interactions (dashed lines) involving the loop residues and associated
waters are shown. In DHQS, the Asp257 carboxylate receives H-bonds
directly or indirectly (via water) from four backbone nitrogens (from
Arg259, Gly261, Gly262, and Arg264). In ValA, the Asn270 side chain
amide directly or indirectly makes H-bonds with two backbone nitrogens
(from Trp272 and Glu275) and two backbone oxygens (from Gln275 and
Arg277).

If ValA Arg278 is taken to be
the equivalent of DHQS Arg264, Figure  compares
the DHQS residues surrounding the substrate
analogue CBP with their ValA equivalents. Among these, just four ValA
residues are different types: Met263 replaces a Lys, Asp281 replaces
an Asn, Pro288 replaces a His, and His360 replaces a Lys. Using atom
numbering for the substrate (see Figure )
rather than the CBP inhibitor, the essential features of binding of
CBP to DHQS (clockwise from the top of Figure ) are a phosphate-binding pocket (at two o’clock), bidentate
metal coordination by the C5 and C4 hydroxyls (at three to six o’clock),
which also serves to point the C5 hydrogen at the nicotinamide C4
atom in good geometry for hydride transfer, and then a pocket for
the C2 hydroxyl and carboxylate groups (around ten o’clock).
In ValA, the metal and nicotinamide are nearly identically positioned
as are key residues interacting with the phosphate (Lys171, Arg149′,
and Asn181) and the metal-coordinating hydroxyls (Asp165 and Lys216).
We take this to mean that the analogous parts of the ValA substrate
will be bound similarly to CBP in DHQS. Having a high degree of spatial
conservation of these parts of the substrate makes sense, as they
are where most of the chemistry takes place.

In contrast, the
significantly shifted or mutated residues (Arg278,
Met263, and Asp281) are present at the pocket around the C2 hydroxyl
and carboxylate groups where the ValA substrate has different substituents.
In particular, the Lys → Met change makes sense with the absence
of the substrate carboxylate. The two remaining changes, involving
ValA residues Pro288 and His360, create more space around the phosphate
group, but we do not understand why that might be. The DHQS residue
replaced by Pro288 is His275, which has been proposed to serve as
an acid/base during catalysis.

On
the basis of the findings mentioned above, we conclude that
ValA will bind its substrate, SH7P, with the phosphate group and the
C5 and C4 metal-coordinating hydroxyls in positions similar to those
in the DHQS·CBP complex. However, other aspects of the binding
mode such as ring conformation and/or orientation must differ from
those of CBP, especially because the configuration of the C4 hydroxyl
in SH7P differs (see Figure B) such that it
and the C5 hydroxyl cannot simultaneously be equatorial. This difference
makes predicting details of the binding mode of SH7P more challenging.

Variations among the SH7PCs and a Proposal for How They Catalyze
Different Reactions
As noted in the introductory section,
a major open question about SH7PC enzymes is how they bind the same
substrate and produce different products (Figure B), with the most conceptually confusing aspect being how
EEVS produces one stereochemistry at position C5 of the product (derived
from the substrate C2 atom, as shown in Figure B) while EVS produces the other. Because
of an internal symmetry in the DDGS product, it could be produced
with either C5 stereochemistry (Figure B).
Interestingly, EEVS and DDGS are more similar to each other in sequence
than they are to EVS, with both being reported to vary from DHQS in
the identities of four putative active site residues while EVS varied
in only one, (Figure ). Our structural
results for ValA (an EEVS) strengthen this pattern, in that the Asn
residue associated with its distinct loop conformation and the alternate
active site Arg residue (Figure ) are also
both present in DDGSs (Figure ). In contrast,
EVS, like DHQS, has an Asp in the loop and conserves the first Arg
(Figure ). This implies that these two subsets
of the SH7PCs (EEVS and DDGS vs EVS) have distinct binding environments
for the substituents of the substrate C2 atom and leads us to hypothesize
that the discrimination related to the stereochemistry at C5 of the
product actually occurs upon substrate binding rather than during
catalysis.

Variation in active site residues among sugar phosphate cyclases.
Schematic drawing of residues lining the substrate-binding pocket
in the DHQS·CBP complex shown in roughly the same orientation
as in Figure . Each DHQS residue shown is
labeled (cyan), and under that label are listed the corresponding
residues found in the structures of DOIS (pink) and EEVS (purple)
or, on the basis of the alignment in Figure , residues expected to be equivalent in DDGS and EVS (black). The
CBP ligand is shown in bold. H-Bond interactions (dashed lines) and
coordination bonds with Zn2+ (solid lines) are shown. The
residue numbering corresponds to the representative proteins used
in Figure  (AnDHQS, BcDOIS, ValA, AvDDGS, and AmEVS).

Specifically, each enzyme would
selectively bind either the α-
or β-pyranose form of SH7P, and the rapid interconversion between
the various pyranose and furanose forms would allow these normally
less populated SH7P forms (∼16 and &lt;1%, respectively) to accumulate in the enzyme active sites (Figure A). In this way, rather than the variation in aldol
acceptor geometry between EEVS and EVS requiring a 180° rotation
of the polar C5 substituents in the middle of the catalytic cycle,
each enzyme would start with a substrate preorganized to generate
the correct configuration at that position (Figure B). As EEV has the configuration at C5 that would be derived
from α-pyranose SH7P, this is the form of substrate that EEVS
and DDGS would bind, and as EV has the same configuration at C5 as
would be derived from β-pyranose SH7P, the EVS active site would
select for that form of the substrate. This hypothesis is completely
consistent with the behavior of DHQS and DOIS, which both bind their
substrate analogues with a fixed configuration corresponding to that
of their product. In the case of DOIS, the enzyme’s selectivity
is directly observed in its preferential binding from a racemic mixture
of the inhibitor CG6P only the form that mimics the β-anomer
of the substrate.,

Proposed enzyme-specific selection of
forms of sedoheptulose 7-phosphate.
(A) The pyranose and furanose α- and β-anomers of SH7P
with their relative abundance as determined by NMR are shown along with the linear form via which they interconvert.
Also shown is our proposal that EEVS and DDGS bind the α-pyranose
anomer while EVS binds the β-pyranose anomer. (B) Ring opening
and intramolecular aldol condensation steps of the proposed reaction
mechanisms of EEVS and EVS, emphasizing how the α- and β-anomers
of pyranose of SH7P are preorganized for the generation of the respective
stereochemistries at C5 in the products. B represents an active site
base that may aid ring opening.

In this way, rather than viewing the SH7PCs as a family of
enzymes
that use one substrate to specifically give two stereochemically distinct
types of products, one can then view them as enzymes that bind distinct
substrates, either α-pyranose or β-pyranose SH7P, to give
products with stereochemistries matching the stereochemistries of
those substrates. In terms of the evolutionary origin of the SH7PCs,
because EVS sequences are more similar to those of DHQSs, we suggest that EVS evolved from DHQS with only
slight changes to the active site being needed to allow binding of
the β-pyranose anomer of SH7P. In contrast, the key differentiating
step in EEVS evolution would have been the Asp → Asn mutation
that changed which Arg pointed into the active site pocket, as this
allowed binding of the α-pyranose anomer of SH7P leading to
the production of EEV. Then further mutations, including two active
site mutations of Asp → Ala and His → Thr (Figures  and ), gave rise to the
mechanistic difference that characterizes the DDGS enzymes. Although
we do not understand this transition yet, the more minor nature of
differences between the DDGSs and EEVSs is emphasized by phylogenetic
trees showing that EEVS and DDGS are more closely related to each
other than to the other SPCs.

Although
much remains to be learned about ValA and the SH7PCs in
general, the ValA structure presented here sheds much light on this
enzyme family. Especially seeing the spatial orientation of active
site residues (Figure ) has provided insight
into how variation in the active site pocket allows for the different
specificities found in the SPC superfamily. Nevertheless, the detailed
roles of catalytic residues in the EEVS, DDGS, and EVS mechanisms
still remain open questions. For example, the residue that takes the
catalytic role of an essential histidine in DHQS (His275) and DOIS
(His250) has not been identified in these enzymes. We expect that
answering such questions for the SH7PCs will best be approached through
kinetics and structural studies conducted with stereospecific carbacyclic
phosphonate analogues of SH7P that do not yet exist but that are in
concept similar to the DAHP analogues used in informative studies
of DHQS.,,, We are now initiating studies in this direction.

Accession Codes
The coordinates
and structure factors have been deposited as Protein Data Bank entry 4P53.

The authors declare no
competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
We thank Dale Tronrud and Camden Driggers for help with the
crystallographic work and Murugesh Padmanarayan for growing and analyzing
the first crystals.

Abbreviations
CG6Pcarbaglucose 6-phosphate

CBPcarbaphosphonate

DAHP3-deoxy-d-arabinoheptulosonate
7-phosphate

DHQ(S)dehydroquinate (synthase)

DDG(S)desmethyl-4-deoxygadusol (synthase)

DOI(S)2-deoxy-scyllo-inosose (synthase)

EEV(S)2-epi-5-epi-valiolone (synthase)

EV(S)2-epi-valiolone (synthase)

G6Pglucose 6-phosphate

SH7Psedoheptulose
7-phosphate

SH7PCsedoheptulose 7-phosphate cyclase

SPCsugar phosphate cyclase.

