Microbial rhodopsins are widespread
photoactive proteins that function as light-driven ion transporters
and light sensors for phototaxis and other photosensory behavior in
prokaryotic and eukaryotic microorganisms.− They contain seven transmembrane
helices that form a pocket for the chromophore retinal, which is covalently
attached in a protonated Schiff base (PSB) linkage to a lysyl residue
on the seventh helix. Retinal photoisomerization from all-trans to 13-cis initiates a photochemical
reaction cycle that typically includes, in both rhodopsin proton pumps
and transducer-free sensory rhodopsin I, transfer of the Schiff base
proton to a conserved carboxylate acceptor, Asp or Glu, on the third
helix.

In the light-driven proton pump bacteriorhodopsin (BR),− the pivotal components of the mechanism are two Asp residues in
the proton conduction channel, one salt-bridged to the PSB on the
extracellular (EC) side and another located in the cytoplasmic (CP)
side of the half-channel with respect to the PSB. Outward proton current
is produced through proton relays in the channel upon breakage of
the salt bridge as a result of photoisomerization of the retinal chromophore,
first from the PSB to the Asp on the EC side (the acceptor Asp85)
and the second from the Asp on the CP side (the donor Asp96) to the
SB. The spectral photocycle intermediate with deprotonated SB exhibits
a far blue-shifted absorption band in the near-UV designated the M
(for “metarhodopsin”) intermediate. Following intrachannel
proton relays, the release of a proton to the external milieu from
the extracellular side and uptake by the unprotonated donor Asp from
the cytoplasm complete the net translocation of a proton across the
membrane.

Sensory rhodopsins (SRs), the best studied of which
are the phototaxis
receptors in haloarchaea (sensory rhodopsins I and II), conserve the
carboxylic acid residue (Asp) corresponding to the acceptor Asp85
in BR, but not that of the proton donor Asp96. Haloarchaeal SRI and
SRII mediate orange-light attractant and blue-light repellent phototaxis
in complex with their respective transducer molecules HtrI and HtrII.
Opposite consequences of the signaling by SRI and SRII in response
to photostimuli have been attributed to opposite conformational changes
of the receptors based primarily on the direction of their SB proton
movements, and confirmed by electron paramagnetic resonance
spectroscopy. The repellent signaling
SRII–HtrII complex exhibits EC side-directed deprotonation,,, as in proton pumps, and the residue
corresponding to Asp85 in BR serves as the PSB proton acceptor. Repellent signaling mutants of the SRI–HtrI
complex (inverted mutants) also deprotonate to the conserved EC Asp;,,− however, the
wild-type attractant signaling SRI–HtrI complex exhibits CP-directed
PSB deprotonation.−

His166 was shown to play a crucial role in
proton transfer, phototaxis
signaling, and the direction of SB deprotonation in the SRI–HtrI
complex, and hence was suggested as the most likely
candidate for the cytoplasmic SB proton acceptor. Here we confirm
this suggestion with Fourier transform infrared (FTIR) spectroscopy
and also investigate the influence of mutation of the proton acceptor
on the PSB deprotonation in the SRI–HtrI complex.

Materials and
Methods
The gene of the SRI–HtrI fusion protein, in
which the C-terminus
of SRI is joined through a flexible linker peptide (ASASNGASA)
to the N-terminus of HtrI truncated at position 147 fused to a hexahistidine
tag at the C-terminus (SRI–HtrI147), was cloned
into expression vector pET-21d (Novagen) under the control of the
T7 promoter as described previously. The
expression of the gene in BL21(DE3) was induced by addition of 1 mM
isopropyl β-d-thiogalactopyranoside and 5 μM
all-trans-retinal. The [15N3]His-labeled SRI–HtrI147 fusion protein was grown
in M9 medium containing [15N3]His (100 mg/L)
according to the method described previously, and mutant proteins were prepared as described previously. Briefly, membranes containing the SRI–HtrI147 complex were solubilized with 2.0% n-dodecyl
β-d-maltoside (DDM) and purified by Ni-NTA chromatography.
The SRI–HtrI147 fusion protein was then reconstituted
into l-α-phosphatidylglycerol (PG) liposomes (1:50
SRI:PG molar ratio), through removal of DDM with Bio-Beads (SM-2,
Bio-Rad). The proteoliposomes were washed three times with 2 mM citrate
buffer (pH 5.5) or 2 mM borate (pH 9.5) containing 300 mM NaCl. The
sediment obtained after the third centrifugation was deposited on
a BaF2 window 18 mm in diameter and was dried slowly at
room temperature under high humidity.

Low-temperature FTIR spectroscopy was performed as described
previously., After hydration of the dried
film of the proteoliposome with 1–2
μL of H2O, the sample was sealed with another BaF2 window with a 1 mm thick spacer between them, which was then
mounted in an Oxford Optistat-DN cryostat placed into an FTS-7000
spectrometer (DIGILAB). Illumination from a 1 kW halogen–tungsten
lamp was passed through a cutoff filter (VY-50, Toshiba) to produce
&gt;480 nm light, which was directed to the sample to convert SRI
into
M at 260 K. The spectra were constructed from 128 interferograms with
a spectral resolution of 2 cm–1. The M-minus-SRI
difference spectrum was calculated by subtracting the spectrum recorded
before the illumination from the spectra recorded after the illumination.
Three difference spectra were averaged to yield the final difference
spectrum. All spectra were normalized with the C–C stretching
vibration of the retinal chromophore at 1197 cm–1.

Attenuated total reflection (ATR) FTIR spectroscopy was performed
with an FTS-6000 spectrometer (DIGILAB) equipped with a diamond ATR
crystal sample cell (SMITHS, nine effective internal reflections). 4-Methylimidazole was dissolved in an aqueous
solution, with the pH value adjusted by adding HCl or NaOH.

Photoinduced electrical measurements were performed as described
previously., Briefly, BL21(DE3) cells expressing
the SRI–HtrI147 fusion protein with or without mutations
suspended in the measuring buffer containing 5 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.0),
1.5 mM NaCl, 0.15 mM CaCl2, and 0.15 mM MgSO4 were placed in a rectangular plastic cuvette with two platinum electrodes.
The sample was flashed with a Nd:YAG Surelite-I laser (532 nm, 6 ns
pulse; Continuum) along the line between two platinum electrodes.
A macroscopic electrical current in the cuvette appeared because of
the asymmetric absorption of light in each bacterial cell. The electrode
remote from the light source was fed into a low-noise current amplifier
(model 428, Keithley) with a rise time of 2 μs. The signals
were digitized and stored by using the DIGIDATA 1325A and pCLAMP 9.0
program (both from Axon Instruments). Twenty to 150 signals with a
maximal sampling rate of 2 μs/point were averaged.

Results
PSB Deprotonation
When the EC Side Acceptor Asp76 Is Protonated
or Unprotonated
At pH values higher than the pKa of Asp76 (∼8.5), the PSB in the SRI–HtrI
complex has been shown to transfer its proton to Asp76 upon light
conversion to the M state when Asp76 is unprotonated in the unphotolyzed
state (e.g., in the HtrI-free or alkaline form of SRI). This proton transfer is evident in FTIR spectra
from the appearance of the C=O stretching vibrational mode
of a protonated carboxylic acid at 1749 cm–1 that
was assigned earlier to that of Asp76 in the difference FTIR spectrum
between M and SRI at pH 9.5 and correlates
with increased outwardly directed photocurrent at high pH. The FTIR spectrum is reproduced in Figure a (dotted line) along with the corresponding difference
spectrum measured at pH 5.5 (solid line). At physiological or lower
pH values, Asp76 is protonated in the unphotolyzed state and cannot
accept the proton from the PSB, which is reflected in the difference
FTIR spectrum devoid of the positive band at 1749 cm–1 (Figure a, solid line). The minor bilobed
bands in the frequency domain between 1800 and 1700 cm–1 appearing in the difference spectrum of the acidic form have been
attributed to perturbations of one or more protonated carboxylic residues,
including Asp76, because of the environmental changes., The lack of a positive band essentially excludes a carboxylic acid
residue as the proton acceptor from the PSB in the acidic form.

M-minus-SRI
difference FTIR spectra of the SRI–HtrI complex
measured at pH 5.5 (—) and pH 9.5 (···) for
the wild-type (a and c) and D76N mutant SRIs (b and d). The SRI–HtrI
complex in the acidic and alkaline forms in the hydrated film sample
in a PG lipid membrane was illuminated with &gt;480 nm light to produce
the M state. Spectra were normalized to the C–C stretching
vibration amplitude of the retinal chromophore at 1197 cm–1. The vertical scale of the y-axis is 0.015 au in
the top panel (a and b) and 0.00114 au in the bottom panel (c and
d).

In D76N of SRI (SRI/D76N–HtrI),
which mediates attractant
phototaxis signaling like the wild type, the pH-dependent alterations of the SB proton acceptor are abolished,
as evidenced by the M-minus-SRI difference FTIR spectra of the HtrI–SRI/D76N
complex (Figure b) showing overall analogy
in the spectral features at both pH 5.5 and 9.0 to that of the acidic
form of the wild-type SRI–HtrI complex (Figure a). Newly appearing bands near 1750–1720 cm–1 can be ascribed to the perturbation of Asn76 due to the environmental
changes upon photoconversion from SRI to M.,

Vibrational Bands That Can be Attributed to the SB Proton Acceptor
in the Acidic Form of SRI
Vibrational modes that can be attributed
to the proton acceptor of the SB in the acidic form of SRI should
appear on the positive side of the M-minus-SRI spectrum of wild-type
SRI only in the acidic form but not in the alkaline form. In HtrI-complexed
SRI/D76N, the appearance of the corresponding bands is expected at
both pH 5.5 and 9.5. Bands fulfilling such requirements appear on
the positive side of the M-minus-SRI difference FTIR spectrum as a
broad feature with subpeaks in the frequency domain between 2800 and
2400 cm–1 only in the acidic form of HtrI-complexed
SRI but not in the alkaline form (Figure c).
Stretching vibrational modes of N–H, O–H, or C–H
groups forming enormously strong hydrogen bonds contribute to the
bands in the frequency domain. Such broad features are also seen in
the M-minus-SRI difference FTIR spectra of HtrI-free SRI in the acidic
form but not in the alkaline form (data not shown) and also in HtrI-complexed
SRI/D76N at both pH 5.5 and 9.5 (Figure d),
with some differences in the intensity and the frequency of sub-bands
compared to those of the bands of the wild type.

Assignment
of the Broad-Featured Band between 2800 and 2400
cm–1
A histidine residue is a candidate
for the proton acceptor of the SB because its imidazole side chain
is possibly in a singly protonated neutral form capable of being protonated
near neutral pH values and also because protonated histidine residues
with strong hydrogen bonding have been shown to exhibit analogous
broad-featured bands in the primary quinone acceptor QA of photosystem II (PSII) upon photoreduction., His166 has been suggested as a possible SB proton acceptor in the
SRI–HtrI complex primarily on the basis of the finding that
its mutation to any of seven different residues greatly reduces the
flash yield of M and inverts the direction of SB proton transfer upon
formation of the M intermediate., We produced the [15N]histidine-labeled SRI–HtrI complex to aid in the
identification of the broad-featured bands. Confirming that protonation
of a histidine residue occurs, each of the sub-bands in the M-minus-SRI
difference FTIR spectrum of the acidic form of the SRI–HtrI
complex exhibited downshifts of ∼15–20 cm–1 in the labeled sample (Figure , top panel),
and the extents of the isotope shifts are almost identical with those
observed previously,, identifying the peaks as originating
from N–H stretching vibrational modes of a histidine side chain.
Our interpretation is that at least one of the two imidazole nitrogens
becomes protonated upon formation of M (i.e., not in the imidazolate
form).

M-minus-SRI difference FTIR spectra of the SRI–HtrI complex
in the acidic form (pH 5.5): (top) unlabeled (—) and [15N]His-labeled (···) protein and (bottom) wild
type (black), H34A (blue), H135A (red), H166L (purple), and H221A
(green) mutant proteins of the SRI in complex with HtrI. The spectrum
of the wild type at pH 9.5 is also shown (gray). One division of the y-axis is 0.0004 au.

To compare spectral features of the N–H stretching
mode
of the imidazole side chain in its neutral form (singly protonated
form) and in its cationic form (imidazolium), a model compound, 4-methylimidazole
(MeIm), in aqueous solution at pH 5.1, 8.6, and 10.1 adjusted by adding
HCl, was subjected to ATR-FTIR (Figure ).
Only at pH 5.1, well below the pKa of
the protonation to the second nitrogen in the imidazole ring (pH ∼7),
do broad features at &gt;2500 cm–1 (Figure , inset) similar to those observed on the positive
side of M-minus-SRI spectra become obvious on top of the large background
absorption caused by water, whereas the spectra measured at pH 8.6
and 10.1, the pH values between the two pKa values for the double protonation (pH ∼7) and for the single
protonation (pH ∼14.5), show negligibly small bands (Figure  and the inset), indicating that the broad-featured
bands can be attributed to a strongly hydrogen-bonded N–H stretching
mode of the cationic form of imidazole. Hence, the appearance of the
analogous positive feature in the M-minus-SRI spectrum in the acidic
form can be attributed to protonation of the second nitrogen (imidazolium
formation) in one or more histidine side chains of SRI upon formation
of M.

ATR-FTIR spectra of 4-methylimidazole in aqueous solution at pH
5.1 (—), 8.6 (---), and 10.1 (···) in the region
of 2900–2500 cm–1. The differences with respect
to the spectrum at pH 10.1 for the spectra at pH 5.1 (—) and
8.6 (---) are shown in the inset.

Assignment to a Specific Histidine Residue
To address
which of the four histidine residues (His34, His135, His166, and His221)
in SRI accepts the proton from the PSB, we conducted FTIR measurements
on SRI mutants in which each of the four histidine residues was mutated
to Ala except for His166, which was replaced with Leu because H166A
did not survive purification.

In the bottom panel of Figure , M-minus-SRI FTIR spectra in the frequency domain
of 2800–2400 cm–1 are compared between wild-type
SRI and the four mutants (H34A, H135A, H166L, and H221A). As is evident
from the almost superimposable spectra of H34A, H135A, and H221A,
the positive N–H stretching modes do not contribute to the
groups of the bands in the frequency domain, ruling out the possibility
that any one of these three residue is the proton acceptor of the
PSB. On the other hand, the M-minus-SRI FTIR spectrum of H166L exhibits
bands with significantly reduced intensity in the same frequency domain
compared to those of the bands in the wild-type spectrum (Figure , bottom panel), attributing most of the portion
of the broad-featured band to the N–H stretching mode of His166
in its imidazolium form (cationic form). It should be noted that the
spectrum of H166L (purple line in Figure )
still exhibits a positive feature at 2800–2400 cm–1, suggesting the presence of X–H stretching vibrations under
strong hydrogen bonds. Interestingly, the purple spectrum resembles
that of the wild type, though H166L lacks His at position 166. While
this result may sound contradictory, one possible interpretation is
that another His residue accepts protons in H166L, but not in the
wild type. Upon formation of M, the proton released from the Schiff
base is transferred, but in the case of H166L, the proton acceptor
must be different from its natural acceptor (His166). The new proton
transfer in H166L may directly or indirectly result in partial protonation
of one of the remaining His residues, even though that residue is
not protonated in the wild type.

Effect of Replacement of
His166 on the FTIR Changes and Direction
of PSB Deprotonation in SRI
If His166 accepts a proton from
the PSB and participates in the hydrogen bonding network alterations
upon formation of M, the H166L mutation is expected to cause perturbations
of the vibrational modes of other residues in the M-minus-SRI FTIR
spectrum. As described above, mutations of the other three histidines
(H34A, H135A, and H221A) caused almost no perturbations in the N–H
stretching vibrational modes in the 2800–2400 cm–1 domain (Figure ). Consistent with this notion,
these mutants exerted almost no influence in the 1800–800 cm–1 domain of the spectrum (data shown for H135A in Figure , top red trace), indicating that these histidine
residues are not involved in hydrogen bonding alterations upon the
conversion from SRI to the M state. His135 is the only one of the
three histidines that is predicted to be located near the chromophore
(specifically near the β-ionone ring) on the basis of the crystal
structure of SRII, and therefore is likely to contribute
to spectral tuning of the absorption maximum (λmax) of SRI. In fact, H135A exhibits a ∼25 nm blue shift relative
to wild-type SRI (data not shown), which is reflected in the M-minus-SRI
difference FTIR spectra of H135A as the ∼8 cm–1 upshift of the C=C stretching modes (1519 from 1511 cm–1) compared to that of the wild type (Figure ), in agreement with the empirical inverse correlation
of the λmax and the frequency of the C=C stretching
vibrational mode. Otherwise, almost no appreciable changes are seen
in the spectral shape of H135A compared to that of the wild type except
for differences in the amplitude of the bands in the amide I and II
regions (1700–1600 and 1600–1500 cm–1, respectively), where strong absorbance by these bands in the absolute
spectrum can compromise the linearity in the difference spectrum.
The striking resemblance of the spectral shape of H135A, H34A, and
H221A compared to that of wild-type SRI suggests that these residues
are involved in neither the intramolecular proton transfer nor any
alterations in the hydrogen bonding network in the SRI-to-M conversion.

M-minus-SRI
difference FTIR spectra of the SRI–HtrI complex
measured at pH 5.5 for H135A (red) and H166L (purple) mutant proteins
and the wild type (···) of the SRI in complex with
HtrI147.

In contrast, H166L exhibits
spectral perturbations in the difference
FTIR spectrum compared to that of wild-type SRI in the 1800–800
cm–1 domain (Figure , bottom
purple trace). The 1104 cm–1 band on the negative
side of the spectrum in the wild type, which shows a shift to 1101
cm–1 upon 15N labeling of histidine (Figure , inset), is largely weakened in H166L, suggesting
the vibrational mode arises from His166. The assignment is in agreement
with the previous observation of the vibrational modes of a model
compound of imidazole (MeIm) in the neutral form showing two C–N
stretch modes at 1104 and 1087 cm–1, corresponding
to the modes containing the unprotonated and protonated nitrogen of
the neutral form of imidazole, respectively, the former of which was
unaffected upon deuteration. Likewise,
the 1104 cm–1 band on the negative side of the spectrum
of the wild type is unaffected by deuteration (data not shown). It
should be noted that the positional assignment of vibrational bands
needs special care if protein structures are modified by mutation.
This is the case for H166L, for which light-induced spectra differ
significantly from that of the wild type. We conclude the residue
is His166 from the spectral identity of His mutants other than His166,
as well as the case in Figure . Thus, the
presence of the C–N stretching mode on the negative side of
the spectrum is one strong piece of evidence that His166 in the initial
state is in the neutral form, which is capable of being protonated
as the SB is deprotonated upon formation of M.

Other changes
in H166L compared to the wild type in the M-minus-SRI
spectrum are likely to be caused by alterations in the hydrogen bonding
interactions and conformational changes as a result of the H166 mutation.
The significant deviations in the spectral shapes in the amide I region
(1700–1600 cm–1) between the wild type and
H166L, which reflect the protein backbone conformational changes,
indicate differences in conformational changes between the two proteins.
Such differences as the proteins convert from the initial state to
the M state are expected from the inverted conformer explanation of
the inverted signaling and outward direction of Schiff base proton
transfer from H166L.,,

Another notable difference between the wild type and H166L is the
newly appearing prominent band at 1722 cm–1 on the
positive side that can be assigned to the C=O stretching vibrational
mode of a carboxylate residue protonated upon formation of M. This
assignment may be validated also by bands on the negative side that
can be attributed to asymmetric O–C–O stretch mode of
carboxylate groups near 1583 cm–1, though the symmetric
O–C–O stretch mode is unclear at 1450–1350 cm–1. The change in protonation of a carboxylic group
upon formation of M indicates that it substitutes for His166 as a
proton acceptor from the PSB. The PSB deprotonation in formation of
the M state of H166L is likely to have occurred in view of the diminished
intensity of the chromophore’s vibrational modes on the positive
side (near 1180 cm–1 for the 13-cis configuration), the feature characteristic of the deprotonated SB
that is seen also in the wild type and in other histidine mutants
because the decreased degree of π electron delocalization reduces
the polarity of the chromophore.

Although attribution of the
1722 cm–1 bands is
yet to be performed, the only two carboxylate residues near the PSB
are Asp76 and Asp201 (corresponding to Asp85 and Asp212 of BR, respectively),
candidates for accepting the proton because the PSB is released outward
in the H166L mutant and Asp76 and Asp201 are expected to be outwardly
located.

The direction of the SB deprotonation that occurs in
the microsecond
to millisecond time domain has been monitored by photocurrent measurements., The acidic form of SRI deprotonates to the CP side of the protein
where His166 is located, as evidenced by the rise of a negative photocurrent
in ∼200 μs (Figure , black line). As previously shown, in the SRI/H166S–HtrI complex, the negative photocurrent
is inverted into a positive one (i.e., movement of a proton toward
the EC side) rising in ∼20 μs (Figure , red line), indicating the presence of an alternative proton
acceptor of the SB on the EC side. Conversely, His166 was found to
contribute to directing the SB deprotonation toward the CP side. However,
even in the absence of His166 (in the H166S background), redirection
of SB deprotonation to the CP side can be restored by an additional
mutation, R215W, in SRI (ref () and Figure , green line), a suppressor
mutant known to revert the repellent phototaxis signaling phenotype
of SRI–HtrI mutant complexes into an attractant response. Thus, these results confirm the two-conformer
model, in which the factor that directs the SP
deprotonation to the CP side is not the presence of His166, but rather
the conformation of SRI responsible for attractant signaling as is
the case in the wild type and H166S/R215W, whereas the conformation
responsible for repellent signaling directs the SB deprotonation to
the EC side.,

Flash-induced charge movements in the
wild-type SRI–HtrI
complex (black), the phototaxis signal-inverted H166S mutant (red),
and the phenotypically wild-type H166S/R215W double mutant (green)
at pH 7.0. Similar measurements were used to calculate the charge
shift ratio of the same mutants by Sineshchekov et al. to establish the charge movement inversion and suppression
effect confirmed here.

Discussion
We conclude that the broad band with subpeaks
in the 2800–2400
cm–1 domain appearing concurrently with SB deprotonation
in the acidic form of SRI, the form physiologically active in attractant
phototaxis, was found to originate from the N–H stretch modes
of the imidazole group of His166. The appearance of a number of subpeaks
on the background of the broad feature is therefore not due to the
presence of multiple histidine residues undergoing protonation changes
but rather can be ascribed to band separation due to the Fermi resonance
of overtones and combinations of imidazole ring modes with the N–H
stretching vibration that have been pointed out in previous studies
of imidazole groups in the histidine of QA upon photoreduction
by PSII., Because these band patterns appear in the
model compound, MeIm, only at pH values well below the pKa for the transition from the neutral form (MeIm-H) to
the cationic form (MeIm-H2+) (Figure ), the most plausible explanation for the appearance
of the positive bands near 2800–2500 cm–1 is that the imidazole group of His166 becomes the imidazolium (cationic)
form upon SB deprotonation. Thus, His166 can be assigned as the proton
acceptor of the SB upon formation of M in the wild-type attractant
signaling SRI–HtrI complex.

This conclusion is in agreement
with the prediction that His166
is located in the vicinity of the SB on the CP side on the basis of
the corresponding residue position in the crystal structure of SRII, and also with the previous observations that the amplitudes of the
M-state absorption (∼400 nm) are greatly reduced by all seven
of the tested mutations of His166, and
that SB deprotonation of wild-type SRI in complex with HtrI is toward
the CP side of the protein. Furthermore,
as reported previously and shown in Figure , the substitution of Ser for His166 inverts the
SB deprotonation to the EC side. Therefore, an alternative proton
acceptor exists. The appearance of a vibrational band at 1722 cm–1 in the M-minus-SRI spectrum of H166L that can be
attributed to a C=O stretching vibrational mode of a protonated
carboxyl group suggests the proton acceptor is a carboxyl residue
(Figure b). Asp76, which corresponds to the
Schiff base proton acceptor Asp85 in BR, is a strong candidate, but
the λmax of the SRI–HtrI147 complex
is almost unaffected by H166L and H166S mutations, a result more consistent with Asp76 remaining protonated
in the unphotolyzed state in these mutants. Asp201, a carboxylate
in the vicinity of the PSB expected to be on the EC side, is a second
candidate as a proton acceptor of the PSB when His166 is eliminated
by mutation. It is noted that the residual positive feature at 2800−2400
cm−1 may suggest partial protonation of one of the
remaining His residues in the H166L mutant.

Despite the fact
that the PSB proton acceptors are present on both
the CP and EC side, the factor that determines the directionality
of the PSB deprotonation is not the availability of the acceptor residues,
because even in the absence of His166 CP-directed deprotonation of
the PSB is observed when the R215A mutation is introduced into the
H166S background, ruling out the possibility that His166 is an unequivocal
determinant for the CP-directed PSB deprotonation. Thus, the opposite
proton release direction is a consequence rather than a cause of the
altered conformational state of SRI induced by the H166S mutation.
That is, the direction of the PSB deprotonation is governed by which
of the two alternative conformers is present in the unphotolyzed state,
namely, the attractant or the repellent signaling receptor conformers,
which show CP- or EC-directed PSB deprotonations, respectively., Note that the direction of charge movement provides a convenient
assay for the attractant and repellent signaling conformers of the
wild-type SRI–HtrI complex, but mutants in which Schiff base
proton transfer is greatly altered or does not occur and yet phototaxis
is intact rule out the possibility that the proton transfer event
itself is a cause of the response. The H166L/S mutation in SRI has
been shown to transform the attractant signaling wild-type SRI into
a repellent signaling photoreceptor (inverter mutation), whereas the
R215A mutation reverts the inverted phenotype into an attractant receptor
(suppressor mutation).,, Moreover, the attractant and the repellent forms of SRI have been
shown to undergo opposite changes in conformation as monitored by
helix F displacement.

Nevertheless,
in view of the attenuation of the CP-directed photocurrent
upon PSB deprotonation in SRI H166S/R215A compared to that in wild-type
SRI (Figure ), His166 may facilitate the CP-directed
deprotonation. This role may be relevant for biasing the conformation
toward the kinase-activating unphotolyzed state making SRI an attractant
signaling photoreceptor for orange-red light. In any case, the functional
importance of His166 is evident in that it is conserved among SRI
homologues not only in the related halophilic archaeon Halobacterium
valismortis and Haloarcula marismortui but
also in SRI in the eubacterium Salinibactor ruber.,

The involvement of histidine residues
in an intramolecular proton
relay in microbial rhodopsins has begun to appear as the number of
new rhodopsin members has grown explosively. For example, proteorhodopsin,
found in abundance in marine bacteria, has conserved residue His75 situated in the vicinity of the PSB
counterion and the proton acceptor Asp97 and was found to release
a proton concurrently with the protonation of Asp97 by the PSB.

However, direct observations of transient
protonation changes of
histidine residues have been difficult to make. Using FTIR spectroscopy,
complexity is often encountered in the assignment of minute vibrational
modes among the crowd of numerous other bands in the frequency domain
between 1800 and 800 cm–1. This problem was overcome
in this investigation by focusing on the Fermi resonance modes of
the N–H stretch modes of the histidine side chain, which appear
in a lower-frequency region (2800–2400 cm–1) than the dominant O–H stretching vibrational modes of water
molecules in the case of His166 and 4-methylimidazole due to strong
hydrogen bonding interaction upon protonation. As Fermi resonance
vibrational modes of amino acid residue side chains in the 2800–2400
cm–1 domain have been reported not only for the
N–H stretch of His, but also for the O–H
stretch of Tyr, analysis of bands in
this frequency domain will allow identification by difference FTIR
spectroscopy of yet uninvestigated roles of amino acid residues in
protein functions.

Author Present Address
∥ Y.F.: Department of Life and Coordination-Complex Molecular Science,
Institute for Molecular Science, Myodaiji, Okazaki 444-8585, Japan.

This work was
supported by grants from the Japanese Ministry of Education, Culture,
Sports, Science and Technology to H.K. (25104009) and by Grant R01GM027750
from the National Institute of General Medical Sciences and Endowed
Chair AU-0009 from the Robert A. Welch Foundation to J.L.S.

The authors declare no
competing financial interest.

Abbreviations
SBSchiff base

PSBprotonated Schiff base

BRbacteriorhodopsin

ECextracellular

CPcytoplasmic

SRsensory rhodopsin

ATRattenuated total reflection

MeIm4-methylimidazole.

