The U-turn
fold is widespread
in RNA structures. It was first identified in the anticodon hairpin
loop of yeast phenylalanine tRNA and later
observed in several hairpin loops, internal loops, and helical junctions
of a variety of functional RNAs.− The UNR sequence (U = uracil, N = any base, and R = purine) typical
of this fold facilitates the formation of a sharp backbone turn at
the UN step and promotes stacking of the bases after the turn in a
favorable position for Watson–Crick base pairing. As a result,
U-turn structures are often key contributors to RNA folding and tertiary
interactions. In addition, U-turn structures are known to initiate
rapid RNA/RNA pairing, as found for codon–anticodon recognition, and antisense RNA targeting in prokaryotes, and such pairing is known to trigger conformational changes in macromolecular
complexes involving RNA., However, despite the
importance of U-turn structures in RNA function, few structural studies
have thoroughly examined their contribution to RNA/RNA interactions
and associated conformational changes.

The Neurospora Varkud satellite
(VS) ribozyme provides a simple model system for investigating the
role of U-turn structures in an RNA/RNA interaction. The VS ribozyme
is derived from the VS RNA, a circular single-stranded RNA satellite
found in certain strains of Neurospora that depends on the cleavage and ligation activities of the VS ribozyme
for its replication.− In vitro, the minimal region of the VS RNA that maintains
catalytic activity contains six stem-loop domains (SLI-SLVI), with
stem-loop I (SLI) corresponding to the substrate and stem-loops II
to VI (SLII-SLVI) forming the catalytic domain (Figure A)., Of particular interest, a unique
kissing-loop interaction between SLI and SLV (Figure A) plays a central role in substrate recognition and is very
important for in vitro cleavage and ligation activities.− Mutagenesis and chemical probing data indicate that this I/V kissing-loop
forms in the presence of magnesium (Mg2+) ions and involves
three Watson–Crick (W–C) base pairs., In addition, formation of the I/V kissing-loop is accompanied by
a structural rearrangement in SLI, best described as a helix shift
(Figure B), that activates the substrate for
catalysis.− Interestingly, the I/V kissing-loop and associated
helix shift can be reproduced biochemically using isolated stem-loops
(SLI and SLV).

Primary and secondary
structures of RNAs used in this study. (A)
The catalytic domain of the Neurospora VS ribozyme containing helical domains II–VI and an SLI substrate
(SLIps) containing stems Ia and Ib. The cleavage site is indicated
by an arrowhead. The I/V kissing-loop interaction involves Watson–Crick
base pairs (thick black lines) between residues G630, U631, and C632
of SLI (shaded in purple) and residues C699, A698, and G697 of SLV
(shaded in green). (B) Formation of the I/V kissing-loop is accompanied
by a structural rearrangement of the SLI substrate from an unshifted
(free SLIsb) to a shifted (bound SLIsb) conformation. (C) The SLV
and SLI RNAs used for investigation of SLI/SLV complexes by NMR spectroscopy.
In (B) and (C), the cleavage site of the SLI substrates (SLIsb, SLIps,
SLIpsΔIa, SLIsbΔIa, and SLIsbΔIaGU) is
between residues −1 and +1.

High-resolution NMR studies of stem-loop domains derived
from the
VS ribozyme have provided initial structural insight into the I/V
kissing-loop and the associated helix shift. NMR structures of the
SLI cleavage site internal loop were determined that correspond to
both the unshifted and shifted conformations− and help explain
the structural changes that likely occur at the cleavage site as a
result of the helix shift. NMR structures of an isolated SLV domain
indicate that the SLV loop forms a U-turn structure,, as predicted from the loop sequence and mutational studies. Furthermore, this U-turn structure becomes more
compact in the presence of Mg2+ ions., Although a U-turn structure was also predicted in SLI, NMR studies of an isolated SLI domain indicate
that the SLI loop is mostly disordered in both the absence and the
presence of Mg2+ ions. On
the basis of these NMR structures and biochemical data, three-dimensional
models of the I/V kissing-loop interaction were derived., In addition, a model of the SLI/SLV interaction was incorporated
in a low-resolution solution structure of the full VS ribozyme obtained
by small-angle X-ray scattering (SAXS). However, these models of the SLI/SLV complex lack the high level
of precision that can only be achieved through high-resolution structural
studies.

In this manuscript, we perform NMR structural studies
of SLI/SLV
complexes to gain additional structural insights into substrate recognition
and activation by the VS ribozyme. We obtain structural evidence for
formation of three W–C base pairs at the kissing-loop junction
and for the helix shift in SLI as a result of SLV binding. In addition,
our NMR data provide novel insights into the structure of the I/V
kissing-loop that help explain the stability of this interaction and
allow us to propose a kinetic model of helix shifting in SLI.

Experimental
Procedures
Preparation of RNA for NMR Studies
All RNAs used in
this study (SLV, SLIps, SLIpsΔIa, SLIsb, SLIsbΔIa, SLIsbΔIaGU, SLIds1, and SLIds2; Figure B,C)
were synthesized in vitro using T7 RNA polymerase (prepared in house),
single-stranded DNA templates (IDT), and NTPs (13C/15N- or 15N-NTPs prepared in house or unlabeled
NTPs from Sigma-Aldrich), and they were purified as previously described., The purified RNAs were first exchanged in NMR buffer (10 mM Tris-d11 at pH 7.0, 50 mM NaCl, and 0.05 mM NaN3 in 90% H2O/10% D2O) by use of Amicon
Ultra-4 3K ultrafiltration devices and then refolded by heating to
95 °C for two min and then cooling in ice water. Prior to complex
formation, the RNA samples were transferred to NMR buffer supplemented
with either 5 mM or 20 mM MgCl2 99.995% (Sigma-Aldrich)
using the ultrafiltration device. In the case of SLIsbΔIaGU, 20 mM MgCl2 was added directly to the sample
without the ultrafiltration device to ensure that it maintained its
hairpin conformation. Using these procedures, the SLI and SLV RNAs
formed hairpin structures, because only this conformation and not
the duplex conformation was detected by native gels (Figure S1 of ).

Formation of SLI/SLV
complexes was generally achieved by titrating the isotopically labeled
stem-loop with the unlabeled stem-loop in ratios of 1:0, 1:0.25, 1:0.5,
1:0.75, and 1:1, and the resulting complex was concentrated to a final
volume of either 350 or 500 μL. For imino NMR studies of complex
formation, the following complexes were prepared at concentrations
of 0.8–1.4 mM: SLIsbΔIa/15N-SLV, 15N-SLIsbΔIa/SLV, 15N-SLIsbΔIa/15N-SLV, 15N-SLIsbΔIaGU/SLV, SLIps/15N-SLV, 15N-SLIpsΔIa/SLV, 15N-SL1ds1/SLV,
and 15N-SLIds2/SLV. For NMR structure determination, the
following complexes were prepared at concentrations of 1.0–2.2
mM in NMR buffer supplemented with 5 mM MgCl2: SLIds2/15N-SLV, SLIds2/13C15N-SLV, 15N-SLIds2/SLV, 13C15N-SLIds2/SLV, 13C15N-SLIds1/SLV, 15N-SLIsbΔIa/15N-SLV, SLIsbΔIa/15N-SLV, and SLIsbΔIa/13C15N-SLV. Moreover, two complexes were similarly
prepared, in which 13C/15N-labeling of SLIds2
was restricted to either guanines or to guanines and cytosines: 13C15N G-SLIds2/SLV and 13C15N CG-SLIds2/SLV. For NMR studies in D2O, the samples were
lyophilized and resuspended in 99.996% D2O a minimum of
four times.

Native Gel Electrophoresis Studies of RNA
Hairpins
The RNA samples were prepared by heating and snap-cooling
5 μg
of each RNA in 20 μL of buffer containing 10 mM Tris, pH 7.0,
50 mM NaCl, and 20 mM MgCl2. Native polyacrylamide gel
electrophoresis was carried out on 7.5% polyacrylamide gels (37.5:1
acrylamide:bisacylamide) and run in TB buffer (20 mM Tris borate at
pH 8). The gels were prerun for 30 min at 200 V and 4 °C, loaded
with RNA samples (SLI and SLV variants), and then run for 2 h at 250
V and 4 °C. The gels were stained with Stains All (Sigma-Aldrich).

NMR Spectroscopy
NMR data were acquired on Varian UnityINOVA 500 and 600 MHz NMR spectrometers equipped with
a pulse-field gradient unit and actively shielded z-gradient probes,
either a 1H{13C/15N} triple-resonance
probe (standard or cold probe) or a 1H{15N–31P} indirect detection probe. For imino NMR studies of complex
formation, NMR data were acquired at either 25 °C (for complexes
of SLIps, SLIsbΔIa, SLIpsΔIa, SLIds1, and SLIds2 with
SLV) or 5 °C (for the SLIsbΔIaGU/SLV complex).
The following NMR spectra were collected: 1D 15N-decoupled 1H watergate and its 15N-filtered and 15N-edited versions, imino-optimized 2D 1H–15N HSQC, 2D HNN-COSY, and 2D 15N(t1/t2)-decoupled 1H–1H flip-back watergate NOESY (2D NOESY), with mixing
times of 150 ms or 250 ms. For NMR structure determination, NMR data
were collected at 25 °C on SLIsbΔIa/SLV and SLIds1/SLV,
SLIds2/SLV complexes. For assignment of exchangeable protons and their
attached nitrogens, the following experiments were collected in H2O: imino and amino-optimized 2D 1H–15N HSQC ; G-specific 2D H(NC)-TOCSY-(C)H (for SLIsbΔIa/15N-SLV only);
2D HNN-COSY; 2D 1H–15N CPMG-NOESY (for SLIsbΔIa/SLV
and SLIds2/SLV only); 2D NOESY;, 3D 15N-edited
NOESY-HSQC and 3D 15N/13C-edited NOESY-HSQC with a mixing
time of 150 ms (for SLIds2/SLV only). For assignment of nonexchangeable
protons and their attached carbons, the following experiments were
collected in D2O: 2D 1H–13C constant-time-HSQC (CT-HSQC);, 3D CT-HCCH–COSY; 3D HCCH-TOCSY (for
SLIsbΔIa/SLV and SLIds2/SLV only) and 3D 13C-edited
HMQC-NOESY collected with mixing times
of 70 or 140 ms. In addition, 2D long-range 1H–15N HMQC spectra optimized for
transfers via J = 21 Hz were collected in D2O for the assignment of purines N7 and N9. NMR data were processed
using the NMRPipe/NMRDraw package and
analyzed with the CCPNMR suite.

Structural
Restraints
Structural restraints were collected
for structure determination of the SLIds2/SLV complex. Two-dimensional
HNN-COSY spectra were collected to detect 2JNN couplings across hydrogen bonds in W–C base
pairs. Distance restraints were extracted from 2D NOESY,, 2D 1H–15N CPMG-NOESY, 3D 15N-edited NOESY-HSQC, and 3D 15N/13C-edited NOESY-HSQC spectra recorded in H2O and 3D 13C-edited HMQC-NOESY spectra
collected in D2O. The NOE-derived distance restraints were
separated in four classes: very strong (1.8–3.3 Å), strong
(1.8–4.5 Å), medium (1.8–5.5 Å), and weak
(2.8–7.5 Å). Based on NMR evidence for specific base pairing
obtained from NOESY and HNN-COSY spectra, canonical distance restraints
were employed to define the hydrogen bonds and planarity of standard
W–C and G–U wobble base pairs. In addition, cross-strand
interphosphate distance constraints were introduced for each of these
base pairs (≥18 Å) to help define A-form geometry in the
SLIds2 and SLV stems. Based on NMR data, all glycosidic angles adopt
an anti conformation, which was defined using H1′-H6/H8 distance
restraints of 3.2–3.6 Å for pyrimidines and 3.4–3.8
Å for purines. Based on NMR evidence, backbone torsion angles
of residues in helical regions (1I-6I, 16I-22I in SLIds2 and 1V-7V,
15V-21V in SLV) were restrained to A-form values
(±15°), whereas a selected few were also restrained to A-form
values (±30°) in the kissing-loop region (α and β
of 13I and 12V, γ and δ of 12I, 13I, 11V, 12V, and ε
and ζ of 12I and 11V). Based on the N7
chemical shift values of G11I and A11V, which
are characteristic of the U-turn motif, two specific distance restraints
of 1.8–3.0 Å were defined (G11I N7 to U9I 2′–OH and A11V N7 to U9V 2′–OH). Finally, based on the C7I NH2 chemical shifts, which are characteristics of G–C
base pairs, an ambiguous distance restraint (1.8–2.2 Å)
was defined between C7 I NH2 and the O6 of either
G14I or G15I.

Residual Dipolar Coupling
Measurements
NMR studies
were performed at 25 °C with an 15N-SLIds2/15N-SLV sample (0.2–0.3 mM RNA in NMR buffer supplemented with
5 mM MgCl2) titrated with a concentrated solution of Pf1
filamentous phage to yield Pf1 phage concentrations of 0, 14.6, 17.2,
18.9, and 20.5 mg/mL. For each of these
samples, values of the 2H splitting of D2O were
measured from 1D 2H NMR spectra, and imino 1H–15N splittings were measured from 2D 1H–15N HSQC spectra collected with active JNH coupling in t1. The 1H–15N splittings
were measured from fitted peaks using NMRWish in the NMRPipe/NMRDraw package. Residual dipolar coupling (RDC)
values were calculated for H1–N1 (G) and H3–N3 (U) signals
detected at the different Pf1 phage concentrations. For each H–N
signal, the RDC values were plotted with respect to Pf1 phage concentration
in order to obtain a linear fit from which a precise RDC value was
determined at 17.2 mg phage/mL.

Structure Calculation
Three-dimensional structures
were calculated with restrained molecular dynamics and simulated annealing
in X-PLOR-NIH version 2.19 using a two-stage protocol, as previously
described. Briefly, an initial set of
50 structures was calculated at stage one from structures with randomized
backbone angles. At stage two, the structures were refined with RDC
restraints using a single alignment tensor. The axial and rhombic
components of the alignment tensor were explored with MODULE 1.0 and
a grid search procedure to obtain reliable values of Da and R. The grid search was repeated
using RDC values from the SLIds2 stem (residues 1–6, 16–21)
and the SLV stem (residues 2–7, 15–20), independently.
All grid search calculations converged on similar values of Da and R [values of Da(NH) = 17.7 Hz and R = 0.25
were used]. A final set of 500 structures was calculated, from which
the 20 lowest-energy structures that satisfied the experimental restraints
(no distance violation &gt; 0.2 Å, no torsion angle violation
&gt;
5° and no RDC violation &gt; 0.1 Hz) were selected for analysis.
These 20 lowest-energy structures were used to calculate an average
structure that was minimized against NOE and dihedral restraints.
All structures were visualized with PyMOL Molecular Graphics System,
Version 1.3 Schrödinger, LLC and analyzed with PyMOL and Curves+.
Interhelical parameters were calculated as previously described.

Results
NMR Evidence for Formation
of the I/V Kissing-Loop Interaction
It was previously established
that the SLV RNA used in this study
(Figure C) adopts a stable hairpin that is
compatible with SLI/SLV complex formation. Thus, we next focused on identifying suitable SLI RNAs for our investigations
of SLI/SLV complexes. Several SLI variants (Figure C) were characterized by imino NMR spectroscopy and native
gel electrophoresis (Figure S1 of ) to identify those that form a stable hairpin to be tested for complex
formation. Initially, we used shiftable SLI substrates with a stable
stem Ia (e.g., SLIsb in Figure B) as found
in the wild-type VS ribozyme, but such SLI variants do not form a
stable SLI/SLV complex (not shown), in agreement with biochemical
studies showing that stem Ia hinders formation of the I/V kissing-loop
interaction.,−

Next,
we investigated complex formation with a shiftable SLI substrate that
does not contain stem Ia (SLIsbΔIa; Figure A). The SLIsbΔIa variant also contains a G627A mutation
(A7I in SLIsbΔIa) compared to the natural sequence
of the VS ribozyme (Figure A). This variant
was selected because a similar SLI substrate with the natural G at
this position did not form a stable homogeneous complex with SLV for
NMR studies (data not shown). Importantly, the G627A mutation is compatible
with both cleavage and ligation activities of the VS ribozyme,,, and it slightly increases the
affinity of the SLI substrate for the VS ribozyme. Formation of the SLI/SLV complex with SLIsbΔIa was
monitored by 1D imino proton NMR (Figure B).
In addition, imino proton assignments of SLIsbΔIa and SLV were
obtained from 2D NOESY spectra of both their free (not shown) and
bound forms (Figure C). Interestingly, upon
addition of SLIsbΔIa to SLV, three new imino proton signals
are observed (Figure B), including one for
SLV (G H1 at 12.11 ppm) and two for SLIsbΔIa (G H1 at 12.92
ppm and U H3 at 14.14 ppm; Figure C), which
indicates that complex formation stabilizes three W–C base
pairs, one A–U, and two G–C base pairs. Interestingly,
two NOE signals involving these new imino protons are observed (Figure C), which support stacking of the A–U base
pair between the two G–C base pairs (Figure A). Further evidence for intermolecular W–C base pairing
was obtained from 2D HNN-COSY spectra
collected on three SLIsbΔIa/SLV complexes prepared with differential 15N labeling (Figure S2 of the ). These spectra confirm W–C base pairing
in the SLIsbΔIa stem (15N-SLIsbΔIa/SLV complex),
the SLV stem (SLIsbΔIa/15N-SLV complex), and at the
kissing-loop junction (15N-SLIsbΔIa/15N-SLV complex). Taken together, the imino NMR data support a secondary
structure model for the SLIsbΔIa/SLV complex (Figure A) that includes the three proposed W–C base
pairs (G11I-C12V, U12I-A11V, and C13I-G10V) at the kissing-loop junction.

NMR evidence
for formation of the SLIsbΔIa/SLV complex. (A)
Proposed secondary structure of SLIsbΔIa, a shiftable SLI variant,
and SLV in their free (left) and bound (right) forms. The boxed nucleotides
in SLIsbΔIa are those involved in the helix shift associated
with SLV binding. (B) Imino region of 1D 1H NMR spectra
recorded for the titration of 15N-labeled SLV with unlabeled
SLIsbΔIa. 1D NMR spectra were collected under the same conditions
and plotted on the same vertical scale but were adjusted to take into
account sample dilution during the titration. Imino proton assignment
is provided for both SLIsbΔIa and SLV in their free forms. The
imino proton signals marked with an asterisk in the 1:1 SLIsbΔIa/SLV
complex represent a small excess of free SLV. (C) Imino region of
the 2D NOESY spectrum of the SLIsbΔIa/15N-SLV complex.
On top, 1D 15N-filtered (purple; SLIsbΔIa) and 15N-edited (green; SLV) spectra of the complex annotated with
imino proton assignments. Annotations in (B) and (C) are used to identify
imino signals within SLIsbΔIa (purple), within SLV (green),
and at the kissing-loop junction (orange), and these imino signals
provide evidence for the base pairs shaded with the corresponding
colors in (A).

NMR Evidence for the Helix
Shift in SLI upon Interaction with
SLV
It was previously demonstrated biochemically that SLI
undergoes a structural rearrangement from an unshifted to a shifted
conformation upon interaction with SLV, and this helix shift activates
the substrate for catalysis., In SLIsbΔIa,
this helix shift should involve three guanines (G3I, G4I, and G5I) that, upon SLV binding, change their
base pairing partners in stem Ib, thereby excluding C14I from the helix (Figure A). To provide NMR
evidence for this structural change, the 1D imino 1H NMR
spectrum of SLIsbΔIa was compared to the 1D 15N-filtered
imino 1H spectrum of the SLIsbΔIa/15N-SLV
complex, which allows for selective detection of the SLI signals from
the complex (Figure AB). Four imino signals
are observed for free SLI, in agreement with the four proposed G–C
base pairs in the stem involving G3I, G4I, G5I, and G13I. In contrast, five imino signals are
observed for the SLV-bound SLI, two originating from U11I and G10I forming W–C base pairs at the kissing-loop
junction and three from G3I, G4I, and G5I forming G–C base pairs in the SLI stem (Figure A,B). The imino signal of G13I, detected
for free SLIsbΔIa, is absent in the spectrum of the SLIsbΔIa/SLV
complex (Figure B), suggesting that SLV binding
destabilizes the SLI loop closing base pair (C4I–G13I in Figure A). Importantly, there
are significant chemical shift changes for the imino signals of G3I and G5I in the stem, which reflect important changes
in their chemical environment upon complex formation (Figure B and Table S1 of the ). Taken together, changes in 1D 1H imino
spectra of free and SLV-bound SLI are compatible with the helix shift
in SLI upon complex formation, although it does not provide evidence
for the proposed C4I-G13I base pair closing
the loop.,

NMR evidence of structural rearrangements in
SLI variants. Upper
panels: Proposed secondary structures of the free and SLV-bound forms
of shiftable SLI [(A) SLIsbΔIa and (C) SLIsbΔIaGU] and preshifted SLI [(E) SLIpsΔIa and (G) SLIps] variants.
Lower panels: Imino region of 1D 1H NMR spectra of (B)
SLIsbΔIa, (D) SLIsbΔIaGU, (F) SLIpsΔIa,
and (H) SLIps (bottom spectra), along with the 1D 1H 15N-filtered or 15N-edited NMR spectra of the (B)
SLIsbΔIa/15N-SLV, (D) 15N-SLIsbΔIaGU/SLV, (F) 15N-SLIpsΔIa/SLV, and (H) SLIps/15N-SLV complexes for detection of SLI imino proton signals
only (top spectra). The shaded imino proton signals of residues from
the kissing-loop interaction (orange) and the adjacent SLI stem (purple)
provide evidence for the base pairs shaded with the corresponding
colors in the proposed secondary structures shown in (A), (C), (E),
and (G).

To provide unambiguous evidence
for base-pair shifting in the SLI
stem, complex formation was investigated using a variant of SLIsbΔIa
carrying a C15I to U15I change that transforms
the G4I–C15I base pair of the free substrate
to a G–U base pair (SLIsbΔIaGU; Figure C). The imino NMR data of the SLIsbΔIaGU/SLV complex confirm formation of the three W–C base
pairs at the kissing-loop junction (Figure S3 of the ). Comparison of the imino 1H spectra of SLIsbΔIaGU in its free and SLV-bound
forms is compatible with the helix shift in SLI (Figure CD). In particular, the imino protons of G13I and
G5I observed in free SLIsbΔIaGU are not
observed for the SLV-bound SLIsbΔIaGU, in agreement
with destabilization of the loop-closing base pairs upon complex formation.
Nevertheless, U15I presents a large chemical shift change
(from 11.69 to 10.91 ppm; Figure D and Table
S1 of the ) consistent
with formation of a G–U base pair closing the loop. More importantly, NOE signals confirm that G4I forms a G–U base pair in the free SLIsbΔIaGU but forms a G–C base pair in the SLIsbΔIaGU/SLV complex (Figure S3 of the ), providing definite NMR evidence for helix shifting
in SLI as a result of complex formation.

Complex formation was
also investigated with two preshifted SLI
substrates, one with a stem Ia (SLIps) and one without a stem Ia (SLIpsΔIa;
Figure E–H). The imino NMR data of
the SLIps/SLV and the SLIpsΔIa/SLV complexes confirm formation
of the three W–C base pairs at the kissing-loop junction (Figures
S4 and S5 of the ). For the stem residues of SLIpsΔIa and SLIps, there are only
minor changes in chemical shifts as a result of SLV binding (Figure E–H and Table S1 of the ), indicating that the structure of
stem Ib is not largely affected by complex formation. However, we
note the disappearance of G14I upon complex formation in
both cases (Figure E–H), which is in
agreement with destabilization of the SLI loop-closing base pair.
In summary, imino NMR data obtained with shiftable versus preshifted
substrates provide structural validation for helix shifting upon complex
formation with the shiftable SLI substrates and the lack of such phenomenon
with preshifted SLI substrates.

Ideal Complex for NMR Structure
Determination
An ideal
SLI/SLV complex for NMR structure determination should present a high
affinity, a minimal size, and stable stems associated with a large
number of detectable imino protons. In this regard, we determined
that the SLI variants considered thus far are suboptimal for NMR structure
determination aimed at providing a high-resolution understanding of
the I/V kissing-loop interaction. Thus, two additional small SLI variants
were prepared, SLIds1 (Figure S6 of the ) and SLIds2 (Figure ),
that each contains a unique stem Ib that is extended compared to the
wild-type SLI. Although these SLI variants are not substrates of the
VS ribozyme, their extended stem Ib makes them particularly useful
for NMR structure determination. Particularly, they should facilitate
NMR resonance assignments and structure refinement using residual
dipolar couplings (RDC). As observed with preshifted substrates, imino
NMR studies indicate that there is little structural change in stem
Ib of SLIds1 and SLIds2 upon complex formation with SLV (Figure  and Figure S6 and Table S1 of the ). Of note, a weak G imino proton signal,
assigned to G15I, is observed in the 1D imino 1H NMR spectra of free SLIds2, and this signal disappears completely
upon complex formation (Figure B), in agreement
with destabilization of the SLI loop-closing base pair. Furthermore,
the SLIds1/SLV and SLIds2/SLV complexes both give high-quality imino
NMR data, including the imino signals and NOE interconnectivities
that are characteristic of the I/V kissing-loop junction (Figure C and Figure S6C of the ). We pursued NMR structure determination with the
SLIds2/SLV complex, which provides superior imino proton dispersion
for both SLI and SLV within a complex of reasonable size (43 nt) and
of affinity similar to that of the two complexes formed with preshifted
SLI substrates [Kd = 0.4–0.7 μM
(Bouchard, P. and Legault, P., Département de Biochimie et
Médecine Moléculair, Université de Montréal,
2013, unpublished data)].

NMR evidence for formation of the SLIds2/SLV
complex. (A) Proposed
secondary structure of SLIds2, a double-stranded SLI variant, and
SLV in their free (left) and bound (right) forms. (B) Imino region
of 1D 1H NMR spectra recorded for the titration of 15N-labeled SLIds2 with unlabeled SLV. 1D NMR spectra were
collected under the same conditions and plotted as described in Figure . Imino proton assignment is provided for both SLIds2
and SLV in their free forms. (C) Imino region of the 2D NOESY spectrum
of the 15N-SLIds2/SLV complex. The signals marked with
an asterisk are decoupling artifacts. On top, 1D 15N-filtered
(green; SLV) and 15N-edited (purple; SLIds2) spectra of
the complex annotated with imino proton assignment. Annotations in
(B) and (C) are used to identify imino signals within SLIds2 (purple),
SLV (green), and at the kissing-loop junction (orange), which provide
evidence for the base pairs shaded with the corresponding colors in
(A).

NMR Structure Determination
of the SLIds2/SLV Complex
Multidimensional heteronuclear
NMR methods were employed to determine
the structure of the SLIds2/SLV complex using several combinations
of unlabeled and uniformly labeled (15N or 13C/15N) SLIds2 and SLV RNAs. In addition, complexes incorporating 13C and 15N labeling of specific residue types within
SLIds2 and complexes containing different SLI variants (SLIsbΔIa/SLV
and SLIds1/SLV, Figure ) were used to facilitate
and confirm spectral analysis. The sequential resonance assignment
mainly relied on 2D and 3D NOESY-type spectra of these complexes (see ), allowing almost complete
assignment of the observable resonances (1H, 15N, and 13C) from the bases and the C1′-H1′
and C2′-H2′ resonances from the ribose moieties (Tables
S3 and S4 of the ).

Three-dimensional structures were calculated using distance,
dihedral angle, and RDC restraints (Figure  and Table ). The overall structure is well-defined
by the NMR data, with a heavy-atom RMSD of 2.02 ± 0.77 Å
for the 20 lowest-energy structures (Figure  and Table ). The stems of both SLI and SLV
form well-defined A-form helices (RMSDs of 0.5–0.6 Å).
The SLV loop is also well-defined (RMSD of 1.01 ± 0.20 Å),
except for the extruded U13V, whereas the SLI loop is not
as well-defined, mainly due to a limited number of restraints for
residues A8I, U9I, and G15I (RMSD
of 1.78 ± 0.69 Å). In terms of interhelical parameters (Figure
S7 of the ), the
majority of structures have an average interhelical angle (θI–V) ∼130° [θI–V = 131° ± 3° with an axis displacement (dI–V) = 15 ± 3 Å], although values ∼160°
are also observed in 6 of the 20 structures [θI–V = 161° ± 9° with dI–V = 19 ± 7 Å].

Stereoview of the NMR structures of the SLIds2/SLV
kissing-loop
complex. Superposition of the 20 lowest-energy structures on the minimized
average structure (not shown). Only heavy atoms of SLIds2 and SLV
residues 2–20 were used for the superposition and are shown.
Residues are shown in the prevailing coloring scheme (SLIds2, purple;
SLV, green; W–C base pairs at the kissing-loop junction, orange).

Structural Statistics
 	SLIds2/SLV	
number of NOE-derived distance
restraints	507	
intranucleotide	181	
internucleotide	291	
 intermolecular	32	
 ambiguous	3	
hydrogen-bond restraints	89	
base-pair planarity restraints	32	
dihedral angle restraints	173	
residual dipolar coupling
(1DNH) restraints	16	
P–P distance restraints	19	
total number of restraints	836	
RMSD from experimental restraints	 	
 NOE (Å;
none &gt; 0.2 Å)	0.069 ± 0.008	
 dihedral
(°; none &gt; 5°)	0.008 ± 0.001	
 residual
dipolar coupling (Hz; none &gt;0.1 Hz)	0.0018 ± 0.0005	
RMSD from idealized
geometry	 	
 bonds
(Å)	0.00441 ± 0.00005	
 angles
(°)	0.995 ± 0.001	
 impropers
(°)	0.385 ± 0.001	
heavy-atom RMSD to
the minimized
average structure	 	
overall
(SLIds2: 2–20, SLV: 2–20)	2.02 ± 0.77	
overall
SLI (SLIds2: 2–20)	1.82 ± 0.77	
overall
SLV (SLV: 2–20)	1.15 ± 0.27	
 stem
I (SLIds2: 2–6, 16–20)	0.59 ± 0.10	
 stem
V (SLV: 2–7, 15–20)	0.49 ± 0.07	
 loop
I (SLIds2: 6–16)	1.78 ± 0.69	
 loop
V (SLV: 7–15)	1.01 ± 0.20	
 kissing-loop
stem (SLIds2: 11–13, SLV: 10–12)	0.73 ± 0.19	
 kissing-loop
junction (SLIds2: 6–16, SLV: 7–15)	1.70 ± 0.51	
Standard U-Turns at the Kissing-Loop Junction
As previously
proposed, both the SLI and SLV loops within the SLI/SLV complex adopt
a U-turn structure (Figure ). The consensus UNR sequence of the U-turn is represented
in SLIds2 by residues U9I, C10I, and G11I and in SLV by residues U9V, G10V, and
A11V. These loop structures are characterized by a sharp
turn in the ribose-phosphate backbone after the first U (U9I or U9V), which is supported by several NOEs for both
SLIds2 and SLV, namely NOEs between U9 H1′/H2′ and R11
H8 and between U9 H1′ and U/C12 H6/H5. As found in other U-turn
structures, there are several base-stacking interactions after the
sharp turn, which are supported by sequential NOEs characteristic
of A-form geometry. These stacking interactions involve C10I, G11I, U12I, C13I, and G14I in SLIds2 and G10V, A11V, C12V, and A14V in SLV (Figure ).

U-turn
structures in the SLIds2 and SLV loops of the SLIds2/SLV
complex. Superposition of (A) the SLIds2 and (D) SLV loops of the 10 lowest-energy structures on the minimized average
structure (not shown). Only heavy atoms of SLIds2 residues 6–16
or SLV residues 7–15 were used for the superposition and are
shown. Minimized average structure of the (B) SLIds2 and (E) SLV
loops showing base stacking after the sharp turn in the backbone,
which is also represented by shaded gray boxes in (C) and (F). Dashed
lines represent hydrogen bonds characteristic of a U-turn motif between
U9I 2′–OH and G11I N7 and between
U9I H3 and G11I 3′-phosphate in SLIds2
as well as between U9V 2′–OH and A11V N7 and between U9V H3 and A11V 3′-phosphate
in SLV. Schematic representation of the (C) SLIds2 and (F) SLV loops
in the complex. The arrows indicate observed NOEs that are characteristic
of the U-turn motif, including those between U9I H1′/H2′
and G11I H8 and between U9I H1′ and U12I H6/H5 in SLIds2 and the equivalent NOEs in SLV.

U-turn structures are generally stabilized by two
hydrogen bonds
involving the required U residue: U 2′–OH to R N7 and
U H3 to R 3′-phosphate. For both
the SLIds2 and SLV loops, a downfield-shifted signal was observed
for R N7 (G11I at 228.5 ppm and A11V at 221.5
ppm, Table S2 of the ) that has been previously associated with hydrogen bonding to U
2′–OH in the U-turn., On this basis,
a distance restraint was defined between the U 2′–OH
and R N7 (1.8–3.0 Å) that contribute to bring these residues
within hydrogen-bonding distances in the ensemble of structures. The
hydrogen bond between U H3 and R 3′-phosphate could not be
similarly defined; nevertheless, the distances of U N3 to R 3′-P
in the ensemble of structures are between 3.88 and 6.19 Å for
SLIds2 and 4.02–5.65 Å for SLV, which is compatible with
hydrogen bonding as observed in other U-turn structures.,,,,,

Both
the SLIds2 and SLV loops present an extruded nucleotide, G15I in SLIds2 and U13V in SLV (Figure ). The imino protons of G15I and U13V are not
detected in the 1D 1H spectra of the complex
and very few NOEs are observed with these bases as expected for an
extruded conformation. For SLIds2, the conformation of G15I is not well-defined, but this nucleotide is most often extruded
from the loop fold and potentially forms a hydrogen bond between G15I N7 and G14I 2′–OH as well as perpendicular
π stacking between G15I and G14I, in which
either the NH2 or the 2′–OH group of G14I can form a hydrogen bond with the base of G15I.− In contrast, the extruded U13V of SLV is better defined
with its W–C edge oriented toward the solvent in all 20 lowest-energy
structures. Most of the U13V signals in the 2D 1H–13C CT-HSQC are observed at higher intensities
and significantly different 1H and 13C chemical
shifts compared to signals of other residues, which is indicative
of fast dynamics for U13V.

Previous NMR studies of
the free SLI and SLV hairpins derived from
the VS ribozymes have provided a wealth of structural information
for the SLI and SLV loops in their free forms.,, Although the free SLI loop is mostly disordered, the free SLV loop adopts a loose U-turn structure
in the absence of Mg2+ ions (SLVfree) that becomes more compact in the presence of
Mg2+ ions (SLVMg). The superpositions of these SLV loops with the SLV loop from the
SLIds2/SLV complex demonstrate that in the complex, the structure
of the SLV loop more closely matches the compact structure of the
SLVMg loop (Figure S8 of the ). However, the base of U9V is tilted
in the complex such that it precludes its stacking with the 5′-phosphate
of A11V, as found in SLVMg and several U-turn
structures. In summary, upon formation
of the I/V kissing-loop complex, loop I undergoes a significant structural
change from a disordered state to a compact fold stabilized by a U-turn
structure, whereas loop V undergoes only minor structural changes
within its compact U-turn fold.

Kissing-Loop Junction Stabilized
by Base-Pairing and Stacking
Interactions
U-turn structures typically expose the W–C
edges of bases after the turn, making them available for base pairing.
In the SLIds2/SLV complex, these exposed bases from SLI and SLV interact
with each other to create the kissing-loop junction (Figure A). The G11I, U12I, and C13I bases of SLIds2 and C12V, A11V, and
G10V bases of SLV, respectively, form the three proposed
W–C base pairs that stack on each other to adopt a short A-form-like
helix that is well-defined by several characteristic NOEs (Figures  and  and Table S5 of the ).

Structural characteristics
of the I/V kissing-loop junction. (A)
Minimized average structure showing the kissing-loop interaction.
(B)(C) Base triples in the minimized average structure. Dashed lines
represent the following hydrogen bonds defined on the basis of short
distances in the ensemble of structures (given in parentheses): A14V H61 and U8V O2 (2.85–4.88 Å), A14V N3 and C10I H41 (2.57–3.43 Å), A14V O2′ and C10I N3 (3.06–4.56 Å),
C7I H41 and G14I O6 (1.70–2.74 Å),
C7I N3 and G14I H1 (2.85–4.52 Å
in 19 structures). (D) Schematic representation of the kissing-loop
interaction between SLIds2 and SLV. The arrows indicate intermolecular
NOEs observed between residues at the kissing-loop junction (Table
S2 of the ). Residues
shaded in orange form Watson–Crick base pairs at the kissing-loop
junction, those shaded in green and purple are involved in base triples,
and shaded gray boxes illustrate base stacking. For clarity, U13V was drawn in a lighter green color.

The kissing-loop junction is stabilized by additional hydrogen-bonding
interactions, which contribute to formation of two base triples, one
at each end of the kissing-loop helix (Figure ). The C10I–A14V–U8V base triple is observed in all of the 20 lowest-energy structures
and involves a two-hydrogen-bond base pair between the W–C
edge of C10I and the sugar edge of A14V and
a one-hydrogen-bond pair between the W–C edges of U8V and A14V (Figure B). The C7I–G14I–G15I base triple
is defined by three hydrogen bonds observed simultaneously in the
average structure (Figure C) and in 11 of
the 20 lowest-energy structures: C7I NH2 to
G14I O6, C7I N3 to G14I H1 and G14I 2′–OH to G15I N7.

Stacking
interactions also play an important role in stabilizing
the kissing-loop interactions, since both C10I and A14V stack on the G11I–C12V base
pair at one end of the kissing-loop helix, while at the other end
both G14I and G15I can potentially stack on
the C13I–G10V base pair (Figure D). Furthermore, the noncanonical A14V–U8V base pair is stacked on the W–C G7V–C15V base pair of stem V, and the noncanonical
G14I–C7I base pair is stacked on the
W–C G6I–C16I base pair of stem
I. Thus, stacking interactions at both ends of the kissing-loop helix
propagate in both directions toward the stems of SLV and SLI to create
a continuously stacked structure throughout the complex.

Discussion
Structural
Characteristics of the Kissing-Loop Interaction
NMR studies
of different SLI/SLV complexes performed in the presence
of Mg2+ ions provide direct evidence that the SLI/SLV interaction
of the VS ribozyme involves three consecutive W–C base pairs
at the kissing-loop junction. In addition, the NMR structure of an
optimal SLI/SLV complex formed with SLIds2 and SLV clearly demonstrates
that the kissing-loop junction involves two U-turn structures, one
in each loop, that enable formation of intermolecular W–C base
pairs. In agreement with these NMR data, site-directed mutagenesis
studies previously revealed that residues in the SLI and SLV loops
must both fit the UNR consensus of U-turn motifs and accommodate W–C
base pairing at the I/V kissing-loop junction.,, Chemical modifications experiments are also
in agreement with the observed U-turn structures in both SLI and SLV,
in particular the two hydrogen bonds commonly found in U-turn structures:
U 2′–OH to R N7 and U H3 to R 3′-phosphate.,,−

In addition to the three
W–C base pairs, other interactions contribute to the stability
of the I/V kissing-loop interaction. The NMR structure of the SLIds2/SLV
complex contains two previously uncharacterized base triples that
provide additional hydrogen bonding and stacking interactions at the
kissing-loop junction. The C10I–A14V–U8V base triple (C629–A701–U695 in the VS ribozyme)
is particularly well-defined by the NMR data and helps rationalize
the preference for a cytidine at the N position of the SLI U-turn. Although several studies have highlighted the
importance of C629,− in the SLI/SLV
interaction, its role had not been clearly established. As shown from
the NMR structure and previous models of the SLI/SLV complex,, the U-turn fold in SLI brings C629 to stack with G630 in proximity
of A701. A cytidine is likely optimal
at this position because its small size prevents steric hindrance
and its unique W–C edge allows hydrogen bonding with the sugar
edge of A701 in SLV. Both deletion of C629 and 2′-deoxy modification
at A701 significantly reduce the VS ribozyme self-cleavage and ligation
activities,,, in agreement with the importance of these residues at the I/V kissing-loop
interface. In contrast, the C7I–G14I–G15I base triple (C626–G633–C634 in the VS ribozyme)
is less well-defined by the NMR data, and the identity of the residues
involved is not strictly required for cleavage and ligation activities.,,

Given the Mg2+-dependence for formation of the SLI/SLV
complex,, it is likely that Mg2+ ions specifically
associate with the kissing-loop junction. Previous phosphorothioate
interference and manganese rescue experiments indicate that the 5′-phosphates
of U631 (SLI) and C699 (SLV) each coordinate a metal ion. In addition, four Mg2+-ion binding
sites were previously identified within the free SLV loop, and these may also be present in the SLI/SLV
complex. In particular, the Mg2+ ion that associates with
the 5′-phosphate of C699 in the free SLV is likely present
in the complex. By analogy, a Mg2+ ion is likely associated
with the 5′-phosphate of U631, which occupies a similar position
in SLI as the 5′-phosphate of C699 in SLV. Additionally, Mg2+ ion(s) may help bridge phosphates from SLI and SLV that
come in proximity at the kissing-loop junction, namely those of the
two Us from the UNR motifs of SLI and SLV. Future studies are needed
to precisely locate Mg2+-ion binding sites at the I/V kissing-loop
junction.

RNA loops containing U-turn structures often include
an extruded
nucleotide,,,, but the role of this residue is not always well understood.
In the SLIds2/SLV complex, both the SLI and SLV loops contain an extruded
nucleotide. For SLV, the extruded U13V (U700 in the VS
ribozyme) can be substituted by any other standard base, but its phosphate
backbone is important for cleavage activity and SLI binding. U700 may play a dual role in the kissing-loop
by providing a flexible linker to SLV as well as a Mg2+-binding site, as previously proposed from kinetic studies of U700
variants. For SLIds2, the extruded G15I (C634 in the VS ribozyme) can be substituted by any other
standard base,, and its location is not precisely
defined by the NMR data. Thus, C634 may be intrinsically dynamic in
the VS ribozyme and thereby provide the necessary loop flexibility
to optimize interactions at the kissing-loop interface. As discussed
below, C634 likely plays a pivotal role in transducing part of the
energy provided by formation of the kissing-loop interaction into
the energy required for substrate activation.

Although the SLIds2/SLV
complex forms a continuously stacked structure
that appears essentially linear, the stems of SLI and SLV are not
coaxially stacked within the complex. Rather, the kissing-loop junction
causes a helical displacement of 10–24 Å between stem
I and stem V associated with an interhelical angle of 127–175°.
The arrays of helical displacements and interhelical angles observed
in the 20 lowest-energy structures may reflect to some extent the
relative range of motion of these stems. First of all, several residues
in SLI (C7I, A8I, U9I, C13I, G14I, and G15I) and SLV (U8V and
U9V) give 1H and 13C NMR signals
of low relative intensity (data not shown), suggesting local dynamics
at the kissing-loop junction. Moreover, it appears from the ensemble
of structures that the observed range of interhelical angles may largely
result from less-well-defined local structure for residues C7I–U9I and C13I–G15I in SLI. Interestingly, we previously kinetically characterized
SLI/ribozyme systems with helix-length variations in SLI and SLV and
built SLI/SLV models compatible with the kinetic data that display
helical displacements of 18–21 Å and interhelical angles
of 165–171°. The helical
parameters of these models fall within the range detected in the ensemble
of NMR structures, suggesting that within
the spectrum of interhelical parameters observed for the SLIds2/SLV
complex, some are compatible with an active VS ribozyme architecture.
Similarly, the interhelical parameters previously reported for the
SAXS model of the full VS ribozyme are more or less compatible with
that of the SLIds2/SLV complex (helical displacement of ∼25
Å and interhelical angle of ∼154°).,

Conformational Changes in SLI and SLV upon Formation of the
Kissing-Loop Interaction
NMR studies of different SLI/SLV
complexes also provide direct structural evidence that the SLI/SLV
interaction involves a helix shift in stem Ib, as previously shown
from biochemical experiments., As expected, this helix
shift is observed only with shiftable SLI variants but neither with
preshifted variants nor with double-stranded variants. NMR studies
of SLI/SLV complexes involving these SLI variants together with available
NMR structures of the free SLI and SLV, allow us to examine structural changes that occur in SLI and SLV
as a result of complex formation. Given that the formation of the
SLI/SLV complex and the associated helix shift in SLI observed in
the VS ribozyme can be reproduced with isolated hairpins, it is likely that the structural changes observed
with isolated stem-loops hold in the intact ribozyme. The SLV loop
adopts a compact U-turn structure in its free form, and only a minor
structural change is observed in the SLI/SLV complex. In contrast, SLI loop is mostly disordered in its free
form, and this disordered state may help
facilitate recognition by the compact SLV loop and trigger a structural
transition in SLI upon interaction with SLV. Upon SLV binding, the
SLI loop undergoes a disorder-to-order conformational transition that
impacts on the loop closing base pairs of stem Ib. In particular,
the NMR data indicate that the stem Ib of shiftable substrates contains
four stable W–C base pairs in their free form but only three
stable W–C base pairs in their SLV-bound forms. A fourth base
pair closing the loop was predicted to form in the SLV-bound form
according to biochemical studies,, but the imino
NMR data indicate that such a base pair is not stably formed in the
complex. For SLIsbΔIa, for example, the C6I–G13I closing base pair (C626–G633 in the VS ribozyme) is
destabilized upon complex formation such that the G13I imino
proton is no longer observable in the SLIsbΔIa/SLV complex.

Interestingly, destabilization of the SLI loop closing base pair
is also observed upon formation of SLI/SLV complexes with preshifted
substrates and the double-stranded substrate SL1ds2. In these cases,
the imino proton of the closing base pair (G14I for SLIpsΔIa
and SLIps and G15I for SLIds2) is observed in the free
SLI but not in the SLI/SLV complex. These NMR data obtained with shiftable
and preshifted SLI substrates indicate that destabilization of the
loop-closing G–C base pair is not a consequence of helix shifting
in stem Ib but instead results from formation of the kissing-loop
interaction.

Detailed NMR studies of SLIds2 demonstrate that
the C7I–G15I loop-closing base pair is
present in the
free SLI but that G15I is preferentially extruded from
the loop fold in the complex, with C7I forming an unstable
and distorted W–C base pair with G14I (C626–G633
base pair in the VS ribozyme). Chemical modification data indicate
that C626 remains mostly inaccessible to DMS modification upon binding
of SLI to the VS ribozyme,, whereas mutational
analysis indicate that disruption of the C626–G633 base pair
is compatible with self-cleavage and ligation activities of the VS
ribozyme.,, Although these
previous results appear contradictory, they both agree with the structure
of the SLIds2/SLV complex, where the C7I–G14I base pair corresponding to C626–G633 is destabilized,
but could still remain inaccessible to chemical modifications. Interestingly,
the extrusion of G15I is similar to the one occurring upon
formation of the I/V kissing-loop complex with shiftable SLI substrates,
where C634 (equivalent to G15I) becomes extruded and accessible
to DMS modification., Thus, the observation of a similar
conformational change for residue G15I in SLIds2, which
is not a shiftable SLI variant, strongly supports the concept that
formation of the kissing-loop interaction is generally responsible
for structural rearrangements involving G633 and G634 within stem
Ib.

Kinetic Model for Substrate Recognition and Activation by the
VS Ribozyme
Overall, the NMR data presented here are in agreement
with previous biochemical studies, further supporting the value of
using stem-loop domains to improve our understanding of substrate
activation and recognition within the context of the full ribozyme.
In-depth analysis of these NMR data reveals interesting conformational
changes that are consistent with a kinetic model in which formation
of an initial contact between the loops of SLI and SLV in the natural
VS ribozyme destabilizes the SLI loop closing base pairs and triggers
the helix shift in SLI. In this model, residues G697, A698, and C699
of the prefolded U-turn of SLV initially target residues C632, U631,
and G630 of the unshifted SLI and thereby induce formation of the
U-turn fold in the SLI loop. Upon formation of the U-turn fold in
SLI, other hydrogen-bonding and stacking interactions form at the
I/V kissing-loop junction to further stabilize the complex and thereby
induce the rearrangement of the C626–G633 base pair and the
extrusion of C634 within stem Ib. These structural changes likely
lead to helix shifting in stem Ib and structural rearrangement in
the cleavage site internal loop. Although this model will need further
experimental validation, it is compatible with the ability of U-turn
structures to initiate rapid RNA/RNA pairing and trigger structural
changes in RNA complexes.,

Supporting Information Available
Supporting Figures: native
gel electrophoresis of several RNAs investigated in this study (S1);
NMR evidence for formation of the SLIsbΔIa/SLV complex (S2);
of the SLIsbΔIaGU/SLV complex (S3), of the SLIps/SLV
complex (S4), of the SLIpsΔIa/SLV complex (S5), and of the SLIds1/SLV
complex (S6); interhelical angle distribution for the 20 lowest-energy
structures of the SLIds2/SLV complex (S7); superposition of the loop
structures of SLV free and bound to SLIds2 (S8). Supporting Tables:
chemical shifts of detectable G/U imino protons for SLI variants either
in their free form or bound to SLV RNA (S1); chemical shift of detectable
G/U imino protons for SLV either in its free form or bound to SLI
variants (S2); chemical shift assignments of exchangeable 1H and 15N for the SLIds2/SLV complex (S3); chemical shift
assignments of nonexchangeable 1H and 13C for
the SLIds2/SLV complex (S4); summary of intermolecular NOEs at the
kissing-loop junction of the SLIds2/SLV complex (S5). This material
is available free of charge via the Internet at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bi401491g_si_001.pdf

Accession Codes
The NMR chemical
shifts, structural restraints and structural coordinates of the SLIds2/SLV
complex have been deposited through the RCSB Protein Data Bank and
given BMRB entry code 19662 and PDB entry code 2MI0.

This work was
supported by the Canadian Institutes for Health Research (CIHR) to
P.L. [MOP-86502]. P.B. was supported by a Frederick Banting and Charles
Best Canada Graduate Scholarship Ph.D. scholarship from CIHR and graduate
scholarships from the Université de Montréal. P.L. holds
a Canada Research Chair in Structural Biology and Engineering of RNA.
Funding for open access charge: CIHR.

The authors
declare no competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
We thank
Dominique Chaussé for sample preparation,
Nicolas Girard for structural analysis, and Ryan Richter for computer
support. We also thank Alexandre Desjardins, Eric Bonneau, and James
G. Omichinski for critical reading of the manuscript.

ABBREVIATIONS
2Dtwo-dimensional

3Dthree-dimensional

bpbase pair

HSQCheteronuclear single
quantum coherence

NOEnuclear Overhauser
effect

NOESYNOE
spectroscopy

PDBprotein data bank

SLIstem-loop I

SLVstem-loop V

RMSDroot mean square deviation

SAXSsmall-angle X-ray scattering

W–CWatson–Crick

