The acquisition of native protein
structure is fundamental to the function of newly synthesized polypeptides. Failure to obtain the native conformation results
in a loss of protein function and is often associated with polypeptide
degradation and/or aggregation. While
non-native proteins have often been considered inactive, their incorporation
into large macromolecular structures is being recognized as being
biologically important.− In addition, the ability to generate specific protein
polymers, including ordered filaments and films, has potential for
the production of biomaterial scaffolds, which are increasingly being
developed for therapeutic applications.−

Many protein sequences
have been shown to self-associate and assemble,
though these reactions are often induced by nonphysiological conditions,
including extreme shifts in buffer composition and pH, salt, temperature,
or extended incubation periods., These harsh treatments
are often limiting to the incorporation of native protein functions,
as, by design, they usually result in the denaturation of protein
structure prior to self-assembly. As a
result, the identification of protein sequences that can be utilized
to facilitate stable polymer assembly under near-physiological conditions
would likely facilitate the development and production of biological
materials.

The repeats-in-toxin (RTX) family of exoproteins
is associated
with the virulence of multiple human pathogens, including Escherichia coli, Bordetella pertussis, Serratia marcescens, and Pseudomonas aeruginosa.− The hallmark of this family of secreted proteins is a highly conserved
nonapeptide glycine- and aspartate-rich repeat, which is concatenated
in C-terminal Ca2+-binding RTX domains. Structural studies
of multiple RTX domains indicate that Ca2+ binding facilitates
the folding of the RTX domains into compact β-helical structures.− In the absence of Ca2+, these domains are largely disordered,
exhibiting limited secondary structure and extended hydrodynamic radii.
It is thought that this structural transition serves to regulate the
activity and secretion of these proteins from the bacterial cell.

Studies of the P. aeruginosa alkaline protease
(AprA) demonstrate that the folding and activation of the enzyme are
coupled to Ca2+ binding within the RTX domains. These Ca2+ binding events first facilitate
the folding of the RTX domain, which, in turn, nucleates the folding
of the protease domain. While characterizing the Ca2+-induced
folding of the AprA sequence, we previously observed that incubation
of the apo RTX domain in near-physiological buffers at both low temperatures
and low concentrations resulted in the formation of ordered protein
polymers. The characterization of these polymeric structures and their
assembly were not explored, nor were the mechanisms by which Ca2+ binding might influence these polymerization events in vitro.

To characterize these structures further
and evaluate their ability
to form stable assemblies, the RTX domain was purified for in vitro polymerization studies. This polymerization was
tightly controlled by Ca2+-induced RTX folding and could
be regulated by Ca2+ addition or chelation. Further, deposition
of these structures onto solid supports resulted in the formation
of large, highly ordered two-dimensional protein sheets. The formation
of the fibrillar structures and the protein sheets both depended on
the presence of the apo RTX conformations. Saturating Ca2+, which facilitates folding of the RTX domain to its native β-helical
conformation, inhibited the production of the polymeric structures.
Fusion of the RTX sequences to a soluble, globular protein resulted
in the incorporation of specific protein activity into these two-dimensional
films. These data suggest that the RTX domain potentially provides
a novel scaffold for producing protein-based biomaterials.

Materials
and Methods
RTX Domain Purification and Refolding
The RTX domain
was purified and stored as previously described. Briefly, the RTX domain was cloned by polymerase chain
reaction from P. aeruginosa PAO1 genomic DNA (ATCC)
into the pET-DUET expression vector (Novagen) for expression in E. coli. The RTX domains contained either an N- or C-terminal
six-His tag for purification. Expression cultures were grown at 37
°C, and the insoluble RTX protein was purified from inclusion
bodies using guanidinium hydrochloride (GuHCl) as the denaturant.
Protein was bound to a Ni-NTA column (GE Health Sciences) in the presence
of GuHCl [50 mM Tris, 150 mM NaCl, and 6 M GuHCl (pH 6.8)]. The bound
protein was washed [50 mM Tris, 150 mM NaCl, and 40 mM imidazole (pH
6.8)] and eluted [50 mM Tris, 150 mM NaCl, and 400 mM imidazole (pH
6.8)] in the absence of GuHCl. Proteins were further purified by gel
filtration chromatography using a Sephacryl S-300 HP 16-60 column
(GE Health Sciences) to isolate the monodisperse protein and to remove
imidazole from the protein storage buffer [50 mM Tris and 150 mM NaCl
(pH 6.8)].

The GFP::RTX and RTX::GFP constructs were synthesized
by Genescript and subsequently subcloned into a T7-regulated pET vector
for expression in E. coli with an N-terminal six-His
tag. The protein was expressed as described for the RTX domain alone.
The soluble fraction of the GFP::RTX and RTX::GFP protein was purified
under native conditions after lysis by sonication and separation by
centrifugation [40000 relative centrifugal force (RCF) for 30 min].
The purification was accomplished using the buffers described for
the RTX protein without the GuHCl.

Calcium-Induced RTX Folding
Calcium-induced RTX folding
was accomplished as previously described. Purified RTX protein was incubated in refolding buffer (50 mM Tris
and 150 mM NaCl) in the presence or absence of Ca2+ for
15 min on ice. The refolded protein was separated from any misfolded
species by centrifugation (21000 RCF at 4 °C for 10 min) or centrifugal
filtration [Millipore Ultracel 100 kDa molecular weight cutoff (MWCO)
filters]. The Ca2+-induced RTX folding was confirmed by
circular dichroism (CD) spectroscopy and analytical gel filtration
chromatography.

Analytical Gel Filtration
Protein
samples were injected
onto a Tosoh GC-PAK 200 gel filtration column that was pre-equilibrated
with buffers in the presence or absence of Ca2+. Sample elution was monitored by UV absorbance
at 220 and 280 nm using a Shimadzu Prominence high-performance liquid
chromatograph. Buffers contained 50 mM Tris and 150 mM NaCl (pH 6.8)
and were supplemented with 2 mM Ca2+ or Mg2+.

CD Spectroscopy
RTX folding was monitored as a function
of protein secondary structure by circular dichroism spectroscopy
using a Jasco 810CD spectrophotometer. Spectra were collected with protein concentrations between 4 and
6 μM at 25 °C using a 1 mm path length cuvette. Buffers
contained 50 mM Tris and 150 mM NaCl (pH 6.8) with or without 2 mM
Ca2+ or Mg2+.

RTX Fibril Formation and
Characterization
Amyloid formation
occurred spontaneously at protein concentrations above ∼5–10
μM in subsaturating Ca2+. Amyloid formation was followed
using thioflavin-T (ThT) fluorescence, which shows a change in emission
upon binding amyloid structures. Fluorescence was measured as a function
of ThT emission after excitation at 450 nm. For kinetic measurements,
emission was monitored at 482 nm; steady-state emission spectra were
collected between 460 and 550 nm. For kinetic aggregation experiments,
the RTX protein was first concentrated and then cleared by centrifugation
or filtration to remove any preformed aggregates that may have appeared
during purification or storage. To evaluate the unfolding and subsequent
aggregation of the RTX protein, the protein was first diluted into
buffers containing 1–2 mM Ca2+ and refolded, as
described above, at a final concentration of 10–15 μM.
Proteins were then mixed with ThT-containing buffer with Ca2+ or EGTA, and reaction mixtures were transferred to 96-well plates
(Costar). The plates were sealed with optical tape for the experiments.
Data were collected on a BioTek Synergy 4 multimode plate reader in
kinetic mode, with constant shaking between reads. Experiments were
read over the course of 24–72 h.

Production of RTX Sheets
RTX sheets were produced by
centrifugal concentration of the apo RTX protein in buffers lacking
Ca2+ [50 mM Tris and 150 mM NaCl (pH 6.8–7.2)].
Proteins were concentrated using Millipore Ultracel 10 kDa MWCO filters
spun at 4000 RCF and 4 °C. Sheets formed spontaneously on the
centrifugal concentrator membrane support. Sheets were removed from
the support by inversion of the concentrator and/or gentle pipetting
and transferred for storage at 4 °C. Alternatively, sheets were
produced using an Amicon Ultrafiltration Cell (Millipore) with a 30
kDa MWCO poly(ether sulfone) membrane (Pall) under nitrogen pressure.
Sheets formed spontaneously on the membrane filter support and could
be displaced by vigorous pipetting.

Analysis of Protein in
the Amyloid Structure
RTX polymers
were formed in the absence of Ca2+ by incubation overnight
at 25 °C and concentration in centrifugal concentrators (Amicon
Ultra, 3 kDa MWCO, Millipore). The large polymers were collected from
the soluble fraction by brief centrifugation (1000 RCF). This insoluble
material was then washed in Ca2+-containing buffer to remove
loosely associated or unincorporated RTX protein. The insoluble material
from each wash was collected by low-speed centrifugation. After the
final wash, the remaining insoluble material was resuspended in buffer
and sonicated extensively to break up the protein polymers. Samples of the original insoluble material,
each of the washes, and the final sonicated material were resuspended
in sodium dodecyl sulfate–polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis
(SDS–PAGE) sample buffer for analysis by Western blotting.
Western blots were performed using the α-RTX antibody described
previously.

Negative Stain Electron
Microscopy of Fibrillar Structures
Sample volumes of 3.5
μL were applied to 400 mesh carbon-coated
copper grids (EM Sciences) that had been freshly glow-discharged.
Grids were lightly blotted, washed in purified water, and stained
with 4% uranyl acetate. Grids were visualized with an FEI Tecnai 12
transmission electron microscope operating at 120 kV, and images were
recorded on Kodak SO-163 film at 30000× nominal magnification
or on a Gatan Ultrascan 1000 CCD camera at 42000× nominal magnification.

Microscopy of RTX Sheets
RTX sheets were separated
from soluble protein by centrifugation at 1000 RCF. The sheets were
stained with ThT and washed repeatedly in PBS to remove excess dye
and soluble RTX protein. The stained sheets were transferred to a
MatTek glass-bottom dish for analysis by fluorescence microscopy.
Images were acquired using an Olympus Fluoview-1000 inverted microscope
on sheets suspended in PBS without fixation. Image stacks were processed
using ImageJ.

Scanning Electron Microscopy
(EM) Analysis of RTX Sheets
RTX sheets were fixed in 2.5%
glutaraldehyde for 1 h at room temperature
and then rinsed several times in 1× PBS. Next, the RTX sheets
underwent secondary fixation in 1% OsO4 for 1 h. After
several PBS washes, RTX sheets were dehydrated in a graded ethanol
series of 15 min washes from 30 to 100%. A final 15 min wash of hexamethyldisilizane
(HMDS) was used to further dehydrate the RTX sheets. RTX sheets were
then removed from the HMDS, immediately placed on aluminum SEM stubs,
and allowed to air-dry. Samples were then sputter-coated with a 3.5
nm gold/palladium coating (Cressington Auto 108) and viewed in a JEOL
JSM-6335F scanning electron microscope at 3 kV.

Results
Folding and
Misfolding of the RTX Domain of Alkaline Protease
Alkaline
protease is a two-domain protein containing an N-terminal
proteolytic domain and a C-terminal Ca2+-binding RTX domain
(Figure A). Previous
studies have shown that Ca2+ binding in the conserved RTX
domain is coupled to the folding and activation of the protease domain,
putatively providing a means of protease regulation during biosynthesis
and secretion. This structural regulation
is controlled by multiple Ca2+ ions that are coordinated
by a nonapeptide repeat that is the hallmark of the RTX family of
proteins. These repeats are enriched with glycine and aspartate residues,
which serve to coordinate the bound Ca2+ ions (Figure B).,

Calcium-regulated conformation of the
RTX domain. The calcium-dependent
conformational changes of the alkaline protease domain from P. aeruginosa were evaluated in vitro.
(A) Cartoon of the determined structure of alkaline protease. The
N-terminal protease domain and a C-terminal, β-helix RTX domain
are indicated. Calcium ions are shown as red spheres. (B) Individual
RTX nonapeptide repeats from the Pseudomonas alkaline
protease after their alignment. The nonapetide consensus sequence,
G-G-X-G-X-(D/N)-X-U-X, is shown below, where X is any amino acid and
U is a hydrophobic amino acid. (C) Representative Coomassie blue-stained
SDS–PAGE gel of the purified RTX protein showing a single predominant
species consistent with an unfolded monomer of RTX. (D) Representative
CD spectra of the RTX protein refolded in the presence (red) and absence
(black) of Ca2+ and in the presence of Mg2+ (blue).
(E) Representative chromatogram from analytical gel filtration of
the Ca2+-free (red) and Ca2+-bound (green) RTX
protein immediately after refolding. Data for the RTX protein in the
absence of Ca2+ after incubation for 24 h are colored black.
The elution peaks for the folded, unfolded, and polymer states are
labeled.

Our previous work suggested that
the RTX domain could form amyloid-like
structures that bound ThT, though the nature of these structures and
their assembly were not characterized. To further explore the Ca2+-free properties of the RTX
domain, these polymeric structures, and their modes of assembly, the
RTX protein was expressed in E. coli and purified
for in vitro structural studies. The RTX protein
was expressed abundantly and could be purified to homogeneity as judged
by Coomassie blue staining of SDS–PAGE gels (Figure C). Typical yields were 5–8 mg of purified
protein/L of expression culture. Elution from preparative sizing columns
in the absence of Ca2+ showed the protein eluted in an
unfolded conformation with a predicted hydrodynamic radius larger
than that expected for the RTX sequence, consistent with previous
reports of Ca2+-dependent RTX folding., Notably, during purification, little to no RTX protein was found
in the column void (&gt;650 kDa), suggesting wide-scale aggregation
was
not associated with these altered hydrodynamic properties under purification
conditions.

To characterize the unfolded state and confirm the
conformational
regulation by Ca2+ binding, the RTX protein was evaluated
by circular dichroism spectroscopy. Previous work has shown that,
in the absence of Ca2+, the purified soluble RTX protein
adopts a predominantly random coil conformation, consistent with that
reported for one of the CyaA RTX domains.− For refolding
experiments, the RTX protein was rapidly diluted into buffer in the
presence or absence of divalent cations. The refolding reaction mixture
was then cleared by centrifugation to remove misfolded species. Previous
studies have demonstrated that this refolding procedure is highly
efficient and yields &gt;85–90% folded protein.

When diluted into buffers without Ca2+, the RTX protein
appeared to adopt a predominantly random coil conformation, with a
strong absorbance minimum near 200 nm (Figure D). A small shoulder of absorbance was routinely observed near 220
nm, suggesting some limited residual structure was likely present
in the sample. When saturating (&gt;500 μM) Ca2+ was
present in the buffer, the CD spectrum showed a single predominant
absorbance minimum at 217 nm, consistent with the RTX domain folding
into a β-rich structure. This shift in CD absorbance is also
consistent with secondary structures of the RTX domains seen in the
crystal structure of alkaline protease and related RTX proteases and
the Ca2+-regulated folding of other RTX domains.,, To evaluate the specificity of
the Ca2+-induced secondary structural changes, protein
was refolded in the presence of Mg2+. When samples were
diluted into buffers with 2 mM Mg2+, the CD spectra appeared
to be unchanged with both the 200 nm minimum and the 220 nm shoulder
being observed. This suggested that the observed changes in secondary
structure were the result of specific conformational changes resulting
from Ca2+ binding.

Additional conformational changes
were evident with the RTX domain
in the absence of Ca2+. After overnight incubation at 4
°C or after concentration beyond ∼5–10 μM,
the RTX domain appeared to form polymers in solution. Overnight incubation
of the RTX domain in the absence of Ca2+ showed a time-dependent
formation of protein polymers by analytical gel filtration chromatography.
Refolding in the presence and absence of Ca2+ was initially
accomplished after preclearing the apo RTX protein solution by centrifugation
to remove protein aggregates formed during purification or storage
(Figure E, red and green traces). After centrifugation
and in the presence of Ca2+, the RTX protein eluted as
a single predominant peak at 13.2 mL, consistent with a compact, folded
protein with an apparent molecular weight of roughly 20–25
kDa, as determined by known molecular weight standards. This elution
profile was consistent with previous measurements of Ca2+-bound RTX protein. The apoprotein eluted
at approximately 10.5 mL as a single symmetrical peak. This change
in elution volume was consistent with our previous reports of the
RTX domain folding and the extended, random coil conformation seen
in the CD spectra. Analytical gel filtration
of the RTX protein refolded in the presence of 2 mM Mg2+ showed no differences from that of the apoprotein (data not shown).
These data were consistent with the Ca2+ specific changes
in secondary structure measured by CD.

Analytical gel filtration
of the apo RTX protein, after overnight
incubation at 4 °C, indicated a population of the protein was
spontaneously forming oligomers or polymers. When the uncleared apoprotein
was evaluated in the absence of Ca2+, two predominant peaks
were seen by analytical gel filtration (Figure E, black trace). The Ca2+-free, extended conformation
of the RTX domain was seen at ∼10.5 mL, consistent with the
peak seen after centrifugation. In addition, a population of the protein
eluted in the column void volume at ∼7.8 mL, consistent with
RTX polymerization. The appearance and stability of the void peak
occurred spontaneously and did not require heating, freeze–thaw
cycles, or other perturbations after preparation. This peak was not
observed immediately after purification or refolding, as the monodisperse
RTX monomer was isolated by preparative gel filtration chromatography
and was the initial starting material. Additionally, no large-scale
flocculent precipitation was seen under these experimental conditions.
No changes in the Ca2+-bound RTX protein were observed
after similar overnight incubation at 4 °C (data not shown).

Predicted Self-Assembly Sequences within the RTX Domain
β-Rich structures are often associated with protein aggregation. Given the β-content of the RTX sequence
and the observation of spontaneous association in the absence of flocculent
precipitation, computational evaluation of the RTX sequence was performed
to assess the amyloid forming tendencies of the sequence. The RTX
sequence was evaluated using a consensus web-based tool, AmylPred,
which utilizes multiple parallel prediction algorithms to define regions
of sequence that may contribute to amyloid or amyloid-like packing
and association. Evaluation of the RTX
primary sequence suggests that multiple regions within the domain
show potential to form amyloid or amyloid-like structures (Figure ). Eight distinct peptide sequences of five or more
amino acids are predicted to potentially form amyloid structure (Figure , saw teeth). These regions were found throughout
the RTX domain and did not appear to be fully correlated with the
specific β-structures formed in the native RTX domain, though
significant overlap is seen with predicted amyloid-forming sequences
and determined regions of β-structure (Figure , boxes). Similarly, the predicted amyloid-forming regions
did not fully correlate with the nonapeptide repeats (Figure , asterisks). Four of the predicted amyloid-forming
sequences were located within the C-terminal “capping region”
of the RTX domain, which is thought to help stabilize the Ca2+-bound fold but does not directly bind Ca2+ (spanning
residues 410–421, 429–435, 442–447, and 455–461).
The lengths of the putative amyloid-forming sequences ranged from
6 to 12 amino acids.

Secondary structure and aggregation propensities of the
RTX domain.
The sequence of the RTX domain from P. aeruginosa alkaline protease is shown. Secondary structure elements are shown
above the sequence with β-structure indicated by bars and α-structure
indicated by curves. Sequences of five or more amino acids predicted
to form amyloid structure are indicated as saw teeth below the protein
sequence. Asterisks indicate the diglycine motifs present in the RTX
nonapeptide repeats. The indicated residue numbering and secondary
structure assignment are consistent with the X-ray structures from
Protein Data Bank entries 1KAP and 1JIW.

Regulated Assembly of the
Apo RTX Domain
Visual inspection
of tubes containing the apo RTX domain incubated overnight suggested
that the protein was polymerizing in solution, as small deposits could
been seen on the walls and base of the plastic storage tubes. However,
large-scale flocculent precipitation was not evident after prolonged
incubation in the absence of Ca2+ at all concentrations
tested (∼1–30 μM). However, after inversion or
vortexing, noticeable deposits adhered to the sides of tubes containing
the apo RTX protein. These deposits were not seen when a millimolar
Ca2+ concentration was included in the refolding buffer
after prolonged incubation times (&gt;7–10 days), suggesting
that
these conformational changes were arising from the apo state (data
not shown). Given the natural β-forming propensities of the
RTX sequences and the prediction of amyloid-forming sequences within
the RTX domain, we sought to characterize these RTX polymers further
using thioflavin-T (ThT) binding. Thioflavin-T has previously been
used to identify and characterize the presence of amyloid structures
with a variety of unrelated proteins.− Spectral and quantal
shifts in ThT fluorescence occur when the dye binds amyloid structures.

To test whether amyloid or amyloid-like structures were being formed
by the apo RTX domain, ThT was included in refolding reactions with
multiple Ca2+ concentrations. For these experiments, the
RTX protein was refolded at 10 μM, a concentration that promoted
competing reactions of folding into a soluble monomer and association
into polymers. The proteins were incubated in Ca2+, and
emission spectra were collected to evaluate ThT incorporation and
alterations in the fluorescence of the dye (Figure A). Our previous work has demonstrated that the RTX domain
cooperatively binds Ca2+ with an apparent affinity of 55
μM and a Hill coefficient of at least 2.8. In the presence of 200 μM Ca2+, a concentration
sufficient to fold the RTX domain, the RTX protein showed minimal
ThT fluorescence at 485 nm, the reported spectral peak for amyloid-bound
ThT. As Ca2+ concentrations
were reduced, the peak intensity at 485 nm increased, consistent with
the formation of amyloid or amyloid-like structures in subsaturating
Ca2+. The coincident increase in the level of RTX folding
and the decrease in ThT fluorescence were consistent with the model
of competing RTX folding pathways. These data suggested that the conformation
that had amyloid-like character and bound ThT originated from and/or
was dependent on the presence of apo RTX. Inclusion of Mg2+ in refolding buffers did not decrease ThT fluorescence (data not
shown), suggesting the alterations in RTX polymerization and ThT binding
were Ca2+ specific.

Characterization of RTX polymers. The
Ca2+-dependent
aggregation of the RTX domain was evaluated using ThT fluorescence.
(A) The purified RTX domain was refolded into buffers containing increasing
concentrations of Ca2+, and emission spectra of ThT fluorescence
were collected after overnight incubation. Increasing Ca2+ concentrations resulted in decreasing maximal emission intensities
[0 (●), 20 (▽), 60 (■), and 200 μM Ca2+ (◇)]. Background fluorescence of buffer without RTX
protein was subtracted from each of the emission spectra. (B) The
kinetics of ThT fluorescence were monitored by emission at 482 nm
as a function of time in the presence or absence of Ca2+ and Mg2+. RTX protein in the absence of Ca2+ showed an increase in ThT fluorescence (black circles), as did the
protein incubated in Mg2+ (red circles). This increase
in TfT fluorescence was not observed with the Ca2+-bound
protein (yellow triangles) or in buffer controls (green triangles).
(C) Analytical gel filtration was used to assess the soluble, monomeric
RTX protein in solution through the time course of aggregation. The
level of soluble RTX protein in the absence of Ca2+ decreased
as a function of incubation time (○), as did the level of protein
incubated in 2 mM Mg2+ (■). Calcium-bound (2 mM)
RTX protein remained soluble and monomeric over the incubation times
tested (●).

To evaluate the kinetics
of the RTX-induced ThT fluorescence, the
purified RTX proteins were incubated in buffers containing ThT in
the presence or absence of Ca2+ and Mg2+ and
fluorescence was measured kinetically. In the presence of 2 mM Ca2+, the RTX protein showed ThT fluorescence similar to that
of buffer controls (Figure B, green and yellow
triangles). After transient changes in fluorescence associated with
thermal equilibration and mixing, no observable changes in ThT fluorescence
were seen over the time course of 20–24 h. In the absence of
Ca2+, ThT fluorescence showed a dramatic increase in fluorescence
intensity (Figure B, black circles). An initial,
rapid rise in fluorescence slowed with time, suggesting depletion
of some component in the reaction. This apparent rise to maximum was
seen in all kinetic experiments. The increase in fluorescence intensity
was dependent on the presence of Ca2+-free protein, as
the Ca2+-saturated protein showed little to no change in
ThT fluorescence over the time courses and protein concentrations
evaluated. Inclusion of 2 mM Mg2+ showed negligible effects
on ThT fluorescence compared to that of the Ca2+-free sample
(Figure B, red circles). These data provide
additional evidence that the Ca2+-induced folding seen
by CD and gel filtration protected the RTX from polymerization and
was Ca2+ specific.

To confirm that the RTX domains
were associating and that this
assembly was correlated with the changes in ThT fluorescence, analytical
gel filtration and UV absorbance were used to assess changes in the
concentrations of soluble RTX protein during aggregation experiments.
Samples from aggregation experiments were removed at regular intervals
and cleared by high-speed centrifugation to remove the polymeric structures.
The soluble, monomeric RTX protein was then evaluated by analytical
gel filtration (Figure C). In the presence
of Ca2+, the relative quantity of soluble RTX protein showed
little aggregation, with the peak for the monomeric RTX showing minimal
changes in area. In contrast, the soluble, Ca2+-free RTX
protein decreased as a function of incubation time. At 6 h, approximately
65% of the Ca2+-free RTX protein remained in solution,
as measured by the area of the elution peak. The decrease in the level
of RTX protein continued throughout the incubation period, with the
peak area decreasing to roughly 40% of the starting area at 24 h.
Similarly, protein incubated at millimolar Mg2+ concentrations
showed a similar decrease in soluble protein as a function of time,
consistent with incorporation of RTX protein into the insoluble fraction.
These data demonstrated that the RTX protein was polymerizing into
higher-order structures and that these association events correlated
with the measured changes in ThT fluorescence.

The observed
polymerization and ThT binding experiments suggested
that the non-native amyloid-like polymer could be produced from the
random coil, apo state of the RTX protein. The ability of Ca2+ to inhibit the formation of this species suggested that these processes
might be controllable, in vitro, by the addition
or removal of Ca2+. To evaluate the control of RTX polymerization,
a series of kinetic experiments in which Ca2+ was added
or removed by chelation and ThT binding was evaluated fluorescently
were performed. The RTX protein was first refolded in the presence
of 1 mM Ca2+, and the evolution of ThT fluorescence was
followed as a function of time. As before, the presence of Ca2+ inhibited the formation of ThT-binding structures for extended
periods of time (Figure A, yellow and magenta
lines). After incubation, EGTA was added to chelate free Ca2+ from the RTX buffers. As the Ca2+-induced RTX folding
is reversible, complete chelation of free Ca2+ should rapidly
facilitate the unfolding of the RTX domain and lead to its association,
as measured by ThT binding. Addition
of 1 mM EGTA at multiple time points in the experiment resulted in
a rapid increase in ThT fluorescence (Figure A, arrowheads). These data confirmed that ThT-binding conformations
of the RTX domain arose from the apo state and could be induced by
Ca2+ chelation from the folded, Ca2+-bound conformation.

Conformational
dependence of RTX aggregation. (A) Ca2+-bound RTX protein
was evaluated by ThT binding kinetically, and
free Ca2+ was chelated by addition of EGTA. Points of EGTA
addition are labeled and indicated by arrowheads. (B) The stability
of the ThT-bound, Ca2+-free species was assessed by addition
of Ca2+. The vertical gray bar marks the addition of Ca2+ (red data set) or EGTA (blue data set). Data for native
RTX protein in 2 mM Ca2+ (black data set) are shown as
a control.

The reversibility of the apparent
amyloid formation and the increase
in ThT fluorescence were evaluated by the addition of Ca2+ to kinetic reaction mixtures in which ThT-binding structures were
preformed. After a period of incubation, either Ca2+ or
EGTA was added to alter the conformation of the RTX domains in solution
(Figure B). Incubation of the RTX domain in
the absence of Ca2+ resulted in increased ThT fluorescence
(Figure B, red circles). Addition of 1 mM
Ca2+ to this reaction rapidly arrested the increase in
ThT fluorescence. Prolonged incubation of this reaction mixture showed
minimal changes in fluorescence despite the high concentrations of
free Ca2+. As a control, the Ca2+-bound protein
was treated with EGTA, as in Figure A, and
a rapid increase in ThT fluorescence was seen (Figure B, blue circles). Changes in buffer fluorescence were not
significant after addition of either Ca2+ or EGTA (data
not shown). These data provided further evidence that the changes
in ThT fluorescence were associated with protein conformations arising
from the apo state. The Ca2+-induced folding of the RTX
domain effectively limits the formation of these ThT-binding conformations.
Further, once formed, the ThT-bound structures appeared to be highly
stable in the presence of Ca2+, as the addition of Ca2+ to the preformed polymers did not appear to alter the ThT
fluorescence over the time courses evaluated.

Multimodal Assembly of
Non-native RTX Protein
To further
evaluate the non-native RTX structures that bound ThT, the protein
was incubated in the absence of Ca2+ and cleared by centrifugation.
The insoluble material was collected, washed, and imaged by negative
stain transmission electron microscopy (Figure A,B), revealing structures resembling amyloid fibrils and protofibrils.
The fibrillar structures grew in length to 300–500 nm and beyond
and showed a relatively uniform diameter of ∼11 nm. The structures
appeared to be unbranched, but many were kinked or bent. While individual
fibrillar structures could be observed, a majority of the material
appeared to be intertwined or tangled.

Electron micrographs
of RTX fibrils. Negative stain electron microscopy
was used to visualize the structures formed by the Ca2+-free RTX domain. (A) Electron micrograph of the apo RTX domain fibrils.
The RTX protein appears as regular fibrillar structures with a uniform
width, but varying lengths and shapes. Nets or tangles of fibrils
were most often seen, though individual fibrils were also visualized.
(B) Electron micrograph of individual fibrillar structures. Fibrils
appeared to be unbranched but often tangled and kinked.

In addition to the fibrillar structures observed
by EM, large protein
structures were observed forming while the RTX protein was being concentrated
in the absence of Ca2+ using centrifugal concentrators.
In the absence of Ca2+ and with protein concentrations
above ∼5–8 μM, translucent sheetlike structures
as large as ∼5 cm2 formed, though they were routinely
smaller and could be readily observed by eye in solution. The apparent
upper bound of sheet size was limited by the size of the solid support
upon which the RTX protein was deposited.

The sheets were imaged
by bright-field and fluorescence microscopy
after staining with ThT and by scanning electron microscopy (SEM)
(Figure ). The sheets appeared to be highly
regular and ordered by both bright-field (Figure A) and fluorescence microscopy (Figure B) and were observed to curl or fold upon themselves in solution
along a single axis. Microscopy allowed the identification of discrete
edges and folds, suggesting that the sheets were flexible. Similarly,
fluorescence microscopy provided further evidence of large, sheetlike
structures that tended to wrap or coil in solution. The natural tendency
of the sheets to wrap or fold appeared to be dynamic and reversible
with agitation of the solution. Orthogonal projections of image stacks
showed the sheets often wrapped loosely with a relatively uniform
sheet thickness across all cross sections analyzed. Low-magnification
SEM also showed the sheets to be uniform and regular with folds, wrinkles,
and other undulations consistent with the light microscopy images
(Figure C). At higher magnifications, the
surface of the sheets appeared to be highly regular and uniform with
few small protrusions and irregularities (Figure D). The thickness was estimated to be between 500 and 600
nm on the basis of edge analyses of sheets imaged at high magnifications.

Characterization
of RTX-containing protein sheets. The RTX protein
formed ordered polymers, which appeared as protein sheets and were
visible in solution. (A) Representative image of a RTX sheet folded
upon itself. Multiple folds of the sheet can be seen along an edge
and are indicated by arrowheads. (B) Representative fluorescence microscopy
image of sheets stained with ThT. Image stacks of RTX sheets in suspension
were collected and analyzed. The RTX sheets were usually wrapped or
folded along a single dimension. Orthogonal views (x–z, bottom; y–z, side) indicate the coiling
or wrapping of the RTX sheets. The Z projection is shown as the sum
of all stacks. White circles show the approximate positions of the
vertical and horizontal orthogonal slices. (C) Scanning electron micrograph
of RTX sheets at low magnification with visible folds and creases.
(D) Representative image of the edge and surface of the RTX sheets
at high magnification. The sheets appear to be uniform in thickness
and along the edge of visualized surfaces. (E) Western blot of the
material found in the RTX sheets that confirms the presence of the
RTX protein. The starting material was pelleted by low-speed centrifugation
and washed with refolding buffer. The supernatants were analyzed by
Western blotting after each step in the procedure. Lanes are labeled
as follows: Sol, soluble material after the first centrifugation step;
W1–W5, successive washes of the centrifuged pellet; Son, final
material after sonication. The blot was probed with a polyclonal α-RTX
antibody. (F) RTX::GFP sheets were formed in the absence of Ca2+ and visualized by fluorescence microscopy. A Z projection
representing the sum of all stack images is shown visualized using
the intrinsic fluorescence of the GFP fusion.

To confirm that these polymeric sheets contained the RTX
protein,
the sheets were isolated by low-speed centrifugation and washed multiple
times in reaction buffer containing Ca2+ before being sonicated.
The sheets were first pelleted, and the supernatant was taken for
Western blot analysis (Figure E, Sol). Multiple
reactive bands were detected, with the prominent band having an apparent
molecular weight of ∼52 kDa, roughly consistent with a dimer
of RTX proteins and suggesting an SDS-resistant intermediate species
may be forming along the polymerization pathway. A fraction of the
protein was also detected at ∼25 kDa, consistent with the presence
of a small quantity of RTX monomer. The high-molecular weight band,
as well as the monomeric species, was washed from the sheets after
centrifugation and exchange into reaction buffer with Ca2+ (Figure E, lanes W1–W5). After multiple
successive washes to remove loosely associated and soluble RTX protein,
the final pellet containing visible RTX sheets was resuspended and
sonicated to break up the protein polymers. Analysis of the sonicated
samples revealed the presence of monomeric RTX species by Western
blotting, consistent with its presence in the polymeric material (Figure E, Son). Absorbance measurements of the sonicated
material showed peaks consistent with peptide bonds and aromatic side
chains (data not shown). No other significant absorbance peaks were
observed.

The controllable formation of both amyloid-like fibrils
and ordered
sheets suggested that the RTX domain might be useful for the generation
of biomaterials. To evaluate the potential that the RTX sequence could
serve as a scaffold for the generation of large macromolecular structures,
GFP chimeras were produced with both N- and C-terminal RTX fusions.
GFP was chosen as it is a soluble protein that is easily monitored
by the measurement of its intrinsic fluorescence. GFP::RTX and RTX::GFP
chimeras were generated using the RTX domain and a short linker (GGSSG)
fused to the N- or C-terminus of GFP. The entire domain was fused
in frame to allow for the Ca2+-controllable transition
from monomeric to polymeric species. The GFP::RTX protein was expressed
poorly under the expression conditions tested. In contrast, the RTX::GFP
protein was expressed robustly in E. coli and was
subsequently purified by Ni-NTA and gel filtration chromatography.
The soluble fraction of the RTX::GFP protein was purified in the presence
of Ca2+ to promote the folding of the RTX domain and inhibit
potential aggregation events during the purification process. Purified
RTX::GFP protein yields were approximately 1.5–2 mg/L of culture.

Following purification, assembly of the amyloid-like fibrils and
protein sheets was accomplished by dilution into Ca2+-free
buffers or buffers containing EGTA. The proteins were then incubated
in the absence of Ca2+ and deposited onto solid supports
as described for the generation of RTX sheets. In the absence of Ca2+, the RTX::GFP protein formed large macromolecular polymers,
similar to those of the RTX domain (Figure F). The RTX::GFP sheets appeared to be uniform in thickness on the
basis of fluorescence microscopy analyses. The surfaces similarly
appeared uniform, though slight irregularities could be seen in the
chimeric sheets (Figure F). The surface irregularities
were observed as small folds or puckering in the sheets. The polymeric
structures were not observed in the presence of Ca2+, suggesting
that the conformational dependence of assembly seen with the RTX domain
was likely important for the assembly of the RTX::GFP chimera. As
with the isolated RTX protein, the inclusion of Mg2+ had
no discernible effects on the RTX::GFP protein behavior, suggesting
the conformational regulation of polymerization was Ca2+ specific.

Discussion
The structures of RTX
domains are highly dynamic and tightly regulated by Ca2+ binding
to the canonical glycine- and aspartate-rich repeats.,,, Previous work has focused on the structural transitions between
the denatured and native conformations of RTX proteins from multiple
virulence factors. Here we show that the association of apo RTX domains
leads to the formation of polymeric molecular structures that share
physical properties with amyloid fibrils. Deposition of these apo
domains onto a solid support facilitates the generation of highly
structured two-dimensional protein sheets. The assembly into fibrils
or films was regulated by Ca2+-induced changes in protein
conformation. Finally, fusion of the RTX domain to a soluble, globular
protein facilitated the generation of protein fibrils and sheets that
incorporated the biological function of the globular protein (GFP)
into the protein assembly.

Consistent with previous reports,
specific binding of Ca2+ to the RTX domain results in its
folding and is not seen with other
divalent cations (Figure )., In the absence of Ca2+, the RTX domain is capable of
adopting non-native conformations and self-assembles into polymeric
species that resemble amyloid-like structures. These assemblies are
predicted to be associated with multiple regions of the denatured
RTX domain (Figure ). These structures share
similar ThT binding characteristics with amyloids (Figures  and ) and grow as amyloid-like
fibrils that are unbranched and exhibit a regular width (Figure ). The apo RTX domain is also capable of forming
large uniform sheets with a smooth surface and uniform thickness both
alone and when fused N-terminally to a globular, soluble protein (Figure ).

Self-assembly was previously reported for
a synthetic β-helical
peptide that was engineered using consensus RTX nonapeptide repeats. Unlike the RTX domain in this study, these peptides
contained only the core Ca2+-binding nonapeptide repeats
and lacked N- and C-terminal “capping” sequences. Further,
the peptides were synthesized with non-native tryptophan residues
that served as intrinsic structural probes. The folding and assembly
of these synthetic RTX sequences showed key differences with the native
domains reported here. The engineered peptides did not bind Ca2+ and did not undergo the disorder-to-order structural transition
of the natural RTX domains, nor did they respond significantly to
other divalent cations. In contrast, the presence of La3+ led to their self-assembly and the reversible formation of protein
fibrils. The fibrillar structures were also unbranched and showed
modest ThT binding properties. It is not clear how La3+ participates in the formation of the fibrillar structures in these
engineered proteins and from what precursor structures these polymers
are formed.

In contrast, we found that self-association of the
AprA RTX domain
was specifically inhibited by the presence of Ca2+. As
such, assembly into either fibrils or sheets likely represents intermolecular
interactions occurring from unsatisfied protein–protein or
protein–ligand interactions in the unfolded ensemble. The mechanisms
by which assembly is initiated in a single dimension (fibril) or in
two dimensions (sheet) are yet to be established and warrant additional
investigation. It is possible that the sheets represent a further
assembly of laterally packed fibrils. Alternatively, the sheets may
represent a fundamentally different polymer structure of the RTX domains.
It is also not clear whether these pathways are mutually exclusive
or if they are linked. However, it is clear that the macromolecular
polymers emerge from the apo, unfolded ensemble that is tightly regulated
and rapidly controlled, in vitro, by the addition
and chelation of Ca2+ under mild ionic and pH conditions.

Similar polymerization under mild conditions has been reported
for ultrabithorax (Ubx), a transcription factor from Drosophila that spontaneously forms films at an air–liquid
interface. The ability to generate such
films provides a potential template for a variety of biomaterials. The assembly of Ubx does not require harsh chemical
treatments and/or prolonged incubation at high protein concentrations.
Like that of Ubx, the polymerization of AprA RTX occurs rapidly and
spontaneously under near-physiological conditions. Moreover, the demonstration
that these scaffolds can incorporate soluble, folded proteins suggests
that both scaffolds could be used to incorporate enzymatic or other
native biological functions into large biomaterial polymers.

The AprA RTX domain provides several unique
properties for studying
the structural transitions into the observed amyloid-like conformations.
First, the association and assembly of RTX domains occur under very
mild biochemical conditions. The assembly into both amyloid fibrils
and protein sheets can be accomplished at near-neutral pH and under
physiological salt and buffer conditions. In contrast, the formation
of many amyloid structures, often, but not always, requires nonphysiological
pH, nonphysiological salt conditions, and/or organic solvents., Second, this assembly occurs rapidly, occurring over the time course
of tens of minutes to hours. Finally, the generation of these macromolecular
assemblies can be tightly controlled by the addition and chelation
of Ca2+. This Ca2+-regulated switch between
structural states allows for the purification of monomeric proteins
followed by the removal of Ca2+ and the initiation of assembly.
The regulation of these structural transitions may also occur in biological
systems and facilitate bacterial infection.

From a biological
perspective, protein self-association and the
formation of functional amyloids contribute to a variety of bacterial
adhesion and biofilm properties.,, The transition from a soluble monomeric protein to a “sticky”
protein polymer may serve to facilitate bacterial adhesion to both
biotic and abiotic surfaces. In addition, the formation of these large
macromolecular structures may contribute to the protein components
of the biofilm matrix. Given the dynamic structural properties of
the RTX domains and the involvement of the RTX proteins in bacterial
virulence, it is possible that these alternative conformations may
also serve a biological function and contribute to previously unappreciated
modes of pathogen virulence. The self-association of these domains
may serve as a scaffold for native “biomaterials” that
were evolved to facilitate pathogen virulence but could similarly
be leveraged for other novel biomedical and biological applications.

Conclusions
The RTX domain from P. aeruginosa is conformationally
dynamic and regulated by binding to Ca2+ cofactors. The
apo-state domain is capable of self-assembly and forms highly ordered
protein structures, including fibrillar amyloid-like structures and
two-dimensional sheets. These assembly events can be tightly controlled
by the addition and chelation of Ca2+ and can be transferred
to fusion proteins that incorporate novel biological function into
these macromolecular assemblies under very mild conditions. This approach
demonstrates that the RTX domain can be used as a scaffold for the
production of protein-based biomaterials that include enzymatic or
other native-state protein properties.

This work was
supported, in part, by National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive
and Kidney Diseases Grant DK083284 to P.H.T. and Faculty Development
Funding from The University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine.

The authors
declare no competing financial interest.

