Many bacteria
secrete siderophores
to facilitate iron acquisition when growing in low-iron aerobic conditions. Siderophores are low molecular weight, high-affinity
iron(III) ligands that can solubilize colloidal iron or sequester
iron from iron-bound proteins of a host organism. A distinct characteristic
of some siderophores is the presence of a fatty acid that confers
amphiphilic character to the siderophore, the most numerous of which
are acylated peptides (Figure ), although
citrate-derived amphiphilic siderophores are also well-known.−

Structures
of selected amphiphilic siderophores: (A) Suites of
marine siderophores include the marinobactins, aquachelins,, amphibactins,, loihichelins, and moanachelins; (B) Siderophores from other environmental isolates include cuprichelin, taiwachelin, and
the serobactins; siderophores from pathogens
include mycobactins, carboxymycobactins, and the acyl precursor to pyoverdine, are also shown, along with pyoverdine. (Note: For moanachelin gly-C14:1
(R1 = H; R2 = C14:1) and marinobactin F (C18:1), not shown,
the position and E/Z orientation of the double bond have not been
determined.)

Many marine bacteria
produce large suites of acyl peptidic siderophores
in which a species-dependent headgroup is appended by a fatty acid
that varies in chain length, degree of unsaturation, and hydroxylation
(Figure A).− Suites of amphiphilic siderophores are also produced by pathogens and most recently reported from numerous environmental
isolates− (Figure B). On the basis of a genomics analysis,
an acyl siderophore precursor has recently been discovered as an intermediate
in the biosynthesis of pyoverdine in the human pathogen Pseudomonas
aeruginosa.−

The functional advantage conferred by amphiphilic siderophores
in the process of iron acquisition remains an open question. One advantage
could be to prevent or limit siderophore diffusion through membrane
association. The membrane partitioning of peptide-derived amphiphilic
siderophores (e.g., the marinobactins, the amphibactins, the mycobactins,) is greater for longer chain acyl-siderophores than those with shorter
fatty acids or those with unsaturated and hydroxylated fatty acids.
For example, the partition coefficients for the suite of marinobactins
A–E (36–5818 M–1) varies widely with
the length of the fatty acid, as well as the extent of unsaturation
in the fatty acid. With differential
membrane partitioning, a suite of siderophores could create a concentration
gradient of siderophore emanating from the bacterium; such a strategy
has been proposed in the bucket brigade model to iron acquisition.

A variation on the large suites of amphiphilic
marine siderophores
is seen in Mycobacteria, which secrete a pair of
related amphiphilic siderophores, the mycobactins and the carboxymycobactins
(Figure B). Mycobactins are cell-associated,
hydrophobic siderophores composed of a 2-hydroxyphenoloxazoline-containing
peptidic headgroup and a long fatty acid (C16–C21) appendage.
Carboxymycobactins are relatively hydrophilic and composed of the
same peptidic headgroup, although appended by a shorter fatty acid
that is also carboxylated at the end. The carboxymycobactins and mycobactins
are thought to cooperate in iron sequestration, whereby carboxymycobactin
scavenges iron from host iron-binding proteins, such as transferrin,
and then transfers Fe(III) to the bacterium’s membrane-bound
apo-mycobactin.,

As mentioned above, an
amphiphilic siderophore precursor was discovered
in the biosynthetic pathway of pyoverdine in P. aeruginosa., From a bioinformatics analysis, it was predicted
and then confirmed that the biosynthesis of these siderophores begins
with acylation of l-glutamic acid in the first module of
the nonribosomal peptide synthetase (NRPS). Prior to formation of
the fluorescent chromophore of pyoverdine, the acyl peptide precursor
is hydrolyzed in the periplasm by the NTN (N-terminal nucleophile)
hydrolase, PvdQ. Interestingly, the major
quorum sensing molecule of P. aeruginosa, N-dodecanoic homoserine lactone (3-oxo-C12-HSL), is also
hydrolyzed by PdvQ, providing a playoff between quorum quenching and
pyoverdine biosynthesis.

We have
observed that the marine bacterium Marinobacter sp.
DS40M6 can alter its own amphiphilic siderophores during growth
by hydrolyzing the fatty acids, as well as hydrolyzing fatty acids
from exogenous acylated siderophores. We report herein the fatty acid
hydrolysis of the suite of marinobactins A–E during growth
of Marinobacter sp. DS40M6, producing the marinobactin
headgroup (marinobactin HG or MHG), the structural analysis
of this headgroup, as well as fatty acid hydrolysis of the aquachelin
siderophores when Halomonas aquamarina str. DS40M3
is grown in culture with Marinobacter sp. DS40M6.
A cell-free extract of Marinobacter sp. DS40M6 containing
an amide hydrolase carries out the fatty acid hydrolysis of amphiphilic
siderophores, as well as acyl homoserine lactones.

Experimental
Procedures
Microorganisms
Marinobacter sp. DS40M6
and H. aquamarina str. DS40M3 were isolated from
open ocean water off the west coast of Africa, and
were grown in liquid M6 media. M6 media contains 31 g of NaCl, 6 g
of Na2HPO4·7H2O, 1.5 g of KCl,
2 g of NH4Cl, 10 g of Na2 succinate, 0.4 g of
MgSO4·7H2O, 0.2 g of CaCl2·2H2O, per 2 L doubly deionized water (ddH2O; Barnstead
Nanopure II), adjusted to pH 7.

For inoculation into liquid
media, bacteria were grown to confluence on maintenance media plates
containing 0.5 g of yeast extract, 5 g of peptone, and 15 g of agar
(bacto, BD), per liter of aged natural seawater. The colonies were
then suspended in an aliquot of sterile M6 media, and the suspension
was inoculated into the sterilized culture medium. The bacterial cultures
were prepared in triplicate. All cultures were shaken on a rotary
shaker at 200 rpm at ambient temperature. Cultures were regularly
tested for a positive response to the CAS assay, indicating the presence of apo-siderophores.

For
bacterial growth in mixed culture, 4 mL of growth media was
pipetted onto each confluent plate (preparation as described above),
and 2 mL of resuspended Marinobacter sp. DS40M6 bacterial
cells and 1 mL of resuspended H. aquamarina str.
DS40M3 cells were inoculated into the autoclave-sterilized M6 culture
medium. Experiments were performed in triplicate in 1 L or 2 L Erlenmeyer
flasks. A greater concentration of Marinobacter cells
was initially required, due to its slower growth rate, in order for
both species to concomitantly reach a similar phase in growth, so
that siderophore production was detected for both species, in addition
to the presence of enzymatic activity in Marinobacter.

Siderophore Isolation
The marinobactin headgroup siderophore
(marinobactin HG, or MHG) was isolated and purified from
the supernatant of a culture of Marinobacter sp.
DS40M6 as previously described for marinobactins A–E. MHG was purified by RP-HPLC with a
preparative C18 column (22 mm ID × 250 mm L, 201SP1022,
GraceVydac), using a gradient 97/3 (% A/B) to 90/10 (% A/B) over 40
min, where solvent A is 99.95% ddH2O with 0.05% trifluoroacetic
acid (TFA) and solvent B is 99.95% acetonitrile with 0.05% TFA. The
eluent was monitored at 215 nm.

Time-Dependent Monitoring of Siderophore Production and Peptidic
Headgroup Formation
For Monoculture Growth
An aliquot
of either Marinobacter sp. DS40M6 or H. aquamarina str. DS40M3 culture was removed daily and centrifuged to pellet
the bacterial cells, and the supernatant was filtered through a sterile
0.22 μm filter and frozen at −20 °C until analysis
by RP-HPLC. The siderophore content of the culture supernatant was
monitored using an analytical C4 RP-HPLC column (5 mm ID
× 250 mm L, 214TP54, Grace Vydac) using a gradient from 100%
solvent A (99.95% ddH2O, 0.05% TFA) to 100% solvent B (99.95%
acetonitrile, 0.05% TFA) over 100 min, after first holding the column
flow at 100% solvent A before starting the gradient. The absorbance
of the eluent was monitored at 215 nm with a photodiode array detector.
The peak area integrations for each marinobactin were performed using
an integral function of the HPLC software (Empower Pro, Waters Inc.).

For Mixed Culture Growth
Mixed bacterial cultures were
treated the same as control cultures of only H. aquamarina str. DS40M3 or Marinobacter sp. DS40M6. Starting
at day 0 and continuing up to day 30, depending on the experiment,
supernatant aliquots were prepared as described above for MHG production and analyzed by RP-HPLC using an analytical C4 column with the following modified program: gradient of 100% solvent
A (99.95% H20, 0.05% TFA), held for 10 min, to 100% solvent
B (50% acetonitrile, 49.95% H20, 0.05% TFA) over 30 min,
followed by a 5 min transition back to solvent A. Peak areas for the
marinobactin and aquachelin siderophores overlap, preventing peak
area integrations for individual siderophores or suites.

Structure
Determination
Electrospray ionization mass
spectrometry (ESI-MS) and tandem mass spectrometry using a Micromass
QTOF-2 mass spectrometer (Waters Corp.) in positive ion mode with
argon as a collision gas were used to determine the mass and partial
amino acid connectivity of the marinobactin and aquachelin head groups.
For MHG, 1H, 13C, and various two-dimensional
nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) techniques, including 1H–1H correlation spectroscopy (COSY), heteronuclear
multiple quantum coherence (HMQC), and heteronuclear multiple bond
correlation (HMBC), were recorded on a 800 MHz JEOL DELTA2 ECA800
spectrometer. A 1H–15N heteronuclear
single quantum coherence (15N-HSQC) NMR spectrum of the 15N-incorporated MHG was recorded on a 500 MHz JEOL
DELTA2 ECA500 instrument. MHG was dissolved in dimethyl
sulfoxide-d6 (DMSO-d6, 99.9%, Cambridge Isotope, Inc.) (d = 2.46
ppm), and experiments were run at 23.5 °C at the National Institute
of Health Sciences in Tokyo, Japan.

15N-Labeled
Marinobactins
To prepare 15N-isotopically labeled
marinobactins (15N-marinobactins
A–E and MHG), Marinobacter sp.
DS40M6 was grown in M6 medium as described above, except that 15N-ammonium chloride (Cambridge Isotope Lab. Inc.) was used
in the culture medium as the sole nitrogen source. The culture was
grown for 4–5 days for isolation of 15N-marinobactins
A–E and approximately 12 days for isolation of 15N-MHG. 15N-MHG and 15N-marinobactins A–E were purified as described above. The
masses of 15N-isotopically labeled marinobactins were determined
by ESI-MS.

To investigate fatty acid amide hydrolysis, 20 μM 15N-marinobactin E (final concentration) was added to a culture
of Marinobacter sp. DS40M6, which had been grown
for 4–5 days. The cells were pelletted by centrifugation, washed,
and resuspended in fresh M6 media of an OD of 0.35 at 600 nm. These
cultures, which were set up in triplicate or quadruplicate, were incubated
on a rotary shaker (200 rpm) at ambient temperature. A 1 mL aliquot
from each culture was removed at 15 min and at 4 days after addition
of 15N-marinobactin E and analyzed for the presence of
marinobactins and MHG. The masses of the peaks eluted from
the HPLC were determined by ESI-MS of the hand-collected sample using
a Micromass QTOF-2 mass spectrometer, specifically tracking the 15N-marinobactins.

Preparation of Cell-Free
Extract
Marinobacter sp. DS40M6 was grown
in M6 medium as previously described and typically
required 4–5 days to reach stationary phase. The optical density
of the culture at 600 nm was allowed to reach approximately 0.4–0.6
to maximize the cell mass harvested from liquid culture. The cells
were peletted by centrifugation and resuspended by gentle pipetting
in a buffer containing 50 mM tris-HCl pH 8.0 (buffer-A). The suspension
was placed in an ice bath and sonicated with a probe tip ultrasound
sonicator (Sonifier 250, Branson). The sonicated homogenate was centrifuged
at 7800g for 10 min to remove large cell debris.
The supernatant was ultracentrifuged without detergent at 108,000g for 90 min at 4 °C (Discovery M120SE, Sorvall, Hitachi)
to obtain a pellet containing the membrane fraction. This pellet was
resuspended in buffer-A with 2% Triton X-100 by gentle pipetting and
allowed to equilibrate for 30 min in an ice bath. The final ultracentrifugation
of the suspension at 108,000g for 60 min at 4 °C
resulted in enzymatic activity in the supernatant. The enzyme-detergent
extract was concentrated by ultrafiltration using a Centriprep YM30
(Amicon, Millipore) as necessary. Subsequent steps to further purify
the enzyme (size exclusion, DEAE, MonoQ chromatography) resulted in
diminished activity or complete loss of activity.

Acyl Amide
Hydrolase Reactivity
Fatty acid hydrolysis
of acyl siderophores (marinobactins A–E, aquachelin C, loihichelin
C) and N-octanoyl-homoserine lactone (C8-HSL) was
investigated using the detergent-extracted acyl amidase preparation
described above, with incubations ranging from 2 to 5 days. The reaction
products were separated from the reaction mixture by RP-HPLC on an
analytical C4 column (Grace Vydac, 214TP54) or an analytical C18 column
(Grace Vydac, 218TP54), with a reverse phase analytical column at
a flow rate of 1 mL/min. The gradients were programmed at 99.95% ddH2O with 0.05% TFA for 3 min, followed by a linear increase
of 1% per minute of 99.95% acetonitrile with 0.05% TFA. The eluent
was monitored by a PDA and peaks were collected manually and analyzed
by ESI-MS.

Results
Time Dependence of Fatty
Acid Hydrolysis of Marinobactins A–E
Marinobacter sp. DS40M6 produces the suite of
amphiphilic marinobactin siderophores A–E and the membrane-associated
marinobactin F (Figure )., Beginning
in the late log phase of growth and continuing into the stationary
phase, a new hydrophilic siderophore is produced, concomitant with
a decrease in the amount of marinobactins A–E in the culture
supernatant (Figures  and ) (marinobactin F is membrane-associated and thus not found
in the culture supernatant; thus the suite will be referred to as
marinobactins A–E). ESI-MS analysis of this new siderophore
gives an intense molecular ion peak at m/z 750.3 (M + H)+, a doubly charged ion peak at m/z 375.6 (M + 2H)2+, and a
minor ion peak at m/z 803, which
is consistent with Fe(III) coordination ([M – 3H + Fe(III)]
+ H)+ (, Figure S1). The mass at m/z 750
matches the mass of the marinobactin peptide headgroup. The exact
mass of MHG, m/z 750.3240
for (M + H)+, is consistent with C28H48N9O15. The shorter retention time of MHG, compared with the amphiphilic marinobactins A–E,
is consistent with a more hydrophilic compound, such as one lacking
a fatty acid appendage (Figure ). MHG produces a positive ninhydrin test, consistent with the presence
of a primary amine, whereas the ninhydrin test with apo marinobactin
E, which has the fatty acid amide in place of a primary amine, is
negative. MHG retains the ability to coordinate Fe(III)
similar to the acyl-marinobactins.

Marinobacter sp. DS40M6
siderophore production.
Data points represent the mean values of triplicate cultures; error
bars indicate standard deviation. Solid line with triangle data points:
MHG production; dotted line with square: the sum of the
marinobactin A–E siderophores; dashed-line with circle: the
sum of the all marinobactins (A–E and HG). The left y-axis denotes the optical density at 600 nm and the right
denotes HPLC peak areas in arbitrary units from Figure .

Marinobactins A–E and MHG production
over time:
RP-HPLC chromatograms of Marinobacter sp. DS40M6
culture supernatant from day 1 (bottom) to day 9 (top). The peak growing
in with a retention time of ∼12 min is MHG; the
retention times of marinobactins A–E are typically between
35 and 50 min. Marinobactin F is not observed here because it is membrane
associated and not released from the bacterium to the supernatant.

The time-dependence of marinobactin
production in the culture supernatant
of Marinobacter sp. DS40M6 (Figures  and ) shows that (1) marinobactins
A–E reach a maximum at about day five of microbial growth and
then decrease; and (2) that MHG production increases steadily
during growth, becoming the predominant siderophore in the culture
medium in stationary phase.

Marinobactin HG Structure Determination
Fragmentation
analysis of the new hydrophilic siderophore, MHG, by tandem
mass spectrometry establishes the partial connectivity of the amino
acids (), consistent with marinobactins A–E.

NMR characterization
of MHG confirms that it is the peptidic headgroup moiety
of the acyl marinobactin siderophores. The 13C and 1H NMR spectral values of MHG in DMSO-d6 are summarized in Table  (). MHG has two significant structural differences from the acylated
marinobactins, which are reflected in the NMR spectra. One is the
absence of a fatty acid appendage, and the other is the presence of
a terminal amine. Thus, 1H resonances at δH 0.85 and 1.23–1.26 (−CH3 and −CH2, respectively) observed for marinobactin E are not observed
in the 1H NMR spectrum of MHG () as a result of the absence of a fatty acid. Moreover,
the number of characteristic amide proton resonances decrease from
seven (i.e., five at ca. δH 8 ppm and two in the
nine-membered ring at ca. δH 9.85 ppm) in marinobactin
E to six in MHG, consistent with the conversion of the
fatty acid amide of marinobactin E to an amine in MHG.
The two amide proton signals in the nine-membered ring of MHG were broad and overlapped at δH 9.68 ppm. The two
amide proton signals of marinobactins C and E were also broad but
clearly separated. This change shows
the increase in symmetry of the nine-membered ring of MHG on fatty acid hydrolysis. Additionally, the proton signal at C26
in marinobactin E at δH 5.05 is shifted to a higher
magnetic field for MHG at δH 4.06 for
MHG. The structure elucidation of MHG is also
consistent with the positive ninhydrin test for a free amine in MHG but not the acylated marinobactins A–E.

NMR Assignments: 13C and 1H NMR Chemical Shifts
(δ, ppm) of MHG in
DMSO-d6
 	 	δC	δH	type	COSY 	HMBC	
(N-Ac, N-OH)-Orn	C1	174.0	 	 	 	2	
 	C2	52.2	4.14	C	3, NH1	 	
 	C3	29.0	1.65, 1.50 	CH2	2, 4	2	
 	C4	23.4	1.5 	CH2	3, 5	2	
 	C5	47.0	3.42 	CH2	4	 	
 	C6	170.8	 	C	 	5, 7	
 	C7	20.9	1.93 	CH3	 	 	
 	N1	 	8.02 	NH	2	 	
Ser	C8	170.2	 	C	 	NH1, 9, 10	
 	C9	55.4	4.30 	CH	10, NH2	10	
 	C10	62.3	3.51 	CH2	9	9	
 	N2	 	7.85 	NH	9	 	
(N-Ac, N-OH)-Orn	C11	171.9	 	C	 	NH2, 12	
 	C12	52.8	4.30 	CH	13, NH3	 	
 	C13	29.8	1.42, 1.63	CH2	12, 14	 	
 	C14	23.4	1.5 	CH2	13, 15	 	
 	C15	47.2	3.42 	CH2	14	 	
 	C16	170.9	 	C	 	15, 17	
 	C17	20.9	1.94 	CH3	 	 	
 	N3	 	8.19 	NH	12	 	
Ser	C18	170.1	 	C	 	NH3, 19, 20	
 	C19	55.9	4.35 	CH	20, NH4	20	
 	C20	62.4	3.54 	CH2	19	19	
 	N4	 	8.35 	NH	19	 	
DHBA	C21	169.7	 	C	 	NH4	
 	C22	51.3	4.32 	CH	23	 	
 	C23	22.0	1.91 	CH2	22	 	
 	C24	36.9	3.27, 3.35 	CH2	23	 	
 	N5	 	9.68 br	NH	24	 	
 	N6	 	9.68 br	NH	 	 	
(α-OH)-Asp	C25	172.7	 	C	 	 	
 	C26	54.9	4.06 	CH	27	 	
 	C27	71.7	4.37 	CH	26	 	
 	C28	172.7	 	C	 	 	
 	N7	 	nd 	NH2	 	 	
See NMR spectra
in ; br, broad; nd,
not detected.
The orientation of β-hydroxyaspartic acid and diaminobutyric
acid in the nine-membered ring was established by HMBC on marinobactins
C and E. The Cα of β-hydroxyaspartate,
C26, couples to the N61H at 9.8 ppm and not
with the N51H located further away at 9.72
ppm, consistent with the orientation of the nine-membered ring that
is shown here. The structure above shows
the 1H–1H correlation (bold lines) and
key HMBC (H → C) correlations.

Microbial Hydrolysis of the Fatty Acid Amide of Marinobactin
E to MHG
MHG production was further
investigated by adding 15N-labeled marinobactin E back
to a culture of Marinobacter at day 4 of growth,
which is in the range of the late log phase or the beginning of the
stationary phase of growth. The cells at 4 days of growth were washed
and resuspended in fresh media. After addition of apo-15N-ME to the bacterial culture (HPLC bottom trace in ), the intensity
of the MHG HPLC peak increased significantly. ESI-MS revealed
that the MHG peak in  consisted of molecular ions at both m/z 759, which is the 15N-isotopically labeled MHG, as well as m/z 750, which is
the nonisotopically labeled (natural abundance) MHG, produced
during growth of Marinobacter sp. DS40M6 over the
four-day incubation period. The HPLC chromatogram shows that the 15N-marinobactins A–E and 15N-MHG elute off the XAD-2 resin nearly identically to the purified nonisotopically
labeled marinobactins (). Thus,
the conversion of exogenously added 15N-labeled marinobactin
E by the bacterial culture demonstrates that the bacteria hydrolyze
the acyl amide bond of marinobactin E to produce MHG, as
opposed to a hydrophilic headgroup siderophore being produced independently
or as a precursor to the acyl-marinobactins.

If instead of using
a Marinobacter culture resuspended in fresh media, 15N-marinobactin E is added to cells resuspended in an isotonic
salt medium (thus lacking a carbon or nitrogen source for bacterial
growth), then only the m/z 759 MHG is detected. It was also observed on addition of 15N-marinobactin E to the culture supernatant from the Marinobacter growth at 4 days that some conversion to the 15N-MHG did occur, although it was much less than that occurring
with the resuspended cell pellet, suggesting that some amide hydrolase
is released during cell harvesting and that the enzyme may be peripherally
membrane associated.

Time-Dependent Siderophore Production by Marinobacter sp. DS40M6 and H. aquamarina str. DS40M3 in Coculture
Growth of H. aquamarina str. DS40M3 in pure culture
resulted in identification of aquachelins A–D, I, and J (Figure )., However, no aquachelin headgroup
formation was detected through the stationary phase of growth and
even through cell death (), despite culturing H. aquamarina under conditions analogous to Marinobacter sp.
DS40M6.

Siderophore production in a mixed culture of Marinobacter sp. DS40M6 and H. aquamarina str. DS40M3 was followed for 30 days and resulted in the concomitant
production of the suites of marinobactins and the aquachelins. The
amide hydrolase enzymatic activity of Marinobacter is evident, and the amount of headgroup increases between days 9
and 14 (data not shown). The appearance of two headgroup peaks indicates
that the Marinobacter bacterium is modifying not
only its own acyl marinobactin siderophores but also the acyl aquachelin
siderophores in vivo.

At day 10 of growth in the mixed culture,
the presence of the suites
of marinobactin and aquachelin siderophores are clearly present, as
well as two headgroup peaks (Figure ). Extraction
of the mixed culture of Halomonas and Marinobacter using XAD-2 resin resulted in results similar to the aliquot samples
and sufficient quantities for identification (Figure ).

RP-HPLC chromatogram of a 100 μL Marinobacter sp. DS40M6 and Halomonas aquamarina str. DS40M3
mixed culture sample from day 10 of growth, injected onto an analytical
C4 column (Vydac) (aliquot from the XAD extract). The sample
was monitored at 215 nm. On the basis of mass spectrometric data,
the peaks at 17 min are HG1:750 m/z, MHG; HG2:883 m/z,
aquachelin headgroup, AHG. The siderophore peaks between
30 and 42 min are aquachelin J (1037 m/z); aquachelin I (1081 m/z); aquachelin
A (1063 m/z); aquachelin B (1066 m/z) and marinobactin A (932 m/z); aquachelin C (1091 m/z) and marinobactin B (958 m/z); aquachelin D (1093 m/z) and
marinobactin C (960 m/z); marinobactin
D (986 m/z); marinobactin E (988 m/z). The peaks between 20 and 30 min in
the XAD extract sample are not siderophores or siderophore fragments.

The first smaller peak was identified
as the marinobactin headgroup,
MHG (750 m/z). The tandem
mass spectrum of MHG correlates well with the expected
fragmentation pattern. The second larger peak was identified as the
aquachelin headgroup (883 m/z),
AHG, and tandem mass spectrometry () reveals the majority of
the y + 2H+ and b fragments expected for fragmentation
of AHG. (The “y” and “b” nomenclature
refers to the charge when retained by the COOH-terminal fragment or
the NH2-terminal fragment of the peptide, respectively.) Interestingly, the AHG peak is the
larger of the two headgroup peaks (Figure  at 17–18 min). The amount of AHG compared to MHG may be due to the concentration difference between the two
suites of siderophores. The Halomonas culture has
a faster growth rate, reaching a higher cell density in culture (data
not shown) than the Marinobacter culture. Thus, H. aquamarina DS40M3 produces the acyl aquachelin siderophores
earlier, as well as perhaps in higher concentration than occurs for
the acyl marinobactin siderophores. Therefore, more AHG is present than MHG. The Marinobacter acyl amide hydrolase enzymatic activity is predominantly constrained
to its cellular membrane; thus, hydrolysis of the acyl aquachelins
results primarily from partitioning of the acyl aquachelins within
the Marinobacter membrane.

Acyl Amidase Activity in Marinobacter sp. DS40M6
Cell-Free Extract
The acyl amidase activity in a cell-free
extract prepared from Marinobacter sp. DS40M6 was
confirmed to be active toward marinobactins A-E, converting the isolated
suite of marinobactins to the MHG siderophore. Intriguingly,
it also showed activity toward other non-native acyl peptidic siderophores,
as well as N-octanoyl homoserine lactone (C8-HSL).
The enzyme hydrolyzed the fatty acid amide bond of two distinct acyl
peptidic siderophores, aquachelin C (also described above in coculture)
and loihichelin C (Figure ). In both cases,
the headgroup siderophore was identified based on mass spectrometric
data (not shown). The partially purified enzyme extract also catalyzed
hydrolysis of the shorter fatty acid amide of the quorum sensing molecule,
C8-HSL as analyzed by HPLC (data not shown). Attempts to purify the
amidase to homogeneity resulted in progressive loss of activity. Acyl
amide hydrolysis activity was not observed using a boiled sample of
the cell-free extract, as investigated using the marinobactins A–E.
Current investigations are directed toward cloning and expression
of the recombinant acyl amide hydrolase, which is likely related to
the NTN hydrolase in P. aeruginosa that deacylates
the acyl pyoverdine precursor (Figure ) and
its quorum sensing molecule, 3-oxo-dodecanoic HSL.

Discussion
We have shown that the
fatty acid appendages of the marinobactins
A–E produced by Marinobacter sp. DS40M6 are
hydrolyzed during bacterial growth, producing the marinobactin headgroup,
MHG, as established by NMR and mass spectrometry. Fatty
acid hydrolysis is carried out by an amide hydrolase present in cell-free
extracts of Marinobacter sp. DS40M6. The acyl amidase
also catalyzes the hydrolysis of fatty acids from other structurally
distinct acylated peptidic siderophores, including aquachelin C and
loihichelin C, producing the respective headgroup peptides as identified
by mass spectrometry. In addition to acyl-siderophore hydrolysis,
the Marinobacter acyl amidase hydrolyzes N-octanoyl-HSL, which was chosen as a test substrate and
one that also serves as a quorum sensing compound in some bacteria.
Figure  shows the faster disappearance of
marinobactin E compared to marinobactins with shorter fatty acid appendages
(e.g., marinobactins A and B). This rate difference is consistent
with the location of the acyl amide hydrolase in the bacterial membrane
since the partitioning of the marinobactins within bilayer membranes
is greater for the longest saturated fatty acids and decreases with
unsaturation or shorter chain length.

The NTN-hydrolase, PvdQ, in P. aeruginosa catalyzes
hydrolysis of the fatty acid from both the acyl-pyoverdine precursor
and the endogenous quorum sensing molecule, N-(3-oxo-C12)-HSL.,, Thus, functional similarities
exist between the Marinobacter acyl amide hydrolase
and the P. aeruginosa NTN hydrolase. In the case
of P. aeruginosa, the acylated pyoverdine precursor
is first hydrolyzed in the periplasm, and subsequent biosynthetic
steps are required to form pyoverdine prior to release from the bacterium,
which differs from that of acyl marinobactin biosynthesis. Further
work is in progress to clone and express a NTN-hydrolase from Marinobacter sp. DS40M6 to investigate the enzyme reactivity
and the relationship between acyl siderophore hydrolysis of native
and exogenous siderophores, as well as a possible role in quorum sensing
regulation.

While the quorum sensing compounds of Marinobacter sp. DS40M6 are not known, the fatty acid amide hydrolase activity
on acyl-HSLs raises a possible role in quorum regulation, and one
that is under investigation for P. aeruginosa. It
is possible that the Marinobacter acyl amidase has
multiple roles for the bacterium, one of which is formation and release
of MHG during growth, and another which may be involved
in quorum sensing regulation. In this latter regard, experiments are
in progress to identify and isolate the quorum sensing compounds of Marinobacter sp. DS40M6.

In contrast to hydrolysis
of the acyl pyoverdine precursor by the
periplasmic NTN-hydrolase, the marinobactins are not hydrolyzed in
the periplasm and in fact are released as the suite of acylated marinobactins,
likely partitioning to varying degrees within the outer membrane. Hydrolysis appears to occur predominantly in
the outer membrane and to a much lesser extent extracellularly by
release of a small amount of the hydrolase. The MHG retains
the ability to coordinate iron(III), as all three of the iron-coordinating
moieties are still present and not impacted by deacylation. As both
the acyl marinobactins and MHG are capable of coordinating
iron(III) and both are present in the external milieu, either form
of the molecule could be active in iron uptake, and they may perhaps
even play different roles during iron uptake for Marinobacter sp. DS40M6. It is interesting to speculate in cases where a bacterium
modifies its own siderophore which form of the molecule is the true
intended siderophore.

A surprising result in this investigation
is that coculturing Marinobacter sp. DS40M6 and H. aquamarina str. DS40M3 results in production of both
the marinobactin and aquachelin
head groups. The ability of one bacterium to structurally alter the
siderophores of another bacterium is intriguing, and the benefits
in the natural environment are not clear. The aquachelin siderophores
are more hydrophilic than the marinobactins as a result of their longer
peptidic headgroup and overall shorter fatty acids compared to the
marinobactins. Production of the aquachelin headgroup, AHG, would indicate that a portion of aquachelin siderophores dissociate
from the H. aquamarina cells and either associate
with the Marinobacter cells by partitioning in the
outer membrane, or encountering the peripherally membrane-bound amidase
enzyme in Marinobacter sp. DS40M6. Thus, the aquachelin
siderophores are encountering the Marinobacter enzyme
at its cell surface, although it cannot be ruled out that growth of H. aquamarina str. DS40M3 with the Marinobacter cells induces expression of a native H. aquamarina acyl amide hydrolase enzyme. In sum, coculturing bacteria can lead
to metabolically altered and tailored metabolites compared to a single
pure culture, which is especially interesting given the importance
of siderophore-mediated iron acquisition for bacterial growth.

Supporting Information Available
ESI-MS of MHG; MS-MS
of MHG and 15N-MHG; 1H, 13C, 1H–1H COSY, 1H–13C HMBC, and 1H–13C HMQC of MHG; HPLC of aquachelin production versus time and HPLC of cocultures
of Marinobacter sp. DS40M6 and H. aquamarina str. DS40M3, MS-MS of AHG. This material is available
free of charge via the Internet at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bi500266x_si_001.pdf

Author Present Address
# Rohto Pharmaceutical
Co., Ltd., 1-8-1 Tatsumi-nishi Ikuno-Ku, Osaka,
Japan.

Author Present Address
∥ Earth
Research Institute, University of California, Santa Barbara,
California 93106-9510.

Author Present Address
‡ National
Institute of Health Sciences, Kamiyoga 1-18-1, Setagaya-ku,
Tokyo 158-8501, Japan.

Author Contributions
⊥ J.M.G.
and A.I. contributed equally to this work

The authors declare no
competing financial interest.

