Human 5-lipoxygenase (5-LOX)
is a non-heme iron-containing enzyme responsible for catalyzing the
stereospecific and regiospecific peroxidation of natural polyunsaturated
fatty acid (PUFA) substrates, specifically converting arachidonic
acid (AA) into 5(S)-hydroperoxy-6-trans-8,11,14-cis-eicosatetraenoic acid [5(S)-HpETE]., 5-LOX shares this hydroperoxidation activity
with other lipoxygenases, such as 12-LOX and 15-LOX, although these
generate different products with different biological roles in the
cell [e.g., 12(S)-HpETE and 15(S)-HpETE, respectively]. A unique feature of 5-LOX is the additional
catalytic step of converting 5(S)-HpETE into the
epoxide, leukotriene A4 (LTA4) (Figure ). This biomolecule is the first in a line of highly
pro-inflammatory mediators that act as potent chemoattractants and
are implicated in a variety of diseases from asthma to cancer.− Distinguishing the biological role of 5-LOX further is the fact
that LTA4 can also be shuttled into neighboring cells expressing
12- and 15-LOX via mechanisms of transcellular biosynthesis., Ultimately, LTA4 is converted to a series of inflammatory
biomolecules (e.g., leukotrienes and lipoxins), both of which are
important in initiating and terminating inflammation.,

Important
metabolites of the regulation of inflammation made by
5-LOX with AA.

5-LOX catalytic activity
is regulated through several mechanisms
by the cell. 5-LOX is recruited to the nuclear membrane upon cellular
Ca2+ influx. Calcium binds to allosteric sites in the 5-LOX
N-terminal polycystin-1/lipoxygenase/α-toxin (PLAT) domain,
promoting attachment to the membrane via conserved tryptophan residues
that embed into the lipid bilayer.− There is also evidence
that magnesium can substitute for calcium in this regard. Membrane association leads to an increased level
of production of hydroperoxide and leukotriene., 5-LOX must interact with 5-LOX-activating protein (FLAP) to secure
PUFA substrates from the nuclear membrane and further promote leukotriene
formation in vivo., Evidence of
an additional protein–protein interaction with coactosin-like
protein (CLP), an actin binding protein, suggests CLP helps stabilize
the membrane-docked 5-LOX and enhances leukotriene formation 3-fold., The fate of LTA4 depends on where 5-LOX is localized
in the cell when it is activated to bind the nuclear membrane, a phenomenon
termed compartmentalization.− LTA4 can be converted
to LTB4 by LTA4 hydrolase, a soluble protein
that can localize in the nucleus, or to LTC4 by LTC4 synthase, a membrane-bound protein embedded in the outer
leaflet of the nuclear membrane. Compartmentalization implicates the
importance of the 5-LOX nuclear localization sequences, which may be further regulated by phosphorylation. Lastly, the ability of 5-LOX to dimerize may
provide yet another avenue of enzymatic regulation.

In addition to the calcium binding allosteric sites,
there is an
ATP binding site(s) that contributes to 5-LOX activation.− Previous studies report a range of 5-LOX activating potentials,
from a 5-fold increase in 5-LOX activity to a 25-fold increase in kcat/Km with Ca2+ added, both found in guinea pig peritoneal polymorphonuclear leukocytes
(PMNLs). Furthermore, the substrate specificity of 5-LOX is affected
by ATP, with the kcat/Km ratio of AA to eicosapentaenoic acid (EPA) increasing
2-fold. Unfortunately, the ATP-induced
activation mechanism is not thoroughly understood and is often explained
with generalized statements, such as extending enzyme stability. The recent crystal structure of Stable-5-LOX,
a mutant with a half-life longer than that of wild-type 5-LOX, gave
further impetus for characterizing ATP’s effect on 5-LOX because
the structural determinants for ATP-induced activation were not obvious
from the structure. In addition, it was
not known if ATP activated just hydroperoxidation or epoxidation as
well.

In comparing the proposed mechanisms of hydroperoxidation
(oxidation
of AA) and epoxidation (dehydration of the hydroperoxide to form the
epoxide), we observed that they are similar but exhibit four key differences
(Figure ). First, the hydrogen atom is abstracted
from C7 for hydroperoxidation but from C10 for epoxidation. Therefore,
the positioning of the substrate will be distinct between the two
processes because the Fe(III)–OH moiety is proposed to be the
active species for both abstractions. Second, molecular oxygen does
not attack the radical intermediate for epoxidation; rather, there
is a radical rearrangement producing the epoxide. Third, the Fe(II)–OH2 moiety donates a hydrogen atom to the peroxyl radical intermediate
on C5 for hydroperoxidation but donates a hydrogen atom to a hydroxide
radical for epoxidation, which is homolytically cleaved from the hydroperoxide.
Finally, these two processes require different substrate rearrangement
steps to abstract a hydrogen atom from the substrate and donate it
back to the intermediate. It is proposed that after abstraction of
a hydrogen atom from C7 and the antarafacial dioxygen attack, the
Fe(II)–OH2 moiety transfers an electron, via long
range, to the peroxyl radical intermediate. For epoxidation, the hydrogen atom is abstracted from C10; however,
the Fe(II)–OH2 moiety is on the same side as the
hydroperoxide, leading to a suprafacial homolytic cleavage of the
hydroperoxide (Figure ). This opens the possibility that the homolytic cleavage
of the hydroperoxide by the Fe(II)–OH2 moiety to
produce the epoxide could possibly be achieved via an inner sphere
reduction, directly with the iron center.

Detailed mechanism of
hydroperoxidation and epoxidation [dehydration
of 5(S)-HpETE to produce the epoxide]. Hydroperoxidation
proceeds after initial abstraction of the pro-S hydrogen
at C7, whereas epoxidation proceeds after abstraction of the pro-R hydrogen at C10. The
antarafacial nature of hydroperoxidation is well-known,,, while a suprafacial arrangement
for epoxidation was postulated by Jin et al.

In this report, we determine that
ATP allosteric activation of
5-LOX promotes both 5(S)-HpETE and LTA4 catalysis by a similar magnitude. ATP induces hyperbolic activation,
allowing for the determination of Ki,
the strength of ATP binding, α, the change induced in Km, and β, the change induced in Vmax. Further kinetic investigations into the
solvent and viscosity effects on product formation reveal changes
in microscopic rate constants that promote activation, establishing
that ATP is an allosteric activator of both 5-LOX hydroperoxidation
and epoxidation. Finally, we review the literature on the role of
ATP in inflammation and speculate that the ATP-induced allosteric
activation of 5-LOX in vitro is a potentially relevant
modulator of inflammation in vivo.

Materials and
Methods
Ammonium Sulfate Precipitation of 5-LOX
Recombinant
human 5-LOX in a pET21 plasmid was expressed in Escherichia
coli BL21(DE3) cells as described previously. Briefly, host cells were grown in LB (100 μg/mL
ampicillin) to an OD of 0.6 at 37 °C, at which time they were
induced with 0.25 mM IPTG and cooled to 18 °C for overnight growth.
Cells were then centrifuged at 4700g for 15 min,
pelleted into smaller aliquots at 6200g for 7 min,
and snap-frozen in liquid nitrogen. Frozen cell pellets were resuspended
in a nitrogen-sparged, 4 °C chilled buffer of 50 mM Hepes and
0.1 mM EDTA (pH 7.5) normalized to an ionic strength of 50 mM with
NaCl (termed buffer A in all subsequent methods). A French pressure
cell press was used to lyse cells at 2000 psi, and the resulting lysate
was centrifuged at 46000g for 25 min. Ammonium sulfate
was added to the supernatant [50% (w/v)], and the mixture was inverted
to mix, centrifuged at 46000g for 20 min, divided
into 200 mg aliquots, and snap-frozen in liquid nitrogen for long-term
storage. When needed for enzymatic assays, an aliquot was resuspended
in nitrogen-sparged, 4 °C chilled buffer A to a standard concentration
and utilized within 3 h to avoid enzyme degradation caused by the
inherent instability of 5-LOX.

Purification of LOX Hydroperoxide
and Hydroxide Enzymatic Products
High-performance liquid
chromatography (HPLC) running solutions
were made prior to the experiment. Solution A consisted of 99.9% ACN
and 0.1% acetic acid; solution B consisted of 99.9% H2O
and 0.1% acetic acid. AA was used to generate 5(S)-HpETE. Two liters of 100 μM PUFA substrate in buffer A was
reacted with 5-LOX and the reaction run to completion as monitored
by a sample reaction on a UV–vis spectrometer; the product
was promptly extracted three times with a total volume of dichloromethane
of 900 mL, evaporated to dryness, and reconstituted in MeOH for HPLC
purification. Products were injected onto a Higgins Haisil Semi-Preparative
(5 μm, 250 mm × 10 mm) C-18 column with an elution protocol
consisting of a 3 mL/min isocratic mobile phase of 55% solution A
and 45% solution B. Both products were tested using analytical HPLC
and liquid chromatography and tandem mass spectrometry (LC–MS/MS),
demonstrating &gt;90% purity, with the other &lt;10% being hydrolysis
products of the hydroperoxide (5-hydroxides and 5-ketones), which
were found to be inert when reacted with 5-LOX.

Steady-State
Kinetic Measurements
Steady-state kinetic
rates were determined by following the formation of the conjugated
product at 234 nm [ε = 27000 M–1 cm–1 for AA turnover; ε = 50000 M–1 cm–1 for 5(S)-HpETE turnover] with a PerkinElmer Lambda
40 UV–vis spectrophotometer at room temperature (21 °C).
All assays were conducted in buffer A. AA concentrated stock solutions
were stored in 95% ethanol and diluted into buffer so that the total
ethanol concentration was &lt;1%. Fatty acid concentrations were verified
by full turnover with soybean-1 lipoxygenase and quantitating product
concentration. Enzymatic reactions were initiated by the addition
of approximately 100–300 nM ammonium sulfate-precipitated wild-type
enzyme. The catalytic activity relative to protein weight was measured
by observing turnover of a 10 μM solution of AA by the production
of 5(S)-HpETE at 234 nm and was calculated to be
≈0.2 absorbance unit s–1 mg–1, or an absolute enzymatic activity of ≈60 μmol min–1 mg–1 (not standardized to metal
content). Activities of all wild-type ammonium sulfate preparations
used were within 20% of this value. Assays were conducted in volumes
of 2 mL with substrate concentrations ranging from 1 to 30 μM
and were constantly stirred with a rotating magnetic bar. Higher substrate
concentrations were avoided to prevent the formation of micelles,
which would alter the free substrate concentration. Initial rates (up to the first 20% of the reaction) for
each substrate were fit to the Michaelis–Menten equation using
KaleidaGraph (Synergy) and kinetic parameters calculated. Calculation
of Vmax/Km parameters was conducted by plotting them as second-order rate constants.
All other kinetic parameters (α, β, and Ki) were calculated from fitting data to the equations
described by Mogul et al. and Joshi et
al. Each plot comprises data from three
or four separate experiments, and the reported error is the error
calculated from nonlinear regression. Wild-type 5-LOX from the ammonium
sulfate preparation showed no inactivation for the 2 h duration of
the experiment, and no 5(S)-HpETE inhibition was
observed for the initial rates of AA catalysis. Finally, it should
be noted that the ammonium sulfate preparation, without 5-LOX, did
not include any fatty acid substrates or impurity proteins with LOX
activity.

Measurement of the CMC via Isothermal Titration Calorimetry
CMCs were measured as described by McAuley et al. A MicroCal VP-ITC Calorimeter was used for data collection.
A solution of highly concentrated AA, dissolved in buffer A, was titrated
into a sample cell containing buffer A only. The final concentration
of AA was determined by quantitating the product concentration after
full turnover with soybean-1 lipoxygenase, and from this, the molar
amount of AA added per injection was extrapolated. Experiments were
repeated three times, and the reported error is the standard error
of the mean (SEM) of each set of measurements.

HPLC Determination of the
5(S)-HETE/5,12-DiHETE
Product Ratio
5-LOX prepared by ammonium sulfate precipitation
was incubated with 10 μM AA in buffer A at room temperature
(21 °C). Enzymatic reactions were quenched with 1% (v/v) glacial
acetic acid at varied levels of turnover between 5 and 60%, as determined
by UV–vis spectrophotometry. Products were then extracted with
dichloromethane, reduced with trimethylphosphite, and evaporated to
dryness under a nitrogen stream. The products were purified via HPLC
as described above for hydroperoxide products using a Phenomenex Luna
(5 μm, 250 mm × 4.6 mm) C-18 column and an elution protocol
consisting of a 1 mL/min isocratic mobile phase of 55% solution A
and 45% solution B. The molar amounts of 5(S)-HETE
and 5,12-DiHETE were calculated by the corresponding peak areas determined
by HPLC and normalized to their respective extinction coefficients
(ε234 = 27000 M–1 cm–1, and ε280 = 50000 M–1 cm–1)., Reactions were repeated 12–26
times, and the reported error is the SEM of each set of measurements.

Structural Determination of 5-LOX-Catalyzed Products by LC–MS/MS
LC–MS/MS running solutions were made prior to each experiment.
Solution A consisted of 99.9% H2O and 0.1% formic acid;
solution B consisted of 99.9% ACN and 0.1% formic acid. Ammonium sulfate-precipitated
5-LOX was incubated with 10 μM AA substrate. A 2 mL sample of
the reaction mixture was monitored at 234 nm with a PerkinElmer Lambda
40 UV–vis spectrophotometer to determine when complete turnover
had been reached. Reactions were quenched with 1% (v/v) glacial acetic
acid, extracted with dichloromethane, reduced with trimethylphosphite,
evaporated to dryness, and reconstituted in MeOH. Products were injected
onto a Phenomenex Synergi (4 μm, 150 mm × 4.6 mm) C-18
column attached to a Finnigan LTQ liquid chromatography mass spectrometer
(LC–MS/MS). The elution protocol consisted of 200 μL/min,
with an isocratic mobile phase of 40% solution A and 60% solution
B. The corresponding reduced product ion peak ratio was determined
using negative ion MS/MS (collision energy of 35 eV) with the following
masses: 5(S)-HETE, parent ion at m/z 319 and fragments at m/z 115, 203, and 129; 5,12-DiHETE, parent ion at m/z 335 and fragments at m/z 317, 273, and 195.,

18O Labeling of PUFA Substrates
HPLC running
solutions were made prior to each experiment. Solution A consisted
of 99.9% MeOH and 0.1% acetic acid; solution B consisted of 99.9%
H2O and 0.1% acetic acid. Arachidonoyl chloride and eicosapentaenoyl
chloride (&gt;99%) were purchased from Nu-Chek Prep, Inc. H218O (97%) was purchased from Cambridge Isotope Laboratories.
One molar equivalent of acyl chloride substrate was reacted with 15
molar equiv of H218O in the presence of dried
pyridine for 10 min in a nitrogen-sparged flask. Lipids were extracted
twice with dichloromethane, evaporated to dryness, and reconstituted
in MeOH for HPLC purification. The sample was injected onto a Higgins
Haisil Semi-Preparative (5 μm, 250 mm × 10 mm) C-18 column
and eluted with an isocratic program of 75% solution A and 25% solution
B. The substrate purity was calculated to be greater than 99% on an
LC–MS/MS, although we measured a range of 18O labeling
efficiencies from 57 to 78% in different labeling experiments. Isotope
ratios of labeled to unlabeled PUFA substrate were used to normalize
the data.

Competitive Substrate Capture Investigations of PUFA and Hydroperoxide
Catalysis
LC–MS/MS running solutions were made prior
to each experiment. Solution A consisted of 99.9% H2O and
0.1% formic acid; solution B consisted of 99.9% ACN and 0.1% formic
acid. Competitive substrate capture method experiments were performed
using a reaction mixture of labeled PUFA substrate and its respective
hydroperoxide product [[18O]AA/5(S)-HpETE]
with a known molar ratio (1:1) and were initiated with ammonium sulfate-precipitated
5-LOX in buffer A in the presence or absence of 200 μM ATP.
The ratio of the simultaneous product formation (5,12-[18O]dihydroxides and 5,12-dihydroxides) by 5-LOX was determined at
a total substrate concentration of 1 μM (substrate limiting
conditions). A 2 mL sample of the reaction mixture was monitored at
234 nm with a PerkinElmer Lambda 40 UV–vis spectrophotometer
to determine time points to achieve ∼5% total substrate consumption
(∼0.05 μM)., Reactions were timed
and quenched with 1% glacial acetic acid (v/v), and mixtures were
extracted with dichloromethane, reduced with trimethylphosphite, evaporated
to dryness, and reconstituted in MeOH. Products were injected onto
a Phenomenex Synergi (4 μm, 150 mm × 4.6 mm) C-18 column
attached to a Finnigan LTQ liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometer
(LC–MS/MS). The elution protocol consisted of 200 μL/min,
with an isocratic mobile phase of 40% solution A and 60% solution
B. The corresponding reduced product ion peak ratio was determined
using negative ion MS/MS (collision energy of 35 eV) with the following
masses: 5,12-DiHETE, parent ion at m/z 335 and fragments at m/z 317,
273, and 195; 5,12-[18O]DiHETE, parent ion at m/z 337 and fragments at m/z 319, 273, and 197. The ratio
of the peak areas for the labeled and unlabeled dihydroxides was then
used to determine the (Vmax/Km)AA/(Vmax/Km)5(S)-HpETE ratio, modeled after our previous report. Reactions were repeated 14–21 times, and the reported error
is the SEM of each set of measurements.

Measurement of Solvent
Isotope Effects
Steady-state
kinetics were performed in H2O and 2H2O at room temperature (21 °C) as previously described to reveal
SIEs., Reactions were performed in buffer A (H2O, pH 7.5) or in the same buffer made with 2H2O (pH meter reading of 7.1),
and all kinetic parameters were determined as described above. A Hewlett-Packard
diode-array 8453 UV–vis spectrometer was used to simultaneously
observe 5(S)-HpETE and LTA4 formation
and thus determine the SIE for either step of catalysis.

Measurement
of Viscosity Effects
Steady-state kinetics
were performed in the absence or presence of a viscogen (dextrose)
at room temperature (21 °C) to reveal any diffusion-linked effects
on catalysis as previously described., Maltose, sucrose,
ethylene glycol, glycerol, trimethylamine N-oxide
(TMAO), and PEG-8000 were also tested as viscogens, but all of these
inhibited (&gt;50%) enzymatic catalysis and thus were not further
used.
Reactions were conducted at different relative viscosities (ηrel = η/η0, where η0 is the viscosity of H2O at 20 °C) in 25 mM Hepes
and 0.05 mM EDTA (pH 7.5), normalized to an ionic strength of 25 mM
with NaCl. All kinetic parameters were determined as described above
in the absence (ηrel = 1) or presence of 1.873 M
dextrose (ηrel = 3).

Results and Discussion
Steady-State
Kinetic Dependence on ATP and Ca2+
Steady-state
hydroperoxidation kinetics of AA demonstrated that
the addition of a saturating level of ATP (200 μM) produced
a 4.9-fold increase in Vmax and a 1.7-fold
increase in Vmax/Km. This increase is due to a large increase in Vmax, relative to a small increase in Km (Table ), indicating that ATP
increases the rate of product release more so than substrate capture.
These observations are consistent with the ATP activation reported
by Ochi et al. for 5-LOX purified from guinea pig neutrophils, underscoring a similarity between the ATP activation
of human and guinea pig 5-LOX isozymes. It should be noted that Aharony
et al. observed a decrease in Km upon
addition of Ca2+ and ATP, leading to an increase in kcat/Km (25-fold)
larger than what we observed. We infrequently
saw a decrease in Km, as well, but it
was only with a small percentage of our 5-LOX preparations; therefore,
we did not consider it relevant. Interestingly, these infrequent preparations
of 5-LOX, which demonstrated a decrease in Km, also exhibited substrate inhibition and manifested artificially
lower Km values. This substrate inhibition
was not due to a change in the critical micelle concentration (CMC)
for AA because the substrate concentrations used were well below the
CMC values [CMC = 43 ± 3 μM (no ATP) and 52 ± 1 μM
(200 μM ATP)], as measured by isothermal titration calorimetry.
In addition, it was confirmed with our 5-LOX preparation that calcium
was not required for ATP activation (data not shown), as previously
reported with recombinant human 5-LOX, obtained from insect cell expression., However, we did notice that calcium slightly diminished the level
of ATP activation (∼10%), but the cause of this small reduction
in the level of activation is unclear. 1,2-Dimyristoyl-sn-glycero-3-phosphocholine (DMPC), with and without Ca2+ and/or Mg2+, also showed no observable kinetic effect
on ATP activation. Furthermore, DMPC hindered accurate absorption
detection because of its high background absorption, and thus, it
was not included in further experiments (data not shown).

Steady State Parameters of 5-LOX Hydroperoxidation
of AA and Epoxidation of 5(S)-HpETE, with and without
ATP
 	AA hydroperoxidation	5(S)-HpETE epoxidation	
[ATP] (μM)	relative Vmax	Km (μM)	relative Vmax/Km	relative Vmax	Km (μM)	relative Vmax/Km	
0	1.0 ± 0.02	1.9 ± 0.2	0.53 ± 0.05	0.33 ± 0.01	14 ± 1	0.023 ± 0.002	
200	4.9 ± 0.3	5.3 ± 0.8	0.90 ± 0.1	1.6 ± 0.09	19 ± 2	0.090 ± 0.01	
ATP change	4.9-fold	 	1.7-fold	4.8-fold	 	3.9-fold	
The relative Vmax of 5-LOX (ammonium sulfate-precipitated)
and AA, with no
cofactors added, is set to 1. All other Vmax values are standardized to this value and are unitless. Vmax values with 5(S)-HpETE
as a substrate were multiplied by 0.54 to account for the difference
in extinction coefficients between HETE (234 nm) and diHETE (280 nm)
products. For comparison to other studies, the absolute kinetic activity
of all of our wild-type 5-LOX preparations, without ATP added, was
≈60 μmol min–1 mg–1.

Steady-state epoxidation
kinetics of 5(S)-HpETE
demonstrated a 3-fold smaller Vmax and
a 23-fold smaller Vmax/Km, compared to those for hydroperoxidation of AA (Table ). These results highlight a prominent difference
between AA and 5(S)-HpETE in their rates of substrate
capture and suggest that LTA4 formation could occur more
readily from sequential steps of hydroperoxidation and then epoxidation
with AA, as has been previously observed., The addition of a saturating level of ATP (200 μM) produced
a 4.8-fold increase in Vmax with 5(S)-HpETE as the substrate, which was the same magnitude
of activation seen for AA hydroperoxidation (Table ). In contrast, ATP induced a 3.9-fold increase in Vmax/Km, which indicates
a 2-fold greater ATP-induced activation of Vmax/Km for 5(S)-HpETE epoxidation than for AA hydroperoxidation (1.7-fold). These
data demonstrate a distinction in the ATP activation mechanism for
hydroperoxidation and epoxidation, and therefore, more extensive investigations
were used to understand ATP activation in more detail.

Effect of ATP-Induced
Activation on Hydroperoxide Retention
and Epoxide Formation
As described above, ATP activates both
AA hydroperoxidation and 5(S)-HpETE epoxidation.
However, it is unclear if the epoxidation reaction affects the rate
of hydroperoxidation, because of the consumption of the hydroperoxidation
product, 5(S)-HpETE, and/or production of the 5,6-epoxide,
LTA4. To investigate this possibility, a diode-array UV–vis
spectrophotometer was used to observe the formation of both 5(S)-HpETE (234 nm) and LTA4 (280 nm) simultaneously
from 0 to 20% product formation and determine if the slight increase
in the 5(S)-HpETE concentration could affect the
rate of hydroperoxide formation. The LTA4/5(S)-HpETE ratio of products (the efficiency of epoxide formation) was
calculated throughout the reaction and observed to remain constant
up to 20% product formation [LTA4/5(S)-HpETE
ratio of 0.161 ± 0.004 (Figure )]. With
the addition of 200 μM ATP, this value increased to a constant
value of 0.247 ± 0.005 (Figure ) and
matched the value determined for rat PMNL 5-LOX. In addition, 5(S)-HETE and 5,12-DiHETE
concentrations were quantified via HPLC and comparable product ratios
were observed [0.19 ± 0.02 (no ATP) and 0.25 ± 0.02 (200
μM ATP)], confirming the accuracy of the dual-wavelength assay
(Figure ). These data indicate that the consumption
of 5(S)-HpETE, and the subsequent production of the
5,6-epoxide, does not affect the relative rates of hydroperoxidation
and epoxidation.

Effect of 200 μM ATP on the efficiency of epoxide
formation.
[LTA4]/[5(S)-HpETE] turnover ratio from
10 μM AA substrate as measured by HPLC and UV–vis spectrophotometry.
[LTA4] was measured at 280 nm and [5(S)-HpETE] at 234 nm, and both were normalized to their respective
extinction coefficients. The absolute kinetic activity of wild-type
5-LOX ammonium sulfate preparations was ≈60 μmol min–1 mg–1.

Hyperbolic Activation of 5-LOX by ATP
To compare the
allosteric effect of ATP activation for AA hydroperoxidation and 5(S)-HpETE epoxidation in more detail, extensive allosteric
titrations were performed (Table ). From the
data, it was observed that 5-LOX and AA exhibited a hyperbolic response
to increasing amounts of ATP with an increase in Km(app) from 1.9 ± 0.2 to 5.3 ± 0.8 μM
and an increase in Vmax/Km(app) from 0.53 ± 0.05 to 0.9 ± 0.1. The saturation
behavior of Km(app) and Vmax/Km, with AA as the substrate,
is indicative of hyperbolic activation (i.e., partial activation).
Similar hyperbolic allostery has been observed for other LOX isozymes
with different allosteric regulators, such as soybean 15-LOX-1 with
oleyl sulfate and human 15-LOX-2 with
13(S)-HODE. These data
indicate the presence of an allosteric binding site in 5-LOX that
affects the catalysis by changing the microscopic rate constants of
5-LOX, as described in Scheme . From Scheme , eqs – allow for the determination of Ki, the strength of binding, α, the change in Km, β, the change in Vmax, and β/α, the change in Vmax/Km.

Kinetic Scheme for Allosteric Activation of 5-LOX
5-LOX catalysis including
hyperbolic partial activation induced by ATP. Similar hyperbolic allostery
has been observed for other LOX isozymes with different allosteric
regulators, such as soybean 15-LOX-1 with oleyl sulfate and human 15-LOX-2 with 13(S)-HODE.

Kinetic Parameters for ATP-Induced
Activation of 5-LOX
substrate	α	β	β/α	Ki (μM)	
AA	3.0 ± 0.4	5.4 ± 0.08	1.8 ± 0.2	8.0 ± 6	
5(S)-HpETE	1.6 ± 0.08	5.1 ± 0.1	3.3 ± 0.2	12 ± 5	
Hyperbolic fit
parameters of 5-LOX
with ATP and AA or 5(S)-HpETE as substrates.

A plot of Km(app) versus ATP concentration,
with AA as the substrate (Figure ), yielded
an α of 3.0 ± 0.4 and a Ki of
8 ± 6 μM, when fit with eq  (Table ). The values of α and Ki were then utilized in eq  and fit
to the Vmax/Km data, which yielded a β of 5.5 ± 0.5. The value of β
was also determined from the Vmax data
(fit with eq  and the values of α and Ki given above), which yielded a β of 5.4
± 0.08 (Figure ) and matched well with
the β value from the Vmax/Km plot. These values indicate mixed hyperbolic
allostery [α &gt; 1 (K-type inhibition), and β &gt; 1
(V-type
activation)], with the majority of the
kinetic change being seen in the value of Vmax. This larger Vmax change is best observed
by considering the Vmax/Km value, which is greater than 1 (β/α = 1.8
± 0.2) and indicates Vmax/Km allosteric activation. These hyperbolic data
suggest the formation of a catalytically active ternary complex (A·E·S)
between 5-LOX and ATP and are consistent with the previous finding
of an allosteric site in 5-LOX., The data are also consistent
with what was observed at saturating ATP concentrations (listed in
Table ).

Effect of ATP on the Km(app) of 5-LOX
with the AA substrate. The data are fit to eq  (Scheme ), where Km = 1.9 μM. α and Ki were determined to be 3.0 ± 0.4 and 8.0 ± 6 μM,
respectively.

Effect of ATP on the Vmax(app) of 5-LOX
with the AA substrate. The data are fit to eq  (Scheme ) with a Km of 1.9 μM, an α of 3, and a Ki of 8, where β was determined to be 5.4 ±
0.08.

Similar ATP titration experiments
were also performed with 5(S)-HpETE as the substrate,
which showed an α value
of 1.56 ± 0.08 (K-type inhibition) and a Ki value of 12 ± 5 μM (Table ), from the Km(app) plot (Figure ). The α value was half the α value
for AA activation, indicative of a weaker ATP allosteric effect on Km with 5(S)-HpETE as the substrate.
However, the Ki value was comparable to
that of AA activation, indicating similar ATP binding affinities and
most likely the same ATP binding site for both hydroperoxidation and
epoxidation. The β value was determined to be 5.1 ± 0.1
(Figure ), which is V-type activation, similar
to that seen for AA. The β/α ratio is nearly 2-fold greater
for 5(S)-HpETE (3.3 ± 0.2) than for AA (1.8
± 0.2), indicating that ATP activates the rate of substrate capture
for 5(S)-HpETE more so than AA. These results agree
with our kinetic results at saturating ATP concentrations (Table ), suggesting that the allosteric effect caused
by ATP binding has largely similar consequences for both the hydroperoxidation
of AA and the epoxidation of 5(S)-HpETE, but with
subtle differences in magnitude.

Effect of ATP on the Km(app) of 5-LOX
with the 5(S)-HpETE substrate. The data are fit to
eq  (Scheme ), with
a Km of 14 μM. α and Ki were determined to be 1.6 ± 0.08 and
12 ± 5 μM, respectively.

Effect of ATP on the Vmax(app) of 5-LOX
with the 5(S)-HpETE substrate. The data are fit to
eq  (Scheme ) with
a Km of 14 μM, an α of 1.6,
and a Ki of 12, where β was determined
to be 5.1 ± 0.1.

Endogenous and Exogenous Rates of Epoxide Formation
As mentioned
above, 5-LOX can produce LTA4 from AA sequentially
[first producing 5(S)-HpETE and then LTA4] or from 5(S)-HpETE directly. To improve our understanding
of the kinetic differences between endogenous 5(S)-HpETE epoxidation (generated in situ from AA)
and exogenous 5(S)-HpETE epoxidation [binding 5(S)-HpETE directly], steady-state experiments with AA and
5(S)-HpETE as substrates were performed by indirectly
observing epoxide formation from its decomposition product at 280
nm (5,12-diHETE). From Table , it is observed
that the Vmax values of epoxidation for
both AA and 5(S)-HpETE were the same. This implies
that hydrogen abstraction is a dominant rate-limiting step for Vmax of epoxidation because 5-LOX abstracts the
same hydrogen atom from 5(S)-HpETE for epoxidation
(C10), regardless of whether the 5(S)-HpETE is endogenous
(generated in situ) or exogenous (bound directly)
(Figure ). In contrast to the Vmax data, the Vmax/Km for epoxidation of endogenous 5(S)-HpETE was found to be 9-fold larger than the Vmax/Km for epoxidation of
exogenous 5(S)-HpETE. Considering that both endogenous
and exogenous 5(S)-HpETE share the same hydrogen
abstraction step, these data indicate there is a difference in their
rate-limiting steps prior to hydrogen atom abstraction. A saturating
level of ATP (200 μM) activated the Vmax and the Vmax/Km for both endogenous 5(S)-HpETE and exogenous
5(S)-HpETE epoxidation, as would be expected; however,
there were slight differences. ATP increased the Vmax of endogenous 5(S)-HpETE 6.5-fold,
relative to 4.8-fold for exogenous 5(S)-HpETE. ATP
increased the Vmax/Km of endogenous 5(S)-HpETE 2.4-fold, relative
to 3.9-fold for exogenous 5(S)-HpETE. The overall
similarity in the ATP activation of endogenous and exogenous 5(S)-HpETE is indicative of similar mechanisms. However, the
slight differences in ATP activation between endogenous and exogenous
5(S)-HpETE could be due to slight differences in
their microscopic rate constants or possibly experimental error.

Steady State Parameters of 5-LOX Epoxidation
of AA (Endogenous) and Epoxidation of 5(S)-HpETE
(Exogenous), with and without ATP
 	AA epoxidation
(endogenous)	5(S)-HpETE epoxidation (exogenous)	
[ATP] (μM)	relative Vmax	Km (μM)	relative Vmax/Km	relative Vmax	Km (μM)	relative Vmax/Km	
0	0.31 ± 0.01	1.6 ± 0.3	0.18 ± 0.04	0.33 ± 0.01	14 ± 1	0.023 ± 0.002	
200	2.0 ± 0.1	4.5 ± 0.7	0.44 ± 0.06	1.6 ± 0.09	19 ± 2	0.090 ± 0.01	
ATP change	6.5-fold	 	2.4-fold	4.8-fold	 	3.9-fold	
The Vmax of 5-LOX epoxidation of AA (endogenous), with no cofactors
added,
is normalized to the Vmax of 5-LOX hydroperoxidation
of AA (Table ). The values for 5(S)-HpETE epoxidation (exogenous) from Table  are listed again for clarity. For comparison to other studies, the
absolute kinetic activity of all of our wild-type 5-LOX preparations,
without ATP added, was ≈ 60 μmol/min/mg.

Competitive Substrate Capture Investigations
of AA and 5(S)-HpETE Catalysis
To further
investigate the kinetics
of AA and 5(S)-HpETE catalysis, a competitive substrate
capture experiment was performed with a mixture of [18O]AA
(0.5 μM) and unlabeled 5(S)-HpETE (0.5 μM).
The results without ATP demonstrated that the amount of 5,12-DiHETEs
produced from [18O]AA was larger than the amounts produced
from exogenous 5(S)-HpETE, with a measured (Vmax/Km)AA/(Vmax/Km)5(S)-HpETE epoxide efficiency
ratio of 1.8 ± 0.06. These results confirm the steady-state results
(vide supra) that 5-LOX is more likely to retain
the nascent 5(S)-HpETE in its active site than to
bind exogenous 5(S)-HpETE to generate the epoxide.
The competitive experiment was repeated with a saturating level of
ATP (200 μM), and the (Vmax/Km)AA/(Vmax/Km)5(S)-HpETE ratio increased to 2.2 ± 0.06, indicating an increase in the
epoxide efficiency of AA conversion, relative to that of 5(S)-HpETE conversion. This is in contrast to the steady-state
(Vmax/Km)AA/(Vmax/Km)5(S)-HpETE ratio, which
not only is larger than the competitive ratio (ratio of 8.6) but also
decreases with the addition of ATP (ratio of 6.4). These differences
between the two methods could be due to the fact that the competitive
measurements were performed with both substrates present while the
steady-state experiments included only one substrate at a time. As
seen previously for 15-LOX-1 and 15-LOX-2,, differences between competitive and steady-state measurements can
be indicative of allosteric effects by either the substrate or product.
Therefore, while these data confirm that the majority of LTA4 produced by 5-LOX is made from AA and not 5(S)-HpETE,
additional experiments are required to investigate why the steady-state
and competitive methods do not correlate. For comparison, Puustinen
et al. observed a (Vmax/Km)AA/(Vmax/Km)5(S)-HpETE epoxide efficiency ratio of approximately 3.2 for 5-LOX from the
human leukocyte homogenate, with ATP being present, while Wiseman et al. measured a (Vmax/Km)AA/(Vmax/Km)5(S)-HpETE ratio of 32 ± 1 for 5-LOX from rat PMNLs
in the presence of ATP, indicating possible
differences between species.

Solvent Effects of the Hydroperoxidation
and Epoxidation Kinetics
The mechanism of hydroperoxidation
for soybean 15-LOX,, human 12-LOX,, human 15-LOX-1,, and human 15-LOX-2 has been shown previously
to manifest multiple rate-limiting steps, defined by substrate diffusion,
hydrogen bond rearrangement, and hydrogen atom abstraction. However,
the mechanisms employed by 5-LOX for hydroperoxidation and epoxidation
are less well understood., The 5-LOX mechanism
for hydroperoxidation has historically been assumed to be similar
to that of other lipoxygenases, but little
experimental evidence has been found. The epoxidation reaction is
also proposed to proceed through a hydrogen atom abstraction mechanism,
similar to that of hydroperoxidation, which is supported by a large primary kinetic isotope effect of
&gt;10,,, and inhibition
of LTA4 formation by reductive inhibitors. On the basis of the data described above, a scheme has
been generated to represent the general steps of hydroperoxidation
and epoxidation (Scheme ). The scheme includes
rearrangement steps (k3 and k7) and hydrogen atom abstraction steps (k5 and k11) for both hydroperoxidation
and epoxidation, respectively. It should be noted that k11 includes both abstraction and product release. With
respect to ATP activation, previous work did not determine if molecular
steps in the reaction coordinate for either hydroperoxidation or epoxidation
are accelerated (Figure ) or if activation
proceeds through an alternative process that does not affect the catalytic
mechanism, such as protein stabilization.

Kinetic Scheme for 5-LOX Hydroperoxidation and Epoxidation (Dehydration)
5-LOX catalysis proceeds with
hydroperoxidation of AA to 5(S)-HpETE and either
product release or subsequent epoxidation (dehydration) to LTA4. This is based on a scheme originally published by Wiseman
et al. The final step (k11) includes both chemical and release steps.

In the work presented here, hydroperoxidation kinetic
studies of
AA in the absence of ATP revealed a normal solvent isotope effect
(SIE) for Vmax[AA] (1.8 ± 0.2) and
an inverse SIE for Vmax/Km[AA] (0.66 ± 0.3) (Table ). Under ATP activation (200 μM ATP), the normal SIE increased
for Vmax[AA] to 3.1 ± 0.6, while
the inverse SIE for Vmax/Km[AA] changed to a normal SIE of 1.8 ± 0.6, demonstrating
that ATP affects the molecular mechanisms of both substrate capture
and product release. In general, SIE values of 2–3 typically
correspond to general acid/base catalysis, while the extent of solvation
of catalytic bridges ranges from 1.5 to 4., Previous studies of LOX isozymes−, attribute their observed SIE results to a solvent-dependent hydrogen
transfer from multiple hydrogen bond rearrangements, presumably because
of an enzymatic conformational change upon substrate binding. Interestingly,
although all four LOX isozymes manifested SIEs, their magnitude and
temperature dependence varied, indicating subtle differences in their
rate-limiting steps. For 5-LOX, the magnitude of the normal SIE for Vmax[AA], with and without ATP added, indicates
a hydrogen bond rearrangement step (i.e., general conformational change),
similar to that seen for other LOX isozymes. The increase in the normal Vmax SIE value, with addition of ATP, indicates
that the hydrogen bond rearrangement step becomes more rate-limiting
with added ATP and that the activation of 5-LOX by ATP is in part
due to a change in its microscopic rate constants, such as increasing
the rate of hydrogen atom abstraction (vide infra). It should be noted that lower values of SIE (&lt;1.5) are typically
ascribed to proton transfer coupled to heavy atom motion in the transition
state or to increased viscosity of D2O relative to H2O. These are unlikely explanations for our data, given their larger
SIE values.

Solvent Isotope Effect (SIE) Values
for Hydroperoxidation of AA and Epoxidiation of 5(S)-HpETE
 	AA hydroperoxidation (234 nm)	5(S)-HpETE epoxidation (280 nm)	
[ATP] (μM)	Vmax SIE	Vmax/Km SIE	Vmax SIE	Vmax/Km SIE	
0	1.8 ± 0.2	0.66 ± 0.3	0.81 ± 0.1	0.49 ± 0.09	
200	3.1 ± 0.6	1.8 ± 0.6	2.6 ± 0.3	1.2 ± 0.2	
In contrast to the Vmax SIE, the Vmax/Km of AA manifests
an inverse SIE without ATP (SIE = 0.66 ± 0.3), which becomes
a normal SIE (SIE = 1.80 ± 0.61) upon addition of ATP. Previously,
our laboratory observed inverse SIE values for both Vmax and Vmax/Km for a soybean 15-LOX mutant and wild-type 15-LOX-2, which was ascribed
to the participation of a ferric–hydroxide moiety in the abstraction
of the hydrogen atom. It is possible that the observed inverse SIE
for 5-LOX with AA is also due to the ferric–hydroxide moiety;
however, because of its large error, it is difficult to state this
with certainty. Nonetheless, the change to a normal SIE upon addition
of ATP is significant and indicates a shift in the nature of the rate-determining
step, possibly from a dependence on hydrogen atom abstraction by the
ferric hydroxide to a dependence on hydrogen bond rearrangement. It
should be noted that Vmax/Km includes the bimolecular encounter of substrate and
enzyme, up to the first irreversible step (hydrogen atom abstraction),
but Vmax includes steps after enzyme substrate
complex formation, and therefore, the SIE observed for Vmax and Vmax/Km could be from the same step or from different steps.

Identical solvent dependence studies, with 5(S)-HpETE as a substrate, were also performed (Table ). Interestingly, the Vmax SIE
for 5(S)-HpETE epoxidation (Vmax SIE = 0.81 ± 0.1) was markedly different from that
for AA (Vmax SIE = 1.8 ± 0.2). This
result clearly demonstrates an inverse SIE for 5(S)-HpETE epoxidation and indicates the participation of the Fe(III)–OH
moiety in the hydrogen abstraction mechanism as a contributor to the
rate-limiting step (vide infra). Adding ATP, with
5(S)-HpETE as the substrate, increased the epoxidation
SIE to 2.6 ± 0.3. This increase in SIE is nearly identical to
that with AA as a substrate, showing that both processes, AA hydroperoxidation
and 5(S)-HpETE epoxidation, display an ATP-induced
increase in SIE, suggesting a shift in their rate-limiting step to
being more dependent on hydrogen bond rearrangement and less on the
hydrogen atom abstraction by the Fe(III)–OH moiety.

For
the Vmax/Km data, the 5(S)-HpETE epoxidation SIE is
0.49 ± 0.09. This value is similar to that seen previously for
AA hydroperoxidation (SIE = 0.66 ± 0.3) and indicates that the
rate-limiting step of Vmax/Km, for both AA hydroperoxidation and 5(S)-HpETE epoxidation, is dominated by the hydrogen atom abstraction
of the Fe(III)–OH moiety. After addition of ATP, the 5(S)-HpETE epoxidation SIE increased to 1.2 ± 0.2, similar
to the increase seen for the AA hydroperoxidation (SIE = 1.8 ±
0.6). This is consistent with a change in the rate-limiting step to
being more dependent on hydrogen bond rearrangement and less on hydrogen
atom abstraction. Considering that ATP activates both hydroperoxidation
and epoxidation to a similar extent and in a similar manner, it is
reasonable that for both processes, ATP increases the rate of hydrogen
atom abstraction and hence lowers its contribution to the rate-limiting
step.

In summary, the SIE results described above indicate that
both
hydrogen atom abstraction and hydrogen bond rearrangement are important
rate-limiting steps for AA hydroperoxidation and 5(S)-HpETE epoxidation. However, the importance of hydrogen atom abstraction
in the rate-limiting step increases for epoxidation and could explain
the rate for epoxidation being slower than that for hydroperoxidation
(vide infra). In addition, the ATP-induced allosteric
effect changes the solvent dependency of the rate-limiting step for
both hydroperoxidation and epoxidation, which cannot be explained
by an ATP-induced stabilization of the 5-LOX protein structure. Rather, the changes in SIE with the addition
of ATP suggest a shift in the rate-limiting step toward hydrogen bond
rearrangement relative to hydrogen atom abstraction for both hydroperoxidation
and epoxidation. Unfortunately, it could not determine if ATP affects
hydrogen atom abstraction directly, because isotopically labeled AA
is not readily available.

Viscosity Effects of the Hydroperoxidation
and Epoxidation Kinetics
To further probe the nature of the
rate-limiting step, viscosity
experiments in dextrose (η/η° = 1 and 3) were performed
in the absence and presence of 200 μM ATP (Table ). The (Vmax/Km°)/(Vmax/Km) for AA substrate was calculated
to be 1.5 ± 0.3 without ATP and 1.2 ± 0.2 with ATP, where Vmax/Km° has an η/η° of 1 and Vmax/Km has an η/η° of 3.
These data indicate that the rate of substrate capture is not diffusion-controlled,
with or without ATP. However, it is interesting to note that Vmax°/Vmax increased
from 1.0 ± 0.1 to 1.6 ± 0.2 upon ATP activation. Because
there is no viscosity effect seen for Vmax/Km, these data are best explained by
decreased translational diffusion rates and/or conformational changes
upon substrate binding,− the latter being consistent with
the SIE results.

Viscosity Effect Values for Hydroperoxidation
of AA and Epoxidiation of 5(S)-HpETE
 	AA hydroperoxidation (234 nm)	5(S)-HpETE epoxidation (280 nm)	
[ATP] (μM)	Vmax°/Vmax	(Vmax/Km°)/(Vmax/Km)	Vmax°/Vmax	(Vmax/Km°)/(Vmax/Km)	
0	1.0 ± 0.1	1.5 ± 0.3	1.0 ± 0.2	0.65 ± 0.1	
200	1.6 ± 0.2	1.2 ± 0.2	1.3 ± 0.2	1.6 ± 0.4	
In contrast to the viscosity effect with AA as the substrate, an
inverse viscosity effect can be seen on Vmax/Km with 5(S)-HpETE
as the substrate [(Vmax/Km°)/(Vmax/Km) = 0.65 ± 0.1]. Considering
there is no viscosity effect observed under the same conditions for
the faster reaction of 5-LOX and AA, the inverse viscosity effect
on Vmax/Km with 5(S)-HpETE appears to arise through a different
mechanism. A change in the dielectric environment could result in an inverse effect, but the dielectric constant
of water (∼80) is reduced by only 10% with the addition of
30% by mass dextrose. Moreover, the finding
that this inverse viscosity effect is removed by the addition of ATP
also suggests dielectric constants are not inducing the effect. Experiments
with PEG-8000 were attempted to confirm that the viscosity effect
is independent of a change in dielectric constants; however, PEG was
observed to inactivate 5-LOX, and thus, no conclusion was possible
(data not shown). The only other hypothesis for the inverse viscosity
effect on (Vmax/Km°)/(Vmax/Km) is due to a partially rate-determining
conformational change during catalysis, which is supported by the fact that the SIE results also indicate
a conformational change. Upon addition of ATP, the (Vmax/Km°)/(Vmax/Km) viscosity effect with 5(S)-HpETE as a substrate
becomes 1.6 ± 0.4. Given the slow rate of 5(S)-HpETE epoxidation relative to AA hydroperoxidation, and the fact
that no viscosity effect was seen for AA hydroperoxidation, the normal
viscosity effect on 5(S)-HpETE Vmax/Km induced by ATP is most
likely not due to a diffusion-controlled mechanism. Therefore, the
small (Vmax/Km°)/(Vmax/Km) viscosity effect with ATP may possibly be
due to a conformational change during catalysis. The Vmax°/Vmax viscosity effect
did not change upon addition of ATP (1.0 ± 0.2 to 1.3 ±
0.2), indicating diffusion is not rate-limiting, with or without ATP.
It should be noted that only dextrose allowed for viscosity measurements.
It is typical of LOX isozymes to be sensitive to high concentrations
of viscogens;, however, the data would engender
more confidence if another viscogen could manifest similar results.
Future experiments are needed to probe the nature of the viscogen
effect further.

Conclusion
It has been known in
the literature for many years that 5-LOX has
two catalytic functions, hydroperoxidation of AA (oxidation of PUFA)
and epoxidation of 5(S)-HpETE (dehydration of hydroperoxide),
but a detailed kinetic investigation comparing these two processes
has never been undertaken. In the work presented here, we demonstrate
that the Vmax of 5(S)-HpETE
epoxidation is 3-fold slower than the Vmax of AA hydroperoxidation and that the corresponding Vmax/Km is 23-fold slower,
indicating that both the rate of substrate capture and the rate of
product release are less efficient for epoxidation than for hydroperoxidation.
These rate differences could be due to the fact that the hydrogen
atom is abstracted from C7 for hydroperoxidation of AA, as opposed
to C10 for epoxidation of 5(S)-HpETE, as discussed
in the introductory section (Figure ). This
hypothesis is supported by the SIE results, which indicate a stronger
dependence on hydrogen atom abstraction for epoxidation than hydroperoxidation.
In addition, if one measures the rate of epoxidation of endogenous
and exogenous 5(S)-HpETE [i.e., 5(S)-HpETE generated in situ from AA and 5(S)-HpETE bound directly, respectively], one observes that
their Vmax values are the same. However,
there is a 9-fold larger Vmax/Km for endogenous 5(S)-HpETE than for
5(S)-HpETE epoxidation. Considering that the Vmax is the same for both processes, the rate
difference appears to be due to a difference in a microscopic rate
constant before hydrogen atom abstraction, possibly a structural rearrangement
[k3 for hydroperoxidation of AA and k7 for epoxidation of 5(S)-HpETE].
In the recently determined crystal structure for human 5-LOX, a unique
FY cork feature is observed that blocks one possible entrance to the
active site. We hypothesize that a difference
in the rearrangement of the FY cork could be the source of the kinetic
difference between AA and 5(S)-HpETE binding, highlighting
future research directions for studying the epoxidation mechanism.
Importantly, these results indicate that 5-LOX has overcome a significant
catalytic barrier of epoxidation by retaining the 5(S)-HpETE in its active site for sequential epoxidation and not binding
free 5(S)-HpETE directly.

Along this same line
of investigation, it was determined that ATP
activates the Vmax of AA (4.9-fold) and
the Vmax of 5(S)-HpETE
by a similar degree (4.8-fold). However, ATP activates the Vmax/Km to a lesser
extent [1.7-fold for AA and 3.9-fold for 5(S)-HpETE],
indicating ATP affects substrate capture and product release differently.
Further titration of 5-LOX with ATP yielded hyperbolic kinetic parameters
supporting the similarity between the activation of hydroperoxidation
and epoxidation. Both processes displayed similar V-type activation,
but the extent of K-type inhibition was greater with AA as the substrate,
resulting in a greater activation for Vmax/Km for 5(S)-HpETE.

Inverse Vmax/Km SIE values observed for 5-LOX indicate the rate-limiting
step for substrate capture is dominated by the hydrogen atom abstraction
by the Fe(III)–OH moiety (k5 for
hydroperoxidation and k11 for epoxidation).
However, ATP shifts the inverse Vmax/Km SIE for both AA and 5(S)-HpETE
to normal SIE values, indicating an increased dependence of the rate-limiting
step on solvent. Given the previous assignment of the SIE to hydrogen
bond rearrangement for other LOX isozymes,−, it appears that addition of ATP increases the dependence of the
rate-limiting step on hydrogen bond rearrangement (k3 and k7) relative to hydrogen
atom abstraction (k5 and k11). Considering that neither mechanism is limited by
substrate diffusion but both substrate capture rates are limited by
hydrogen atom abstraction (inverse SIE), it appears that the 23-fold
faster rate for hydroperoxidation is due to an increased rate of hydrogen
atom abstraction compared to the rate of epoxidation. In addition,
it appears that ATP increases the rate of hydrogen atom abstraction,
such that its contribution to the rate-limiting step is decreased.
This hypothesis is remarkable because the position of the abstracted
hydrogen atom for hydroperoxidation and epoxidation is distinct (C7
and C10, respectively), and the overall structure of the substrates
is also distinct [AA vs 5(S)-HpETE]. However, subtle
changes in the positioning of the abstracted hydrogen relative to
the Fe(III)–OH moiety have an effect on LOX rates,, and therefore, substrate differences and/or addition of ATP would
likely affect the rate of 5-LOX. We are currently investigating the
molecular mechanism of ATP activation further to gain molecular insight
into how the rate of hydrogen atom abstraction is increased.

With respect to the larger implications of these ATP results, 5-LOX
has a unique role in the inflammatory response by catalyzing the formation
of potent pro- and anti-inflammatory molecules, and as such, the cell
has devised several strategies for regulating its control.,,,,, Along these
lines, we note that ATP has a well-established role as an upregulated
mediator in inflammation− and that extracellular ATP is
measured at elevated levels for patients suffering from inflammatory
diseases, such as chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) and
emphysema, which are known to involve leukotrienes as causal factors
in their pathology.− Lommatzsch et al. recently established that ATP concentrations in
bronchoalveolar lavage fluid increased from &lt;10 μM in a control
group of patients to &gt;300 μM in patients with increasing
stages
of COPD. They also presented in vitro results suggesting
that increasing concentrations of extracellular ATP, from 1 to 100
μM, increased the chemotactic index of human neutrophils, an
effect that saturated and resisted any further changes even when probed
with 1000 μM extracellular ATP. While a direct link to 5-LOX activity was not tested, we note that
these results correlate with our measured Ki of ATP-induced activation for 5-LOX (∼10 μM), suggesting
a possible connection between the increasing chemotactic index and
ATP-induced activation of 5-LOX in disease. There is also evidence
of intracellular compartmentalization of ATP itself up to low millimolar
concentrations and for high micromolar
amounts of ATP being released extracellularly from HEK293 and ACN
neuroblastoma cells through nonlytic ATP release, further demonstrating that the concentration of ATP necessary
for ATP-induced activation is biologically relevant. We reason that
these divergent lines of evidence could suggest that the ATP-induced
allosteric effect of 5-LOX we have characterized herein may be another
biologically relevant form of 5-LOX regulation through which inflammation
control can be modulated. The distinction between extracellular and
intracellular ATP is an important one, and while ATP is thought to
be released from neutrophils, 5-LOX activation
would still require an elevated intracellular ATP concentration prior
to release. The critical question is whether the ATP concentration
in the 5-LOX-localized cellular compartment is changing as the experiments
described above predict, suggesting future directions for in vivo research.

The
authors declare no
competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
We thank
Qiangli Zhang for her assistance in operating the
LC–MS/MS instrument and Eric K. Hoobler for thoughtful discussions
and advice.

Abbreviations
AAarachidonic acid

CLPcoactosin-like protein

CMCcritical micelle concentration

5,12-DiHETE5,12-dihydroxy-6(E),8(E),10(E),14(Z)-eicosatetraenoic acid

FLAP5-LOX-activating protein

5(S)-HETE5(S)-hydroxy-6(E),8(Z),11(Z),14(Z)-eicosatetraenoic acid

5(S)-HpETE5(S)-hydroperoxy-6(E),8(Z),11(Z),14(Z)-eicosatetraenoic
acid

13(S)-HpODE13(S)-hydroperoxy-9(Z),11(E)-octadecadienoic acid

kcatrate constant for
product release

kcat/Kmrate
constant for substrate capture

LOXlipoxygenase

5-LOXhuman 5-lipoxygenase

12-LOXhuman platelet 12-lipoxygenase

15-LOX-1human reticulocyte
15-lipoxygenase-1

15-LOX-2human epithelial 15-lipoxygenase-2

soybean LOX-1soybean lipoxygenase-1

LTA4leukotriene
A4

LTB4leukotriene B4

LXA4lipoxin A4

LXB4lipoxin B4

PLATpolycystin-1/lipoxygenase/α-toxin

PMNLpolymorphonuclear
leukocyte

PUFApolyunsaturated
fatty acid

RvD1resolvin D1

RvE1resolvin E1

SIEsolvent isotope effect

hydroperoxidationoxidation of AA

epoxidationdehydration of a hydroperoxide to form an epoxide

endogenous 5(S)-HpETE5(S)-HpETE generated in situ from AA

exogenous 5(S)-HpETEfree 5(S)-HpETE
in solution.

