Potassium ions moving from the
inside to the outside of a cell through a potassium channel first
move into a water-filled cavity within the channel and then pass through
the narrow selectivity filter that defines the ion selectivity of
the filter before being released to the outside (Figure ). The central cavity is lined
by hydrophobic amino acids, ensuring a rapid flow of K+ ions through the cavity. The hydrophobic
lining of the central cavity provides a potential binding surface
for small hydrophobic molecules, and X-ray crystallographic studies
have shown that tetrabutylammonium (TBA) ions block potassium channel
KcsA by binding in the cavity, blocking entry of K+ ions
into the selectivity filter., Increasing the length
of the acyl chains in a tetraalkylammonium ion increases its binding
affinity, showing the importance of hydrophobic interactions for binding. The linings of the central pores of pentameric
ligand-gated ion channels have also been shown to be hydrophobic;
blockage of these channels by quaternary ammonium ions and by hydrophobic,
positively charged drugs such as lidocaine again follows from binding
to the hydrophobic surface of the central pore.

Structure of KcsA. Cross sectional view of the KcsA tetramer in
a surface representation showing the selectivity filter and the central
cavity. The surface is colored by polarity: gray, hydrophobic; blue,
positive; red, negative. The horizontal lines show the approximate
position of the surrounding lipid bilayer. The coordinates were from
Protein Data Bank entry 1K4C.

Fatty acid molecules have also been suggested to
bind in the central cavities of potassium channels, blocking ion flux
through the channel.− The observation that mutations in just one of the
four subunits of potassium channel Kv1.1 led to a loss of block by
fatty acids suggested that there was a single binding site per channel. We recently used electron paramagnetic resonance
(EPR) to study binding of the spin-labeled fatty acid 14-(4,4-dimethyloxazolidinyl-N-oxyl)stearic acid (14-SASL) to KcsA. We observed a strongly immobilized signal that we attributed
to fatty acid bound in the cavity but were unable to determine the
number of binding sites per channel; assuming one site per channel
gave a binding constant in the range of ∼0.1–1 μM.

The observation that 14-SASL was strongly
immobilized on KcsA suggested that it might also be possible to study
fatty acid binding using fluorescent analogues of fatty acids, because
fluorescence emission spectra can be sensitive to environmental mobility
as well as to environmental polarity. In
particular, the fluorescence emission spectrum of the dansyl probe
shows a marked time dependence on the nanosecond fluorescence time
scale, because of solvent relaxation around the excited state dansyl
group, resulting in a shift of the emission spectrum to longer wavelengths
with increasing times after excitation. The extent to which solvent can relax around a dansyl group during
the time it remains in the excited state depends on the mobility of
the solvent; large shifts in the fluorescence emission spectrum to
long wavelengths are expected when the solvent is mobile, but only
small shifts are expected for a rigid solvent. The environment of
a dansyl group bound to a site on a protein will consist of, at least
in part, amino acid residues whose mobility is likely to be limited
on the nanosecond fluorescence time scale; in contrast, a dansyl group
embedded in a lipid bilayer will experience an environment with much
greater mobility. This suggests that the fluorescence emission spectrum
for a dansyl-containing probe bound to a reconstituted membrane protein
may contain separate components because of protein-bound and lipid-bound
probe. We show here that this is the case for 11-dansylaminoundecanoic
acid (Dauda) bound to KcsA and that Dauda can be used to characterize
the fatty acid binding site in the cavity of KcsA.

Experimental Procedures
Dioleoylphosphatidylcholine
(DOPC) was obtained from Avanti Polar Lipids (Alabaster, AL). Dauda
was obtained from Axxora (San Diego, CA). Fatty acids were obtained
from Sigma, and tetrabutylammonium bromide was obtained from Aldrich.

Purification and Reconstitution of KcsA
KcsA was purified
as described by Marius et al. It was
reconstituted into lipid bilayers by mixing lipid and KcsA in cholate
at a DOPC:KcsA tetramer molar ratio of 40:1, followed by dilution
into buffer [20 mM Hepes and 100 mM KCl (pH 7.2)] to decrease the
concentration of cholate below its critical micelle concentration
and to re-form membranes.

Fluorescence Measurements
Fluorescence was recorded
on a model 8000C fluorimeter (SLM, Urbana, IL) at 25 °C. Dauda
was added directly to the fluorescence cuvette containing reconstituted
KcsA from a 2 or 0.2 mM stock solution in methanol. Concentrations
of Dauda and KcsA were determined using molar extinction coefficients
of 4800 and 34850 M–1 cm–1 for
Dauda at 335 nm and KcsA monomer at 280 nm, respectively. Fluorescence
intensities were measured at 450 nm with excitation at 345 nm, unless
otherwise stated. Values for the intensity of the signal measured
in the absence of Dauda were subtracted from those measured in the
presence of Dauda to give the fluorescence intensity caused by Dauda
emission.

The significant light scatter observed in samples
containing high concentrations of protein resulted in a decrease in
the observed intensity of Dauda emission. This was corrected for using
NADH as a nonbinding fluorescence molecule with excitation and emission
characteristics similar to those of Dauda; the fluorescence intensity of NADH (10 μM) was measured in
the absence and presence of KcsA with excitation and emission wavelengths
of 345 and 450 nm, respectively, and a set of correction factors was
generated by comparing the measured fluorescence intensity in the
presence of a given concentration of KcsA to that in the absence of
KcsA.

It was also necessary to correct for the inner filter
effect, observed at high Dauda concentrations. Fluorescence
intensities were measured for Dauda solutions in methanol as a function
of Dauda concentration, with excitation and emission wavelengths of
345 and 450 nm, respectively. At low Dauda concentrations, fluorescence
intensities increased linearly with an increasing Dauda concentration,
but at high concentrations, the fluorescence intensity was reduced
because of the inner filter effect; comparison of the observed fluorescence
intensities at high concentrations with those expected by extrapolation
of the values observed at low concentrations gave the required set
of correction factors.

The reported fluorescence intensities
represent averages of triplicate measurements from two or three separate
reconstitutions.

Analysis of Fluorescence Titrations
As described later,
titrations measuring fluorescence intensities of Dauda at 450 nm were
fit to the sum of a saturable and a nonsaturable component, corresponding
to binding to the cavity of KcsA and to partitioning into the lipid
bilayer, respectively. Binding of the saturable component was described
by the equationwhere Lt and Pt are the total concentrations of Dauda and
KcsA tetramer, respectively, n is the number of saturable
binding sites per KcsA tetramer, Kd is
the dissociation constant for binding of Dauda to the saturable sites,
and Lb is the concentration of Dauda bound
to the saturable sites. The observed fluorescence intensity measured
at 450 nm, Fobs, is then given byHere the first term refers to the saturable
component, and Cs is the constant relating
fluorescence intensity to the concentration of Dauda bound to the
saturable sites. The second term refers to the nonsaturable component
due to partitioning into the lipid bilayer, the extent of which will
depend on the unbound concentration of Dauda (Lt – Lb) and on the concentration
of lipid, given by the concentration of protein Pt and the molar ratio of lipid:protein; the constant Cns is a composite, including a term relating
the fluorescence intensity to the concentration of lipid-bound Duada,
the partition coefficient, and the lipid:protein molar ratio, and
is treated simply as a variable in the fitting procedure.

Titrations
were performed as a function of KcsA concentration at a fixed Dauda
concentration and as a function of Dauda concentration at a fixed
KcsA concentration, and a global fit of the fluorescence intensities
to eq  was performed using the nonlinear least-squares
routine in SigmaPlot (SPSS Inc., Chicago, IL).

Competition between TBA and Fatty Acids
Assuming a
single site at which Dauda and TBA can bind to the KcsA tetramer,
the binding equilibria can be written aswith dissociation constants of K1 and K2 for binding of Dauda
and TBA, respectively. In the absence of TBA and under conditions
where Dauda is in excess over KcsA so that the free concentration
of Dauda is equal to the total concentration, the fraction of the
sites on KcsA occupied by Dauda, [P·Dauda]/Pt, is given bywhere [Dauda] is the total Dauda concentration.
In the presence of TBA, this becomeswhereand where it is again assumed that the concentration
of TBA is much higher than that of KcsA so that the free concentration
of TBA is equal to its total concentration, [TBA].

As described
below, competition between TBA and Dauda was studied by incubating
KcsA with a series of fixed concentrations of TBA and then titrating
with Dauda. The Dauda titration data were then fitted to eq  to give the corresponding values of Keff, assuming a value for n of 1. The
values for Keff as a function of TBA concentration
were then fit to eq  to give the dissociation
constant for TBA, K2.

Competition
between Dauda and nonfluorescent fatty acids for binding to KcsA was
studied by titration with a fatty acid at a fixed Dauda concentration.
The data were then fit to the equationwith Keff given
by eq  but with the concentration of TBA replaced
by that of fatty acid, and with Fmax and Fmin being the fluorescent values for fully KcsA-bound
and non-KcsA-bound Dauda, respectively.

Fitting Fluorescence Emission Spectra
Fluorescence
emission spectra of the dansyl group have been shown to fit to the
equation for a skewed Gaussian:where Fo is the
maximal fluorescence intensity, F is the fluorescence
intensity at wavelength λ, λmax is the wavelength
at the peak maximum, ωλ is the peak width at
half-height, and b is the skew parameter. Fluorescence
emission spectra were fit to single skewed Gaussians (eq ) or to a sum of skewed Gaussians using the nonlinear least-squares
routine in SigmaPlot.

Results
Binding of Dauda to KcsA
The fluorescence emission
spectrum of Dauda in water is compared to those of Dauda bound to
lipid bilayers and to bovine serum albumin (BSA) in Figure A. The emission spectrum for Dauda in buffer is
of lower intensity and shifted to a longer wavelength than those for
Dauda located in the hydrophobic environments provided by a lipid
bilayer or by the fatty acid binding sites in BSA. Importantly, however,
the fluorescence emission maximum for Dauda bound to BSA is at a lower
wavelength than that for Dauda in a lipid bilayer (Figure A).

Fluorescence emission spectra of Dauda. (A) Dauda (10
μM) in buffer and in the presence of DOPC (75 μM) and
BSA (20 mM). (B) Dauda in the presence of KcsA reconstituted with
DOPC with excitation at 345 nm (a and b) or 280 nm (c). The concentration
of the KcsA tetramer was 0.19 μM, and concentrations of Dauda
were 0.3 (a) and 2 μM (b and c). The dotted lines show best
fits to one, two, or three skewed Gaussians, as described in the text,
giving the parameters listed in Table .

Fluorescence Emission Parameters for
Dauda
component	λmax (nm)	ωλ (nm)	b	
water	557 ± 3	102 ± 1	0.20 ± 0.01	
DOPC	512 ± 1	84 ± 3	0	
KcsA	469 ± 1	78 ± 2	0.37 ± 0.02	
Fluorescence emission spectra shown
in Figure  were fit to one or more skewed
Gaussians (eq ) as described in the text. λmax is the wavelength at the peak maximum, ωλ the peak width at half-height, and b the skew parameter.

Figure B shows fluorescence
emission spectra of Dauda bound to KcsA reconstituted in DOPC; the
spectra clearly contain more than one component. Fluorescence can
be excited directly at 345 nm (curves a and b) or indirectly at 280
nm by the transfer of fluorescence energy from the Trp residues in
KcsA (curve c). As shown, when excited at 280 nm, the emission spectrum
is dominated by emission at low wavelengths. Because the efficiency
of fluorescence energy transfer between donor and acceptor groups
is strongly dependent on the distance between the groups, this suggests that fluorescence emission at low
wavelengths corresponds to Dauda bound directly to KcsA, for which
Trp–dansyl distances will be shorter than for Dauda located
in the lipid bilayer component of the membrane.

Fluorescence
emission spectra of the dansyl group have the shape of a skewed Gaussian
(eq ). The emission
spectrum for Dauda in water (Figure A) was
fit to this equation, giving the parameters listed in Table . The emission spectrum for Dauda in the presence
of DOPC (Figure A) was then fit to the sum
of two skewed Gaussians, corresponding to Dauda in water and bound
in the lipid bilayer, with the parameters for the aqueous component
fixed at the values listed in Table , giving
the values for Dauda in the lipid bilayer (Table ). The emission spectrum for Dauda in the presence of KcsA
with excitation at 280 nm was then fit to the sum of three skewed
Gaussians, with the parameters for the lipid-bound and aqueous components
fixed at the values listed in Table , giving
the values for the KcsA-bound component again listed in Table . Finally, the spectra obtained at 0.3 and 2 μM
Dauda with excitation at 345 nm (curves a and b, Figure B) were fit to the sum of three skewed Gaussians with the
parameters fixed at the values given in Table ; the good fits obtained show that the experimental emission spectra
can indeed be represented by the sum of KcsA-bound, lipid-bound, and
aqueous components. The amplitudes of the KcsA-bound, lipid-bound,
and aqueous components giving the best fits to the emission spectra
excited at 345 nm were 2.14 ± 0.01, 0 ± 0.01, and 0.36 ±
0.01, respectively, at 0.3 μM Dauda and 3.40 ± 0.01, 0.39
± 0.02, and 2.97 ± 0.01, respectively, at 2.0 μM Dauda.
The low intensity for the lipid-bound component is consistent with
weak binding of Dauda to DOPC, described by an effective dissociation
constant (Kd) of ∼270 μM.

Confirmation that the blue-shifted peak
centered at 469 nm arises from binding of Dauda to the central cavity
of KcsA comes from competition experiments with TBA. A single TBA
ion binds in the central cavity of KcsA,, and the effects
of fatty acids and tetraalkylammonium ions on channel function are
competitive. As shown in Figure A, incubation of KcsA with TBA results in a decreased
fluorescence emission at low wavelengths, where the spectra are dominated
by the KcsA-bound component, with no effects at higher wavelengths;
the effects of TBA increase with increasing concentration as expected
for simple competition between Dauda and TBA for binding to the central
cavity in KcsA. Addition of oleic acid also results in a decrease
in intensity for the 469 nm component (Figure B), showing that binding of Dauda and oleic acid to the central cavity
is also competitive.

Effects of TBA and oleic acid on fluorescence emission
spectra of Dauda in the presence of KcsA. (A) Emission spectra in
the absence of TBA (a) and in the presence of 5 (b), 10 (c), and 20
mM TBA (d). (B) Emission spectra in the absence of oleic acid (a)
and in the presence of 10 (b), 50 (c), 100 (d), and 300 μM oleic
acid (e). The Dauda and KcsA tetramer concentrations were 2 and 0.19
μM, respectively, and fluorescence was excited at 345 nm.

Number of Binding Sites for Dauda on KcsA
KcsA was
titrated with Dauda, and fluorescence intensities were measured at
450 nm, at which wavelength the spectra are dominated by Dauda bound
to the central cavity. Titrations as a function of Dauda concentration
(Figure B) showed a saturable component at
low concentrations of Dauda and a nonsaturable component resulting
in a linear increase in fluorescence intensity at higher concentrations.
The data fit to eq  with a dissociation constant
(Kd) for Dauda of 0.47 ± 0.10 μM
and a number of binding sites per tetramer (n) of
0.94 ± 0.06 (Figure ).

Titrations with Dauda.
Fluorescence intensities at 450 nm were measured for (A) 0.2 (○)
and 1 (□) μM Dauda in the presence of the given concentrations
of the KcsA tetramer and (B) 0.09 (○), 0.19 (□), and
0.37 (△) μM KcsA tetramer in the presence of the given
concentration of Dauda. A global fit of the data to eq  gave a dissociation constant (Kd) for Dauda of 0.47 ± 0.10 μM and a number of binding
sites per tetramer (n) of 0.94 ± 0.06.

Binding of TBA to KcsA
As shown in Figure , incubation of KcsA with TBA results in weakened binding
of Dauda. However, the decrease in fluorescence intensity seen when
TBA is added to KcsA preincubated with Dauda is very slow (Figure ). The decrease in fluorescence intensity as a function
of time fits to a single-exponential process with the rates listed
in Table . The observation that the rate of
displacement of Dauda by TBA is independent of the concentration of
TBA (Table ) shows that the rate of TBA binding
is controlled by some initial slow step before the actual binding
event. If TBA can enter the central cavity of a potassium channel
only when the channel is open, this slow step is presumably opening
of the channel, which will be slow for KcsA at pH 7.2 as KcsA is a
proton-gated channel., Interestingly, in contrast to
the slow binding of TBA, the increase in fluorescence intensity observed
upon addition of Dauda to KcsA is complete within the mixing time
of the experiment (Figure , inset), so that
Dauda does not require the channel to be open for it to bind to its
binding site in the cavity.

Rate Constants for Displacement of
Dauda from KcsA by TBA
[TBA] (mM)	rate constant (s–1)	
5	0.0009 ± 0.0001	
10	0.0009 ± 0.0001	
20	0.001 ± 0.0001	
The data shown in Figure  were fit to single-exponential decays giving the
rates listed.

Displacement of bound Dauda by tetrabutylammonium (TBA) ion. KcsA
was incubated with 0.2 μM Dauda and the fluorescence intensity
measured at 450 nm, with excitation at 280 nm. TBA was then added
to give concentrations of 5 (A), 10 (B), and 20 mM (C), and the fluorescence
intensity was monitored as a function of time (···).
The data were fit to single-exponential decays (—) with the
rates listed in Table . The inset shows the
rapid increase in fluorescence intensity observed upon addition of
Dauda (1.0 μM) to KcsA at the time marked by the arrow; the
horizontal line corresponds to 100 s.

Determination of Binding Constants for Fatty Acids and TBA
KcsA was incubated with fixed concentrations of Dauda and then
titrated with oleic acid to yield a dissociation constant for oleic
acid (Figure ). The data fit to a simple competitive
model (see eq ), giving dissociation constants
for oleic acid of 3.02 ± 0.42 and 2.58 ± 0.27 μM measured
at 0.3 and 2 μM Dauda, respectively, assuming a dissociation
constant of 0.47 μM for Dauda. Similar titrations were performed
with a range of other unsaturated fatty acids, giving the dissociation
constants listed in Table .

Fatty Acid Dissociation Constants
for Binding to the KcsA Cavity
fatty acid	chain	Kd (μM)	
myristoleic acid	C14:1	27.1 ± 2	
palmitoleic acid	C16:1	5.0 ± 0.6	
oleic acid	C18:1	2.9 ± 0.2	
ecosenoic acid	C20:1	2.6 ± 0.1	
erucic acid	C22:1	16.4 ± 2.4	
linoleic
acid	C18:2	3.0 ± 0.4	
linolenic acid	C18:3	5.8 ± 1.4	
arachidonic acid	C20:4	3.0 ± 0.4	
Determined by displacement of Dauda
assuming a dissociation constant for Dauda of 0.47 μM.

Chain length followed by the number
of double bonds.

Fluorescence titrations with oleic acid. KcsA (0.19 μM tetramer)
was incubated with 0.3 (○) and 2 μM Dauda (□),
and fluorescence intensities were then measured after addition of
oleic acid to the given concentration. The solid lines show fits to
the competitive binding model (see eq ) with Kd values for oleic acid of 3.02 ± 0.42
and 2.58 ± 0.27 μM calculated from the data at 0.3 and
2 μM Dauda, respectively, assuming a Kd of 0.47 μM for Dauda.

Because binding of TBA to KcsA is very slow, the
binding constant for TBA was determined by incubating KcsA with TBA
overnight, followed by titration with Dauda (Figure A). The data were fit to eq , giving
effective Kd values for Dauda in the presence
of TBA, which were then fit to eq  giving a
dissociation constant for TBA of 1.2 ± 0.1 mM, again assuming
a dissociation constant of 0.47 μM for Dauda (Figure B).

Fluorescence titrations with Dauda in the presence of
TBA. (A) KcsA (0.19 μM tetramer) was incubated with the following
concentrations of TBA for 3 h: 0 (○), 5 (□), 10 (△),
and 20 mM (▽). Fluorescence intensities were then determined
in the presence of the given concentrations of Dauda. Each curve was
then fit to eq  with the number of binding
sites per tetramer (n) fixed at 1, giving the effective
dissociation constants (Kd, in micromolar)
for Dauda plotted in panel B as a function of TBA concentration. The
solid line in panel B shows a fit to the competitive binding model
(eq ) giving a value for Kd for TBA of 1.2 ± 0.2 mM, assuming a Kd of 0.47 μM for Dauda.

Discussion
Central Cavity of K+ Channels
A prominent
feature of the structure of potassium channels is the central water-filled
cavity lined with hydrophobic residues, located just below the narrow
selectivity filter (Figure ). X-ray crystallographic studies have shown that TBA ions
block the channel by binding in the cavity, with
hydrophobic interactions between the butyl chains and the wall of
the cavity contributing to the binding affinity. A wide range of charged drug molecules have also been suggested
to bind to this same site in many potassium channels, based on mutagenesis
experiments.−

Potassium channels can also be blocked by binding
of fatty acids., In particular, polyunsaturated
fatty acids and endocannabinoids such as arachidonoylethanolamide
(anandamide) derived from them have been shown to block potassium
channels in the micromolar concentration range.− Many of these channels are also blocked by simpler fatty acids such
as the monounsaturated oleic acid, with oleic acid blocking at lower
concentrations than polyunsaturated fatty acids in some cases.,− Voltage-gated sodium channels are also blocked by
both polyunsaturated fatty acids and oleic acid. Although it has been suggested that the effects of fatty
acids on ion channels could be mediated indirectly through effects
on the mechanical properties of the lipid bilayer surrounding the
channel (reviewed in ref ()), it has also been suggested, on the basis of mutagenesis
experiments, that channel block follows from binding to the central
cavity.,,

Dauda Binding to KcsA
Here we show that the fluorescent
fatty acid Dauda can be used to characterize the binding of a fatty
acid to the cavity in KcsA. The fluorescence emission spectrum for
Dauda in the presence of KcsA contains three components, corresponding
to KcsA-bound and lipid-bound Dauda together with unbound Dauda (Figure ). The KcsA-bound component is reduced in intensity
in the presence of the TBA ion (Figure A),
showing that Dauda binds in the central cavity of KcsA. Fluorescence
titrations (Figure ) give a number of binding
sites for Dauda of 0.94 ± 0.06 per tetramer. The observation
of one binding site per KcsA tetramer, together with the competition
with TBA ions for binding, suggests a binding site close to the central
symmetry axis of the pore and close to the selectivity filter. The
positively charged TBA ion binds with its charged nitrogen close to
the location of the K+ ion whose position is resolved in
the cavity in the absence of the TBA ion. It is possible that the carboxyl group on Dauda occupies a position
similar to that occupied by the nitrogen atom of the TBA ion, interacting
with the innermost potassium ion in the selectivity filter, an interaction
of the type suggested to be important for the binding of antiarrhythmic
chromanol 293B in the cavity of Kv7.1.

The marked shift to lower wavelengths for the emission spectrum
for KcsA-bound Dauda relative to lipid-bound Dauda (Table ) could reflect a difference in hydrophobicity but
could also reflect strong immobilization of the bound Dauda on the
cavity walls because the emission spectrum of the dansyl group is
strongly dependent on environmental mobility; in earlier EPR studies using the spin-labeled fatty acid 14-SASL,
we also detected strong immobilization upon binding to KcsA.

Effect of Fatty Acid Structure on Binding in the Cavity
The dissociation constant for Dauda was determined to be 0.47 μM
(Figure ). Dauda is displaced from its binding
site by a variety of fatty acids, with the dissociation constants
listed in Table . The strength of binding
of the monounsaturated fatty acids increases with an increasing chain
length from myristoleic acid (C14) to ecosenoic acid (C20) but then
falls again to erucic acid (C22). The decrease in the dissociation
constant from C14 to C16 by a factor of 5.4 (Table ) is smaller than that expected from simple hydrophobicity
arguments; the free energy change of −3.63 kJ/mol per CH2 group for the partitioning of long chain alcohols into lipid
bilayers gives an expected change in
the dissociation constant of a factor of 18.7. The changes in dissociation
constant from C16 to C20 are even smaller than that between C14 and
C16 and, combined with the observed increase in dissociation constant
from C20 to C22, suggest that the fatty acid binding site has an optimal
size matching a C20 chain. Increasing the number of double bonds in
the chain has a relatively weak effect on the dissociation constant,
that for arachidonic acid being the same for mono- and polyunsaturated
fatty acids (Table ).

The dissociation
constants for KcsA listed in Table  are comparable
with the concentrations of fatty acids blocking mammalian potassium
channels. For example, 50% block of human cardiac Kv4.3 and Kv1.5
channels by oleic acid has been observed at 2.2 and 0.4 μM,
respectively, and by arachidonic acid at 0.3 and 1.5 μM, respectively., The physiological significance of this block is difficult to assess
because the relevant free cellular concentrations of fatty acids are
not known and local concentrations could be high where receptor-mediated
activation of phospholipases leads to release of fatty acids from
membrane phospholipids. However, TRAAK and TREK channels are activated
by arachidonic acid and other polyunsaturated fatty acids at concentrations
in the micromolar range, implying that
these kinds of concentrations of free fatty acids must be physiologically
relevant to cell function.

Mode of Binding of TBA and Fatty Acids to the Cavity
The dissociation constant for TBA was determined to be 1.2 ±
0.1 mM (Figure ). A wide range of dissociation
constants for TBA have been estimated from electrophysiological measurements
ranging, for example, from 1.5 μM for Kv1.4 to ∼0.2 mM for KCa3.1, 2 mM for ROMK1, and 400 mM
for 1RK1, the wide variation being attributed
to large differences in the on rates for binding. The large size of the TBA ion (diameter of ∼10 Å)
means that it is likely to be able to enter the cavity in KcsA only
when the channel is open. This is consistent with the very slow rate
of displacement of Dauda by TBA observed at pH 7.2, described by a
rate constant of 0.0009 ± 0.0001 s–1 (Figure  and Table ). In contrast,
binding of Dauda to KcsA is much faster, being complete in the mixing
time of the experiment, &lt;1 min (Figure ). Similarly, displacement of Dauda by added fatty acids is complete
within the mixing time of the experiment (data not shown). The implication
is that Dauda and other fatty acids can bind directly to the closed
KcsA channel, presumably via the lipid bilayer with the bound fatty
acid molecules penetrating between the transmembrane α-helices.

The authors declare no
competing financial interest.

Abbreviations
14-SASL14-(4,4-dimethyloxazolidinyl-N-oxyl)stearic acid

Dauda11-dansylaminoundecanoic
acid

DOPCdioleoylphosphatidylcholine

BSAbovine serum albumin

EPRelectron paramagnetic
resonance

TBAtetrabutylammonium.

