Indolethylamine-N-methyltransferase (INMT), as a transmethylation enzyme, transfers
one or more methyl groups from S-adenosyl-l-methionine (SAM) to appropriate amino group acceptors on indole-containing
compounds. The activity of this enzyme was first reported in rabbit
lung homogenate by J. Axelrod, and rabbit
and human INMT were eventually cloned and sequenced by Thompson and
collegues in the late 1990s., INMT is a member of
a large family of N-methyltransferases that can methylate
a variety of small molecule acceptors such as tryptamine, serotonin, and other endogenous indole-containing
compounds.− This enzyme is widely distributed in mammalian tissues, including
the lungs, adrenal gland, thyroid, placenta, heart, pancreas, lymph
nodes,− retina, pineal gland, and spinal cord ventral horn motoneurons., Tryptamine, the substrate normally associated with INMT, is derived
from the in vivo decarboxylation of tryptophan. Transmethylation
produces N-methyltryptamine (MMT) and N,N-dimethyltryptamine (DMT). DMT is found in trace
amounts in humans and other animals.,− For a thorough review of the synthesis of DMT, its regulation, and
its metabolism, see ref (). Recently, Barker and colleagues, using microdialysis techniques,
detected DMT in real time in the pineal glands of living rats.

The precise role of INMT in biological
systems is currently unresolved.
However, several observations indicate the pleiotropic importance
of the INMT gene. For example, expression of the INMT gene has been
shown to be downregulated in prostate cancer and lung cancer, implying a role for
INMT in inhibiting tumor progression. Further, successful implantation
of the embryo in the mouse appears to be supported by the presence
of the INMT/TEMT gene (together with several other genes). INMT enzyme activity is elevated in the rabbit
fetal lung. Refer further to a recent
review of the possible peripheral [in addition to the central nervous
system (CNS)] role(s) of INMT/DMT in mammalian systems involving the
sigma-1 receptor by Frecska and colleagues.

Increased INMT activity had been suggested to be involved
in schizophrenia
and stress-related psychoses in humans, and this served as the basis
for early work on the proposed utility of inhibiting in vivo INMT enzyme activity to treat schizophrenia.− Further, the
INMT product DMT, when ingested, produces a psychological state characterized
by colorful visual illusions, altered time and space perceptions,
and changes in body image. Because of
these known psychoactive effects of DMT, the proposition that INMT
activity and DMT production may be involved in producing exceptional
mental states may be worth investigating.

The psychoactive effects
of DMT are mediated through various mechanisms,
including binding to and activating serotonin receptors,− exhibiting substratelike behavior at serotonin and vesicular uptake
transporters,, and inhibiting monoamine oxidase
enzymes.− The sigma-1 receptor is the latest identified receptor target for
DMT, where it binds at low micromolar concentrations, inhibits voltage-activated
sodium ion channels via sigma-1 receptor interactions at higher concentrations,
and induces a hypermobility response in wild-type mice that is abolished
in sigma-1 receptor knockout mice. INMT
has been shown to colocalize with the sigma-1 receptors in primate
spinal cord motoneurons containing unique synapses called C-terminals and may be involved in future therapeutic strategies
for the treatment of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS)., Whether INMT colocalizes with sigma-1 receptors in other neural
tissue remains unknown.

Product inhibition of INMT by S-adenosyl-l-homocysteine (SAH) has been demonstrated.
SAH’s inhibitory
mechanism has been reported to be competitive against SAM and noncompetitive
against N-methylserotonin. Little is known regarding the relationship between the structure
and activity of INMT and synthetic or endogenous small molecule regulators
or their kinetic mechanisms. Thompson et al. identified several compounds, including the β-carboline, norharmane,
that when compared to tryptamine, served as relatively effective substrates
for rabbit INMT. Several inhibitors of rabINMT were identified by
Thompson et al., but the kinetic mechanism(s)
was not reported. The in vivo activity of INMT appears
to be inhibited by uncharacterized dialyzable endogenous compounds., A competitive inhibition mechanism of 1,8-diaminooctane and 1,7-diaminoheptane
of rabbit lung INMT when measured against tryptamine has been reported. Here, we report the mechanism of inhibition
of rabINMT by DMT and a novel derivative of tryptamine, N-[2-(1H-indol-3-yl)ethyl]-N′,N′-dimethylpropane-1,3-diamine (PDAT). Inhibition
by PDAT was compared to that by N-[2-(1H-indol-3-yl)ethyl]propane-1,3-diamine (PAT), which is lacking the
two methyl groups on the N-propyl amino moiety.

Experimental
Procedures
Materials
All chemicals were purchased from Aldrich
Chemical Co. (Milwaukee, WI) and utilized without further purification
unless stated otherwise. [14C]-S-Adenosyl-l-methionine ([14C]SAM) was purchased from PerkinElmer
Life Sciences (Wellesley, MA). Frozen rabbit lungs were purchased
from Pel-Freez (Rogers, AR). Histidine-tagged human indolethylamine-N-methyltransferase was obtained from the Structural Genomics
Consortium (University of Toronto, Toronto, ON). Recombinant human
phenylethanolamine-N-methyltransferase (hPNMT) and
nicotinamide-N-methyltransferase (hNNMT) were purchased
from Creative BioMart (Shirley, NY). All reagents for the hPNMT assay
were prepared in 50 mM Tris-HCl buffer (pH 8.5) unless stated otherwise,
excluding PDAT, which was dissolved in dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO).
All reagents for the hNNMT assay were prepared in 50 mM Tris-HCl buffer
(pH 7.2).

Chemistry
Synthesis of N,N-Dimethyltryptamine
(DMT)
DMT was synthesized by the method of Speeter and Anthony with minor modifications. Briefly, indole, dissolved
in ice-cold diethyl ether, was reacted with a solution containing
2 equiv of oxalyl chloride in diethyl ether followed by a 20 wt %/vol
solution of dimethylamine in diethyl ether until the pH reached 9–10,
while maintaining the reaction mixture at 0 °C with an ice bath.
The resulting 3-indoleglyoxyl-N,N-dimethylamide was reduced to DMT with lithium aluminum hydride (LAH)
in refluxing dioxane essentially as described previously. After workup and solvent removal, DMT free base
was obtained. The DMT was purified by several recrystallizations from
hot heptane followed by air drying. The product migrated as a single
spot on silica gel thin layer plates (4:1:1 n-BuOH/AcOH/H2O mobile phase) and comigrated with authentic DMT. The melting
point for DMT was determined to be 64–65 °C and is consistent
with previously reported data.1H nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) was consistent with the assigned
structure.

Syntheses of N-[2-(1H-Indol-3-yl)ethyl]propane-1,3-diamine
(PAT)
This compound was prepared as the nonmethylated derivative
of PDAT to assess the possible importance of the N,N-dimethylation
of the aminopropyl side chain. The synthesis occurred in two steps
according to the schemes outlined in panels A and B of Figure . In reaction A, N-(3-bromopropyl)phthalimide
(1 mmol, 0.268 g) and 5 equiv of tryptamine (5 mmol, 0.8 g) were refluxed
together in ethanol and 2 mmol of potassium carbonate (0.27 g) for
5 h. The solid was filtered off, and the solvent was evaporated under
reduced pressure using a rotary evaporator. Then the reaction was
quenched with water and the mixture extracted three times with 5 mL
of ethyl acetate. The combined extracts were dried in MgSO4 and evaporated under reduced pressure. The product was purified
by column chromatography using silica gel and a 4:6 n-hexane/EtOAc mixture, giving a 90% yield. The product was subsequently
taken to the next step without further characterization.

Synthetic schemes
of DMT and inhibitors of INMT: (A) DMT, (B) N-[2-(1H-indol-3-yl)ethyl]propane-1,3-diamine
(PAT), and (C) N-[2-(1H-indol-3-yl)ethyl]-N′,N′-dimethylpropane-1,3-diamine
(PDAT).

The phthalimide tryptamine product
from reaction A was subsequently
reduced with hydrazine in a Gabriel synthesis as shown in Figure B. Briefly, 1 mmol (0.349 g) of phthalimide tryptamine
and 2 mmol (0.064 g) of hydrazine were refluxed together in ethanol
for 1.5 h. The mixture was subsequently cooled to room temperature,
and a 5-fold molar ratio of concentrated HCl was added dropwise. The
mixture was refluxed for an additional 4 h and the reaction quenched
with H2O. Workup procedures for this compound were performed
in a manner similar to those described for reaction A. The product
was purified by column chromatography using silica gel and a 9:1 toluene/diethylamine
solvent system, giving an 82% yield.

Synthesis of N-[2-(1H-Indol-3-yl)ethyl]-N′,N′-dimethylpropane-1,3-diamine
(PDAT)
This compound was prepared according to the synthetic
scheme shown in Figure C. The reaction was
conducted using a straightforward alkylation using 1 mmol (0.224 g)
of 3-(2-bromoethyl)indole and 5 mmol (0.52 g) of 3-(dimethylamino)-1-propylamine.
The reaction mixture was refluxed in ethanol for 5 h and the reaction
quenched with H2O. Workup procedures for this compound
were performed in a manner similar to that of the procedures described
for reaction A. The product was purified by column chromatography
using silica gel and a 9:1 toluene/diethylamine solvent system, giving
an 80% yield.

Characterizations of PAT and PDAT
Yields refer to isolated
products after column chromatography, and products were characterized
by 1H NMR. 1H NMR spectra were recorded at 300
MHz in CDCl3 relative to TMS (0.00 ppm).

PAT: 1H NMR δ 10.1 (NH, 1 H), 7.60–7.47 (m, 5 H), 5.11
(d, 2 H), 2.63–2.57 (m, 6 H), 2.3 (d, 1 H), 1.84 (m, 2 H); 13C NMR (75 MHz, CDCl3) δ 136.2, 127.41, 123.0,
119.7, 118.6, 113.4, 111.6, 49.8, 46.9, 39.3, 31.725.3; EMS [MH+] for C13H19N3 calcd 218.1579,
found 218.2892.

PDAT: 1H NMR δ 10.2 (d, 1 H),
7.60–7.47
(m, 2 H), 2.78 (m, 2 H), 2.37–2.46 (m, 3 H), 2.26 (d, 7 H),
1.62 (m, 2 H); 13C NMR (75 MHz, CDCl3) δ
136.8, 127.0, 123.6, 119.7, 118.6, 111.2, 54.9, 49.6, 46.5, 45.7,
26.7, 25.1; EMS [MH+] for C15H23N3 calcd 246.1892, found 246.2958.

Preparation of Rabbit Lung
Homogenates
Rabbit lung
homogenates were prepared according to the method described by Thompson
and Weinshilboum. Briefly, one pair of
frozen rabbit lungs was thawed in 50 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.3), minced
with a scissors, and homogenized using four bursts of 10 s each with
a brinkman polytron (American Laboratory Trading Inc., East Lyme,
CT) on setting 6 on ice. Homogenates were centrifuged at 15000g for 15 min at 4 °C, and the supernatant from this
first low-speed centrifugation was subjected to a second centrifugation
step at 100000g for 60 min at 4 °C. The supernatant
from the second high-speed spin was aliquoted and frozen at −80
°C until it was used in the INMT enzymatic assay.

Rabbit Lung
INMT Assays
Rabbit lung INMT assays were
modified from those described by Thompson et al. A final incubation volume of 100 μL in 15 mL capped
tubes contained ice-cold tryptamine solutions in Tris-HCl (pH 8.5)
at final concentrations of 0.1, 0.3, 0.6, 0.8, and 1.0 mM, 250 μg/mL
bovine serum albumin (BSA), and 35.5 μM [14C]-S-adenosyl-l-methionine ([14C]SAM) (specific
radioactivity varied between 28.15 and 56.3 μCi/μmol).
DMSO solutions of PDAT and DMT (when tested as inhibitors) were diluted
100-fold to a final concentration of 0.1 mM, and the same concentration
of DMSO alone was added to the noninhibitor controls. The assay was
initiated by the addition of 10 μL of rabbit lung supernatant
(rabINMT) in Tris-HCl (pH 8.5) (stock protein concentrations between
10 and 25 mg/mL). The final volume was adjusted to 100 μL with
Tris-HCl (pH 8.5). The reaction was allowed to proceed at 32 °C
in a gently rotating water bath for 45 min. The assay was terminated
by the addition of 0.6 mL of an ice-cold 0.5 M potassium borate solution
(pH 10). Tubes without tryptamine were used as background controls.
The [14C]-N-monomethyltryptamine (MMT)
and DMT reaction products were extracted by addition of 5 mL of a
3% isoamyl alcohol/toluene mixture. Tubes were vortexed three times
for 5 s each and then centrifuged at 1620g for 2–3
min. Following centrifugation, 3.5 mL of the top organic layer was
assessed for the [14C]methylated tryptamine levels using
a Beckman LS 6500 scintillation counter. The presence of authentic
[14C]MMT and [14C]DMT, which comprised &gt;95%
of the reaction products, was confirmed by silica gel thin layer chromatography
using a 12:5:3 n-butanol/water/acetic acid mixture
followed by autoradiography (Figure S1 of the ). Each radioactive spot was confirmed
by comigration with nonradioactive MMT (Rf = 0.48) and DMT (Rf = 0.39). Assays
were performed in duplicate, and each experiment was repeated. The
results reported are averages of quadruplicate counts from each duplicate
sample.

hPNMT Assay
The activity of hPNMT was measured following
the method of Gee et al. Briefly, phenylethanolamine
(PEA) at 2.48 mM and [14C]SAM (20.95 μM) were prepared
in the absence (2% DMSO) or presence of PDAT (2 μM) in a final
volume of 100 μL in 50 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.5). The reaction was
initiated via the addition of 5 μL of hPNMT (0.025 μg/μL)
and incubated for 90 min at 32 °C. The reaction was quenched
with 0.6 mL of 0.5 M potassium borate (pH 10.0); the product, [14C]-N-methyl-PEA, was extracted with 5 mL
of 3% isoamyl alcohol in toluene, and the organic layers were separated
by centrifugation for 2 min at 1620g in a swinging
bucket centrifuge. The organic layer (approxiamtely 3.5 mL) was combined
with 6 mL of a scintillation solution (Ultima Gold, PerkinElmer Life
Sciences) and counted. The assay for hINMT was performed similarly
except tryptamine (8 mM) and hINMT (0.14 μg/μL) were used.

hNNMT Assay
The hNNMT assay was performed in a manner
similar to that used for hPNMT with modifications following Rini et
al. Nicotinamide (10 mM) and 5 μL
of [14C]SAM (20.95 μM) were prepared in 50 mM Tris-HCl
(pH 7.2) in a final volume of 100 μL in the absence (2% DMSO)
or presence of PDAT (2 μM). As a positive control, a similar
reaction mixture was prepared in the presence of 1-N-methylnicotinamide (1 mM). The reaction was initiated by adding
5 μL of hNNMT (0.025 μg/μL). After 90 min at 32
°C, each reaction was quenched with 0.6 mL of 0.5 M potassium
borate and 100 μL of 1.3 M 1-heptanesulfonic acid to neutralize
the charge on the product 1-N-methylnicotinamide. The product was extracted with 5 mL of 60% isoamyl
alcohol in toluene. The organic and aqueous layers were separated
by centrifugation at 1620g for 3.5 min, after which
3.5 mL of the organic layer was extracted, combined with 6 mL of a
scintillation solution (Ultima Gold, PerkinElmer Life Sciences), and
counted.

The Ki for PDAT was determined
from the Km and Vmax values by use of the equation Vmax (+inhibitor) = Vmax (−inhibitor)/(1
+ [inhibitor]/Ki) to be ∼84 μM.

In Silico Modeling
The rabINMT sequence
was aligned with the human INMT (hINMT) sequence using ClustalW. The
human and rabbit INMT are 90% identical in amino acid sequence (Figure
S2 of the ). This
aligned rabINMT sequence was threaded onto the hINMT structure [Protein
Data Bank (PDB) entry 2A14] by sequential mutation of residues using the ‘mutate’
option in the biopolymer module of the molecular modeling program
Sybyl (Tripos Corp., St. Louis, MO). The fits were examined with molecular
graphics and the side chains torsioned to accommodate any clashes
with the surrounding residues. To remove residual clashes, when fully
threaded, the resultant model was energy-minimized using the Tripos
force field. The allosteric loop (residues 25–34) was examined
for conformational similarity to the hINMT and its suitability for
docking.

All dockings were performed with Autodock4 (Scripps
Institute) with a box size adequate to include the allosteric loop
and the active site. The active site in hINMT has no ligand (other
than SAH) and is an apo conformation that excludes ligands as part
of the docking process. All the docking of ligands occurs in the allosteric
loop. All minimizations and dockings included the SAH.

Results
The lead compound, PDAT, showed inhibition of INMT in rabbit lung
homogenates (rabINMT) with a half-maximal inhibitory concentration
(IC50) of 83 μM (Figure A).
PAT was decidedly less potent than PDAT for inhibition of rabINMT,
showing an IC50 of approximately 1 mM (data not shown).
These data demonstrate the importance of N,N-dimethylation of the
propylamino moiety for effective INMT inhibition. PDAT inhibition
of pure human INMT (hINMT) was also observed with an estimated IC50 of 1 mM (data not shown).

Selectivity profile of PDAT for N-methyltransferases.
(A) Inhibition of rabINMT by PDAT. Data are presented as a percentage
of the control after background subtraction, and the absence of PDAT
was normalized as 100%. (B) Inhibition of hINMT by PDAT. hINMT assays
were conducted with tryptamine as a substrate and [14C]SAM
as the methyl donor, in the absence or presence of 2 mM PDAT. (C)
Lack of inhibition of human recombinant PNMT by PDAT. PNMT assays
were conducted like hINMT assays but with phenylethanolamine (PEA)
as a substrate. (D) Lack of PDAT inhibition of hNNMT. hNNMT assays
were conducted as described for hINMT assays but using nicotinamide
as a substrate.

The affinities of PDAT
for two structurally related N-methyltransferases,
human hPNMT and hNNMT, were assessed. PDAT did
not inhibit either enzyme at a concentration of 2 mM, supporting its
selectivity for INMT (Figure B). Inhibitors
for both PNMT and NNMT,− when measured against their respective
substrates, phenylethanolamine and nicotinamide, respectively, showed
complete inhibition of these enzymes (data not shown).

DMT is
a known inhibitor of INMT, but
its kinetic mechanism of inhibition has not been elucidated. DMT showed
a mixed noncompetitive mechanism when measured against its substrate,
tryptamine, as assessed by Michaelis–Menten and Lineweaver–Burk
analysis. The rabINMT Vmax was reduced
from 4.63 ± 0.14 μmol/min for the control to 2.75 ±
0.85 μmol/min in the presence of DMT, and the Km for tryptamine was increased from 852 ± 61 to 1618
± 275 μM (Figure , Figure S3 of
the , and Table ).

Mechanism of binding of DMT to rabINMT. (A) Representative
Michaelis–Menten
plot for DMT in the absence or presence of cold DMT (100 μM).
Concentrations of tryptamine varied from 100 to 1000 μM. (B)
Lineweaver–Burk transformation of the data presented in panel
A. Velocity (V) was calculated by determining the
amount of [14C]DMT formed over the time course of 60 min,
and [S] represents the tryptamine concentration. The inset shows a
close-up of panel B showing the intersections of the two lines. In
the absence of an inhibitor, the Km for
DMT is 852.2 ± 61.35 μM, and the Km for DMT is 1618 ± 275.5 μM in the presence of
cold DMT. The Km values were determined
using the Michaelis–Menten analyses from GraphPad Prism, and
the standard error of the mean was calculated from two separate experiments
performed in duplicate.

 	Km (μM)	Vmax (μmol/min)	
control	852 ± 61	4.63 ± 0.14	
100 μM DMT	1618 ± 275	2.75 ± 0.85	
control	499 ± 68	2.47 ± 1.22	
100 μM PDAT	523 ± 85	1.13 ± 0.37	
PDAT inhibition of rabINMT showed a pure noncompetitive inhibition
mechanism when measured against the variable substrate, tryptamine. Vmax was reduced from 2.47 ± 1.22 μmol/min
for the control to 1.13 ± 0.37 μmol/min in the presence
of PDAT, but the Km for tryptamine remained
largely unaltered (from 499 ± 68 to 523 ± 85 μM) (Figure , Figure S4 of the , and Table ). These data
are consistent with an INMT allosteric inhibitory mechanism for DMT
and DMT-like molecules, such as PDAT.

Mechanism of binding of PDAT to rabINMT.
(A) Representative Michaelis–Menten
plot for DMT in the absence or presence of 100 μM PDAT. Concentrations
of tryptamine varied from 100 to 1000 μM. (B) Lineweaver–Burk
transformations of the data presented in panel A. Velocity (V) was calculated by determining the amount of [14C]DMT formed over the time course of 60 min, and [S] represents the
tryptamine concentration. The inset shows a close-up of panel B showing
the intersections of the two lines. In the absence of inhibitor, the Km for DMT is 499.6 ± 68.2 μM, and
the Km for DMT is 523.4 ± 85.4 μM
in the presence of 100 μM PDAT. The Km values were determined using the Michaelis–Menten analyses
from GraphPad Prism, and the standard error of the mean was calculated
from two separate experiments performed in duplicate.

Because the crystal structure of SAH-bound hINMT
has been reported, we assessed the potential
docking site of DMT
and PDAT for hINMT using an in silico approach (Figure A,B). Both molecules docked to the N-terminal helix–loop–helix
region of INMT with binding energies of −6.34 kcal/mol for
DMT and −7.58 kcal/mol for PDAT. There are multiple hydrogen
bonds that may contribute to binding of both DMT and PDAT to this
loop region. As shown in Figure , the indole
nitrogen of DMT forms two hydrogen bonds with aspartic acid 28 with
the terminal nitrogen hydrogen bonding with glutamic acid 34. Unlike
DMT, PDAT is predicted to form four hydrogen bonds in which the middle
nitrogen forms two hydrogen bonds with aspartic acid 28, and the indole
nitrogen bonds with tyramine 24. The terminal nitrogen of PDAT bonds
to glutamic acid 34. This mechanism of binding may contribute to the
energy of PDAT being lower (or the affinity higher) than that of DMT.

In silico docking of DMT and PDAT on the hINMT
(PDB entry 2A14). The crystal structure of hINMT was determined with SAM bound.
(A) Structure of hINMT docked with DMT. The optimal DMT docking to
hINMT indicates a terminal nitrogen hydrogen bond to Glu-34, with
the indole nitrogen hydrogen bonded to the loop Asp-28 carboxylate.
The free energy of binding of the displayed fit is −7.06 kcal/mol.
(B) Structure of hINMT docked with PDAT. Stabilization of PDAT with
the protein is predicted to be mediated by the hydrogen bonding interactions
between the terminal nitrogen and Glu-34, between the middle nitrogen
and Asp-28 of the protein, and with the indole nitrogen hydrogen bonded
to the backbone of the Tyr-24 carbonyl of helix Leu-16–Tyr-24.
The free energy of binding of the displayed fit is −8.24 kcal/mol.

Additionally, we threaded the
sequence of rabINMT onto the sequence
of hINMT (Figure A,B). When DMT and PDAT were
assessed in silico for their interactions with rabINMT
using Autodock, the highest-affinity interactions of DMT and PDAT
were found to occur exclusively in the N-terminal helix–loop–helix
region like the docking of DMT and PDAT to hINMT. The proposed allosteric
N-terminal helix–loop–helix region is not within the
active site of the enzyme as assessed by the position of SAH in the
cocrystal structure of hINMT (PDB entry 2A14). In addition to the hydrogen bonding
interactions between these compounds and INMT, however, rabINMT contains
a glutamine at position 28 that is likely to form π-stacking
interactions with the indole ring of both DMT and PDAT to contribute
to the binding of both compounds for rabINMT. The N-terminal helix–loop–helix
sequences (amino acids 24–34) are aligned and identified in
Figure S2 of the .

In silico docking of DMT and PDAT on the threaded
structure of rabINMT. The threaded structure of rabINMT was modeled
after that of hINMT (PDB entry 2A14). (A) Threaded structure of rabINMT docked
with DMT. Optimal DMT docking in threaded the rabINMT model uses a
terminal hydrogen bond to Glu-34, with the indole nitrogen hydrogen
bonded to the helix backbone. The free energy of binding is −6.34
kcal/mol. (B) Structure of rabINMT docked with PDAT. Optimal PDAT
docking in the threaded rabINMT also uses a hydrogen bond from the
terminal nitrogen to Glu-24, but the middle nitrogen is placed at
the negative polar end of the Leu-16–Tyr-24 helix. The docking
free energy of binding is calculated to be −7.58 kcal/mol.
A π–π stacking interaction may occur between the
indole rings of PDAT and DMT with Gln-28.

Discussion
INMT is a member of a large class of N-methyltransferases
that utilize SAM as a methyl donor. The enzyme INMT transfers methyl
groups from SAM to the nitrogen of substrates containing indolyl alkyl
amino groups with the resultant formation of SAH.,, One product of INMT N-methylation of tryptamine
is DMT. In light of the recent discovery that DMT activates the sigma-1
receptor, we sought to find DMT-like
small molecule regulators of INMT to study the crosstalk between this
metabolic pathway and that of the sigma-1 receptor, as well as to
better understand the biology of INMT. Two N-propylamino
derivatives of tryptamine, PAT and PDAT (panels B and C of Figure , respectively) were synthesized, and their INMT
regulatory properties were compared to those of DMT (Figure A).

The biological role of DMT remains largely
unknown. There are suggestions
that DMT may act as a neurotransmitter in humans and may be involved
in psychosis, dreaming, near-death experiences, and spiritual exaltation.,− INMT/DMT/sigma-1 receptor mechanisms involving peripheral as well
as CNS roles may also be important in mammalian biology. Recently, N-methylated derivatives of tryptamine,
including N-monomethyl-, N,N-dimethyl-, and N,N,N-trimethyltryptamines,
have been identified in the leaves and seeds of a wide variety of
citrus plants, including Bergamot orange (Citrus bergamia) and other Citrus fruits. Presumably, these naturally occurring compounds
are formed through INMT transmethylation of tryptamine, but this is
yet to be established. DMT and related tryptamines also occur in the
Illinois bundleflower (Desmanthus illinoensis, common
in the United States), chacruna (Psychotria viridis, native to Central and South America), and trees of the Virola genus, native to South American rainforests. Archeological
evidence indicates that South American native cultures have used these
plants for shamanistic rituals for at least 3000 years.

The work reported in this paper on the
inhibition of rabbit lung
INMT by DMT and by a novel synthetic tryptamine derivative, PDAT (Figure C), enhances our knowledge of the mechanisms of
INMT regulation. Both compounds showed noncompetitive inhibition kinetics
when measured against tryptamine at saturating concentrations of SAM.
DMT showed mixed competitive and noncompetitive kinetics (Figure ), consistent with DMT binding to INMT alone and
to the INMT–tryptamine complex with different Ki values (see Table  and Figure
S5A of the ). PDAT,
on the other hand, showed pure noncompetitive kinetics (Figure ) consistent with an equal affinity for INMT alone
and for the INMT–tryptamine complex (see Figure S5B of the ). The Ki for PDAT was determined to be 84 μM (Figure A). The presence of the dimethyl substitution on
the propylamino side chain was found to be important for the affinity
of PDAT for INMT, because the nonmethylated propylamino tryptamine
derivative, PAT (Figure B), was significantly
weaker in INMT inhibition (data not shown). PDAT was shown to be a
selective inhibitor of INMT because 2 mM PDAT showed no significant
inhibition of NNMT or PNMT (Figure B–D).

These data support an allosteric inhibitory mechanism for DMT and
PDAT for rabbit INMT. An in silico analysis of binding
of DMT and PDAT to both hINMT and rabINMT (Figures  and ) identified the N-terminal helix–loop–helix
region of INMT as a possible location for a proposed allosteric inhibitory
site. The volumes of the loop regions of PNMT and NNMT are substantially
reduced because of an extra partial turn of the N-terminal helix as
it enters the loop, consistent with the
observation that PDAT did not inhibit these N-methyltransferases
because it likely cannot bind.

There were several reports of
developing inhibitors of INMT in
the 1970s and 1980s. These compounds include derivatives of SAM that are broad-based inhibitors of SAM-dependent
methyltransferases. These compounds are less selective for specific N-methyltransferases such as INMT. Cyclic amidine inhibitors
of INMT were also previously developed.− These compounds were
tested for inhibition of both human and rabbit INMT, but their kinetic
mechanisms, with the exception of a compound identified as DBN (2,3,4,6,7,8-hexahydropyrrolo[1,2-a]pyrimidine), were not thoroughly
characterized. Our work with DMT thus provides the first kinetic analysis
of a mixed competitive–noncompetitive mechanism of product
inhibition of INMT. Further, characterization of the pure noncompetitive
inhibition by PDAT suggests PDAT as a lead compound for the development
of effective and selective allosteric regulators of INMT. In the broad
family of methyltransferases, unique allosteric mechanisms of regulation
may be common. As examples, a small molecule allosteric inhibition
of a protein N-methyltransferase has been recently
reported, and the type 1 protein arginine
methyltransferase 3 (PRMT3) asymmetrically dimethylates one of the
guanidine nitrogens of arginine on 40S ribosomal protein S2, resulting
in stabilization of the protein. Siarheyeva
et al. show that a unique phenethyl thiadiazolyl
urea compound is an allosteric inhibitor of PRMT3 by binding at the
nonactive site interface of a PRMT3 dimer. Other methyltransferases
appear to be allosterically activated by interaction with their protein
partners. For example, the DNA methyltransferase,
Dnmt 1, preferentially methylates hemimethylated CpG sites on DNA
after DNA replication,, and Bashtrykov et al. report that the ubiquitin-like PHD and RING
finger domains protein 1 (Uhrf1) allosterically activates Dnmt 1 by
unblocking an inhibitory domain of Dnmt 1, thus allowing better access
of the CpG substrate to the active site of Dnmt 1. In a similar manner,
because the sigma-1 receptor colocalizes with INMT in primate motoneuron
cell bodies, a regulatory allosteric interaction
may occur between these two important signaling proteins, as well.

In summary, PDAT selectively inhibited hINMT in comparison to the
structurally similar N-methyltransferases, PNMT and
NNMT. DMT and PDAT were found to inhibit INMT activity, and the kinetic
mechanisms for inhibition were determined to be mixed competitive
and noncompetitive and pure noncompetitive, respectively. In silico docking analyses supported the experimentally
derived kinetic data through the identification of a putative allosteric
inhibitory binding site in the N-terminal helix–loop–helix
region of the computer-threaded structure of rabINMT using hINMT as
the template. Pharmacological approaches to regulating INMT enzymatic
activity are highly desirable for assessing the biological importance
of INMT and its possible role in cancer, autoimmunity, normal and
aberrant mental states, and neurodegeneration.

Supporting Information Available
Representative
thin layer chromatography
showing the end products of rabINMT methylation reactions (Figure
S1), sequence alignment of human and rabbit INMT (Figure S2), mechanism
of binding of DMT to rabINMT (Figure S3), mechanism of binding of
PDAT to rabINMT (Figure S4), and chematic representation of the kinetic
mechanisms of binding of DMT and PDAT (Figure S5). This material is
available free of charge via the Internet at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bi500175p_si_001.pdf

bi500175p_si_002.pdf

Author Contributions
U.B.C. and
S.K.V. contributed equally to this work.

This research
was supported by National Institutes of Health Grant NS075820 (to
A.E.R.), the PhRMA Foundation (to U.B.C.), and the Science Research
Intern Program (Madison Metropolitan School District, 545 W. Dayton
St., Madison, WI 53703).

The authors declare no
competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
We thank Dr. Masoud Vedadi from the Structural Genomics Consortium
at the University of Toronto for providing the human INMT for our
work.

Abbreviations
DMTN,N-dimethyltryptamine

hINMThuman indolethylamine-N-methyltransferase

hNNMThuman nicotinamide-N-methyltransferase

hPNMThuman phenethanolamine-N-methyltransferase

PATpropyl amino tryptamine
or N-[2-(1H-indol-3-yl)ethyl]propane-1,3-diamine

PDATpropyl dimethyl
amino tryptamine or N-[2-(1H-indol-3-yl)ethyl]-N′,N′-dimethylpropane-1,3-diamine

rabINMTrabbit indolethylamine-N-methyltransferase

SAHS-adenosyl-l-homocysteine

SAMS-adenosyl-l-methionine.

