DNA replication
requires the
coordinated action of many different proteins and enzymes.− Decades of research into the mechanisms of genomic maintenance have
provided us with a wealth of knowledge regarding the molecular transactions
that occur at sites of DNA synthesis. However, new features of the
replisome are still being discovered, and our view of the replication
machinery is continually being refined. One such addition to models
for eukaryotic replication is found in the newly described bifunctional
enzyme human PrimPol.,

PrimPol is a 560 a.a. protein
encoded by the human gene CCDC111 that was recently
shown to possess both RNA/DNA
primase and DNA polymerase (pol) activities.− PrimPol is the
second member of the archaeal-eukaryotic primase (AEP) superfamily
member to be identified in humans, with the Pol-α-associated
DNA primase subunit, Prim1 (also called p48), being the other., In addition to primase and pol catalytic activities, PrimPol also
possesses a UL52-like zinc finger domain that regulates primase processivity
and may affect some aspects of pol fidelity. PrimPol prefers to synthesize DNA primers de novo as opposed to RNA primers, and it has been proposed that PrimPol
acts to reinitiate DNA synthesis downstream from lesions that block
the replication machinery. Consistent
with a role for PrimPol in DNA damage tolerance, it is found localized
to chromatin during DNA replication and becomes enriched following
exposure to DNA damaging agents (e.g., UV irradiation). Further study
revealed that PrimPol interacts with RPA and can bypass some DNA adducts
with relative ease,,,, leading to the proposal that PrimPol is
a new translesion DNA synthesis pol (TLS pol).

PrimPol is found
localized to both the nucleus and in mitochondria, in line with an earlier study that isolated mitochondrial
primase activity from human cells without identifying the gene product
responsible for the primase action. The
reported role for PrimPol in maintenance of mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA)
is especially intriguing since DNA pol gamma (hpol γ) has been
considered to be the only enzyme able to perform DNA synthesis in
mammalian mitochondria. A model in which hpol γ is the sole
enzyme capable of performing synthesis on damaged mtDNA presents a
problem when one considers two very basic ideas related to mtDNA damage:
(1) mitochondrial DNA is subject to higher levels of oxidative damage
than nuclear DNA, and (2) hpol γ is not proficient at bypassing
even the simplest of oxidative lesions, such as 7,8-dihydro-8-oxo-2′-deoxyguanosine
(8-oxo-dG). In the nucleus, blocks to replication fork progression
can activate replication stress response pathways that recruit DNA
repair and damage tolerance proteins/enzymes to sites of fork stalling., There are DNA repair mechanisms at work in mitochondria, primarily
in the form of base excision repair (BER), but given the amount of
damage ubiquitous to mtDNA, there are likely to be numerous encounters
between the mitochondrial replication/transcription machineries and
DNA adducts. The mechanism by which damage to mtDNA is tolerated in
the absence of repair has been a long-standing question in the field
of mtDNA replication, and the emergence of PrimPol as a potential
means of performing TLS in mitochondria has opened up a number of
fascinating possibilities.

While a flurry of studies have shown
that PrimPol can bypass DNA
adducts and that it likely contributes to TLS in cells, a detailed
quantitative analysis of PrimPol DNA binding and enzymatic activity
is largely absent. We have performed steady-state kinetic analysis
of PrimPol DNA polymerase activity so that comparisons can be made
between this purported TLS enzyme and other well-studied TLS pols.
We find that PrimPol exhibits weak binding affinity to primer-template
DNA (p/t-DNA) in the presence of Mg2+, but this affinity
is dramatically increased by Mn2+. The kinetic parameters
for nucleotide incorporation suggest that PrimPol is highly stimulated
by Mn2+ and has a misinsertion frequency on par with other
TLS pols, such as the Y-family pols. Finally, we quantified the efficiency
and accuracy of PrimPol activity on damaged DNA templates and find
that PrimPol preferentially bypasses 8-oxo-dG in an accurate manner.
In short, our results provide the first quantitative insights into
the PrimPol mechanism of action as a TLS pol and lay the groundwork
for more detailed kinetic study of individual steps within the PrimPol
catalytic cycle.

Materials and Methods
Materials
All
chemicals were molecular biology grade
or better. 2′-Deoxynucleoside triphosphates (dNTPs) were obtained
from Promega (Madison, WI). All oligonucleotides used in this work
(with the exception of tetrahydrofuran, THF-containing oligonucleotides)
were synthesized by Integrated DNA Technologies (Coralville, IA) and
purified using high-performance liquid chromatography by the manufacturer,
with analysis by matrix-assisted laser desorption time-of-flight mass
spectrometry. Oligonucleotides containing THF were synthesized by
Midland Certified Reagent Co. (Midland, TX). Primers were labeled
at the 5′-end with 6-carboxyfluorescein (FAM). Fourteen different
primer-template DNA (p/t-DNA) substrates were used in the study (Table ).

DNA Substrates Used
in the Study
The template
base paired with the
incoming dNTP is underlined.

AP = THF abasic site.

Expression
and Purification of Recombinant Human PrimPol
Rosetta (DE3)
competent Escherichia coli cells were
transformed with 10 ng of pSUMO-PrimPol (WT or AA), plated onto agar
media containing the appropriate antibiotics, and grown at 30 °C
overnight. The pSUMO vector was obtained from LifeSensors, Inc. Then
2 × 100 mL (starter cultures) NZCYM media containing kanamycin
(25 μg/mL, K25) and chloramphenicol (20 μg/mL, C20) were
inoculated with a smear of colonies from freshly plated and transformed
cells. These cultures were grown at 37 °C with shaking (250 rpm)
to an OD600 of 1.0. Next, 4 × 500 mL autoinducing
media (Amresco) containing K75 and C60 (3 times) was inoculated to
an OD600 of 0.025 with the starter culture and grown at
37 °C with shaking (250 rpm) to an OD600 of 1.0. Once
the cultures reached OD600 of 1.0, they were placed at
4 °C until the temperature reached 15 °C. One milliliter
of culture was removed for uninduced sample. The flasks were then
grown at 15 °C with shaking (250 rpm) overnight for 40 h. A 1
mL aliquot of culture was removed for induced sample after 40 h to
check for protein expression. After verifying induction, cells were
harvested by centrifugation, washed once with cold T10E1 (20 mL/L OD), centrifuged again, and frozen at −80
°C (T10 E1 is 10 mM Tris pH 8 and 1 mM EDTA).

For the purification,
frozen cell pellets were thawed on ice and suspended in 50 mM Tris
(pH 8.0) buffer containing 500 mM NaCl, 10 mM β-mercaptoethanol
(β-ME), 20% (v/v) glycerol, 1.4 μg/mL pepstatin A, and
1 μg/mL leupeptin (Buffer A) at a concentration of 5 mL of lysis
buffer per 1 g of cell pellet. A single EDTA-free protease tablet
(Roche) was added per 10 g of cell pellet. Cells were lysed by passing
through a French pressure cell at 20 000 psi. Phenylmethyl-sulfonyl
fluoride (PMSF) and nonidet P-40 (NP-40) were added immediately after
lysis to final concentrations of 1 mM and 0.1% (v/v), respectively.
The lysate was centrifuged for 30 min at 25 000 rpm (75000g) at 4 °C using a Beckman JA 30.50 rotor. The clarified
lysate was decanted and then loaded onto a Ni-NTA column at a flow
rate of 0.5 mL/min (approximately 1 mL of bed volume/30 mg of total
protein). After the clarified lysate was loaded, the column was washed
at a flow rate of 1 mL/min with 20 column volumes of 50 mM Tris (pH
8.0) buffer containing 500 mM NaCl, 10 mM β-ME, 20% (v/v) glycerol
containing 5 mM imidazole and 0.1% (v/v) NP40 (Buffer B). Protease
inhibitor pepstatin, leupeptin, and PMSF were present in all the buffers
at the indicated concentrations above. The column was washed a second
time with 10 column volumes of buffer B containing 5 mM imidazole
(NP40 was left out of all subsequent buffers) and then with 5 column
volumes of buffer B containing 50 mM imidazole. The protein was then
eluted with buffer B containing 500 mM imidazole and collected in
one column volume fractions and assayed for purity by SDS-PAGE. In
addition, all fractions were run on 1% (w/v) agarose gel to check
for nucleic acid contamination. Fractions were pooled based upon purity.
Pepstatin A and leupeptin (1 μg/mL final) were added to the
pooled samples along with PMSF (1 mM final) prior to adding Ulp1 and
dialyzing overnight. To cleave the SUMO-PrimPol fusion protein, Ulp1
protease (LifeSensors Inc.) (10 units per 1 mg of SUMO fusion) was
added to the pooled sample, and dialysis was performed overnight at
4 °C against two changes of 1 L of 20 mM HEPES (pH 7.5) buffer
containing 500 mM NaCl, 10 mM β-ME, 20% (v/v) glycerol (Buffer
C) (12–14 000 Da MWCO membrane). After 16 h of incubation,
the cleavage of the SUMO fusion protein was verified by SDS-PAGE,
and the dialyzed sample was loaded onto a second Ni-NTA column equilibrated
with Buffer C at a flow rate of 1 mL/min (approximately 1 mL of bed
volume/5 mg of total protein). After loading, the column was washed
at a flow rate of 1 mL/min with 10 column volumes of Buffer C. The
pass-through and 10 one-half column volume fractions were collected
and assayed for purity by SDS-PAGE. Fractions were pooled based upon
purity and concentration.

The pooled sample was then concentrated
to ∼4 mg/mL final
with the Vivaspin protein concentrators and further purified in a
gel filtration column Superdex 75 in 20 mM HEPES (pH 7.5) buffer containing
500 mM NaCl, 20% (v/v) glycerol, 1 mM dithiothreitol (DTT). Fractions
of 3 mL were collected and after Bradford and PAGE analysis fractions
containing the proteins were pooled. Pooled PrimPol was concentrated
with the Vivaspin protein concentrator. The protein concentration
was determined and supplemented with 1 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine
(TCEP). The protein was then aliquoted, frozen, and stored at −80
°C. The quality of the final purified protein was assessed by
assaying for nuclease activity (RNase and DNase) and phosphatase activity.

Measurement of DNA Binding Affinity by Fluorescence Polarization
PrimPol DNA binding affinity was measured by incubating p/t-DNA
substrates (1 nM) labeled at the 5′-end of the primer with
FAM with varying concentrations of PrimPol (0 to 4 μM). Fluorescence
polarization was measured in a Biotek Synergy4 plate reader using
the appropriate filter sets (λex = 485 ± 20
nm and λem = 525 ± 20 nm). All titrations were
performed at 25 °C in 50 mM HEPES buffer (pH 7.5) containing
10 mM KOAc, 10 mM KCl, 0.1 mM EDTA, 2 mM β-ME, and 0.1 mg/mL
bovine serum albumin (BSA). Where indicated, either 5 mM MgCl2 or 5 mM MnCl2 was added to the DNA binding experiment.
Polarization was determined using eq :where F∥ equals fluorescence intensity parallel to the
excitation plane and F⊥ equals
the fluorescence intensity perpendicular
to the excitation plane. The resulting change in polarization units
was plotted against protein concentration and fit to a quadratic equation
to estimate the equilibrium dissociation constant for PrimPol binding
to DNA (Kd,DNA).

Full-Length Extension Polymerase
Assays
DNA substrates
were prepared as described previously. PrimPol extension reactions were initiated by adding dNTP·MgCl2 (0.25 mM of each dNTP and indicated concentrations of metal
ion) solution to a preincubated PrimPol·DNA complex (250 nM PrimPol
and 2.5 μM DNA). All pol extension reactions were carried out
at 37 °C in 10 mM HEPES buffer (pH 7.5) containing 100 mM KCl,
1 mM DTT, 100 μg mL–1 BSA, and 5% (v/v) glycerol.
At the indicated time points, 15 μL aliquots were quenched with
85 μL of a 95% (v/v) formamide/20 mM EDTA/0.1% (w/v) bromophenol
blue solution and were separated by electrophoresis on a 16% polyacryamide
(w/v)/7 M urea gel. The products were then visualized using a Typhoon
imager (GE Healthcare Life Sciences).

Steady-State Kinetic Analysis
of Polymerase Activity
Single-nucleotide incorporation by
PrimPol was measured over a range
of either metal or dNTP concentrations. The single-nucleotide insertion
experiments were performed in a manner nearly identical to the extension
reactions described above except only a single dNTP was used instead
of a mixture. For reactions where the concentration of metal ion (MgCl2 or MnCl2) was varied, the concentration of dNTP
was held constant at 2.5 mM for reactions with varying MgCl2 and 100 μM for reactions with varying MnCl2. Likewise,
the metal ion concentration was held constant at 10 mM when the dNTP
concentration was varied. The products were imaged as described for
full-length extension assays and quantified using ImageQuant software
(GE Healthcare Life Sciences). The initial portion of the velocity
curve was fit to a linear equation in the program GraphPad Prism (GraphPad,
San Diego, CA). The resulting velocity was plotted as a function of
metal or dNTP concentration and then fit to a hyperbolic equation,
correcting for enzyme concentration, to obtain estimates for the turnover
number (kcat) and Michaelis constant (KM,metal or KM,dNTP). The reported steady-state parameters are derived from a single
set of titration experiments. However, preliminary time course assays
were used to assess the reproducibility of the experimental conditions.
Additionally, the experiments measuring PrimPol-catalyzed dCMP insertion
opposite template dG were repeated twice in the presence of Mn2+ with results that indicate very high precision.

Results
Purification
of Recombinant PrimPol and Metal Ion Dependence
of PrimPol Polymerase Extension Activity
We purified full-length
recombinant human PrimPol from E. coli cells (Figure A). An active-site titration experiment was performed
to confirm the activity of the purified recombinant PrimPol (Figure B). We note that the majority of the previously
reported pol assays were performed with PrimPol in excess of DNA substrate
(often as much as 80-fold excess enzyme). Notably, we see robust polymerization
by PrimPol even under enzyme limiting conditions (1:10 PrimPol/DNA,
Figure B,C). We also reconfirmed the preference
of PrimPol for Mn2+ over Mg2+ by performing
pol extension assays in the presence of each metal ion cofactor (Figure C). As shown previously by other groups, PrimPol
is more active in the presence of Mn2+ than it is when
Mg2+ is the cofactor for polymerization. We then went on
to test PrimPol action in the presence of other divalent metal ion
cofactors. We performed pol extension assays in the presence of seven
different divalent metal ions. We find that PrimPol pol activity is
stimulated to a measurable extent by four different metal ions with
the degree of stimulation (from greatest to least) being: Mn2+ &gt; Mg2+ &gt; Co2+ &gt; Ni2+ (Figure C). Extension experiments with Ca2+,
Fe2+, and Zn2+ failed to yield measurable product.
These results confirmed the quality of our purified recombinant PrimPol
and reaffirmed the preference for Mn2+ over other metal
ion cofactors.

DNA polymerase activity of PrimPol is most strongly promoted
by
manganese. (A) Recombinant full-length human PrimPol (a.a. 1–560)
was purified from Escherichia coli. (B) The polymerase
activity of purified recombinant PrimPol was confirmed with an active-site
titration. PrimPol (0.25 μM, ●; 0.5 μM, ■;
1 μM, ▲) was incubated with p/t-DNA (2.5 μM) and
dCTP insertion was measured. Linear regression analysis resulted in
a y-intercept of 0.32 ± 0.04, 0.53 ± 0.01,
and 0.99 ± 0.13 μM for PrimPol concentrations of 0.25,
0.5 and 1 μM, respectively. (C) PrimPol (250 nM) was incubated
with 13/18-mer p/t-DNA (2.5 μM), a mixture of all four dNTPs
(250 μM each) and seven different metal ions at the indicated
concentrations. The reactions were allowed to proceed for 30 min,
and the products were separated by 16% (w/v) polyacrylamide/7 M urea
gel electrophoresis. DNA synthesis is most robust with Mn2+ as the cofactor.

Primer-Template DNA Binding
Properties
Next, we wanted
to determine the substrate binding preference for PrimPol. It was
previously shown that PrimPol could bind single-stranded DNA (ssDNA),
as well as blunt-ended DNA using gel shift assays. Binding to ssDNA and blunt-end DNA was only observed at
concentrations of PrimPol higher than 500 nM, which indicates relatively
weak binding affinity compared to other pols. Strangely enough, no
binding studies have been reported for primer-template DNA (p/t-DNA)
even though PrimPol performs DNA synthesis on these types of substrates.
Therefore, we performed DNA binding experiments with p/t-DNA substrates
of varying lengths.

Fluorescence anisotropy was used to measure
equilibrium dissociation constants defining PrimPol binding to different
p/t-DNA substrates (Table ). First, we measured
PrimPol binding to a short 13/18-mer p/t-DNA substrate, which has
a five nucleotide (nt) ssDNA overhang on the template strand. In a
buffer solution that contains Mg2+ as the metal ion cofactor,
PrimPol binds this short 13/18-mer p/t-DNA substrate with a Kd,DNA of 910 (±550) nM (Table ). Substituting Mg2+ with Mn2+ dramatically decreased the Kd,DNA for
PrimPol binding to the 13/18-mer to 27 (±8) nM (Table ). In addition to the p/t-DNA substrates, binding
of PrimPol to 24-mer ssDNA was also examined (). PrimPol exhibited very weak affinity for ssDNA
in the presence of Mg2+ (Kd,DNA = 4500 ± 2500 nM). The affinity of PrimPol for ssDNA is increased
∼7-fold by Mn2+ (Kd,DNA = 670 ± 180 nM), which is not as dramatic of a change as that
observed for p/t-DNA. Changing the metal ion in the binding solution
from Mg2+ to Mn2+ results in ∼34-fold
tighter binding to 13/18-mer p/t-DNA, consistent with the dramatic
increase in pol activity observed for this substrate with Mn2+.

Equilibrium Dissociation Constants
for PrimPol Binding to p/t-DNA
substrate	metal	Kd,DNA (nM)	
1 (13/18-mer)	Mg2+	910 ± 550	
 	Mn2+	27 ± 8	
2 (13/28-mer)	Mg2+	240 ± 100	
3 (24/29-mer)	Mg2+	1200 ± 550	
4 (24/39-mer)	Mg2+	350 ± 160	
The binding data
were fit to a quadratic
equation. The values reported represent the mean ± s.e.m. (n = 2).

We went
on to measure PrimPol binding to a p/t-DNA substrate that
possessed a longer ssDNA overhang in the template strand (substrate
2, 13/28-mer). In the presence of Mg2+, increasing the
length of the ssDNA portion of the p/t-DNA from 5 to 15 nts increased
the apparent affinity of PrimPol for p/t-DNA, as evidenced by a lower Kd,DNA of 240 (±140) nM for substrate 2
(Table ). We then tested PrimPol binding to
a pair of p/t-DNA substrates with a longer 24 bp dsDNA region (substrates
3 and 4). In Mg2+, PrimPol binding to the 24/29-mer (substrate
3), which possesses a five nt ssDNA overhang, was weak, with a Kd,DNA value of 1210 (±550) nM. PrimPol
was found to bind the 24/39-mer, which possesses a 15 nt ssDNA overhang,
with higher affinity (Kd,DNA = 350 ±
160 nM). From these results, we conclude that increasing the ssDNA
overhang of p/t-DNA substrates results in tighter binding, while the
length of the dsDNA region has little effect on the affinity of the
enzyme for the DNA substrate.

Stimulation of PrimPol
Catalytic Efficiency by Mn2+
Next, we wanted to
quantify the metal ion-dependent changes
in PrimPol catalytic efficiency. Based on our pol extension results,
we were interested in determining the magnitude of PrimPol stimulation
by Mn2+ relative to Mg2+. We varied the concentration
of metal in the reaction mixture and measured PrimPol-catalyzed insertion
of dCMP opposite template dG (substrate 1) at saturating concentrations
of nucleotide. Steady-state kinetic analysis reveals that the turnover
number (kcat) for PrimPol catalysis is
increased ∼30-fold by Mn2+ compared to Mg2+ (Table ). Using the specificity constant
(kcat/KM)
as a measure of PrimPol catalytic efficiency, it would appear that
PrimPol has a ∼16-fold preference for Mn2+ over
Mg2+ (Table ).

Steady-State Kinetic Analysis of Metal-Ion-Dependent
Nucleotidyl Transfer by PrimPol
metal	kcat (min–1)	Km,metal (mM)	kcat/Km,metal (min–1 mM–1)	
magnesium	0.23 ± 0.004	1.2 ± 0.1	0.20	
manganese	7.0 ± 0.2	2.2 ± 0.2	3.1	
Pol assays were performed on a 13/18mer
primer-template (substrate 1) with dCTP as the incoming nucleotide
triphosphate and dG as the template base. For determination of kinetic
values, graphs of product formation versus dNTP concentration were
plotted using nonlinear regression analysis (one-site hyperbolic fit)
in the GraphPad prism program. The standard error of the fit is reported
for each value.

Then we
determined the effect of the metal ion cofactor on the
kinetics of nucleotide selectivity by PrimPol. Measuring insertion
of dCMP opposite template dG, we find that substituting Mn2+ increases the kcat ∼18-fold relative
to Mg2+ (Table ). Remarkably, the
specificity constant for dCMP insertion across from template dG is
increased over 400-fold when saturating concentrations of Mn2+ and Mg2+ are compared (Table ). The large increase in the specificity constant is from the 18-fold
increase in the kcat combined with an
approximate 25-fold decrease in the Km,dNTP when Mn2+ is the cofactor. The KM,dNTP values measured for PrimPol in the presence of Mg2+ are extraordinarily high (in the hundreds of micromolar)
for correct insertion events. In the presence of Mn2+ the
measured KM,dNTP values for accurate copying
of undamaged DNA are closer to physiologically relevant concentrations
(in the tens of micromolar). Thus, Mn2+ could serve as
something of a “switch” that activates PrimPol-catalyzed
nucleotide insertion by increasing the affinity of the enzyme for
DNA, as well as the efficiency of pol activity.

Steady-State Kinetic Comparison of
PrimPol Fidelity Across from Template dG in the Presence of Magnesium
and Manganese
template Metal dNTP
Base	kcat (min–1)	Km (mM)	kcat/Km (min–1 mM–1)	fins (misinsertion frequency)	
dG	Mg2+	dCTP	0.54 ± 0.05	0.84 ± 0.25	0.64	 	
 	 	dGTP	0.0014 ± 0.0001	0.36 ± 0.10	0.0039	0.006	
dG	Mn2+	dCTP	10.8 ± 1.3	0.036 ± 0.004	300	 	
 	 	dGTP	0.072 ± 0.002	0.023 ± 0.003	3.1	0.01	
The frequencies of misinsertion
were calculated relative to insertion of dCTP opposite dG using the
ratio (kcat/KM,mispaired dNTP)/(kcat/KM,dCTP). The smaller the value of fins, the
more accurate the polymerase. The kinetic values were determined and
are reported as in Table .

The dCTP:dG reactions in Mn2+ were performed twice. The mean ± s.e.m. is reported
(n = 2).

Measurement
of PrimPol Catalytic Efficiency and Misinsertion
Frequency on Undamaged DNA Templates
A fundamental parameter
for every DNA pol is the rate at which the enzyme makes mistakes (i.e.,
misinserts non-Watson–Crick bps). The misinsertion frequency
(fins) for a pol is often reported as
the efficiency of incorrect bp formation divided by the efficiency
of Watson–Crick bp formation. Many TLS pols have error-rates
on the order of 1 mistake every few hundred (fins = 0.01) to few thousand (fins = 0.001) catalytic events, with some enzymes like hpol ι exhibiting
misinsertion frequencies greater than 1 (i.e., non-Watson–Crick
bps are preferred over Watson–Crick bps).

Given its purported
role in DNA damage tolerance, we wanted to determine the misinsertion
frequency of PrimPol on both undamaged and damaged DNA templates.
To do so, we first measured the catalytic efficiency of PrimPol in
inserting the correct nucleotide opposite the four normal template
bases. Comparing the efficiencies for accurate insertion events, PrimPol
copies template dC &gt; dT &gt; dG &gt; dA, when Mn2+ is
the cofactor
(Tables  and ). Changing
the metal ion cofactor to Mg2+ does not alter the efficiency
of accurate nucleotide insertion (Tables  and ). The absolute specificity constant values
describing PrimPol activity ranged from a low of 0.25 mM–1 min–1 for dAMP:dT to a high of 1.3 mM–1 min–1 for dGMP:dC in the presence of Mg2+. With Mn2+ as the cofactor, the specificity constants
ranged from a low of 270 mM–1 min–1 for dAMP:dT to a high of 470 mM–1 min–1 for dGMP:dC. There is an approximate 5-fold range in catalytic efficiency
for copying the four template bases in Mg2+, compared to
only a ∼2-fold range in the efficiency of nucleotidyl transfer
with Mn2+ as the cofactor. We also noted that PrimPol activity
on substrates with template dA was stimulated over 1000-fold by Mn2+ (Table  and ), which is even greater than that observed for substrates
with template dG.

Steady-State Kinetic Parameters for
Single Base Insertion on Different Template Bases in the Presence
of Manganese
template
base	dNTP	kcat (min–1)	Km (mM)	kcat /Km (min–1 mM–1)	fins (misinsertion frequency)	
dT	dATP	6.2 ± 0.1	0.015 ± 0.001	410	 	
 	dGTP	0.021 ± 0.001	0.032 ± 0.005	0.66	0.002	
dA	dTTP	12.0 ± 0.2	0.045 ± 0.003	270	 	
 	dGTP	0.0053 ± 0.0002	0.017 ± 0.003	0.31	0.001	
dC	dGTP	5.6 ± 0.1	0.012 ± 0.001	470	 	
 	dATP	0.013 ± 0.001	0.064 ± 0.012	0.20	0.0004	
The frequencies of misinsertion
were calculated relative to insertion of dCTP opposite dG using the
ratio (kcat/KM,mispaired dNTP)/(kcat/KM,dCTP). The smaller the value of fins, the
more accurate the polymerase. The kinetic values were determined and
are reported as in Table .

Once we had determined the efficiency
of accurate DNA synthesis
by PrimPol, we then measured the efficiency of misinsertion on undamaged
template bases. Prior to performing steady-state kinetics for misinsertion,
we performed a short time course for misinsertion on p/t-DNA substrates
with either dG or dT as the template base. For both substrates we
found that, next to accurate Watson–Crick bp formation, the
most efficient misinsertion product was generated when the enzyme
is incubated with the dNTP capable of base pairing with the template
base at the +1 position (i.e., the dNTP capable of pairing with the
template base on the 5′ side of the 0 position to generate
−1 frameshift deletion products; data not shown). The steady-state
kinetic parameters describing PrimPol-catalyzed misinsertion of dGMP
across from template dA, dG, and dT was then measured. We also measured
PrimPol-catalyzed misinsertion of dAMP opposite template dC using
a slightly altered template sequence. Comparing the fidelity for the
four template bases, the misinsertion frequency in the presence of
Mn2+ was highest (i.e., most error-prone) for template
dG (fins = 0.01) and lowest (i.e., most
accurate) for template dC (fins = 0.0004)
(Tables  and ). Steady-state
kinetic parameters revealed that PrimPol fidelity is decreased ∼1.7-fold
by Mn2+ when copying template dG, as indicated by an increase
in the misinsertion frequency relative to Mg2+ (Table ). These results show that, like other TLS pols,
PrimPol makes a mistake copying undamaged template DNA about once
every 100–2500 insertion events.

Metal Ion-Dependent Primpol
Polymerase Extension Activity on
8-oxo-dG DNA template
PrimPol has been shown to bypass certain
DNA adducts, including 8-oxo-dG, 6-4 photoproducts, cyclobutane pyrimidine
dimers (CPDs), and tetrahydrofuran (THF) abasic site mimics. The bypass
of CPD lesions has only been observed when the zinc finger domain
of PrimPol is deleted from the protein. Of these adducts, 8-oxo-dG and abasic sites are of particular importance
to replication of mitochondrial DNA since the ratio of 8-oxo-dG to
dG in mtDNA is several times higher than in nuclear DNA, and oxidative
damage can lead to the formation of abasic sites in mtDNA.

To provide an initial measure for PrimPol-catalyzed
bypass of 8-oxo-dG, we compared PrimPol extension activity in the
presence of either Mg2+ or Mn2+ using p/t-DNA
substrates containing either template dG or 8-oxo-dG at the insertion
point (i.e., standing start extension assays). PrimPol exhibits robust
extension activity on both DNA substrates in the presence of Mn2+ (Figure ). There is a slight reduction
in the amount of extended product for 8-oxo-dG templates, and there
are clearly two products formed when PrimPol copies 8-oxo-dG (Figure ), presumably due to insertion of either dCMP or
dAMP opposite the lesion. The faster migrating of the two bands is
more intense than the upper band for both metals and is likely the
dCMP insertion product. The ratio of the two bands is slightly different
when comparing Mg2+ and Mn2+, with the lower
band dominating the products when Mg2+ is used for the
reaction. It is apparent from these experiments that extension by
PrimPol is not greatly impeded by 8-oxo-dG and that it is likely inserting
both dCMP and dAMP opposite the lesion.

Primer extension by PrimPol
on unmodified and 8-oxo-dG-modified
DNA templates is increased by manganese. Primpol (250 nM) was incubated
with 13/18-mer p/t-DNA (2.5 μM), a mixture of all four dNTPs
(250 μM each) and 10 mM of either (A) MgCl2 or (B)
MnCl2. The first template base is indicated above the gel
(dG or 8-oxo-dG). Primer extension was allowed to proceed for up to
60 and 30 min for Mg2+ and Mn2+ reactions, respectively,
and the products were separated by 16% (w/v) polyacrylamide/7 M urea
gel electrophoresis. The inclusion of Mn2+ has a pronounced
stimulatory effect on DNA synthesis by PrimPol.

PrimPol Prefers to Insert dCMP Opposite 8-oxo-dG
We
next performed steady-state kinetic analysis of PrimPol-catalyzed
single-nucleotide insertion of either dCMP or dAMP opposite 8-oxo-dG.
PrimPol prefers to insert dCMP opposite 8-oxo-dG over dAMP misinsertion
based on steady-state kinetic parameters (Table ). PrimPol catalytic efficiency, as measured by changes in the specificity
constant, is decreased to 26% during insertion of dCMP opposite 8-oxo-dG
(relative to dCMP insertion opposite dG). The fidelity of PrimPol-catalyzed
insertion opposite 8-oxo-dG is affected somewhat by the identity of
the metal ion cofactor. Insertion of dCMP opposite 8-oxo-dG is 5.7-fold
more efficient than dAMP misinsertion when Mg2+ is the
cofactor and only 1.8-fold when Mn2+ is the cofactor. Thus,
PrimPol-catalyzed bypass of 8-oxo-dG is 3.2-fold less accurate in
Mn2+ than it is in Mg2+. The metal ion-dependent
decrease in fidelity for 8-oxo-dG bypass (3.2-fold) is slightly greater
than the metal ion-dependent change in fidelity observed for undamaged
template DNA (1.7-fold). Nevertheless, these results lead us to conclude
that PrimPol prefers to catalyze accurate bypass of 8-oxo-dG, regardless
of whether Mn2+ or Mg2+ is used.

Steady-State Kinetic Parameters for
Single Nucleotide Insertion Opposite 8-oxo-dG
lesion	metal	dNTP	kcat (min–1)	Km (mM)	kcat/Km (min–1 mM–1)	
8-oxo-dG	Mg2+	dCTP	0.23 ± 0.02	1.4 ± 0.3	0.17	
 	 	dATP	0.04 ± 0.003	1.2 ± 0.3	0.03	
8-oxo-dG	Mn2+	dCTP	4.0 ± 0.2	0.052 ± 0.008	77	
 	 	dATP	2.2 ± 0.1	0.052 ± 0.013	42	
The kinetic values were determined
and are reported as in Table .

PrimPol Prefers to Extend From dC:8-oxo-dG Base Pairs over dA:8-oxo-dG
Mispairs
From our pol extension gels, it was obvious that
PrimPol readily extends past 8-oxo-dG sites (Figure ). Our single-nucleotide results revealed that accurate insertion
opposite the lesion is preferred, but it remained to be seen if PrimPol
preferentially extends from dC:8-oxo-dG or dA:8-oxo-dG pairs. In order
to determine PrimPol fidelity at the extension step past 8-oxo-dG,
we measured the catalytic efficiency of PrimPol-catalyzed next-base
extension from primers containing either dC or dA paired opposite
dG and 8-oxo-dG (substrates 11–14). We first measured next-base
extension for unmodified DNA substrates and found that PrimPol extends
from dC:dG bps ∼2500-fold more efficiently than dA:dG mispairs
(Table ). As with the insertion step, PrimPol
shows a preference for accurate bypass of 8-oxo-dG, extending from
dC:8-oxo-dG bp 1.8- (Mg2+) to 2.1-fold (Mn2+) better than dA:8-oxo-dG mispairs (Table ). The efficiency of the next-base extension step past dC:8-oxo-dG
bps increases back to near the level observed for unmodified DNA templates
(∼75% to 85% of that observed for undamaged DNA), which is
consistent with a mild reduction in PrimPol DNA synthesis in extending
past 8-oxo-dG lesions.

Steady-State Kinetic
Parameters for
Next-Base Extension in the Presence of Magnesium and Manganese
template	dNTP	metal	kcat (min–1)	Km (mM)	kcat /Km (min–1 mM–1)	
5′—CC −3′	dGTP	Mg2+	0.50 ± 0.04	0.98 ± 0.23	0.51	
3′—GGC—5′	 	 	 	 	 	
 	 	Mn2+	5.4 ± 0.1	0.020 ± 0.002	270	
5′—CC -3′	dGTP	Mg2+	0.48 ± 0.01	1.2 ± 0.1	0.39	
3′—GXC—5′	 	 	 	 	 	
 	 	Mn2+	6.9 ± 0.3	0.030 ± 0.006	230	
5′—CA -3′	dGTP	Mg2+	0.00021 ± 0.00005	1.1 ± 0.7	0.00019	
3′—GGC—5′	 	 	 	 	 	
 	 	Mn2+	0.0026 ± 0.0003	0.024 ± 0.01	0.11	
5′—CA -3′	dGTP	Mg2+	0.20 ± 0.01	0.91 ± 0.12	0.22	
3′—GXC—5′	 	 	 	 	 	
 	 	Mn2+	3.4 ± 0.1	0.031 ± 0.005	110	
X represents 8-oxo-dG lesion. The
template dC paired with the incoming dGTP is underlined. The kinetic
values were determined and are reported as in Table .

PrimPol Either Skips Over or Uses the “A-rule”
To Copy the THF Abasic Site Mimic
Compared to nucleotide
insertion opposite 8-oxo-dG, PrimPol exhibits weak catalytic proficiency
on a THF containing template, preferentially skipping over the lesion
and inserting dGMP opposite template dC positioned just 5′
of THF (Table ). The specificity constant
for dGMP insertion on the THF substrate is ∼0.04% of that measured
for dGMP insertion opposite template dC, and dAMP insertion on the
THF substrate is ∼0.03% of that observed for dATP insertion
opposite template dT. The slight preference for skipping past the
THF moiety is driven primarily by a larger increase in the Michaelis
constant for dAMP insertion relative to what is observed for dGMP
(Table ). Thus, PrimPol is more strongly impaired
by the THF abasic mimic than 8-oxo-dG, and it shows nearly equal preference
for either skipping past the abasic site or inserting dAMP.

Steady-State Kinetic Parameters for
Single Nucleotide Insertion Opposite a THF Abasic Site Mimic
lesion	metal	dNTP	kcat (min–1)	Km (mM)	kcat/Km (min–1 mM–1)	
abasic	Mn2+	dATP	0.012 ± 0.007	0.11 ± 0.02	0.11	
 	 	dGTP	0.0085 ± 0.0002	0.048 ± 0.005	0.18	
The kinetic values were determined
and are reported as in Table .

Discussion
Cellular
responses to perturbed replication involve the coordination
of many different proteins and enzymes. The discovery of PrimPol as a component of nuclear and mitochondrial
DNA replication has led to new models for translesion synthesis and
replication fork restart. PrimPol and replication protein A (RPA)
colocalize to foci in 293T cells following exposure to hydroxyurea
and ionizing radiation. There is also
a reported role for PrimPol in the bypass of UV irradiation induced
DNA damage., The proposed role of PrimPol
in mitochondrial DNA replication is especially exciting because of
the dearth of translesion synthesis and DNA repair elements known
to function in the mitochondria. A number of recent papers have reported
on several biochemical and biological aspects of human PrimPol activity,
but kinetic analysis of this new enzyme has yet to be investigated.
We sought to determine some of the kinetic parameters describing human
PrimPol activity in order to better understand how it compares to
other TLS and DNA repair pols and gauge its potential contributions
to DNA replication at sites of damage.

First, both Mn2+ and the length of the ssDNA overhang
increase the affinity of PrimPol for p/t-DNA (Table ). Our results also show that PrimPol has a ∼16-fold
preference for utilizing Mn2+ over Mg2+ during
DNA synthesis (Table ). Furthermore, we find
that the specificity constant for nucleotide insertion is increased
400–1000-fold by Mn2+ relative to Mg2+ (Tables  and ).
The metal ion-dependent change in fidelity is not large for unmodified
DNA (∼1.7-fold). Importantly, the misinsertion frequency of
PrimPol on normal template DNA ranged from one mistake every 100–2500
catalytic events, which is comparable to other TLS pols like the Y-family
members.

Others have shown that
PrimPol can copy past 8-oxo-dG lesions with
relatively little pausing. However, it
was unclear how accurate PrimPol was based on the qualitative experiments
with 8-oxo-dG. The misinsertion of dAMP opposite 8-oxo-dG is the most
common mistake made by pols, due in large part to the thermodynamically
favorable pairing betweein syn oriented 8-oxo-dG
and the incoming dATP., Also, the (syn) 8-oxo-dG: (anti) dA base pair is geometrically
deceptive to DNA pols due to its similarity to dT:dA bps. If we take
into account both the insertion and the extension steps, then accurate
bypass of 8-oxo-dG by PrimPol is around 4- (Mn2+) to 10-fold
(Mg2+) more efficient than misinsertion based on steady-state
measurements. The ability of PrimPol to catalyze effective and accurate
bypass of 8-oxo-dG is likely important for assisting both hpol γ,
as well as POLRMT, both of which are impeded by this ubiquitous DNA
adduct. Since hpol γ is the main mitochondrial DNA pol, it will
undoubtedly encounter 8-oxo-dG lesions that have not been removed
by BER. Kinetic studies have shown that the transient state specificity
constant for hpol γ-catalyzed insertion of dCMP opposite 8-oxo-dG
is decreased ∼470-fold relative to template dG. As it turns out, hpol γ-catalyzed bypass
of the lesion is accurate ∼90% of the time, but the fidelity
of the enzyme is diminished ∼30000-fold. In this respect, PrimPol could provide the mitochondria
with a relatively accurate means of copying 8-oxo-dG with only a moderate
decrease in catalytic efficiency.

The fact that PrimPol can
catalyze bypass of 8-oxo-dG in a relatively
accurate fashion is interesting, though it is not the only enzyme
capable of accurately bypassing 8-oxo-dG. Human pol λ appears
to be among the most accurate DNA pols at copying 8-oxo-dG. Human and yeast pol η also prefer to insert
dCMP opposite 8-oxo-dG., The Y-family member,
hpol κ, is quite error-prone, preferring dAMP insertion ∼10-fold
more than accurate insertion of dCMP., A previous
report on PrimPol erroneously stated that addition of PCNA and RPA
stimulated pols λ and η to perform misinsertion of dAMP
opposite 8-oxo-dG. This statement is not
correct. Adding accessory factors, such as PCNA and RPA, increases
the fidelity of translesion synthesis opposite 8-oxo-dG by stimulating
accurate insertion of dCMP opposite the lesion. In the presence of
RPA and PCNA, DNA pol λ incorporates dCMP 1200-fold more effectively
than misinsertion of dAMP opposite 8-oxoG and hpol η performs
accurate insertion of dCMP 68-fold better than dAMP opposite the adduct. It remains to be seen if RPA can stimulate PrimPol
action on 8-oxo-dG, but it seems unlikely that it will achieve the
levels of accuracy reported for either pols λ or η.

Compared to other TLS pols, PrimPol insertion across from the THF
modification is not effective, with ∼103-fold reduction
in the specificity constant. This decrease in PrimPol activity is
∼10-fold greater than that observed for Dpo4 from Sulfolobus
solfataricus., PrimPol is also not nearly as
effective as either hpol η, hpol ι, or hRev1 at bypassing
abasic sites. The contribution of PrimPol
to abasic site replication in cells remains uncertain, but it appears
to be inhibited substantially by these lesions based on our kinetic
results.

Sequence comparisons have revealed that human PrimPol
belongs to
an ancient class of enzymes that function to replicate small DNA genomes.
PrimPol shows sequence similarity to archaeal and eukaryotic primases,
and it contains a zinc finger homologous to that of herpesvirus UL52
primase. On the basis of sequence homology,
PrimPol may share structural features with a bifunctional primase-polymerase
enzyme ORF904 encoded by the pRN1 plasmid from Sulfolobus
islandicus. The pRN1-derived ORF904 primpol crystal structure
has been solved, revealing that a catalytic triad (Asp111, Glu113, and Asp171) is responsible for both
the primase and the pol activities of this bifunctional enzyme. It would seem that PrimPol also has a single
catalytic site since mutation of Asp114 and Glu116 abolishes both primase and pol activities of the enzyme. The ORF904 primpol crystal structure reveals
a shallower DNA binding surface than other DNA pols. It has been postulated that the zinc finger domain of PrimPol
may act in a manner similar to the little finger or polymerase-associated
domain (PAD) of the Y-family pols. Comparing
the structure of ORF904 prim-pol to Y-family pols (), it seems more likely that the zinc stem is positioned
in a manner that is analogous to the finger domain of Y-family pols,
while the so-called “DNA-binding sub-domain” (a.a. 1–100
in ORF904) is acting in a fashion comparable to the little finger
domain. In a general sense, the secondary structural elements of the
ORF904 DNA-binding subdomain represent a compressed or miniaturized
version of the Y-family little finger domain, with three short beta
sheets set atop two alpha helices and facing the proposed DNA binding
site (). The little finger structure
for Y-family pols is composed of four beta sheets lining the DNA binding
cleft and backed by two alpha helices. In this way, the overall arrangement
of the ORF904 domain architecture (and by inference, the structure
of PrimPol) may not be all that dissimilar to other TLS pols.

In terms of metal ion utilization by PrimPol, the decrease in the Kd,DNA and the increase in the kcat for Mn2+ relative to Mg2+ are
what drives the preference for Mn2+ (Table ). The 400–1000-fold increase in the value for the
specificity constant describing dNMP insertion in the presence of
Mn2+ stems from a large increase in the kcat and an equally large decrease in the Km,dNTP (Tables , , and ). Mechanistically speaking,
we cannot say if the decrease in the Km,dNTP is due to a higher affinity for the incoming dNTP, but this would
seem to be a reasonable possibility. Transient-state kinetic analysis
of PrimPol activity is ongoing and will likely provide greater insight
into how Mn2+ affects individual steps within the catalytic
cycle of PrimPol. However, it is clear that the KM,dNTP values measured for PrimPol-catalyzed primer extension
are very high (in the hundreds of micromolar), to the point where
one could postulate that the DNA pol activity of PrimPol would not
function in cells (where the concentration of the dNTP pool is in
the tens of micromolar) unless Mn2+ is bound in the active
site of the enzyme. This scenario seems even more likely in the mitochondria
where dNTP levels are about an order of magnitude lower than those
in the cytosol.

Other TLS pols
have been shown to exhibit higher catalytic proficiency
in the presence of Mn2+. For example, the catalytic efficiency
of Dpo4 from Sulfolobus solfataricus is increased
∼3-fold by Mn2+ on unmodified DNA templates and
∼10-fold on substrates containing either THF or CPD lesions. Dpo4 fidelity on unmodified DNA templates is
decreased 4.3-fold by Mn2+. The catalytic activity of hpol ι is stimulated ∼1600-fold
by Mn2+ on undamaged DNA and ∼2000-fold on substrates
containing N2-ethyl-dG, which is greater than what we observe with PrimPol. However,
like PrimPol, hpol ι shows modest decreases in fidelity in the
presence of Mn2+. Hpol κ,
on the other hand, shows diminished catalytic efficiency for Mn2+ compared to Mg2+. Even more striking is the large decrease in hpol κ fidelity
observed when Mn2+ is substituted for Mg2+.
Steady-state kinetic parameters indicate that nucleotide selection
by hpol κ is ∼6000-fold less faithful in the presence
of Mn2+. The Mn2+-dependent changes in hpol κ activity and fidelity are reminiscent
of those observed for replicative pols. Finally, studies with the
X-family members pols β, λ, and μ have shown that
each of these enzymes preferentially utilize Mn2+ over
Mg2+, with differing effects upon fidelity.−

It was established decades ago that Mn2+ could
induce
mutagenic DNA synthesis in manner that seems to affect mitochondria
more than nuclear components, and it has long been recognized that
DNA pols are generally more error-prone in the presence of Mn2+.− Structural comparisons between Mg2+ and
Mn2+ coordinated in the active site of Dpo4 reveals that
relaxed coordination requirements for Mn2+ contribute to
error-prone synthesis by allowing a greater range of productive base
pair arrangements. While the exact biological
relevance of Mn2+ toward mtDNA replication is unclear,
it is interesting to note the relatively large &gt;400-fold activation
of PrimPol catalysis that accompanies substituting Mg2+ with Mn2+, given the reported role for PrimPol in mtDNA
replication. Still, it is not clear if physiological concentrations
of Mn2+ are sufficient to compete with Mg2+ for
pol active sites. The concentration of intracellular Mg2+ ranges from 14 mM to 20 mM in mammalian cells with considerably
less free Mg2+ in the cytosol (∼0.5–0.7 mM). Intracellular Mn2+ has been measured
near 10 μM. In the last several
years, a newly identified class of ion transporters called natural
resistance-associated macrophage proteins (NRAMPs) have been shown
to regulate Mn2+ concentrations in the cell. These NRAMP proteins have been identified in
prokaryotes and eukaryotes, including humans. NRAMP-mediated ion transport
can increase intracellular Mn2+ concentrations to &gt;300
μM. In bacteria, NRAMP proteins
are up-regulated in response to treatment with hydrogen peroxide,
which leads to the intriguing possibility that an influx of Mn2+ could activate PrimPol (and perhaps other TLS pols) during
periods when oxidative damage to DNA is increased. However, it is
also possible that the utilization of Mg2+ by PrimPol leads
to incorporation of only a single nucleotide, which could be sufficient
for bypass of DNA damage and thereby limit the risk of PrimPol-induced
mutagenesis.

The ability of PrimPol to accurately bypass 8-oxo-dG
during periods
of oxidative stress could impact human health by preventing the untimely
depletion of mtDNA. The role of mitochondrial DNA replication components
in human disease is well documented. Mutations in the POLG gene, encoding the catalytic subunit of hpol γ, are heterogeneous
and result in multiple disorders, such as progressive external ophthalmoplegia,
parkinsonism, premature menopause, and Alpers syndrome. Interestingly, a recent exome sequencing study
identified missense mutations in the CCDC111 gene
that encodes PrimPol in a family diagnosed with high myopia. The resulting Y89D amino acid change in PrimPol
occurs in a position that is highly conserved across species (from
humans through zebrafish) and is predicted to reside in the DNA-binding
subdomain of human PrimPol at a residue that may be homologous to
Phe88 in ORF904 primpol from S. islandicus, based on sequence comparisons. The structure of ORF904 primpol
shows Phe88 to reside in the α2 helix, which sits
on the opposite face of the subdomain that is predicted to be in contact
with DNA. When considering the potential
impact of the Y89D change observed for human PrimPol, it is possible
that changing Tyr to Asp could be slightly more disruptive to α-helix
formation, but it could also result in altered interactions with RNA/DNA.
Future studies will investigate the functional changes to PrimPol
action that are imposed by the Y89D mutation.

In summary, we
have performed the first in depth kinetic analysis
of the DNA pol activity of human PrimPol. We find that PrimPol preferentially
binds to p/t-DNA with longer ssDNA overhangs and that binding is tighter
when Mn2+ is the cofactor. The polymerization activity
of PrimPol is strongly stimulated by Mn2+. We quantified
the PrimPol misinsertion frequency on undamaged DNA templates and
find that the fidelity of polymerization is indeed comparable to other
TLS pols (1 mistake every ∼100–2500 insertion events).
Finally, we provide evidence that PrimPol prefers to bypass 8-oxo-dG
in an accurate manner, clarifying previous qualitative suggestions
to the contrary. The mechanism by which PrimPol is recruited to sites
of stalled mitochondrial DNA replication and/or transcription by POLRMT
is still an active area of investigation, and additional studies are
needed to decipher the exact role of PrimPol in the maintenance of
mtDNA.

Supporting Information Available
Supporting Tables S1 and S2
report on ssDNA binding and steady-state kinetic parameters describing
PrimPol activity in magnesium, and Figure S1 compares structural elements
of ORF904 primpol from Sulfolobus islandicus and
Dpo4 from Sulfolobus solfataricus. This material
is available free of charge via the Internet at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bi501024u_si_001.pdf

The authors
declare no
competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
We thank Dr. Matthew Pence for
critically reading our manuscript
and for helpful suggestions.

Abbreviations
8-oxo-dG7,8-dihydro-8-oxo-2′-deoxyguanosine

dNTPsdeoxyribonucleotide
triphosphates

DTTdithiothreitol

EDTAethylenediaminetetraacetic acid

POLRMTmitochondrial RNA polymerase

polpolymerase

THFtetrahydrofuran

TLStranslesion DNA synthesis

