Protein phosphorylation on Ser,
Thr, or Tyr is an abundant and ubiquitous post-translational modification
(PTM) reaction. This PTM is central to all signaling pathways and
impacts protein activity, interactions, localization, and degradation., Defects in kinase signaling are implicated in many diseases, including
cancer, and neurodegenerative and metabolic disorders.,

The mitogen activated protein (MAP) kinases are a family of
related
enzymes found at key nodes in major cell signaling pathways. Each of the MAP kinase subfamilies is activated
by different stimuli; ERK1/2 can be stimulated by growth factors,
while the p38 and JNK subfamilies are typically stimulated by environmental
stressors, such as DNA damage, heat shock, or oxidative stress. Within each MAP kinase subfamily, each isoform
often has overlapping roles, but differential activation may result
from varying tissue distribution. These central kinases have been
implicated in cancer, inflammatory, and other diseases and have thus
become major drug discovery targets.,, Because of their centrality in cellular function
and frequent association with dysregulated cellular activity, individual
MAP kinase subfamilies represent important targets for the development
of quantitative activity sensors in order to understand the intricate
dynamics of kinase activation and signaling networks at the systems
levels.,,

Commonly
employed approaches for monitoring protein kinase activity
include quantitative radioactivity-based approaches that rely on phosphoryl
transfer from [γ-32/33P]ATP to peptide or protein
substrates, semiquantitative phosphoprotein-specific antibody-based
methods, and mass spectrometry-based phosphoproteomics analyses. In considering methods for direct and quantitative
measurement of target kinase activities in the context of unfractionated
cell lysates and tissue homogenates, radioactivity-based assays are
not suitable due to the promiscuity of ATP in many cellular phosphorylation
reactions. Alternatively, antibody-based measurements, while useful
in cell and tissue lysates, are limited by the availability, reliability,
and cost of specialized antibodies. Additionally, antibodies only
provide a semiquantitative proxy for kinase activation, since assays
are based on measuring the presence of phosphorylation that correlates
with activated kinase—not the biochemical activity or activation
kinetics of the target kinase. Mass spectrometry-based methods, while
also applicable in complex systems, require specialized training,
instrumentation, and data analysis and are limited to semiquantitative
analysis because data acquisition is labor- and equipment-intensive.
In contrast, the application of fluorescence-based sensors that provide
quantitative readouts of kinase activity have considerable potential
to overcome these limitations, provided
that the challenges of sensor selectivity in complex mixtures can
be adequately addressed.

We have previously reported protein
kinase activity sensors that
take advantage of the sulfonamido-oxine (Sox) fluorophore, which reports
peptide phosphorylation via chelation-enhanced fluorescence (CHEF).− In these sensors, the CHEF fluorophore is introduced into peptide
substrates via cysteine alkylation with the electrophilic 2-bromomethyl-5-(N,N′-dimethyl)sulfonamide-quinoline
(Sox-Br) reagent, affording the CSox residue (Figure A). Generally, CSox is introduced into an optimized peptide
substrate for a target kinase at positions ±2 or ±3 relative
to the Ser/Thr/Tyr phosphorylation site. Using this small set of peptides,
the best sensor is generally identified empirically based on the robustness
of the fluorescence signal change and the substrate kinetic parameters.
Typicallly, these 8–12 amino acid substrate sequences represent
the major determinant of kinase specificity, i.e., the kinase consensus
sequence. The fluorescence-sensing mechanism
is based on the chelate effect introduced by phosphorylation of the
Ser/Thr/Tyr residue proximal to CSox, which enhances Mg2+ binding affinity compared to the unphosphorylated species and results
in increased fluorescence due to the CHEF effect (Figure A). In this way, CSox-modified peptide substrates
provide a means to directly measure kinase activity in continuous
time-dependent assays in medium to high throughput (96–1536
well plate).

Design of MAP kinase activity sensors. (A) MAP kinase
activity
sensors are comprised of three domains: a docking motif to impart
selectivity, a Sox-containing phosphorylation motif that provides
fluorescence readout, and a linker between the two motifs (TMG = tetramethyl
guanidine; R1 = tBu; R2 = H or CH3). (B) Co-crystal structures of JNK1
(top, gray surface) and p38α (bottom, gray surface) with substrate
docking motifs, NFAT4 (mesh) and MK2 (mesh) respectively (PDB 2XS0() and 2OKR()). Arrows indicate the orientation that
the docking motifs of each MAP kinase subfamily bind. The ATP derivative,
phosphoaminophosphonic acid-adenylate ester (ANP), is shown in orange
sticks for clarity. (C) Design strategies for MAP kinase activity
sensors that have docking motifs in forward (Design A) and reversed
(Design B) directions.

The MAP kinases present unique challenges in terms of sensor
design
due to the minimal consensus sequence for phosphorylation, which include
either a Ser-Pro or Thr-Pro dipeptide motif. As such motifs are common among MAP kinase substrates, an alternate
strategy is required to realize selective sensors for specific kinases
in the family. One way to achieve selectivity for the MAP kinases
is to exploit docking grooves, or D-recruitment sites, located distal to the enzyme active site that
provide a second specificity-determining element. Previous efforts in our laboratory took advantage of the
ERK docking groove in the pursuit of an ERK1/2 sensor. The ERK1/2
sensor contained a CSox-based sensing module, which was ligated via
native chemical ligation to the ERK1/2-selective PNT domain of the
transcription factor Ets-1, a small protein domain that binds to the
ERK1/2 docking groove., However, while this approach
afforded a sensor with advantageous kinetic parameters and fluorescence
signaling properties, the semisynthetic strategy hampered sensor production
and broad availability as the synthesis involved recombinant expression
of the 100-residue PNT domain together with the preparation of a CSox
peptide for native chemical ligation.

It was also realized that
short docking motifs (8–12 amino
acids) could also be incorporated into MAP kinase activity sensors
without the need for a more extended protein domain such as the PNT
domain., MAP kinase docking sites generally feature
an acidic cleft adjacent to a hydrophobic pocket and cognate substrates
and upstream kinases include linear stretches of amino acids (docking/D-motifs,
Figure B) that display complementary basic
and hydrophobic features that bind the docking sites.− It has been observed through X-ray crystallography, by Garai and
others, that these D-motifs can bind to MAP kinases in two opposite
orientations., More specifically, selective
docking motifs for JNK1 were observed to bind in an N′ to C′
orientation, while selective docking motifs for ERK2 and p38α
were observed to bind in an opposite, C′ to N′ orientation,
relative to the enzyme active site (Figure B). Previous work showed that these D-motifs can be linked to CSox
containing substrate peptides to provide selective sensors for certain
MAP kinases., One example resulted in a p38α
sensor; however, the application of this sensor is hampered by crosstalk
with other kinases in the context of cell lysates. We therefore sought to expand this approach to other MAP
kinases and create a general route to MAP kinase sensors. The optimization
of each sensor was guided by their individual kinetic parameters,
specifically the Michaelis constant (KM) and kcat. Critically, we note that
sensors with advantageous KM values allow
for lower concentrations of sensor to be used in the assays, which
makes phosphorylation of the CSox substrate by off-target kinases
less problematic and as a consequence increases kinase selectivity
in cell and tissue lysate based assays.

The design, synthesis,
and evaluation of sensors for the MAP kinase
subfamilies, p38α/β, ERK1/2, and JNK1/2/3, are described.
The sensor design strategy exploits modular, peptide-based sensing
and recognition elements, which are covalently assembled using an
abiotic linker component that is tuned to optimize the distance between
the modules and engineered to provide the optimal relative orientation
of the recognition module relative to the sensing module. These MAP
kinase sensors provide a means to quantify kinase activities in cell
lysates over an extended time course and monitor kinase inhibitor
activities in either recombinant or cell lysate-based assays. To underscore
the utility of these MAP kinase subfamily selective sensors, we demonstrate
their application in the analysis of breast cancer progression in
a cell culture model, which reveals a correlation between p38α/β
activity and increased tumorgenicity.

Experimental Procedures
Peptide
Synthesis and Characterization
Peptides were
prepared using standard Fmoc-based solid-phase peptide synthesis as
previously described.,, The synthesis of peptides containing reversed docking domains is
described in . Peptides
were purified by preparative reversed-phase HPLC using dual wavelength
detection (228 nm: amide; 360 nm: Sox). Peptide concentrations were
then determined using UV–vis spectrophotometry based on the
Sox-chromophore extinction coefficient of 8247 M–1 cm–1 at 355 nM in 0.1 M NaOH and 1 mM EDTA. Further
peptide characterization is provided in the .

Recombinant Kinase Assays
All assays
were performed
in 96-well, 1/2 area, white, flat bottom plates at 30 °C in a
BioTek Synergy H1 fluorescence plate reader. Reactions were carried
out with sensors at varying concentrations (0.1–10 μM)
in assay buffer containing 50 mM Tris, pH 7.4, 10 mM MgCl2, 1 mM EGTA, 2 mM DTT, 0.01% Brij-35P, and 1 mM ATP at 30 °C
and were initiated by addition of kinase. Kinase amounts used for
each sensor are as follows: JNK1/2/3 20 ng/well; ERK1/2 10 ng/well;
p38α/β 10 ng/well, and the kinases were added in kinase
dilution buffer (20 mM Tris, pH 7.4, 0.01% Triton X-100, 0.1 mg/mL
BSA, 1 mM DTT, 10% glycerol) at concentrations of 2–4 ng/μL
(final volume/well = 120 μL). Following initiation of the kinase
reaction, fluorescence was monitored over time (λex = 360 nm; λem = 485 nm). Determination of kinetic
parameters was performed as previously described. Kinase panel screens were performed as described above
with 15 nM of each indicated kinase while the sensor concentrations
were held at 2 × KM: JNK1/2/3 3 μM;
p38α/β 1 μM; ERK1/2 2.5 μM. All kinases were
purchased from Invitrogen.

Cell Culture and Lysis
HeLa cells
were maintained in
Dulbecco’s Modified Eagle’s Medium (DMEM, Invitrogen)
supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS, Atlanta Biological,
Select Premium), 50 μg/mL streptomycin, and 50 U/mL penicillin.
MCF10A and MCF10AT cells were maintained in complete HuMEC medium
(per manufacturer instructions, Invitrogen) supplemented with 50 μg/mL
streptomycin, and 50 U/mL penicillin. MCF10AT.KC12 and MCF10CA1 cells
were maintained in advanced DMEM/F12 (1:1, Invitrogen) supplemented
with 10% FBS, 50 μg/mL streptomycin, and 50 U/mL penicillin.
All cells were cultured at 37 °C and 5% CO2. HeLa
cells were plated in 10 cm dishes in a density of 15 × 106 cells/dish on the day prior to the experiment and then treated
with 1 μM anisomycin in DMSO (1% DMSO final concentration).
To harvest cells at various times, they were washed with cold PBS,
scraped from the plate in cold PBS, spun down and finally resuspended
and lysed on ice for 15 min in 300 μL of lysis buffer containing
50 mM Tris, pH 7.4, 150 mM NaCl, 50 mM β-glycerophosphate, 10
mM sodium pyrophosphate, 1% Triton X-100, 2 mM EGTA, 1 mM DTT, protease
inhibitor cocktail and phosphatase inhibitor cocktail. Lysates were
then clarified via centrifugation (15 min × 14,000g) and protein concentration was determined via the BioRad colorimetric
assay. Typical total protein concentrations of the lysates were 1,000–5,000
μg/mL. The MCF10 cell lines without anisomycin treatment were
harvested in the same manner.

Kinase Assays in Cell Lysates
Assays were conducted
using a concentration of 2 × KM of
the indicated sensor (3 μM JNK, 1 μM p38, 2.5 μM
ERK, and 2.5 μM MK2) and 20 μg (for JNK) or 10 μg
(for ERK, p38 or MK2) of total protein from cell lysates. Sensor solutions
in assay buffer were prepared in bulk in buffer containing 50 mM Tris,
10 mM MgCl2, 1 mM EGTA, 2 mM DTT, 0.01% Brij-35P, and 1
mM ATP (final assay concentrations) and aliquoted across 96-well plates.
Reactions were initiated with addition of lysate (final volume/well
= 120 μL), and fluorescence emission over time was monitored
(at 30 °C; λex = 360 nm; λem = 485 nm). Slopes representing the rates of phosphorylation were
then determined by plotting fluorescence emission vs time data, and
these values are reported as kinase activity.

Western Blotting
Equal amounts of total protein (20
μg) were electrophoresed under reducing conditions (Bio-Rad
Mini-Protean TGX, 4–15%), transferred to a nitrocellulose membrane,
and immunoblotted with the corresponding phosphorylation site-specific
antibodies (see ).
Membranes were then incubated with an appropriate IR-dye linked secondary
antibody (Li-COR, IRDye 800CW goat antirabbit IgG and IRDye 680LT
goat antimouse IgG) and visualized (Li-COR Odyssey IR-Scanner).

Results and Discussion
Design and Synthesis of MAP Kinase Sensors
We envisioned
chimeric MAP kinase sensors that contain a docking motif and CSox-containing
phosphorylation site (Figure A). The CSox
module would provide fluorescent readout of kinase activity in addition
to a first layer of selectivity for the MAP kinase of interest based
on the SP/TP and extended phosphorylation consensus sequence. The
docking motif then provides a crucial secondary layer of selectivity
for the MAP kinase of interest. Ideally, the phosphorylation motif
and docking motif could be independently optimized and then joined
by a linker to provide MAP kinase sensors. The choice of docking motif
was guided by binding affinities between docking motif peptides with
the kinase of interest. Using published dissociation constants (KD) between various docking motifs and each of
the MAP kinases, we chose docking motifs that manifested not only
low micromolar KD’s, but also differential
selectivity between each of the MAP kinases (Table ). An additional consideration
in the choice of docking motif and subsequent sensor synthesis was
the orientation in which the docking motif binds to its cognate MAP
kinase-docking site. The docking motifs utilized in each of the three
MAP kinases sensors are listed in Table ,
which shows that each manifested at least a 70-fold enhanced affinity
for the MAP kinase subfamily of interest. The two alternate orientations
of docking motifs led to two separate sensor designs (Design A and
Design B), wherein those sensors with reversed docking motifs required
an alternate synthetic strategy for preparation (Figure C, Design B). Synthesis of the JNK sensor, with a “forward”
docking motif (Figure C, Design A) could be
achieved via a continuous Fmoc-based solid phase peptide synthesis
with incorporation of Fmoc-Cys(Mmt)-OH at the eventual site of CSox.
The Sox fluorophore could then be installed as previously described. The ERK and p38 sensors required a ligation
between the N-termini of the phosphorylation site module that contained
CSox and the docking motif, as is described below and in .

Reported
Docking Motifs and Corresponding
Binding Affinities for Specific MAP Kinase
 	 	 	KD (μM)	 	
kinase	docking motif	docking domain
sequence	JNK	p38	ERK	orientation	
JNK	NFAT4	ERPSRDHLYLPLEP	7.1	&gt;100	&gt;100	forward	
p38	MK2	IKIKKIEDASNPLLLKRRKK	&gt;100	0.05	19.5	reverse	
ERK	RSK1	PQLKPIESSILAQRRVRKL	&gt;100	0.3	23	reverse	
The
CSox containing phosphorylation motifs were either empirically
determined or guided by known substrate peptides of each kinase (Table ). The CSox-containing phosphorylation motifs for
ERK1/2 and p38α/β were previously determined,, while the JNK1/2/3 phosphorylation motif was based on a JNK1/2/3
phosphorylation site consensus sequence, namely, SANLLSPSPA. The optimal CSox location in the JNK phosphorylation
motif was determined by evaluating each of the peptides wherein CSox
was placed at either the +2, +3, −2, or −3 positions.
The phosphorylation-motif only peptide with CSox in the +2 position
provided a 3.7-fold fluorescence increase upon phosphorylation, which
translates into a useful Z′ factor for kinase
assays, and this peptide manifested a
Michaelis constant (KM) of 52 ± 5
μM.

Sequences of Modular MAP Kinase Activity
Sensors
With the key modular
elements established including a robust phosphorylation
module and selective docking site module, the complete JNK1/2/3 sensor
was developed after optimization of the linker between the two modules.
Originally, we chose a native peptide linker between the docking motif
and phosphorylation site, wherein we utilized either a two- or four-residue
linker between the NFAT4-derived docking motif and the optimized phosphorylation
motif. The amino acid linker was based on the JNK substrate, NFAT4,
wherein we essentially extended the length of the docking domain,
by either two (-SY-) or four (-SYRE-) residues. Following preparation
of these two sensors, we evaluated their activity as JNK substrates.
These two sensors showed modestly improved KM values of 20 μM (2-residue) and 30 μM (4-residue),
relative to the isolated phosphorylation site module. However, we
reasoned that if both docking site and phosphorylation modules bound
to JNK1/2/3 simultaneously, the complete sensors should manifest better KM values than those that were observed. After
careful consideration of the relative orientation of the docking motif
to the ATP binding site (approximately 90°, Figure B), we reasoned that a flexible linker might allow for better
simultaneous occupation of the docking groove and catalytic site.
Toward this end, we chose a flexible polyethylene glycol (PEG) linker
to join the two sensor modules. JNK sensors with a PEG2 linker between the phosphorylation site and docking motif exhibited
significantly improved kinetic parameters upon phosphorylation by
JNK2 (KM = 0.95 ± 0.13 μM).
This Michaelis constant was within the target range (low micromolar)
that we proposed would provide selectivity for the MAP kinase of interest
in cell lysate based assays.

In order to explore the generality
of the approach, we sought to
expand this modular chemical strategy, including a flexible linker,
to prepare sensors for ERK1/2 and p38α/β. However, as
it was proposed that reversed docking motifs were required for selective
p38α/β and ERK1/2 sensors, a complementary synthetic strategy
was required to facilitate a formal N-terminus to N-terminus ligation,
between the phosphorylation/sensing site and the docking motif modules
(Figure C, Design B). To achieve this, the
two modules were independently synthesized and following capping with
6-azidohexanoic acid (azide) and propiolic acid (alkyne), respectively,
the modules were conjugated via a Copper-mediated “click”
reaction (). This ligation allowed for effective incorporation
of reversed docking motifs into MAP kinase activity sensors. Following
the preparation of docking-domain based activity sensors for ERK1/2,
p38α/β, and JNK1/2/3 (Table ),
the ability to function as kinase activity sensors was investigated.

MAP Kinase Sensors Robustly and Selectively Report Kinase Activity
Each sensor was validated and characterized by determining the
kinetic parameters of phosphorylation (Table  and ). All three MAP kinase sensors manifested improved Michaelis constants
(KM) as compared to previously reported
sensors., This reduction in KM enables improved selectivity in complex cell lysates systems,
as the concentration used in assays is directly related to the KM. Following the validation and kinetic characterization
of each sensor with the appropriate recombinantly expressed and activated
MAP kinase, each sensor was screened against a panel of related and
nonrelated kinases to evaluate sensor selectivity (Figure A–C). The JNK sensor reported activity for
each of the three major JNK isoforms, JNK1, JNK2, and JNK3, while
the selectivity for JNK1/2/3 over other MAP and non-MAP kinases was
excellent at concentrations of 2 × KM, with no greater than 12.5% activity observed for any of the off
target kinases. Interestingly, the activities (and KM’s) observed for each of the JNK isoforms correlated
well with the sequence homology among the three isoforms; i.e., the
JNK sensor had similar catalytic efficiency between JNK1 and JNK3,
which show the highest homology to each other and slightly lower efficiency
for JNK2 (Table  and ). The p38 sensor
demonstrated robust selectivity for the highly similar p38 isoforms,
p38α and p38β, over the other p38 isoforms (p38δ
and p38γ), as well as over ERK1/2, JNK1/2/3, and other non-MAP
kinases evaluated. Lastly, the ERK sensor selectively reported ERK1
and ERK2 activity, with measurable crosstalk observed with p38α
and p38β (10% and 17%). However, this p38α/β crosstalk
will only be relevant in situations where the relative amounts of
ERK and p38 are similar. In one example, we observed that p38 activity
was not detected in cell lysates using the ERK sensor (). In addition, given the broad availability of selective p38 inhibitors,
such as SB203580, the p38 crosstalk can be minimized by running a
control assay that includes a selective p38α/β inhibitor
(). Importantly, none of the MAP kinase sensors were phosphorylated
by the cyclin dependent kinases (CDK1/Cyclin B and CDK2/Cyclin A),
which are closely related proline-directed kinases. In the event that
the small amount of crosstalk observed between the MAP kinase subfamilies
would hamper activity measurements in complex mixtures, selective
kinase inhibitors could be employed to minimize this effect. Following
promising results using purified, activated enzymes, we sought to
investigate the utility of these sensors in unfractionated cell lysates.

MAP kinase
activity sensors can selectively report kinase activity
in recombinant assays. (A–C) Kinase selectivity profile for
each sensor was determined by evaluating kinase activity in a panel
of related kinases (15 nM kinase, 2 × KM sensor concentration). Values are plotted as a percentage
of the target kinase.

Kinetic Parameters for Each MAP Kinase
Activity Sensor
sensor	isoform	KM (μM)	Vmax (μmol min–1 mg–1)	kcat (min–1)	catalytic
efficiency (min–1 μM–1)	
JNK1/2/3	JNK1	3.30 ± 1.1	0.38 ± 0.05	17.9 ± 2.2	5.4	
 	JNK2	0.95 ± 0.13	0.37 ± 0.02	18.2 ± 1.3	19.2	
 	JNK3	2.84 ± 1.3	0.35 ± 0.07	26.6 ± 5.6	9.4	
ERK1/2	ERK1	1.14 ± 0.02	0.42 ± 0.03	29.9 ± 2.0	26.2	
 	ERK2	1.15 ± 0.18	0.90 ± 0.01	62.8 ± 0.7	54.6	
p38α/β	p38α	0.31 ± 0.03	1.37 ± 0.08	92.6 ± 5.4	298.7	
 	p38β	0.14 ± 0.03	0.84 ± 0.13	39.6 ± 6.3	282.9	
Amino Acid Sequence Homologies within
Each MAP Kinase Subfamily
MAP Kinase Sensors Report Kinase Activity in Unfractionated
Cell Lysates
To first assess the ability of each sensor to
report kinase activity in cell lysates, HeLa cells were treated with
anisomycin, a known stimulator of the stress response and potent activator
of the three major MAP kinases. The cells were then lysed and kinase
activity measurements were made (Figure A,B).
ERK1/2, p38α/β, and JNK1/2/3 each gave a different activation
profile, both temporally and in maximal activation, following treatment
with anisomycin. In parallel, Western blot analysis for the phospho-MAP
kinases was performed. Results obtained using the Sox-based activity
sensors correlated well with traditional Western blot analysis. One
notable difference between the two methods is in detecting and quantifying
low basal kinase activities. The kinase activity sensors report low
basal activities, in situations where signals for the active phosphokinases
could not be observed without maximizing the intensity settings, which
compromises the resolution of the other signals.

MAP kinase activities
can be monitored in cell lysates. (A) Activity
of JNK1/2/3, ERK1/2, and p38α/β in HeLa cell lysates following
treatment with 1 μM anisomycin. Values are plotted as a fold
change from the 0 min control and are representative of triplicate
measurements performed in duplicate. (B) Western blot analysis of
the same anisomycin treated lysates as A. Tubulin is shown as a loading
control. (C) MAP kinase activity sensors can report inhibitor activities
in cell lysates or with recombinant kinases (rKinase). (D) MAP kinase
and MK2 activities were monitored in MCF10 cell line series. Values
are shown as fold change from level in MCF10A cell line. Values are
representative of triplicate measurements performed in duplicate.

The kinase selectivity in cell
lysates was determined by performing
kinase activity measurements in anisomycin-treated lysates in the
presence of selective inhibitors for each of the MAP kinase subfamilies.
The half maximal inhibitory concentration (IC50) for each
kinase inhibitor-kinase pair was evaluated against both recombinant
kinase and in anisomycin treated lysates. By comparing the relative
IC50 values in lysates vs recombinant kinase and the remaining
kinase activity at the highest inhibitor concentration, the kinase
selectivity can be inferred. For all three kinase sensors evaluated,
the IC50 in cell lysates is consistent with the values
derived from assays with recombinant kinases (Figure C and ). In the case of the JNK inhibitor, JNK-IN8, a
lower IC50 was observed in cell lysates. This could be
due to the selectivity of the compound for the various JNK isoforms. In addition, the residual activity detected
at the highest inhibitor concentrations used for each of the MAP kinases
was approximately 10% or less. This correlates well with the kinase
selectivity observed in the kinase panel selectivity screen (Figure A–C). Overall, these results demonstrate
the utility of Sox-based kinase activity sensors in monitoring kinase
activity following various stimuli.

Profiling MAP Kinase Activity
in a Cellular Model of Breast
Cancer Progression
We next sought to apply these sensors
to evaluate MAP kinase signaling in a cell culture model of breast
cancer progression. We chose the MCF10A series, which is a set of
isogenic cell lines that represent progression of proliferative disease, as a system to explore whether the MAP kinase
sensors could be used to provide quantitative data which may correlate
with the cancer progression phenotype. Until now, a quantitative analysis
of the activities of the MAP kinases in this system has not been reported.
Specifically, we used the MCF10A, MCF10AT, MCF10AT1K.c12, and the
MCF10CA1h cell lines. MCF10A cells represent benign, normal breast
epithelium. Initially transformed MCF10AT
cells have been transfected with oncogenic H-ras, premalignant MCF10ATK.c12 cells were isolated after xenograft
passage of MCF10AT cells,, and fully malignant
MCF10CA1h cells were isolated after further xenograft passages in
mice. Previously, mRNA gene expression
profiling, copy number variation analysis, and proteomic analysis
have been performed in this series of cell lines.− Although these
studies provided useful information, mRNA expression and protein levels
may vary with enzymatic activity, and we were therefore interested
in changes in MAP kinase activities during the course of disease progression
(Figure D).

We monitored ERK1/2, JNK1/2/3,
and p38α/β activity as well as MAP kinase activated protein
2 (MAPKAP2, MK2), which is a downstream target of p38α/β
and is involved in the DNA damage response and other stress and inflammatory
pathways.,, As shown in Figure D, the activities of ERK1/2 and JNK1/2/3 do not significantly change
in the varying MCF10A cell lines. Strikingly, we observed significantly
higher activity of p38α/β in MCF10AT, MCF10AT.Kc12, and
MCF10CA1 (2.2-, 4.0-, and 15.2-fold, respectively), compared to the
benign MCF10A cells. Presumably, this increased activity of p38α/β
leads to the increased activity observed with MK2, as MK2 is a substrate
of p38α/β. Also of interest is in the comparison of the
gene expression and proteomic analysis of these cell lines. Neither
study identified p38 or MK2 as having increased levels,− demonstrating that kinase activity measurements can provide valuable
insight into cellular signaling that would not have been otherwise
observed in genome/proteome wide experiments. The current study demonstrates
the utility of quantitative kinase activity sensors in probing kinase
activities in various biological contexts, potentially providing insights
into interesting biological questions.

Herein we have detailed
the design and characterization of selective
MAP kinase activity sensors using a docking domain based strategy.
We chose docking domains for p38α/β, ERK1/2, and JNK1/2/3
that bound preferentially to the kinase of interest. When introduced
into chimeric sensors, the docking motifs imparted selectivity for
each intended kinase. Interestingly, the docking motifs for ERK1/2
and p38α/β bound in an opposite orientation as compared
to JNK1/2/3 and required an alternative synthetic strategy that allowed
for N-terminus to N-terminus ligation between the docking motif and
phosphorylation domain. Using recombinant kinase panel screens, we
demonstrated that each sensor was selective for the intended kinase
and furthermore this selectivity translated into selectivity in cell
lysates. With this set of kinase sensors, we proceeded to profile
MAP kinase activities in different cellular contexts. In this regard,
we were interested in MAP kinase activities in neoplastic disease
and investigated MAP kinase activities in the MCF10A model of breast
cancer progression. Through this study, we observed that p38 activity
was significantly increased in each successive cell line, while p38
activity was 15-fold higher in the most aggressive MCF10CA1h cell
line as compared to the benign MCF10A cell line. These studies demonstrated
the utility of kinase activity sensors in profiling kinase activities
in various contexts.

Overall, these sensors demonstrate the
utility of using secondary
kinase interactions in combination with Sox-containing phosphorylation
motifs, to generate useful kinase activity sensors. Future investigation
of isoform selective MAP kinase activity sensors or use of the current
sensors with isoform selective inhibitors would further enhance the
information that can be garnered from these sensors. In addition,
the use of kinase activity sensors may provide different insights
and/or novel perspectives into different biological phenomenon as
compared to other methods including gene profiling and proteomic analysis.
We anticipate that these sensors will be extremely valuable reagents
for systems biology studies of signaling. Furthermore, the combination of these three sensors that can distinguish
and rigorously quantify kinase activities through the three main MAP
kinase signaling pathways represents a major advance for the signaling
community. For example, we and others have shown that accurate measurements
of these pathways alone is sufficient to predict the apoptotic response
to cytokine and growth factor combination treatments. These sensors may also provide valuable tools in profiling
kinase activities in clinical tumor samples. In conclusion, we have
prepared a useful set of tools for selectively monitoring MAP kinase
activities that are useful in quantifying disease progression in cell
culture models of disease and in diseased tissues.

Supporting Information Available
Synthetic procedures, peptide
characterizations, and expanded methods section. This material is
available free of charge via the Internet at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bi500862c_si_001.pdf

This project
was supported by the Integrated Cancer Biology Program at MIT (NIH
U54-CA112967 – PI Douglas A. Lauffenburger and M.B.Y.), the
NIH (GM104047 and ES015339 - M.B.Y.), and a Koch Institute Bridge
Project Grant (M.B.Y. and B.I.). L.B.P. was supported by an NIH Ruth
L. Kirschstein National Research Service Award (F32 GM102992).

The authors declare
the
following competing financial interest(s): Imperiali, Shults and Lukovic
hold a patent on the CSox methodology.

Acknowledgments
We acknowledge Nathanael Gray for the generous
gift of the
JNK-selective inhibitor, JNK-IN8, and Professor Lee Bardwell for advice
regarding a JNK substrate peptide.

Abbreviations
MAPmitogen activated protein

KDdissociation constant

KMMichaelis constant

IC50half maximal
inhibitory concentration

CHEFchelation-enhanced fluorescence

Soxsulfonamido oxine

Sox-Br2-bromomethyl-5-(N,N′-dimethyl)sulfonamidoquinoline

