Protein kinases are a large superfamily of phosphoryl transferases
involved in the regulation of diverse cellular processes including
transcription and replication of DNA, biosynthesis of neurotransmitters,
metabolism of carbohydrates and lipids, organelle trafficking, muscle
contraction, and cell differentiation (−). Because of these critical regulatory roles and because protein
kinase defects are associated with many diseases, protein kinases
are obvious targets for drug design. Among over 2000 unique eukaryotic
protein kinases, protein kinase A (PKA) is
the most intensively studied and the best understood biochemically.
PKA thus serves as a prototypical enzyme for the whole family.ATP, adenosine triphosphate; ADP, adenosine
diphosphate; DNA, deoxy-ribonucleic acid; PKA protein kinase A; HFB,
harmonic Fourier beads; cAMP, cyclic adenosine monophosphate.



Within the cell, PKA is typically stored as an inactive holoenzyme
complex comprised of two regulatory (R) and two catalytic (C) subunits (,). Two functionally nonredundant types of R-subunits, RI and RII,
define the variety of responses of PKA to extracellular signals. In
the holoenzyme complex, RI subunits position an inhibitor peptide
in place of substrate in each C-subunit loaded with an ATP molecule
and two Mg2+ ions. Inhibition is allosterically lifted
upon binding of four cAMP molecules to the two R-subunits, one to
each of the tandem cAMP-binding domains, thereby unleashing the active
C-subunits. In addition to allosteric activation by cAMP, ATP and
Mg2+ concentrations are important for association between
the C- and RI-subunits (,,).
RII-subunits differ from RI in that they provide true substrate peptide
and do not require either Mg2+ or ATP to form a holoenzyme
complex.

ATP and Mg2+ bind to PKA in the active site cleft between
the small and large lobes (see Figure ). A
flexible Gly-rich loop from the small lobe closes over the nucleotide
like a lid, sealing off the active site (−). Main chain NH groups of three residues, S53, F54, and G55, at the
tip of the Gly-rich loop form the so-called nest that latches to the
phosphates (Figure B) (,). This interaction helps to lock the enzyme in the closed conformation
and to properly position the nucleotide for catalysis (,,−). Inside the
active site, a conserved K72-E91-D184 triad reorganizes to bind the
nucleotide with Mg2+ ions by breaking the K72-D184 salt
bridge. The K72 side chain coordinates α- and β-phosphates,
while D184 coordinates the Mg2+ ions. In addition, another
residue K168 coordinates γ-phosphate to further stabilize the
nucleotide-PKA complex.

The binding site can accommodate two Mg2+ ions (Figure ) (,,), the final coordination of which depends on the bound nucleotide.
With ATP, one Mg2+ ion, referred to as activating, is chelated
by the β- and γ-phosphates, and coordinates the D184 side
chain from the K72-E91-D184 triad in a bidentate fashion (,). The second Mg2+ ion, termed inhibitory, binds to the
α- and γ-phosphates, a single carboxyl oxygen of D184,
and a side chain carbonyl oxygen of N171. Structural water molecules
complete coordination shells of each ion to an octahedron (). Upon transfer of the γ-phosphate to substrate
followed by release of the phosphopeptide, the coordination shells
of the two Mg2+ ions rearrange to adjust to the ADP product
as has been shown by crystallographic () and computational (−) studies. In the product state with ADP, the activating Mg2+ ion coordinates only the β-phosphate, whereas the inhibitory
ion binds α- and β-phosphates.

The binding site for the activating Mg2+ has a higher
affinity (Kd = 1.7 mM) than the inhibitory
site (Kd = 3.2 mM) with ATP (,). In contrast, with ADP, the two Mg2+ binding sites have
identical binding constants (Kd = 1.6
mM) (). Therefore, depending upon Mg2+ concentration, PKA can have ATP bound with either a single
activating ion or both activating and inhibitory ions. Interestingly,
it is only when the second Mg2+ ion is bound that all of
the residues and the phosphates at the active site cleft become ordered
and could be resolved crystallographically (). Binding a Mg2+ ion in the primary site is believed to
activate, whereas binding an additional Mg2+ ion in the
secondary site is believed to inhibit catalysis (−). Why would the second, low affinity Mg2+ ion that brings
order into the active site cause catalytic inhibition?

At low Mg2+ concentrations PKA has been inferred to
undergo conformational change following binding of the nucleotide.
This conformational change can be partially rate limiting (,). Although details of the conformational change are unavailable,
one hypothesis is that it involves rearrangements of various residues
in the active site along with the Gly-rich loop and the binding cleft (). Another prominent hypothesis involves a highly
conserved DFG motif. On the basis of the universal conservation of
these residues in the kinase family and their link to kinase inactivation (), it was suggested that conformational changes
in this region may facilitate the release of ADP (,).

At high Mg2+ concentrations, when both Mg2+ are bound, kinetic studies have identified ADP release to be the
rate-limiting step in PKA catalysis (,,−). It is not known whether Mg2+ ions release simultaneously
with or prior to ADP dissociation. Although the activating Mg2+ ion is necessary and sufficient for catalysis, the second
Mg2+ ion increases the nucleotide binding affinity to PKA (,,,). In fact, binding of either ATP or ADP to PKA critically depends
on Mg2+ ions (,,,,). Neither nucleotide nor Mg2+ ions alone bind strongly
to PKA, whereas together their binding affinities increase substantially.
The reasons for this cooperativity remain unclear.() Thus, Mg2+ ions play crucial roles at various
stages of PKA catalysis and inhibition and are worth studying in detail (,,,−,,).

Answering the questions about how Mg2+ ions affect PKA
catalysis in general, and in particular at the critical, rate-limiting
step of ADP release would require atomically detailed structural and
energetic description of the process, which is difficult to achieve
experimentally. Computational methods, on the other hand, can provide
such a description in principle. The first direct computational study
of the ADP release mechanism was performed in earlier work from our
lab that employed steered molecular dynamics (SMD) (−) to pull ADP
out of the binary complex with PKA ().
This work showed that the adenine ring underwent a swinging motion
out of the active site while the pyrophosphate remained anchored to
the Gly-rich loop. The Gly-rich loop opened significantly during this
rearrangement and eventually allowed the release of the pyrophosphate.
Although this pioneering work provided important insights into the
mechanism of ADP release, it suffered from a series of shortcomings.
No free energy estimates were provided. Most importantly, the Mg2+ ions were absent from the simulations and hence their role
could not be established.

Here we investigate in detail the effect of Mg2+ ions
on the rate-limiting step of ADP release from PKA. Previous studies
identified the need for ensemble methods to study transitions in large
molecules such as PKA (−,−). Therefore,
we model the ADP release transition directly by computing a transition
path ensemble that takes an ADP molecule from a bound state to a well-separated
state in which ADP no longer interacts with PKA. To do that, we employ
an equilibrium transition path ensemble methodology, namely, harmonic
Fourier beads (HFB) (−). The HFB method, in addition to its capability of finding minimum
free energy transition path ensembles, can compute corresponding free
energy profiles and their decompositions. Such energy partitioning
is invaluable for understanding of the ligand binding mechanism, and
is impossible to obtain experimentally. By computing the transition
path ensemble and their free energy characteristics in the presence
and absence of Mg2+ ions, we probe the role of the Mg2+ directly for the first time.

Thus, the present study provides a detailed structural and energetic
description of the complete mechanism of ADP binding and release.
The results allow us to evaluate previous proposals for the conformational
changes that should facilitate ADP release, such as Gly-rich loop
opening and DFG-flip. Furthermore, the free energy data reveals the
contributions of individual nucleotide groups and Mg2+ ions
to the nucleotide binding. It reveals the origin of binding cooperativity
between the Mg2+ ions and the nucleotide, and demonstrates
that Mg2+ ions act as linchpins that fasten the nucleotide
in the active site seat.

The depicted
model of the catalytic subunit of PKA was derived from the transition
state analogue structure with the PDB code 1L3R by removing AlF3. (A) The small and large lobes of the
conserved catalytic core are shown using cartoon representation in
blue and red, respectively. PKA-specific N-terminal and C-terminal
tails are depicted in lime and purple, with the hollow segment showing
disordered residues. The Gly-rich loop in the small lobe is shown
in orange. The inhibitor peptide PKI is depicted in yellow. This peptide
was removed in our simulations. Two Mg2+ ions are shown
as green balls. Mg1 corresponds to activating, whereas Mg2 corresponds
to inhibitory ion. The ADP molecule is shown in tan ball-and-stick
model. A few side chains that are most sensitive to Mg2+ presence in the active site are shown using licorice representation.
On the PKI inhibitor the phosphorylation site and the P-3 Arg are
also shown in thinner licorice. (B) A close up of the ADP and Mg2+ ions bound in the active site.

Methods
The HFB Method
We employ the recently developed HFB
transition path ensemble optimization and free energy calculation
method (−). Details of the approach have been presented elsewhere. Briefly,
the HFB method requires the initial reactant and product states of
the system to be predefined. Intermediate states are then generated
by an adaptive Fourier interpolation and represented together with
the reactant and product as a finite set of structures, termed beads.
The corresponding Cartesian coordinate space is then partitioned into
a reactive coordinate space (RCS) that best describes a particular
transition and a complementary spectator coordinate space (SCS). Independent
classical molecular dynamics simulations of each bead with matching
harmonic restraints on RCS positions are used to compute the Cartesian
free-energy gradients or mean forces using the generated ensemble.
These mean forces are used to drive the enhanced steepest descent
optimization of all beads (representing the transition path ensemble)
toward the bottom of the nearest free-energy valley. Finally, a Fourier
interpolation of the mean forces is used to compute the potential
of mean force (PMF) along the path via a line integral approach.

Initial Path Setup
To set up a transition path ensemble
optimization, one needs to define a reactant and a product state for
the ADP dissociation process. Reactant state setup proceeded from
the crystallographic structure of the transition state analogue, PDB
code: 1L3R, by removing AlF3 and the
phosphorylated substrate peptide. This resulted in a catalytic subunit
complexed with two Mg2+ ions and an ADP molecule. Missing
residues, numbers 5 through 13, were modeled (see ). Histidine residues 62, 68, 87, 142,
158, and 260 were doubly protonated, while histidines 131 and 294
were protonated on their Nδ atoms only. In addition, residues
S10, S139, T197, and, S338 were phosphorylated, each contributing
−2 charge. To maintain system neutrality and near physiological
ionic strength 31 Cl−, 23 Na+ and 4 Mg2+ ions were placed in a rectangular simulation box of 79 ×
88 × 69 Å filled with 13 103 water molecules. The
total number of atoms in the simulation box was 45 142.

To generate the product state we modified the reactant state by translating
ADP 33 Å to a corner of the simulation box along a direction
that visually presented the least steric clashes. Note that the two
Mg2+ ions bound at the active site were not immediately
translated along with the ADP (see below).

To establish a sound coordinate system for the path activation
and subsequent optimization, we performed analysis of available PKA
crystallographic structures (see ) using Bio3D software (http://mccammon.ucsd.edu/∼bgrant/bio3d) (). This analysis identified four helices
in the large lobe as the least mobile between available structures.
This rigid core comprised residues 140−160, 217−234,
263−274, and 288−298 from helices E, F, H, and I, respectively.
The rigidity of these helices has also been noted in previous molecular
dynamics simulations and structural analyses (,). These core positions were kept fixed throughout the simulations
and served as the reference for alignment of beads during the transition
path activation and optimization procedure. In particular, every time
a new path was generated, reference beads were realigned to match
the core Cα atoms of the 1L3R PDB structure.

Activated Evolution
We followed a standard activated
evolution procedure to build the path between the reactant and the
product states (). Specifically, we used
24 beads and a soft mass-weighted force constant of 0.05 kcal/mol/Å2 on all heavy atoms of the solute excluding fixed atoms of
the core. Hence, the RCS comprised all nonfixed heavy atoms of the
protein, ADP and bound Mg2+ ions (hereafter termed RCS1).
Activation started from the reactant state with a new bead activated
after every evolution step with 50 ps of MD. This procedure was continued
for each of the 24 beads. During the procedure, once activated, a
bead continues to evolve until the final step when all beads are active.

To probe the behavior of the Mg2+ ions upon ADP dissociation,
we designed our activated evolution procedure to initially bias the
ions to their original crystallographic positions. That is, similar
to the reactant sate, our first product state had both Mg2+ ions bound to their original positions in the active site. After
running activated evolution for 20 steps, we observed that in all
cases Mg2+ ions closely followed the dissociating ADP despite
the opposing bias. We then altered the product state by translating
the Mg2+ ions by the same amount as ADP. This prevented
collapse of the Mg2+ ions back to the bound state at the
product beads. With that we completed the activated evolution procedure
with four final steps. As a result, in the product state the Mg2ADP moiety was in a conformation similar to the bound state,
but simply translated outside the active site.

Transition Path Optimization and PMF Calculations
After
the initial path was generated, we continued optimization for 451
more optimization steps, while gradually expanding the path to 185
beads. Near the end of optimization, the RCS1 has been reduced to
include only heavy backbone atoms of the protein, select atoms of
ADP and coordinated Mg2+ ions (RCS2). The details of the
optimization and changes in RCS are also provided in .

Because optimization of an analogous
path without Mg2+ ions would have been prohibitively expensive,
we devised the following procedure to assess the influence of Mg2+ ions on the ADP binding. We used the coordinates of the
final path optimized with Mg2+ ions, but translated the
bound Mg2+ ions to two different corners of the simulation
box where they were held by the restraints and interacted only with
the solvent. The resulting perturbations of all the atoms affected
by the move were then gradually relaxed and the system re-equilibrated
for all the beads prior to final data collection and PMF calculation.

To allow more robust PMF calculations, we further reduced the reactive
coordinate space to include only core Cα atoms along with ADP
and Mg2+ ion coordinates (hereafter termed RCS3). The final
PMFs for the 185-bead paths with and without Mg2+ ions
were computed using RCS3 with a force constant of 5.0 kcal/(mol Å2). The collection time for each bead was 1 ns. The integration
of the PMFs employed the maximum number of Fourier basis functions,
which equals the total number of beads in the path.

Advantageously, the HFB method allows decomposition of the free
energy along the path onto subsets of the RCS degrees of freedom.
Here, we decomposed the final PMFs into contributions from both Mg2+ ions and the three groups of ADP, namely, the adenine, ribose
ring, and the pyrophosphate, both individual and collective. Integrating
the degrees of freedom of the rigid protein core that were restrained
to the 1L3R crystallographic coordinates throughout the path must
give a flat PMF, and can be used as an internal standard.

Estimates of Systematic Errors in PMFs
To gauge possible
systematic errors in the final PMFs, and to accurately estimate the
deformation of the ADP ligand upon binding to the protein, we constructed
two additional ADP-only paths for PMF calculations. For the first
path, we extracted the coordinates of the ADP molecules from the optimized
path for the whole system and then translated their RCS3 centers of
mass to the origin. For the second path, we used a line interpolation
procedure to generate a much shorter, 12-bead path between the translated
reactant and product ADP states that were quite similar. The 12-bead
path should yield accurate free energy difference between the end
point states, thus, serving as a benchmark. Each translated ADP molecule
was solvated in a small cubic box of dimensions of 31 × 31 ×
31 Å filled with 991 water molecules, 5 Na+, and 2
Cl− ions. Following equilibration, we collected
data for 4 ns per bead using restraints on the ADP atoms as defined
in the RCS3. The final PMFs allowed error evaluation of the PMF integration
and the free energy of deformation of the ADP upon binding to PKA.

Simulation Parameters
For the transition path optimization
and PMF calculations, we used the HFB method as implemented in the
CHARMM simulation package (version c34b2) (). MD simulations were performed with NAMD (version 2.6) () using the CHARMM27 forcefield (,). The temperature was maintained at 310 K with the Langevin thermostat
using a coupling parameter of 1 ps−1. Pressure was
maintained at 1 atm by the Nosé-Hoover Langevin piston method
with a piston oscillation period of 200 fs and a piston decay parameter
of 500 fs (,). Nonbonded interactions were computed using
particle mesh Ewald (,) with a 8.5 Å real space
cutoff for electrostatic interactions and a switching function between
8.5 and 10 Å for vdW interactions. However, a multiple time-step
method (,) was employed for the electrostatic forces
with full electrostatic interactions computed every other step. The
nonbonded interaction list was updated every 20 steps using a 12 Å
cutoff. Covalent bonds involving hydrogen atoms were constrained using
SHAKE (−) with a tolerance in the bond length of 10−8 Å. The MD integration step size was 2 fs.

Results
Energetics of ADP Release
Calculating free energy profiles
along the optimized transition path yields detailed information on
the overall ADP association free energy and the forward and reverse
activation barriers. In addition, decomposition of the free energies
into contributions from specific subgroups of atoms permits a deeper
understanding of the mechanism of ADP release from PKA. It should
be noted that the computed free energies are properties of our model
and underlying forcefield. Furthermore, the computed free energies
have not been converted to the standard binding free energies as this
requires a nontrivial correction (−) that is presently unavailable for the multidimensional restraints
employed in the present study. Therefore, the computed free energy
values should not be compared directly to experimental values. Instead,
trends should be inferred to generate testable hypotheses.

Error Estimates
Transition path optimization yields
a relatively rough path even with 185 beads. It is anticipated that
PMF integration along such a rough path may suffer from systematic
errors. To assess these errors, we computed ADP-only PMFs for the
ADP deformation due to binding PKA. In particular, we compare the
free energy along the extracted 185-bead path with that from a 12-bead
path constructed by linear interpolation between the same end points.

Because both paths have the same end points, they should yield
the same ADP deformation free energies in the absence of systematic
errors. The free energy from the linearly interpolated 12-bead path
is expected to be the most accurate and should serve as a benchmark.
The final ADP-only PMFs appear rather smooth and well converged. (Figure ). However, the 185-bead PMF exhibits two kinks
due to abrupt changes in the ribose ring puckering between beads 19
and 20 that correspond to the release progress variable α =
0.10 and also between beads 180 and 181 at α = 0.98.

The final
PMFs for ADP binding to PKA and ADP deformation induced by the binding.
The free energy of the unbound state is set to zero. The line interpolated
ADP-only PMF used 12 beads; all the other PMFs employed 185 beads.
The PMFs were collected on the RCS3 surface (see ). The ADP-only PMFs for free energy
of deformation have been collected with total of 4.0 ns MD per bead.
The PMFs for ADP binding to PKA have been computed using 1 ns MD per
bead. In addition to the final PMFs, two intermediate PMFs are shown
to demonstrate convergence. The arrow points to the metastable intermediate
at α = 0.42. All the PMFs correspond to 1 atm and 310 K.

The linearly interpolated benchmark path yields a 3.3 kcal/mol
ADP deformation free energy (see Table ).
In contrast, the deformation free energy calculated along the coordinates
extracted from the path optimized for the full system produces −7.5
kcal/mol. Thus, the absolute error in PMF calculation along the 185-bead
path is 10.8 kcal/mol. Therefore, we can expect that the magnitude
of the association energies calculated for the full system would be
overestimated by at least 10.8 kcal/mol. We will use this estimate
of the systematic error to correct the final free energy differences
obtained for the full system. Where applicable, the corrected free
energy differences will be shown in parentheses.

Total Free Energies (in kcal/mol)
and Their Decompositions into Specific Groups for ADP-Binding to PKA,
along with ADP Deformation Benchmarks
 	Total	TotalC	Mg1Mg2	Mg1	Mg2	ADP	A	P	R	
ADP-line	3.3	3.3	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	
ADP-path	−7.5	3.3	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	
ADP-2Mg	−108.1	−97.3	−33.3	−12.7	−20.6	−74.8	−32.5	−24.7	−17.5	
ADP-0Mg	−22.0	−11.2	0.0	 	 	−22.3	−33.1	58.8	−48.1	
2Mg-0Mg	-86.1	-86.1	-33.3	 	 	-52.5	0.6	-83.6	30.5	
ADP-line is the 12-bead ADP-only
linearly interpolated path that provides the free energy of ADP deformation
upon binding to PKA. This free energy serves as a benchmark and is
used to correct the total binding free energies. All the other values
are given for 185-bead paths. ADP-path is ADP-only path extracted
from the optimized path for ADP release from PKA in the presence of
two Mg2+ ions. ADP-2Mg and ADP-0Mg are the free energies
computed for the full system along the optimized ADP release path
with Mg2+ ions and after the ions have been removed without
reoptimization, correspondingly. A − adenine, P − pyrophosphate,
R − ribose.

Corrected for the systematic
error.

ADP Release PMFs
As the final PMFs in Figure  demonstrate, association of the Mg2ADP
with PKA is favorable by −108.1 (−97.3) kcal/mol and
has no significant barriers. In the absence of Mg2+ ions,
ADP association remains favorable by as much as −22.0 (−11.2)
kcal/mol, but has a significant barrier of 17.5 kcal/mol. Although
in the absence of Mg2+ ADP release faces a significant
barrier of 39.5 kcal/mol, it is much less unfavorable than release
with Mg2+ ions. Note that the path ensemble for ADP release
in the absence of Mg2+ ions has not been free energy optimized.
Therefore, the referred barriers provide upper bounds for the true
barriers.

ADP Release Free Energy Decomposition
Although the
overall association free energies and corresponding free energy barriers
are useful, they provide little insight into the mechanism without
further structural analysis. Additional details about the mechanism
of ADP release from PKA can be gleaned from free energy decomposition
analysis. Such analysis would reveal exactly how Mg2+ ions
affect ADP release. Advantageously, the fact that we used the same
path to compute PMFs in the presence and absence of Mg2+ ions greatly simplifies the comparison of free energy decompositions.

ADP Release with Mg2+ Ions
Decomposition
of the PMF for ADP release in the presence of two Mg2+ ions
(Figure A and Table ) reveals individual contributions of different groups. The ADP itself
contributes −74.8 kcal/mol to the overall association free
energy. Breaking the ADP contribution further into those from adenine,
ribose, and the pyrophosphate groups, we find contributions of −32.5,
−17.5, and −24.7 kcal/mol, respectively. Note that all
three groups contribute favorably to association. The two Mg2+ ions contribute −33.3 kcal/mol to the total association free
energy. Interestingly, activating Mg1 contributes −12.7 kcal/mol,
whereas inhibitory Mg2 contributes a significantly larger amount of
−20.6 kcal/mol. The control contribution of the restrained
protein core degrees of freedom alone yields 0.0 kcal/mol as anticipated.

Decomposition
of the PMFs for ADP binding to PKA with (A) and without (B) Mg2+ ions. The complete PMFs are shown in red thick solid lines.
The arrows point to the location of the metastable intermediate at
α = 0.42 that only exists with Mg2+ ions. The overall
ADP contribution is shown in green thick solid line. Its further decomposition
into contributions from adenine ring (A), ribose (R), and pyrophosphate
(P) are shown in thin lines of the same color. In the case where Mg2+ ions are present, their overall contribution is shown in
blue solid thick line whereas the individual contributions are shown
in thin lines of the same color. Also shown in thin purple and blue
lines are the control contributions of the protein core degrees of
freedom and of the two Mg2+ ions, respectively.

ADP Release without Mg2+ Ions
Decomposition
of the PMF obtained without Mg2+ ions (Figure B and Table ) highlights the pronounced
influence of Mg2+ ions on the ribose and the pyrophosphate
groups of ADP. In the absence of Mg2+ ions, ADP is the
sole contributor to the association free energy. It contributes −22.3
kcal/mol, which is significantly (by 52.5 kcal/mol) weaker than in
the presence of Mg2+ ions. Interestingly, the adenine ring
makes a favorable contribution of −33.1 kcal/mol that is nearly
identical to that in the presence of the Mg2+ ions (−32.5
kcal/mol). This similarity suggests independence of the adenine association
with PKA from Mg2+ ions. Importantly, removal of the Mg2+ ions greatly perturbs the contributions from the ribose
and the pyrophosphate groups in the opposite directions. In particular,
the negatively charged phosphate group strongly disfavors binding
by as much as 58.8 kcal/mol. The ribose contribution is favorable
by −48.1 kcal/mol, but falls 10.7 kcal/mol short of canceling
the pyrophosphate contribution. As expected, the two control contributions,
namely, that of the protein rigid core and of the separate Mg2+ ions yield numbers very close to zero (0.0 and 0.3 kcal/mol,
respectively).

Structural Changes in PKA Associated with ADP and Mg2+ Release
We have analyzed atomic contacts established between
the ADP, Mg2+ ions and PKA along the ADP binding path.
The results are summarized in Table 2S of . Here we report only the most interesting results.

Because two functionally distinct Mg2+ ions can be present
in the active site, we distinguish them based on their coordination
environment in the reactant state. The coordination sphere of Mg1
is comprised of the β-phosphate of the nucleotide and the carboxyl
group of D184, in a bidentate coordination mode. Three additional
water molecules complete the coordination shell of Mg1. The coordination
sphere of Mg2 comprises the α- and β-phosphates of the
nucleotide, a single carboxyl oxygen of D184, the side chain carbonyl
of N171 along with two additional water molecules (Figure A). Hence, each Mg2+ ion has a total
of six coordinate bonds in a roughly octahedral coordination shell.

A snapshot
from an optimized reactant state ensemble: the active site of the
PKA with ADP bound with (A) and without (B) two Mg2+ ions.
The Gly-rich loop is shown in cartoon representation in transparent
orange color. All the other secondary structure elements of the protein
frame that are relevant to the active site are shown in transparent
white-gray. The ADP is shown with ball-and-stick model. The important
active site residues are depicted in licorice representation. The
two Mg2+ and one Na+ ions are shown in green
and yellow transparent balls, respectively. Water molecules coordinating
Mg2+ ions are shown in transparent pink color. Some of
the hydrogen bonds present are depicted with dashed bonds.

Structural Observations Based on the End-States
Because
transition path optimization also optimizes the end-states, namely,
reactant and product, that are experimentally observable, it is worth
analyzing structural changes in these states first. The reactant state
corresponds to a binary complex of PKA with ADP (), whereas the product state corresponds to the apo enzyme (). To the best of our knowledge, no structure
of the binary complex with ADP is currently available. To date, all
the structures with ADP include a bound peptide and therefore recruit
some of the key residues near the active site for peptide binding.
Although the crystal structure of the apo enzyme has been solved,
many of its key residues are disordered. In addition, these structures
are perturbed to some degree by crystal contacts (). Therefore, our work provides a look at the binary complex
and the apo enzyme in solution from the point of view of classical
MD simulations.

PKA Response to Substrate Removal
Because our reactant
state was derived from the ternary complex (PDB code: 1L3R) by removing the phosphorylated substrate peptide, we have an opportunity
to trace spontaneous rearrangements of key residues that were previously
involved in protein−protein interactions with the substrate.
Thus, we observed the residue E170 that coordinated P-2 Arg of the
substrate () to flip up toward the nucleotide
to make a salt bridge with K168. The residue E127 that together with
Y330 coordinated P-3 Arg () remained relatively
unperturbed. However, Y330 and its adjacent cluster of residues F327,
D328, and D329 from the C-terminal tail moved away from E127 upon
substrate removal.

Further comparison of the reactant and product
structures with and without Mg2+ ions highlighted residue
clusters important for interactions of PKA with ADP and residues sensitive
to the presence of Mg2+ ions.

Mg2+-Dependent Rearrangement of the D184-K72-E91
Triad
The conserved residues D184, K72, and E91 are located
in close vicinity to the adenine binding site. In the product state
(formed upon dissociation of both ADP and Mg2+ ions from
PKA) these residues participate in two salt bridges, namely, D184-K72
and K72-E91 (Figure A,B). Breaking the D184-K72
salt bridge upon ADP association engages the K72 side chain in interactions
with the pyrophosphate and D184 in interactions with both Mg2+ ions (Figure A). As a result, sacrificing
the D184-K72 salt bridge creates four new salt bridges: two involving
K72 with the α- and β-phosphates of the nucleotide, and
two resulting from the bidentate coordination of Mg1 with D184. D184
contributes an additional salt bridge in the presence of Mg2. In the
absence of ions only two salt bridges, between K72 and the phosphate
groups are possible (Figure B). In this case,
the negative charge on the D184 creates an unfavorable repulsive interaction
with the negatively charged phosphate group. This repulsion can be
rescued by K168 residue from another important triad.

A snapshot
from an optimized product state ensemble: the empty active site of
the PKA formed upon release of ADP with (A) and without (B) Mg2+ ions. The Gly-rich loop is shown in cartoon representation
in transparent orange color. All the other secondary structure elements
of the protein frame that are relevant to the active site are shown
in transparent white-gray. The important active site residues are
depicted in licorice representation. Some of the hydrogen bonds present
are depicted with dashed bonds.

The Effect of Mg2+ on the N171-D166/K168 Interactions
In the ADP bound reactant state with two Mg2+ ions,
the carbonyl of residue N171 coordinates Mg2, while its amide coordinates
the backbone carbonyl of D166 (Figure A).
Removing Mg2+ ions from the active site disrupts the hydrogen
bonding of N171 with D166, and allows the N171 amide to flip toward
and hydrogen bond the α-phosphate of ADP (Figure B). Moreover, the carbonyl of the unleashed N171 can participate
in hydrogen bonding with either the 3′-OH of ADP or the side
chain of K168. Removing ADP from the binding pocket relaxes the N171
side chain back to its original state hydrogen bonding to the backbone
of D166 (Figure A,B) (,).

The K168-D166-T201 Triad
The residue K168 is part of
yet another important Mg2+-sensitive cluster, K168-D166-T201.
The catalytic base D166 resides in the immediate vicinity of the Mg2+ ions, contacting water molecules in their primary coordination
shells (Figure A). Interestingly, removing
both Mg2+ ions, while keeping the ADP bound, triggers a
local conformational change of the D166 side chain that assumes a
position suitable for coordination with T201 (often in a bidentate
mode, with one hydrogen bond to the backbone amide and the other to
the side chain OH group) (Figure B). Furthermore,
the excess negative charge on ADP triggers another conformational
change during which K168 breaks away from its binding partners, E170
and D166, and moves to coordinate the phosphates of ADP (Figure B). Once the nucleotide molecule leaves the binding
site, D166 coordinates primarily the side chain of T201 (Figure A,B). In addition, D166 forms a strong salt bridge
with the side chain of K168 released by the nucleotide. Thus, the
residues K168, D166, and T201 form yet another versatile functional
triad.

A Third High Affinity Cation-Binding Site in the Reactant State
ADP association with PKA creates two well-established binding sites
for Mg2+ ions. These sites are not accessible to Na+ ions during our simulations with Mg2+ ions removed
from the active site. Note that Na+ (R = 0.95 Å) is larger than Mg2+ (R = 0.65 Å) and cannot always penetrate places that Mg2+ can. In addition to these two sites, analysis of the 3D-distribution
of Na+ ions around the surface of PKA identified a third
high-affinity cation-binding site. This site exists only in the presence
of ADP and involves its 2′-OH group along with the side chains
of residues E127 and Y330. Binding of a Na+ ion to this
third site is stronger than to phosphorylated side chains with twice
the negative charge.

ADP Release Trajectory
In the path optimized with Mg2+, we observe that the adenine group swings out of its binding
pocket followed by the ribose and the pyrophosphate groups. Mg2+ ions remain associated with ADP, thus leaving the active
site together with the nucleotide. Because we did not optimize the
ADP release path in the absence of Mg2+ ions, we do not
know how removing Mg2+ ions would affect the actual trajectory
for the ADP release. Nevertheless, we can use previous SMD simulations
from our lab for comparisons (). Furthermore,
as will be shown in the , dissecting
PMFs into contributions from adenine, ribose, and pyrophosphate allows
speculations on the order of events in the absence of Mg2+ ions. At this point, we recall that the pyrophosphate group that
serves as an anchor with Mg2+ ions strongly favors ADP
release once the Mg2+ ions are removed.

Transport of Ions by Carboxylate Shifts
As mentioned
above, our optimized transition path ensemble has the two Mg2+ ions remaining closely associated with the ADP during the release.
Given that in generating the initial path we intentionally biased
the Mg2+ ions to stay in the active site, this behavior
strongly suggests that the interactions of both Mg2+ ions
with ADP are much stronger than with PKA. Because during the path
optimization the Mg2+ ions are subject to harmonic restraints,
they are not free to dissociate from ADP. Whether this is a feasible
transition path can be decided based on its free energy profile.

Assuming that the ions would remain associated with ADP, the optimized
transition path ensemble indicates that release or, reversibly, binding
of nucleotide associated Mg2+ ions would proceed in highly
orchestrated stepwise manner (see  for details). Two conserved residues, E170 and D184, participate
in a Mg2+ release relay involving a series of carboxylate
shifts (−). Although we have computed the path for ADP release, it is more
instructive to consider the reverse process of binding in describing
the relay. Residue E170 acts like a fishing rod that tethers and directs
the incoming Mg2+ ions into the active site. D184, from
the conserved triad of D184-K72-E91, receives the two Mg2+ ions at the end of the relay.

On-Path Intermediate
The final PMFs identified a metastable
intermediate in the presence of Mg2+ ions that is largely
absent otherwise (Figure A,B). Structural
analysis reveals that this intermediate, located at the ADP release
progress variable α = 0.42, has the N6 amide of the adenine
ring hydrogen-bonded with the side chain of D328 and the backbone
carbonyl of D329. Hydrophobic stacking of the adenine ring with the
underlying phenol ring of Y330 further stabilizes this intermediate.
Thus, the D328-D329-Y330 motif appears to provide an adenine anchorage
site. In addition to this surface patch, ADP anchors PKA through associated
Mg2+ ions. Specifically, Mg1 coordinates D184 carboxyl
in a monodentate way, whereas Mg2 coordinates E170 in a bidentate
way.

Unexpectedly, interactions between adenine and these residues
are persistent in the presence of Mg2+ ions (Figure A), but deteriorate quickly in their absence (Figure B). This is reflected in the depth of the corresponding
wells in the PMF (see Figures  and A,B). In the absence of Mg2+ ions, three
Na+ ions form a highly labile complex with the phosphates
to compensate their negative charge. Thus, the Mg2+ ions
coordinated to the ADP appear to enhance interactions of the adenine
with the anchoring residues D328, D329, and Y330.

A snapshot
from an optimized intermediate state ensemble: the active site of
the PKA during ADP release with (A) and without (B) Mg2+ ions. The Gly-rich loop is shown in cartoon representation in transparent
orange color. All the other secondary structure elements of the protein
frame that are relevant to the active site are shown in transparent
white-gray. The ADP is shown with ball-and-stick model. The important
active site residues are depicted in licorice representation. The
Mg2+ and Na+ ions are shown in green and yellow
transparent balls, respectively. Water molecules coordinating Mg2+ ions are shown in transparent pink color. Some of the hydrogen
bonds present are depicted with dashed bonds.

RMSD histograms
for the Gly-rich loop residues 49 through 58 computed after aligning
the structures for the product and reactant states defined in the
text to the PDB structures representing closed (1L3R) and open (1J3H)
states of PKA by the rigid core. The histograms with respect to closed
state are shown using left and bottom axes, whereas the histograms
with respect to open state are inverted and use right and top axes.

Flexibility of the Gly-Rich Loop
Opening of the Gly-rich
loop has been suggested to facilitate ADP release. Here we directly
analyzed how the flexibility of the Gly-rich loop changes during nucleotide
release. On the basis of PMF inspection, we define the reactant state
as a combination of the beads 1 through 18 (α = 0.0 to 0.09)
and the product state as beads 113 through 185 (α = 0.61 to
1.0).

With the Mg2+ ions coordinated to ADP in the
reactant state, the Gly-rich loop is relatively rigid (as is seen
from the RMSD histograms Figure  and analysis of dihedral angle distributions in
residues 49 through 58 in Figure S1 of ). Absence of Mg2+ ions in the active
site renders the Gly-rich loop more flexible. This is revealed both
by the corresponding RMSD histogram and an activation of a spontaneous
peptide flip transition between T51 and G52 residues in the reactant
state.

Upon ADP release, the Gly-rich loop motions enhance further, both
internally (dihedral angles) and relative to the large lobe (RMSD).
The dihedral angle analysis reveals that the peptide plane between
T51 and G52 spontaneously flips back and forth during the unbinding
process. Because Mg2+ ions do not affect the unbound product
state (Figure A,B), Gly-rich loop fluctuations
become similar in both paths. The final loop conformation in the product
state appears intermediate between closed and open conformations defined
by the crystal structures of 1L3R and 1J3H, respectively.

A good correlation between the Gly-rich loop motion and relative
positions of two important hydrophobic residues, namely, Phe54 and
Phe187, is observed. These residues help shield the active site from
water in the closed state. In the reactant, with the nucleotide and
two Mg2+ ions bound, their conformations are similar to
those in the crystal structure with PDB code 1L3R. When we remove
the two Mg2+ ions, both Phe54 and Phe187 move substantially
from their original positions in the crystal structure and from each
other. In the product state, once the nucleotide is out of the pocket,
Phe54 moves by about 5−6 Å from Phe187, which settles
back near its original position. Thus, it appears that Mg2+ ions help to shield the active site from water even in the absence
of the substrate.

Flexibility of the DFG Motif
Throughout the ADP release,
PKA remained in its active state, showing no significant conformational
changes in the DFG motif. Therefore, DFG flip is a rare event. To
study the effect of DFG-flip on the ADP release, it would be necessary
to enforce it artificially.

Discussion
Here, we have computed a transition path ensemble for ADP release
from PKA in the presence of two Mg2+ ions. Along this path
we have calculated free energies required to release ADP in both the
presence and absence of Mg2+. To better understand the
ADP release mechanism, we have dissected the PMFs into individual
contributions from important functional groups. Specifically, we have
examined contributions from each Mg2+ ion (Mg1 and Mg2),
as well as the adenine, ribose, and pyrophosphate groups of ADP. We
have also analyzed the conformational rearrangements and flexibilities
of active site residues and of the Gly-rich loop.

ADP Release PMFs and Their Decompositions
Our PMFs
demonstrate the strong binding free energy of ADP to PKA (−108.1
(−97.3) kcal/mol) in the presence of Mg2+ ions.
Removal of both Mg2+ ions greatly reduces ADP binding free
energy (to −22.0 (−11.2) kcal/mol) and introduces a
significant association barrier that is not evident in the presence
of Mg2+. Experimentally, binding of nucleotides to PKA
at high Mg2+ concentrations has been demonstrated to be
diffusion controlled (). This result is
consistent with our calculations. The computed PMFs suggest that PKA
must undergo some major structural change, such as local unfolding (), to release ADP with Mg2+ ions. Otherwise,
ADP can only dissociate from PKA following dissociation of the Mg2+ ions. Thus, Mg2+ appears to act as a linchpin
in the rate-limiting ADP release.

A number of studies have addressed
the driving forces underlying nucleotide association and the origins
of cooperativity with Mg2+ ions (,,). Of particular note was the thermodynamic
characterization of ligand binding and its effect on thermostability
of PKA for a series of ligands derived from ATP (). Specifically, the series of ligands was designed by truncation
of ATP to ADP, AMP (adenosine monophosphate), adenosine, and adenine.
Thus, binding of both adenine and adenosine enhanced the stability
of the C-subunit and required no Mg2+ ions. However, presence
of the negatively charged phosphates destabilized nucleotide association
and required Mg2+ ion presence to restore binding affinity.
Two ions were necessary to achieve stabilizing effects comparable
to the adenosine alone. Therefore, ion binding was beneficial only
in the presence of the charged phosphate groups. Such “dissection”
of binding into contributions from different groups suggested that
the adenine moiety contributed to binding of nucleotide independently
of Mg2+ ions. These findings correlated well with available
thermodynamic measurements of binding constants for the ligands studied.
Although highly successful in advancing our understanding of nucleotide
binding and the origin of its cooperativity with Mg2+ ions,
these studies lacked structural details and could not provide the
precise contributions of individual groups to binding of a given nucleotide.

Adenine Independence of Mg2+
PMF decomposition
provides additional information regarding the mechanism of ADP binding.
Specifically, our analysis indicates that the adenine group contribution
is independent of Mg2+ presence. This is in agreement with
the experimental results mentioned above (,). Therefore, the adenine group provides a constant driving force
for nucleotide binding. The independence of the adenine binding from
Mg2+ ions, allows us to predict that binding of ADP without
Mg2+ ions would be 11.1 kcal/mol less favorable than that
of the adenine alone.

In contrast to adenine, the ribose and
the pyrophosphate group contributions are greatly perturbed by Mg2+ ions. The contribution of the pyrophosphate group changes
from favorable to strongly unfavorable upon removal of Mg2+. The ribose contribution becomes more favorable, but insufficient
to compensate that of pyrophosphate. Therefore, the negatively charged
pyrophosphate drives the ADP release. The experimental observation
that adenine or adenosine binding to the catalytic subunit of PKA
is not noticeably affected by the presence of Mg2+ ions
supports our results and further implicates the pyrophosphate group
in binding cooperativity (,).

Binding Cooperativity
The effect of the Mg2+ ions on the binding of ADP is highly nonlinear. Specifically, the
difference between ADP association free energies in the presence and
absence of Mg2+ ions is −86.1 kcal/mol, whereas
the overall direct contribution of the Mg2+ ions found
by energy decomposition is only −33.3 kcal/mol (Table ). Therefore, the association of ADP with the Mg2+ ions produces a much larger binding free energy than the
sum of the two groups considered separately. This finding is consistent
with the fact that binding of the ADP and Mg2+ ions to
PKA is cooperative ().

Interestingly,
as seen from Table , the change in the free
energy contribution of the pyrophosphate group upon association with
the Mg2+ ions (−83.6 kcal/mol) is close to the overall
binding free energy change of ADP due to association with ions (−86.0
kcal/mol). These observations suggest that the origin of the cooperativity
lies in quenching of the negative charge on the pyrophosphate group
that otherwise contributes unfavorably to the binding process.

Overall, the results of the current free energy calculations and
their decomposition are in remarkable agreement with earlier experimental
work that dissected “the nucleotide and metal-phosphate binding
sites” (,,).

Structural Changes Associated with ADP Release
In addition
to free energy decomposition, our simulations provide structural details
on the mechanism of ADP release and intricate details of cooperative
interactions among ADP, Mg2+ ions, and PKA. Combining knowledge
of structural changes with their corresponding free energy information
provides a powerful tool for gaining mechanistic insight.

Key Structural Elements
Our simulations capture all
the interactions that have been previously described crystallographically
for adenine ring anchoring (). For example,
adenine insertion completes the so-called C-spine structure of PKA
that couples the N- and C-terminal lobes (). As these are well-established and do not depend on Mg2+ ions, we omit them from the further discussion. Below we concentrate
on residues to which we can attribute a novel Mg2+-dependent
functional role.

The conserved D184-K72-E91 triad appears to
serve multiple functions. Besides positioning the pyrophosphate group
of the nucleotide in the presence of Mg2+ ions, it also
encourages its release in their absence. Interestingly, our results
suggest that N171 also plays a multifunctional role. On one hand,
it helps coordinate Mg2 with its carbonyl, while anchored to the backbone
of the catalytic loop D166 with its amide. On the other hand, when
Mg2+ ions are removed, the amide N171 coordinates the α-phosphate
of the nucleotide and its carbonyl contacts either the 3′-OH
of the nucleotide or the side chain of K168.

Yet another multifunctional cluster, K168-D166-T201, performs different
Mg2+-dependent roles. K168 is known to bind γ-phosphate
of ATP during catalysis (−). In our study, in the absence of Mg2+ ions, K168 binds
the α- and β-phosphates of the nucleotide. In the presence
of Mg2+ ions, K168 resides outside the active site and
is able to pull up the side chain of E170. Although E170 has not been
observed in the upward lifted conformation in PKA, there are precedents
in a related kinase PDK1 (). The D166 is
known to coordinate the substrate OH group during phosphorylation
and is able to reach water molecules in the first coordination shell
of the Mg2+ ions. Yet in the absence of the substrate and
Mg2+ ions this residue moves away from the active site
to establish contact with the conserved T201 residue from peptide
positioning loop.

Effect of Mg2+ Ions on the ADP Release Mechanism
The ADP release mechanism suggested by the optimized path in the
presence of Mg2+ ions has the adenine group swing out of
its binding pocket first, followed by the ribose and, finally, dissociation
of the pyrophosphate group. Interestingly, a very similar sequence
of events was observed in simulations where ADP was pulled from the
binding pocket using SMD simulations in the absence of Mg2+ ions (). The agreement between the two
independent simulations is particularly good during the early stages
of nucleotide release. However, the paths diverge once the adenine
group has left its binding pocket.

Although we have not optimized
the ADP release path in the absence of Mg2+ ions, we refer
to the free energy decomposition to gain additional insights into
the effect of Mg2+ ions on the dissociation mechanism.
Because the negatively charged pyrophosphate of ADP provides significant
impetus for ADP dissociation, it would seem that pyrophosphate would
not act as an anchor in the absence of Mg2+ ions. Our simulations
suggest that with the Mg2+ ions removed, the pyrophosphate
is coordinated by K72, K168, and N171 residues and in addition by
the nest on the Gly-rich loop. However, even combined these interactions
are not strong enough to combat the repulsive drive from the negatively
charged residues in the vicinity, particularly E127, D184, E170, and
D166. Note that strong repulsive electrostatic interactions between
the pyrophosphate and D184 as well as other neighboring anionic residues
have been suggested previously as the driving force for ADP release (). Thus, based on the free energy decomposition,
it appears that the pyrophosphate can dissociate from PKA in the absence
of Mg2+ ions at any time. This proposal is different from
the SMD-derived mechanism, but is consistent with the fact that in
crystal structures of bound nucleotide at low Mg2+ concentrations
the positions of the β- and γ-phosphates are often disordered (,).

Three Cation-Binding Sites Created by Nucleotide Binding
Our simulations demonstrate that ADP binding creates three cation-binding
sites at the ADP/PKA interface that are absent in nucleotide free
PKA (see  for details).
Two of these sites employ the pyrophosphate group of the nucleotide,
along with active site residues, to coordinate the linchpin Mg2+ ions. The third site utilizes the ribose hydroxyl groups
and residues E127 and Y330. We note that this previously unreported
site utilizes the same residues that coordinate an invariant P-3 Arg
residue from substrate and inhibitor peptides (). Formation of this nucleotide-dependent cation-binding
site may therefore operate as a functionally important sensor for
the closed C-subunit. We postulate that this binding site may be linked
to the absolute requirement for Mg2+-nucleotide binding
prior to complex formation with RI inhibitor or PKI (,,−), and furthermore
determine the specific order of the underlying binding events (,,,,).

Inhibitory versus Activating Mg2+ Binding Site
Mg2+ binding has been previously probed with various
physicochemical techniques (,,,,). It was demonstrated that the two major binding sites are not coupled.
That is binding at one site can be considered independent of the occupancy
of the other site. These studies have also indicated that activating
site (Mg1) has higher affinity for Mg2+ than the inhibitory
site (Mg2) (,,). The inhibitory Mg2 has been shown to affect the rate of catalysis
by inhibiting ADP release (,,,). However, a detailed mechanism
of this inhibition has not yet been established.

Recall that
with ATP, Mg1 binds β- and γ-phosphates, whereas Mg2 binds
α- and γ-phosphates (). The
γ-phosphate transfer causes the coordination shells of both
ions to rearrange such that Mg1 now binds only β-phosphate,
whereas Mg2 binds α- and β-phosphate (assuming phosphorylated
product has dissociated from PKA leaving Mg2+ behind).
This in turn causes the binding constants of the two Mg2+ ions to become equal as determined experimentally. Surprisingly,
our free energy decomposition demonstrates that Mg2 contributes to
binding of ADP almost twice as much as Mg1, reminiscent of its contribution
to stabilizing of the transition state in the phosphoryl transfer
reaction predicted by QM/MM (). These contributions,
however, are different from the experimentally measured binding free
energies, and are the opposite of those expected for ATP. The QM/MM
calculations that predict phosphoryl transfer rate enhancement due
to Mg2 also differ from the kinetic studies that have indicated that
the transfer rate is independent of the second Mg2+ ion (,). Thus the experimental and computational studies appear to create
a controversy regarding the individual roles of Mg2+ ions.

The change in Mg2+ binding affinity upon γ-phosphate
transfer (followed by product release) predicted by the present study
could rationalize how the weakly ATP-bound Mg2 inhibits PKA catalysis.
Specifically, upon γ-phosphate transfer from ATP the weakly
bound Mg2 ion would become strongly bound, and would therefore inhibit
the release of ADP. This proposal is consistent with the prevalent
binding mode of Mg2+ to ADP in solution (,,).

On-Path Intermediate
Analyzing the PMF for ADP unbinding
with Mg2+ ions highlighted a metastable intermediate (Figure ). Corresponding structural analysis identified
hydrogen-bonding interactions from the side chain of D328 and backbone
of D329 to the N6 amide of ADP along with hydrophobic interactions
from Y330. Besides these interactions, ADP was anchored to E170 and
D184 carboxyl oxygens through associated Mg2+ ions. Such
an intermediate was not apparent in a previous steered MD study performed
in the absence of Mg2+ ions (). The free energy profiles (Figure ) have
confirmed absence of this intermediate upon removal of the Mg2+ ions. This metastable intermediate underscores the important
role of the E170 residue, which would be difficult to identify experimentally.

Even though structural analysis clearly identified two sets of
interactions of ADP with PKA in the intermediate, one set turns out
to be relatively unimportant energetically. Specifically, free energy
decomposition (Figure ) shows that the intermediate
is predominantly due to the pyrophosphate group of ADP along with
Mg2+ ions and not due to the adenine ring. Therefore, the
adenine anchoring at the surface patch of residues D328, D329, and
Y330 is in fact inconsequential in the absence of Mg2+ ions.

Residues D328, D329, and Y330 from the anchoring patch are part
of a larger D328DYEEEE patch that has been shown to be sensitive to
conformational changes, and in particular to ATP and inhibitor binding (). The same patch has been identified through
fragment binding assays as important for allosteric regulation of
PKA (). Recall that residue Y330 along
with E127 and the 2′-OH group of ADP forms the high affinity
cation-binding site that binds absolutely conserved P-3 arginine of
substrate or inhibitor peptides.

Main Chain Conformational Changes
The Gly-rich loop
pins down the nucleotide’s phosphates helping to ensure the
proper positioning of the γ-phosphate for phosphoryl transfer.
It has been suggested that the small lobe that provides the Gly-rich
loop can move with respect to the large lobe to open the active site
cleft. In addition, the Gly-rich loop itself can move relative to
the small lobe to modulate the opening of the active site cleft. To
facilitate rate-limiting ADP release, the Gly-rich loop along with
the small lobe have been proposed to assume an open conformation (,,,,,,). Our simulations show the considerable opening of
the Gly-rich loop during the ADP release and support this suggestion.

Furthermore, we have found that Mg2+ ions can modulate
opening of the Gly-rich loop. Comparing simulations with and without
Mg2+ ions in the active site, we find that the Gly-rich
loop prefers a more closed conformation in the presence of Mg2+. When the Mg2+ ions have been removed from the
active site, the Gly-rich loop becomes more flexible as evidenced
by its RMSD in Figure  and activation of the
rotation for the peptide plane between residues T51 and G52 (shown
in ). Although we
do not have direct evidence for Gly-rich loop motions facilitating
ADP release, we note a correlation between the degree of flexibility
of the loop and the bound Mg2+ ions. Thus higher flexibility
of the loop corresponds to lower binding affinity and more facile
release of ADP from PKA. This observation appears to be in good agreement
with the X-ray data on the ADP ternary complex, where the Gly rich
loop was observed to be somewhat flexible along with the β-phosphate
of ADP ().

The spontaneous rotations of the peptide plane between T51 and
G52 can influence the dipolar balance in the loop that glues it to
the phosphates and to the large lobe in the reactant state. Furthermore,
rotation of the peptide bond can also serve as a gate for ADP release
from under the Gly-rich loop that acts as a lid to the active site.
Interestingly the G52 mutation has been found to be the most important
for catalysis (). However, only mutations
at G50 affected binding of ADP directly, suggesting that the detected
rotation is not essential for ADP release.

Finally, our simulations indicate that the DFG motif remains in
the active conformation along the whole path of ADP release from the
binary complex to the apoenzyme. In agreement, previous MD simulations
on Abl kinase have suggested that the DFG flip is a rare event (). Our study suggests further that the DFG flip
is off path for the nucleotide release. We believe that the DFG flip
in the closed state with ADP and Mg2+ ions bound would
be strongly unfavorable due to the Mg2+ coordination of
the DFG motif through the D184 residue. Therefore, similar to ADP
release, the DFG flip would require prior Mg2+ dissociation.

Conclusions
Overall, we find simultaneous release of ADP with two Mg2+ ions from PKA to be so unfavorable that it would require local unfolding
of the enzyme or some other major conformational change to disassemble
the complex. On the other hand, removal of Mg2+ ions substantially
accelerates release of ADP. Therefore, we conjecture that Mg2+ ions act as linchpins to ADP dissociation. Hence, a likely dissociation
mechanism entails ADP release following Mg2+ ion dissociation.

Although the optimized path for the ADP release with Mg2+ ions resembles the path obtained without Mg2+ in previous
SMD simulations, with the adenine ring leaving the binding site first (), our free energy analysis suggests a different
dissociation sequence. Specifically, in the absence of Mg2+ ions the pyrophosphate group provides strong impetus for nucleotide
dissociation from PKA acting as a float. On the other hand, compensating
for the charge on the pyrophosphate group by association with Mg2+ ions removes the dissociation driving force and is responsible
for the binding cooperativity.

According to our calculations, Mg2+-independent adenine
binding drives the nucleotide association with PKA. This binding creates
three cation-binding sites (see Figure A)
at the protein−nucleotide interface that are otherwise absent.
One of these sites coincides with the binding site for the conserved
P-3 Arg from substrate and inhibitor peptides (see Figure ). Appearance of this site may serve as a reporter
of active site occupation and may explain cooperativity of binding
between the nucleotide and PKA inhibitor or substrate proteins.

Finally, our study identifies several residues, namely, D166, K168,
E170, N171, D184, and T201 that along with Gly-rich loop undergo specific
conformational changes in response to binding or release of Mg2+ ions in the active site. The process of ADP binding with
Mg2+ ions, involves a series of carboxylate shifts that
begins with residue D184 and ends with E170 (see ). These conserved residues, therefore,
play important Mg2+-dependent roles in nucleotide binding.
Dissociation of Mg2+ ions makes Gly-rich loop more flexible
in the ADP-bound state. In the product state, in which ADP has left
the active site, the Gly-rich loop assumes the conformation that is
intermediate between the open and closed states.

The results of this work further understanding of small ligand
binding to proteins in general, and their role in the allosteric regulation
of the PKA in particular. Thus, the study prepares grounds for future
work on the allosteric mechanisms in the holoenzyme complex. Finally,
insights from this study may contribute to developing new kinase drug
design strategies.

Acknowledgments
The computations described in this paper were made possible
by a generous teragrid MRAC awards (TG-MCB080040N and TG-MCA93T013)
from NCSA on Abe supercomputer, and in-house computer cluster acquired
through HHMI. The authors thank Professor J. Adams, Professor J. Weare,
and Dr. Y. Cheng for helpful discussions, and especially Dr. A. Kornev
for critical reading of the manuscript and suggested improvements.

Supporting Information Available
Details of model setup, transition
path optimization, and PMF calculations along with protocols and results
of analysis. Figure 1S A,B illustrates peptide bond conformation between
residues T51 and G52. The results and the protocol of Bio3D analysis
of the structures of PKA available from PDB and from the simulated
trajectories are also provided. Full author name for ref (). This material is available
free of charge via the Internet at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bi901475g_si_001.pdf

bi901475g_si_002.pdf

