The envelope
of Gram-negative
bacteria is characterized by an outer membrane that consists of phospholipids
in the inner leaflet and lipopolysaccharide (LPS) in the outer leaflet. Lipid A is the conserved lipid anchor portion
of LPS and is recognized by several branches of the host innate immune
system. However, Gram-negative bacteria, including the human pathogens Escherichia coli, Yersinia pestis, Salmonella typhimurium, and Pseudomonas aeruginosa, have evolved mechanisms to
modify the structure of lipid A and resist the antimicrobial response
mounted by the host. Such modifications include both acylation and
deacylation of the lipid core, as well as addition of phosphoethanolamine
and 4-amino-4-deoxy-arabinose (Ara4N) to phosphate groups among other
mechanisms.,

Cationic Antimicrobial Peptides (CAMPs)
constitute a branch of
the innate immune system. They are small, positively charged amphipathic
peptides that destroy microorganisms primarily by membrane disruption.− CAMPs initially bind to the Gram-negative bacterial cell surface
through electrostatic interactions with the negatively charged phosphate
groups of lipid A and the lipopolysaccharide core. There are several
proposed models for the mechanism of membrane disruption by CAMPs,
and the specific mechanism may depend on the features of the CAMP. In general, they are thought to coalesce and
form a pore that permeabilizes the membrane. In Gram-negative bacteria,
breaching of the outer membrane allows additional peptides to gain
access to the periplasmic space where they can disrupt the inner membrane
causing bacterial death.− In addition to membrane disruption
mechanisms, CAMPs may have intracellular targets that contribute to
their antimicrobial activity. Peptidoglycan cell wall synthesis inhibition
has been well documented,, whereas inhibition
of nucleic acid and protein synthesis has also been reported.

The modification of a phosphate group in
lipid A with 4-amino-4-deoxy-Arnabinose
(Ara4N) leads to reduced density of negatively charged groups on the
bacterial outer membrane, resulting in reduced CAMP binding. This
mechanism mediates resistance to both CAMPs of the host immune system
as well as related antibiotics such as Colistin and other polymyxins.− The pathway specific proteins responsible for the biosynthesis of
Ara4N and its attachment to lipid A are encoded in pmrHFIJKLM operon (pmr stands for polymyxin resistance, now
renamed arn for AraN synthesis) under the control
of the PmrA/PmrB and PhoP/PhoQ two-component systems., The biosynthesis of UDP-Ara4N from UDP-Glucuronic acid (UDP-GlcA)
is carried out by two enzymes (Figure ). ArnA
is a bifunctional enzyme whose C-terminal domain catalyzes the oxidative
decarboxylation of UDP-GlcA to yield UDP-4-keto-pentose (UDP-Ara4O).
ArnB uses glutamate as an amino group donor and catalyzes a transamination
reaction to yield UDP-4-amino-4-deoxy-arabinose (UDP-Ara4N). This
is a reversible reaction with an equilibrium constant of approximately
0.1 in the forward direction of the pathway. In subsequent steps, Ara4N is transiently formylated, transferred
to the lipid carrier undecaprenyl-phosphate, and flipped to the periplasmic
side of the membrane where it is transferred to lipid A.−

Initial
steps in the biosynthesis of lipid A-Ara4N. The pathway
starts with UDP-glucose that is oxidized to UDP-glucuronic acid (UDP-GlcA)
by UDP-glucose dehydrogenase (Ugd). UDP-GlcA is then oxidatively decarboxylated
to UDP-4-ketopentose (UDP-Ara4O) by the C-terminal domain of ArnA.
UDP-Ara4O is transaminated by ArnB to form UDP-Ara4N that, after transient
formylation, sugar transfer to undecaprenyl-phosphate, and flipping
to the periplasmic side of the inner membrane is finally transferred
to lipid A.

All the proteins encoded
by the arn operon are
essential for lipid A modification with Ara4N and resistance to polymyxins., Therefore, they represent attractive targets for development of
inhibitors that would abolish resistance to CAMPs of the host immune
system and last-resort antibiotics such as Colistin. Such inhibitors
would be particularly useful in the treatment of chronic Pseudomonas infections in cystic fibrosis (CF) patients.
Analysis of prevalence has showed that 33% of the Pseudomonas isolates from CF patients, and as much as 44% of the isolates from
infants with CF display Lipid A modified with Ara4N. It is striking that the unique environment encountered
by Pseudomonas in the CF airway appears
to induce the pathway for Ara4N Lipid A modification, hence making
the bacteria resistant to the host innate immune response (CAMPs).
Using cultured epithelial cells, it has been shown that normal, but
not CF airway, epithelia can efficiently kill Pseudomonas
aeruginosa. The bactericidal
activity was traced to CAMPs synthesized by the epithelium, underscoring
the importance of these compounds preventing bacterial colonization. In addition, aerosolized polymyxins are clinically
used for the treatment of Pseudomonas infections in CF patients.− Therefore, inhibitors of the Ara4N Lipid A modification pathway
would not only enhance the ability of the host immune system to clear
the infection but could also be administered together with clinically
useful CAMPs such as polymyxins to increase their effectiveness.

In this study, we focus on ArnB, a pyridoxal-phosphate (PLP) dependent
transaminase. Previous crystal structures of ArnB revealed the overall
type I fold of the enzyme as well as the residues involved in binding
the cofactor, α-keto-glutarate, and the inhibitor cycloserine. However, the basis for specificity toward the
substrate sugar–nucleotide remained elusive. Here, we enzymatically
synthesized UDP-Ara4N and expressed in E. coli a mutant of Salmonella typhimurium ArnB to prepare, in vitro, a ternary complex of
the enzyme with UDP-Ara4N forming the external aldimine with PLP in
the active site. We present the crystal structure of the complex refined
to 2.3 Å resolution, define the sugar nucleotide binding determinants,
and discuss the implications for the design of specific inhibitors.

Materials
and Methods
Cloning, Expression, and Purification of Wild Type and Mutant
ArnB
The arnB gene of S.
typhimurium was PCR amplified from genomic DNA (forward
primer AGC GGC GTC ATA TGG CTG AAG GAA AAA TGA TG, reverse primer
CGT CTA GAG CTC TTA TTG TCC TGC TAT CTG ATG) incorporating NdeI and
SacI restriction sites at the N- and C-terminus of the coding region,
respectively. The gene was cloned into pMS122 (a derivative of pET28(+)
modified to include an N-terminal His-tag followed by a tobacco etch
virus (TEV) protease cleavage site) digested with the same restriction
enzymes. The correct cloning was confirmed by sequencing and the plasmid
designated pMS206. E. coli BL21(DE3)
cells were transformed with pMS206 and a single colony used to inoculate
60 mL of LB broth containing 50 μg/mL kanamycin and grown at
37 °C overnight with shaking at 225 rpm. The starter culture
was diluted 1/100 into fresh LB medium containing 50 μg/mL of
kanamycin and incubated at 37 °C with shaking at 225 rpm until
OD600 reached about 0.6. The culture was cooled down in ice for 30
min and overexpression of the protein was induced by adding isopropyl-1-thio-β-d-galactopyranoside (IPTG) to a final concentration of 0.5 mM,
and incubation overnight at room temperature with shaking at 225 rpm.
All the purification steps were carried out at 4 °C. The cells
were harvested by centrifugation at 6000g for 20
min in a Beckman JLA 8.1000 rotor, resuspended in 60 mL of lysis buffer
containing 25 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.0, 300 mM NaCl, 10% glycerol, 5 mM
β-mercaptoethanol, and protease inhibitor cocktail, and broken
by sonication (20 cycles of 10 s sonication and 30 s rest). The crude
cell lysate was centrifuged at 40 000g for
30 min in a Beckman JA20 rotor to remove cell debris and unbroken
cells, and the supernatant loaded on a 10 mL Ni-NTA column pre-equilibrated
with equilibration buffer containing 25 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.0, 300 mM
NaCl, 10% glycerol, and 5 mM β-mercaptoethanol. The column was
washed with 50 mL of washing buffer (equilibration buffer supplemented
with 25 mM imidazole) and the bound protein eluted with 50 mL of elution
buffer (equilibration buffer containing 300 mM imidazole). The eluted
protein solution was concentrated in a Vivaspin 20 centrifugal concentrator
(MWCO 10K) and the His-tag cleaved by incubation with His-tagged-TEV
protease while dialyzing against equilibration buffer containing 10
mM DTT. The sample was again loaded on a Ni-NTA column equilibrated
as before to remove the cleaved 6-His tag as well as the His-tagged-TEV
protease. The flow-through was concentrated to 4 mL and loaded on
Superdex 200 gel filtration column pre-equilibrated with buffer containing
25 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.0), 150 mM NaCl, 10% glycerol, and 5 mM β-mercaptoethanol.
Fractions containing highly purified ArnB, as judged by SDS-PAGE,
were pooled and concentrated with Vivaspin 20 centrifugal concentrator
(MWCO 10K) to 26 mg/mL. The K188A mutant of ArnB was prepared using
the QuickChange kit (Agilent) and primers (forward primer TCC TTC
CAC GCC ATT GCC AAC ATT ACC TGC GCT, reverse primer AGC GCA GGT AAT
GTT GGC AAT GGC GTG GAA GGA). The mutation was confirmed by sequencing
and the protein expressed and purified as described above for the
wild-type protein.

Synthesis and Purification of UDP-Ara-4N
The ArnA dehydrogenase
domain (ArnA_DH) required for the production of UDP-Ara-4O was prepared
as previously described. UDP-Ara-4N was
enzymatically synthesized in two steps. First, a reaction containing
25 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.0), 5 mM β-mercaptoethanol, 0.2 mg/mL BSA,
10% glycerol, 100 mM KCl, 100 mM NAD+, 50 mM UDP-glucuronic
acid, and 200 nM ArnA_DH was incubated at room temperature overnight.
To test the reaction progress, 1 μL of the reaction was diluted
50-fold in 25 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.0), filtered through an Amicon ultrafilter
(MWCO 5K) to remove the protein and 10 μL injected into an ion-pair
HPLC column (Hypersil Gold 250H × 3D mm, Thermo Scientific) pre-equilibrated
5 mM TPA (pH 7.0). The column was developed with a gradient of acetonitrile
in 5 mM TPA pH 7.0 (0–10% in 20 min, flow rate 1 mL/min). Elution
of the UDP-Ara-4O, UDP-glucuronic acid, and NAD+ was monitored
at 254 nm and elution of NADH was monitored at 340 nm (). After confirming complete conversion
of UDP-glucuronic acid to UDP-Ara-4O by ion-pair HPLC, the reaction
was filtered to remove protein as described above. In a second step,
the reaction mixture was supplemented with l-glutamic acid
to a final concentration of 500 mM and incubated with 200 nM ArnB
at room temperature overnight. Reaction progress was monitored by
ion-pair HPLC as described above, confirming complete conversion of
UDP-Ara-4O to UDP-Ara-4N ().
The reaction mixture was ultrafiltered to remove ArnB and loaded onto
a semipreparative C18 HPLC column (Hypersil Gold 250H × 21.2D
mm, Thermo Scientific) for purification. The column was pre-equilibrated
with 5 mM TPA (pH 7.0) and the sample eluted with a two step gradient
of acetonitrile in 5 mM TPA pH 7.0 at a 5 mL/min flow rate (0–1.6%
acetonitrile in 80 min, and 1.6–10% acetonitrile in 100 min).
Elution of the UDP-ArnB-4N was monitored at 254 nm and the eluted
product collected and lyophilized. The identity of the product was
confirmed by mass spectrometry and NMR ().

Electrospray Ionization Mass Spectrometry
(ESI-MS) and Nuclear
Magnetic Resonance (NMR)
ESI-MS was conducted with a Synapt
G2 High Definition Mass Spectrometer (Waters Company) at the Central
Analytical Laboratory of the University of Colorado at Boulder. The
ESI-MS settings were as follows: capillary voltage 2.2 kV (ESI-),
sampling cone voltage 30 V, extraction cone 4.0 V, source temperature
80 °C, desolvation temperature 150 °C, and desolvation gas
(N2) 600 L/h. The flow rate for the infusing sample solution
(in 100% MeOH) was 5 μL/min. For NMR data collection, 1 mg of
lyophilized UDP-Ara4N was dissolved in 0.5 mL D2O and the
proton NMR spectrum was collected at 25 °C on a Varian Inova
500 MHz spectrometer as described in ref ().

Protein Crystallization and X-ray Data Collection
Purified
ArnB (K188A) was incubated with 5 mM PLP on ice for 4 h. Then, UDP-Ara-4N
was added to a final concentration of 5 mM and the mixture incubated
for 16 h on ice prior to crystallization. The initial search for suitable
crystallization conditions for ArnB/PLP/UDP-Ara-4N ternary complex
was conducted with numerous commercial and homemade crystal screen
solutions in sitting drop 96-well plates set up with the Phoenix drop
setter (Art Robbins Instruments) and incubated at 20 °C. Conditions
that yielded crystals in the presence of UDP-Ara4N and PLP, but not
with PLP alone, were refined using the hanging drop vapor diffusion
method at 20 °C, with a precipitant volume of 500 μL and
drops initially containing 1.5 μL of protein sample (12 mg/mL)
and 1.5 μL of reservoir solution. A precipitant formulation
consisting of 0.1 M sodium citrate (pH 4.5), 19% PEG 20 000
yielded well-formed crystals, which were harvested and frozen directly
in mother liquor by immersion in liquid nitrogen. After initial evaluation
using our home X-ray source, the crystals were analyzed using synchrotron
radiation at the Beamline 8.2.1 of the Advanced Light Source, Lawrence
Berkeley National Laboratory. Initial diffraction and data collection
strategy were evaluated using iMosfilm. Data were collected at a 1 Å wavelength using 0.5° oscillations.
The diffraction data were indexed, integrated, and scaled with DENZO
and SCALEPACK incorporated into the HKL2000 package. Data processing statistics are summarized in Table .

Data Collection and
Refinement Statistics
data collection
statistics	K188A	
Wavelength (Å)	1.0	
Resolution (Å)	37.18–2.3 (2.174–2.099)	
Space Group	P43212	
Cell Dimensions (Å)	a = b = 90.952, c = 129.123, α = β = γ = 90°	
Unique Reflections	29611 (3067)	
Completeness (%)	91.53 (96.78)	
I/σ	17.75 (2.81)	
Wilson B-factor	35.67	
refinement statistics	
Rwork (%)	22.64 (34.44)	
Rfree (%)	26.08 (34.92)	
Number of non-hydrogen atoms	2948	
Number of macromolecule atoms	2768	
Number of ligands atoms	49	
Number of water molecules	131	
Number of amino acid residues	363	
Mean B-value
(Å2)	40.20	
Mean B-value protein (Å2)	40.30	
Mean B-value
ligands (Å2)	39.20	
Mean B-value solvent molecules (Å2)	38.60	
RMS deviation from ideal values:	 	
Bond lengths (Å)	0.003	
Bond angles (deg.)	0.692	
Residues in Ramachandran
plot:	
Most favored regions (%)	98	
Generously allowed regions (%)	2.0	
Outliers (%)	0.0	
Statistics for the highest-resolution
shell are shown in parentheses.

Structure Determination and Refinement
All crystallographic
calculations were carried out with the PHENIX software suit. The structure was determined by molecular replacement
using the published ArnB/PLP/α-ketoglutarate ternary complex
structure (Protein Data Bank code 1MDX) as a search
model. The PLP and α-ketoglutarate ligands and water molecules
were removed from the search model and residue K188 was mutated to
alanine before calculations. Five percent of the unique reflections
were reserved for the calculation of free R for validation. Unambiguous solutions to the rotation and translation
functions were found. An electron density map calculated with phases
from the model after a single round of positional and B-factor refinement revealed clear density for the UDP-Ara4N-PLP aldimine
in the active site. A set of coordinates and restraints for the ligand
were obtained using a SMILES string and the program ELBOW. The ligand was then built into the electron
density using the program COOT and the
model subjected to alternating cycles of refinement and rebuilding.
After the Rfree had dropped to 0.29, water
molecules were added to the model and additional rounds of refinement
and manual rebuilding were carried out until no further improvement
of the Rfree was observed. Final refinement
statistics are summarized in Table . Atomic
coordinates and structure factors have been deposited with the RCSB
Protein Data Bank under accession code 4OCA.

Results and Discussion
Synthesis
and Purification of UDP-Ara-4N
The reaction
catalyzed by ArnB is a reversible transamination. In the forward direction
of the pathway, glutamic acid donates the amino group to UDP-L-Ara4O
yielding UDP-L-Ara4N and α-ketoglutarate. Whereas the ArnB binding site for α-ketoglutarate
has been defined crystallographically, the UDP-sugar binding site has remained unknown and co-crystallization
efforts have been hampered by the lack of a commercial source for
these sugar–nucleotides. To address this problem, UDP-Ara4N
was targeted for enzymatic synthesis and purification (UDP-Ara4O has
been described as unstable). First, UDP-Ara4O
was synthesized from UDP-glucuronic acid (UDP-GlcA) by NAD+ dependent oxidative decarboxylation catalyzed by the dehydrogenase
domain of ArnA,, (Figure ). The reaction progress was examined
by ion-pair reversed-phase HPLC monitored at 256 and 340 nm (to detect
NADH) (). In a second step,
ArnA decarboxylase domain was removed by ultrafiltration and the reaction
supplemented with ArnB and a large excess of glutamate to drive the
synthesis of UDP-Ara4N. Analysis of the reaction products by HPLC
showed disappearance of the UDP-Ara4O substrate with concomitant appearance
of an early eluting peak ().
Mass spectrometry analysis of this early eluting material indicated
a molecular mass of 534.1 Da consistent with UDP-Ara4N (theoretical
molecular weight 535.29) (). NMR analysis of this material showed a spectrum essentially identical
to that of UDP-Ara4N reported by Raetz and co-workers confirming the identity of the purified nucleotide ().

Structure of ArnB in Complex
with PLP and UDP-Ara4N
Initial attempts to determine the
structure of an ArnB/PLP/UDP-Ara-4N
ternary complex were conducted by incubating wild-type ArnB with purified
UDP-Ara4N in crystallization screens. Analysis of the resulting crystals
indicated the presence of the cofactor in the active site, but no
additional electron density could be ascribed to UDP-Ara4N (data not
shown). At the available resolution (3.5 Å), it was not clear
if the cofactor was PLP or PMP. However, further analysis of the structure
showed that the side chain of the catalytic residue K188 was in a
position previously reported for the ArnB/PMP structure. Furthermore, the plane of the cofactor was tilted
close to the PMP position in the ArnB/PMP structure. This was interpreted
as an indication that, (i) during crystallization incubation, UDP-Ara4N
reacted with PLP to produce PMP and UDP-Ara4O, and (ii) under the
conditions of the experiment, this PMP-bound form of the enzyme did
not bind the sugar nucleotides tightly enough to result in a stable
ternary complex.

In a second approach to crystallize an ArnB/PLP/UDP-Ara-4N
ternary complex, the catalytic lysine 188 was mutated to alanine.
In the proposed catalytic mechanism () K188 acts as a general base and abstracts a proton from
the 4′ carbon of the UDP-Ara4N-PLP aldimine to generate a quinonoid
intermediate. Thus, it was reasoned that the K188A mutant might trap
the UDP-Ara4N-PLP aldimine in the enzyme active site. To this end,
a binary complex was prepared first, by incubating ArnB K188A with
PLP to saturate the cofactor binding site. This step was necessary,
because in ArnB K188A, the PLP is not stably linked to the enzyme
by an internal aldimine with K188. The protein was then incubated
with an excess of purified UDP-Ara-4N in crystallization screens.
Conditions that yielded crystals in the presence of UDP-Ara-4N, but
not in its absence, were refined. Large diamond-shaped crystals obtained
in 0.1 M Sodium acetate (pH 4.5), 19% PEG20000 were cryoprotected
and used to collect a data set to 2.3 Å resolution. The crystals
belonged to space group P43212 with unit cell dimensions: a = b = 90.952 and c = 129.123 Å, which suggested
one protomer per asymmetric unit. The structure was determined by
molecular replacement using S. typhimurium ArnB (PDB ID 1MDX) stripped of its ligands as a search model. After an initial round
of positional and B-factor refinement, clear electron density for
the UDP-Ara-4N-PLP aldimine was observed confirming the achievement
of a ternary complex. The final model (Rwork 0.23; Rfree 0.26) contains residues
9 to 384 except a short stretch of polypeptide spanning residues 219
to 232, which could not be unambiguously modeled presumably due to
conformational flexibility. This region was also missing in the structures
of ArnB with other ligands. The final
model also contains the UDP-Ara-4N-PLP aldimine and 131 water molecules.
Data collection and refinement statistics are summarized in Table .

The ArnBK188A/PLP/UDP-Ara4N ternary
complex superimposes
with wild-type ArnB with an RMS deviation of 0.3 Å for all Cα
atoms, indicating that the K188A mutation does not alter the overall
conformation. Furthermore, ligand binding does not appear to induce
any significant conformational changes in the protein. ArnB is a dimer
in solution as defined by its size exclusion chromatography elution
profile (data not show). Although some type-I aminotransferases assemble
into larger oligomers, members of this family are known to be catalytically
active as dimers. The dimer twofold symmetry
axis is incorporated into the crystal symmetry, which was used to
generate a model of the ArnB dimer (Figure A). We and others have proposed that ArnB may oligomerize with other
enzymes in the pathway to form a multiprotein complex in vivo where the substrates are channeled between active sites for protection
of labile intermediates and efficient synthesis of product.,, However, no evidence for such
an assembly has been reported, and we expect the ArnB dimer to be
the functional unit in vivo.

ArnB ligand binding Site.
(A) Molecular surface representation
of the dimeric structure of ArnB showing the UDP-Ara4N-PLP binding
pocket. Subunits 1 and 2 are colored in yellow and cyan, respectively.
UDP-Ara4N-PLP from subunit 1 is shown as a stick model. The insert
is a close up view of the binding site showing the exposed UDP moiety.
(B) Stereoview of a simulated annealing Fo-Fc omit map (contour level 3.0 σ) where the ligand UDP-Ara4N-PLP
was omitted. The structure of the refined ligand is superimposed on
the map for reference.

Substrate and Cofactor Binding Sites
The cofactor and
substrate binding sites are at the interface between the two subunits.
Pyridoxal-phosphate binds in a deep pocket within one subunit (Figure A), with D160 interacting with the pyridine ring
nitrogen (Figure A) and increasing its electron-sink
character as is typical in this family of aminotransferases., The PLP phosphate group interacts with T64, S183, the main chain
amides from A63 and T64 (Figure A). In addition,
a well-defined water molecule (wat1) mediates binding of the phosphate
group of PLP to the side chains of K241 and H215 from the opposite
subunit. Another water molecule (wat2) also mediates binding of the
phosphate group of PLP to the side chain of E194 and the main chain
amide and carbonyl oxygen of G195 as observed previously in the cofactor
bound structures of ArnB. The UDP-Ara4N
binding site is more solvent exposed than the PLP site (Figure A). The uracil ring is sandwiched between the side
chains of P16, A186, and I187 from one subunit and the indole ring
of W34 from the opposite subunit (Figure B).
Binding is also stabilized by a hydrogen bond between the 4-oxygen
of uracil and the main chain amide of I35 from the second subunit.
The ribose adopts a 3′ endo conformation and makes no direct
hydrogen bonds with the protein. The phosphate groups of UDP-Ara4N
make only two hydrogen bonds with ArnB (Figure B). The side chain of His185 contacts the β-phosphate of the
UDP moiety, whereas the α-phosphate forms a hydrogen bond with
the side chain of H329 (Figure B). Remarkably,
H329 forms a nonproline cis peptide bond with F330
stabilized by a hydrogen bond between the side chain of Y136 and the
carbonyl oxygen of H329. Nonproline cis peptide bonds
are observed with a frequency of only 0.03% and are typically found in active sites. Curiously, they appear
to be enriched in carbohydrate binding or processing enzymes. The unusual cis peptide bond
between H329 and F330 and its stabilization by Y136 was noted in the
previous structures of ArnB without UDP-Ara4N, but its role was undefined. The function of H329 in binding the sugar nucleotide
substrate is now established.

Close up views of the active site of S. typhimurium ArnB. (A) Binding site of PLP moiety.
(B) Binding site of UDP moiety.
(C) Stereoview of the binding site of Ara4N moiety. Residues from
subunit 1 and subunit 2 are colored in yellow and cyan, respectively.
Possible hydrogen bonds lying within ∼3.2 Å are indicated
by the blue dashed lines. Water molecules are shown in red sphere.

The Ara4N pyranose ring adopts
a 4C1 chair
conformation in the ArnB ternary complex structure (Figure C). Raetz and co-workers identified this as the
most stable conformation for the UPD-Ara4N pyranose ring based on
the characteristic H1–H2 and H2–H3 J coupling constants as well as the diagnostic chemical shift of the
C1 carbon linked to an axial glycosidic oxygen. In this orientation the 4″ proton is ideally positioned
for abstraction by the catalytic K188 (A188 in the mutant structure).
This suggests that UDP-Ara4N is bound in a physiologically relevant,
catalytically competent orientation in the structure. The pyranose
ring is packed against the indole group of W89 and its binding stabilized
by several hydrogen bond interactions (Figure C). The 5-hydroxyl group of PLP interacts with the 3″OH of
Ara4N while the 2″OH interacts with the carbonyl oxygen of
L328 through a water molecule (wat3). The water molecule (wat1) that
links the PLP phosphate with H215 and K241 from the opposite subunit
(Figure A) is also within hydrogen bonding
distance of the pyranose oxygen and may contribute to the sugar binding,
although the geometry is not ideal for a hydrogen bond.

Comparison
to Other Aminotransferases and Implications for Inhibitor
Design
ArnB is most closely related to bacterial PLP-dependent
aminotransferases that act on sugar nucleotides and are involved in
cell envelope synthesis or modification such as PseC and perosamine
synthase. PseC catalyzes amino transfer to the 4″-keto group
of UDP-2-acetamido-2,6-dideoxy-4-hexulose yielding UDP-4-amino-4,6-dideoxy-AltNAc,
a crucial intermediate in the synthesis of pseudaminic acid, which
glycosylates flagelins in Helicobacter and Campylobacter strains., Similarly, GDP-perosamine synthase aminates the 4-keto group of
GDP-4-keto-6deoxymannose to yield GDP-perosamine, an unusual sugar
found in the O-antigen of Vibrio and Caulobacter strains., Despite low sequence identity (on the order of 30%), ArnB shares
with these enzymes both the overall fold and the sugar-nucleotide
binding site (RMS deviations of 1.5 Å for 356 Cα superimposed
on PseC (PDB ID 2FNU()); and 1.4 Å for 359 Cα superimposed
on perosamine synthase (PDB ID 3DR4()) as calculated
with Dali). The ArnB active site is most
similar to that of PseC, which also binds a UDP-sugar nucleotide.
As shown in Figure , most active site residues
are conserved despite the relatively low overall sequence identity,
and the substrate is bound in the same orientation with the pyranose
ring retaining the 4C1 chair conformation. In
fact, it appears possible that both these enzymes may be able to catalyze
transamination of both substrates. However, this structure-based hypothesis
awaits experimental confirmation.

Comparison of ligand binding site in ArnB
and PseC. Stereo representation
of the active site of ArnB (subunits colored yellow and cyan) superimposed
on PseC (subunits colored light orange and slate blue). The position
and conformation of the ArnB and PseC ligands, UDP-Ara4N and UDP-4-amino-4,6-dideoxy-AltNAc,
respectively, are very similar. Carbon atoms in the ArnB and PseC
ligands are colored green and pink, respectively, whereas oxygen is
red, nitrogen is blue, and phosphorus is orange.

The similarity of ArnB to human amino transferases is more
limited.
Sequence similarity is barely detectable, with the closest homologue,
δ-aminolevulinate synthase, sharing only 20% identity and 29%
similarity (aligned using DELTA-BLAST). Despite poor sequence conservation, many PLP dependent human enzymes
retain the type I aminotransferase fold. The closest structural homologues
of ArnB in humans, as detected by Dali, include cystathionine-γ-lyase and kynurenine aminotransferase. However,
these enzymes bind substrates totally different from those of ArnB
and the geometry of their active sites is incompatible with binding
UDP-Arabinose sugar nucleotides (Figure ).
Furthermore, whereas plants and lower eukaryotes such as leishmania
synthesize UDP or GDP-Ara, to the best of our knowledge no arabinose-nucleotides
have been described in mammals. This provides a rationale for the
development of small molecule inhibitors that would target bacterial
but not human PLP-dependent enzymes.

Comparison of ligand binding site in ArnB
and its human structural
homologues. Surface representations of the active sites of S. typhimurium ArnB (A); Human cystathion-γlyase
(B); and Human kynurenine aminotransferase I (C). The proteins were
superimposed using Dali and they are displayed in the same orientation
with their respective ligands shown as stick figures. Whereas the
PLP cofactor is bound in approximately similar conformations, the
substrates are accommodated in completely different binding sites.

We propose that ArnB is an excellent
target for development of
selective inhibitors that would abolish lipid A modification and render
bacteria sensitive to host CAMPs and antibiotics that act by similar
mechanisms such as Colistin. Molecules designed to occupy the UDP-Ara4N
binding site should provide specificity for bacterial targets. In
addition, analogs designed to incorporate cycloserine or aminodyhydroquinolone
functionalities in place of the arabinose moiety may result in irreversible
inhibitors where the external aldimine formed with PLP tautomerizes
to a stable enamine. This strategy has been used successfully to develop
specific, irreversible inhibitors of kynurenine aminotransferase for
the treatment of schizophrenia.− It is also worth highlighting
that ArnB makes only two hydrogen bonds with the phosphate groups
of UDP-Arn4N. This suggests that it may be possible to develop analogs
that replace the phosphates with noncharged functionalities capable
of satisfying the hydrogen bonding requirements. This would improve
the membrane permeability characteristics of the inhibitor as well
as facilitate the synthesis of analogs.

Supporting Information Available
Chromatography traces tracking
the synthesis of UDP-Ara4N (Figure S1); the mass spectrometry and
NMR spectra identifying UDP-Ara4N (Figure S2); and a scheme of the
proposed reaction mechanism of ArnB. This material is available free
of charge via the Internet at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bi4015677_si_001.pdf

The authors declare
no
competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
We are indebted to Danielle Castagneri for assistance with
cloning, and to Dr. David McKay for X-ray facility support. We also
thank Sabrina Hunt and Dr. Arthur Pardi for assistance with NMR experiments
identifying UDP-Ara4N.

Abbreviations:
CAMPscationic antimicrobial peptides

PLPpyridoxal-phosphate

PMPpyridoxamine-phosphate

LPSlipopolysaccharide

CFcystic fibrosis

UDP-Ara4Nuridine 5′-diphospho-β-(4-amino-4-deoxy-l-arabinose)

UDP-Ara4Ouridine 5′-diphospho-β-(l-threopentapyranosyl-4″-ulose)

IPTGiso-propyl-1-thio-β-d-galactopyranoside

