In 1953, Kidd made the serendipitous
discovery that guinea pig serum can kill transplanted lymphomas in
mice. The active agent behind this unexpected
activity was revealed by Broome in 1961 to be an enzyme with l-asparaginase (ASNase) activity., Astonishingly,
the precise identification of the guinea pig ASNase responsible for
the anticancer effect is still unclear. In this study, we tested whether
the guinea pig l-asparaginase that we refer to as gpASNase3
has the required properties to be that enzyme. In addition to characterizing
its kinetic properties, we elucidated its crystal structure in its
inactive and active states.

The work of Kidd and Broome suggested
that ASNases may have clinical
utility as anticancer agents. However, since it was found that the
guinea pig serum ASNase was difficult to work with, alternative sources
for ASNases with anticancer activity were sought. In 1964, an ASNase
isolated from E. coli was discovered to have cell
killing activity comparable to that of the ASNase present in guinea
pig serum. Antitumor activity was also
observed for an ASNase from Erwinia chrysanthemi. Both of these bacterial enzymes are currently
FDA approved to treat acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL).

ASNases catalyze the conversion of the
amino acid l-asparagine
into l-aspartate and ammonia (Figure A). Both the substrate asparagine and product aspartate are used
for protein synthesis, while aspartate also participates in several
biosynthetic pathways, including serving as a precursor to several
amino acids and in the biosynthesis of purine bases. Despite the indispensable
role of these amino acids, neither is considered an essential amino
acid in humans (i.e., requiring intake through the diet), due to de novo pathways for their synthesis. In the specific case
of asparagine, human cells can either acquire this amino acid from
the blood, where it is present at a concentration of approximately
50 μM, or employ the enzyme asparagine
synthetase to produce it.

Reaction schemes, sequence alignment, and constructs
of guinea
pig ASNase3. (A) Reaction scheme whereby asparaginase hydrolyzes asparagine
into aspartate and ammonia. (B) Sequence alignment using Clustal Omega of gpASNase3 (H0VQC8_CAVPO), hASNase3 (ASGL1_HUMAN), E. coli type III (IAAA_ECOLI), gpAGA (H0UZ36_CAVPO), and
hAGA (ASPG_HUMAN). The hAGA signal peptide and the uncharacterized
peptide at the N-terminus of gpASNase3 are denoted in green. Conserved
active site residues are in red. The black dashed line separates the
α- and β-subunits after autoproteolytic cleavage. The
cartoon β-strands and helices in cyan and light cyan represent
the secondary structural elements of the α- and β-subunits,
respectively, of gpASNase3. (C) Scheme of the uncharacterized H0VQC8_CAVPO
UniProt entry. We refer to gpASNase3 as the catalytic domain (gray),
lacking the preceding 23 residues (green). (D) Cleavage reaction scheme.
GpASNase3 is cleaved between Gly167 and Thr168 through autoproteolysis
(very slow) or accelerated by glycine (see text). The freed amino
group of Thr168, the first residue of the β-subunit, is required
for its l-asparaginase activity.

Interestingly, some cancer types, such as ALL, have lost
the ability
to synthesize asparagine de novo, making them dependent
on extracellular asparagine for survival., When
used clinically to treat ALL, administration of ASNase depletes asparagine
from the blood, and this disrupts vital growth processes and ultimately
causes apoptosis. Not surprising due
to the bacterial origin of the enzymes used as antileukemic agents,
immunogenic responses are a major drawback to their clinical use,
manifesting themselves as rash, edema, bronchospasm, erythema, and
even systemic anaphylaxis. Moreover,
the generated antibodies inactivate the drug., Attempting to shield the ASNase from recognition by the immune system,
the E. coli enzyme was conjugated to polyethylene
glycol (PEG).− However, it has recently been shown that antibodies to PEG can cause
silent inactivation by depleting the serum of ASNase through clearance
of the PEG conjugates, rendering the treatment ineffective.,− Hence, a nonimmunogenic ASNase would greatly improve
this treatment strategy. In order to be useful as an anticancer therapeutic,
an ASNase must exhibit a Michaelis constant, KM for asparagine in the micromolar
range, a property of the clinically used bacterial ASNases. This requirement
precludes the use of human ASNases since these have been reported
to have a KM for asparagine in the millimolar
range.

While human ASNases can be ruled out as potential replacements
for the bacterial ASNases, the still-unidentified ASNase present in
guinea pig serum, due to the decreased taxonomic distance to human,
would potentially be less immunogenic than the bacterial enzymes.− To identify that particular enzyme, we searched the UniProt database for guinea pig proteins with asparaginase activity
and found four such entries. One is annotated as H0UX35_CAVPO and
shares 98.8% identity with human threonine aspartase (all sequence
alignments performed with Clustal Omega); a second is annotated as H0W0T5_CAVPO and has 70.4% identity with
human 60 kDa lysophospholipase. The other two uncharacterized proteins,
classified as protein fragments, have similarities to members of the
N-terminal nucleophile (Ntn)-hydrolase superfamily: H0UZ36_CAVPO as
a homologue of aspartylglucosaminidase (AGA) sharing 86.7% identity
with human AGA and H0VQC8_CAVPO, which when analyzed from the first
methionine in the reported sequence has 79.9% sequence identity with
human ASNase3 (hASNase3), also known as hASRGL1,, ALP, and CRASH (see Figure B). H0VQC8_CAVPO would also
be classified as a type III or plant-type asparaginase given its similarity
to Lupinus luteus plant asparaginase, E.
coli EcAIII, and hASNase3.− On the basis of the homology of H0VQC8_CAVPO to human
ASNase3, in this article we refer to this enzyme as the guinea pig
ASNase3 (gpASNase3).

In this study, we focus on gpASNase3. Interestingly,
gpASNase3
contains an N-terminal extension of 23 amino acids that is absent
in the human homologue hASNase3 (Figure C).
This leader sequence, located prior to what would be the initiation
methionine as present in hASNase3, could be part of a signal peptide
for secretion into the serum, where the cell killing asparaginase
from guinea pig is located. Note that
most ASNases are not secreted. While gpASNase3 belongs to the type
III enzyme class as opposed to the type II class of the clinically
used ASNases (type II and III enzymes do not share any homology),
a common property of the type II bacterial enzymes is periplasmic
localization due to an ∼20 amino acid N-terminal signal peptide.
We pondered whether the N-terminal extension, indicated by the UniProt
database to be present in gpASNase3, could perform a similar translocation
function.

Guinea pig ASNase3, being a member of the Ntn-hydrolase
family,
would be enzymatically inactive when first produced. Previously, we
reported our studies of hASNase3 and its autocleavage (and hence activation)
properties., Activation occurs upon autoproteolytic
cleavage that results in α- and β-subunits. The catalytic residue for the cleavage reaction
(in the context of the intact protein) and for the asparaginase activity
(in the context of the cleaved protein) is the N-terminal threonine
of the β-subunit. In hASNase3, and by homology in gpASNase3,
activation by autocleavage into α- and β-subunits occurs
between Gly167 and Thr168 (Figure D).

In addition to catalyzing asparagine hydrolysis,
AGA and type III l-asparaginases also function as β-aspartyl
peptidases
(EC 3.4.19.5).,, β-Aspartyl bond formation leads to significant structural
alteration and often dysfunction and is one of the most common nonenzymatic
processes by which protein damage occurs.,, Therefore, we also examined the ability
of gpASNase3 to catalyze β-aspartyl peptide bond breakage.

In this study, we investigated the intrinsic cleavage (and hence
activation) rate of gpASNase3 and the ability of glycine to accelerate
the cleavage process, a property we previously reported for hASNase3. We determined that activated gpASNase3 acts
both as an asparaginase and as a β-aspartyl peptidase and characterized
its kinetic properties. Furthermore, we determined the first structures
of gpASNase3, both in its inactive, uncleaved state and in its active,
cleaved state bound to the product aspartate. In addition to increasing
our mechanistic understanding of this enzyme, our analysis suggests
that gpASNase3 is not the asparaginase present in
guinea pig serum that is responsible for the antitumor activity observed
by Kidd in 1953.

Materials and Methods
Cloning
of Guinea Pig ASNase3
Cavia
porcellus (guinea pig) asparaginase UniProt entry H0VQC8 is annotated
as an uncharacterized protein fragment consisting of 332 amino acid
residues (see Figure B,C) that is lacking
its N-terminal translation initiation methionine. The first methionine
in the UniProt entry is at position 24, which corresponds to the position
of the translation initiation methionine in the human homologue hASNase3.
For our studies, we ordered a synthetic gene (Genscript) codon optimized
for expression in E. coli that began at that first
methionine since we were interested in the catalytic domain of the
enzyme, not in its putative secretion properties. The synthetic gene
was transferred to a His6-TEV-pET14b expression vector
using NdeI and BamHI restriction
sites at the 5′ and 3′ ends, respectively. The expression
plasmid encodes for an N-terminal hexahistidine tag followed by a
TEV protease cleavage site (MGSSHHHHHHSSGGNENLYFQGH) (see
Figure A).

Glycine accelerates cleavage of gpASNase3
into its α- and
β-subunits in a dose-dependent manner. (A) Scheme of the uncleaved
and cleaved gpASNase3 constructs used in this study. In yellow are
regions that had no clear electron density. (B) SDS–PAGE gels
showing intrinsic cleavage as a function of time and the accelerated
cleavage due to the addition of 10, 25, 50, 100, and 250 mM glycine
at pH 6.5. (C) Quantification of the uncleaved, the α-, and
the β-subunit bands of gpASNase3 using ImageJ software. The higher the concentration of glycine added,
the greater is the decrease in uncleaved protein and the greater is
the accumulation of the α- and β-subunits.

Expression and Purification
The
His6-TEV-gpASNase3(1–309)-pET14b
plasmid was transformed into BL21 (DE3) C41 E. coli cells for expression. A starter culture of the plasmid was grown
overnight and inoculated into 6 L of 2YT medium at a ratio of 1:100.
The cells were grown at 37 °C to an optical density (at 600 nm)
of 0.6, and overexpression was induced with isopropyl-β-d-1-thiogalactopyranoside (IPTG) at a final concentration of
0.1 mM. Growth continued at 37 °C for 6 h, at which point the
cells were harvested by centrifugation, and the pellet was frozen
at −20 °C. For purification, the cell pellet was thawed,
resuspended in lysis buffer (25 mM Tris-HCl at pH 7.5, 200 mM KCl,
10 mM MgCl2, 10 mM imidazole, 10% glycerol, 1% Triton X100,
1 mM PMSF), and disrupted by sonication. The lysate was cleared by
ultracentrifugation (33K rpm, 1 h, 4 °C), and the supernatant
was loaded onto an equilibrated 5 mL HisTrap HP Ni Sepharose column
(GE Healthcare), washed with buffer containing 25 mM Tris-HCl at pH
7.5, 200 mM KCl, 10 mM MgCl2, and 25 mM imidazole followed
by a wash with buffer containing 25 mM Tris-HCl at pH 7.5, 200 mM
KCl, 10 mM MgCl2, and 50 mM imidazole. The column was washed
overnight at 4 °C with buffer containing 25 mM Tris-HCl at pH
7.5 and 100 mM KCl. The next morning, a final wash step was performed
using buffer containing 25 mM Tris-HCl at pH 7.5, 200 mM KCl, and
75 mM imidazole. The uncleaved His6-TEV-gpASNase3(1–309)
was unstable and prone to precipitation at pH 7.5 and was eluted in
buffer that aided stabilization (20 mM CAPS at pH 10.5, 100 mM KCl,
and 250 mM imidazole) with a yield of 155 mg as determined by UV absorbance
at 280 nm. Two millimolar DTT was added to the eluted protein. The
protein was concentrated to 10 mL (14.5 mg/mL). Five milliliters was
loaded at a time onto a Superdex 200 Hi Load 26/60 gel filtration
column (GE Healthcare) pre-equilibrated with 10–20 mM CAPS
at pH 10.5, 100 mM KCl, and 2 mM DTT. The protein eluted as one main
peak (corresponding to the monomer) with a slight shoulder at the
beginning (corresponding to the dimer). The monomer peak was pooled,
concentrated to ∼50 mg/mL, aliquoted, flash frozen in liquid
nitrogen, and stored at −80 °C.

Glycine-Accelerated Cleavage
Assay
Cleavage of His6-TEV-gpASNase3(1–309)
into its α- and β-subunits
was measured over several days in the absence and presence of glycine.
The protein was diluted to 1.5–1.75 mg/mL in buffer in which
the cleaved form was stabilized instead of the uncleaved form and
was composed of 25 mM CAPS (used as an additive), 25 mM MES at pH
6.5, 100 mM KCl, and 2 mM DTT ± glycine at pH 6.5. For the comparison
between cleavage of the guinea pig and human ASNase3 enzymes in the
absence or presence of 250 mM glycine, the buffer contained 25 mM
MES at pH 6.5, 100 mM KCl, and 2 mM DTT ± glycine. A small amount
of initial precipitation occurred due to the instability of the uncleaved
protein in this buffer at this pH. Samples were centrifuged at 13,000
rpm for 10 min at 4 °C to ensure that samples run on the gel
contained only soluble, stable protein.

Kinetic Assay
In order to activate gpASNase3, which
was purified primarily in its uncleaved form, gpASNase3 was dialyzed
against buffer that contained glycine (20 mM MES at pH 6.5, 100 mM
KCl, 3 mM DTT, and 400 mM glycine) for 4 days. The same kinetic assay
was utilized to test for both asparaginase and isoaspartyl dipeptidase
activities., It measures the production of l-aspartate through the 1:1 oxidation of reduced nicotinamide
adenine dinucleotide (NADH). The conversion of NADH to NAD+ was measured spectrophotometrically as a decrease in absorbance
at 340 nm at 37 °C. Glutamic-oxalacetic transaminase (Sigma G2751)
and malic dehydrogenase (Sigma M2634) were helper enzymes for the
coupled enzymatic reactions; ∼12 and ∼0.8 U were used,
respectively. Our 2× kinetic assay buffer was composed of 100
mM Tris at pH 7.5, 400 μM α-ketoglutarate, and 400 μM
NADH. The l-Asn substrate stock (Sigma-Aldrich A93003) was
made fresh as a 125 mM solution in 50 mM Tris at pH 7.5. Controls
were performed wherein all the components were included in the cuvette
except for gpASNase3 or l-Asn. The control lacking gpASNase3
was to ensure that in the absence of enzyme the assay showed no signal.
This control also confirmed the lack of prehydrolyzed l-Asn.
The control lacking the substrate was to ensure the dependency of
the reaction on l-Asn. Kinetic data were analyzed with SigmaPlot
2000/Enzyme Kinetics Module 1.0, from Systat Software, Inc., San Jose,
California, USA, (www.sigmaplot.com). Error estimates for kcat (turnover number)/KM were calculated from the
individual errors of kcat and KM using the following equation: (Δz/z) = ((Δx/x)2 + (Δy/y)2)1/2.

Crystallization
A variety of crystallization screens
(Qiagen) were applied to purified His6-TEV-gpASNase(1–309).
Several hits were obtained that contained buffers ranging from pH
5.0–6.5, 0.1–0.2 M salt (ammonium acetate, ammonium
sulfate, lithium sulfate), and 17–25% PEG 3350–10000.
Condition 22 from The Protein Complex Suite (0.15 M ammonium sulfate,
0.1 M MES at pH 6.0, and 15% PEG 4000) was optimized. For setups,
1 μL of protein (35–45 mg/mL in 20 mM CAPS at pH 10.5,
100 mM KCl, and 2 mM DTT) was mixed with 1 μL of reservoir solution
(0.2 M ammonium sulfate, 0.1 M MES at pH 6.0, and 13–15% PEG
3350) on a glass coverslip and left to undergo vapor diffusion using
the hanging drop method at 20 °C. Large rod-like crystals grew
within 1 day. To obtain the Asp-bound gpASNase3 complex, crystals
were first soaked in a solution (0.1 M MES at pH 6.0 and 15% PEG 3350)
containing 2 M glycine to cleave the enzyme followed by a soak in
cryoprotectant solution (0.1 M MES at pH 6.0, 15% PEG 3350, and 30%
ethylene glycol) containing saturated l-aspartic acid sodium
salt monohydrate (Sigma A6683).

Data Collection and Structure
Solution
X-ray diffraction
data were collected at the Advanced Photon Source LS-CAT beamline.
Data were processed using XDS. The structure
of uncleaved gpASNase3 was determined by molecular replacement (CCP4Molrep) using hASNase3 with Protein Data Bank (PDB)
entry 4GDV. The structure of uncleaved gpASNase3 was then
used to determine the phases for the cleaved gpASNase3 diffraction
data. The diffraction data collected from the uncleaved and cleaved
gpASNase3 crystals were determined to be untwinned and twinned, respectively,
using the twinning server Web site located at http://services.mbi.ucla.edu/Twinning/() and the program Phenix.xtriage. Refinement was performed with Refmac5, during which twinning of the cleaved gpASNase3
diffraction data was selected in the configuration settings. The sodium
cations in the binding site were validated with the CheckMyMetal:
Metal Binding Site Validation Server. Coot was used for model building, and
figures of the structures were made using a MacPyMOL (PyMOL Molecular
Graphics System, version 1.4.1, Schrödinger, LLC).

Results
and Discussion
Guinea Pig ASNase3 Predominantly Purifies
as the Uncleaved Protein
A synthetic gene of gpASNase3 codon
optimized for expression in E. coli was made to encompass
the complete 309 residue catalytic
domain. The majority of gpASNase3 eluted from the nickel column as
a single band of ∼35 kDa corresponding to the inactive, uncleaved
precursor protein. About 25% of the eluted protein was present as
active, cleaved gpASNase3 with bands occurring at ∼20 and ∼15
kDa, which correspond to the α- and β-subunits, respectively.

Glycine Accelerates Cleavage of gpASNase3 into Its Activated
form
Being an Ntn-hydrolase family member, gpASNase3 requires
autoproteolysis for activation, converting it from an uncleaved precursor
into α- and β-subunits (Figure A). In gpASNase3, cleavage occurs between Gly167 and Thr168. Freeing
the amino group of Thr168, the N-terminal nucleophile of the β-subunit,
endows gpASNase3 with its catalytic ability to convert asparagine
into aspartate and ammonia. The observation that the majority of gpASNase3
remained in its inactive, uncleaved state throughout purification
is similar to what was seen for hASNase3 where intrinsic self-activation
occurs very slowly., This is in contrast to what was
reported for other bacterial and plant type III ASNases where autoproteolysis
occurs quickly and efficiently even at low temperatures.,,,

We previously reported that glycine accelerates the rate of
cleavage of hASNase3. To test whether
the free amino acid glycine can also accelerate the cleavage of gpASNase3,
we incubated the enzyme in the presence and absence of glycine and
analyzed the cleavage state by SDS–PAGE. In the absence of
glycine, the percent of uncleaved gpASNase3 is only reduced ∼30%
over a three-day incubation period (Figure B,C). This showcases the slow intrinsic cleavage rate of gpASNase3.
In contrast, during the same incubation time but in the presence of
250 mM glycine, gpASNase3 was cleaved almost completely. This would
correspond to the glycine-stimulated cleavage rate. Glycine stimulates
cleavage in a dose-dependent manner (Figure B,C): the higher the concentration of glycine, the greater is the
decrease in uncleaved and subsequent increase in cleaved gpASNase3.

We also compared the rate of intrinsic and glycine-stimulated cleavage
of gpASNase3 and hASNase3. Although a higher proportion of hASNase3
remained uncleaved after purification, the intrinsic rate was similar
to that of gpASNase3 (Figure ). Similarities
between guinea pig and human ASNase3 cleavage rates were also observed
in the presence of 250 mM glycine with the majority of cleavage occurring
within 24 h (Figure ). Through this study,
we show that both the slow intrinsic rate of cleavage and the ability
to stimulate cleavage with glycine occur in gpASNase3 and are not
properties unique to hASNase3. It is possible that these properties
may be common to mammalian ASNase3 enzymes. In a previous report,
we speculated as to the biological implication of glycine being an
activator of this type of enzymes.

Comparison
of the intrinsic and glycine-stimulated cleavage rates
of guinea pig and human ASNase3. (A) SDS–PAGE gels of gp and
hASNase3 with and without glycine at pH 6.5. Intrinsic cleavage occurs
slowly over time; however, the addition of 250 mM glycine greatly
stimulates cleavage. (B) Quantification of band intensities using
ImageJ software. Both intrinsic and glycine-stimulated
cleavage rates are comparable between guinea pig and human ASNase3.

GpASNase3 Exhibits β-Aspartyl
Peptidase Activity in Addition
to ASNase Activity
β-Aspartyl bond formation is a spontaneous
process that is a common form of protein damage, leading to significant
structural changes, which can be responsible for loss of function
and can alter recognition by proteases. In the case that these aberrant peptides cannot be repaired, β-aspartyl
peptidases are able to degrade these damaged peptides. We investigated
whether gpASNase3 exhibited β-aspartyl peptidase activity in
addition to ASNase activity. Despite gpASNase3 having a higher turnover
rate of 4 s–1 for l-Asn compared to 2 s–1 for β-l-Asp-l-Phe (see Table ), gpASNase3 has ∼3-fold lower catalytic
efficiency (defined as kcat/KM) of 1.8 mM–1 s–1 for l-Asn compared to 4.8 mM–1 s–1 for β-l-Asp-l-Phe. This is
due to gpASNase3 exhibiting a higher KM value with l-Asn (2.2 mM) versus β-l-Asp-l-Phe (0.4 mM). The KM of hASNase3
for β-l-Asp-l-Phe was reported to be 0.4 mM
by another group. According to data from
Nomme et al. (manuscript submitted), who utilized the same kinetic
assay and handling as those in this study, hASNase3 has a kcat of 3.2 s–1 and a KM of 2.1 mM for l-Asn hydrolysis and
a kcat of 0.8 s–1 and
a KM of 0.12 mM for β-l-Asp-l-Phe. This demonstrates that gpASNase3 and hASNase3
behave nearly identically in regard to their l-ASNase activity
and very similarly regarding their β-aspartyl peptidase activity.

Kinetic Parameters for gpASNase3 Hydrolysis
of l-Asn and β-l-Asp-l-Phe
substrate	kcat (s–1)	KM (mM)	kcat/KM (mM–1 s–1)	
l-Asn	3.95 ± 0.08	2.24 ± 0.14	1.76 ± 0.15	
β-l-Asp-l-Phe	1.98 ± 0.04	0.41 ± 0.03	4.83 ± 0.45	
The implication of this kinetic characterization of gpASNase3 is
that this cannot be the ASNase responsible for the cell killing property
of guinea pig serum. That serum ASNase would have a KM for l-Asn in the low micromolar range like
the bacterial enzymes used therapeutically. The KM of 2.2 mM for l-Asn means that gpASNase3 would
most likely be unable to deplete circulating asparagine levels sufficiently
to cause the death of tumor cells. The relevance for ASNase3’s
low affinity for asparagine is unclear and indicates that its precise
physiological role has yet to be elucidated.

Uncleaved versus Ligand-Bound,
Cleaved States of gpASNase3
We determined two crystal structures
of gpASNase3: one structure
displayed the inactive, uncleaved enzyme (solved at 1.9 Å resolution)
and the other the active, fully cleaved enzyme in complex with the
product aspartate (2.2 Å). To obtain the latter, since the enzyme
was primarily uncleaved after purification, full cleavage was accomplished
by soaking the crystal in mother liquor containing 2 M glycine; this
was followed by a soak in cryoprotectant that was saturated with l-aspartic acid sodium salt monohydrate. Data collection and
refinement statistics can be found in Table . Both crystals were of the P3221 space
group with nearly identical unit cell parameters and two molecules
of gpASNase3 in the asymmetric unit. The crystal of uncleaved gpASNase3
was not twinned, while the crystal from cleaved gpASNase3 with a molecule
of aspartate bound in the active site was twinned.

Data Collection and Refinement Statistics
for gpASNase3
 	uncleaved	cleaved ASP
complex	
PDB entry	4O47	4O48	
Data Collection	
X-ray source	LS-CAT, ID-G	LS-CAT, ID-G	
wavelength
(Å)	0.978 57	0.979 11	
temperature (K)	100	100	
resolution (Å)	30–1.9 (2.01–1.9)	30–2.29 (2.43–2.29)	
number of reflections	 	 	
observed	384991 (60228)	220590 (33863)	
unique	83640 (13338)	47228 (7297)	
completeness
(%)	99.7 (99.7)	98.8 (96.0)	
Rsym (%)	5.4 (49.6)	8.2 (59.7)	
average I/σ(I)	14.8 (2.6)	15.7 (3.3)	
space group	P3221	P3221	
unit
cell (Å)	 	 	
a = b	114.87	114.58	
c	138.97	138.59	
Twinning Analysis (xtriage)	
⟨I2⟩/⟨I⟩2, (untwinned: 2.0), perfect twin: 1.5)	1.952	1.604	
⟨|L|⟩, (untwinned: 0.500), perfect twin: 0.375)	0.478	0.385	
⟨L2⟩,
(untwinned: 0.333), perfect twin: 0.200)	0.310	0.210	
twin law	no twinning	-h,-k,l	
Refinement	
refinement program	REFMAC5	REFMAC5	
twinning fraction	 	0.4, 0.6	
Rcryst (%)	19.3	18.2	
Rfree (%)	21.3	22.1	
resolution range (Å)	28.7–1.90	29.7–2.29	
no. of protein molecules
per asymmetric unit	2	2	
no. of atoms	4456	4443	
protein
(protA, protB)	2157,
2119	2171, 2174	
aspartate	 	2 × 9	
water
molecules	178	78	
Na+	2 × 1	2 × 1	
rmsd from ideal	 	 	
bond lengths (Å)	0.013	0.011	
bond angles
(deg)	1.58	1.50	
average B factor
(Å2)	 	 	
protein (protA, protB)	40.5, 45.9	39.5, 45.3	
aspartate
(protA, protB)	 	39.2, 47.1	
water molecules	43.5	37.0	
Na+ (protA, protB)	36.0, 35.3	30.7, 36.2	
Ramachandran plot (%)	 	 	
favored
regions	96.9	95.7	
additionally allowed regions	2.8	3.9	
outlier regions	0.3	0.3	
Data for the last
shell are in parentheses.

As observed with the structures of hASNase3 (PDB entries 4GDU, 4GDT, 4GDV, 4GDW, 4HLO, and 4HLP),,E. coli type III ASNase (PDB entry 1T3M), and other Ntn-hydrolases, both
the uncleaved and the cleaved, ligand-bound gpASNase3 exist as dimers
where each protomer is formed from one α- and one β-subunit.
The protomers display the conserved αββα motif
consisting of two β-sheets sandwiched between α-helices
(Figure ). On one side, the α-subunit
contributes α-helices 1–6, which flank the mixed β-sheet
composed of strands from both the α- and β-subunits (refer
to strands M, L, K, A, E, F, B, C, and D of Figure B). The strands are all antiparallel with the exception of
C and D. The other antiparallel β-sheet is made up of strands
J, I, H, and G from the β-subunit, and α-helices (7–9)
from the β-subunit complete the sandwich.

Structure of cleaved
guinea pig ASNase3. Cartoon diagram of the
cleaved gpASNase3 dimer with its ligand Asp (green) in the active
site. Secondary structure elements are indicated. Despite no longer
being covalently linked as a single polypeptide chain, the α-
and β-subunits remain tightly associated after autocleavage.

Although the construct used was
a fusion protein with an intact
N-terminal His6-TEV tag, the first residue for which electron
density is observed was the histidine before the starting methionine.
The uncleaved structure also lacks electron density for the flexible
loop region between residues 11–15 in chain A and 11–19
in chain B. In contrast to the uncleaved state, in the cleaved enzyme
this N-terminal loop displayed clear electron density and was modeled.
Additionally, residues spanning 154–165 (chain A) and 153–165
(chain B) are also disordered in the uncleaved structure. Hence, despite
the unambiguously uncleaved state, the only residues with clear electron
density preceding the cleavage site (Thr168) are Gly167 and Leu166.
This disorder of the region analogous to the C-terminus of the α-chain
of the cleaved enzyme was also observed with other Ntn-hydrolase enzymes
including hASNase3.−, In the cleaved structure,
this region (residues 156–167 in both chains A and B, i.e.,
this time including Gly167) also did not display clear electron density.

Consistent with E. coli type III ASNase, plant-type
ASNase, and hASNase3, sodium cations were also observed in gpASNase3
to be part of a stabilizing metal binding loop that connects α-helix
2 to strand B, both of the α-subunit.− The cation
is coordinated by main chain carbonyl interactions with Leu55, Glu56,
Asp58, Phe61, Ala63, and His65.

The dimer interface, as calculated
by PDBsum per protomer, spans ∼1700
Å2 and
involves ∼35 residues for both uncleaved and cleaved gpASNase3;
91% of these are nonpolar interactions with the remaining contributions
being hydrogen bonds. There were no major differences between protomers
(i.e., comparing protomer A to protomer B) within the uncleaved (root-mean-square
deviation (rmsd) of 0.13 Å over 257 Cα atoms) or cleaved
(rmsd of 0.21 Å over 267 Cα atoms) structures, respectively.
Similarly, there were no major differences between protomers of the
uncleaved and cleaved structures (rmsd of 0.19 Å over 275 Cα
atoms). The latter observation demonstrates that there are no large
structural changes resulting from the cleavage of gpASNase3 into its
α- and β-subunits and binding of an aspartate molecule
in the active site.

One region that does show a striking difference
between the uncleaved
and cleaved states is the motif that we refer to as the HGG loop (named
for His8-Gly9-Gly10 which are conserved in plant-type ASNases). Cleavage
of gpASNase3 results in a local conformational change involving the
flipping of the carbonyl group of Gly9. In the uncleaved structure,
the carbonyl of Gly9 forms a hydrogen bond with His8 (Figure A, dashed line), whereas in the cleaved structure,
the carbonyl of Gly9 points away from His8, and the interaction is
lost (Figure B). The flexibility of the HGG
loop and its conformational flip between uncleaved and cleaved states
most likely plays an important regulatory role in the cleavage and
asparaginase reactions. Results from Nomme et al. (ref () and manuscript submitted)
regarding hASNase3 also support this proposition.

Comparison of the structures
of uncleaved and cleaved guinea pig
ASNase3. (A) The conserved HGG loop of uncleaved gpASNAse3 (protomer
A) with the 2Fo – Fc electron density map (blue, contour level of 2σ).
Enzyme activation via cleavage of the peptide bond between Gly167
and Thr168 is accompanied by a flip in the carbonyl at Gly9 (arrow),
which disrupts its interaction (dashed black line) with the imidazole
ring of His8. (B) The HGG motif of cleaved gpASNase3 (protomer A)
with the carbonyl group (arrow) at Gly9 facing the opposite direction
as clearly seen in the 2Fo – Fc electron density map (blue, contour level
of 2σ). (C) The Fo – Fc omit map (gray, contoured at +3σ) present
in the active site of cleaved gpASNase3 (protomer A). A molecule of
Asp is modeled into it. (D) Overlay of uncleaved and cleaved gpASNase3
protomer A showing the active site residues and the ligand Asp (green).
In the uncleaved structure, the Asp binding site is occupied by water
molecules (not shown). The covalent bond between Gly167 and Thr168
is observed in the uncleaved structure. For cleaved gpASNase3, dashed
lines indicate interactions of the Asp ligand with the active site
residues. (E) Modeling of the two best fitting rotamers of Thr168
in uncleaved gpASNase3 protomer A. The 2Fo – Fc and Fo – Fc electron density
maps shown were calculated for the dark gray rotamer, labeled rotamer
2. Although rotamer 2 partially fits the 2Fo – Fc electron density map (blue,
contour level of 1σ), negative electron density (red, contoured
at −3σ) surrounds the methyl group, indicating that too
many electrons are modeled at that position. There is also positive
electron density (green, contoured at +3σ) at the position occupied
by the hydroxyl group of rotamer 1, indicating that more electrons
should be modeled at that position. This shows that rotamer 1 (light
gray) is the correct one.

An additional contrast between the uncleaved and cleaved
structures
is that in the former, water molecules occupy the active site, whereas
in the latter the Fo – Fc omit map showed large positive density in
the active site (Figure C) into which a molecule
of Asp was modeled. The aspartic acid molecule forms hydrogen bonds
with the conserved Ntn-hydrolase residues Thr168, Arg196, Asp199,
Thr219, Gly220, and Gly222 (Figure D).

Conformation
of the Catalytic Thr168
Threonine 168
belongs to a threonine catalytic triad (the others being Thr186 and
Thr219) that is strictly conserved in this enzyme family. The role
of Thr168 is to nucleophilically attack the asparagine side chain
carbonyl C atom, a step that initiates the hydrolysis reaction. The
nucleophilicity of the Thr168 side chain is increased by its α-amino
group, a moiety that is freed by the cleavage reaction.− In fact, Thr168 is not only required for the hydrolysis of asparagine
into aspartic acid, but in addition, the hydroxyl group of its side
chain is required for its own activation by initiating cleavage through
nucleophilic attack on the carbonyl of Gly167.

Interestingly,
Thr168 exists in different conformations in the uncleaved versus cleaved
structures, with the conformation observed in the uncleaved structure
deviating from that observed in both uncleaved and cleaved hASNase3.
Because of the key catalytic functions of this residue, we took great
care to confirm that indeed the correct rotamer of Thr168 was modeled
at the active site in the uncleaved structure. For this reason, we
examined all three possible rotamers of Thr168 and compared their
fit to 2Fo – Fc and Fo – Fc electron density maps. The third rotamer clearly
did not fit the electron density and was ruled out. The second rotamer
mostly fit the 2Fo – Fc map; however, the Fo – Fc difference map showed negative density (indicating
too many electrons modeled) at the position of the methyl group and
positive density (indicating not enough electrons modeled) 120°
away (Figure E, dark gray). This observation
was confirmed for both protomers A and B and suggested that this rotamer
is not the correct one. In contrast, in addition to clearly fitting
in the 2Fo – Fc map, the first rotamer of Thr168 (Figure E, light gray) did not display any positive density and showed
only slight negative density in the Fo – Fc difference map, and only
in protomer B. This analysis validates the choice of the first rotamer
for this key residue in the uncleaved structure.

The observed
Thr168 rotamer of the uncleaved structure is perplexing
since the critical distance between the carbonyl of Gly167 and the
hydroxyl group of Thr168 is too long for cleavage to occur. The first
step in the cleavage reaction would involve the Thr168 hydroxyl group
attacking the carbonyl C atom of the preceding Gly167. This cleavage-incompetent
conformation of Thr168 observed in the uncleaved structure could help
to account for the slow intrinsic cleavage rate of gpASNase3. Moreover,
this observation suggests that this region must be flexible to allow
a conformational change of Thr168 and/or Gly167 that would build the
cleavage competent state.

Comparison to Human ASNase3
Guinea
pig and human ASNase3
are not only highly similar in sequence and kinetic properties, but
as can be seen in Figure , they are very similar
in structure as well. The main differences occur in the flexible loop
regions. The cleaved gpASNase3 Asp-bound structure displays high similarity
to cleaved, Asp-bound hASNase3 (PDB entry 4GDW; rmsd of 0.36 Å over 498 Cα
atoms) (Figure A). The position of the aspartate
molecule bound in the active site of cleaved guinea pig and human
ASNase3 is nearly identical (Figure B), and
the interactions between the aspartate and conserved Ntn-hydrolase
active site residues Thr168, Arg196, Asp199, Thr219, Gly220, and Gly222
are the same. Additionally, the flip of the Gly9 carbonyl of the HGG
loop between the uncleaved and cleaved states is consistent between
human and guinea pig ASNase3.

Comparison of the structures of cleaved guinea
pig and human ASNase3.
(A) Overlay of cartoon diagrams of the structures of cleaved gp and
hASNase3 (PDB entry 4GDW) in complex with Asp. The Na+ cation present in each
protomer is represented as a gray sphere. (B) Overlay of the active
sites of cleaved gp and hASNase3 in complex with Asp denoted in green
and yellow, respectively. The freed N-terminus at Thr168 denoting
cleavage into α- and β-subunits is observed. Interactions
made by conserved Ntn-hydrolase residues (dashed light cyan lines)
are consistent between gp and hASNase3. The carbonyl of Gly9 in the
HGG loop is also pointed away from the side chain of His8 in both
gp and hASNase3 in agreement with cleavage between Gly167 and Thr168
and enzyme activation. Water molecules are shown as small spheres
whose colors correspond to either h or gpASNase3.

As noted earlier, the HGG motif is conserved in plant-type
asparaginases.
Interestingly, the glycine of this motif that we observe to flip between
the uncleaved and cleaved structures in the mammalian enzymes was
observed for the E. coli enzyme to be in the same
conformation regardless of cleavage (E. coli cleaved
PDB entry 2ZAL; uncleaved attained by the T179A mutation,
PDB entries 2ZAK() and 3C17()). Additionally,
whereas the bacterial enzyme readily undergoes cleavage, both the
human and guinea pig homologues cleave very slowly. This high conformational
flexibility of the HGG motif may contribute to the slow autocleavage
rate of the mammalian enzymes. The interaction between the carbonyl
group of Gly9 and the imidazole ring of His8 could aid in stabilization
of the uncleaved form, preventing autoproteolysis. It remains to be
elucidated whether cleavage of mammalian ASNase3 into its α-
and β-subunits is what triggers this conformational change at
the HGG loop or whether the flipping of the carbonyl group of Gly9
makes the autocleavage reaction more favorable.

Conclusions
In this study, we determined that the uncharacterized protein fragment
H0VQC8_CAVPO in the UniProt database corresponds to a type III ASNase,
which we named guinea pig ASNase3. We show that like other Ntn-hydrolases,
gpASNase3 is predominantly produced as an inactive, single polypeptide
and requires autocatalytic activation by cleavage into α- and
β-subunits that remain closely associated despite no longer
being covalently linked. We have investigated the self-cleavage of
gpASNase3 and found that analogously to the human enzyme, gpASNase3
has a very slow intrinsic rate of cleavage. Cleavage, and hence activation,
can be stimulated by the presence of glycine. In addition to being
an asparaginase, gpANase3 can also function as a β-aspartyl
peptidase.

We also determined both the uncleaved (inactive)
as well as the
cleaved (active), aspartate-bound structures of gpASNase3. We observed
that cleavage does not greatly alter the overall structure of gpASNase3
with the exception of the conformational change in the conserved HGG
loop that coincides with cleavage. We also compared the gpASNase3
structure with hASNase3 and found that they are almost identical with
the differences between them occurring in regions known to be highly
flexible.

Most important from a translational aspect, we were
able to conclusively
determine that gpASNase3 is not the asparaginase responsible for the
antitumor effects elicited by treatment with guinea pig serum. Despite the probable decrease in negative side
effects related to immunogenicity, the high KM of gpASNase3 makes it unsuitable for use in anticancer therapy.

This work was
supported by a National Institutes of Health grant R21 CA155424.

The authors declare
no
competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
We thank Ying Su for generously providing
purified hASNase3
and Dr. Julian Nomme for helpful suggestions. We thank the staff of
LS-CAT for their assistance in data collection.

Abbreviations
ASNasel-asparaginase

ALLacute lymphoblastic leukemia

NtnN-terminal nucleophile

AGAaspartylglucosaminidase

hASNase3human l-asparaginase type III

gpASNase3guinea pig l-asparaginase type III

PEGpoly(ethylene glycol)

IPTGisopropyl β-d-1-thiogalactopyranoside

PMSFphenylmethanesulfonyl fluoride

DTTdithiothreitol

NADHnicotinamide adenine dinucleotide
(reduced)

rmsdroot-mean-square
deviation

PDBProtein
Data Bank

