G protein-coupled receptors
(GPCRs) bind arrestin proteins after
receptor activation by agonists and phosphorylation by G protein-coupled
receptor kinases. Arrestin binding produces a termination of G-protein
signaling, and until very recently, arrestins were considered only
for their role as GPCR signal transduction desensitizers. In the past decade, we have come to appreciate
that arrestins orchestrate a number of intracellular signaling paradigms
that occur independent of G protein participation. Activated arrestin2
and 3 (also known as β-arrestin1 and β-arrestin2, respectively)
direct desensitized receptors to clathrin-rich plasma membrane, where
together they organize molecular signaling scaffolds., β-Arrestin dependent signal transduction includes protein
kinases, for instance, Src and AKT/GSK3β; involves transcription
factor regulation through associated kinases such as ERK and JNK;
and regulates diverse cellular behaviors such as adaptation, proliferation,
and apoptosis., As a consequence of the dichotomy
in receptor signaling arising from G protein and β-arrestin
pathways, searches are underway for receptor biased pathway modulators
that could provide drugs with novel therapeutic profiles.

β-Arrestin fusion proteins make practical,
optically detectable
sensors for identifying GPCR ligands, and its green fluorescent protein
(GFP) fusion finds use in high content screening assays. For example, within seconds to minutes of receptor
exposure to agonist, receptor complexed β-arrestin-GFP can be
imaged in clathrin coated pits., This remarkably simple
readout also provides an accurate indication of both receptor and
β-arrestin activation. As a prelude to a Molecular Libraries
Probe Centers Network (MLPCN) β-arrestin based, ultrahigh throughput
screen for small molecule nonpeptide agonists of the neurotensin1
receptor (NTR1), we performed using a
U2OS cell line permanently expressing NTR1 and β-arrestin2-GFP
a 5 μM screen of the Johns Hopkins FDA-drug library. Similar to how β-arrestin regulates GPCR
behavior in general, activated neurotensin receptor, NTR1, β-arrestin
signaling complexes form clathrin-based plasma membrane and endocytic
aggregates (Figure A, left lower panel)., We observed a similar neurotensin-like response for two wells in
the Hopkins Library screen that corresponded to Brilliant Green (BG)
and Triple-Dye (BG, Gentian Violet and Proflavine hemisulfate; 2:2:1
by weight).

Fluorescence images of U2OS cells from a high-content screen searching
for NTR1 agonists. (A) Cells expressing the human HA-NTR1 receptor
and a β-arrestin-GFP reporter exposed to vehicle (upper left
panel), neurotensin peptide (lower left panel), Brilliant Green (upper
right panel), or Triple-Dye (lower right panel). (B) Table and structures
of representative triphenylmethane compounds along with their CAS
registration numbers.

Brilliant Green and Gentian Violet are members of the large
triphenylmethane
dye family (Figure B, right panel) and are
primarily utilized as coloring agents.− Triphenylmethane dyes, however,
are also utilized extensively outside the textile industry. They find
laboratory use as fluorescent biosensors− and as therapeutics,
particularly in fish farming to treat bacteria, fungal, and parasitic
infections., Despite the proven bioactivity
of triphenylmethane derivatives, direct BG activation οf β-arrestin
appeared unlikely given the historical absence of direct small molecule
β-arrestin activators and the complex regulation that β-arrestins
undergo with receptors;, and indeed our findings could
simply be a direct consequence of identifying a new, albeit remarkable,
small molecule agonist for the NTR1. Therefore, in an attempt to determine
the role of BG in β-arrestin activation, we investigated β-arrestin
recruitment for a cohort of G protein-coupled receptors that were
exposed to BG, the industrially important dye Malachite Green (MG),
and the reduced, uncharged metabolite of MG, Leukomalachite Green
(LG) (Figure B).

Materials and Methods
Plasmids
and Cells
Human neurotensin receptor 1 (NTR1)
and N-terminal triple hemeagglutinin-tagged neurotensin receptor 1
(3HA-NTR1) in pcDNA3.1+ were purchased from the Missouri S&amp;T cDNA
Resource Center (Rolla, MO). The GFP conjugate of the human 3HA-NTR1
was generated by PCR with the receptor inserted in frame at the Nhe
I/BamH I restriction sites of pEGFP-N3 (Clontech, Mountain View, CA).
Mitochondria targeted apo-aequorin was a gift from Dr. Stanley Thayer
(University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN). The GloSensor-22F cAMP
Plasmid was purchased from Promega (Madison, WI). U2OS stable cells
expressing β-arrestin2-GFP and receptor were provided by our
laboratory from the cell stocks which are part of the Duke University
National Institutes on Drug Abuse (NIDA) P30 Center, www.duke.edu/web/gpcr-assay/index.html. HEK293 cells stably expressing GFP-β2adaptin were generated
as described.

Antibodies
Anti-HA
mouse monoclonal antibody was isolated
in house using the hybridoma clone X22 from the American Type Culture
Collection (Manassas, VA). AlexaFluor 568 goat antimouse antibody
and Alexa-Fluor 680 goat antimouse IgG were purchased from Invitrogen
(Carlsbad, CA). IR-Dye 800 conjugated antirabbit IgG was from Rockland
Antibodies and Assays (Gilbertsville, PA). The phospho-p44/42 MAPK
(ERK1/2) (Thr202/Tyr204) (197G2) rabbit mAb, p44/42 MAPK (ERK1/2)
(3A7) mouse mAb, antiphospho-GSK-3α/β Ser-21/9, and GSK-3α/β
(D75D3) XP rabbit mAb were purchased from Cell Signaling Technology
(Beverly, MA).

Automated High-Throughput Screening
U2OS cells stably
expressing NTR1 and β-arrestin2-GFP were split into MGB101-1-2-LG
glass-bottom 384-well plates (MatriCal, Spokane, WA) using a Multidrop
384 liquid dispenser (Thermo Scientific, Hudson, NH). Each well contained
25-μL aliquots of 12 000 cells in Minimum Eagle’s
medium (MEM) containing 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS) and 100 U/mL
penicillin/streptomycin (Life Technologies, Grand Island, NY). The
plates were incubated overnight at 37 °C in 5% CO2, and on the following day the media was changed to 30 μL clear
MEM without serum. Compounds at 50 μM in 5% DMSO from the Johns
Hopkins FDA-drug Library were added to each well using a MicroLab
StarLET liquid handler (Hamilton Robotics, Reno, NV) and diluted 10-fold
to 5 μM final concentration. The plates were returned to the
incubator for 40 min, and the cells were fixed by adding 30 μL
of 2% paraformaldehyde-phosphate buffered saline (PBS) to each well.
Plates were stored at 4 °C until analysis on an ImageXpress Ultra
(Molecular Devices, Sunnyvale, CA) at 488 nm. Images were analyzed
using a wavelet algorithm to measure formation of fluorescence aggregates. Image results were also visually confirmed.

Microscope Imaging
For dose response assays of the
triphenylmethane dyes, U2OS cells stably expressing β-arrestin2-GFP
with or without various GPCRs were plated into glass-bottom 384-well
plates at 95–100% cell confluence. Cells were treated with
a serial concentration of dye compounds or known agonists for 40 min,
fixed in paraformaldehyde, and examined on a Zeiss Axiovert200 fluorescent
microscope platform using a plan-apochromat 40×/0.95 N.A. air
objective. For confocal microscope imaging on a Zeiss LSM-510, cells
were plated at a density of (4–8) × 104/well
in 35 mm MatTek (Ashland, MA) glass coverslip dishes. Transient transfection
or immunostaining staining was performed as described. Cells were examined with a 100×/1.4 N.A.
oil objective at 488 nm excitation for the GFP tag and 568 nm for
AlexaFluor 568 labeled antibody. Images were analyzed using a wavelet
algorithm, and data were analyzed using
Prism 5.0 software (GraphPad, San Diego, CA).

Neurotensin Receptor Internalization
Assay
U2OS cells
stably expressing 3HA-NTR1 and β-arrestin2-GFP were grown until
confluent on poly-d-lysine coated 96-well plastic culture
plates (Corning, Corning, NY). The cells were serum-starved for 5
h in clear MEM before treatment with a serial concentration of neurotensin
or Brilliant Green in clear MEM with 10 mM HEPES at 37 °C for
40 min. The detection of remaining 3HA-NTR1 on the cell surface was
performed following the protocol of Daigle, et al. (2007) with modifications.
Briefly, cells were fixed with 4% paraformaldehyde at room temperature
for 20 min, washed once in PBS (without detergent to avoid membrane
permeabilization), blocked in LI-COR Odyssey blocking buffer for 90
min, and incubated with anti-HA mouse monoclonal antibody overnight
at 4 °C. After three washes in Tris-buffered saline containing
0.1% Tween-20, AlexaFluor 680 goat antimouse IgG was added to assess
immunoreactivity. Immunofluorescence was quantified on the Odyssey
Infrared Imager (LI-COR Biotechnologies, Lincoln, NE) set at a 169
mm resolution, a focus offset of 3, and an intensity of 5. Data were
fit using Prism 5.0 software.

Western Blot Analysis
U2OS cells stably expressing
β-arrestin2-GFP with or without GPR35, NTR1, or V2R were seeded
onto six-well plates and grown until 90% confluent at 37 °C in
5% CO2. The cells were serum-starved overnight in MEM prior
to the experiment. The cells were then stimulated as indicated at
37 °C. Supernatants were discarded and cells were lysed with
150 μL/well lysis buffer containing proteinase and phosphatase
inhibitors (Roche and Thermo Scientific). Cells were further disrupted
by sonication. Supernatants were collected by centrifuge and boiled
in SDS Sample Buffer for 5 min. The protein samples were subjected
to SDS-PAGE using 10% Novex Tris-Glycine Gels (Invitrogen), transferred
to nitrocellulose membranes (Bio-Rad Laboratories, Hercules, CA),
blocked with 5% nonfat milk powder in Tris-buffered saline containing
0.2% Tween-20 for 1 h, followed by incubation with primary antibodies
and then an IR-Dye 800 conjugated antirabbit IgG. Imaging and quantification
of bands were performed on the LI-COR Odyssey. Data were analyzed
using Prism 5.0.

Apo-Aequorin Calcium Measurement
HEK293 cells plated
in 100-mm dishes were transiently transfected with 0.2 μg of
human NTR1 cDNA and 10 μg of apo-aequorin cDNA using a calcium
phosphate protocol. After 4–6 h, the cells were detached and
plated into a 96 well, white OptiPlate (PerkinElmer; Waltham, MA).
The following day cells were equilibrated with 5 μM Coelenterazine-h
(Promega) at 37 °C for 1 h and 50 min. To assess effects of compound
pretreatment, the cells were exposed to either a dye compound or neurotensin
for a further 10 min. Bioluminescence was detected immediately upon
injection of 10 nM neurotensin into each well with a Mithras LB940
luminescence reader running MikroWin2000 software (Berthold Technologies,
Oak Ridge, TN). To assess compound responsiveness, a 96-well assay
plate with 2× concentration of dye compounds or neurotensin in
PBS with calcium and magnesium was prepared. A transfected 1 mL suspension
of cells (equivalent to one 100-mm dish) in 10% FBS-MEM was equilibrated
in a dark 37 °C incubator with 5 μM coelenterazine-h for
2 h using mild agitation. Immediately prior to measurement, the cells
were diluted to a concentration of 1 × 106 cells per
milliliter with culture medium for injection. Bioluminescence for
each well was recorded for 30 s post injection.

GloSensor cAMP
Assay
HEK293 cells in 100-mm dishes
were transiently transfected with 5 μg of GloSensor plasmid
cDNA and 2 μg of receptor cDNA using a calcium phosphate protocol.
After 4–6 h, cells were detached and plated at 50 000
cells/well into clear MEM with 2% FBS, HEPES, and glutamine using
poly-d-lysine coated (Sigma), 96-well Costar 3610 (Corning
Inc.) assay plates. The following day, cells were washed with Hank’s
Balanced Salt solution (HBSS, Life Technologies-GIBCO) and equilibrated
in the dark with 4 mM luciferin in HBSS for 2 h at room temperature.
Luciferin buffer was removed and 90 μL of HBSS and 10 μL
of 10× compound was added to each well. Following a 10 min incubation
period, bioluminescence was read with an integration time per well
of 1.2 s for four sequential plate determinations. To assess the effect
of dye compound on luminescence signaling, dose response curves were
obtained in vitro for luciferase and luciferin in
the presence and absence of brilliant green.

Transferrin Endocytosis
U2OS cells stably expressing
β-arrestin2-GFP with or without overexpressed NTR1 in 100 μL
MEM in 96-well plates were pretreated with either 5 μM BG or
10 μM MG for the indicated times before 5 μM AlexaFluor-680
transferrin (Life Technologies, Grand Island, NY) was added for 40
min at 37 °C. Cells were then washed in MEM and fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde
for 20 min at room temperature, and the internalized transferrin was
measured at 680 nm excitation on a LI-COR Odyssey Infrared Imaging
system.

β-Arrestin2 Binding to Malachite Green
HEK293
cells in 150-mm dishes were transiently transfected with 20 μg
of plasmid cDNA expressing either β-arrestin2-GFP, GFP, or empty
vector. Lysate preparation: After 24 h, cells were washed with phosphate
buffered saline (PBS) and lysed with 1 mL/dish lysis buffer (10 mM
Tris-HCl containing 150 mM NaCl, 5 mM EDTA, 0.1% SDS; 1% Triton X-100,
and 1% sodium deoxycholate at pH 7.5) and cOmplete protease inhibitor
cocktail (Roche Diagnostics, Mannheim, Germany). After a brief sonication
on ice, cell lysates (1 mL in eppendorf tubes) were rotated gently
at 4 °C for 30 min followed by centrifugation at 20000g at 4 °C for 20 min. Supernatants were transferred
to tubes precooled on ice. Bead preparation: Agarose GFP-Trap beads
(20–40 μL per 150 mm dish) (Chromotek or Allele Biotech,
San Diego, CA) were suspended, washed, and then pelleted at 2500g a total of 3× in 500 μL of ice cold lysis buffer.
Cell lysates prepared as above were added to individual tubes of beads,
and the lysates were tumbled with the GFP-Trap beads either at room
temperature for 2 h or at 4 °C overnight. Each bead slurry sample
was then washed three times with 0.5% NP40 in PBS, and then samples
from each tube were either (1) incubated with 10 μM MG for 30
min at room temperature in preparation for confocal observation or
(2) eluted in SDS sample buffer and divided 80/20 for AcquaStain (Bulldog
Bio, Portsmouth, NH) gel staining or Western blotting. β-Arrestin2-GFP
and GFP were detected in Western blots with primary rabbit antibodies
from Abcam (anti-β-arrestin2 Catalog No. ab167047 Cambridge,
MA) and GeneTex Inc. (anti-GFP, Catalog No. GTX113617, Irvine, CA)
at 1:700 and 1:500 dilutions, respectively, followed by application
of goat antirabbit secondary antibodies (Rockland Antibodies and Assays,
catalog no. 611-132-122, Gilbertsville, PA) at a dilution of 1:5000
for LI-COR Odyssey imaging.

Results
Triphenylmethane
Dye-Induced β-Arrestin Translocation
Dose responses
for β-arrestin translocation in permanent
lines of U2OS cells containing no transfected receptor(control), the
NTR1, the pamoic acid receptor (GPR35), and the vasopressin receptor
(V2R) are shown for cognate agonists (Figure A) and BG, MG, or LG (Figure B). The cell
lines contain β-arrestin2-GFP with intensity ratios of 1.6/1.2/1.2/1(NTR1/V2R/GPR35/control
= 1). LG has no β-arrestin2 translocation inducing activity
in all cell lines and MG is 2–3-fold less potent than BG but
is equally efficacious. BG is the most potent β-arrestin2 activator.
It induces translocation to levels almost equal to that of neurotensin
and surprisingly has activity without an exogenous GPCR present (control,
Figure B, upper left panel).

β-Arrestin activation
by triphenylmethane dyes. (A) Responses
of transfected cells, in objects per unit area, that were incubated
with the cognate receptor agonists zaprinast (GPR35), vasopressin (V2R), or neurotensin
(NTR1). (B) Graphs depicting the formation of β-arrestin-GFP
fluorescent aggregates in the same cell lines resulting from exposure
to triphenylmethane compounds. The U2OS cell lines each permanently
expressing β-arrestin-GFP and no transfected receptor (control),
NTR1, GPR35, and V2R were treated with the three compounds BG/MG/LG.
Image data (as objects, mean ± SEM) corresponding to the graphs
were obtained with a Zeiss Axiovert 200 fluorescence microscope equipped
with a plan-apochromat 40×/0.95 air objective and were analyzed
using a wavelet based algorithm (N = 3).

GPCR Role in Triphenylmethane
Dye-Induced β-Arrestin Translocation
In order to characterize
the role of the conformational state of
the receptor in BG/MG β-arrestin2 activation, we simultaneously
treated the NTR1, GPR35, and beta2-adrenergic receptor (β2AR)
expressing U2OS cells with cognate antagonists or inverse agonists
(Figure A,B, SR142948A for NTR1, CID2745687 for GPR35, and propranolol and ICI118551 for
the β2AR) and measured the aggregation of β-arrestin2-GFP.
These antagonists were unable to block BG mediated β-arrestin2
recruitment in contrast to their abilities to inhibit agonist mediated
β-arrestin2 recruitment to the cognate receptors. Even though activated receptors were not required
for the induction of β-arrestin2-GFP recruitment by BG and MG,
we observed that U2OS/β-arrestin2-GFP cells transfected with
GPCRs contained more β-arrestin2-GFP aggregates upon exposure
to BG and MG (Figure C). Thus, at first glance
β-arrestin activation in the presence of triphenylmethane dye
exposure appears receptor dependent. We investigated this observation
by transfecting epitope tagged NTR1 receptors into the control β-arrestin2-GFP
U2OS line and visualizing that cells containing transfected NTR1 contained
many more β-arrestin-GFP aggregates in response to MG than contiguous
cells lacking transfected receptor (Figure C lower panels).

Receptor conformation in the activation of β-arrestin
by
Brilliant Green. (A) Fluorescence images of U2OS cells expressing
β-arrestin2-GFP and HA-NTR1 exposed to either NT or BG in the
absence (upper panels) and presence (lower panels) of the NTR1 antagonist
SR142948A (10 μM). The leftmost panel shows an untreated control.
Images were obtained on a Zeiss LSM510 confocal microscope using a
100×/NA 1.43 plan apochromat objective. (B) Quantification of
β-arrestin fluorescence aggregates in confocal images obtained
in (A) for the NTR1 and also those obtained from similar images in
analogous experiments for β-arrestin2-GFP permanent U2OS cell
lines expressing either HA-GPR35 or β2AR. Each receptor type
was pre-exposed to 1–10 μM of a cognate antagonist or
inverse agonist SR142948A (10 μM, NTR1), CID2745687 (1 μM,
GPR35), and propranolol or ICI118551 (10 μM, β2AR) for
15 min at 37 °C followed by addition of its cognate agonist (0.5
nM NT, 1 μM Zaprinast, 1 μM isoproterenol) or BG (3–5
μM), N = 3–5 experiments and data are
mean ± SEM and assessed in GraphPad Prism by one-way Anova using
Bonferonni’s post test (* vs basal, # vs agonist, ^ vs
agonist plus antagonist, p &lt; 0.05). (C) Dependence
of β-arrestin2-GFP aggregate formation on receptor expression.
Control U2OS cells expressing only β-arrestin2-GFP were transiently
transfected with HA-tagged NTR1 and treated with either vehicle or
5 μM Malachite Green (MG) for 40–60 min at 37 °C
and then fixed. HA-tagged receptors were labeled with mouse anti-HA
and goat antimouse AlexaFluor 568 antibodies. Receptors and β-arrestin2-GFP
were imaged as in (A) at 488 nm/568 nm (N = 3).

Receptor Absence from MG
Activated β-Arrestin/Clathrin
Complexes
The above data indicate that the ability of GPCRs
to activate β-arrestin2 in the presence of MG and BG does not
require an agonist induced conformational change in the receptor. The ability of MG and BG to induce β-arrestin2-GFP
translocation for multiple receptors in the presence of inhibitors,
however, indicates that BG and MG do not behave as orthosteric receptor
agonists. GPCR agonists typically induce not only receptor internalization
but also cluster these β-arrestin/receptor complexes in clathrin
rich membrane pits for signaling and recycling by clathrin/AP2 coated
vesicles., From Figure A, it
is apparent that 10 μM MG treatment results in the activation
of β-arrestin2-GFP and its widespread colocalization with clathrin
in plasma membrane punctae in cells containing V2R or NTR1. Similar
colocalization was also observed for Flag-β-arrestin2 (). Measurement
of clathrin aggregates in the membrane by immunostaining under basal
conditions (in the absence of drugs) demonstrated that cells containing
the NTR1 had over twice the number of clathrin positive areas as either
the β-arrestin2-GFP control cells or V2R expressing U2OS cells
(). However,
these receptors, that normally bind β-arrestin2 with high affinity
and internalize with it into well recognized “doughnut-shaped”
endosomes, do not exhibit this agonist typical behavior in the presence
of MG as observed by β-arrestin-GFP fluorescence (Figure B, compare upper to lower panels). Therefore, to
assess whether a receptor is necessary to form these dye induced complexes
with clathrin, we performed colocalization studies using the permanent
line of U2OS cells expressing HA-GPR35 and β-arrestin2-GFP (Figure C). Application of 10 μM of the GPR35 agonist
pamoic acid coclusters GPR35 and β-arrestin (rightmost panels),
while in contrast the receptor in the presence of 10 μM MG is
absent from β-arrestin aggregates (middle panels).

Triphenylmethane
dye activated β-arrestin complexes. (A)
(β-arrestin/clathrin) U2OS cells permanently expressing a transfected
receptor, NTR1 or V2R, and β-arrestin2-GFP were treated with
10 μM malachite green for 40 min at 37 °C, fixed in 1%PFA,
permeabilized with 0.5% Triton X-100 in PBS, treated with a 1:70 dilution
of mouse anticlathrin X22 antibody sera, and labeled with a 1:1500
dilution of goat antimouse AlexaFluor 568 secondary antibody. Cells
were imaged by confocal microscopy using 488 (GFP)/568 (AlexaFluor)
nm excitation. (N = 3). (B)(β-arrestin/endosomes)
NTR1 or V2R and β-arrestin2-GFP U2OS cells in MEM were pretreated
with 10 μM MG for 10 min at 37 °C, exposed to cognate agonist
(5 nM NT or 40 mIU vasopressin) for 40 min, and then fixed for confocal
imaging. (N = 3). (C) (β-Arrestin/receptor)
U2OS cells permanently expressing HA-GPR35 and β-arrestin2-GFP
were treated with either 10 μM MG or 10 μM pamoic acid
for 40 min at room temperature and fixed. GPR35 receptors were visualized
for confocal imaging using anti-HA mouse primary antibody at 1:400
followed by a 1:1500 dilution of goat antimouse AlexaFluor 568 secondary
antibody (N = 3).

Effect of Triphenylmethane Dyes on Receptor Internalization
Using NTR1-GFP and HA-epitope tagged NTR1, we investigated both
internalization and β-arrestin scaffolding in the presence of
the triphenylmethane dyes. In HEK293 cells, NT treatment results in
significant NTR1 internalization from the plasma membrane that is
visible as endosomes (Figure A, mid upper
panel). In contrast, there is no BG induced loss of NTR1 from the
plasma membrane (Figure A, right upper panel);
in fact NTR1 plasma membrane receptor levels slightly increase with
BG treatment as opposed to NT exposure (middle panels).

Triphenylmethane
dye and endosome incorporation of adaptor proteins.
(A) (Receptor/plasma membrane) HEK-293 cells in clear MEM expressing
transiently transfected NTR1-GFP were treated with either 5 nM neurotensin
peptide or 5 μM BG for 40 min at 37 °C, fixed, and confocally
imaged. In the middle panels are shown graphical plots of an on-cell
Western analyses of HA-NTR1 U2OS cells that demonstrate concentration-dependent
ligand induced change of plasma membrane receptor after 40 min of
NT or Brilliant Green treatment (N = 2). (B) (AP2
complex/clathrin) HEK-293 cells that permanently express GFP-β2-adaptin
were treated in clear MEM with vehicle, BG, or MG for 40 min at 37
°C and then fixed. GFP containing fluorescent punctae representing
AP2 complexes in clathrin coated vesicles were imaged at 488 nm excitation
and quantified as for β-arrestin-GFP. Data in the graph are
mean ± SEM and assessed in GraphPad Prism by one-way Anova using
Bonferonni’s post test (* vs basal, # vs 2.5 μM BG, p &lt; 0.05, N = 4). (C) (Transferrin)
Transferrin internalization in U2OS cells in the presence of BG/MG
was compared to cells not pretreated with triphenylmethane dye. The
graph represents grouped data for cell types (with or without overexpressed
NTR1, which showed similar responsiveness) and are presented as mean
± SEM. Differences in internalized transferrin were assessed
by Anova as above (* vs basal, p &lt; 0.05, N = 2).

Triphenylmethane Dyes,
Clathrin, and AP2
In the steady
state activated receptor/β-arrestin complexes that bind AP2,
via β-arrestin directly interacting with the β and μ
AP2 subunits, and clathrin, are disassembled and inactivated in acidic
endosomes.,,, The accumulation of activated β-arrestin/clathrin
complexes and the modest inhibition of basal NTR1 internalization
in the presence of BG suggest that the triphenylmethane dyes might
be inhibiting β-arrestin trafficking. Therefore, we investigated
triphenylmethane dye effects on cells containing AP2 labeled with
GFP-β2adaptin. Upon cell exposure to either BG or MG, the number
of AP2 vesicles was greatly decreased (Figure B). Therefore, the accumulation of β-arrestin/clathrin complexes
in the absence of receptor activation is consistent with a BG and
MG inhibition of the AP2/clathrin interaction. This is supported by
the observation that transferrin internalization is decreased to 76
and 54% of that observed in the control cells after a pre-exposure
as brief as 10
or 30 min respectively to 5 μM BG or 10 μM MG (Figure C).

Effect of Triphenylmethane Dyes on β-Arrestin
Related
Signaling
Even though β-arrestin recycling is modified,
β-arrestin colocalization with clathrin suggests the formation
of signaling scaffolds analogous to those observed in the presence
of receptor activation but occurring without the active participation
of the receptor. Therefore, we evaluated downstream indicators of
clathrin/β-arrestin signaling, ERK and GSK3β,,, and compared this with receptor-mediated
G protein signaling in the presence of BG, MG, or LG. Figure A shows a NT-induced time course of pERK phosphorylation
in U2OS cells containing NTR1. The pERK signal peaks somewhat earlier
in the presence of 4 nM NT (5 min) than with 10 μM BG (10–15
min, Figure B), but the signals are nearly
equal in magnitude. We thus measured pERK or pGSK levels by Western
blot at 10 min, a time compatible with agonist or dye exposure activation,
in the presence of BG, MG, LG, and various GPCRs (Figure C–F). U2OS/β-arrestin2-GFP cells expressing
GPR35, NTR1, V2R, or no additional transfected receptor (control)
were exposed to either 3 or 10 μM BG, 10 μM MG, or 10
μM LG. In no instance did LG produce a change over basal for
either pERK or pGSK. BG addition resulted in elevated pERK and pGSK
in most instances, whereas MG produced a response profile intermediate
between LG and BG.

Effect of triphenylmethanes dyes on ERK and GSK3β
signaling.
(A, B) Time course of pERK response in U2OS cells permanently expressing
the NTR1 and β-arrestin-GFP treated with either 4 nM NT or 10
μM BG. (C–F) U2OS cell lines permanently expressing GPR35,
NTR1, V2R, or no transfected receptor (β-arrestin2 control)
were treated with the indicated concentrations of BG, MG, LG, or cognate
peptide for 10 min at room temperature. Phospho-ERK, total ERK, phospho-GSK3β,
and total GSK3β were measured as described in . Results are from N = 2–4
experiments and data are presented as mean ± SEM. Data in the
graphs were analyzed in GraphPad Prism using one-way Anova and Dunnett’s
post test against basal (* corresponds to vs basal, p &lt; 0.05).

Effect of Triphenylmethane
Dyes on G Protein Related Signaling
We also determined the
effects of BG, MG, and LG on G protein signaling
(Figure ) using a bioluminescence apo-aequorin
calcium reporter to assess Gq-protein signaling of the NTR1 and a
bioluminescence resonance energy transfer cAMP, Gs reporter assay
for the β2AR and V2R. For the cAMP assay, we first determined
that BG does not quench luciferin/luciferase luminescence (Figure A,B). Additionally BG, MG, and LG do not themselves
activate cAMP signaling in cells expressing the β2AR and V2R
(not shown) or in cells with NTR1 and the apo-aequorin reporter (Figure E). In contrast to pERK and pGSK responsiveness
to BG and MG, their preincubation with cells at greater than 3 μM
blocked neurotensin related Ca2+ responsiveness and V2R
and β2AR cAMP signaling (Figure C,D,F).
LG had no effect on signaling. Thus, taken together, the results are
in agreement with a generalized biased effect of triphenylmethane
dyes on signaling; with a preservation of β-arrestin (clathrin
scaffolding) compatible pERK/pGSK based signaling and a concomitant
loss of G protein signaling capability.

Effect of triphenylmethanes
dyes on receptor-mediated G protein
signaling. (A) The linearity of the enzymatic cleavage of 1 mM luciferin
by an increasing concentration of luciferase in a solution at room
temperature was evaluated in the presence and absence of 10 μM
BG (N = 2). (B) Using a 2.5 ng/well concentration
of luciferase as determined from (A), the dose response of luciferin
in a solution at room temperature was measured in the presence and
absence of 10 μM BG (N = 2). (C, D) Measurement
of cAMP in HEK-293 cells transiently transfected with either the V2R
or β2AR was determined. Cells were pretreated for 10 min with
the indicated concentrations of vehicle, BG, MG, or LG and then the
cognate peptide, 16 nM vasopressin, or 10 μM isoproterenol was
added. Cell cAMP was measured 10 s after agonist addition using the
GloSensor bioluminescence assay in 96-well plates. Data were reported
as mean ± SEM. (E) HEK-293 cells transfected with the NTR1 and
an apo-aequorin calcium reporter were exposed to vehicle, 10 nM neurotensin
(NT) peptide, 10 μM BG, 10 μM MG, or 10 μM LG, and
the time course of the aequorin luminescence was measured. Data are
plotted as mean ± SEM (N = 2). (F) HEK-293 cells
expressing the NTR1 were pretreated as in (C, D) and the calcium response
measured with the apo-aequorin reporter (N = 2).
Data in the graphs C, D, F were analyzed in GraphPad Prism using one-way
Anova and Bonferonni’s post test (* vs basal, # vs agonist, p &lt; 0.05).

Binding of Malachite Green to β-Arrestin2 Complexes
In order to assess whether the observed activity of the triphenylmethane
dyes on β-arrestin behavior could result from a direct interaction,
we incubated HEK-293 cell lysates containing β-arrestin2-GFP
fusion protein or GFP with nonfluorescent agarose beads containing
a high affinity, single chain antibody against GFP (Figure ). Following incubation of the beads with Malachite
Green, by confocal microscopy the β-arrestin2-GFP beads demonstrated
binding of the dye (Figure A,B) relative to
the GFP control (Figure C,D) or beads not
exposed to GFP (Figure E,F). Analysis of SDS-PAGE
protein gels (Figure H) and Western blots
(Figure I) of eluted beads confirmed that
the predominant proteins isolated from the respective lysates were
β-arrestin2-GFP and GFP.

Interaction of Malachite Green with β-arrestin2-GFP
coated
anti-GFP beads. GFP-Trap agarose beads were exposed to lysates of
HEK-293 cells transfected with β-arrestin2-GFP (A, B), lysates
of HEK-293 cells transfected with GFP (C, D), or not exposed to GFP
protein (control) (E, F). The beads were next treated with 10 μM
MG for 30 min at room temperature, washed, and imaged with a Zeiss
LSM-510 confocal microscope at 20×. GFP was assessed in the 488
nm channel and malachite green in the 633 nm channel. For comparative
purposes, images of β-arrestin2-GFP, GFP, and control beads
at the same wavelength were acquired and printed under identical settings.
(A) βarr2-GFP exposed beads imaged for GFP. (B) β-Arrestin2-GFP
exposed beads imaged for malachite green. (C) GFP exposed beads imaged
for GFP. (D) GFP exposed beads imaged for malachite green. (E) Phase
images of GFP-Trap control beads. (F) Control beads imaged for malachite
green following treatment. (G) Panels from left to right depicting
results from a different experiment showing a larger sample size of β-arrestin2-GFP
exposed beads (leftmost two panels) and GFP exposed beads (rightmost
two panels). GFP-Trap agarose beads eluted with SDS sample buffer
were processed for SDS-PAGE. (H) Shown is an AcquaStain protein gel
of β-arrestin2-GFP and GFP containing cell lysates from purification
by GFP-Trap beads. (I) Corresponding Western blots of β-arrestin2-GFP
and GFP lysates probed by antibodies to β-arrestin2 (left gel)
and antibodies to GFP (right gel). Upper and lower arrows indicate
expected positions at which each protein should run. Results are representative
of 2–3 independent experiments. GFP in this figure corresponds
to the variant S65T-GFP.

Discussion
Thousands of metric tons of triphenylmethane
dyes are used annually
as colorizers. Importantly, triphenylmethane
dyes have a long safety record for use in humans as topical antibiotics,
and newborns with purple, triple-dye stained umbilical cords have
experienced their use in a medical setting.− While the antibacterial,
antiphagocytic properties of triphenylmethane dyes were assessed more
than 80 years ago, only recently has
BG been proposed as an antibacterial additive for gloves and in mouthwash
for immune-compromised individuals., Triphenylmethane
dyes redistribute within cell membranes and are known to interact
with cell receptors,− enzymes,− and DNA.,, In some cases, the reported affinity is
quite high, for instance, with the Torpedo californica nicotinic acetylcholine receptor (AChR) the dissociation constant
of crystal violet is 10 nM.

The
bioactivity of these dyes with their resulting economic benefits
has resulted in their continued widespread environmental use. Malachite
green is still considered the gold standard for aquaculture both as
an antibiotic and antiparasitic based upon its relatively good efficacy
and relatively low toxicity,,, and solutions containing malachite green are readily available for
the treatment of ornamental fish. However, it is the proven efficacy
of these dyes and their low costs for treating consumable pond-raised
fish of commercial importance, where effective alternatives are generally
lacking, that drives their continued usage., This has persisted despite toxicity concerns arising from their
extended retention and metabolism in animal tissue and concerns over
mutagenicity and carcinogenicity from either the dyes themselves or
toxic byproducts such as LG. The concomitant legal restrictions in
Europe and the U.S. has led to their ban in foods in many countries.,, In comparison to the concerns
about their long-term genetic effects, relatively little is known
about the short-term, immediate effects of triphenylmethanes on cell
biochemistry, in particular via GPRC signaling.

Our data show
the triphenylmethane dyes MG and BG in low micromolar
to sub-micromolar concentrations affect G protein-coupled receptor
signaling in cells within minutes of their application. Surprisingly,
the two major legs of GPCR signaling seem to be oppositely impacted
with G protein responses being reduced as shown in Figure  and β-arrestin consistent activation maintained,
Figure . Importantly, even though BG increases
ERK phosphorylation, multiple mechanisms may be at work, and a direct
connection with β-arrestin binding remains to be established.
Likewise, while the suppression of G protein-mediated GPCR signaling
may be related to binding or activation of β-arrestins by these
dyes, it is unclear whether alternative interactions are also in play.
To address these issues, it will minimally be necessary to examine
ERK activity in β-arrestin knockdown cells to determine the
full extent to which β-arrestins contribute to observed BG/MG
ERK signaling. While the concentration range of the dyes that we employed
is compatible with that deemed safe to treat fish over brief to extended
periods, the immediate effects on G protein
and β-arrestin signaling pathways that we observed may potentially
explain some of the longer term cytotoxic behaviors of triphenylmethane
dyes.

There are no small molecule
nonreceptor ligands available to modulate
β-arrestin behavior, whose receptor-mediated activation results
in receptor cargo moving to clathrin coated pits. This trafficking
is normally a direct result of three processes: (1) self-interaction
between the β-arrestin N- and C-termini with the exposure of
C-terminal motifs governing; (2) an interaction with clathrin; and
(3) an interaction with the AP2 adaptor complex in the presence of
receptor. However, a report of a C-terminal
β-arrestin2 mutant with increased affinity for AP2 indicated
that β-arrestin localization to clathrin coated pits can occur
independently of receptor activation and that receptor cargo is necessary
for the accumulation of AP2 in newly formed clathrin coated vesicles. Recent studies also suggest that receptors as
cargo are not passive passengers and can also modify the dynamics
of clathrin coated pits. Indeed, our
data show that overexpression of NTR1s induce formation of additional
clathrin coated pits, potentially explaining the receptor/cell line
efficacy differences observed for β-arrestin activation by BG/MG.
Likewise, our BG/MG data pharmacologically recapitulate the behavior
of the β-arrestin2 mutant, demonstrating
that in the presence of cognate receptor antagonists, activated β-arrestin2-GFP
can bind clathrin without also being bound to activated cargo.

BG/MG treatment resulted in a loss of vesicular and aggregated
GFP-β2adaptin affecting endocytosis in general as indicated
by the rapid reduction in transferrin internalization we observed.
This suggests that AP2 in the presence of a β-arrestin with
an intact β-adaptin binding motif may also require the presence
of an activated receptor to properly incorporate in the clathrin scaffolds
that drive vesicle formation. The triphenylmethane dyes potentially
block otherwise active receptors from occupying clathrin-related sites
by filing them with activated β-arrestin2 sans cargo. While
the mechanism underlying BG/MG β-arrestin activation requires
further study, a parsimonious explanation is that a β-arrestin-scaffolded
protein or β-arrestin itself is directly targeted by triphenylmethane
dyes, GPCRs having no direct involvement. This is supported by the
Malachite Green, bead, cell lysate studies; the receptor antagonist
experiments, and the observation that cargo can indirectly effect
clathrin coated-pit expression. Further studies with purified β-arrestin-GFP
preparations may validate this hypothesis, perhaps verifying that
β-arrestin contains a MG binding site using either mutagenesis
or by exploiting the fluorescent enhancement of MG that can occur
upon protein binding. This property of MG currently serves as the
basis for a recently developed, cell-based MG reporter assay of protein
dynamics.

Our studies indicate
that triphenylmethane dyes can be employed
as tool compounds to study β-arrestin activity. The ability
of triphenylmethane dyes to directly regulate processes involving
β-arrestin trafficking and scaffolding may provide novel strategies
to dissect the biological importance and clinical utility of this
signaling pathway given the recent interest in biased medicinal compounds
able to discriminate between receptor conformations favoring G protein
or β-arrestin signaling., Even without identifying
the β-arrestin-related MG/BG target, it may be possible to develop
compounds with better pharmacological properties based upon our finding
differences between the potencies and efficacies of BG and MG for
β-arrestin2 activation. Substantial numbers of triphenylmethane
dyes are currently available for structure activity relationship (SAR)
determinations. In fact, some dyes are already being evaluated for
therapy of central nervous system disorders, such as Alzheimer’s,
that are characterized by abnormal plaque formation and believed associated
with protein plaque endocytosis,−

Triphenylmethane dyes, despite concerns about their cytotoxicity
and environmental impact, continue to find roles as therapeutic tools.
BG and MG can safely treat fish for extended periods against bacteria,
fungus, and parasites that are refractory to other forms of drug therapy
and most recently, Brilliant Blue variants have been investigated
for the treatment of plaque forming diseases of the central nervous
system. Our data taken together with these other studies suggest the
effectiveness of triphenylmethane dye treatment may be due in part
to their ability to disrupt clathrin-mediated endocytic trafficking,
including inhibiting the entry of proteins, organisms, or obligatory
nutrients into cells. If so, it may also be useful to examine the
utility of triphenylmethane dyes as topical inhibitors of receptor
mediated viral entry into cells, such as for HIV/CCR5, in instances
where other methods are uneconomical, unavailable, or impractical.

Supporting Information Available
Images illustrating
clathrin/flag-β-arrestin
colocalization resulting from Malachite Green treatment are found
in supplemental Figure S1. The effects of receptor overexpression
on basal clathrin coated pit formation is shown in supplemental Figure
S2. This material is available free of charge via the Internet at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bi400217r_si_001.pdf

The authors
declare no competing financial interest.

Abbreviations
β2-adaptinbeta-adaptin 2 subunit
of AP2

β-arrestin2beta-arrestin 2

β2ARbeta-adrenergic receptor 2

BGBrilliant Green

GFPgreen fluorescent protein

GPCRG protein-coupled receptor

GPR35G protein-coupled receptor
35

LGLeukomalachite
Green

MGMalachite
Green

NTneurotensin

NTR1neurotensin receptor
1

V2Rvasopressin
receptor 2

