Etoposide is an integral component
of chemotherapeutic regimens that are used to treat hematological
malignancies, somatic tumors, germ cell tumors, and other human cancers.− The drug targets type II topoisomerases, enzymes that generate transient
double-stranded breaks in the double helix.,,− These enzymes regulate DNA supercoiling and remove knots and tangles
from the genome. Etoposide kills cells by inhibiting the ability of
type II topoisomerases to ligate DNA, which leads to the accumulation
of double-stranded breaks in the genome.− These breaks induce DNA recombination–repair processes and
have the potential to activate apoptosis.,,, However, if
cells survive drug treatment, they may carry stable chromosomal translocations
or other rearrangements.,,−

Despite the wide use of etoposide, there is a well-established
correlation between chemotherapeutic regimens that include the drug
and the development of therapy-related acute myeloid leukemias (t-AMLs)
that feature rearrangements in the MLL (mixed lineage
leukemia) gene at chromosomal band 11q23.−,− Initially, as many as 12% of patients treated with etoposide developed
t-AMLs.−, Once high-risk schedules were
identified and eliminated, that number subsequently dropped to ∼2–3%.−,

Several studies suggest
that therapy-related leukemic translocation
breakpoints in MLL are derived directly from chromosomal
breaks generated by type II topoisomerases.,−,, However, the molecular events that link the initiating DNA cleavage
event and the resulting translocation are not well defined. Recent
work indicates that topoisomerase II-mediated DNA strand breaks are
processed and eventually resected by an alternative nonhomologous
end joining pathway.,− Furthermore, there is evidence that the induction
of t-AMLs following etoposide treatment is influenced by the ability
of cells to metabolize the drug and the ability of these metabolites
to interact with one of the two topoisomerase II isoforms.,,

Etoposide can be metabolized
by a number of cellular pathways.− In a cytochrome P450-mediated
pathway (Figure ), one of the two methoxy
groups on the E-ring of etoposide is converted
to a hydroxyl moiety by oxidation by CYP3A4. The resulting etoposide
catechol can be further oxidized to a quinone metabolite by the actions
of myeloperoxidase and other oxidases (Figure ).− The high concentration of myeloperoxidase in hematopoietic cells
(∼3% of the cell by weight) is consistent with a role for etoposide
quinone in the generation of leukemic chromosomal translocations.,,, A further epidemiological study has linked a polymorphism in the
5′-promoter region of CYP3A4 (i.e., CYP3A4-V) with a lower risk of t-AMLs that involve MLL gene translocations. This
polymorphism is believed to decrease the rate of cytochrome P450-mediated
production of etoposide catechol, lending further credence to the
postulated role for etoposide metabolites in the leukemogenic process.

Etoposide
metabolites. CYP3A4 can metabolize etoposide to the catechol
in the liver. In bone marrow progenitor cells, which contain high
levels of myeloperoxidase, the catechol can be oxidized further to
produce the quinone.

Human cells encode two isoforms of topoisomerase II, α
and
β.,−, These isoforms share
extensive amino acid sequence identity (∼70%), but have distinct
patterns of expression and separate nuclear functions. Topoisomerase
IIα is essential for the survival of proliferating cells, and
its expression is proliferation-dependent.,−,, The α isoform functions in growth-related cellular processes
and is required for chromosome segregation. In contrast, topoisomerase
IIβ is dispensable at the cellular level, and its presence cannot
compensate for the loss of topoisomerase IIα in human cells.,−,, The cellular concentration of topoisomerase IIβ is independent
of proliferation status, and the enzyme appears to play an important
role in transcription.,−,,−

All clinically used topoisomerase II-targeted anticancer drugs
affect the activities of both enzyme isoforms.,,,, However, the degree to which topoisomerase IIα
and IIβ are targeted by any given drug and the relative contributions
of either isoform to the curative effects of drugs are not well understood.
The above notwithstanding, in vivo and cellular studies
suggest that topoisomerase IIβ is the enzyme primarily responsible
for generating the breaks in MLL that initiate t-AMLs., First, in a skin carcinogenesis model, the incidence of secondary
malignancies was greatly diminished in a skin-specific top2b-knockout mouse. Second, in a murine
cell model, etoposide-induced DNA sequence rearrangements and double-strand
breaks were dependent on the presence of topoisomerase IIβ. Third, in a human cellular system, the majority
of MLL breaks generated by etoposide, as well as
the genotoxic effects of the drug, appeared to be mediated primarily
by topoisomerase IIβ.

Despite
the proposed roles of etoposide metabolites and topoisomerase
IIβ in the induction of t-AMLs, the effects of etoposide quinone
on this isoform have not yet been described. Therefore, we characterized
the ability of etoposide quinone to alter enzyme-mediated DNA cleavage
and ligation. Results indicate that the quinone induces ∼4
times more DNA cleavage than etoposide and appears to function by
a different mechanism than that of the parent drug. These findings
support a role for etoposide metabolites and topoisomerase IIβ
in etoposide-associated t-AMLs.

Experimental Procedures
Enzymes
and Materials
Human topoisomerase IIβ
was expressed in Saccharomyces cerevisiae JEL1Δtop1
cells and purified as described previously.− The enzyme
was stored at −70 °C as a 1.5 mg/mL (4 μM) stock
in 50 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.7), 0.1 mM EDTA, 750 mM KCl, 5% glycerol,
and 8 μM DTT (carried from the enzyme preparation). Negatively
supercoiled pBR322 DNA was prepared using a Plasmid Mega Kit (Qiagen)
as described by the manufacturer. Etoposide was obtained from Sigma-Aldrich.
Drugs were prepared as 20 mM solutions in 100% DMSO and stored at
−70 °C.

Synthesis of Etoposide Quinone
Etoposide
quinone was
synthesized and purified according to previously published procedures
with slight modifications.,, The purity was determined to be &gt;99% by liquid chromatography–mass
spectrometry analysis at 220 and 254 nm, and the final yield of etoposide
quinone was 72%.

DNA Cleavage Mediated by Topoisomerase IIβ
DNA
cleavage reactions were performed using the procedure described by
Fortune and Osheroff. Reaction mixtures
contained 100 nM human topoisomerase IIβ and 10 nM negatively
supercoiled pBR322 DNA in 20 μL of 10 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.9),
5 mM MgCl2, 100 mM KCl, 0.1 mM EDTA, and 2.5% (v/v) glycerol.
Final reaction mixtures contained ∼0.4 μM DTT, which
represents the residual DTT from the enzyme preparation. DNA cleavage
reactions were carried out in the absence of the compound or in the
presence of 0–30 μM etoposide or etoposide quinone as
indicated. In some cases, 50 μM DTT or 1 mM ATP was added to
reaction mixtures. Unless stated otherwise, assays were started by
the addition of drug, and DNA cleavage mixtures were incubated for
6 min at 37 °C.

DNA cleavage complexes were trapped by
the addition of 2 μL of 5% SDS followed by 1 μL of 375
mM Na2EDTA (pH 8.0). Proteinase K was added (2 μL
of a 0.8 mg/mL solution), and reaction mixtures were incubated for
30 min at 45 °C to digest topoisomerase IIβ. Samples were
mixed with 2 μL of agarose gel loading buffer [60% sucrose in
10 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.9)], heated for 2 min at 45 °C, and subjected
to electrophoresis in 1% agarose gels in 40 mM Tris-acetate (pH 8.3)
and 2 mM EDTA containing 0.5 μg/mL ethidium bromide. Double-stranded
DNA cleavage was monitored by the conversion of negatively supercoiled
plasmid DNA to linear molecules. DNA bands were visualized by UV light
and quantified using an Alpha Innotech digital imaging system.

To examine the potential effects of drug–DNA adduction on
topoisomerase IIβ-mediated scission, 0.6 μg of pBR322
DNA was incubated with 30 μM etoposide quinone for 6 min at
37 °C in the absence of enzyme. Samples were then applied to
a DNA Spin Column (Qiagen) and processed according to the manufacturer’s
protocol. DNA was eluted and added to DNA cleavage reaction mixtures.

DNA Ligation Mediated by Topoisomerase IIβ
DNA
cleavage–ligation equilibria were established as described
above for 6 min at 37 °C in the absence or presence of 30 μM
etoposide quinone. Ligation was initiated
by cooling samples from 37 to 0 °C. Reactions were stopped at
time points ranging from 0 to 30 s by the addition of 2 μL of
5% SDS followed by 1 μL of 375 mM Na2EDTA (pH 8.0).
Samples were treated with Proteinase K, mixed with agarose gel loading
buffer, processed, and analyzed as described above. The amount of
linear DNA cleavage product at time zero was set to 100%, and DNA
ligation was monitored by the loss of linear DNA.

Results and Discussion
Etoposide is one of the most well studied topoisomerase II-targeted
agents in clinical use.− The drug stabilizes covalent topoisomerase II-cleaved DNA complexes
(i.e., cleavage complexes) by interacting at the enzyme–DNA
interface in a noncovalent manner.−,, Once the double helix is cut, the drug slips (i.e., intercalates)
between the 3′-hydroxyl and the enzyme-linked 5′-phosphate
at the cleaved scissile bond and acts as a physical block to topoisomerase
II-mediated DNA ligation., Etoposide and other
drugs that utilize this mechanism are termed “interfacial topoisomerase
II poisons”.,

The effects of etoposide
catechol and etoposide quinone on human
topoisomerase IIα have been examined.,,,,, The catechol displayed
properties that were similar to those of the parent drug and appeared
to be an interfacial poison. In contrast, the properties of the quinone
metabolite differed from those of etoposide, and the quinone appeared
to function by a different mechanism. Previous studies with quinones and other protein-reactive agents
have found that some of these compounds increase levels of topoisomerase
II-mediated DNA cleavage by covalently adducting to the enzyme at
residues that are distal to the active site.,− Thus, these agents are termed “covalent topoisomerase II
poisons”. It is believed that
covalent poisons enhance DNA cleavage, at least in part, by closing
the N-terminal gate of the protein.,− Several lines of evidence suggest that etoposide quinone poisons
topoisomerase IIα by this latter, covalent mechanism.

As discussed above, topoisomerase IIβ
appears to be the isoform
largely responsible for initiating the chromosomal breaks that trigger MLL-associated t-AMLs.,,, Because of the proposed
role of etoposide quinone in this leukemogenic process, we characterized
the effects of the metabolite on the DNA cleavage reaction mediated
by human topoisomerase IIβ.

Effects of Etoposide Quinone on DNA Cleavage
Mediated by Human
Topoisomerase IIβ
The activity of etoposide quinone
against topoisomerase IIβ was considerably higher than that
of etoposide (Figure , left). The quinone
increased the relative level of double-stranded DNA cleavage ∼14-fold,
which plateaued at ∼17.5 μM, while etoposide increased
the level of cleavage only 3-fold at similar concentrations. The efficacy
of etoposide quinone against topoisomerase IIβ was similar to
that reported with the α isoform. However, the metabolite was ∼2 times more potent against
topoisomerase IIβ. Furthermore, etoposide quinone reacted more
rapidly with the β isoform, inducing maximal DNA cleavage in
2.5–5 min (as opposed to ∼10 min with topoisomerase
IIα) (Figure , right).

Etoposide quinone enhances DNA cleavage mediated by human topoisomerase
IIβ. DNA cleavage was carried out in the presence of etoposide
(Etop, red) or etoposide quinone (EQ, blue) in the absence (closed
circles) or presence (open circles) of 50 μM dithiothreitol
(DTT). The left panel shows drug titrations, and the right panel shows
a time course for DNA cleavage in the presence of 15 μM etoposide
quinone. Error bars represent the standard deviation of three or more
independent experiments.

Because covalent topoisomerase II poisons require protein-reactive
groups, their activity can be suppressed by the presence of reducing
agents.,,,,, Therefore, the effects of 50 μM DTT on the activity of etoposide
quinone (which should reduce the metabolite to the “unreactive”
catechol) were examined. The ability of the quinone to induce topoisomerase
IIβ-mediated DNA cleavage decreased precipitously in the presence
of the reducing agent (Figure ). In contrast,
DTT had no effect on the activity of the parent drug, which acts by
the interfacial mechanism (Figure , left).
These findings imply that etoposide quinone is a covalent poison of
topoisomerase IIβ.

Several control reactions were conducted
to ensure that the DNA
cleavage enhancement observed with etoposide quinone was mediated
by topoisomerase IIβ (Figure ). No DNA
scission was seen in the presence of the quinone when the type II
enzyme was omitted from reactions. Moreover, cleaved DNA products
were covalently linked to topoisomerase IIβ. In the absence
of proteinase K, the linear DNA band disappeared and was replaced
by a band that remained at the origin of the gel (not shown). Finally,
DNA cleavage induced by the drug metabolite was reversed when the
active site Mg2+ ions were chelated with EDTA or the reaction
mixture was treated with 0.5 M salt prior to trapping cleavage complexes
with SDS. EDTA cannot chelate Mg2+ in the cleavage complex and can only sequester the metal
ion after the DNA has been ligated. Similarly, the presence of an
increased salt concentration will lead to dissociation of the enzyme–DNA
complex only after the nucleic acid has been ligated. The fact that
EDTA and salt can “reverse” cleavage demonstrates that
the DNA scission observed reflects an enzyme-mediated cleavage–ligation
equilibrium rather than an enzyme-independent reaction. These results
establish that the DNA scission observed in the presence of etoposide
quinone is mediated by topoisomerase IIβ.

Etoposide quinone induces
DNA cleavage via an enzyme-mediated mechanism.
Control reactions were conducted in the absence of enzyme or drug
(DNA Control), in the presence of 30 μM etoposide quinone without
enzyme (+EQ −hTIIβ), or in the presence of topoisomerase
IIβ without drug (−EQ +hTIIβ). All other reaction
mixtures contained topoisomerase IIβ and 30 μM etoposide
quinone. DNA cleavage reactions were terminated by the addition of
SDS (+EQ +hTIIβ). To determine whether cleaved DNA was protein-linked,
proteinase K treatment was omitted (−ProK). The reversibility
of DNA cleavage was examined by adding EDTA (EDTA) or 0.5 M salt (NaCl)
prior to SDS. The level of enzyme-mediated DNA cleavage in the absence
of etoposide quinone was set to 1 in the bottom panel, and all other
reactions were expressed relative to that value. Error bars represent
standard deviations for three independent experiments. A representative
agarose gel stained with ethidium bromide is shown at the top. The
positions of supercoiled (form I, FI), nicked circular (form II, FII),
and linear (form III, FIII) molecules are indicated at the left.

Etoposide, as well as many covalent
topoisomerase II poisons, increases
the level of enzyme–DNA cleavage complexes primarily by inhibiting
the DNA ligation activity of the enzyme.,,,, Like its parent compound, etoposide quinone severely
inhibited DNA ligation mediated by human topoisomerase IIβ (Figure ).

Etoposide quinone inhibits DNA ligation mediated by topoisomerase
IIβ. DNA cleavage reactions were initiated in the absence (open
circles, ND) or presence (closed circles, EQ) of 30 μM etoposide
quinone. The DNA cleavage–ligation equilibrium was established
at 37 °C, and ligation was initiated by cooling samples to 0
°C. The level of DNA cleavage observed at equilibrium for each
reaction was set to 100% at time zero. Error bars represent the standard
deviation of three independent experiments.

Etoposide Quinone Acts Primarily as a Covalent Poison of Human
Topoisomerase IIβ
The fact that a reducing agent severely
diminishes the activity of etoposide quinone strongly suggests that
the drug metabolite is a covalent poison of topoisomerase IIβ.
However, the activity of etoposide is highly sensitive to changes
in the substituents on the E-ring (Figure ).,, Consequently,
an alternative hypothesis is that the presence of the 3′- and/or
4′-carbonyl groups on etoposide quinone converts the metabolite
into an interfacial poison that is more potent and efficacious than
the parent drug (or the catechol).

Therefore, several experiments
were performed to resolve this important issue. First, we examined
the effects of ATP on the ability of etoposide quinone to induce DNA
cleavage mediated by human topoisomerase IIβ. Previous studies
have demonstrated that etoposide requires ATP for maximal DNA cleavage
activity with the α isoform., A similar
result was seen with topoisomerase IIβ (Figure , left). Up to 30 μM etoposide, levels of drug-induced
DNA cleavage were 2–5-fold higher in reaction mixtures that
contained ATP compared to those that did not. In contrast, no such
effect was seen with etoposide quinone and the β isoform (Figure , right). In fact, levels of DNA cleavage induced
in the presence of ATP were similar to or lower than those seen in
the absence of the cofactor.

Etoposide quinone does not require ATP to induce
optimal DNA cleavage
mediated by topoisomerase IIβ. DNA cleavage reactions of etoposide
(left panel, Etop, red) or etoposide quinone (right panel, EQ, blue)
were carried out in the absence (closed bars) or presence (open bars)
of 0.25 mM ATP. Control reactions conducted in the absence of drug
are shown (ND). Error bars represent the standard deviation of three
independent experiments.

Second, we examined the ability
of etoposide quinone to generate double-stranded versus single-stranded
DNA breaks with topoisomerase IIβ (Figure ). For the parent drug to stabilize topoisomerase II-generated double-stranded
breaks, an etoposide molecule must intercalate between the newly formed
DNA termini at each cleaved scissile bond.,, Because the two drug molecules appear to
bind independently, a high proportion of cleavage complexes established
at clinically relevant (i.e., subsaturating) concentrations of etoposide
contain only one cleaved DNA strand.− Thus, under these conditions,
etoposide routinely induces high levels of single-stranded DNA breaks.
With human topoisomerase IIα, double-stranded:single-stranded
break ratios as low as 0.5:1 frequently are observed in the presence
of etoposide., Although the effect is less dramatic
with the β isoform, etoposide still generates approximately
equimolar levels of double- and single-stranded DNA breaks (Figure  shows results for 30 μM etoposide). In contrast,
at a drug concentration (15 μM) that was lower than that used
for etoposide, the quinone still generated approximately two double-stranded
breaks for every single-stranded cut. Taken with the ATP results,
these findings suggest that etoposide quinone induces topoisomerase
IIβ-mediated DNA cleavage by a mechanism different than that
of the parent drug.

Etoposide quinone induces a high ratio of double-stranded
DNA breaks
(DSB) to single-stranded DNA breaks (SSB). DNA strand breaks generated
by human topoisomerase IIβ were monitored in reaction mixtures
containing no drug (ND, black), 30 μM etoposide (Etop, red),
or 15 μM etoposide quinone (EQ, blue). Double- and single-stranded
DNA cleavage was monitored by the conversion of negatively supercoiled
plasmid DNA to linear and nicked molecules, respectively. Error bars
represent the standard deviation of three independent experiments.
Results of an unpaired two-tailed t test are shown
(**p = 0.001).

Third, covalent topoisomerase II poisons display the hallmark
characteristic
of inactivating the enzyme when the two are incubated prior to the
addition of DNA.,,, This inactivation is not observed with interfacial
poisons. As seen in Figure , incubation of
15 μM etoposide quinone with human topoisomerase IIβ rapidly
inactivated the enzyme. The DNA cleavage activity was decreased by
more than 90% following a 6 min incubation of the drug with the enzyme
(t1/2 ≤ 1.5 min). Under parallel
conditions (6 min incubation), little enzyme inactivation was observed
in the presence of etoposide or a mixture of etoposide quinone and
DTT (Figure , inset).

Etoposide quinone inactivates
human topoisomerase IIβ when
incubated with the enzyme prior to the addition of DNA. The enzyme
was incubated in the presence of 15 μM etoposide quinone (closed
circles, blue) prior to a DNA cleavage assay. The inset shows cleavage
levels established following incubation for 6 min in the absence of
drug (ND, black bar) or in the presence of 30 μM etoposide (Etop,
red bar), 15 μM etoposide quinone and DTT (EQ+DTT, open blue
bar), or 15 μM etoposide quinone in the absence of DTT (EQ,
blue bar). Error bars represent the standard deviation of three independent
experiments.

Fourth, once a covalent
poison has adducted topoisomerase II and
stimulated DNA cleavage, the redox state of the poison (quinone vs
catechol) no longer appears to matter. Thus, if a reducing agent is
added to reaction mixtures after the DNA cleavage–ligation
equilibrium has been established in the presence of the poison, it
will not reverse the cleavage enhancement., To determine whether this was the case for etoposide quinone, an
order of addition experiment was carried out. As seen in Figure  (left), once cleavage complexes were established
in the presence of the quinone, the addition of DTT did not affect
levels of DNA scission. This is in contrast to results seen when DTT
was added to reaction mixtures prior to the generation of cleavage
complexes (Figure  and Figure , left). Once again, these results are consistent with a topoisomerase
II adduction mechanism for DNA cleavage enhancement by etoposide quinone.

Etoposide
quinone is a covalent poison of topoisomerase IIβ.
In the left panel, etoposide quinone enhancement of DNA cleavage is
not reversed by the addition of reducing agents after DNA cleavage
complexes have been established. DNA cleavage reactions were carried
out in the absence (blue bars) or presence (open blue bars) of DTT.
Reaction mixtures contained no drug (ND) or 30 μM etoposide
quinone in mixtures that included DTT at the time of DNA cleavage
(Pre EQ) or DTT that was added (for an additional 6 min) after cleavage
complexes were formed (Post EQ). In the right panel, etoposide quinone
does not form DNA lesions that poison topoisomerase IIβ. DNA
was incubated without (−EQ, open orange bars) or with (+EQ,
orange bars) 30 μM etoposide quinone. DNA was purified from
free drug and used in DNA cleavage reactions mediated by topoisomerase
IIβ. DNA cleavage reactions were performed in the absence of
drug (ND) or in the presence of 30 μM etoposide quinone (EQ).
In all cases, error bars represent the standard deviation of three
independent experiments.

In addition to modifying proteins, etoposide quinone also
can form
covalent nucleic acid adducts, especially with N7 of guanine residues. Because alkylated DNA lesions can enhance DNA
cleavage mediated by human topoisomerase IIβ, it is possible that etoposide quinone stimulates the reaction
by a mechanism that involves DNA, rather than protein, adduction.
To address this possibility, DNA was incubated with 30 μM etoposide
quinone for 6 min at 37 °C and then purified prior to cleavage
assays. The incubation had no effect on the ability of topoisomerase
IIβ to cleave DNA regardless of whether etoposide quinone was
added to final reaction mixtures (Figure ,
right). Together with all of the data presented above, we conclude
that etoposide quinone enhances DNA cleavage mediated by human topoisomerase
IIβ primarily by a mechanism that involves adduction to the
enzyme.

Conclusions
Previous studies have
identified a role for etoposide metabolites
and topoisomerase IIβ in the initiation of t-AMLs associated
with anticancer regimens that contain etoposide. However, the effects
of etoposide quinone on the activity of the β isoform have not
been described. Results indicate that the quinone is a potent topoisomerase
IIβ poison that induces higher levels of enzyme-mediated DNA
cleavage than does the parent drug. Etoposide quinone also displays
higher reactivity toward topoisomerase IIβ than it does with
topoisomerase IIα. Finally, the metabolite induces DNA cleavage
primarily by a mechanism that differs from that of etoposide and appears
to involve covalent modification of the enzyme. These findings are
consistent with the hypothesis that the oxidative environment of hematopoietic
progenitor cells generates a highly reactive etoposide metabolite
that contributes to the generation of DNA breakpoints with leukemogenic
potential.

The authors
declare no competing financial interests.

Acknowledgments
We are
grateful to Katie J. Aldred, MaryJean Pendleton, Rachel
E. Ashley, Kendra R. Vann, and Joel H. Everett for critical reading
of the manuscript. N.A.S. was a participant in the Vanderbilt University
School of Medicine Emphasis Program.

