Throughout biology, the addition
of carbohydrates, or glycans, to extracellular and membrane proteins
is an important post-translational modification involved in protein
stability, quality control, cell-surface retention, and ligand interactions. Glycans modulate the biophysical properties of
proteins and lipids and play particularly prominent roles in cellular
interactions as the primary constituents of the often nanometer thick
glycocalyces coating all mammalian cells. O-Linked mannose (O-mannose)
glycans are initiated by covalent linkage of mannose to the hydroxyl
oxygen of a serine or threonine amino acid residue. O-Mannose may
then be extended by the addition of other monosaccharides and functional
groups to form a variety of glycan structures.

In recent years,
O-mannose glycans have been demonstrated to play
critical roles in cellular interaction-based pathologies, including
congenital muscular dystrophies (CMDs)− and cancers.− In particular, defects in the biosynthesis
of O-mannose glycans often result in the hypoglycosylation of α-dystroglycan
(α-DG), the most well characterized O-mannosylated mammalian
protein. α-DG is a key part of the dystrophin–glycoprotein
complex that links the extracellular matrix to the intracellular cytoskeleton.
This linkage depends on the “functional glycosylation”
of α-DG and its subsequent ability to bind to extracellular
matrix proteins containing laminin globular (LG) domains., Hypoglycosylation of α-DG thus results in compromised tissue
structure and robustness, causing CMDs termed secondary dystroglycanopathies.

In the past few years,
glycomic advances have
allowed the increasingly rapid characterization of O-mannose glycans,
including further elucidation of the laminin-binding glycan structure., These results in conjunction with results from other studies have
brought the complement of observed O-mannose glycan structures to
at least 23, some yet to be completely defined (Charts –). Glycoproteomic
advances have dramatically enhanced our knowledge of proteins modified
by O-mannosylation with a 2013 publication from the Clausen laboratory
expanding the number of known O-mannosylated proteins from approximately
10 to more than 50 O-mannosylated glycoproteins, modified at a minimum
of 235 sites, including most prominently the cadherins and plexins,
which further cements the role of O-mannosylation in cellular adhesion
and interaction. During the period from
2010 to mid-2013, the first papers mapping specific O-mannose glycans
to distinct peptides and providing the first views of the actual sets
of glycans cosynthesized in vivo were published.,− Additionally, a complementary series of quantitative
glycomic and glycoproteomic studies of O-mannosylation in mammalian
systems and pathologies were also published.,, In parallel, advances in gene-based technologies
in the past three years have allowed increasingly rapid characterization
of the biosynthetic pathways involved. This has led to an expansion
in the number of genes encoding proteins known to be directly involved
in O-mannose structure synthesis from roughly 9 to 17 (Tables  and ). In particular, gene
trap insertion in a haploid mammalian cell line coupled with flow
cytometry allowed the Brummelkamp laboratory to locate nearly all
genes known to play a role in mammalian pathologies related to O-mannosylation
(the work of roughly 15 years of biochemistry) as well as to identify
previously undiscovered genes in a single publication. Information about the “α-DG glycosylome”
published in this paper integrated with biochemical information from
the Campbell laboratory mapping a significant portion of key outstanding
O-mannosylation pathway enzymatic activities will play a prominent role in this review as we highlight the most
recent results and synthesize information from across the field.

Core m1 Glycans Found in Mammals
See
Figure  for the symbol legend. Core m1 glycans
account for more than 15%
of protein-linked O-glycans in mouse brain. Core m1 glycans are necessary for α-DG functional glycosylation
and modulate O-GalNAcylation. Note that O-mannose without an extension
has also been observed.



Core structures of O-mannose glycans. The naming scheme used in
the bottom row was proposed in ref (), while the top row includes our proposed naming
scheme for substructures. Essentials of glycobiology symbolic representations
of monosaccharides and other molecules are described in the box.

Core m2 Glycans Found in Mammals
See
Figure  for the symbol legend. Core m2 glycans
account for ∼5% of
protein-linked O-glycans in mouse brain. Core m2 glycans are involved in the inhibition of RPTPβ activity,
which causes an increased level of integrin-dependent cell migration.



Core m3 Glycans Found in Mammals
See Figure  for the symbol legend. Core
m3 glycans account for an unknown but
probably small fraction of protein-linked O-glycans in mouse brain.
Core m3 glycans include the α-DG functional glycan (structure 22), are involved in LG domain binding and in the entry of
viruses into cells. (X) depicts unknown elements, and a subscript
n indicates polymer repeats.



Genes Encoding
Established O-Mannose
Glycan Synthesis Activities
gene(s)	protein function	core glycans	
POMT1 and POMT2	transfer of mannose from DPM
to Ser/Thr	M1, M2, M3	
POMGNT1	transfer of β1,2-GlcNAc to O-mannose	M1, M2	
POMGNT2 (GTDC2)	transfer of β1,4-GlcNAc to O-mannose	M3	
GNT-VB (GNT-IX)	transfer of β1,6-GlcNAc
to O-mannose	M2	
B3GALNT2	transfer of β1,3-GalNAc
to GlcNAc-β1,4-Man-α	M3	
POMK (SGK196)	6-phosphorylation
of O-mannose	M3	
LARGE	Xyl-GlcA repeat polymerization	M3	
LARGE2	Xyl-GlcA repeat
polymerization	M3	
HNK-1ST	GlcA sulfation, including core M3 glycan Xyl-GlcA polymer sulfation	M1, M2, M3	
FUT9	α1,3-fucose
transfer	M1, M2	
B3GAT1	β1,3-glucuronyl transfer	M1, M2	
Genes Encoding Hypothesized
O-Mannose
Glycan Synthesis Activities
gene(s)	protein function	core glycans	
ISPD	role in O-mannose transfer activity	M1, M2, M3	
FKTN	protein
maturation?	M3	
FKRP	protein maturation?	M3	
B3GNT1	β1,3-GlcNAc transfer?	M3	
TMEM5	unknown	M3	
However, our understanding
of mammalian O-mannosylation is far
from complete. Glycan structures remain to be completely elucidated;
details of the α-DG functional glycan epitope recognized by
LG domains and antibodies IIH6 and VIA4-1, remain to be conclusively resolved, and significant questions about
the regulation and specificities of key enzyme activities and their
functions across tissues and during development remain. Consequently,
we will also attempt to highlight the most important outstanding questions
in each section.

Nomenclature
To organize and conveniently
discuss O-mannose glycans and glycosylation,
first let us briefly consider nomenclature. In a recent paper from
the Campbell laboratory elucidating biosynthesis of the “core”
glycan structure that is ultimately extended so as to serve as the
only known normal physiological acceptor of α-DG functional
glycosylation, a set of core O-mannose structures were proposed (Figure ). We will adopt this
nomenclature when discussing the order-dependent biosynthesis of structures
that represent base extensions beyond the N-acetylglucosamine (GlcNAc)
residues directly attached to O-mannose. However, we also propose
a corresponding set of named structures denoting O-mannose extended
only by GlcNAc residues and will distinguish these smaller (sub)structures
by the use of a lowercase m (Figure ). This
corresponding proposal more closely resembles the core structure naming
convention adopted for O-GalNAc glycans. Analogously, each core m structure is the most basic common core
shared by a class of typically further extended O-mannose glycans.
Consequently, this naming scheme allows for categorization of all
of the known O-mannose structures observed to date (Charts –) and highlights
possible biosynthetic fates dependent only on monosaccharides attached
directly to O-mannose. We will use the core m nomenclature when discussing
categories of glycans sharing a given core O-mannose structure.

Structures
O-Mannose glycans account for up to 30% of all
glycans O-linked
to proteins in mammalian brain tissue., It is therefore
understandable that O-mannose glycans have been shown to be essential
for normal nervous system development that is dependent on neuron
migration,, and axon path
finding, and to play a role in remyelination
following myelin sheath damage. Consequently,
O-mannose glycans are tied to disorders causing cobblestone lissencephaly
and mental retardation as well as disorders
such as multiple sclerosis in which myelin sheath destruction is a
dominant factor. O-Mannose glycans also
play a critical role in muscle structure and function, and defects
in O-mannosylation can cause congenital muscular dystrophies (CMDs)
that may or may not exhibit neurological involvement.

Protein-linked O-mannose glycans are initiated by
the covalent
attachment of mannose to serines and threonines via an α-linkage.
Extended O-mannose glycans currently divide naturally into three categories
based on known GlcNAc residue extensions of the initiating mannose
(Figure , cores m1–m3). This set of
core structures also captures the division in biological and biochemical
roles ascribed to O-mannose structures (Charts –). O-Mannose core structures may
be extended in the Golgi by the addition of galactose (Gal) residues,
N-acetylgalactosamine (GalNAc) residues, sialic acid (SA) terminals,
sulfated glucuronic acid terminals forming human natural killer-1
epitopes, α1,3-linked fucose residues forming Lewis x structures,
and the rather elusive core m3-specific post-phosphoryl laminin globular
(LG) domain-binding moiety containing xylose (Xyl) and glucuronic
acid (GlcA) (Chart ). To date, at least 23
distinct structures have been observed and characterized to varying
degrees. Evidence indicates that O-mannose glycans show wide variation
across tissue and cell types likely reflecting important differences
in function.,,,, For years,
α-DG was among the few protein substrates known until more recent
studies suggested and confirmed a wide distribution of O-mannosylation
across proteins.,,,

Core m1
The class of core m1 glycans
consists of all
O-mannose glycans in which O-mannose is extended with β1,2-linked
GlcNAc but not with β1,6-linked GlcNAc (Figures  and  and Chart ). Core m1 glycans accounted for the largest fraction of O-mannose
glycans released from mouse brain proteins, detected and quantified
in a recent study, and constituted at least 15% of total brain protein
O-glycans. At least six different structures
have been observed, including notably the “classical tetrasaccharide”
originally thought to be directly involved in laminin binding (structure 4, Chart ) and a human natural killer-1
(HNK-1) epitope extended structure (structure 6, Chart ). The current literature suggests that core m1
glycans do not directly bind key extracellular factors, and that they play a less direct role at the cell surface in mammalian
pathologies such as CMDs. Nevertheless, core m1 glycans are biologically
essential because core m1 itself is the precursor for core m2 and
core m1 structures appear to be highly important for the maturation
of core m3 glycans on α-DG (functional glycosylation). Core
m1 glycans are abundant on the mucin domain of α-DG, and contribute to the extended conformation adopted by this domain, a potential factor influencing core m3 glycan
maturation. Loss of core m1 glycans correlates with a spectrum of
CMDs,− perhaps because of the
resulting disruption of the maturation of core m3 glycans on α-DG
shown to underlie the molecular mechanism of these pathologies., Core m1 glycans are typically sialylated, contributing to the charge
state of the mucin domain of α-DG.,

Synthesis
of representative structures along the Golgi-centric
core M1 and M2 glycan synthesis pathways. FUT9 and B3GAT1 (GlcAT-P)
have been demonstrated in certain tissues and models to be the primary
enzymes responsible for the steps indicated, although other fucosyl-
and glucuronyltransferases may be present. Abbreviations: GalT, β1,4-galactosyltransferase;
SiaT, α2,3-sialyltransferase. See Figure  for the monosaccharide code legend.

Core m2
The class of core m2 glycans is initiated by
β1,6-linked GlcNAc extension of core m1 (Figures  and ). These structures are primarily
found in brain and prostate tissue and
accounted for no more than 5% of brain protein-linked O-glycans quantified
in a recent study. Evidence of at least
13 different core m2-based structures exists (Chart ), including HNK-1 epitope-containing structures that are
linked to neural cell adhesion and migration. Early studies demonstrated that an increased level of core m2 glycan
synthesis in neuroblastoma cells leads to an increased level of integrin-dependent
cell migration on laminin-coated plates., It was subsequently demonstrated that this effect depends on an
increased level of tyrosine phosphorylation of β-catenin caused
by core m2 glycan-based inhibition of receptor tyrosine phosphatase
β (RPTPβ) activity. Further, the decrease in RPTPβ
activity appears to depend on the increased level of HNK-1 epitope
presentation caused by increased core m2 glycan levels. Interestingly, however, a recent study of a
mouse model lacking core m2 glycan synthesis revealed no obvious developmental
nervous system defects despite changes
in integrin-dependent cell adhesion and migration noted in earlier in vitro studies. In this study,
it was also shown that the lack of core m2 glycans does not alter
α-DG functional glycosylation. Core m2 glycans may however play
a role in demyelination pathologies such as MS as demonstrated in
a recent study showing inhibition of axon remyelination by core m2
glycans in model systems. An increased
level of core m2 glycosylation has also recently been correlated with
increased prostate cancer tumor growth and metastasis.

Core m3
The class of core m3 glycans
is initiated by
β1,4-linked GlcNAc extension of O-mannose (Figures  and ). Apparently constituting
a small and highly heterogeneous portion of the O-glycome, these structures
have outsized biological effects as cell surface determinants of the
binding of α-DG to its ECM partners., In particular, defective core m3 glycosylation appears to be the
common factor in secondary dystroglycanopathies,,,, in increased
metastasis of carcinomas, including prostate and breast cancers,−, and in various forms of aberrant
neuronal migration, and axon guidance in mammals. On the other hand, properly extended
core m3 glycans may contribute to more aggressive forms of melanomas and can promote the entry of certain arenaviruses
into cells. The mechanisms involved are
mediated through synthesis of a post-phosphoryl LG domain-binding
extension apparently unique to core m3 glycans in vivo() containing -α3-GlcA-β3-Xyl-
repeats that has been shown to be a “tunable
scaffold” regulating the avidity of cell surface receptors
for ECM proteins. In muscular dystrophies,
shortening of this scaffold has deleterious effects on basement membrane
compactness and structure and on neuromuscular junction formation. A definitive structure of the post-phosphoryl
LG domain-binding epitope remains an important question, although
the -α3-GlcA-β3-Xyl- repeating structure is similar to
known acidic sugar-containing LG domain-binding epitopes observed
on glycosaminoglycans (GAGs) such as heparin. These acidic GAG epitopes bind to basic residues in LG domains via
electrostatic interactions. Because core
m3 glycans without LG domain-binding extensions are detected in other
tissues, it is hypothesized that core m3 glycans lacking these extensions
may play other roles.

Synthesis of representative
core M3 structures that are dependent
on multiple initial activities based in the ER. Evidence suggests
that phosphorylation of position 6 of O-mannose that is dependent
on β1,4-GlcNAc extension precludes β1,2-GlcNAc addition
in the Golgi. Core M3 is the only core
known to be modified with the α-DG functional glycan structure.
Various steps as well as the structures ultimately built have not
been fully elucidated. See Figure  for the
monosaccharide code legend.

Pathway: Genes and Enzymes
O-Mannose glycan synthesis
begins in the endoplasmic reticulum
(ER) with addition of mannose to serine and threonine residues by
the protein complex consisting of protein O-mannosyltransferase 1
(POMT1) and protein O-mannosyltransferase 2 (POMT2). Synthesis may
then continue, producing various core structures and their elaborations
(Figures –).
Current data suggest that addition of 6-phosphate to O-mannose in
the ER (completing core M3) precludes the addition of β1,2-linked
GlcNAc in the cis-Golgi (Figure ). As a consequence, β1,6-linked GlcNAc addition
would also be prevented. However, the existence of other as yet undetected
O-mannose glycan core structures cannot be ruled out. In this section,
we focus on the synthesis and elaboration of core M3 glycans because
of an abundance of recent discoveries, the remaining biochemical mysteries
regarding their synthesis, and their centrality in human disease.
We will also briefly discuss the synthesis of the other core structures
and finally summarize information from the current literature pertaining
to other genes that are involved in O-mannose glycan synthesis.

Protein O-Mannosylation
(initiation)
Protein O-Mannosyltransferase 1 and 2 (POMT1
and POMT2, respectively)
POMT1 and POMT2 encode multipass
membrane proteins that catalyze
the transfer of mannose from dolichol-phosphate mannose (DPM) to serines
and threonines in an O-linkage in the ER. Mutations in these genes cause a spectrum of CMD phenotypes.,− Recent studies have provided evidence that supports
the hypothesis that phenotype severity
correlates with the predicted degree of gene disruption and inversely correlates with measurable enzymatic
activity. Knockout of either gene is
embryonic lethal,, while a significant loss of function
results in the most severe CMD phenotype, Walker-Warburg syndrome.
POMT1 and -2 are located early in the secretory pathway anterior to
most other glycosyltransferases and have been shown to significantly
influence patterns of O-GalNAcylation in in vitro studies, increasing the level of interest
in its specificity. This is due to the fact that O-GalNAcylation may
greatly impact the biophysical properties of the α-DG mucin
domain, particularly its conformational properties,, and thus processing of α-DGs by other enzymes during secretory
pathway traversal. A recent study showed that a 40-amino acid peptide
region upstream of α-DG O-mannose sites is involved in controlling
specificity in EBNA-293 (human kidney) cells; however, another study found that specificity may be controlled
by different currently unknown elements in lectican O-mannosylation
in the brain. Additional recent results
of interest include the demonstration that N-glycosylation of POMT1
and -2 is necessary for activity as well
as the observation that POMT1 and -2 activity can be significantly
reduced by defects in another gene, ISPD, encoding a putative nucleotidyltransferase.

Core M3 Synthesis
Genes encoding
proteins involved
in core M3 synthesis (Figure ) have been identified
over the past few years primarily on the basis of genetic studies
conducted on patients presenting with congenital muscular dystrophy
(CMD) phenotypes. These genes also appear prominently in the recently
published α-DG glycosylome and
comprise three of the eight genes shown to be involved in the mammalian
O-mannosylation pathway in the past three years (Table ). The three genes involved had been annotated as glycosyltransferase-like
domain-containing protein 2 (GTDC2, now POMGNT2), UDP-GalNAc:β-1,3-N-acetylgalactosaminyltransferase
2 (B3GALNT2), and probable inactive protein kinase-like protein SgK196
(SGK196, now POMK). POMGNT2 was identified in a paper employing exome
sequencing of Walker-Warburg syndrome (WWS) patients and validated
in zebrafish models. B3GALNT2 was identified
and validated similarly with the addition
of the direct demonstration of α-DG hypoglycosylation accompanying
B3GALNT2 deficiency. The in vitro activity of B3GALNT2
had been demonstrated previously, in 2004, but the in vivo function was not determined at that time. Finally, POMK was identified as a cause of hydrocephalus and abnormal
neuronal migration (WWS hallmarks) in genetically engineered mouse
models in 2012 but does not appear to
have been directly implicated in muscular dystrophy biology and O-mannosylation
until the publication of the Brummelkamp laboratory α-DG glycosylome
in 2013. The biochemistry of these genes
was elucidated in a 2013 paper from the Campbell laboratory. As discussed in , core M3 glycans are the only proven in vivo acceptors
of the biologically critical LG domain-binding moiety of α-DG
central to a number of disease processes including CMDs. This draws
attention to the most important open question regarding core M3 glycan
biosynthesis, the manner in which protein and site specificity is
determined in vivo, which will also be discussed
in this section.

Protein O-Linked Mannose N-Acetylglucosaminyltransferase
2 (POMGNT2
or GTDC2)
Experiments conducted in the Campbell laboratory
demonstrated that POMGNT2 was ER-localized and that it transfers GlcNAc
from UDP-GlcNAc to a synthetic version of an α-DG O-mannose
peptide in a β1,4-linkage in vitro() (Figure ). Ogawa and
colleagues also demonstrated ER localization and found that CTD110.6,
an antibody raised against O-GlcNAc, can cross react with β1,4-GlcNAc-extended
O-mannose. Because POMGNT2 is localized
earlier in the secretory pathway than other O-mannose-extending enzymes,
it is noteworthy that prior studies of laminin binding reactivity,
phosphorylation status,, and O-glycan sites of mammalian
glycoproteins,−, suggest that core M3 structures are unique to a handful
of sites of α-DG in vivo. In light of this,
it is interesting that Yoshida-Moriguchi and colleagues demonstrated
the transfer of β1,4-linked GlcNAc to 4-methylumbelliferyl-α-d-mannoside, at least in
vitro, and that Ogawa and colleagues demonstrated the CTD110.6
reactivity of a number of α-DG deletion and substitution mutants
cotransfected with GTDC2 in HEK293T cells. Consequently, it is currently unclear what structural or other biochemical
determinants result in β1,4-GlcNAc modification of such a limited
set of sites in vivo at this key biosynthetic point
in the pathway.

UDP-GalNAc:β-1,3-N-Acetylgalactosaminyltransferase
2 (B3GALNT2)
In 2013, B3GALNT2 was shown to be defective
in some cases of congenital
muscular dystrophy and to localize to the ER and was hypothesized
to transfer GalNAc in a β1,3-linkage to GlcNAc-β1,4-Man-α
on α-DG. Significantly, B3GALNT2
is the first GalNAc-transferase that has been shown to localize primarily
to the ER as opposed to relocating to the ER as a regulatory mechanism. Yoshida-Moriguchi and colleagues demonstrated
the apparent in vivo acceptor of B3GALNT2 activity
for the first time in a paper published shortly thereafter. B3GALNT2 transfers GalNAc in a β1,3-linkage
to GlcNAc-β1,4-Man-α-R, where R may be a peptide from
α-DG or 4-methylumbelliferyl. Given the early position of B3GALNT2
activity in ER and Golgi trafficking, O-mannose glycans may provide
the only acceptors for this enzyme in vivo.

Protein
O-Mannose Kinase (POMK or SGK196)
In 2013,
Yoshida-Moriguchi and colleagues established, through in vitro enzyme assays and high-performance liquid chromatography separation
of fluorescently labeled substrates and products, that POMK is the
kinase responsible for phosphorylating O-mannose at position 6, completing
the core M3 structure (Figure ). In contrast to the seeming lack of specificity in vitro of the previously discussed core M3 synthesizing
enzymes, POMK could be shown to phosphorylate α-linked mannose
only after the addition of GalNAc-β1,3-GlcNAcβ1,4. The discovery that POMK is a kinase is significant
for two reasons. First, POMK lacks key catalytic residues found in
other kinases characterized to date and
may therefore be the first discovered member of a new class of kinases.
Second, extension of phosphate groups attached to sugars is an unusual,
more difficult, chemistry for various reasons. Therefore, the enzymatic activity stably extending the
phosphate at position 6 is of clear interest.

Core M3 Elaboration
and LG Domain-Binding Related Genes
Core M3 glycans have
been observed only on α-DG and were shown
in 2010 to be the only glycans extended with the LG domain-binding
moiety (functional glycan) of α-DG in vivo. Because the Brummelkamp laboratory gene disruption
screening methodology is based on the functional glycan status of
α-DG, their screen should detect positive regulators of functional
glycosylation. Negative regulators are
unlikely to be detected by this screen; however, one was discovered
by another group recently using different methods. The genes from these studies encoding proteins in the secretory
pathway are likely to play direct roles in core M3 elaboration. The
genes in Tables – meeting these criteria are like-glycosyltransferase (LARGE), glycosyltransferase-like
1B (GYLTL1B or LARGE2), UDP-GlcNAc:βGalβ-1,3-N-acetylglucosaminyltransferase
(B3GNT1), human natural killer-1 sulfotransferase (HNK-1ST), solute
carrier family 35 (CMP-sialic acid transporter), member A1 (SLC35A1),
fukutin (FKTN), fukutin-related protein (FKRP), transmembrane protein
5 (TMEM5), and base core M3 synthesis genes and POMGNT1 discussed
in other sections. LARGE, FKTN, and FKRP have been extensively studied
since the late 1990s, while B3GNT1, HNK-1ST, SLC35A1, and TMEM5 have
only recently been implicated in the modification of α-DG. Recent
major results include the elucidation of the enzymatic reactions conducted
by LARGE and LARGE2,,, the determination that B3GNT1 forms complexes with LARGE and LARGE2
critical to their activity, and the discovery
that HNK-1ST negatively regulates LG domain-binding glycan synthesis., Further, all of these results have been tied either directly or indirectly,− to the post-phosphoryl moiety of core M3 glycans. The roles of FKTN,
FKRP, and TMEM5 remain less clear.

Genes Encoding Proteins
Involved in
Precursor Supply
gene(s)	protein function	core glycans	
MPDU1	mannose supply	M1, M2, M3	
PMM2	mannose supply	M1, M2, M3	
GPMBB	Ssynthesis
of GDP-Man	M1, M2, M3	
DPM1, DPM2, and DPM3	GDP-Man to DPM
transfer	M1, M2, M3	
UGDH	UDP-Glc to UDP-GlcA conversion	M1, M2, M3	
UXS1	UDP-GlcA to UDP-Xyl conversion	M3	
SLC35A1	Golgi CMP-sialic
acid antiporter	M1, M2, M3	
Like-glycosyltransferase (LARGE), Glycosyltransferase-like
1B
(LARGE2), and N-Acetyllactosamide β-1,3-N-Acetylglucosaminyltransferase
(B3GNT1)
LARGE and LARGE2 encode proteins containing both
a GT8 glycosyltransferase domain and a GT49 glycosyltransferase domain and have been extensively studied using overexpression,,,,, and glycosylation
deficient cell lines.− Native LARGE modification of α-DG is regulated
directly and/or indirectly by the activities of a number of other
enzymes, including HNK-1ST, B3GNT1, and possibly SLC35A1 and POMGNT1
(see below). Overexpression of LARGE has been shown to lead to LARGE
modification of non-native acceptors, including N-glycans and O-GalNAc
glycans,, and, potentially as a consequence, to partially
rescue functional glycosylation in cells derived from patients deficient
in other O-mannosylation pathway activities., This
has led to the suggestion that LARGE may be a particularly good target
for gene therapy treatment strategies given that it can compensate
for a variety of deficiencies.

In 2012, Inamori and colleagues determined by compositional sugar
analysis that recombinant α-DG co-expressed with LARGE in HEK293
cells is modified by substantial quantities of xylose and glucuronic
acid. Competition assays and experiments
conducted in UDP-Xyl synthesis deficient cell lines demonstrated that
functional glycosylation of α-DG depended on xylose. Subsequent in vitro enzyme assays using tagged xylose and glucuronic
acid acceptors established the reactions catalyzed by LARGE. Specifically,
it was shown that the GT8 domain catalyzes the transfer of xylose
(Xyl) in an α1,3-linkage to β1,3-linked glucuronic acid
(GlcA) from UDP-Xyl and that the GT49 domain catalyzes the transfer
of GlcA in a β1,3-linkage to α1,3-linked Xyl from UDP-GlcA. Furthermore, Inamori and colleagues demonstrated
that LARGE can build polymers consisting of -α3-GlcA-β3-Xyl-
repeats without the presence or action of other proteins. LARGE2 was
subsequently shown to catalyze the same reaction,, although none of the currently published studies have established
the initial acceptor for these activities in vivo. For example, Yoshida-Moriguchi and colleagues found that LARGE
indeed appears to be unable to transfer directly to the phosphate
at position 6 on the core M3 structure. The role of B3GNT1 is currently unknown, but it is interesting to
note that it is the only B3GNT to cluster into CAZy family GT49.

Human Natural Killer-1 Sulfotransferase (HNK-1ST)
HNK-1ST
encodes a sulfotransferase responsible for the sulfation of GlcA residues
at position 3. In 2012, Nakagawa and colleagues observed an upregulation
of HNK-1ST in S91 melanoma cells treated with the antitumor agent
retinoic acid (RA) and demonstrated that the suppression of melanoma
cell migration by RA depended on a reduction in the level of functional
glycosylation of α-DG. Furthermore,
they demonstrated that the interaction between LARGE and α-DG
was not disrupted by HNK-1ST and that the sulfo-transfer activity
of HNK-1ST was the mechanism by which this enzyme modulates functional
glycosylation of α-DG. In 2013, Nakagawa and colleagues demonstrated
that HNK-1ST transfers sulfates to core M3 glycans in the post-phosphoryl
moiety and that it is the activity of HNK-1ST in this post-phosphoryl
moiety that is responsible for abolishing the functional glycosylation
of α-DG. Experiments utilizing
the LARGE in vitro assay system established by Inamori
and colleagues coupled with HNK-1ST-based
“pretransfer” of sulfates to α-DG suggest that
the primary effect of sulfate transfer is the disruption of the ability
of LARGE to build the repeating disaccharide. These results taken together suggest a mechanism in which the relative
activities between LARGE and HNK-1ST in a given cell compete to mediate
the length of the disaccharide repeat and thus its affinity for ECM
ligands. These results also strengthen the glycosaminoglycan analogy
because HNK-1ST has also been shown to negatively regulate GAG chain
length by sulfate transfer. An important
distinction is the lack of HNK-1 reactivity of the resulting glycan
on α-DG, indicating that GlcA is not β1,3-linked to Gal.

Solute Carrier Family 35 (CMP-sialic acid transporter), Member
A1 (SLC35A1)
SLC35A1 encodes the well-characterized Golgi
CMP-sialic acid transporter in mammals., Mucin domains
are heavily sialylated with significant consequences for protein conformation
during and after trafficking (Table ). Synthesis of LG domain-binding glycans on the
mucin domain of α-DG clearly depends on structural features., Furthermore, because sialidase treatment after synthesis of the
functional glycans on α-DG results in increased laminin and
IIH6 binding activity, a lack of concurrent
sialylation of O-mannose and O-GalNAc glycans during DAG1 traversal
of the compartments of the Golgi that contain LARGE may result in
an unfavorable protein state for effective LARGE modification. Regardless
of the exact mechanism, the lack of appearance of specific sialyltransferases
(SiaTs) in the published α-DG glycosylome suggests that redundancy exists and that multiple SiaTs
are involved. As with many of the defects found in α-DG processing,
LARGE overexpression has been shown to mitigate sialic acid deficiency-based
aberrant glycosylation.

Fukutin (FKTN),
Fukutin-Related Protein (FKRP), and Transmembrane
Protein 5 (TMEM5)
Genes FKTN, FKRP, and TMEM5 encode the
remaining positive regulators of α-DG functional glycosylation.
These proteins localize to the secretory pathway and are potentially
directly involved in α-DG functional glycan synthesis (Table ). While it is likely that at least one of these
genes encodes an activity synthesizing a key part of the linker between
core M3 itself and the LARGE modification, and there has been extensive
speculation with regard to FKTN and FKRP activities in particular,− experiments to date have not revealed nucleotide–sugar transfer
activities or other activities. Recent studies have shown that at least a fraction
of α-DG from FKTN and FKRP deficient models is partially extended
on core M3 glycans post-phosphate, and that mutation
of the DXD motif of FKRP does not necessarily result in a loss of
functional glycosylation of α-DG. Furthermore, functional glycosylation of α-DG has been observed
in cell lines in which FKRP transcripts were not detected. It has also been shown that some mutants of FKTN
fail to fold properly and are retained in the ER, causing POMGNT1
to be retained as well, and that there
may be direct interaction between FKTN and α-DG. Thus, the role of FKTN and FKRP remains unclear,
and they may not be directly involved in enzymatic synthesis. Recently,
a study conducted in zebrafish has indicated that FKTN and FKRP may
be required for appropriate folding and secretion of a set of proteins
in a potentially non-glycosylation-dependent manner (viz. laminin-1). This model may explain the hypoglycosylation
of α-DG in FKTN and FKRP deficient patients given the importance
of the α-DG and LARGE binding interaction that depends on protein
conformation. This model is also consistent
with the lower degree of correlation between α-DG hypoglycosylation
and CMD phenotype severity in such patients. For example, studies including observations concerning a role for
laminin-1 in muscular dystrophies have since been published. Further evaluation of this model is needed.
New animal models,,, and biochemical tools developed in the past few years should help researchers
to further resolve the roles of FKTN and FKRP, which generally occur
at low levels, can be difficult to detect, and may be differentially
required among cell types and during development.

TMEM5 has
only recently been identified as a cause of dystroglycanopathies,
and no biochemical characterization appears in the literature at present.
It has been noted that TMEM5 defects can cause cobblestone lissencephaly
A, a severe phenotype associated most closely with POMT1 defects, placing TMEM5 centrally in α-DG functional
glycan synthesis in vivo.

Core M1 and
Core M2 Synthesis
Core M1 and core M2 glycans
and their elaborated structures account for 20–30% of the O-glycans
detected and quantified in various studies., Core M1 glycan synthesis is initiated by POMGNT1, which has long
been implicated in CMDs (see ).
Core M2 glycan synthesis is initiated by GNT-VB (GNT-IX) and has been
demonstrated to play a role in remyelination and potentially multiple
sclerosis (see ).

Protein O-Linked
Mannose N-Acetylglucosaminyltransferase 1 (POMGNT1)
POMGNT1
encodes the enzyme that extends O-mannose with β1,2-linked
GlcNAc in the cis-Golgi, an initial step in the synthesis of core
M1-based and core M2-based structures (Charts  and ). Although these structures are not
directly involved in LG domain binding reactivity, POMGNT1 loss of
function causes a loss of functional glycosylation of α-DG,
a severe form of muscular dystrophy termed muscle eye brain disease,
and a &gt;10 kDa reduction in the molecular mass of α-DG in
mouse
skeletal muscle tissue. This reduction
is larger than that caused by deficiencies in other functional glycosylation
genes and has potentially substantial structural consequences that
may affect the activities of other enzymes implicated in CMDs. More
directly, Nilsson et al. found strict core M1 glycan modification
of the glycopeptide consisting of mucin domain residues 361–373
in human α-DG, a peptide that is
directly N-terminal to the peptide on which the core M3 phospho-O-mannose-trisaccharide
was mapped by Yoshida-Moriguchi and colleagues. The only detected heterogeneity was in sialylation, and
Harrison et al. detected core M3 (minus phosphate) on the corresponding
mouse α-DG site followed by a core M1 classical tetrasaccharide
attached to the two C-terminal threonine residues. These regions contain sequences that are significantly
similar to the sequences of a region of α-DG most directly demonstrated
to be highly important for laminin binding consisting of the first
24 residues of the mucin domain. Specifically,
paired threonine residues separated by a proline appear to be critical
for LARGE-dependent functional glycosylation. Becauser enzymatic removal
of core M1 glycans on α-DG from normal rabbit skeletal muscle
causes an increase in laminin binding reactivity, one reasonable hypothesis is that specific sites of core
M1 glycan modification could be a factor in the ability of LARGE to
build the scaffold of the functional glycan structure of α-DG
core M3 glycans. It has also been shown that CMD severity is inversely
correlated with POMGNT1 activity. Finally,
one recent study found a correlation between POMGNT1 protein levels
and glioma tissue grade, but further
studies are needed to refine this finding and possible mechanisms.

α-1,6-Mannosylglycoprotein 6-β-N-Acetylglucosaminyltransferase
B (GNT-VB or GNT-IX)
GNT-VB (GNT-IX) encodes the enzyme that
extends O-mannose with β1,6-linked GlcNAc in the cis-Golgi that
is dependent on prior β1,2-GlcNAc extension by POMGNT1. This
activity is blocked when branch β2 is further extended. GNT-VB is active primarily in brain and prostate
tissue and has been shown to negatively
affect axon remyelination after neurotoxicant-induced myelin damage and to promote prostate cancer metastasis. These findings establish GNT-VB as a possible
therapeutic target.

Additional Genes in O-Mannosylation
Isoprenoid
Synthase Domain-Containing Protein (ISPD)
ISPD encodes a
protein with an isoprenoid synthase domain most similar
to 2-C-methyl-d-erythritol 4-phosphate cytidylyltransferase,
an enzyme active in the non-mevalonate isoprenoid synthesis pathway
found in bacteria that appears to be absent in mammals. The role of
this gene in dystroglycanopathies was discovered in 2012 through genetic
screening and complementation analyses.,, Defects in ISPD appear to be a common cause of dystroglycanopathies
accounting for 10% of dystroglycanopathies in studies to date, and 30% of the cases of Walker-Warburg syndrome examined in one
study. Willer and colleagues subsequently
found that microsomal fractions from ISPD deficient Walker-Warburg
syndrome patient fibroblasts showed significant reductions in the
extents of transfer of O-mannose to proteins. This is an intriguing result considering that ISPD does not appear
to contain a signal sequence and may have a cytosolic or possibly
nuclear localization, raising questions about how ISPD might affect
the activity of the protein O-mannosyltransferase complex in a microsomal
fraction supplied with exogenous DPM. Although ISPD appeared to associate
most closely with more severe forms of CMD in previous studies, at
least one study identified patients with mutations in ISPD and milder
limb-girdle muscular dystrophy phenotypes.

α-1,3-Fucosyltransferase 9 (FUT9)
FUT9 encodes
an α-1,3-fucosyltransferase that catalyzes synthesis of Lewis
x glycans (Lex). O-Mannose-initiated Lex structures
accounted for roughly 10% of the O-glycans released from mouse brain
tissue and quantified in recent glycomic studies. Studies have demonstrated that of the two fucosyltransferases
capable of synthesizing Lex glycans, FUT9 is substantially
more active in such a synthesis and is expressed in mouse brain at
levels far higher than those of FUT4. Furthermore, FUT9–/– mice show a complete
absence of detectable Lex epitopes in brain tissue. FUT9 is likely to encode the primary fucosyltransferase
responsible for fucosylation of O-mannose glycans. Addition of fucose
to GlcNAc has been shown in other glycan classes to block GlcA transfer
and consequently HNK-1 epitope synthesis. Given the prevalence of HNK-1 epitopes in brain tissue and their
previously noted functions, the interplay between fucosylation and
glucuronylation may have a regulatory role.

Galactosylgalactosylxylosylprotein
3-β-Glucuronosyltransferase
1 (B3GAT1)
B3GAT1 encodes one of two primary HNK-1 epitope-synthesizing
β1,3-glucuronyltransferases in mammals (GlcAT-P). In a recent
paper, Morise et al. demonstrated that phosphacan is the major protein
carrying the HNK-1 epitope in the developing mouse brain, that monoclonal
antibody 6B4 specifically recognizes HNK-1-modified phosphacan, and
that 6B4 reactivity is virtually completely abolished in B3GAT1 knockout
mice. Additionally, experiments involving
cotransfection of phosphacan and GlcAT-P into COS-1 cells provided
further evidence that GlcAT-P is required for HNK-1 epitope synthesis
on O-linked glycan structures primarily attached to phosphacan.

Protein Substrates (O-mannosylated proteins)
O-Mannose modification was first detected in mammalian tissue in
1979 and was subsequently shown to occur
prominently on the protein α-DG from nervous, and skeletal muscle tissues. Several
additional proteins were identified in the 2000s, including RPTPβ, cd24 from mouse brain, and a human IgG2 light chain expressed in CHO cells, primarily in the context of biochemical studies
directed at characterizing specific proteins. Efforts directed specifically
at finding O-mannosylated proteins have been undertaken more recently,
beginning with a study based on a bioinformatic search for a previously
identified cis-peptide determinant of O-mannosylation on α-DG
that resulted in the demonstration that neurofascin 186 is O-mannosylated. Further studies utilizing large-scale enrichment
and fractionation-based strategies resulted in the identification
of the four lecticans (aggrecan, brevican, neurocan, and versican)
as an important class of O-mannosylated proteins, and most recently, 37 cadherins and six plexins were shown
to be O-mannosylated using a “SimpleCell” system and
Concanavalin A chromatography. One of
the most consistent themes observed in O-mannosylation is the association
of O-mannosylation with proteins involved in cell–cell and
cell–matrix adhesion. For example, O-mannosylation of RPTPβ,
which is not directly involved in cell–cell or cell–matrix
interactions, has been shown to modulate cell–cell interactions
and to result in an increased level of cell migration through an intracellular
signaling mechanism. Protein cd24 is
likewise involved in cell adhesion in cancer biology, in immune system
function, and in nervous system biology (potentially mediated in part
through the presentation of the HNK-1 epitope on O-mannose glycans). In cancer biology, increased levels of cd24
correlate with more aggressive metastatic carcinomas. Finally, the newly demonstrated importance
of O-mannosylation in cadherin-mediated cell–cell adhesion
and its crucial role in development as
well as the discovery of the prevalence of O-mannose glycans linked
to cadherins further illustrate this
theme and open many avenues of additional study.

Conclusions
Progress
in the field of O-mannosylation within the past few years
has been substantial, culminating in the publication of three high-impact
papers in 2013, the Brummelkamp laboratory α-DG glycosylome,
the Clausen laboratory O-mannose glycoproteome, and the Campbell laboratory
core M3 enzymes. Publication of the Brummelkamp laboratory α-DG
glycosylome suggests that we may finally be able to define the borders
of genetic causes of secondary dystroglycanopathies and may be close
to determining genetic etiologies for most dystroglycanopathy patients
without previously understood genetic defects. It will also allow
for biochemical characterization of the proteins encoded by these
genes, ultimately allowing further development of treatments for dystroglycanopathies
and other diseases caused by defects in O-mannosylation. The Clausen
laboratory O-mannose glycoproteome provides a significant addition
to the set of known O-mannosylated proteins, helping to explain how
O-mannose glycans can account for approximately 30% of O-glycans released
and quantified from brain proteins even in mouse models lacking α-DG.
Finally, the Campbell laboratory assigned three enzyme activities
critical to functional glycosylation of α-DG that are dependent
on O-mannose glycans. The field of mammalian O-mannosylation is at
an exciting juncture with completion of such a solid framework upon
which accelerated progress in attaining a deeper understanding, particularly
clinically, may rest.

Genes Encoding Proteins
Involved in
ER and Golgi Trafficking
gene(s)	protein function	core glycans	
COG4	vesicle trafficking	?	
COG5	vesicle trafficking	?	
COG7	vesicle trafficking	?	
COG8	vesicle trafficking	?	
PTAR1	protein trafficking	?	
The authors declare
no
competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
We thank Christina M. Dobson for thoughtful comments
and careful
editing of the manuscript. We also thank the members of the Wells
laboratory and CCRC colleagues for valuable discussions and for reviewing
the manuscript. We apologize ahead of time to those in the field whose
work we failed to cite because of focus and/or space limitations.

Abbreviations
α-DGα-dystroglycan

CMDscongenital muscular
dystrophies

Cytcytoplasm

DPMdolichol-phosphate
mannose

ECMextracellular
matrix

ERendoplasmic
reticulum

FGfunctional
glycosylation

Fucfucose

FucTfucosyltransferase

GAGglycosaminoglycan

Galgalactose

GalTgalactosyltransferase

GalNAcN-acetylgalactosamine

GlcAglucuronic acid

GlcATglucuronyltransferase

GlcNAcN-acetylglucosamine

HNK-1human natural
killer-1

LGlaminin
globular

Loclocalization

Manmannose

N-glycanN-linked glycan

Nucnucleus

RAretinoic acid

RPTPβreceptor tyrosine
phosphatase β

SAsialic acid

SiaTssialyltransferases

WWSWalker-Warburg syndrome

Xylxylose.

