Living cells rely on the continuous
exchange of diverse molecular species, e.g., nutrients, precursors,
and reaction products, across the cellular membrane for their proper
function. Membrane transporters are proteins
that serve as active gatekeepers closely regulating the traffic of
these species across the membrane. Similar to channels, membrane transporters
provide selective pathways for the permeation of their substrates
across the membrane, but they are endowed with the additional ability
to actively pump their substrates across the membrane, often against
their electrochemical potential gradient. These specialized molecular
devices provide the machinery to intimately couple active transport
to various forms of cellular energy; light or the energy released
by chemical reactions (mainly ATP hydrolysis) is utilized by primary
active transporters, while the chemical gradients of other species
are exploited by secondary active transporters. The fundamental role of membrane transporters in diverse
biological and physiological processes has rendered them as important
drug targets, further stimulating widespread interest in mechanistic
studies of these proteins at a molecular level.

The widely accepted general mechanistic model for
transporters,
termed the alternating-access model, proposes
that the transporter protein switches substrate accessibility from
one side of the membrane to the other, by undergoing structural transitions
between outward-facing (OF) and inward-facing (IF) states, temporarily
residing in several possible intermediate states. Crystal structures
for several of these proposed states across various families of transporters
have provided strong support for this mechanism.− However, the availability of structures
for multiple functional and/or conformational states of the same protein,
or even within the same family, is limited.− Even when multiple conformational states have been characterized
for the same transporter protein, knowledge of the transitions between
these states and the coupling of these transitions to the energy-providing
mechanism is largely lacking for most membrane transporters. Hence,
reconstructing the transport cycle and understanding the mechanism
of energy coupling and substrate/ion transport remain challenging
and rely on techniques that would yield a dynamical description of
the process.

Computational techniques such as molecular modeling
and simulation
have been widely applied in the description of dynamics and mechanistic
aspects of biomolecular function. The
overlap between computational and experimental observations has expanded
considerably because of long time-scale simulations allowed by advanced,
more efficient algorithms and the increased availability of faster
and more powerful resources., Computational methods
are now routinely adopted for predictive or descriptive studies that
parallel or complement experimental techniques and have allowed significant
discoveries about how biomolecules work.

The application of
computer simulation to studies of membrane transport
proteins has a short history, because of the previously limited availability
of structural information, as well as several technical challenges
in computationally describing these complex systems. These limitations have been addressed diligently over the
past decade: advancements in crystallographic techniques have resulted
in the determination of numerous crystal structures for several membrane
transporters across diverse families,− and significantly longer simulations enjoying
improved force fields, e.g., the recent revision of CHARMM providing
more accurate representations of lipids and lipid–protein interactions, have resulted in more realistic representations
of physiologically relevant phenomena. These factors have together
resulted in a quantum leap in the field of membrane protein simulations.−

Conformational changes are central to biomolecular function
and
particularly important to the mechanism of membrane transporters.
The transport cycle of membrane transporters involves structural changes
on a diverse scale, ranging from small (local) rearrangements such
as salt bridge and hydrogen bond formation or breakage and localized
gating motions to large (global) structural transitions such as helix
or domain motions. The molecular events leading to these conformational
changes and their effects on the overall mechanism are largely unknown
and often difficult to characterize experimentally. Molecular dynamics
(MD) simulation offers a method with sufficiently high temporal and
spatial resolutions suitable for the characterization of conformational
events ranging from local to global (Figure ). Such structural transitions have been successfully captured in
MD simulations of a large number of membrane transporters.−,−,,,,−

Different scales at which structural and
dynamical changes relevant
to the function of membrane transporters occur. MD simulations can
be used to study transporter dynamics at scales ranging from the global
conformational and/or functional state of the protein (top) to changes
in the secondary structure and topology (middle) to changes in local
interactions between individual groups at the atomic level (bottom).
The structure of LeuT is used to illustrate these levels. In the top
panel, LeuT (white surface) is embedded in a lipid membrane (green),
surrounded by water and ions. The crystal structure is in the OF state;
the cavity through which the substrate binds is visible. The middle
panel shows the LeuT secondary structure, where the 10 TM helices
forming the unique LeuT fold are shown. In the bottom panel, specific
salt bridge and hydrophobic interactions serve as extracellular gates
in LeuT. Superimposed snapshots for the residues illustrate their
dynamics observed during an MD simulation.

In this review, after providing a brief introduction
to MD simulation,
we describe the application of the method to membrane transporters,
using examples from our own studies highlighting functionally relevant
features captured by the simulations. We use five systems (Figure ), viz., leucine transporter (LeuT), galactose transporter
(vSGLT), glutamate transporter (GlT), glycerol 3-phosphate transporter
(GlpT), and an ATP-binding cassette transporter (ABCT); this set samples
mechanistically diverse classes of primary and secondary active transporters,
the latter including symporters and an antiporter (Figure ).

Five transporters discussed herein. The LeuT fold inverted
repeat
is highlighted in color in LeuT (green and blue) and vSGLT (green
and pink). Bound substrate and ions are shown. The GlT trimer is shown,
colored by the trimerization domain (orange) and transport domain
(blue). The two helical bundles in GlpT are colored yellow and blue,
respectively. For ABCT, the structure of the intact maltose transporter
with different domains colored individually is shown. The approximate
position of the embedding membrane is shown as two solid lines.

Molecular Dynamics Simulation
The molecular dynamics
(MD) method and its applications to molecular
systems are largely based on classical mechanics and statistical mechanical
theories. Intensive calculations are
required in this method; hence, the efficiency of MD simulations is
heavily dependent on algorithmic developments in mathematics and computer
science as well as on advancements in computer hardware.

In a typical atomistic MD simulation,
interactions are calculated
between atoms using a set of parameters that define a potential energy
function, representing a “force field”. The derivation
of force field parameters is typically a painstaking iterative process,
in which initial parameters obtained from experimental data and quantum
mechanical calculations are optimized
to reproduce structure and vibrational modes, as well as thermodynamic
properties of the molecular systems of interest. Various force fields
are available for biomolecular simulations, with minor differences
in their potential energy functions, and corresponding differences
in parameters.− A typical potential energy function for biomolecular simulations, U, includes terms that describe bonded (bonds, bond angles,
dihedral angles, etc.) and nonbonded (van der Waals and electrostatic)
interactions:Nonbonded interactions usually form the more
expensive part of the calculations and often play a more important
role than bonded interactions in describing interactions between different
molecules, or even between different functional groups within the
same molecule, e.g., side chain interaction within a protein.

During an MD simulation, at each time step, the total force F acting on each atom is calculated as the negative derivative
of the potential energy U with respect to its coordinates r:Using these forces, the Newtonian equations
of motion are then integrated, to determine changes
in the position r and velocity v of individual
atoms in time, t:where m is the mass and a is acceleration. The result of an MD simulation is, therefore,
a trajectory file that includes an ensemble of configurations of the
system over a period of time, typically ranging from tens to hundreds
of nanoseconds for atomistic simulations of biomolecular systems.
These trajectories contain information about motions and interactions
that can occur in a system under given conditions and may also be
used to calculate macroscopic properties for prediction of or comparison
to experimental observables.

MD has the advantage of providing
dynamical information at high
spatial and temporal resolutions. It allows the researcher not only
to monitor the natural motion of a molecular system in real time but
also to test out various conditions, including those that are not
accessible experimentally. While extremely powerful in generating
and testing hypotheses, MD methods are severely limited in time scale
because of the short time steps (on the order of femtoseconds for
atomistic simulations) required for accurate integration of the trajectory
and proper description of the molecular system. Many important biological
processes occur on the microsecond, millisecond, or even longer time
scales, while simulations for large biomolecular systems are currently
limited to the nanosecond to microsecond time-scale range, hence restricting
direct application of MD to the simulation of such processes completely.
The time-scale limitation often translates into inadequate sampling
of the configurational space and incomplete description of the entropy
of the system. A second major shortcoming of classical MD simulations
is the use of simplified potential energy functions to describe the
molecular system that do not account well for electronic properties,
particularly resulting in inadequate treatment of electronic polarization
effects. To alleviate this problem, efforts aimed at developing “polarizable”
force fields are under way.−

Despite these limitations, MD has been successfully
employed in
studying a wide range of biomolecular systems and phenomena, including
membrane transport proteins and their mechanisms.,, Furthermore, with continuous algorithmic
improvement, the availability of faster hardware, and refinement of
the available force fields addressing these limitations, the gap between
simulations and experiments is rapidly closing, as evidenced by recent
studies reporting simulations reaching time scales on the order of
microseconds to submilliseconds.− We also note that often, long
time-scale processes are long simply because they are composed of
many “steps” or molecular events that each might occur
in short time scales and therefore can be efficiently described using
MD. Ideally, when structural descriptions of a sufficient number of
intermediate states involved in a long process are available, MD can
be used to reconstruct the dynamics of the entire process.

To
study large transitions, as well as other high-barrier processes
that are amenable to only prohibitively long equilibrium simulations,
specialized simulation and sampling techniques that can be adopted
to induce and study transitions within reachable simulation time scales
have been developed. In techniques such as steered and targeted MD (SMD and TMD,
respectively), external forces (or biasing potentials) are applied
to one atom or a group of atoms, to induce specific molecular events
and to drive the system from one state to another. Other enhanced
sampling techniques that have been developed particularly with the
purpose of calculating the free energy of processes such as substrate
binding and release or conformational transitions include free energy
perturbation (FEP),, thermodynamic integration (TI),, umbrella sampling (US), and the more
recently developed methods of adaptive biasing force (ABF), and implicit ligand sampling (ILS).,

In a
typical membrane protein simulation of the kind presented
here, the researcher starts with an experimentally determined atomistic
protein structure, to which water, lipids (membrane), and ions are
added. Figure  shows a typical membrane protein
simulation system, featuring LeuT embedded in a lipid bilayer. NAMD was adopted
for the reported simulations. To mimic ambient experimental conditions,
MD simulations are often conducted either under NPT [constant temperature (310 K) and constant pressure (1 atm), while
keeping the total number of particles in the system constant] or under NVT conditions in which the volume of the system (instead
of the pressure) is kept constant. Force field parameters are available
for standard molecular systems, such as protein residues, nucleotides,
and lipid molecules. Missing parameters and topology files for ligands
are included either by adopting similar parameters from the available
force field or by quantum mechanical calculations in a manner consistent
with the employed force field. The simulations involve a brief period
of initial membrane equilibration (typically 1–5 ns), wherein
the lipid tails are allowed to equilibrate while the lipid headgroups
and the protein are constrained to their initial positions. This is
then followed by an unconstrained equilibration of the lipids and
the protein for simulation times ranging from tens to hundreds of
nanoseconds, dictated by the nature of the molecular problem and the
available resources. As will be discussed, these time scales are appropriate
for capturing various motions ranging from very fast ones, e.g., water
and ion diffusion, to slower motions such as side chain reorientations
and loop movements, and in some cases even larger conformational changes
such as domain motions.

Applications of MD to Studying Membrane Transporters
Computational techniques often step in when a research problem
becomes particularly refractory to experimental investigations. Prime
examples of such research problems are the molecular details of the
mechanisms involved in the function of membrane transporters. To understand
the transport mechanism, a dynamical description of several states
in the transport cycle, and the transition between them, is necessary.
Despite recent progresses in the structural biology of membrane proteins,
high-resolution structures of membrane transporters are still scarce,
and multiple states are rarely captured for the same transporter.
In some cases, the functional state represented by the determined
structures is not straightforward to characterize. Furthermore, even
in cases where multiple crystal structures exist for different states,−, the dynamics of the transporter
and molecular events involved in the mechanism, such as the sequence
of binding, unbinding, and translocation events for the primary substrate
and the cotransported ion(s), remain unresolved. Describing such mechanistic
aspects requires methodologies offering a dynamical treatment of the
protein of interest. Recent applications of experimental methods such
as electron paramagnetic resonance (EPR) and single-molecule Förster
resonance energy transfer (FRET) have shown promise in characterizing
the conformational dynamics of membrane transporters.− Further application of these techniques to multiple transporter
families is expected to greatly enhance the current understanding
of the mechanism of transport. Meanwhile, MD simulations have proven
to be a powerful tool, complementary to experimental approaches, for
characterizing transporter dynamics.

In the context of membrane
transporters, some of the problems that
can be investigated by MD simulations are the study of atomic-scale
details of interactions of the protein, substrate, ions, and water;
substrate–ion coupling and cotransport; the nature of permeation
and binding–unbinding pathways; the effect of titration states
of protein residues or the substrate on the transport mechanism; and
substrate-induced protein conformational changes. Moreover, in conjunction
with other modeling techniques, MD can be employed to provide structural
models for missing states in the transport cycle and to provide a
possible mechanism for structural transitions between major states.,,, Finally, MD simulations provide an extremely powerful method for
characterizing the energetics associated with various processes and
transitions in biomolecular systems. Such calculations are among the
most expensive computations but have been successfully employed, e.g.,
to compare the affinity of binding of ions to various binding sites
in transporters,, and to calculate the free energy profile of substrate translocation
along its binding pathway.,

MD has been most
effective in capturing small-scale structural
changes in membrane transporters, such as gating motions caused by
side chain flipping, loop motions, and the movement of small molecular
species, e.g., water, ions, and, in some cases, the primary substrate
itself. The study of larger-scale changes in transporters using MD
is restricted by the time scales that can be reached using conventional
MD methods. This restriction, coupled with the stochastic nature of
conformational changes, considerably lowers the probability of capturing
global structural changes in MD simulations. While in rare cases large-scale
changes have been observed within a few hundreds of nanoseconds in
equilibrium MD simulations of membrane transporters,, such transitions may be studied by employing biased simulations
to accelerate the process, e.g., by performing SMD or TMD.,,,,

The following sections will describe
the application of MD and
other modeling techniques to the mechanistic investigation of these
five transporter systems, viz., LeuT, vSGLT, GlT, GlpT (all secondary
active transporters), and an ABCT (a primary active transporter).
LeuT, vSGLT, and GlT perform Na+-coupled symport, while
GlpT utilizes a substrate gradient to perform antiport. ABCTs are
primary active transporters that utilize ATP binding and hydrolysis
as a source of energy for substrate transport. The major focus of
each section will be the design of the computational approach and
its application, as well as the nature of the lessons learned from
the application of the methods. We have therefore refrained from providing
a detailed description of specifics of each molecular system and the
results. The reader is encouraged to refer to the original articles
for more details about each system. The spectrum of the conformational
changes characterized in these studies is presented as two classes:
smaller-scale events that are often efficiently sampled by MD simulations
and large-scale motions that rely on extended equilibrium simulations
and/or biased simulations. In the accompanying figures, these two
types of molecular motions have been distinguished by using green
and blue frames, respectively.

Modeling an Unknown State for Neurotransmitter Transporters
The leucine transporter (LeuT) is an amino acid transporter, and
a bacterial homologue of the neurotransmitter sodium symporter (NSS)
family that includes transporters responsible for clearing the synaptic
cleft of neurotransmitters, e.g., serotonin, dopamine, norepinephrine,
and GABA. The NSS family thus includes important drug targets for
the treatment of neurological conditions such as depression, anxiety,
and drug addiction.− LeuT provides the only crystal structure
known for this family and also represents the first example of a unique
fold, termed the LeuT fold, characterized
by a 5+5 inverted-repeat arrangement of TM helices and the presence
of two broken helices in the center. The LeuT fold was subsequently
observed in several other families of transporters, suggesting a possibly
common mechanism of transport despite functional diversity.,, LeuT thus serves as an important
model for the study of the dynamics and mechanism not only for NSS
members but also for the whole family of LeuT fold transporters.

Despite having access to structural information for only the OF state,− until recently, several studies focused
on deciphering the transport mechanism of LeuT have been reported
over the years. The field has particularly benefited from several
collaborative studies between experimental and computational researchers
jointly reporting models of the IF state, and the dynamics
of LeuT relevant to its transport function.,,,

LeuT
function is known to be Na+-dependent, but the
structural and dynamical roles of Na+ ions in the transport
function have emerged only recently. Several simulation studies of
LeuT have addressed the dynamics of the two Na+ ions bound
to LeuT in most of its reported structures. Earlier MD studies coupled with free energy calculations have revealed
that the bound Na+ ions stabilize the binding pocket and
that both ions were required for effective substrate coupling. Structural and energetic factors determining
ion selectivity in LeuT have also been examined., An interesting observation noted in MD studies of LeuT, its homologue
SERT, and other LeuT fold transporters, vSGLT and Mhp1, has been the
spontaneous release of a bound Na+ from the IF state.,,,,, This event
occurs while the substrate is still bound, suggesting the possible
order of release of ions and substrate to the intracellular side.
Furthermore, in simulations of substrate-free LeuT with bound Na+, and in corresponding EPR studies, the presence of Na+ was observed to increase the accessibility of the binding
site that could aid substrate binding, thus suggesting the possible
order of binding of ions and substrate.

The earliest MD studies of LeuT used the OF crystal structure
to
describe the putative substrate binding–unbinding process and
the transport mechanism., SMD simulations in
which forces were applied on the substrate bound to LeuT were performed
to induce its release to the extracellular solution., During the induced translocation of the substrate through the extracellular
vestibule, major barriers to unbinding were offered by interaction
with a bound Na+ ion, aromatic residues (Y108 and F253)
forming an occlusion over the substrate, and a salt bridge (R30 and
D404). Rotation of the side chains of Y108 and F253 was found to allow
opening of the binding site when the substrate exited. The substrate
showed a common unbinding pathway in a majority of the simulations,
suggesting the functional relevance of this pathway. SMD studies of LeuT also revealed for the first time the
location of a putative secondary substrate binding site, which was
later verified experimentally and became a topic for much debate over
its significance to the transport mechanism.,,−,,,

Over the past few years, several crystal structures of LeuT
have
been reported, all representing only the OF state,,− until a recent report in which the IF state structure was captured. While the lack of structures of IF and intermediate
states continued for several years, multiple attempts were made to
model these alternate states of LeuT.,, The absence of crystal structures for homologous
proteins presented a challenge as standard modeling techniques could
not be adopted to generate model structures of the unknown states.
In one of the first computational studies aimed at modeling the unknown
LeuT IF state, a novel approach in which the structure of one-half
of the inverted repeat was switched with the other half, resulting
in a structure that was open to the intracellular side, was adopted. Because the two inverted repeats lacked significant
homology, accurate positioning of residues could not be expected;
however, the TM helix positions provided mechanistic insight. Most
significantly, the interconversion of the OF and IF states was attributed
mostly to the rocking of the TM1–TM2/TM6–TM7 bundle
as a rigid body with respect to the rest of the protein. In another
approach, the substrate was pulled through LeuT toward the intracellular
side using SMD simulations, to induce inward opening. Because this study used the LeuT crystal structure as the
starting conformation, it could record residue–residue interaction
changes and provided information about local interaction network rearrangements
that are possibly involved in the formation of the IF state. In a
later study using extended MD simulations, a comparison of the LeuT
interaction network with that in the IF state of ApcT, a related LeuT
fold transporter, provided details about the common mechanistic aspects
of IF state formation in the LeuT fold., However,
the SMD-based modeling method was limited in capturing larger global
conformational changes that might arise during the transport process.

In a third approach, a modeling methodology in which the aim was
to generate the IF state with much of the structural information of
the OF state intact was devised, while also attempting to capture
local and global structural changes occurring during the formation
of the alternate state. The methodology combined computational techniques
of structure-based alignment, comparative modeling, targeted MD, and
equilibrium MD. The structure of vSGLT, a LeuT-fold transporter in the IF state, was
used as the template for building the IF state model. Structure-based
alignment was performed to align the structurally similar portions
(5+5 TM repeats) between LeuT and vSGLT, and the resulting alignment
was used to generate a preliminary model of IF state LeuT. Rather
than this homology model being used directly as an IF structure for
LeuT, TMD was used to gradually deform key helices in the OF crystal
structure toward the conformation in the IF homology model. The rest
of the protein and side chains were allowed to undergo free dynamics
in their natural environment of water, ions, and membrane, hence incorporating
the effect of the environment on the protein as the transition was
induced and ensuring a better representation
of the complete protein structure in the resulting model. Equilibrium
MD was then performed to obtain a relaxed model of the IF state structure.

During the TMD simulations in which the OF to IF transition was
induced, several local interactions were broken in the intracellular
half, while new ones formed in the extracellular half. In particular,
the rearrangements of hydrogen bonds, salt bridges, and hydrophobic
interactions were monitored through the simulations (Figure A). Conformational hot spots were thus pinpointed,
revealing the structural elements of the transporter that contributed
to the transition (Figure A).

Structural changes of LeuT during the OF to IF transition. (A)
Salt bridge rearrangements captured in the extracellular (EC) and
intracellular (IC) halves of LeuT as the structure transits from the
OF to IF state. Side chain positions before (light) and after (dark)
the transition are shown. Distances between salt bridging residues
show salt bridge formation as closure occurs in the EC half and breakage
as opening occurs in the IC half. (B) OF to IF state transition in
LeuT. Superimposed structures before (transparent) and after (colored)
the transition viewed along the plane of the membrane (left) and perpendicular
to the membrane: the extracellular half (right, top) and intracellular
half (right, bottom). A contact map of interactions broken (black)
and newly formed (red) during the transition, pinpointing conformational
hot spots (green ovals).

The TMD simulations designed for IF model generation
also allowed
the monitoring of global conformational changes that transform the
structure from the OF state to the IF state (Figure B). It should be noted, though,
that the transition pathway observed in such biased simulations does
not necessarily represent the biologically relevant transition pathway,
and further examination of the pathway using parallel computational
or experimental techniques is recommended. Experimental mutagenesis
and accessibility studies using MTS reagents have revealed that the
cytoplasmic lumen in SERT, a mammalian homologue of LeuT, is lined
by residues from TM1, TM5, TM6, and TM8., The TMD-based LeuT IF model successfully captures these observations.
Recent reports of LeuT dynamics using FRET and EPR have identified
important dynamic components, including the role of the outward swinging
of TM1 in the formation of the IF state., The dynamics
of LeuT monitored during simulations agreed with these
observations. These simulations also yielded mechanistic details that
have not been characterized before: in the IF state, Na+ unbinding was observed to
occur before the substrate, suggesting the sequence of events in the
transport cycle; the TM1–TM2/TM6–TM7 bundle was found
to be internally flexible, i.e., did not move as a rigid body as suggested
in an earlier model; and a possible
role for TM2 and TM7 as facilitators was also predicted. Detailed
contact maps (Figure B), indicating the changes
in interactions from the OF to IF state, were generated using the
simulation results, providing an informed starting point for further
mutagenesis studies designed to study the LeuT transport cycle.

The much-awaited IF state crystal structure of LeuT was reported
recently at 3.2 Å resolution. The
structure broadly confirms some predictions about the overall structure
of the IF state from the three modeling attempts described above,,, such as the helices lining the
intracellular opening and the swinging out of TM1 as an important
feature of inward opening. However, the extent of TM1 swinging and
the limited role of other TM helices in comparison to that of TM1
evidenced by this structure had not been addressed by these studies.
The first methodology in which the two halves of the inverted repeat
were switched is computationally inexpensive
and yields a coarse model that can be used to study the secondary
and tertiary structural arrangement. The other two methods, based
on SMD and TMD, respectively, are time-consuming but yield a much higher level of
information in terms of possible residue–residue interaction
changes, dynamics of the ions and substrate, changes in solvent accessibility,
etc. Structural superimposition of the freely available model generated
by the TMD-based method on the crystal
structure resulted in a backbone root-mean-square deviation (rmsd)
of 3.4 Å for all residues, which is reduced to 2.8 Å upon
exclusion of TM1. Considering that in nanosecond-scale simulations
of membrane proteins with low-resolution crystal structures, the rmsd
often reaches 3.0 Å, the model performs fairly well in this comparison.

The LeuT IF state modeling efforts thus provide an example in which
modeling and simulation techniques were used effectively to study
local structural rearrangements (Figure A),
as well as global conformational transitions (Figure B), in membrane transporters. Also, the power of a combination
of approaches such as homology modeling and biased MD with conventional
MD, when any single computational technique is insufficient, is demonstrated.

Sequence of Unbinding Events in Solute Sodium Symporters
The solute sodium symporter (SSS) family consists of secondary active
transporters that couple Na+ symport to the transport of
a wide range of solutes, including sugars, amino acids, vitamins,
and inorganic ions. Members of the SSS
family play crucial roles in human health, and their malfunction is
associated with various metabolic disorders. vSGLT is the first SSS transporter for which high-resolution structures
have been determined., Although it adopts the LeuT
fold, it is functionally divergent from LeuT.

MD studies of
vSGLT have provided much insight into key aspects of the transport
mechanism, i.e., its dynamics and transport mechanism,−, most prominently characterization
of the functional state of the crystallographically captured structure,
the functional importance of the structural element missing in the
crystal structure, and permeation of
water through vSGLT.,

In the first crystal structure
of vSGLT, which was reported to
be a substrate-bound IF state, the position
of the Na+ ion could not be directly resolved, but on the
basis of the structural homology to LeuT for which the position of
the ions had been unequivocally determined, a Na+ ion was also modeled in the reported Protein Data
Bank file for vSGLT. In the crystal
structure, the substrate, galactose, is bound approximately halfway
across the membrane and proposed to be occluded from the cytoplasmic
side by hydrophobic residues, especially Y263 stacking with the pyronose
ring of the substrate (Figure A). Simulation studies, however, strongly suggested
that the state captured in the crystal structure was indeed representing
a Na+-free (Na+-releasing) structure,, likely representing an IF-open state rather than an IF-occluded
state.

Cytoplasmic release of the substrate and
the cotransported ion
in a solute sodium symporter. (A) Overview of the substrate release
trajectory shown during equilibrium MD (pink) and SMD (red). Residues
lining the substrate pathway are shown as sticks. The substrate (galactose)
and the suggested gate residue, Y263, are shown in van der Waals form.
(B) Time evolution of the z coordinate of the Na+ ion during six independent simulations highlighting its spontaneous
unbinding from the putative site in the crystal structure. The blue
bar highlights the region in the vicinity of D189. (C) Position of
the substrate during a 200 ns equilibrium simulation shown using the
maximal and minimal z coordinates (blue solid lines)
and the geometrical center (black solid line) of the substrate. For
comparison, the z position of the geometrical center
of the ring of Y263 (red solid line) is also shown. Two arrows highlight
the two observed substrate unbinding events from the binding site.

In a series of equilibrium simulations (10 ns each)
of vSGLT, starting
from the crystal structure described above, surprisingly, rapid unbinding of Na+ from its reported
binding site was consistently observed in multiple independent runs
(Figure B). This
functionally relevant event was also observed subsequently in simulation
studies reported by other laboratories., On the basis
of these simulations, a low-affinity Na+ binding site was
proposed for the IF state of vSGLT, an attribute that is strongly
corroborated by structural comparison of the site with that in the
OF state of LeuT. Given that in these
simulations the protein did not undergo a major structural deviation
from the reported crystal structure (rmsd of ≤2.5 Å),
the observed spontaneous Na+ release suggests that the
crystal structure of vSGLT is in a Na+-releasing state.

During its release, the ion hovers around
an aspartic acid, D189,
∼4.5 Å from the proposed Na+ binding site in
the crystal structure. The interaction between the Na+ ion
and D189 was consistently observed in the MD simulations.− The functional importance of D189 is supported by experimental studies
of homologous proteins, hSGLT1 and Na+/proline transporter
PutP, where mutation of the corresponding residue results in complex
effects ranging from a significant decrease in the level of Na+-coupled transport to altered
Na+ versus H+ selectivity, supporting the notion that this highly conserved residue
might play a role in Na+ unbinding in SSS transporters.

Subsequent extended equilibrium simulation (200 ns) revealed also
spontaneous unbinding of the substrate from the conformational state
captured in the crystal structure (Figure C). In contrast to the previously proposed
gating role of a tyrosine (Y263) side chain,, the unbinding mechanism captured in our equilibrium simulation does
not rely on the displacement and/or rotation of this side chain. Rather,
during its unbinding, the substrate adopts a curved pathway going
around the side chain of the proposed gate, thereby avoiding the need
for its rotation. The revealed pathway, which can be easily obfuscated
from plain visual examination of the static crystal structure, could
be revealed only through the extended simulations in which natural
thermal fluctuation of the substrate within its binding pocket, assisted
by stepwise hydration of the binding site, resulted in the spontaneous
movement of the substrate along this hidden pathway.

During the spontaneous exit of the substrate from
the binding site,
H-bonds with T431 and N142 appear to facilitate substrate unbinding. As support for their involvement in the exit
pathway, it has been shown that the mutation of the residue corresponding
to N142 in the homologous human protein SGLT1 impairs transport. The residue corresponding to T431 in vSGLT
(T460 in human SGLT1) was even suggested to be a substrate-binding
residue in SGLT1 because its mutation to cysteine altered sugar selectivity
and decreased the affinity for glucose. Interestingly, neither N142 nor T431 appears to contribute directly
to the substrate binding site in the crystal structure, and only the unbinding mechanism and pathway
characterized by the simulations could provide a molecular explanation
for their importance for proper transport function.

Although the substrate exhibits full unbinding from
its crystallographically
determined binding pocket on several occasions during the equilibrium
simulation, it does not completely leave the protein’s lumen
during the simulated time scale, and thus, the unbinding event described
above was only partial. To probe the remainder of the exit pathway
from the protein lumen into the cytoplasmic milieu and to examine
the existence of other barriers along the pathway, SMD simulations
in which the substrate was slowly pulled toward the cytoplasmic solution
were employed (Figure A). These biased simulations were repeated each time starting
from a different snapshot taken from the equilibrium trajectory representing
various configurations of the substrate sampled in the absence of
any forces. The results confirmed that once the substrate avoids the
major obstacle of Y263, an event observed during the equilibrium simulation,
it can smoothly diffuse along the rest of the exit pathway toward
the cytoplasm without facing any major barriers and, importantly,
without requiring any conformational change in the transporter protein.
The observed molecular events clearly indicate that no gating motion
is required for the release of the substrate from the crystallographically
captured structure of the IF state of vSGLT. In other words, this conformation likely represents an open, rather
than occluded, state of the transporter. Several residues, e.g., E68, N142, T431, and N267, facilitate the
substrate’s initial displacement from the binding site, while
along the remainder of the exit pathway, the translocation of the
substrate is facilitated by the sequential formation and breakage
of H-bonds between the substrate and a series of conserved, polar
residues lining the pathway.

Computational
studies of vSGLT−,,− provide a typical example of using MD simulations
to access the
dynamics of small molecules such as ions, water, and the substrate
and thereby to characterize the functional state of crystallographically
determined structures of membrane transporters, a task that is often
not straightforward.

Gating and Substrate–Ion Coupling in the Glutamate Transporter
GlTs [also termed excitatory amino acid transporters (EAATs)] belong
to solute carrier family 1 (SLC1) of neurotransmitter transporters,
which catalyze translocation of neurotransmitters from the synapse
to the cell. The malfunction of GlT
in humans is associated with numerous diseases and pathological states,
including neurodegenerative disorders, epilepsy, schizophrenia, and
traumatic brain injury.− Driven by pre-established electrochemical
ionic gradients, GlT catalyzes the “uphill” translocation
of its substrate. During each transport cycle, one substrate is translocated
along with three Na+ ions. The crystal structures of a
bacterial homologue of GlT (Gltph) in both the IF and OF
states− have provided a structural framework for understanding the transport
mechanism of all GlTs.

These structures have revealed a trimeric
architecture for GlT along with the positions of the substrate and
two of the Na+ binding sites (termed Na1 and Na2 sites)
in each monomer. Although the structures do not provide any information
about the third Na+ binding site (Na3), mutagenesis studies of a mammalian GlT have provided hints about
the putative Na3 site. It has been shown, for instance, that an acidic
residue corresponding to Asp312 in Gltph, which is not
coordinated to any ion in the crystal structure, is involved in binding
to one of the Na+ ions during the transport cycle, suggesting
that this residue is likely involved in the Na3 site. Various experimental
studies− have indicated that the binding of the substrate
or Na+ ions induces conformational changes in GlT that
facilitate the movement of these species inside the transporter. These
studies clearly suggest a coupling between the binding and translocation
of these species during the transport cycle. However, their limited
resolution did not allow one to draw specific conclusions about the
nature of such conformational changes and substrate–Na+ coupling.

To investigate the effect of binding of the
ions and the substrate
on protein dynamics, one would ideally design and perform equilibrium
MD simulations of the protein in the presence of these species initially
placed in the bulk and monitor their movement over time as they diffuse,
find, and bind to their respective binding sites. While such calculations
can, in principle, be done (e.g., see refs (), (), and (−)), and one might even increase
the likelihood of capturing successful events by including a large
number of ligands in the simulations (flooding),,, the time required for free diffusion of
the substrate (or ions) from the bulk into the lumen of the protein
and then into their respective binding sites is usually prohibitively
long, especially when the binding site of interest is buried inside
the protein. Because it was not expected that the complete binding
of the substrate and Na+ ions could be fully captured by
equilibrium MD simulations, a different strategy was taken for the
case of Gltph. Starting from the OF crystal structure, we performed multiple simulations, in which
the substrate and/or different Na+ ions were either kept
or removed at the beginning of each simulation, thereby generating
a set of simulations that included all possible combinations of the
protein, the substrate, and the ions., The goal was
to study the dynamics of the protein in these different “bound”
states and to use the resulting dynamical information to draw conclusions
about the nature of the coupling between the various elements and,
we hope, about the sequence of binding events. These simulations were
performed on membrane-embedded trimeric models, which allowed us to
simulate three different bound states within each simulation systems,
as the individual monomers are believed to function independently
(no cooperativity).

Monitoring structural fluctuations of Gltph in these
simulations revealed the gating dynamics of this transporter.,, Comparison of the dynamics of
the substrate-bound and substrate-free simulations showed a clear
contrast in the dynamics of helical hairpin HP2 in these states (Figure ). In all the simulations performed in the presence
of the substrate, HP2 invariably stays closed, while removing the
substrate results in a large opening motion of HP2 and complete exposure
of the substrate to the extracellular solution (Figure A,B). These results suggest that
HP2 plays the role of the extracellular gate and, more importantly,
that its opening and closure are controlled by substrate binding. A gatinglike motion of HP2, which has also been
observed in an MD study by another laboratory, is supported by the crystal structure of Gltph in the presence of an inhibitor.

Dynamics of
the extracellular gate and substrate–ion coupling
in the glutamate transporter. (A) HP2 loop motions responsible for
extracellular gating. Superimposed snapshots of HP2 (gray) show opening
motions after the removal of the substrate. Yellow and pink show the
closed conformation of HP2 and its open conformation in one of the
last simulation frames, respectively. (B) Time evolution of the rmsds
of helical hairpins HP1 and HP2 in the presence (top) and absence
(bottom) of the substrate. (C) Substrate-induced formation of the
Na2 site (marked with a red oval). The dipole moments (arrows) of
two short helices, from TM7 and HP2, which are misaligned in the substrate-free
state, converge at a point upon substrate binding, creating a highly
negative electrostatic potential for binding of the Na2 ion. (D) Putative
site for Na3. The residues involved in direct coordination of the
ion in this site are labeled.

The simulations also revealed that substrate binding
results in
the formation of one of the Na+ binding sites (Na2 site)
at a position between two short helices. In the apo state, the dipole moments of these helices are not aligned.
When the substrate binds, these two opposing helices align such that
their dipole moments converge on a common spot, resulting in the formation
of the Na2 site (Figure C). These results
suggest that the formation of the Na2 site is likely an event induced
by the binding of the substrate and that substrate binding precedes
that of the Na2 ion. These aspects are both in agreement with experimental
current measurements, indicating that substrate binding allows the
binding of one of the Na+ ions., In addition, the functional role of Na1 in Gltph has
been described in another simulation study employing metadynamics, a nonequilibrium simulation technique used
to reach larger-scale conformational changes.− Metadynamics was used to describe the transition of the OF state
between the open and occluded state. Although using a single Gltph monomer immersed in water represents a drawback in these simulations,
the results indicated that binding of Na1 stabilizes the open conformation,
which is consistent with its facilitatory role in substrate binding.,

To probe potential binding sites for the third Na+ ion
(Na3), for which no binding site has been identified in the crystal
structures, we took advantage of the fast dynamics of water molecules
because they can quickly visit sufficiently polar regions within the
protein matrix. We focused our analysis on water molecules that hydrate
the region around Asp312 during the simulations, as this residue has
been implicated in ion binding based on mutagenesis studies showing that neutralization of this residue
inhibits binding of Na+ to the substrate-free form and
thereby prevents the cycling of the glutamate transporter. A series
of MD simulations were performed, in which individual water molecules
visiting this region were selected one by one and “mutated”
to a Na+ ion. The dynamics of the inserted Na+ ion and its interaction with the surrounding site were monitored, to identify a consensus site to which Na+ ions frequently bind. A putative Na3 site was thus identified,
in which the Na+ ion is coordinated by Asp312, Asn310,
Thr92, and one water molecule (Figure D). The putative Na3 site suggested by the simulations
is strongly supported by recent mutagenesis experiments with EACC1 showing that the T101A mutation (corresponding
to Thr92 in Gltph) dramatically decreases the apparent
affinity of Na+ for empty EAAC1, indicating the direct
involvement of this conserved residue in Na+ binding in
GlTs. In a different computational study, a different binding site for Na3 was proposed on the basis of grand
canonical Monte Carlo and MD simulations, which is ∼8 Å
from our proposed Na3 binding site and is coordinated by Thr314, Ala353,
and Asn401 as well as the bound substrate. This binding site was also
supported by mutagenesis studies showing that mutations of Thr314A
and Asn401A abolish Na+-driven glutamate uptake. Although the two binding sites are different,
their relevance to the transport process, as indicated by experiments,
might indicate that they may become important at different stages
of the transport cycle.

The described simulations for a bacterial
GlT captured some of
the functionally relevant features for this transporter, including
the nature and motion of the extracellular gate at an atomic level,
how its closing and opening are controlled through substrate binding,
and the binding site for Na3. The dynamics of the IF state of Gltph has also been studied with MD simulations, suggesting the involvement of both hairpins HP1 and HP2
in intracellular gating. Moreover, the global conformational changes
during the transition between the OF and IF states have been explored
using the anisotropic network model, revealing two major types of large-scale motions: an asymmetric
stretching and contraction and a symmetric opening and closing of
the three subunits. These theoretical studies, together with the experimentally
characterized mechanistic aspects,,− provide a more complete picture of the transport mechanism in GlTs.

Substrate-Induced Rocker Motion in an Antiporter
GlpT
belongs to the major facilitator superfamily (MFS),, the largest superfamily of secondary active transporters. Found
in all kingdoms of life, MFS transporters include several medically
and pharmacologically important proteins, e.g., efflux pumps conferring
resistance to antibiotics in bacteria and to chemotherapeutics in
cancer cells. GlpT, which couples the
import of glycerol 3-phosphate (G3P) across the cytoplasmic membrane
to the export of inorganic phosphate (Pi), was among the
first structurally characterized members of the MFS.− Thus, the crystal structure of GlpT has been also used as a structural
and functional model for other MFS proteins.,

MFS transporters typically consist of a single polypeptide
chain folded into a pseudosymmetric pair of helical bundles each composed
of six transmembrane α-helices.,, The crystal structures available for MFS transporters− support a “rocker-switch”-like motion of the two bundles
during the transport cycle.,− Following the proposal that MFS transporters
share the inverted repeat topology observed in other transporter families,, a structural model of lactose permease (LacY) from MFS in the OF
conformation was obtained by swapping the conformations of inverted-topology
repeats found in the protein, which conforms to the alternating access
model both theoretically and experimentally.

GlpT has been crystallized without a bound substrate, i.e.,
in
its apo state, and only an approximate
putative binding site for the substrate could be inferred from the
structure. As substrate binding is believed to be coupled to protein
conformational changes relevant to the transport cycle, describing
the binding mode of the substrate in a detailed manner is one of the
first steps in a mechanistic characterization of GlpT.

Docking
is one of the most popular computational approaches used
for identifying potential binding sites and favorable ligand–substrate
poses. In docking, the favorable locations, orientations, and conformations
of the ligand within the protein of interest are probed through efficient
search algorithms and ranked on the basis of scoring functions., Despite computational efficiency, most docking procedures at best
only partially take into account the intrinsic flexibility of the
protein, an important component that we have only recently been able
to start to take into consideration., Furthermore,
docking cannot provide information about the nature of the binding
pathway and mechanism. MD simulations, on the other hand, allow for
direct observation of the binding process and a less biased description
of binding sites and modes. They are, however, computationally much
more expensive, with a nontrivial chance of not yielding any answer
to the problem, as diffusion and binding of the substrate to its respective
binding site might take a long time. Given the highly charged nature
of the substrate(s) in GlpT, and the expectation that strong electrostatic
forces might be involved, we decided to test whether equilibrium MD
simulations might be able to capture the binding mode and site relying
only on unbiased diffusion of the substrates from their initial position
at the mouth of the lumen to the binding site.,

Another important aspect of these simulations, which is often
important
for other biomolecular problems, is the choice of the protonation
states of titratable groups. Conventional MD simulations cannot accommodate
titration state fluctuations in response to changes in the local environment.
The majority of the reported MD studies, including our own, therefore,
have considered only a “fixed” set of protonation states
for the titratable groups of the molecular systems of interest. To
set these protonation states during the initial setting of the system,
a variety of algorithms (available in different programs and through
various web interfaces) have been developed that allow the user to
quickly estimate pKa values of residues
in the presence of the rest of the molecular system.− Once set, the protonation states of the residues will not change
over the course of the MD simulations, even though significant structural
changes that might alter the local environment of these residues might
indeed occur, in particular in extended simulations. To alleviate
this problem to some degree, one might reassess the protonation states
at certain intervals and if needed readjust them before continuing
the simulations. A more systematic treatment is provided by the so-called
“constant-pH” simulation protocols that allow a more
dynamical, on the fly assignment and adjustment of the titration states
of chemical groups.− These simulations are, however, much more expensive and do not yet
fully cover the wide range of titratable groups available in proteins,
lipids, etc.

For GlpT, one of the main groups that was expected
to be heavily
affected by the problem of fixed protonation described above is the
substrate itself. Having in mind the high efficiency of running multiple
parallel simulations when one uses a large number of processors, we
opted to treat each physiologically relevant titration state of the
substrates of interest in separate simulations., The second pKa value for the substrates
of GlpT (Pi and G3P) is very close to neutral pH; that
is, monovalent and divalent forms of both substrates have approximately
equal concentrations under physiological conditions. To account for
this, multiple simulations each with a different titration state of
each substrate (Pi–, Pi2–, G3P–, and G3P2–) were performed., These simulations
consistently revealed both local and global conformational changes
that accompany substrate binding, thus characterizing substrate binding
and protein dynamics simultaneously (Figure ).

Spontaneous substrate binding and substrate-induced conformational
changes in GlpT. (A) Trajectory of Pi binding (left) starting
from its initial position (van der Waals representation, red) to its
final binding site (blue). K80 acts as a “fishing hook”,
catching the substrate at the mouth of the lumen and escorting it
to the binding site at the apex of the lumen where it mainly interacts
with R45 and H165. Distances between Pi and key residues
in the binding site (right). No direct contact between Pi and R269 is observed during the simulations. (B) Substrate-induced
helical motion in GlpT. H5 and H11 become straight upon substrate
binding on the cytoplasmic side, resulting in partial occlusion of
the transporter in this region. Three superimposed conformations of
H5 and H11 (left): initial (t = 0; black) and final
(t = 50 ns; red) along with an intermediate snapshot
(t = 25 ns; blue). Distances between the H5 and H11
helices (right) measured by Cα atoms of representative
residues located on the same x–y plane. All
substrate binding simulations result in closure of the cytoplasmic
side, while apo system simulations do not. Different substrate binding
simulations are colored differently.

Experimental mutagenesis of highly conserved residues
in the putative
binding site (R45, R269, H165, and K80) results in the loss of binding
and transport. Moreover, unlike all other
arginine residues, which could be mutated to lysines without impairing
function, residues corresponding to R45 and R269 in a homologous protein
(UhpT) were shown to be vital for the function. The spontaneous substrate binding observed consistently
in all the simulations not only supports the binding site proposed
on the basis of the crystal structure but also demonstrates the dynamics
and distinct role of each residue., The simulations
revealed that K80 functions as a “hook” in recruiting
and escorting substrates from the mouth to the apex of the lumen,
aspects consistently observed in all the simulations (Figure A). The phosphate moiety rapidly associates with
R45 in the apex whose guanidinium group acts like a “fork”
stabilizing the substrate in its binding site. Moreover, the hydroxyl
groups of three conserved tyrosine residues (Y38, Y42, and Y76) residing
below the guanidinium group of R45 form a “cage”-like
binding pocket providing hydrogen bonding. The role of these conserved
tyrosines was previously suspected to be only maintaining the basicity
of the binding site., The simulations, however, characterized
this “tyrosine cage” as a part of the binding site.
R269 was also suspected to contribute to substrate binding in a manner
similar to that of R45, because of their symmetric arrangement in
the crystal structure. However, R269 did not directly bind the substrate
in any of the simulations., Given the experimentally
established importance of R269 for function, the absence of its direct interaction with the substrate immediately
after substrate binding as observed in the simulations suggests that
it might play a role in later stages of the transport cycle. Furthermore, the substrate failed to diffuse
into the binding site upon in silico neutralization
of R269, suggesting that the positive charge of this residue makes
an important contribution to the attractive positive electrostatic
potential of the lumen.

Several
experimentally testable hypotheses about the substrate
binding site emerged from these simulations. Two distinct components
of substrate–protein interactions could be identified: phosphate–GlpT
interaction identified in both Pi2– and
G3P2– simulations and glycerol–GlpT
interactions identified only in the G3P2– simulations. Binding affinities measured
experimentally for various mutants clearly verified the predictions
made on the basis of the simulations; while mutation of the residues
proposed to bind the phosphate moiety disrupts the binding of both
Pi and G3P, mutation of glycerol-interacting residues disrupts
only G3P binding, with no effect on Pi binding. Therefore, the first component of the binding site
accounts for general recognition of phosphate-containing species,
while the second component confers higher binding affinity to G3P.

In addition to the local conformational
changes during substrate
recruitment, several salt bridge rearrangements also occur as a result
of substrate binding. Salt bridges play important roles in transporter
conformational changes likely by stabilizing different functional
states. The closed periplasmic side of GlpT is kept together by a
salt bridge network formed by K46 on the N-terminal half and D274
and E299 on the C-terminal half. These residues are necessary for
transport but do not contribute directly to substrate binding. The simulations show that substrate binding
disrupts this salt bridge network, primarily by manipulating K46.
Perturbation of the salt bridges upon substrate binding has been also
reported for the mitochondrial ADP/ATP carrier (AAC),, suggesting a general mechanistic element for how substrate binding,
particularly for charged substrates, might facilitate the progression
of larger-scale conformational changes.

Simulations of GlpT
provide one of the few examples in which functionally
relevant large-scale motions were also captured upon substrate binding. Two initially bent helices (H5 and H11) become
straight upon substrate binding on their cytoplasmic sides, partially
closing the mouth of the lumen (Figure A). Interestingly, these helices appear to be inherently
more flexible than the other helices in GlpT when simulated individually. These helical conformational changes were observed
only in the presence of the substrate, i.e., not in simulations, indicating
their substrate-dependent nature. The
resulting structure is partially closed to both sides of the membrane, and, therefore, reminiscent of a “substrate-occluded”
state inferred from the “alternating-access mechanism”.

Simulations described in this section elucidated
several functionally
relevant molecular events and provided a dynamical view for an MFS
transporter. These events include the coupling between substrate binding
and the onset of protein conformational changes along the required
alternating-access mechanism. These observations detailing the molecular
interactions have been strongly supported by the experimental measurements
designed to test and verify them.

Conformational Response of ABC Transporters to ATP Hydrolysis
ABC transporters make up a superfamily of primary active transporters
found in almost all organisms and responsible for essential processes
such as acquisition of nutrients, removal of hazardous molecules,
and homeostasis of a wide variety of compounds. Both normal activity and malfunction of different ABC transporters
have been directly implicated in many diseases, most prominently in
cystic fibrosis, and in the development
of multidrug resistance in cancer cells and pathogenic organisms.

Most functional ABC transporters are
composed of at least four subunits: two transmembrane (TM) domains
where the transport process takes place and two cytoplasmic nucleotide
binding domains (NBDs) providing the energy required for active transport
(Figure ). Although for a long time, all ABC
transporters were assumed to share the same molecular mechanism, recently
accumulating evidence suggests that the mechanisms might vary from
one subfamily to another.− Despite the structural and likely mechanistic
discrepancies among different ABC transporters, their NBDs are highly
conserved and are likely responding to ATP binding and hydrolysis
similarly. That is, as evidenced by many crystal structures,, the NBDs form a closed dimer upon ATP binding, which opens after
ATP hydrolysis, a scheme commonly described in different mechanistic
models.,− The change in the dimerization
state of the NBDs upon ATP binding and hydrolysis is the driving force
for the transport as these events are coupled to different conformational
states of the TM domains and their interconversion between the IF
and OF states.

The conformational response of NBDs to ATP binding
and hydrolysis
has been best demonstrated by the crystal structures of the isolated
NBDs from the maltose transporter (MalK)., The observed conformations for the NBDs within the context of a
full transporter for several ABC transporters are also consistent
with this picture.,, MalK has been crystallized as an ATP-bound, closed dimer, which appears to convert to an open dimer when
Mg2+ is supplied to the crystallizing solution to allow
for ATP hydrolysis. The structure of
the ADP-bound form of the MalK dimer is clearly in an open form. However,
this structure does not establish whether dimer opening is an immediate
result of ATP hydrolysis or requires the hydrolysis products, Pi, to be released from the NBDs. Furthermore, protein–nucleotide
interactions during dimer opening cannot be derived from the static
pictures provided by these crystal structures. Moreover, because there
are two nucleotide binding sites in the NBDs, it has been debated
whether ATP hydrolysis in both active sites is required for dimer
opening and, if so, whether simultaneous or sequential hydrolysis
events in the two binding sites constitute the mechanism. The dynamical
view provided by atomistic MD simulations thus makes it an optimal
tool for exploring the detail of the structural transitions constituting
the posthydrolysis events.

To investigate the conformational
changes after ATP hydrolysis,
the bound ATP was hydrolyzed in silico to ADP and
Pi at either or both of the binding sites in several MalK
simulations. This important biochemical
reaction (ATP hydrolysis) can be conveniently modeled in MD simulations.
After an initial equilibration phase of the ATP-bound system, we stopped
the simulations and, using the positions of the three phosphate groups
as a reference, converted ATP to ADP and Pi through breaking
the bond between the γ- and β-phosphates. The proper number
of hydrogens and oxygens were added to account for the hydrolytic
nature of the reaction and to model the hydrolysis products in their
relevant titration states. The simulations were then resumed with
the new system. It was found that after the ATP is hydrolyzed, the
nascent Pi moves quickly and significantly away from the
β-phosphate of ADP, an event that can be attributed to the electrostatic
repulsion between these two separate molecular species. Meanwhile,
the ATP-associated Mg2+ cofactor moves between the produced
ADP and Pi, so that it loses the coordination of a highly
conserved glutamine residue (Q82) of the NBD. The nascent Pi, on the other hand, loses a critical hydrogen bond to a strictly
conserved serine (S135) in the opposite MalK monomer (Figure A). Because the NBD dimer is held together largely
by the interactions between the ATP and both of the two NBD monomers,
the loss of a key H-bond at the dimer interface as a result of ATP
hydrolysis destabilizes the dimer interface to a degree that eventually
results in dimer opening, typically in 30–70 ns. The opening
of the nucleotide binding sites at the dimeric interface can be clearly
demonstrated by the distance between the two highly conserved ATP
binding motifs, one from each NBD monomer (Figure B).

Conformational changes induced by ATP hydrolysis in the NBD of
ABC transporters. (A) The local rearrangements of the nucleotide binding
site induced by ATP hydrolysis, in particular disruption of a key
hydrogen bond between the γ-phosphate and a serine residue (the
thick dotted line in the left panel) at the dimer interface, eventually
trigger the separation of the two monomers. The distance between the
hydrogen bond donor and the acceptor in each binding site is shown
at the right. (B) Global conformational change induced by ATP hydrolysis.
In this particular simulation, the opening of the dimer is evident
at both nucleotide binding sites. The distances between two nucleotide
binding motifs at the dimer interface are recorded as an indicator
of the degree of dimer opening.

As any other microscopic molecular event, dimer
opening is a stochastic
process; the opening time varies in different simulations, and any
of the two nucleotide binding sites (not necessarily the site at which
ATP has been hydrolyzed) may open first. Closer examination of the
trajectories revealed the origin of the stochasticity: dimer opening
requires simultaneous disruption of several H-bonds between the nucleotide
and the opposite NBD. As each H-bond
exhibits an independent pattern of formation and breaking, which is
facilitated by and also coupled to random collisions of the surrounding
water molecules, simultaneous breaking of all H-bonds in each simulation
is observed to happen on a different time scale.

These simulations characterize the sequence of molecular
events
in the nucleotide binding sites following ATP hydrolysis that eventually
lead to separation of the NBD monomers. In addition, they provide
novel insight into the ambiguity about the stoichiometry between ATP
hydrolysis and substrate transport: it is possible to induce NBD opening
with only one ATP hydrolyzed in an NBD dimer. Because NBD opening
results in the conformational changes in the TM domains, it is suggested
that hydrolysis of only one of the two bound ATP molecules may be
sufficient for interconversion of the transporter between the OF and
IF states and thus to drive substrate translocation. This conclusion
might explain the functionality of several ABC transporters with one
degenerate nucleotide binding site, in
which the ATP binding capability of both sites is preserved but hydrolytic
activity is present in only one of the sites.

The conversion
of ATP to ADP and has also been used in the simulations
of the isolated NBD dimers of other ABC transporters., Despite the use of lengthy simulations on multiple replicates, NBD
dimer opening was not observed in those studies,, possibly because of specific simulation conditions, including the
choice of the protonation state of the nucleotide. On the other hand,
NBD dimer opening has been captured with MD simulations when the effect
of ATP hydrolysis was approximated by either complete removal of the
nucleotide− or replacement of the nucleotide with only
ADP (that is, without the inclusion of Pi)., A further separation between NBDs has also been demonstrated in
simulations starting with a nucleotide-free, semiopen NBD dimer.

The simulations described in this section
exemplify some of the
ATP-induced large-scale conformational changes in isolated NBDs of
ABC transporters that have been successfully captured by equilibrium
MD simulations. For an intact ABC transporter embedded in a membrane,
it is much more difficult to capture similar conformational changes
within the limited time scales of MD, because of the close coupling
of the motions of the NBD and the TM domains, with the latter being
further dampened by the membrane. As a result, NBD opening within
the context of a full ABC transporter has been observed in only a
small number of previous MD studies,,, while the majority of such studies report no significant
opening of the NBDs upon replacement of ATP with ADP.,,, Therefore, a full description of conformational changes underlying
the complete transport cycle is still beyond the reach of conventional
MD simulations, and one has to resort to more advanced simulation
techniques (e.g., nonequilibrium methods) to investigate such structural
transitions within currently feasible computational resources.

Concluding Remarks
The scope of molecular simulation
as a biophysical technique has
significantly expanded in recent years. At present, all areas of modern
biomolecular sciences benefit from close integration of simulation
technologies. In this review, using a number of membrane transporters,
we have exemplified the application of these methodologies to the
investigation of biomolecular dynamics and function. Molecular simulation
techniques are highly useful when employed hand in hand with experiments.
MD simulation techniques have been shown to be useful not only in
explaining experimental observations but also in making predictions
that can be tested experimentally. Furthermore, as in other research
methods, the obtained results from simulation studies can be affected
by the approximations and limitations of the method, and therefore,
it is important to, when possible, verify and test the models and
hypotheses generated by simulation studies through experiments. Given
this, the examples in this review as well as many other studies demonstrate
that because of the uniquely high spatial and temporal resolutions
of MD methods, carefully designed simulations can provide insight
that would be otherwise inaccessible. The detailed pictures of molecular
events visualized by molecular simulations are by and large impossible
to elucidate using currently available experimental techniques. As
technological advancements continue at a rapid pace, simulation techniques
are set to become a nearly essential analytical tool for biophysical
investigations.

The authors declare no
competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
We acknowledge computer time at XSEDE resources (MCA06N060),
as well as computer time on Anton, at PSC (MCB100017P).

