The epidermal growth factor
(EGF) receptor (EGFR) is a member of the ErbB family of receptor tyrosine
kinases., The EGFR signaling network contributes to
a number of processes important to cancer development and progression,
including cell proliferation, angiogenesis, and metastatic spread.
EGFR overexpression and truncation have
been observed in a number of common cancers, including brain, lung,
breast, colon, and prostate, giving credence to the notion that a
molecular understanding of EGFR activation will yield clinical benefit.
EGFR signaling is generally regarded to be initiated by ligand binding
to the extracellular region, which leads to receptor dimerization, conformational rearrangements within preformed
complexes− and higher-order oligomerization−. Subsequent
to kinase activation and autophosphorylation, cytoplasmic adaptors
are recruited to the EGFR cytoplasmic tail.− Whether these processes are influenced by the size of the EGFR cell-surface
clusters is an important question. Here, we address this question
with a focus on adaptor binding, which is the first step after receptor
activation and connects receptor activation to its intracellular signaling
cascades.

Grb2 is a pivotal adaptor first discovered to physically
link phosphorylated
EGFR to the Ras signaling pathway, through the
guanine nucleotide exchange factor Sos. Grb2 overexpression has been found in breast cancer cells. Since the initial discovery, Grb2 has been linked
to a host of other cellular pathways including the actin cytoskeleton
and endocytosis.

Theoretical studies
suggest the possibility that EGFR clustering
into subcellular domains (or perhaps protein islands) may indeed influence
the binding of cytoplasmic adaptors such as Grb2. Comparison of randomly dispersed EGFR dimers and clustered
EGFR distributions predicted the retention of EGFR–Grb2 complexes
in clusters for a longer period than the randomly distributed dimeric
EGFR distributions. Consequently, it is important to measure the cluster
size of adaptor-bound EGFR and to determine whether there is a relationship
between adaptor binding and receptor cluster size.

We have made
use of a method developed in our earlier work to determine
the relative cluster size of complexed versus uncomplexed molecules
on the surface of cells. The method, called
FRET–FLIM–ICS, combines
two well-established techniques: (1) lifetime-detected (FLIM) FRET, which can be used to measure complex formation,
and (2) image correlation spectroscopy (ICS),− which can be used to determine cluster densities
and sizes. Sorkin and co-workers previously established that FRET
can be used to detect interactions between EGFR and Grb2, but no estimates
of cluster sizes were made in that study.

To ascertain the relative importance of dimers versus higher-order
oligomers, one requires a model system wherein higher-order oligomerization
has been established and characterized. Such a system is provided
by murine BaF/3 cells stably transfected with EGFR coupled at the
C-terminus to an enhanced GFP tag (EGFR–eGFP). In prior work
with this system, we found that EGFR–eGFP is predominantly
dimeric in the absence of ligand (with less than 10% of EGFR–eGFP
being monomeric) and forms phosphorylated tetramers upon exposure
to ligand.,, The results
reported here were obtained using two related BaF/3 cell lines: the
cell line used in prior work, which expresses
EGFR–eGFP at physiological levels (i.e., 50 000 to 70 000
copies per cell), and a new cell line expressing both EGFR–eGFP
and Grb2–mRFP.

Our report is organized as follows. First,
we present FLIM data
for EGFR–eGFP BaF/3 cells and EGFR–eGFP/Grb2–mRFP
BaF/3 cells with different combinations of EGF stimulation. Using
the cell-phasor approach to lifetime microscopy,− we detected EGF-dependent FRET
between EGFR–eGFP and Grb2–mRFP. Second, we present
the results of FRET–FLIM–ICS analysis of individual
EGFR–eGFP/Grb2–mRFP BaF/3 cells. The results indicate
that Grb2–mRFP associated with EGF-EGFR–eGFP complexes
that are more than 4-fold brighter than EGF-EGFR–eGFP complexes
not associated with Grb2–mRFP. The brightness ratio, as well
as Grb2–mRFP association with EGFR–eGFP, correlates
positively with EGFR–eGFP cluster density. Third, we present
a rule-based model, which we have used to interpret our experimental
data. The model is an extension of our earlier model and now includes EGFR–Grb2 binding in addition to
the processes considered in the original model (i.e., ligand–receptor
binding, self-interactions capable of mediating receptor oligomerization,
and receptor autophosphorylation). In the extended model, receptors
are considered to be bivalent, with sites of self-interaction in the
ectodomain and the cytoplasmic domain. The model allows for the formation
of extended polymer-like chains (up to tetramers) as well as the formation
of a cyclic receptor tetramer. Oligomers larger than dimers emerge
through a combination of ectodomain–ectodomain and kinase–kinase
interactions. Significantly, in agreement with our new experimental
observations, the model predicts that Grb2 associates predominantly
with EGFR tetramers. We conclude that ligand-induced EGFR tetramers
can play an important role in sequestering Grb2, Grb2-associated proteins,
and possibly other proteins that directly interact with phosphorylated
EGFR.

Experimental Procedures
Construction of Grb2–mRFP Plasmid
Human Grb2
(growth factor receptor-bound protein-2) transcript variant 1, as
10 μg of transfection-ready DNA, was purchased from OriGene
(catalog no. SC111933) in the vector pCMV6-XL5. Grb2 was amplified
from the Origene clone using the Invitrogen Pfx kit according to manufacturer’s
instructions with the following primers: forward 5′ GGA TAC
GTA GGG TGG CAT TGT GTG TCC CAG (incorporating a SnaB1 site) and reverse 5′ TGA GAC GTT CCG GTT CAC GGG GGT GAC
ATA. The PCR product was purified and cloned into pPCRScript Amp,
and resulting clones were sequenced. A correct forward-orientation
clone was then cloned into pMonoRed using HindIII
and SacII. Positive clones were identified by analytical
restriction enzyme digest and then confirmed with sequencing. Grb2-pMonoRed
was further subcloned into pBABE, a puromycin vector. The fragment
was amplified by PCR using the same forward primer as was used previously
and the reverse primer 5′ TGA GTC GAC TTA GGC GCC GGT GGA GTG
GCG. A band of the correct size was excised from an agarose gel and
purified used a QIAGEN gel extraction kit per the manufacturer’s
instructions. Both pBABE and the PCR fragment were digested with Sal1 and SnaB1, ligated, and transformed.
The resulting Grb2–RFP–pBABE clones were confirmed by
analytical digests and sequencing.

Cells and Reagents
The murine hemopoietic cell line
BaF/3 expressing C-terminally tagged EGFR–eGFP constructs has
been described previously. BaF/3 cells
expressing EGFR–eGFP and mRFP–Grb2 were produced by
cotransfection of EGFR–eGFP and mRFP–Grb2 plasmids.
Murine EGF was purified from mouse submaxillary glands as described
previously.

Live-Cell Microscopy
Suitable clones of BaF/3 cells
(transfected with EGFR–eGFP or cotransfected with EGFR–eGFP
and mRFP–Grb2) were selected using flow cytometry as described
previously. Cells from each clone were
collected by centrifugation (5 mL culture, 1400 rpm, 4 min, 4 °C),
serum starved for 3 h at 37 °C in serum-free medium, and then
resuspended in PBS containing 0.25% BSA and 10 μM phenyl arsine
oxide (to block receptor internalization−). Half of the cell suspension
was treated with EGF (final concentration: 16 nM) and half with an
equivalent volume of buffer. After 20 min, the cells were aliquoted
onto a coverslip of an inverted chamber (ambient conditions, ca. 23
°C) and imaged with a frequency-domain lifetime-imaging microscope
(100× NA1.2 oil objective, 470 nm LED, FITC filter block, Nikon
TE2000U microscope; Nikon Inc., Japan) coupled to a LIFA lifetime
attachment (Lambert Instruments, The Netherlands). Lifetime images
were corrected for instrument response (pixel-dependent instrument
phase and modulation) with a solution of rhodamine 6G in distilled
water (lifetime: 4.1 ns). BaF/3 cells
(nontransfected) were also measured to determine the lifetime characteristics
of cell background fluorescence.

Data Analysis
FLIM
An intensity threshold was applied to isolate
the fluorescence from the BaF/3 cells. The fluorescence lifetime measurements
were represented in two different ways. First, to get an indication
of trends, the average phase lifetime and average modulation lifetime
were determined for each BaF/3 cell along with the average values
for a number of cells. The second approach utilized the AB plot (also referred to as phasor or polar plot) to display
the lifetime experiments graphically. This plot represents an experiment
by a point in 2D space defined by x = m cos φ and y = m sin φ
(where φ is the phase and m is the modulation
of the fluorescence signal). This graphical approach has the advantage
that the type of fluorescence decay (simple, complex, or excited-state
reaction/solvent relaxation) and the complexity of the system trajectory
(binary or more complex) can be deduced visually without further analysis.
The phasor of single-exponential-decaying fluorophores lies on a semicircle
described by m = cos φ that intersects with
points (0,0), (0.5,0.5) and (1,0). Phasors from heterogeneous fluorescence
decays lie in the region within the semicircle and follow the inequality m &lt; cos φ. The linear combination of two phasors
is described by a linear trajectory in AB space. This enables the
distinction between optical mixing of two species and FRET to be made.

FRET–FLIM–ICS with Two Species
The FRET–FLIM–ICS
procedure for two species was outlined in two previous publications., In essence, three images (phase, modulation, and intensity) are
converted into two images: one that represents the spatial intensity
distribution from the FRET species and the other the image of the
non-FRET species.

For a given phasor, r(x,y), the fractional fluorescence from
the FRET states, fFRET, is given bywhere r(x,y)NFRET is the (constant)
phasor for the non-FRET state and r(x,y)FRET is the (constant) phasor for
the FRET state. These phasor values are fixed and determined using
global analysis procedures as outlined.,

The
fluorescence of the FRET species, IFRET, is a function of the total intensity, ITOT, and the fractional fluorescence resulting from the FRET species, fFRET, according to eq ,

A similar relationship pertains to the non-FRET
species, INON-FRET

Applying
eqs – to each
pixel enables fluorescence images of FRET and non-FRET states
to be produced. Image correlation spectroscopy techniques are then
applied to the fluorescence images representing the FRET and non-FRET
species.

The density of clusters (number of FRET clusters per
beam area)
containing molecules undergoing FRET is given by the reciprocal of
the amplitude of the spatial autocorrelation function (g(0))

The cluster density of molecules not undergoing FRET is given
by

If the expression level of receptors is known, then the brightness
or oligomeric state of the FRET and non-FRET clusters, BFRET and BNON-FRET,
can be
determined

A more robust measure,
which does
not require knowledge of expression
level, is the brightness ratio or BR, which is a function of the measured
cluster densities (CDFRET and CDNFRET), fractional
FRET fluorescence (fFRET), and lifetimes
of the FRET and non-FRET states (τFRET and τNFRET)

Equation  can be written
in more compact
form using concentration fraction ratioswhere fraction/(1 –
fraction) is equal to τNFRETfFRET/τFRET(1 – fFRET).

The brightness ratio is a particularly useful
index if there is
a correlation between the occurrence of FRET and oligomerization or
dissociation. BR = 1 implies no correlation between FRET and oligomeric
state, BR &gt; 1 implies oligomerization is linked to FRET, and BR
&lt;
1 implies that the lower-order oligomers are associated with FRET.

FRET–FLIM–ICS with Three Species
The
total phasor for FRET, non-FRET, and background species is given by
the equationThe symbols have been defined
above (see eq ) and r(x,y)BK represents the phasor
for the background fluorescence.

Subtracting the background
phasor from both sides we have

Similar
to the two-species case, the phasor values are fixed, and
NFRET and BK can be determined from cells containing donor-only and
untransfected cells, respectively. The FRET phasor can be determined
using global analysis methods using the approaches previously described., By inversion of eq  (using the cosine and
sine components of the phasor), the fractional fluorescence contributions
from FRET and NFRET can be extracted. Using the values of fFRET and fNFRET,
the procedures outlined for the two-species case can then be followed.

Geometric Transformation of Phasor Approach
If the
components of the non-FRET, background, and FRET phasor values are
known, then eq  can be solved exactly to yield
the fraction of three species (i.e., two equations and two unknowns).
An alternative procedure based on the linear properties of the phasor
representation itself can be utilized that essentially subtracts the
contributions from the background and non-FRET states without explicit
knowledge of the FRET values. The steps required to achieve this are
(i) to add a constant phase to all pixels in the phase image Δ
= (π/2 – arctan((m sin φNFRET – m sin φBK)/(m cos φNFRET – m cos φBK)), creating a new m cos(φi + Δ) image, and then (ii) to subtract a constant value (m cos(φb + Δ)) from all pixels in
the m cos(φi + Δ) image. In
essence, this rotates and translates the phasors such that the line
connecting the background and non-FRET phasors is parallel to the y axis and intersects the origin, making (m cos φ)NFRET and (m cos φ)BK both zero. The transformed M cos φ
image then takes the form

For a constant FRET
phasor value ((m cos(φ + Δ)FRET), the transformed M cos φ is proportional
to fFRET, which is the fraction FRET species
in the pixel. Because
of this proportionality, knowledge of the actual FRET phasor value
is not required for the subsequent ICS analysis.

Model
A rule-based model reported earlier was
extended to include one new rule for Grb2 interaction with phosphorylated
EGFR (pEGFR) (Figures  and ). This rule is associated with two rate constants and corresponding
mass-action rate laws for Grb2–pEGFR association and dissociation.
The rate constants were set at values consistent with an equilibrium
dissociation constant (0.713 μM) and a dissociation rate constant
(0.31/s) reported in the literature. In
addition to these parameters, a copy number for Grb2 was also introduced
to the model. This parameter was adjusted to account for the high
percentage of EGFR–eGFP bound to Grb2–mRFP observed
in our experiments. The model was formulated using BNGL; it was simulated
using BioNetGen. A model specification
that can be processed by BioNetGen is provided as a plain-text file
in the . The file
includes parameter estimates, annotation, and simulation instructions.

Proteins
(EGF, EGFR, and Grb2), EGFR component states, and protein–protein
interfaces considered in our computational model. The EGFR ectodomain
is taken to be free or bound to EGF. A cytoplasmic domain of EGFR,
comprising the juxtamembrane region (JM) and kinase domain, is taken
to be locked (i.e., unavailable for interaction) or freed (i.e., available
for interaction). The C-terminal tail of EGFR is taken to contain,
as a simplification, a single docking site for Grb2, which can be
unphosphorylated (Y) and inactive or phosphorylated (pY) and active.

Illustration of the rules for interactions in
our computational,
rule-based model. The model, which captures the mass-action chemical
kinetics of the indicated interactions, consists of 16 rules, which
are either reversible (and associated with two rate constants) or
unidirectional (and associated with a single rate constant). Each
rule represents an interaction. The glyphs used here to represent
proteins and protein components are the same as those presented in
Figure . Here, in illustrating a rule, we
use a question mark (?) to indicate a missing protein component or
component state that is not depicted explicitly; the missing component
or state is taken to have zero influence on the interaction represented
by the rule. Similarly, representation of an EGFR ectodomain by a
dotted triangle is meant to indicate that the ectodomain may or may
not be present in a complex, without influence on the interaction
of concern. The model is the same as that presented in our earlier
report except that a rule for Grb2 binding
to phosphorylated EGFR has been added. This rule is illustrated in
the lower left box.

The model has several
notable features. It includes a cyclic EGFR
tetramer and a ligand-triggered conformation change that frees the
EGFR kinase domain to participate in kinase–kinase interactions,
which are necessary for kinase activity. A 3D structural model with
atomic resolution recently constructed by C.-S. Tung suggests that the EGFR tetramer considered in the model
can feasibly form. Moreover, the model is consistent with observed
negative cooperativity in EGF binding to intact EGFR as well as positive
linkage between EGF dose and the size of EGF-induced EGFR clusters.

Results
FRET–FLIM
Studies of the Interaction of EGFR–eGFP
with Grb2–mRFP
Previously, Sorkin et al. used FRET microscopy to image the association
of EGFR–CFP with Grb2–YFP in porcine aortic cells using
filter-based fluorescence imaging. FRET is particularly sensitive
to such interactions because of the highly nonlinear dependence of
FRET rate, R, on distance, D, between
donor and acceptor labels (R is proportional to D–6 on the length scale of 1–10
nm). To quantitatively measure the interaction between EGFR–eGFP
and Grb2–mRFP in BaF/3 cells, we utilized lifetime-detected
FRET–FLIM microscopy, which enables a robust evaluation of
FRET efficiency based on the quenching of donor lifetime in the presence
of acceptor.

Table  summarizes the time-resolved
fluorescence parameters obtained using frequency-domain FLIM from
measurements on several sets of cells. Figure  portrays the time-resolved experiments in terms of a polar plot,
which is also called an AB or phasor plot.−

FLIM data of living BaF/3 cell populations
represented on a phasor
diagram. (A) Phasor diagram over a limited data range. (B) Phasor
diagram on an expanded scale. Individual data points represent the
cell-phasor components [x = m cos(φ); y = m sin(φ)] averaged from &gt;20
cells.
Data points correspond to BaF/3 cells transfected with EGFR–eGFP
alone (blue diamond), EGFR–eGFP + EGF (second blue diamond),
EGFR–eGFP/Grb2–mRFP (red-filled diamond), EGFR–eGFP/Grb2–mRFP
+ EGF (red-filled triangle), and untransfected control cells (blue
filled circle).

Summary
of FLIM Parameters for EGFR–GFP
in Living BaF/3 Cells
ligand	adaptor	τphase	τmod	m cos(φ)	m sin(φ)	N	τ	E	
no	no	2.82	2.81	0.67	0.47	48	2.82	n.a.	
yes	no	2.82	2.76	0.67	0.48	23	2.85	n.a.	
no	yes	2.67	3.26	0.64	0.43	60	2.76	0.03	
yes	yes	2.46	3.20	0.78	0.67	57	2.50	0.11	
background	 	2.30	5.50	0.51	0.29	80	n.a	n.a.	
Lifetime calculated
from the phase
of the fluorescence at 40 MHz (±0.011 ns).

Lifetime calculated from the modulation
of the fluorescence at 40 MHz (±0.015 ns).

Components of the cell population
FLIM phasor: m represents the modulation and φ
represents the phase.

Number
of cells.

Apparent lifetime
calculated by
subtraction of background phasor.

Apparent FRET efficiency calculated
as E = 1 – (apparent lifetime(donor + adaptor)/2.8
ns).

In the absence of EGF
or Grb2–mRFP, the emission from BaF/3
cells expressing EGFR–eGFP was characterized by a phase lifetime
of 2.82 ± 0.01 ns and a modulation lifetime of 2.81 ± 0.02
ns. Importantly, addition of EGF did not appreciably affect phase
or modulation of EGFR–eGFP fluorescence (Table ).

BaF/3 cells cotransfected with EGFR–eGFP and
Grb2–mRFP
displayed perturbations to time-resolved fluorescence that was reflected
in the lifetime parameters (Table ). The EGFR–eGFP
phase lifetime decreased from 2.82 ± 0.01 (in the absence of
Grb2–mRFP) to 2.76 ± 0.02 ns (in the presence of Grb2–mRFP),
and the modulation lifetime increased. In the presence of both EGF
and Grb2–mRFP, the phase lifetime of EGFR–eGFP decreased
further to 2.46 ± 0.01 ns, whereas the modulation lifetime remained
at the value in the presence of Grb2–mRFP.

Insight into
the physical mechanisms responsible for the observed
changes is gained by inspection of the phasor plot (Figure ) together with the phasor components (m cos(φ), m sin(φ)) of the time-resolved
emission from the cells and background. The position of the phasor
corresponding to BaF/3 cells containing EGFR–eGFP is close
to, but not on, the universal circle, which indicates non-exponential
behavior from the eGFP fluorophore of EGFR–eGFP (Figure , blue diamond, and Table ).− As expected, EGF treatment does not significantly
change the phasor position of EGFR–eGFP (second blue diamond
and Table ). However, in the cells containing
both EGFR–eGFP and Grb2–mRFP, the phasor lies further
inside the semicircle (Figure A, red diamond).
This change in phasor position can be explained by fractional emission
because of the cell’s background fluorescence (i.e., by background
mixing only). Background mixing only (i.e., no FRET) is apparent because
the background phasor (Figure B, blue circle),
the EGFR–eGFP phasor (Figure B, blue
diamond), and the EGFR–eGFP/Grb2–mRFP phasor (Figure B, red diamond) are almost collinear (Figure ). In contrast, EGF treatment of EGFR–eGFP/Grb2–mRFP
cells moves the phasor of EGFR–eGFP/Grb2–mRFP in a clockwise
direction such that it is no longer collinear with the background
and EGFR–eGFP cell phasors (red triangles). These results provide
qualitative evidence for an interaction between EGFR–eGFP and
Grb2–mRFP after EGF treatment.

Using the approach of
Caiolfa et al., we can determine whether
FRET is significant by removing the background
contribution. By drawing a line connecting the background phasor to
the observed phasor, an apparent lifetime (i.e., lifetime in the absence
of background) can be obtained from the intersection point of the
line with the semicircle. The apparent lifetimes calculated in this
manner are listed in Table . This analysis
yielded an EGFR–eGFP lifetime of 2.76 ± 0.03 ns in EGFR–eGFP/Grb2–mRFP
cells compared with 2.82 ± 0.03 ns in cells lacking Grb2–mRFP.
A Student’s t test revealed that the difference
between 2.81 and 2.76 ns was not statistically significant at the
95% confidence interval (p &gt; 0.1, standard error
about the mean 0.03 ns, sample size = 50). Using the same background
subtraction procedure, a lifetime of 2.5 ± 0.03 ns was obtained
for EGFR–eGFP in the presence of EGF and Grb2–mRFP.
A Student’s t test revealed that the difference
in apparent lifetimes (2.85 vs 2.50 ns) was highly significant (p &lt; 0.0001, standard error about the mean 0.03 ns, sample
size = 50). These results provide quantitative evidence for an EGF-dependent
interaction between EGFR–eGFP and Grb2–mRFP.

To
gain further insight into the interaction, we examined the phasors
of individual EGFR–eGFP/Grb2–mRFP BaF/3 cells in the
presence of EGF (Figure ). It is apparent
that some cells have phasors that are close to the phasor of the EGFR–eGFP
donor. Our intepretation is that this population of cells exhibits
no or low FRET. This interpretation is supported by the fact that
these cells appear close to the line joining the EGFR–eGFP
phasor and the background phasor (Figure ,
blue line). The other populations of cells have phasors that lie on
a line connecting background, donor, and a highly quenched fluorescence.
Using linear extrapolation (Figure , red line), we calculate that the lifetime of the
FRET state is 0.71 ± 0.03 ns. This FRET state lifetime is physically
reasonable and is similar to the 0.75 ns lifetime determined for EGFR–eGFP
interacting with Cy3-labeled antiphosphotyrosine antibodies. According to this interpretation, the different
phasor positions for individual cells can be explained by different
proportions of free EGFR–eGFP and EGFR–eGFP/Grb2–mRFP
complexes. This information can be used to determine whether there
is a link between EGFR cluster size and Grb2–mRFP binding.

FLIM data
of individual living BaF/3 cells represented on a phasor
diagram. Data points correspond to BaF/3 cells transfected with EGFR–eGFP
alone (blue diamond), EGFR–eGFP + EGF (second blue diamond),
EGFR–eGFP/Grb2–mRFP (red-filled diamond), EGFR–eGFP/Grb2–mRFP
+ EGF (red-filled triangle), and untransfected control cells (blue
filled circle). Blue solid line denotes trajectory for mixtures of
background and EGFR–eGFP. Red line indicates trajectory for
EGFR–eGFP/Grb2–mRFP FRET complex mixing with background
and EGFR–eGFP fluorescence.

FRET–FLIM–ICS Measurements Reveal That Grb2 Is
Associated with Higher-Order EGFR Clusters
To assess the
relative sizes of Grb2–bound versus Grb2-free EGF–EGFR–eGFP
oligomers in EGFR–eGFP/Grb2–mRFP BaF/3 cells, we used
a FRET–FLIM–ICS approach that was modified to take background
fluorescence into account. Figure A displays
a typical fluorescence image from EGF–EGFR–eGFP/Grb2–mRFP
complexes, and Figure B displays the corresponding
2D spatial autocorrelation function image. The amplitude of the autocorrelation
function is inversely related to the cluster density of an EGF–EGFR–eGFP/Grb2–mRFP
complex (eq ). Analogous images of the EGF–EGFR–eGFP
complexes were also obtained, and the cluster densities were calculated
(eq ). A summary of lifetime parameters, fraction
of EGFRs undergoing FRET, cluster densities, and brightness ratios
obtained from the analysis of several cells is shown in Table . The fraction FRET values are positively correlated
with the cluster density FRET values (correlation coefficient 0.81)
and also positively correlated with the brightness ratio values (correlation
coefficient 0.74), implying that EGFR clustering and Grb2 adaptor
association are linked. We shall use the data in Table  to extract the information on the sizes of EGFR–Grb2
complexes.

FRET–FLIM–ICS on living BaF/3 cells cotransfected
with EGFR–eGFP and Grb2–mRFP. (A) Fluorescence image
of EGFR–eGFP/Grb2–mRFP complexes. (B) Spatial autocorrelation
image of EGFR–eGFP/Grb2–mRFP complexes. (C) Density
of Grb2–mRFP-bound EGFR–EGFP clusters as a function
of the density of Grb2–free EGFR–eGFP clusters. The
solid line is fit to a Hill function (CDbound = A/(1 + ((Kd/CDfree)(N−1)), with N = 4.1, A = 27, and Kd = 18 clusters).

Fluorescence
Parameters Including
Lifetime, Average Degree of Adaptor Binding, and Relative Brightness
for EGF-Treated Live Cells Expressing Both EGFR–eGFP and Grb2–mRFP
experiment	τphase	τmod	fractionbound	CDbound	CDfree	relative brightness	
1	1.41	2.20	0.86	23	23	5.9	
2	1.60	2.51	0.81	11	16	6.2	
3	1.46	2.32	0.85	25	42	9.3	
4	1.84	2.73	0.72	5.5	10	4.7	
5	1.92	2.87	0.69	5.4	9.2	3.8	
6	2.37	3.03	0.42	0.9	4.1	3.3	
average	 	 	0.725	11.7	17.3	5.5	
SEM	 	 	0.06	4	5	0.9	
Lifetime calculated
from the phase
of the fluorescence at 40 MHz (±0.011 ns).

Lifetime calculated from the modulation
of the fluorescence at 40 MHz (±0.015 ns).

Fraction of receptors bound to adaptor
(i.e., fraction EGFR–eGFP bound to Grb2–mRFP).

Cluster densities or number of aggregates
per square micrometer. The label “bound” refers to images
containing only EGFR–eGFP bound to Grb2–mRFP. The label
“free” refers to images containing only EGFR–eGFP
uncomplexed with Grb2–mRFP.

Relative brightness (RB) of EGFR–eGFP/Grb2–mRFP
complexes compared to uncomplexed EGFR–eGFP. Calculated from
the equation RB = (fraction)g(0)bound/(1
– fraction)g(0)free

One estimate of cluster size comes
from measurement of the cell-averaged
cluster densities (Table  and eq ). Grb2-bound EGFR clusters were dispersed at an average of
11 clusters/μm2, whereas the Grb2-free EGFR population
had a spatial organization characterized by an average cluster density
of 17 clusters/μm2. Considering that on average 74%
of EGFRs make up the Grb2-bound population and 36% the unbound population,
the normalized density for 100% Grb2-bound EGFR clusters would be
16 clusters/μm2 and 100% Grb2-free EGFR clusters
would be 63 clusters/μm2. These cluster density estimates
agree remarkably well with cluster densities previously determined
for EGFR–eGFP in BaF/3 cells, namely,
a tetramer density of 17 clusters/μm2 and a monomer
density of 70 clusters/μm2. Accordingly, the estimated
size of clusters containing Grb2-bound EGFR would be about 4.2 ±
1 receptors/cluster and the estimated size of clusters free of Grb2
would be about 1.1 ± 0.3 receptors/cluster.

Examination
of cluster densities across different cells is also
informative (Table ). The local EGFR 2D concentration
sampled in experiments varies over a wide range (Table ; CDfree: 4.1–40 clusters/μm2, CDbound: 0.9–25 clusters/μm2), with a positive correlation between increases in CDfree with CDbound. A plot of CDbound as a function
of CDfree is depicted in Figure C and closely resembles a sigmoidal binding curve. In the context
of a simple local equilibrium between EGFR and EGFR–Grb2 complexes
of size N, the concentration of EGFR–Grb2
clusters as a function of EGFR is given by a Hill function of the
form CDbound = A/(1 + ((Kd/CDfree)(N−1)), where A, Kd, and N are constants. Nonlinear least-squares fit to the data
(solid line, Figure C) revealed (N – 1) = 3.1 and therefore N = 4.1. This result
suggests that in the context of a simple monomer/N-mer equilibrium the cluster size of the Grb2-bound EGFR is approximately
4.

A third method of analysis utilizes a direct calculation
of the
brightness ratio for each individual cell (eq ). The brightness ratios obtained in this manner ranged from 3.3
to 9.3, with a cell average of 5.5 ± 1. It is difficult to determine
whether the observed range of brightness ratios represents true cell-to-cell
variation in the proportions of different oligomeric states or errors
in the determination of cluster densities and fraction FRET values.
Using the error calculation procedure from Wiseman’s laboratory, we estimate that the error in the cluster densities
is approximately 10–20% about the mean value. We take an error
of 30% in the cluster density to be conservative. The FRET fraction
error is estimated to be 0.05. By error propagation analysis of eq , the BR has a 95% confidence interval given by
BR ± (2 × 0.43)BR. It is clear that N =
2 cannot explain the spread of BR values because it covers the range
of BR = [0.3,3.7]. In order to match to the experimentally determined
range BR = [3.3,9.3], the error in the BR would have to be 150% of N = 2, which is unrealistic. However, models with oligomers
of higher order than dimers can account for the data, with a BR of
4 to 5 accounting for the majority of observed BR values.

To
summarize, using the combined data from the cells examined,
we obtained an estimated average cluster size of approximately 4 ±
1 receptors/cluster for the adaptor-bound receptor pool. We next compare
these data with our model for receptor aggregation and adaptor binding.

Theoretical Model of Receptor Oligomerization and Adaptor Binding
We recently presented a model for ligand binding, higher-order
receptor oligomerization, and receptor phosphorylation that reproduced
our biophysical and biochemical experiments with EGFR–eGFP
in BaF/3 cells. Key ingredients of the
model are (i) monomer–dimer equilibrium in the absence of ligand,
(ii) retention of negative cooperativity in the ligand-binding step
using features and parameters of the model of Pike and Macdonald, (iii) inclusion of a ligand-induced conformational
transition leading to liberation of the kinase domain in the ligand-bound
receptor (making it available for interaction with a neighboring kinase
domain, also in the liberated state), (iv) receptor phosphorylation
in oligomers of size 2 or larger, (v) ectodomain and kinase domain
interactions between receptors leading to linear polymer-like aggregates
up to tetramers (i.e., dimers, trimers, and tetramers) as well as
cyclic tetramers, and (vi) phosphorylation and dephosphorylation reactions.

To relate the present experimental data to models of adaptor binding,
we augmented our previous model to include a Grb2-binding step characterized
by parameters determined via surface plasmon resonance. In the model, we allowed Grb2 to bind a phosphorylated
receptor regardless of its aggregation state. This aspect of the model
is consistent with the conventional view that adaptors bind exposed
phosphotyrosine residues on receptors and our experiments showing
that there is only measurable FRET between EGFR and Grb2 after EGF
stimulation. We calculated the predicted cluster size distribution
of EGFR and EGFR–Grb2 complexes. Figure A shows that the dominant Grb2-bound cluster is the EGFR tetramer
at all concentrations of EGF. Figure B displays
the proportion of each cluster bound to Grb2 from a simulation with
10 nM EGF and parameters fixed from our previous publication. Tetramers
are the dominant species bound to Grb2, with nearly 95% of tetramers
containing at least one bound Grb2 (Figure B). The trimers and dimers make up only a small fraction of the total
population (&lt;1% of total population); however, the majority of
both the trimeric and dimeric pools do not contain any bound Grb2
(Figure B). The second largest species in
terms of population is the EGFR monomer, which contributes to 28%
of the clusters. Ninety-eight percent of the EGFR monomer is not bound
to Grb2 (Figure B). These results agree well
with the cluster size estimates from experiments. The average value
of 4 ± 1 EGFR’s per EGFR–Grb2 complex from the
FRET–FLIM–ICS experiments is in excellent agreement
with the model prediction that the EGFR tetramer is the dominant Grb2-bound
form, whereas the dominant Grb2-free form is the monomer, which also
agrees well with the cluster size estimate of 1 ± 0.3 EGFR’s
from the cell-averaged data.

(A) Plot of simulation results depicting the
cluster distribution
of Grb2-bound EGFR as a function of EGF concentration. Note that at
all concentrations of EGF the EGFR tetramer is the predominant form
associated with Grb2. The curves corresponding to dimer and trimer
are indistinguishable from monomer because the total number of these
oligomeric forms bound to Grb2 is almost negligible. (B) Cluster size
distribution of EGFR bound to Grb2 and unbound (free) to Grb2 from
simulation with 10 nM EGF.

Discussion
Alternative Interpretations
The
model above assigns
the receptor clustering and adaptor binding to an oligomeric complex
formed entirely from extracellular and kinase-activated intracellular
domains of the EGFR. However, it is important to consider the following
alternative explanations of the observed behavior:

Coated Pits
It is known that after activation EGFR
is transported to coated-pit regions of the cell membrane, where Grb2
is also colocalized. Therefore, a trivial explanation might be that
the EGFR–Grb2 clusters we observed are multiple copies of activated
EGFR dimers that have assembled in coated pits. For example, Nagy
et al. reported pentamers of EGFR that were associated with coated
pits. However, there is evidence that
EGFR clusters can also form outside coated pits. First, the measured
average cluster density of the EGFR–Grb2 complexes (Table , CDbound = 11 clusters/μm2) is an order of magnitude larger than typical coated pit
densities (CDcoated-pits = 0.5 clusters/μm2). Second, high-resolution imaging
has
established that EGFR nanoclusters appear outside coated-pit regions
of the cell membrane. Therefore, EGFR
clustering cannot be solely attributed to EGFR accumulation in coated
pits.

Subcellular Domains
Another possible explanation is
that activated EGFR dimers are corralled into subcellular domains
mediated via membrane rafts or possibly interactions with the cytoskeleton.
If we assume that after EGFR dimer activation domain entry is a random
partition process, then the domain occupancy distribution will be
a Poissonian aggregate distribution and the equilibrium distribution
between domain and nondomain sites will be given by a simple linear
partition function. However, the CDfree versus CDbound plot (Figure C) does not fit as well to
a linear model as it does to a sigmoidal Hill function; the residual
sum of squares is approximately 4.6-fold greater for the linear model
than for the Hill function. We suggest that although subcellular domains
or lipid platforms may increase local concentrations to enhance oligomerization our data clearly does not support a simple domain
accumulation model of activated dimers in the absence of higher-order
oligomerization.

Adaptor-Mediated
Receptor Cross-Linking
It has been
reported that Sos and Grb2 can form a trimeric complex and this trimeric
Grb2–Sos–Grb2 complex can cross-link phosphorylated
transmembrane proteins. Such a mechanism
might also account for the observation that Grb2-bound EGFR is in
a higher-order oligomeric complex relative to Grb2-unbound EGFR and
for the positive correlation between Grb2–mRFP binding and
EGFR–eGFP clustering. The activated EGFR dimer has at least
four phosphorylation sites (two per receptor monomer) that recognize
Grb2, allowing for the possibility of multivalent (receptor dimer)–bivalent
(adaptor complex) interactions. Our model does not include this adaptor-mediated
cross-linking mode of interaction. Determination of the role of adaptor-mediated
receptor cross-linking versus receptor-mediated oligomerization requires
further investigation with cells that contain defined concentrations
of Sos, Grb2, and EGFR.

Phenyl Arsine
Oxide-Mediated Phosphorylation and Clustering
Our experiments
were conducted in the presence of phenyl arsine
oxide to block receptor internalization and to ensure that we are
measuring cell-surface activation and clustering processes. The possibility
remains that the phenyl arise oxide may influence receptor phosphorylation
and clustering by keeping receptor activity/phosphorylation at an
artificially high level. We argue that these effects are modest on
the basis of experimental and theoretical grounds. First, as discussed
in detail in our previous paper on receptor clustering and receptor
phosphorylation, we see negligible effects
of phenyl arise oxide on EGF-dose-dependent receptor cluster size
and phosphorylation in our BaF/3 cell system at the concentrations
of phenyl arsine oxide employed. Second, a sensitivity analysis, performed
in our earlier modeling study, indicates
that receptor tetramer formation is insensitive to changes in the
values of the model parameters that govern receptor phosphorylation
and dephosphorylation.

Receptor clustering was recognized more
than 30 years ago as being important in the activation and biological
functioning of the EGFR. Notably, Schlessinger’s
laboratory revealed that the biological effects of EGF on cells could
be mimicked using bivalent or polyvalent antibodies against the receptor
but not using monovalent antibody fragments., Results from biochemical and structural studies in noncellular environments
have produced refined models leading to the conclusion that an asymmetric
kinase dimer is required for initial kinase activation (see refs (, , and ) for recent
reviews). These studies are so elegant that the role of the higher-order
oligomers or clusters, as distinct from the dimers, has been largely
overlooked, although oligomerization has received some notable attention
recently.−,,− In other cell-surface receptor systems, receptor oligomerization
or clustering, as distinct from the initial activation event in dimers,
is seriously considered as a biological control mechanism.− In this study, we examined the possibility that the first step in
the assembly of signaling complexes at the cell membrane, the binding
of adaptor to activated receptor, might be influenced by receptor
clustering. We did this by measuring the relationship between Grb2
binding and EGFR cluster size.

The following lines of evidence
point to the enhanced propensity
of higher-order oligomers of EGFR to bind the adaptor Grb2. First,
the average brightness of EGFR–eGFP complexed with Grb2–mRFP
is more than two times greater than uncomplexed EGFR–eGFP.
Because
the smallest possible aggregation state of the EGFR–eGFP is
a monomer, this implies that higher-order EGFR oligomers bind Grb2–mRFP.
Second, there is a positive correlation between fraction of EGFR’s
bound to Grb2, average cluster size, and overall receptor density.
Third, the distribution and
proportion of Grb2-bound EGFR oligomers revealed by theoretical modeling
indicated a predominance of the EGFR tetramer as the major Grb2-bound
form.

What is the significance of adaptor binding to receptor
clusters?
Theoretical simulations from the Wilson/Edwards laboratories revealed that Grb2 association with EGFR is
longer-lived if EGFR is clustered nonrandomly. Experimental support
for this concept also comes from single-molecule studies that indicate
a positive correlation between clustering of phosphotyrosine binding
sites and increases in dwell time of SH2-containing proteins near
the plasma membrane surface.

To
conclude, EGFR higher-order oligomers bind Grb2 and therefore
should be considered, along with the classical EGFR dimer, in models
of EGFR signaling. Moreover, the positive correlation between clustering
of EGFR and EGFR–Grb2 interaction is consonant with the concept
that the nonrandom spatial organization of receptor dimers, in our
case, tetramers, can concentrate signaling complexes in space and
time.

Supporting Information Available
Text file used for specification
of the theoretical model using BioNetGen that includes parameter estimates, annotation, and simulation instructions.
This material is available free of charge via the Internet at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bi500182x_si_001.txt

This work was
partially supported by Australian NHMRC Project Grants (nos. 280918
and 433624), NIH/NIGMS grant P50 GM085273, and DOE contract DE-AC52-06NA25396.

The authors declare
no
competing financial interest.

Abbreviations Used
EGFepidermal growth factor

EGFRepidermal growth factor
receptor

Grb2growth
factor receptor-bound protein-2

eGFPenhanced green fluorescent protein

mRFPmonomeric red fluorescent
protein

ICSimage
correlation spectroscopy

FRETFörster resonance energy transfer

FLIMfluorescence-lifetime imaging microscopy

PBSphosphate-buffered
saline solution

