Enzyme recruitment
is the process
whereby an extant catalyst is enlisted to perform a new function that
provides a selective advantage to a host organism. The new function
can be comparable to, or distinct from, the enzyme’s ancestral
purpose. Recruitment requires a random genetic change that affords
realization of the new function and subsequent fixation of the gene
encoding the new catalyst within a given population. In many instances,
enzyme recruitment represents the initial molecular genetic event
upon which the acquisition of new metabolic potential relies.

Although enzyme recruitment was long proposed
to be a driving force
in metabolic evolution,, conclusive evidence of recruitment
required advances in comparative phylogenetics and high-throughput
structural biology. The enormous number of protein primary structure
data resulting from genomic sequencing efforts of the past 25 years
provide compelling evidence that enzyme recruitment is pervasive in
extant metabolic pathways. Structural and functional studies have
revealed surprising evolutionary relationships between enzymes that
catalyze seemingly disparate transformations., This
information is leading to a more detailed appreciation of the interrelatedness
within, and between, primary and secondary metabolism. Moreover, recent
experimental work suggests that recruitment likely contributed to
the earliest stages of evolution, including the templated synthesis
of polypeptides.−

Investigating the molecular mechanisms of enzyme
recruitment is
not simply an exercise in understanding the past. Recruitment also
plays a central role in important contemporary biological processes.
It facilitates the appearance of drug resistance in microorganisms, as well as the emergence of bioremediation pathways
for anthropogenic toxins. Our understanding
of enzyme recruitment is now sufficiently advanced that protein engineers
and synthetic biologists are beginning to utilize this knowledge for
the discovery of new catalysts and the design of novel metabolic pathways.
For these reasons, a review of enzyme recruitment is particularly
timely.

Mechanisms That Facilitate Enzyme Recruitment
All mechanisms
that drive enzyme recruitment involve genetic change.
The simplest of these is the accumulation of point mutations. A point
mutation can facilitate enzyme recruitment by enhancing a latent activity
or by installing a new function onto a preexisting catalyst (Figure A). Point mutations appear at an average rate of
0.0033 nucleotide change per genome per DNA replication in microorganisms. However, a vast majority of these mutations
do not become fixed, because they are either neutral or deleterious., Most instances of recruitment are not driven by a gain-of-function
point mutation but instead involve a beneficial mutation that causes
a loss of regulatory control leading to overproduction of an enzyme
possessing hidden activity., For example, the transcriptional
level of a coding region can be elevated by mutations that inactivate
a repressor protein or by promoter mutations that disrupt the binding
site for a repressor (Figure B). Similarly,
the translational level of an enzyme can be increased by mutations
that alter codon usage efficiency, mRNA stability, or ribosome binding
strength. Hence, enzyme recruitment can be facilitated by any mutation
that amplifies the cellular concentration of a catalyst to an extent
such that a latent function rises to a physiologically relevant level.

Genetic
mechanisms that facilitate enzyme recruitment. (A) Gain-of-function
point mutations (red) that endow new activity to an extant gene. (B)
Beneficial point mutations (red) that afford enzyme overproduction
by inactivating a repressor protein (R, yellow) or by disrupting the
binding site of the repressor in the promoter (P) region. (C) Gene
duplication. (D) Horizontal gene transfer by virtue of a phage or
an extrachromosomal plasmid.

A more substantial change at the genomic level that can facilitate
recruitment is gene duplication (Figure C).
Gene duplication events occur frequently during the normal course
of cell division., Under normal environmental conditions,
the estimated frequency of gene duplication in Salmonella
typhimurium is 10–2 to 10–4 per genome per DNA replication., This level
increases under extreme environmental conditions, but can rapidly return to normal levels within a few generations
after the selective pressure disappears. It is estimated that at least 10% of all prokaryotic cells contain
at least one duplicated gene., Gene duplication provides
another mechanism for the overproduction of a gene product with latent
activity.− Duplication also removes constraints associated with the retention
of a gene’s ancestral function, as one copy of the gene continues
to fulfill its intended metabolic task, while the second copy can
be subjected to more intense diversification.,

Horizontal gene transfer is another genetic alteration that
promotes
enzyme recruitment by providing new genetic material to a host organism
(Figure D). Short DNA sequences, as well as
complete coding fragments, can be transferred via conjugation and
plasmid exchange or directly acquired from the environment.− Importantly, this exchange of genetic material can occur within
or between species.− Genome sizes can increase by 10–80% as a result
of gene transfer or gene duplication, providing a wealth of new genetic
material for subsequent diversification. Duplication and horizontal gene transfer also allow for shuffling
of partial coding regions, which can lead to the generation of new
multifunctional proteins. Although gene duplications and horizontal
transfer events are less genetically stable than point mutations,
their natural frequency exceeds the rate of beneficial point mutation
by several orders of magnitude. For this
reason, the duplication and transfer of genes are particularly effective
in promoting enzyme recruitment.

Properties of Enzymes That
Facilitate Their Recruitment
Genetic variation is constantly
occurring within organisms, providing
ample opportunities to recruit enzymes for new biological purposes.
What makes one recruitment event successful while others are only
transient in nature? The answer to this question depends, in part,
upon the environmental context in which recruitment takes place. However,
specific characteristics of the catalyst appear to contribute to the
long-term success of the recruitment process. In general, the more
evolvable an enzyme, the more likely that it will become permanently
recruited to perform a new task.

As with other proteins, the evolvability of an enzyme is determined
by its stability and its potential for functional innovation.− Stability promotes mutational robustness,− as newly introduced
mutations are often destabilizing in nature., Thus, a highly stable enzyme can tolerate the accumulation of a
larger number of destabilizing mutations. Because the acquisition
and optimization of new function often require the accumulation of
multiple mutations, stability is beneficial for evolvability., Stability often correlates with reduced conformational flexibility,− however, and biochemists now appreciate that structural plasticity
and dynamism can empower the evolution of function by providing access
to different conformational states and unique arrangements of active
site residues (Figure A). In nature, the apparent conflict between the benefits of
stability (i.e., mutational robustness) and the benefits of flexibility
(i.e., functional plasticity) is addressed by specific features of
the polypeptide scaffold. For many proteins, an apparent correlation
exists between the thermal stability of the folded state and the physiological
temperature that provides optimal growth for the host organism. This correlation indicates that proteins are,
in general, only marginally stable at the specific environmental conditions
under which selective pressures operate. Marginal stability provides a balance between maintaining a well-folded
structure and retaining sufficient flexibility to promote evolvability. Protein scaffolds are equipped with discrete
structural elements that confer flexibility and stability. For example,
the (β/α)8-barrel scaffold appears to be highly
evolvable., It represents a common enzymatic
fold that is present in more than 120 enzyme families. The (β/α)8-barrel fold
is built from a stable core of repeating α-helix−β-strand
units, which are linked together by a series of intervening loops.
The loops cap the active site, which is located near the C-terminal
end of the β-strands. In this scaffold, the core provides mutational
robustness while the loops provide flexibility. A similar segregation
of protein structural elements is apparent in other polypeptide folds.

Properties that facilitate enzyme recruitment. (A) Trade-off
between
stability, which affords mutational robustness, and flexibility, which
affords functional plasticity. (B) Substrate ambiguity (left) allows
a single enzyme to transform multiple structurally distinct compounds,
and catalytic promiscuity (right) allows a single enzyme to catalyze
multiple chemically distinct transformations. (C) Epistasis constrains
the evolutionary trajectories of ancestral enzyme sequences (black
arrows represent mutations) into functionally discrete pools (blue,
orange, and violet). Epistasis prevents the interconversion of contemporary
functions without retracing past trajectories (red sign). Figure adapted
from ref ().

The potential for future functional
innovation is another contributor
to enzyme evolvability.− Enzymes have long been depicted
as highly specialized catalysts with finely tuned functionalities. However, recent experiments demonstrate that
such a picture is oversimplified. We now recognize that contemporary
enzymes can be both promiscuous in the reactions they catalyze and
ambiguous in their choice of substrates (Figure B).− Catalytic promiscuity is defined as the ability of
an enzyme to promote distinct chemical transformations that are often
related by a common half-reaction or involve a common intermediate. Substrate ambiguity is a related but conceptually
distinct attribute, which describes an enzyme’s ability to
catalyze the same chemical transformation on a series of structurally
distinct reactants. Although catalytic promiscuity and substrate ambiguity
were most likely more pronounced in ancestral proteins, they continue
to facilitate enzyme recruitment by contributing to evolvability. Promiscuity and ambiguity provide flexibility
to modern metabolism and endow multifunctionality to catalysts. As
such, finding new ways to detect and characterize promiscuous or ambiguous
catalysts is likely to be advantageous to protein engineers seeking
to repurpose extant enzymes.

Studies of molecular evolution
have demonstrated that the trajectory
of natural protein evolution is highly context-dependent., In many cases, a particular amino acid substitution that proves
to be beneficial in one genetic context can be deleterious in another.
Epistasis is the term used to describe such a situation, in which
the positive or negative fitness impact of a mutational event is contingent
upon the genetic background, and thus the past evolutionary history,
of a protein., In this situation, interactions
between mutations can produce nonadditive effects on phenotype and
fitness. Multiple-sequence alignment analyses indicate that epistatic
constraints are a dominant factor in dictating both the rate and scope
of natural protein evolution., From an evolvability
perspective, epistasis appears to be a key limiting factor in the
ability to generate new molecular function, as it limits sampling
of many distinct evolutionary trajectories (Figure C). Epistasis can also constrain the end point of an evolutionary
trajectory, as it can lead to a rugged fitness landscape containing
many local minima into which evolving species can become trapped. In some instances, epistasis stems from the
multifaceted nature of a protein’s biophysical properties.
This is because the impact of a mutation is not solely limited to
its effect upon activity. It can also impact the stability, solubility,
and interaction network of a protein. These features act in concert
to determine the fitness outcome of specific amino acid substitutions. In one experimental evolution study, Hartl and
co-workers demonstrated that epistasis resulting from such “biophysical
pleiotropy” is so strong that the trajectory of evolution is
limited to a very narrow ridge along the adaptive landscape. From a total of 120 potential evolutionary trajectories
available for the evolution of a highly active β-lactamase from
a progenitor catalyst, more than 100 were inaccessible because of
epistasis. Identifying methods to overcome epistatic constraints upon
the evolutionary process could be useful in future efforts to expand
the functionality of biological catalysts.

Evidence of Natural Enzyme
Recruitment
Instances of enzyme recruitment have been detected
in multiple
primary metabolic pathways.− In general, past recruitment events are most easily
identified by searching for similar chemical transformations within
unrelated branches of metabolism. Subsequent comparative sequence
and structural analyses of the associated enzymes reveal potential
homology. Several excellent reviews describing specific recruitment
events are available.,− Below we highlight only a few examples for illustrative purposes.

An interesting example of recent enzyme recruitment has been discovered
in the pentachlorophenol catabolism pathway of Sphingobium
chlorophenolicum. Pentachlorophenol
is a halogenated aromatic pollutant found in several pesticides and
disinfectants. Pentachlorophenol hydroxylase
(PcpB) is a flavin monooxygenase that catalyzes the first step in
pentachlorophenol bioremediation. Sequence
analysis reveals that PcpB was likely recruited from a pathway involving
hydroxylation of natural products. The
dehalogenation reaction catalyzed by PcpB results in the formation
of the highly reactive intermediate tetrachlorobenzoquinone. To protect against modification of cellular
constituents by tetrachlorobenzoquinone, PcpB has evolved the ability
to form a transient interaction with tetrachlorobenzoquinone reductase,
which catalyzes the second step of pentachlorophenol degradation. This protein–protein interaction prevents
release of the PcpB reaction product. In this example, the recruited
PcpB appears to have emerged from evolutionary alteration of the progenitor’s
substrate specificity, as well as optimization of an interaction surface
on the protein.

Melamine deaminase and atrazine chlorohydrolase
are two enzymes
that have nearly identical structures and perform similar chemistry,
but have been recruited into distinct degradative pathways. Atrazine (2-chloro-4-N-ethylamino-6-N-isopropylamino-triazine) and melamine (2,4,6-triamino-triazine)
are intensively used in the industrial synthesis of herbicides and
pesticides. Microbial degradation of
both compounds begins with the hydrolytic removal of the C2 substituent
(Figure A). Melamine deaminase and atrazine
chlorohydrolase have 98% identical sequences. Despite the fact that these two enzymes differ by only nine amino
acid residues that are distributed throughout the scaffold, atrazine
chlorohydrolase does not catalyze the deamination of melamine and
melamine deaminase possesses exceedingly low chlorohydrolase activity.
The lack of substantial cross-reactivity within these two highly homologous
enzymes provides strong support for epistasis, leading to a very narrow
evolutionary trajectory from the progenitor catalyst to the present-day
enzymes.

(A) Reactions catalyzed by atrazine chlorohydrolase (AtzA) and
melamine deaminase (TriA), two enzymes that have 98% identical sequences.
TriA possesses low levels of chlorohydrolase activity (red), but AtzA
cannot catalyze the deaminase reaction. (B) Pericyclic reactions catalyzed
by the highly homologous enzymes isochorismate pyruvate lyase (PchB)
and chorismate mutase (CM). PchB catalyzes the chorismate mutase reaction
at a low level (red), but CM is incapable of performing the PchB transformation.

A similar situation is observed
by comparing the isochorismate
pyruvate lyase (PchB) from Pseudomonas aeruginosa and Escherichia coli chorismate mutase (CM). These
enzymes have 20% identical sequences, adopt similar tertiary structures,
and catalyze comparable pericyclic reactions.− PchB catalyzes
the conversion of isochorismate to salicylate and pyruvate in bacterial
siderophore biosynthesis (Figure B). PchB
can also complement a chorismate mutase deficient bacterial strain, by catalyzing the conversion of chorismate to
prephenate with respectable efficiency (kcat/Km = 2200 M–1 s–1). In contrast, chorismate
mutase from E. coli displays no detectable isochorismate
pyruvate lyase activity. These findings
suggest that an ancestral protein was recruited to perform both transformations,
but that the subsequent evolutionary trajectory of the chorismate
mutase was incompatible with retention of PchB activity. In contrast,
the epistatic constraints encountered during PchB divergence allowed
for the persistence of a promiscuous chorismate mutase function. Whether
the ancestral polypeptide possessed both activities remains unknown;
however, ancestral protein reconstruction could shed light on this
issue.

In some cases, only single enzymes are recruited, whereas
in other
instances, entire metabolic pathways appear to have been co-opted
for new function. Sequence comparisons reveal an evolutionary relationship
between enzymes in the microbial arginine biosynthetic pathway and
the enzymes that constitute the mammalian urea cycle. Four of the first five enzymes in the urea cycle catalyze
reactions identical to those involved in arginine biosynthesis. The
fifth enzyme, arginase, transforms arginine into ornithine and urea.
Arginase is homologous to two enzymes, agmatine ureohydrolase and
formiminoglutamate hydrolase, which participate in arginine and histidine
degradation, respectively. Thus, it appears
that the urea cycle of terrestrial animals was assembled from a combination
of anabolic and catabolic pathways of amino acid metabolism after
the transition from ocean- to land-dwelling organisms. Presumably,
this recruitment process was advantageous, as it provided a mechanism
for detoxifying ammonia produced by amino acid recycling. A similar
example of pathway recruitment can be found in the Krebs cycle, which
is postulated to have evolved from a combination of glutamate and
aspartate biosynthetic enzymes.

Experimentally
Facilitated Enzyme Recruitment
Several experimental approaches
have been developed to foster recruitment
of enzymes for altered metabolic function. These studies highlight
the scope of latent activities harbored within existing genomes and
provide insight into the flexibility of modern metabolism. A powerful
tool for experimental enzyme recruitment is the ASKA library, a collection
of more than 4000 plasmid-borne open reading frames from E.
coli. The ASKA collection allows
controlled overproduction of each protein encoded within the E. coli genome via the powerful, IPTG-inducible T5 promoter.
This collection can be used to identify proteins with latent activities
capable of altering normal cellular metabolism. For example, the ASKA
library was used to detect proteins whose overproduction allowed resistance
to bromoacetate, a compound that mimics electrophilic toxins. Nine genes were identified whose overexpression
resulted in bromoacetate resistance. Eight of the recruited genes
encode transporters, while the ninth gene encodes UDP-N-acetylglucosamine enolpyruvoyl transferase (MurA), an essential
cell wall biosynthetic enzyme. MurA was found to be the primary target
of bromoacetate and overproduction restored growth by outcompeting
the toxic effects of this halogenated compound. In a related set of experiments, bacteria harboring the
ASKA collection were challenged for growth in the presence of 237
toxic compounds, including many antibacterial agents. In total, 61 open reading frames were identified that increased
the fitness in 86 of the 237 toxic environments. The encoded proteins
possessed a variety of defined and putative functions, with many postulated
to possess latent enzymatic activity arising from catalytic promiscuity
or substrate ambiguity. These genome-wide overproduction studies demonstrate
a surprising degree of metabolic flexibility that can result from
enzyme recruitment as driven by multicopy suppression.

Another
genomic tool that has proven to be beneficial in experimental
investigations of enzyme recruitment is the Keio collection, which
constitutes ∼4000 nonessential single-gene knockout strains
of E. coli K-12. This
collection has been used to analyze the consequences associated with
the loss of a single gene under different environmental conditions.− Screening of the Keio collection identified 63 strains that were
hypersensitive to growth in media supplemented with bromoacetate. The hypersensitive strains contained deletions
in a variety of gene functions, one of which encoded a previously
uncharacterized glutathione transferase, GstB. Biochemical investigations
revealed that GstB functions as a reasonably efficient bromoacetate
dehalogenase (kcat/Km = 5000 M–1 s–1). On the
basis of these findings, one can predict that GstB represents a future
candidate for recruitment to detoxify electrophilic small molecules.
Merging the Keio collection with the ASKA library can identify intracellular
enzymes with promiscuous functions. Patrick and co-workers found that
growth of 20% of all Keio knockout strains can be rescued for growth
on glucose minimal medium by overproduction of at least one nonidentical
gene. In 35 of the 41 cases identified,
the deleted genes and multicopy suppressors were not homologous. The
authors proposed several putative mechanisms for phenotypic reversion,
including isozyme overexpression, substrate ambiguity, reaction promiscuity,
and metabolic bypasses, which could yield alternate sources of downstream
intermediates.

The use of single-gene knockout strains in combination
with the
ASKA collection has also provided new insights into the plasticity
of modern metabolism. In an attempt to uncover enzymes with latent
triosephosphate isomerase (TIM) activity, Desai and Miller provided
a TIM knockout strain with the ASKA collection and selected for genes
whose overproduction restored growth on glycerol minimal medium. Rather than identifying a promiscuous isomerase,
the investigators discovered a putative aldo-keto reductase gene that
provided conditional growth. Characterization of the gene product
revealed that the enzyme catalyzes the efficient, stereospecific reduction
of l-glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate, the enantiomer of the natural
TIM substrate. The reaction provides an alternate route to the formation
of dihydroxyacetone, thereby allowing a metabolic bypass of the disrupted
pathway. In similar work, Copley and co-workers utilized an E. coli strain lacking 4-phosphoerythronate hydroxylase,
which catalyzes the second step in pyridoxal phosphate (PLP) biosynthesis,
to uncover three latent pathways for PLP production. Overexpression of the ASKA library in a 4-phosphoerythronate
hydroxylase knockout strain identified seven genes that complemented
the metabolic deficiency. Only two of the seven gene products appeared
to recapitulate 4-phosphoerythronate hydroxylase activity. The other
genes encode putative or established dehydratases, kinases, or hydrolases.
Detailed investigation of these unexpected results demonstrated that
the selected enzymes are capable of generating functional intermediates
of PLP biosynthesis that lie downstream of the disrupted gene. Increasing
the cellular concentration of these inefficient catalysts allows improved
metabolic flux, which is sufficient for survival under the selective
conditions. These experiments demonstrate that enzyme recruitment
is a powerful tool for adapting to new environmental challenges and
for generating altered metabolism.

Applying Enzyme Recruitment
The catalytic repertoire of contemporary enzymes is enormous. Multiple
combinations of different enzymatic functions have produced complex
metabolic pathways for the synthesis or degradation of structurally
diverse compounds. In principle, it should be possible to design new
metabolic pathways by recruiting functionally distinct enzymes to
build new molecules. Indeed, modifying or extending existing pathways
for the production of value-added compounds is already possible (Figure ). Choi and co-workers have engineered a bacterium
that produces short chain alkanes for gasoline production (Figure A). This was achieved
by first altering the endogenous fatty acid metabolism of E. coli and then recruiting the fatty acyl CoA reductase
from Clostridium acetobutylicum and the fatty aldehyde
decarbonylase from Arabidopsis thaliana. The strain
was further modified to produce high yields of free fatty acids and
short chain fatty esters by recruiting the wax ester synthase from Acetinobacter sp. ADP1. In related work, enzyme recruitment
played a key role in engineering a Pseudomonas putida strain to produce high yields of phenol (Figure B), an important starting material for pharmaceutical production. Phenol production was achieved by recruiting
the tyrosine phenol lyase from Pantoea agglomerans in combination with overproducing the endogenous P. putida enzyme that catalyzes the first step of tyrosine biosynthesis.

Structures
of representative molecules for which in vivo synthetic
pathways have been successfully designed using enzyme
recruitment: (A) nonane, (B) phenol, (C) the fluorinated triketide
5-fluoro-6-(1-fluoro-2-hydroxybutyl)-3-methyldihydro-2H-pyran-2,4(3H)-dione, (D) 3-hydroxypropionate, (E)
styrene, and (F) 1,4-butanediol.

Many FDA-approved pharmaceutical agents contain fluorine
substituents. Recently, the natural
fluoroacetate pathway
of Streptomyces cattleya was exploited to allow synthesis
of structurally diverse fluorinated compounds in vitro.() By engineering the specificity of
endogenous enzymes and recruiting the acetoacetyl CoA synthase from Streptomyces, the authors developed a new metabolic pathway
for the incorporation of monomeric fluoroacetate building blocks into
diverse polyketide scaffolds. The authors also succeeded in producing
fluorinated triketide lactones (Figure C) in vivo from a fluoromalonate precursor, using a designed
pathway built from a recruited ketosynthase and a modified 6-deoxyerythronolide
B synthase–thioesterase module.

More extensive enzyme
recruitment has been utilized to convert
carbon dioxide into useful compounds. The 3-hydroxypropionate/4-hydroxybutyrate
pathway allows multiple thermoacidophilic archaea to assimilate carbon
dioxide, in the form of bicarbonate, to generate acetyl-CoA. The recruitment of five consecutive enzymes
from this pathway into Pyrococcus furiosus, a hyperthermophile
that cannot use carbon dioxide naturally, allowed the production of
3-hydroxyproprionate in high yields (Figure D). Together, these successes demonstrate
the power of using distinct recruitment strategies for the production
of non-natural or non-native compounds.

Enzyme recruitment also
facilitates the expansion of the degradative
potential of existing pathways. Several classes of microorganisms
have the ability to combat environmental contaminants such as oil
spills, because they can metabolize unbranched alkanes., Although it is difficult to degrade β-methyl-branched alkanes
via the β-oxidation pathway, multiple Pseudomonas strains can degrade short chain alkanes via
the citronellol pathway. To expand the
chain length specificity of the citronellol pathway of Pseudomonas
citronellolis, this microorganism was provided with a P. putida plasmid harboring a gene cluster encoding enzymes
that oxidize C6–C10n-alkanes. The resulting strain was
able to grow on multiple n-alkane substrates. After
whole genome mutagenesis of P. citronellolis and
selection on n-decane medium, this pathway was further
expanded to allow degradation of the multibranched alkane 2,6-dimethyl-2-octene.

The construction of simple de
novo pathways is
now possible using enzyme recruitment. For example, the production
of the common industrial monomeric building block styrene (Figure E) has been achieved in an engineered strain of E. coli. This required a phenylalanine
ammonia lyase for the conversion of l-phenylalanine into trans-cinnamate, and a cinnamate decarboxylase to catalyze
the subsequent decarboxylation of trans-cinnamate
to styrene. Multiple isoenzymes from bacteria, yeast, and plants were
tested for potential recruitment. The largest yield of styrene was
produced by combining the phenylalanine ammonia lyase from A. thaliana with the phenylacrylate decarboxylase from Saccharomyces cerevisae in a strain of E. coli that overproduces phenylalanine. A more complex de novo pathway has been designed with the assistance of computational methods
that identify suitable candidates for recruitment based on the nature
of the endogenous function of the catalyst. Computational approaches
predict more than 10000 potential metabolic pathways for the production
of 1,4-butanediol, a useful polymer building block (Figure F). A single pathway was chosen from this pool on
the basis of minimizing the length of the pathway, minimizing the
number of unknown enzymatic steps, and predicting the thermodynamic
likelihood of each reaction. The resulting
pathway combines five heterologous enzymatic conversions integrated
into natural E. coli metabolic pathways and results
in the production of 18 g/L 1,4-butanediol.

A de novo-designed remediation pathway for paraoxon,
a powerful insecticide and an efficient acetylcholinesterase inhibitor,
has been developed via enzyme recruitment. A synthetic operon assembled
from genes of multiple organisms in combination with a natural operon
from Pseudomonas sp. allows P. putida to efficiently degrade large amounts of paraoxon. The synthetic operon encodes the organophosphate hydrolase
gene from Flavobacterium sp., which hydrolyzes paraoxon
into p-nitrophenol and diethyl phosphate. Diethyl
phosphate is then converted to ethyl phosphate and subsequently to
orthophosphate by the sequential action of two additional operon components,
the phosphodiesterase from Delftia acidovorans and
the alkaline phosphatase from P. aeruginosa. p-Nitrophenol is processed by the natural pnp operon from Pseudomonas sp., which encodes five
enzymes catalyzing the transformation of p-nitrophenol
to β-ketoadipate. This intermediate is further processed to
succinyl-CoA and acetyl-CoA by the natural tricarbonic acid cycle
of the host strain P. putida.

Future Perspectives
The study of enzyme recruitment has illuminated our understanding
of the natural processes that drive the evolution of molecular function.
It has also empowered the application of such knowledge to engineer
new catalysts and new metabolic pathways. Where does the future lie?
A major stumbling block in applying enzyme recruitment for useful
new purposes remains the initial identification of the desired catalytic
activity. Several computational approaches currently under development
may help overcome this limitation. One promising area is computational
protein design, which offers the possibility of creating enzymes for
both natural and non-natural chemical transformations.− Although the enzymes designed to date generally possess activities
that are low compared to those of natural enzymes,, these scaffolds serve as attractive starting points for further
directed evolution− that could lead to optimized performance in vitro and in vivo. Bioinformatics methods
that facilitate the organization of enzymes into superfamilies based
on common tertiary structure and a fully or partially shared mechanism
have also emerged.− While this information has been largely
used to assign activities to genes of unknown function,, it also provides a database of homologous proteins that can be searched
for candidate enzymes with the potential to be recruited for a specific
type of chemical transformation.

The computational approaches
described above are complemented by
experimental methods to identify potential candidates for enzyme recruitment.
The use of the aforementioned E. coli ASKA collection,
in a high-throughput format, provides one source for discovering latent
enzyme activities. An extension of the ASKA library can also be envisioned.
Developing new open reading frame libraries that include genes from
the more than 1000 organisms whose genomes have been sequenced would
substantially expand the search landscape. A further expansion of the search zone could be achieved by creating
robust environmental DNA libraries using methods established in the
past decade., These approaches, while potentially
powerful, require important advances in developing universal plasmid
systems and host organisms to afford efficient heterologous production
of library-encoded gene products in vivo.

Loosening
the epistatic constraints inherent in modern enzymes
as a result of their evolutionary history offers another approach
that may facilitate the identification of latent activities. Ancestral
proteins are thought to have possessed greater functional plasticity
than their modern counterparts. Ancestral
sequence reconstruction, using weighted parsimony and maximum likelihood
methods, allows one to resurrect plausible models of extinct protein
sequences in the laboratory.− The extent to which ancestral
reconstruction of ancient proteins increases the likelihood of revealing
latent functions within a protein superfamily remains to be determined.
At the very least, however, such a procedure promises to restore evolvability
within a scaffold. Targeted ancestral sequence reconstructions within
a specific protein superfamily could yield polypeptides that share
potential mechanistic capabilities found within the modern superfamily.
To widen the catalytic repertoire, ancestrally reconstructed sequences
from multiple, mechanistically distinct protein superfamilies could
be pooled to generate a more complex library.

The strategies
outlined above could yield a variety of low-activity
enzymes that may be assembled into a new pathway (Figure A). To date, successes in novel metabolic pathway
development have largely centered on short pathways− and/or the recruitment of enzymes that promote transformations currently
found in nature.,,,, To generate more complex pathways, however, the recruitment of enzymes
that catalyze non-natural chemical reactions will likely be necessary.
Examples of such reactions include metal-catalyzed cross coupling
transformations and olefin metathesis, reactions for which efficient
protein catalysts are not presently available.− The identification of enzymes for these reactions, which are heavily
used in pharmaceutical development, could facilitate the design of
metabolic pathways for the microbial production of drugs. Two potentially
attractive candidates are Zytiga and Gilenya (Figure B), both of which bear structural resemblance to natural metabolites
and are prohibitively expensive, with an estimated annual cost of
$40000 per patient.,

(A) Pathway design using enzymes recruited
as a result of de novo design (red) that arise from
ancestral reconstruction
(green) or that possess promiscuous activities (blue). These catalysts
can be installed into preexisting metabolic pathways (gray). (B) Structures
of two pharmaceutical agents, Zytiga (Abiraterone) and Gilenya (Fingolimod),
that represent attractive targets for future metabolic pathway design
efforts with their annual treatment cost indicated.

The study of enzyme recruitment has a long history,
which includes
both experimental and phylogenetic approaches. This field is sufficiently
mature such that applications of enzyme recruitment for new catalyst
discovery and pathway development are now routine. Further progress
is likely to be stimulated by the convergence of molecular evolutionary
theory, directed enzyme evolution strategies, and computational protein
and pathway design. From this effort, it is reasonable to expect impressive
advances over the next decade culminating in the emergence of new
organisms with genomes tailored for specific metabolic purposes.

The authors declare no
competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
We are grateful to Kevin Desai, Christoph
Giese, Donald Hilvert,
and Darin Rokyta for support and helpful discussions during the preparation
of this work.

