Motile bacteria
sense and respond
to their environment through a networked system of chemoreceptors. These receptors are best understood in Escherichia coli, where an extended array of methyl-accepting
chemotaxis proteins (MCPs) is found at the pole of each cell. Dimeric
MCPs are anchored in the inner cell membrane and sense stimuli through
their periplasmic ligand-binding domains. The resulting signal, either
attractive or repulsive, is transferred down the length of the MCPs
through conformational changes in various domains, culminating in
a change in the activity of a histidine kinase, CheA, bound to the
cytoplasmic tip of the MCP dimer. CheA also functions as a homodimer,
performing trans-autophosphorylation and the subsequent transfer of
a phosphoryl group to one of two response regulators. One of these,
CheY, binds to the flagellar motor when phosphorylated, triggering
a switch in the predominant direction of rotation, and thus effecting
“tumbles” that interrupt linear “runs”
and change the search direction. The other response regulator, CheB,
is a methylesterase whose activity is stimulated by phosphorylation.
The balance of the activities of CheB and the methyltransferase CheR
dictates the methylation state of specific glutamate residues in the
MCPs that are responsible for adaptation.

The polar chemoreceptor
array has a highly regular structure: trimers
of MCP dimers are linked in extended hexagonal lattices, with 12 nm
spacing between the centers of adjacent hexagons. Associated molecules
of CheA and CheW, a coupling protein, form rings linking trimers-of-receptor
dimers into hexagons and neighboring hexagons into the extended lattice., This arrangement and spacing is highly conserved among different
bacterial species and between different signaling states in E. coli.− The structure of the extended lattice is important
because it gives rise to one of the most striking aspects of the chemotaxis
system, its high degree of cooperativity. Signal amplification in vivo can lead to apparent Hill coefficients (nH) ranging from 10 to 27 depending on the type
of receptor and its modification state, indicative of a highly cooperative
system., It remains unclear, however, how this extended,
regular lattice forms.

To study the structure and function of
the chemoreceptor array,
a variety of protocols have been explored to reconstitute complexes in vitro. Such samples have been used to study phosphotransfer,− cooperativity,− stability,, and protein–protein
interactions.− Here, we apply electron cryotomography (ECT) to image native chemoreceptor
arrays as well as selected chemoreceptor complexes reconstituted in vitro. We find that the stoichiometry, mixing order,
and the presence of membranes and crowding agents all effect higher-order
structure. Our results point to an assembly process in which coordinated
production of receptors and CheA and CheW in the presence of stabilizing
membranes and the dense cytoplasmic environment all contribute to
the formation of fully ordered, extended lattices.

Materials and
Methods
Strains and Growth Conditions
Strains used in this
study are listed in Table S1 of the . pCO3 was derived from pJC3 by polymerase chain reaction-based site-directed mutagenesis
to generate tsrA413T. Strains were grown to midexponential phase in
Tryptone Broth (TB) at 30 °C, with appropriate antibiotics. Expression
of Tsr from pCO3 was induced with 250 μM isopropyl β-d-1-thiogalactopyranoside (IPTG). Expression of CheA and CheW
was induced from pPM25 with 100 μM sodium salicylate. Strain
UU2619 was lysed by incubation with 300 ng/mL pencillin for 1 h at
30 °C. Strain CO4 was lysed by treatment with 2 mg/mL lysozyme
for 45 min at 37 °C, followed by treatment with 1 mg/mL DNase
for 30 min at 37 °C. Samples were kept on ice until they were
frozen for ECT.

Electron Cryotomography (ECT)
A
20 μL cell culture
was mixed with a pelleted 100 μL colloidal gold solution, BSA
treated to avoid aggregation. Three microliters
of this cell/gold mixture was then applied to R2/2 copper Quantifoil
grids (Quantifoil Micro Tools). After excess liquid had been blotted
away using a Vitrobot (FEI), the sample was plunge-frozen in a liquid
ethane/propane mixture., Images were collected
using either an FEI Polara G2 (FEI Co., Hillsboro, OR) 300 kV field
emission gun electron microscope at California Institute of Technology,
an FEI TITAN Krios (FEI Co.) 300 kV field emission gun at the University
of California (Los Angeles, CA), or an FEI TITAN Krios (FEI Co.) 300
kV field emission gun with an image corrector for lens aberration
correction at Janelia Farms. All microscopes were equipped with Gatan
(Pleasanton, CA) image filters. California Institute of Technology
and Janelia Farms microscopes were outfitted with a K2 Summit counting
electron detector camera (Gatan), and the University of California
microscope was outfitted with a 4 megapixel CCD (Gatan). Data were
collected using UCSFtomo or BatchTomo
(FEI Co.) using cumulative electron doses of approximately ≤160
e/A2 for each individual tilt series. The images were CTF
corrected, aligned, and reconstructed using weighted back projection
using the IMOD software package. SIRT
reconstructions were calculated using TOMO3D. Subvolume averaging and symmetrizing were conducted using PEET.

Classification by Missing Wedge Effect-Corrected
Principle Component
Analysis (WMD-corrected PCA) Using PEET
WMD-corrected PCA,
which attempts to compensate for the missing wedge effect in the electron
cryotomogram, and k-means clustering was performed using PEET. Subvolumes were chosen from a single array patch
and contained one to six receptor hexagons, and associated density
above and below. Varying the cube size of the subvolume did not affect
the results. Classes with fewer than 10 particles were discarded,
as they likely contained misaligned or false particles, and the resulting
subvolume averages were too noisy to interpret. The results of WMD-corrected
PCA, including variances and information criteria, are summarized
in Table S2 of the .

Purification of Signaling Components and Assembly in
Vitro
Two different types of in vitro reconstitutions were tested employing full length Tsr, CheA, and
CheW.

In method A, Tsr-containing inner membranes were prepared
essentially as described previously,, with some
modifications. Briefly, Tsr expression was induced from plasmid pJC3 with 1 mM IPTG for 4 h in HCB326, an E. coli strain lacking native chemotaxis proteins. Cells
were collected, resuspended in lysis buffer [50 mM KH2PO4 (pH 7.5), 5 mM DTT, 10 mM EDTA, 1 mM 1,10-phenanthroline,
10% glycerol, and 1 mM phenylmethanesulfonyl fluoride (PMSF)], and
lysed with a Constant Cell Disruption System (Constant Systems, Kennesaw,
GA). Cell debris was removed by centrifugation and the supernatant
equilibrated with 10 mM aqueous iodoacetamide. Membranes were isolated
by ultracentrifugation and passage over a sucrose gradient and resuspended
in Tsr reaction buffer [50 mM HEPES (pH 7.5), 50 mM KCl, and 5 mM
MgCl2] with 1 mM PMSF. Membrane suspensions were stored
at −80 °C until they were used. The membrane protein content
was determined by a modified BCA assay (Pierce Biotechnology, Rockford,
IL). Membranes typically contained 20% Tsr, determined by densitometry
of Coomassie-stained sodium dodecyl sulfate–polyacrylamide
gel electrophoresis (SDS–PAGE) gels.

To reconstitute
signaling complexes, native membranes containing
Tsr were combined with purified His6-CheW and His6-CheA (prepared as described in refs () and ()). The following ternary complex components were combined:
12 μM Tsr, 6 μM His6-CheW, and 2 μM His6-CheA in Tsr reaction buffer. Samples were incubated at room
temperature for 15 min, extruded through a 27 gauge needle, and incubated
again for 30 min at room temperature before being washed. The resulting
sample was immediately placed on ice until they were imaged.

Method B was a modification of several previous protocols.,,,, The E. coli serine receptor
(Tsr) was overexpressed in gutted E. coli strain
UU1581, which lacks all chemotaxis proteins, including receptors and
adaptation enzymes, using plasmid pJC3. Inside-out, inner bacterial membrane vesicles containing Tsr were
isolated as previously described., The total
protein concentration in the membranes was determined by the BCA assay,
and the fraction of total protein represented by receptors (typically
∼20%) was determined by ImageJ densitometry of SDS–PAGE
gels.

Signaling complexes were reconstituted by combining 6.7
μM
Tsr receptor, 5 μM CheA kinase, and 10 μM CheW adaptor
protein in activity buffer [160 mM NaCl, 6 mM MgCl2, 50
mM Tris, and 3 mM EDTA (pH 7.5)] for 45 min at 22 °C in the presence
of 0.5 mg/mL BSA, 2 mM TCEP, and 2 mM PMSF. Samples were centrifuged
at 21000g for 7 min, and pellets were washed twice
to remove unbound CheA and CheW by resuspension in a 10-fold excess
of activity buffer (without BSA, TCEP, and PMSF) and repelleting.
After the final wash, pellets were resuspended in the original volume
of activity buffer, resulting in functional, stable complexes.,,, The resulting sample was immediately placed on ice, shipped overnight,
and then cryo-frozen and prepared for ECT.

Ordered Assembly of Array
Components in Vitro
Cytoplasmic fragments
of the Tar receptor without the transmembrane
and HAMP domains (amino acids 1–256) and with full methylation
(CF4Q) were generated. CF4Q, CheW, CheA, and
CheY were expressed and purified as previously described. Protein purity was assessed via SDS–PAGE
analysis, and protein concentrations were determined using a BCA assay
(Thermo Fisher Scientific). All lipids were purchased from Avanti
Polar Lipids, and large unilamellar vesicles (LUVs) were prepared
as previously described. PEG 8000 (Fluka)
and d-(+)-trehalose (Sigma-Aldrich) were prepared as 40%
(w/v) stock solutions in deionized water and passed through a 0.22
μm syringe filter prior to being used. A modified kinase buffer
[50 mM potassium phosphate, 50 mM KCl, and 5 mM MgCl2 (pH
7.5)] was used for sample preparation.

Formation and characterization
of kinase-active ternary complexes followed published methods,, further specified as follows. Vesicle-mediated CF4Q ternary
complexes were prepared by incubating 30 μM CF, 12 μM
CheW, and 6 μM CheA with 580 μM total LUVs (1:1 DOPC:DOGS-NTA-Ni2+ ratio), while PEG-mediated CF4Q complexes were
prepared by incubating 50 μM CF, 20 μM CheW, and 12 μM
CheA with final concentrations of 7.5% (w/v) PEG 8000 and 4% (w/v)
trehalose. For both PEG- and vesicle-mediated complexes, CF was added
last to minimize CF-promoted aggregation, and samples were incubated overnight at 25 °C in a circulating
water bath and subjected to an enzyme-coupled assay and gel-based
cosedimentation assay to check for phosphorylation activity and ternary
complex formation.

Results
WT E. coli Chemoreceptor Arrays Are Superlattices
of Alternating CheA-Filled and CheA-Empty Rings
In E. coli polar chemoreceptor arrays, dimers of CheA link
adjacent trimers of MCP dimers. On the basis of the crystal structures
of these components and their complexes, it is apparent that in the
extended hexagonal lattice, not all hexagons can be occupied by three
CheA dimers. Rather, a regular pattern was predicted in which CheA-filled
hexagons alternate with CheA-empty hexagons. While this hypothesis was strongly supported by the demonstration
that there are two different kinds of array hexagons in a tomogram
(“filled” and “empty”), the arrangement
of these units was not reported.

Because of further advances in sample preparation (receptors locked
in a single state), data collection (thinner sample, direct detector),
and processing (contrast transfer function correction), we are now
often able to visualize CheA dimers individually in tomograms within
intact arrays. This allowed us to confirm the order of the “superlattice”
of CheA-filled and CheA-empty hexagons directly. To do this, we analyzed
tomograms of wild-type (WT) cells expressing serine-sensing receptors
in the demethylated state (Tsr-EEEE). This modification state of the
receptors promotes stable packing of the P1 and P2 domains of CheA, leading to a strong keel-like density that facilitates
identification of CheA dimers in tomograms. We observed a layer of
CheA below the MCP hexagons in tomograms, which appeared to be highly
ordered, as confirmed by Fourier transform (Figure ). Individual CheW molecules were not identifiable, likely
because of their smaller size. We then used principal component analysis
(PCA) to identify classes of hexagons in a tomographic slice on the
basis of CheA occupancy. Only two classes of receptor hexagons were
observed: one in which each pair of Tsr trimers is linked by a CheA
dimer and one in which none of them is (Figure G,H). When we forced more classes to exist, only additional filled
and empty classes resulted, confirming that there are very few if
any partially filled hexagons. These two classes were present in a
roughly 2:1 ratio (117 filled rings and 64 empty rings). By mapping
the classes back onto the tomographic slice, we found a strictly alternating
pattern (Figure I), confirming that native
arrays are a superlattice. The trimers-of-receptor dimers lie at the
vertices of a hexagonal lattice with 12 nm spacing. Connected to the
cytoplasmic tips of the receptors, the associated CheA (together with
CheW) forms another lattice. Here, the three CheA dimers linking one
receptor hexagon lie at the vertices of a larger hexagonal lattice
with a spacing of 21 nm. This results in a hexagonal array of receptors
linked to a lattice of alternating CheA-filled and CheA-empty hexagons.
This pattern is reflected in the power spectrum shown in Figure F. We also classified arrays from cells expressing
Tsr in the methylated state (Tsr-QQQQ). While the classification did
not result in a high degree of confidence, it did separate the hexagons
into the same two classes: one in which each pair of Tsr trimers is
linked by a CheA dimer and one in which none of them is. The resulting
CheA localization pattern resembled that seen in Tsr-EEEE, but with
some errors in the distribution pattern, likely because of a higher
number of misclassified subvolumes because of the smaller keel density
of CheA (Figure S1 of the ).

Classification of E. coli chemoreceptor array
hexagons reveals ordered CheA occupancy. (A) Tomographic slice through
an array patch at the level of the chemoreceptors. (B) Cutout of the
patch, and corresponding power spectrum (C), revealing hexagonal lattice.
(D) Tomographic slice of the same array patch below the level of the
chemoreceptors, showing CheA. (E) Cutout of the patch, and corresponding
power spectrum (F), revealing ordered occupancy by CheA. (G–I)
Classification by principal components analysis and k-means clustering of hexagons in the same array patch results in
two distinct classes: hexagons linked by three CheA dimers (green
symbols, subvolume average circled in panel G) and hexagons lacking
CheA dimers (turquoise symbols, subvolume average circled in panel
H). The organization of class averages is shown in panel I. Scale
bars are 100 nm, and power spectra are not to scale.

Overexpressed Chemoreceptors, in the Absence
of CheA and CheW,
Form Zippers
As different investigators have explored different
protocols to characterize array structure and function, one of the
earliest strategies was to simply overexpress receptors, often in
the absence of CheA and CheW. Strongly overexpressed Tsr chemoreceptors
are known to form non-native ordered arrays termed “zippers”
in which two receptor layers interact with one another at their normally
CheA–CheW-binding, cytoplasmic tips, creating characteristic
membrane invaginations.− We investigated the structure of these zippers at
higher resolution using a preparation of E. coli Tsr
in purified inner membranes. Interestingly, we found that zippers
survived cell lysis and membrane purification, indicating that the
interactions between the kinase-binding domains of the MCPs at their
membrane-distal tips are highly stable. Importantly, the fundamental
building block in zippers was seen to be trimers of dimers, just as
in native arrays, but when viewed from the top, zippers exhibited
tighter packing, with triangular lattices at the top and bottom and
a hexagonal pattern at midsection (Figure ). This complicated pattern was the result of two layers of receptors
linked in a hexagonal lattice with a center-to-center spacing of 9
nm at the midsection, with alternating trimers facing opposite directions
(Figure  and Movie S1 of the ).

Overexpression of Tsr without sufficient
CheA and CheW results
in zippers. (A) A side view of a receptor zipper reveals two layers
of membrane-bound receptors interacting at their membrane-distal tips.
PD denotes periplasmic domains and IM inner membrane leaflets. The
scale bar is 50 nm. Arrows indicate relative positions of subvolume
averages shown at the right in panels B–D. Scale bars are 10
nm. (E–H) Model of receptor density from the subvolume average
and manually fitted Tsr crystal structure from ref () in top view (E–G,
levels roughly corresponding to B–D, respectively) and side
view (H), showing the arrangement of receptors. Blue and yellow colors
indicate receptors of opposing orientation.

In Vitro Assembly of Array Components Results
in Functional Complexes, Hexagons, and Small Arrays
Another
strategy that has been used to reconstitute chemoreceptor systems in vitro is to add excess purified CheA and CheW to overexpressed
receptors purified within their native E. coli membranes.
Different variations of this basic strategy have been explored. One
important variable appears to be the length of time CheA and CheW
are allowed to interact with the receptors, as the largest Hill coefficients
have been measured after the longest incubation times (exceeding 4
h). Here we isolated inner membrane vesicles
containing Tsr and then combined them with purified CheA and CheW
for 15–45 min., This type of preparation is known
to generate functional receptor–CheA–CheW units in which
receptors bind attractant serine and regulate CheA kinase activity
in the normal way. ECT revealed Tsr zippers similar to those observed
in Tsr inner membranes prior to addition of CheA and CheW (see above),
as well as large, loosely associated aggregates (Figure ; overview in Figure S2 of the ). The zippers likely formed within the cell and
remained associated throughout lysis and addition of CheA and CheW.
Inner membrane preparations are known to yield an ∼80:20 molar
ratio of inside-out to right-side-out receptors. Both receptor orientations are observed in the images,
and the outward-pointing cytoplasmic tips dominate as expected (Figure  and Figure S2 of the ).

In vitro reconstitution of signaling
complexes
produces a variety of structures. Arrangements observed included receptor
zippers with 9 nm center-to-center hexagonal spacing (side view, A;
top view, B), loosely ordered aggregates (C), individual hexagons
of six trimers of dimers (D), receptors oriented inward (E) and outward
(F) from vesicles, linked hexagons (G), multiple unlinked hexagons
(H), and the largest 12 nm hexagonal array patch observed (I). Arrows
indicate structures of interest. Scale bars are 100 nm.

Besides the expected zippers, a range of assembly
intermediates
was observed, providing insight into the mechanism of array assembly.
We also found partial or full Tsr hexagons, double hexagons, and small
arrays formed from multiple hexagons. Individual receptor hexagons
were fully occupied by three CheA dimers (Figure S3 of the ). No large, nativelike
arrays were detected, however, consistent with the low Hill coefficient
observed for this type of preparation. We have not observed small assembly intermediates in native cells
but would likely to be unable to resolve them because of the relative
thickness of the sample.

Co-overexpression of Chemoreceptors, CheA,
and CheW Yields Nativelike
Hexagonal Arrays, but CheA Occupancy Is Diminished
Suspecting
that optimal array formation may require simultaneous production of
receptors, CheA, CheW, some investigators have tried co-overexpression.
Concomitant overexpression of CheA and CheW has in fact already been
shown to produce large arrays without membrane invaginations. In cells overexpressing Tsr from one plasmid
and CheA and CheW from another, we observed arrays with the native
12 nm hexagonal spacing (Figure ). We again
used a Tsr variant (Tsr-A413T) that locks the P1 and P2 domains of
CheA into an identifiable “keel” to investigate CheA
occupancy. By immunoblotting, we determined
that Tsr and CheA had been overexpressed to similar extents [25.5
and 26 times their WT levels, respectively (Figure S4 of the )], but classification
of hexagons in tomograms revealed significantly lower and less ordered
occupancy of CheA than in native arrays (Figure S5 of the ). Two major classes were
observed with zero or two CheA dimers per ring. Direct observation
of CheA dimers in the tomograms confirmed the lack of any superlattice
order of CheA-filled or CheA-empty rings.

Co-overexpression of
Tsr, CheA, and CheW restores WT array structure.
(A) A tomographic slice of a lysed E. coli cell overexpressing
the chemotaxis proteins Tsr-A413T, CheA, and CheW reveals extended
well-ordered hexagonal arrays with 12 nm center-to-center spacing.
The inset shows a higher-magnification subvolume average showing the
top view of a single hexagon. (B) Array patch at the level of the
receptors and the corresponding power spectrum (C). (D) Same array
patch at the level of CheA and the corresponding power spectrum (E)
showing a lack of order in the CheA arrangement. Scale bars are 100
nm, and power spectra are not to scale.

Ordered, Vesicle-Mediated Assembly of Receptor Fragments, CheA,
and CheW in Vitro Leads to Large Arrays
The overexpression experiments described above suggest that in addition
to proper ratios of receptors, CheA, and CheW, assembly of native
arrays depends on proper temporal and perhaps spatial ordering of
the process. To expore this possibility, we used a system in which
soluble MCPs lacking their transmembrane domains could be added to
mixtures of Ni2+-NTA-conjugated lipids and CheA and CheW
in different orders., His-tagged cytoplasmic fragments
of the aspartate-sensing Tar chemoreceptor lacking their periplasmic
ligand-binding domains, transmembrane domains, and HAMP domains (Tar-CF)
were purified. We found that by first adding purified CheA and CheW
to Ni2+-NTA-tagged lipids and then adding the soluble receptor
fragments, we could form vesicle-associated arrays containing at least
20 hexagons with a 12 nm center-to-center spacing (Figure ). The ordered patches may have been even larger,
but unfortunately, the high degree of curvature of the vesicles precluded
accurate estimation of the total hexagon number, as well as visualization
of the organization of CheA dimers. Zippers and loose aggregates of
MCPs were not observed.

Addition of MCPs after CheA and CheW produces
extended 12 nm arrays.
Vesicle-mediated assembly of Tar-CF, CheA, and CheW leads to extended
arrays, shown in a tomographic slice. The inset shows a power spectrum
(not to scale) of the white-boxed region that shows the hexagonal
order of the array, with a 12 nm center-to-center spacing. The scale
bar is 200 nm.

The Membrane Is Not Essential
for Array Formation and Can Be
Replaced by Crowding Agents
Membrane interactions are essential
for transmembrane chemoreceptor array formation and function.− However, many bacteria contain soluble cytoplasmic chemoreceptor
arrays that do not associate with any membrane, [e.g., Vibrio cholerae (Figure S6 of the )]. If cytoplasmic receptors
can form extended arrays without an organizing membrane, can normally
polar chemoreceptors do so as well? To test this, we again purified
soluble cytoplasmic fragments of the Tar receptor, as well as CheA
and CheW, from E. coli. Again we assembled complexes in vitro using these components, with CheA and CheW present
in stoichiometric excess, but this time in the absence of lipid vesicles.
To mimic cellular conditions, we included the molecular crowding agents
PEG-8000 and trehalose in the assembly reaction mixture. Interestingly, extended arrays formed with an
architecture identical to those of the cytoplasmic clusters in Rhodobacter sphaeroides and V. cholerae in vivo (Figure S6 of the ). Two CheA and CheW base plates, 31 nm apart, flanked two hexagonal
lattices of chemoreceptor trimers with a 12 nm center-to-center spacing
to form a “sandwich” (Figure ). In contrast to zippers, in which receptors interact at the kinase-binding
tip, in this case the two receptor layers interacted at their membrane-proximal
tips. As observed for polar chemoreceptors,,, the kinase-binding regions near the CheA
and CheW base plates were well ordered, with a decreasing level of
order toward the midsection of the sandwich (Figure S7 of the ). To assess CheA occupancy,
we classified an array patch and observed hexagon classes with zero,
one, two, and three CheA dimers, indicating less order than in native
membrane-bound arrays (Figure S8 of the ), consistent with direct observation (Figure F,G). Interestingly, we were able to assemble functional
complexes in the absence of membranes only from Tar-CF in the methylated
(QQQQ) adaptation state, not in the demethylated (EEEE) state, even
in the presence of higher concentrations of molecular crowding agents,
suggesting that the methylated receptor state may form more stable
complexes.

E. coli Tar chemoreceptors lacking transmembrane
regions form extended arrays in the presence of CheA, CheW, and molecular
crowding agents. Tomographic slices showing extended arrays. (A) A
side view reveals two parallel CheA and CheW base plates (arrows)
spaced 31 nm apart. Top views of the chemoreceptors close to either
base plate (B and C, corresponding to white and black arrows in A,
respectively) reveal a well-ordered, hexagonal arrangement with a
center-to-center spacing of 12 nm. Insets show enlarged subvolume
averages. (D) Array patch at the level of the receptors and the corresponding
power spectrum (E). (F) Same array patch at the level of CheA and
the corresponding power spectrum (G), showing the lack of order. Scale
bars are 100 nm, and power spectra are not to scale.

Discussion
Here we explored the
structure and assembly of chemoreceptor arrays
by imaging both native arrays and selected in vitro preparations that yield functional receptor–CheA–CheW
complexes. We found that native arrays are not only hexagonally ordered,
but a superlattice of alternating CheA-filled and CheA-empty rings
exists. When Tsr receptors are overexpressed in the absence of CheA
and CheW, stable double-layer zippers form as previously observed,
and this study reveals that the receptors are still arranged as trimers-of-receptor
dimers, though packed in a non-native lattice. When receptor-containing
membranes are incubated with purified CheA and CheW, isolated “functional
units” (pairs of trimers-of-receptor dimers linked by CheA
dimers) and “rings” (six trimers-of-receptor dimers
linked by three CheA dimers) were found, as were clusters of rings
forming small arrays, but no large, nativelike arrays were observed
(as expected given the low Hill coefficient reported for this type
of preparation). Instead, the observed
small complexes and arrays are proposed to be early intermediates
in the assembly of native arrays. Larger, more extended 12 nm hexagonal
arrays are produced by co-overexpression of the receptor, CheA, and
CheW, or by reconstituting receptor cytoplasmic domains with CheA
and CheW on Ni-NTA lipid vesicles. The same receptor cytoplasmic domains
form sandwiched arrays upon being incubated with CheA and CheW in
the absence of membranes, but in the presence of crowding agents.

One of the principles that emerges from these observations and
others already in the literature is that with the exception of some
crystal structures, for example the Thermatoga receptors,
where the receptors were arranged in “hedgerows” of
dimers, receptors always form trimers
of dimers linked together tightly at their kinase-binding tips but
splaying outward toward their ligand-binding tips. However, the degree
of splaying observed by ECT is less than that seen in the crystal
structure.,, This same
building block is seen in native arrays, zippers, reconstituted mixtures,
and cytoplasmic arrays. This structure probably forms rapidly within
cells and is highly stable, remaining intact through cell lysis and/or
diverse purification–reconstitution procedures.

The second
principle that emerges is that the trimers-of-receptor
dimers unit exhibits striking versatility in the kinds of contacts
it can form with other trimers-of-receptor dimers and other components
of the signaling pathway. In native arrays, trimers of receptor dimers
form extended hexagonal arrays anchored in the membrane at their ligand-binding
tips and associating laterally through networked CheA and CheW. In
the absence of CheA and CheW, trimers bind each other at their kinase-binding
tips in antiparallel fashion to form superstable zippers. A more recent
crystal structure reveals two potential CheA- and CheW-binding sites
along each dimer. In the absence of
membrane binding, either through deletion of transmembrane domains
or in endogenous cytoplasmic chemoreceptors, MCPs again form bilayers,
but in these cases through interactions at the ends of the receptors
distal to their CheA-binding tips. Because there are so many possible
structures that can form, while the architecture seen in cells is
universally conserved, the assembly process
within a cell must be tightly regulated.

For transmembrane receptors,
the membrane likely accelerates array
formation by holding newly synthesized receptors in a plane and then
stabilizes arrays after formation.− These findings reveal,
however, another assembly principle: the membrane is neither necessary
for proper array organization (evidenced by endogenous cytoplasmic
clusters in many organisms and in vitro assembly
of cytoplasmic fragments of normally polar receptors) nor sufficient
(evidenced by zippering of receptors in the absence of coupling proteins).
Active signaling complexes of cytoplasmic receptor fragments can be
generated via association with lipid vesicles and can also be generated in the absence of membrane binding, by
increasing the extent of molecular crowding to mimic the cellular
environment. Our new results show that
both of these preparations contain extended arrays with a 12 nm spacing
equivalent to that of intact receptor arrays. In addition, our results
also show that extended arrays are always stabilized on both faces,
by either membranes or CheA and CheW base plates (arrays stabilized
on only one side have not been observed). Molecular crowding agents
increase the apparent local concentration of components by excluding
volume, shifting the equilibria of biomolecular interactions in favor
of associated states. The ability of molecular crowding agents to
promote arrays of CheA and CheW and cytoplasmic receptor domains underscores
the dramatic role that the dense cellular environment can play in
assembly.−

As a final assembly principle, the effective
determinant of array
structure seems to be CheA and CheW, for both membrane-bound and cytoplasmic
arrays. In native arrays, we find nearly complete, and highly ordered,
CheA occupancy. Filled hexagons containing three CheA dimers surround
an empty hexagon containing none. This leads to a slightly higher
receptor:CheA ratio in arrays (6:1) compared to the total concentration
ratio in cells (3.4:1). It may be that
cells contain excess CheA and CheW to promote correct assembly. When
Tsr, CheA, and CheW are decoupled and overexpressed, the resulting
arrays exhibit the same 12 nm hexagonal packing as native arrays,
but we observe less-than-native CheA incorporation, suggesting that
the assembly process may become defective when the precise stoichiometry
and temporal control provided by native transcription is disrupted.
Alternatively, overexpression could activate a putative disassembly
mechanism responsible for removing CheA and destabilizing the array,
thereby preventing excess array growth, as previously suggested. Intriguingly, Bacillus subtilis has been reported to have a much higher ratio of MCP to CheA than E. coli, approximately 23 receptor dimers to one CheA dimer versus 3.4:1 for E. coli. Thus, at least in B. subtilis, it appears that relatively little CheA is required to nucleate a
morphologically correct array with respect to receptor packing.

We imagine then that in cells, receptors are inserted into the
membrane as they are produced and quickly dimerize. Next, receptor
dimers trimerize, and then CheA dimers capture trimers-of-receptor
dimers into six-receptor functional units before any off-pathway complexes
form. These functional units either unite through CheW with existing
arrays or link together to form CheA-filled rings, which then unite
to existing arrays. Given the known interactions of CheA and CheW,
both processes lead directly to the highly cooperative superlattice
of alternating CheA-filled and CheA-empty rings (Figure  and Movie S1 of the ).

Model of array assembly. Schematic showing sequential assembly
of the core functional unit (two trimers-of-receptor dimers, one CheA
dimer, and two CheW monomers) forming from individual trimers-of-receptor
dimers, and subsequently coalescing into individual hexagons, which
in turn assemble into the extended superlattice. Empty hexagons without
associated CheA are colored blue.

The special conditions that exist within cells that allow
and guide
this assembly process may, however, be challenging to mimic in vitro. Given that, the smallest functional unit that
displays full regulation of kinase activity is the six-receptor-dimer,
one-CheA-dimer, two-CheW unit that also seems to be the basic building
block of array assembly, and all the reconstitution protocols explored
here produce such functional units. Their biochemical and biophysical
properties can therefore be studied effectively as long as care is
taken not to include the signal from non-native structures that may
also be present. This can be done through CheA- or CheW-readout methods
(rather than simply monitoring receptors); for instance, monitoring
the effects of mutagenesis, cross-linking, or protein modification
on kinase activity measures only the effects within functional complexes.−,− Notably, certain
reconstitutions have also already exhibited Hill coefficients close
to those observed for cellular arrays, suggesting that nativelike higher-order structures must be present.
We hope the interplay between EM and in vitro reconstitution
methods, together with the application of the new assembly principles
revealed here, will eventually allow the production of even larger-than-cellular
arrays with the fully native structure for enhanced structural, biophysical,
and biochemical characterization of array properties.

Supporting Information Available
Two supporting tables, eight
supporting figures, and a movie summarizing the main findings of this
paper. This material is available free of charge via the Internet
at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bi5000614_si_001.pdf

bi5000614_si_002.mov

Author Present Address
# M.L.W.: Novartis
Institutes for Biomedical Research, Cambridge,
MA 02139.

This work was
supported by National Institutes of Health Grant R01-GM085288 to L.K.T.,
National Institute of General Medical Sciences Grant GM101425 to G.J.J.,
National Institutes of Health Grant R01-GM040731 to J.J.F., National
Institutes of Health Grant RO1-GM055984 to L.L.K., and National Institutes
of Health CBI training grant T32 GM008505 to H.L.H.

The authors declare
no
competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
We thank Drs. Zhiheng Yu and Jason de la Cruz for microscopy
support at Howard Hughes Medical Institute Janelia Farms and Dr. Dan
Toso and Associate Director Ivo Atanasov for support using the University
of California TITAN Krios microscope. We thank Drs. Gongpu Zhao and
Peijun Zhang for initial electron micrographs of the PEG-mediated
complexes of CF, CheA, and CheW. We thank Dr. Sandy Parkinson for
the gift of α-Tsr and α-CheA antibodies, strains, and
plasmids, as well as for sharing results prior to publication. We
thank Dr. John Heumann for assistance with PEET software.

