Vascular
tension in mammals
is maintained by arginine/nitric oxide signaling, regulated by isoforms
of nitric oxide synthase (NOS) and their inhibitors. NOS activity itself is regulated by the products of the
catabolism of proteins containing methylated arginine that result
from the action of protein-arginine methyl transferases. Specifically,
the asymmetric Nη-methylated arginine
amino acids l-Nη-monomethylarginine
and asymmetric Nη,Nη-dimethylarginine (l-NMMA and ADMA, respectively)
antagonize the action of NOS by competition with the substrate l-arginine and lead to an elevation in vascular tension. In
healthy individuals, the levels of l-NMMA and ADMA are subject
to the combined action of excretion via the kidneys and catabolism
by isoforms of the enzyme dimethylarginine dimethylaminohydrolase
(DDAH). DDAH converts l-NMMA or ADMA into the amino acid, l-citrulline, and methylamine or dimethylamine, respectively.
Pharmacologic manipulation of DDAH activity affects vascular tension
indirectly. As such, DDAH has been the subject of a substantial level
of investigation as a potential therapeutic target,− for example, to block synthesis
of NO indirectly by the blockade of the degradation of naturally occurring
NOS inhibitors in septic shock, arthritis, and some cancers.

The therapeutic potential has led to the need to understand
the
structure and mechanism of DDAH enzymes in detail. Murray-Rust and
co-workers solved the first three-dimensional X-ray crystal structure
of a DDAH, from Pseudomonas aeruginosa (PaDDAH). They reported details of wild-type PaDDAH in
the apo state and of the active site Cys249Ser mutant in separate
complexes with reaction substrate ADMA and product l-citrulline.
The crystal structure of the Cys249Ser mutant revealed that the 254-residue
protein chain is arranged like a propeller with five pseudosimilar
modules as blades, each comprised of a three-stranded β-sheet
packed against an α-helix (Figure A).
The overall pentein propeller is decorated with long variable loops
occupying the top of the structure, as shown in Figure . The bound ligand resides in the center of the propeller,
oriented along the propeller shaft axis with the distal end of the
substrate side chain (the dimethyguanidinium group in the case of
ADMA, the ureidyl group in the case of l-citrulline) sitting
in a negatively charged pocket, made of Asp66, Glu65, and surrounded
by a catalytic triad, comprising Glu114, His162, and Cys249 (Figure B). The ligand α-amino and carboxylate groups
are braced on either side by H-bond interactions with the backbone
carbonyl groups of Leu18 and Ile243 and salt bridge contacts with
side chains of Arg85 and Arg132, respectively (Figure B). The ligand-binding site is covered by a loop (denoted
L1, residues Gly17-Asp27) that lacks regular secondary structure (Figure A). The active site entrance is composed of an arrangement
of loops between residues 54–67 (L2), 78–82 (L3), 107–113
(L4), 130–133 (L5), 157–161 (L6), and 243–251
(L7). The active site residues Glu114 and His162 lie in 310-helix segments, just adjacent to loops L4 and L6, and Cys249 lies
in the L7 loop. Immediate egress of the ligand to solvent is apparently
blocked by the position of the side chain of Leu18, the β-methylene
group of which is in direct van der Waals contact with the α-CH
moiety of the ligand (Figure B).

Three-dimensional
structure of PaDDAH bound to l-citrulline
showing the main features relevant to this work. (A) Ribbon representation
of the crystal structure (PDB code 1H70) of the
Cys249Ser mutant PaDDAH bound to l-citrulline. The ligand
is shown in stick form with standard atom-type coloring. Loops that
surround the active site chamber are depicted in color: red, loop
1 (L1); green, L2; blue, L3; yellow, L4; magenta, L5; cyan, L6; and
orange, L7. (B) Close-up of the coordination of l-citrulline
(CIR) by PaDDAH side chains. Protein side chain atoms (only) are displayed
in stick representation and the color scheme is as in (A). The side
chains of Leu18, Thr19, and Ser20 in L1 are labeled. Dashed lines
(brown) indicate the van der Waals contact between the Cβ of
Leu18 and the Cα and carboxylate carbon atoms of the ligand.

We previously demonstrated that
PaDDAH forms a symmetric 58 kDa
homodimer at concentrations required for biophysical and structural
analysis., Analytical size exclusion chromatography
and sedimentation-equilibrium analytical ultracentrifugation (AUC)
showed that self-association was sensitive to substitutions of surface
amino acid residues without a significant impact on the observed level
of catalytic activity. Locations for such substitutions were determined
from the crystal structure, which displays contact between adjacent
protein chains that conceals a total of 1720 Å2 solvent
accessible surface area. The equilibrium dissociation constant (Kdiss) for the wild-type homodimer was determined
by AUC to be 0.45 μM. The substitution, Asn36Trp, strengthened
the dimer slightly (Kdiss = 0.26 μM),
whereas mutations Arg40Glu or Arg98His significantly weakened the
self-association: Kdiss was 73 μM
and 87 μM, respectively. The double mutant, Arg40Glu/Arg98His,
displayed no detectable self-association and so provides a catalytically
competent monomeric form of PaDDAH. This form of the protein shows
excellent quality NMR spectra and so is a useful basis for detailed
examination of the function and dynamics of the enzyme by heteronuclear
NMR methods.

Here we report the
use of this double mutant PaDDAH (DM-PaDDAH)
and its Cys249Ser variant triple mutant (TM-PaDDAH) that is almost
completely inactive catalytically. These variants allow characterization
of ligand binding and dynamic properties of the enzyme using NMR and
fluorescence methods, supplemented with molecular dynamics (MD) simulations.
A picture emerges of ligand-dependent ordering of the L1 loop. Incorporation
of an environmentally sensitive fluorophore within this loop enabled
the quantitative characterization of the enzyme mechanism. These data
suggest that the rate-limiting step of the reaction, which is remarkably
slow (kcat ∼ 0.5 s–1), is not release of the l-citrulline product but is attributable
to an earlier step associated with the enzyme substrate interaction.

Materials
and Methods
Protein Expression and Purification
The preparation
of wild-type PaDDAH and DM-PaDDAH has been described previously., For this work, a pPROEX Hta plasmid encoding TM-PaDDAH was obtained
by site-directed mutagenesis of the Cys249 codon using QuikChange
site-directed mutagenesis (Agilent Technologies). Similarly, variants
of both DM- and TM-PaDDAH were obtained, harboring additional Cys
substitutions for coupling to a fluorophore label (see below).

PaDDAH proteins were expressed in Escherichia coli BL21 (DE3) cells at 37 °C, following induction with isopropyl-β-d-thiogalactopyranoside. Uniformly 15N- and 15N, 13C-labeled proteins were prepared using
an M9 culture medium containing 15N2-ammonium
sulfate and 13C6-glucose as the sole nitrogen
and carbon sources. Protein purification was performed using immobilized
Ni-ion affinity chromatography (Ni Sepharose High Performance, GE
Healthcare), polyhistidine affinity tag removal with TEV protease,
removal of the affinity tag by a second Ni-affinity step, followed
by semipreparative size-exclusion chromatography (Superdex 200, GE
Healthcare) in 20 mM sodium phosphate buffer pH 7.0, 100 mM NaCl,
1 mM EDTA (buffer A).

NMR Spectroscopy
For NMR measurements,
the protein
samples were prepared at 0.8 mM concentration (for resonance assignments
and relaxation measurements) or 0.3 mM (for ligand titrations) in
buffer A, supplemented with 10% v/v D2O. Saturating concentrations
of l-citrulline were included in the bound state samples:
15 mM for DM-PaDDAH and 1.0 mM for TM-PaDDAH. A variety of NMR spectrometers
were used during this work: resonance assignments were obtained from
3D triple resonance data sets (HNCA, HNCACB, CBCACONH, HNCO, HN(CA)CO) obtained at either 600 or 700 MHz 1H frequency. Two-dimensional 15N, 1H-HSQC experiments
to monitor ligand binding were recorded using a 700 MHz instrument. 15N relaxation measurements, were performed
at both 600 and 800 MHz. The majority of the data sets were recorded
using a cryogenically cooled triple resonance probe, with the sample
temperature maintained at a calibrated 25 °C. The pulse sequences
employed H2O-selective “flip-back” pulses
and WATERGATE to minimize the effects of HN-resonance cross-saturation., Ligand-induced chemical shift perturbations differences for ligand
titrations were computed using the formula Δδ = [(Δδ1HN)2 + (Δδ15N/5)2]1/2.

15N Longitudinal (R1) and transverse (R2) relaxation rate constants and {1H}15N heteronuclear
nuclear Overhauser enhancements (hNOEs) were recorded for apo and l-citrulline bound states of DM-PaDDAH and TM-PaDDAH at two
field strengths, B0 = 14.1 T (1H frequency 600 MHz) and 18.8 T (1H 800 MHz), using pulse
sequences based upon those of Kay et al. with embellishments described by Farrow et al. Peak intensity errors were estimated from selected data
sets with replicated relaxation delays. Spectra were acquired at 25
°C using 2000 × 240 and 2048 × 360 complex points in
the t2 × t1 dimensions at 1H frequencies of 600 and 800 MHz respectively,
with 16–48 scans per t1 increment,
a recycle delay of 1.4 s in R1 and R2 experiments, and a recycle delay of 1.2 s
added prior to the 3.9 s 1H saturation period in the hNOE
experiments. The spectral widths in the direct and the indirect dimensions
were 10000 × 2000 and 12000 × 3242 Hz at 1H proton
frequencies of 600 and 800 MHz, respectively.

NMR data were
processed using NMRpipe package and analyzed
in CCPN analysis software., The data were analyzed
in terms of the model-free formalism, implemented
in a version of TENSOR 2.0, modified
to perform simultaneous fitting of data obtained at multiple
field strengths (Blackledge, M., unpublished data). Essentially identical
results were obtained using MODELFREE., Protons were
built onto the crystallographic coordinates using MOLMOL.

MD Simulations
Explicit solvent
molecular dynamics
simulations of apo and l-citrulline-bound DM-PaDDAH were
performed in Particle-Mesh-Ewald periodic boundary mode using AMBER11,, broadly according to the protocols adopted by Palmer and co-workers. Namely, the coordinates of the Cys249Ser PaDDAH/l-citrulline complex crystal structure (PDB code 1H70) were mutated in silico to include the substitutions Arg40Glu, Arg98His,
and Cys249Ser. The structure was minimized and solvated in a truncated
octahedral box of ∼7000 TIP3P water molecules with a minimum
distance of 11 Å from box boundary to any protein atom. Crystallographically
observed water molecules were retained. Six sodium ions were strategically
added to achieve charge neutrality. The total number of atoms was
∼24 950. Following separate minimization of the solvent
and intact system and regularization of the temperature (298 K) at
constant volume and pressure, a 20 ns simulation at constant pressure
and temperature (NPT) was used for equilibration. Multiple 20 ns NPT
simulations were performed using the AMBER ff99SBILDN force field
using a nonbonded cutoff of 10 Å, the SHAKE algorithm to constrain
vibrations of bonds involving H-atoms, and an integration time step
of 2 fs. Force field parameters for l-citrulline were generated
using the R.E.D. Server, and the Antechamber
tools in AMBER. For the apo-DM-PaDDAH simulation, the crystallographic
coordinates of the l-citrulline ligand were removed prior
to the solvation step. Visual inspection of the starting model validated
the presence of several water molecules in the ligand binding cavity.
Generalized order parameters for NH bonds (S2) were calculated using a method that accounts for the effects
of rare conformational transitions on the bond vector orientation
autocorrelation functions, described by Palmer and co-workers, from independent 4-ns trajectory slices.

Fluorophore
Labeling
DM- or TM-PaDDAH constructs were
mutated to contain an additional, solvent-exposed Cys residue at residue
positions corresponding to Thr19, Ser 20, Ser84, and Asp244. Following
expression, the purified proteins were each incubated in buffer A
with 1 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) for 0.5 h. The sample was then passed
through a desalting PD-10 column (GE Healthcare) in buffer A and concentrated
to 100 μM. N-[2-(1-Maleimidyl)ethyl]-7-(diethylamino)coumarin-3-carboxamide
(MDCC) dissolved in DMF (20 mM) was added
to a 2-fold excess, and the solution was incubated for 1 h. The reaction
mixture was passed again through a fresh desalting column to remove
unreacted label. The labeled protein concentration was measured by
spectrophotometry (ε430 (MDCC) = 46 800 M–1 cm–1, ε280(MDCC)
= 7470 M–1 cm–1, ε280(PaDDAH) = 18 910 M–1 cm–1). Formation of the product was assessed by electrospray ionization
mass spectrometry. Control experiments in which the coupling reaction
was carried out with DM-PaDDAH (i.e., lacking an additional Cys residue)
yielded no reaction with the MDCC coupling reagent, indicating that
none of the other cysteines in the protein are sufficiently solvent
accessible to react with the fluorophore. On the basis of this result
and the spectrophotometric measurements, the level of labeling was
in the 70–100% range.

Fluorescence Measurements
PaDDAH
fluorescence spectra
were measured at 25 °C on an FP-6300 spectrofluorometer (Jasco
Ltd.) in buffer A. MDCC fluorescence was excited at 430 nm and emission
was recorded at 476 nm. The change in fluorescence emission intensity
with ligand concentration was fit to a 1:1 binding isotherm using
nonlinear least-squares Python code written in-house.

Stopped-flow
experiments were carried out in buffer A at 25 °C using a HiTech
SF61 DX2 stopped-flow instrument equipped with a Xe/Hg lamp (TgK Scientific,
UK). MDCC fluorescence was excited at 436 nm, and emission was detected
by a photomultiplier after a 455 nm cutoff filter (Schott glass).
Protein (1 μM) was mixed with the ligand (ADMA or l-citrulline) at various concentrations up to 4 mM. In the mixing
cell, concentrations were half these. Each fluorescence time course
was fitted to a single exponential functionwith the observed first-order rate
constant, kobs, and maximum fluorescence
change, ΔFmax.

For mixing l-citrulline with MDCC-Ser20Cys TM-PaDDAH (fl-TM-PaDDAH), the dependence of kobs on l-citrulline concentration ([l-cit])
was linearly fitted for the association reaction:For the mixing of l-citrulline with
MDCC-Ser20Cys DM-PaDDAH (fl-DM-PaDDAH) conversion
of the substrate to products is included, using this reaction scheme:where kcat is
the rate constant for the conversion of the enzyme–substrate
complex to dissociated products. Under the pseudo-first-order conditions
of the experiment, where the change in fluorescence was attributed
to the formation of the fl-DM-PaDDAH/ADMA complex,
the dependence of kobs on ADMA concentration
was fitted to a straight-line graph:

Results
Resonance Assignments
We have previously reported the
backbone resonance assignments of the 254 residue DM-PaDDAH by triple
resonance NMR using a uniformly 2H, 13C, 15N-labeled sample. The 2D 15N, 1H-HSQC spectrum of TM-PaDDAH that contains
the additional substitution Cys249Ser is highly similar to that of
DM-PaDDAH. Nevertheless, because of the relatively large number of
cross peaks and the potential for misassignment by homology, we performed
an independent, ab initio, triple-resonance-based, backbone resonance
assignment for TM-PaDDAH. This could be achieved straightforwardly
without recourse to the perdeuteration that we had employed previously.
Comparison of the two sets of assignments resolved some minor ambiguities
for both proteins with a small number of corrections to the deposited
chemical shifts for DM-PaDDAH. Overall the assignment coverage (&gt;97%
of expected cross peaks) was excellent; none of the resolvable amide
NH cross peaks was unattributed, and only a few residues had no detectable
NH (Ser21, His22 in loop L1, and Gly246 in loop L7), presumably due
to exchange broadening. Three amide NH cross peaks appeared close
to the solvent H2O resonance: Glu171 (HN; 4.30
ppm), Asn209 (HN; 5.11 ppm), and Glu210 (HN 5.03
ppm). The strong upfield shift was consistent with the close proximity
of the amide HN of Glu171 to the aromatic ring of Tyr169,
and the amide HN of Asn209 and Glu210 to the ring of Trp207.
Chemical shift differences between DM- and TM-PaDDAH were localized
to those residues lining the active site cavity. The invariance of
the vast majority of chemical shifts indicated that the overall structure
of the two proteins was very similar. Moreover, analysis of the 13Cα/13Cβ secondary chemical shifts
in terms of predicted secondary structure showed that the patterns
were entirely consistent with the protein architecture, observed for
the single mutant, Cys249Ser PaDDAH protein in crystallo.

Ligand-Binding
Titrations
Step-wise titration of DM-PaDDAH
with substrates l-NMMA or ADMA yielded series of spectra
that were essentially indistinguishable from those obtained by titration
with the reaction product, l-citrulline. In these experiments,
the chemical shifts of a subset of cross peaks displayed monotonic
changes consistent with ligand binding with a dissociation rate on
the fast-intermediate time scale (Figure A).
This indicated that DM-PaDDAH was active and that the end-state of
the measurements with substrates was the l-citrulline, product-bound
state. Separate NMR titrations showed that the byproduct methylamine
(from l-NMMA) or dimethylamine (from ADMA) did not detectably
bind to the protein.

NMR titration of DM-PaDDAH with l-citrulline.
(A–C)
Selected regions of the 15N, 1H-HSQC spectrum
of 0.3 mM DM-PaDDAH recorded in the presence of different concentrations
of l-citrulline. Dashed arrows indicate the chemical shift
perturbation from the spectrum of the apo protein (black) to the effectively
saturated complex (red). The concentration of l-citrulline
in each spectrum was 0 mM (black), 0.6 mM (teal), 1.8 mM (orange),
3.0 mM (light green), 5.4 mM (purple), 8.7 mM (magenta), 13.8 mM (blue),
15.9 mM (dark green), and 20.7 mM (red), respectively. (D) Combined
chemical shift 15N, 1H perturbation (Δδ)
plotted as a function of residue number. The secondary structure of
PaDDAH is depicted at the top of the graph. The vertical scale is
matched to that of Figure D. Values of Δδ
for residues Leu18 and Ser20 were not measurable as the bound-state
cross peaks are broadened beyond detection even at the highest loading
of l-citrulline.

Most assignments of the l-citrulline-bound DM-PaDDAH
could
be obtained simply by monitoring the chemical shift trajectory during
the titration (Figure A–C). However,
for a subset of cross peaks (e.g., Gly17, Gly24, Figure A) the titration was characterized by an almost immediate
signal disappearance at low ligand concentration. The recovery of
apparently new cross peaks at distinct positions in the spectrum occurred
only at very high loading of the ligand, making transfer of assignment
from free to bound state ambiguous. This ambiguity was resolved by
a subset of triple-resonance NMR spectra for DM-PaDDAH saturated with l-citrulline that gave an almost complete assignment for the
bound state. Notably, NH group assignments could not be obtained in
the bound state for residues Leu18 and Ser20 in loop L1, and the NH
cross peaks for residues in the C-terminal portion of loop L6 remain
somewhat broader than the remainder.

For residues exhibiting
fast-exchange behavior (e.g., Figure A–C),
fits of the change in chemical shift
to a model of 1:1 PaDDAH/l-citrulline complex formation yielded
an estimate of the dissociation constant (KD(DM/l-cit)) of 3.6 ± 0.1 mM (Figure A). Interestingly, use of this value in simulations
of titration spectra for amides exhibiting intermediate exchange,
concomitant with the larger overall chemical shift perturbation, accurately
reproduced the observed dependence of the cross-peak position and
line shape profiles (Rasheed, M. et al., unpublished result). This
indicated that the differing behaviors, observed for specific cross
peaks, were attributable to a simple two-site exchange process without
long-lived intermediates. Figure D shows the l-citrulline-dependent chemical shift changes for DM-PaDDAH
plotted per residue. These changes occurred in regions lining the
active site pocket and particularly in loops L1–L7 that represent
the ligand-binding site. The largest chemical shift changes occurred
for residues in the N-terminal arm of loop L1, with the highest value
displayed by Thr19.

Substrate and product titrations were also
performed with TM-PaDDAH.
With l-NMMA and ADMA there were slow ligand- and time-dependent
changes in the spectrum of the protein–ligand mixtures that
were consistent with turnover of the substrate. This interpretation
was supported by observation of the TM-PaDDAH-dependent production
of l-citrulline and methyl- or dimethylamine in the one-dimensional 1H NMR spectrum. Thus, despite the removal of the catalytic
thiol by Cys249Ser mutation, TM-PaDDAH retained weak catalytic activity,
detectable at the high protein concentrations used for these NMR experiments.
On the other hand, titration of TM-PaDDAH with l-citrulline
gave rise to classic two-site, slow-exchange behavior (Figure A–C). Fitting
the change in a subset (Gly24, Glu158, Lys159) of peak intensities
as a function of ligand concentration yielded an estimate of the dissociation
constant for the TM-PaDDAH/l-citrulline complex (KD(TM/l-cit)) of 3.5
± 1.5 μM (Figure B).

NMR titration of TM-PaDDAH with l-citrulline. (A–C)
Selected regions of the 15N, 1H-HSQC spectrum
of 0.3 mM TM-PaDDAH recorded in the presence of different concentrations
of l-citrulline. Dashed arrows indicate the chemical shift
perturbation from the spectrum of the apo protein (black) to the effectively
saturated complex (red). The concentration of l-citrulline
in each spectrum was 0 mM (black), 0.18 mM (dark green), and 0.46
mM (red), respectively. (D) Combined chemical shift 15N, 1H perturbation (Δδ) plotted as a function of residue
number. The secondary structure of PaDDAH is depicted at the top of
the graph.

Ligand-dependent effects on the NMR spectrum
of DM- and TM-PaDDAH
proteins. Nonlinear best fits of the l-citrulline-dependent
change in (A) combined 15N, 1H chemical
shifts and (B) apo (green squares) and bound (red squares) cross peak
intensities for 0.3 mM DM-PaDDAH and TM-PaDDAH, respectively. In each
case, data points are aggregated over a small number of well-resolved
cross peaks. The fitted values of the DM-PaDDAH/l-citrulline
and TM-PaDDAH/l-citrulline dissociation constants are KD(DM/l-cit) = 3.6
± 0.1 mM and KD(TM/l-cit) = 3.5 ± 1.5 μM, respectively.

The backbone chemical shifts of l-citrulline-saturated
TM-PaDDAH were obtained by analysis of triple resonance NMR data sets
recorded on a 13C, 15N-labeled protein sample.
Figure D shows that the pattern of amide NH
chemical shift changes upon binding l-citrulline is similar
to that for DM-PaDDAH (Figure D), with the
largest changes occurring for loops L1, L6, and L7. As with DM-PaDDAH,
the most highly perturbed cross peaks are those that derive from the
N-terminal segment of loop L1. In this case, assignments of the NH
groups of both Leu18 and Ser20 in the bound state could be unambiguously
identified; these two residues displayed the highest values of l-citrulline-dependent chemical shift perturbation of the whole
protein. This observation is relevant to the interpretation of the
corresponding behavior for DM-PaDDAH: the intermediate exchange regime
that pertains to those cross-peaks with the largest chemical shift
differences could lead to a situation in which exchange broadening
persists even in the presence of a very significant excess of l-citrulline. This broadening rationalizes the failure to detect
NH cross peaks for Leu18 and Ser20 in the spectrum of l-citrulline-bound
DM-PaDDAH.

Dynamics by NMR
Backbone dynamics
of ligand-free (apo)
and l-citrulline-saturated DM- and TM-PaDDAH proteins were
measured using nuclear relaxation measurements recorded at two field
strengths. The R1, R2, and hNOE values were plotted per residue for apo and l-citrulline saturated DM-PaDDAH in Figures  and , respectively. The corresponding
data for apo and l-citrulline-bound TM-PaDDAH were highly
similar (Figures 1 and 2 of the ). The data were analyzed in terms of the model-free formalism, using essentially standard procedures., The effective overall rotational correlation time (τc) for the protein was estimated from the set of 15N R2/R1 ratios, trimmed
for outliers. The data for the four samples yielded τc in the range 13.7–14.4 ns in line with expectations for a
28 kDa protein at 25 °C. Using the crystallographic coordinates
of Cys249Ser PaDDAH (PDB code 1H70) as a structural model, the analysis
also showed that the degree of rotational diffusion anisotropy, predicted
by the NMR measurements, is relatively small (D∥/D⊥ ∼ 1.04),
broadly consistent the moments of inertia ratio Ixx/Iyy/Izz = 1.0:0.86:0.80.

15N nuclear relaxation measurements for apo DM-PaDDAH.
Per-residue 15N R1, 15N R2, and {1H}15N heteronuclear NOE (hNOE) values obtained at 1H 600 MHz
(blue) and 800 MHz (red) and 25 °C. The secondary structure of
PaDDAH is depicted at the top of the figure.

15N nuclear relaxation measurements for l-citrulline-saturated
DM-PaDDAH. Per-residue 15N R1, 15N R2, and {1H}15N heteronuclear NOE (hNOE) values obtained at 1H 600 MHz (blue) and 800 MHz (red) and 25 °C. The secondary
structure of PaDDAH is depicted at the top of the figure.

For apo DM-PaDDAH evidence of exchange contributions
to 15N R2 (Rex) was slight: the maximum values detected at 800 MHz
were &lt;5 s–1 with outlying, highest values identified
for Phe2
in the N-terminus, Leu145, His162 in L6, and Thr165 (data not shown).
On the other hand, following model-free analysis, the pattern of generalized
order parameters (S2) for NH bonds was
broadly flat with values in the range 0.8–0.9, which are typical
of highly ordered protein structure (Figure A). Exceptions were Phe2 at the extreme N-terminus of the protein,
and Gly17-Ser20 and Leu23-Lys25 in loop L1, which display S2 as low as 0.55, and Glu158 and Val160 in loop
L6 (S2 = 0.73 and 0.69, respectively).

NMR and
MD-derived order parameters for apo and l-citrulline-bound
DM-PaDDAH. (A) Plots of the generalized order parameters S2 for 15N–1H bond vector
orientations obtained by model-free analysis of the multiple field 15N R1, R2, and {1H}15N heteronuclear NOE data
for apo (blue) and l-citrulline-saturated (green) DM-PaDDAH.
(B) Plots of 15N–1H S2 values obtained from multiple slices of molecular dynamics
trajectories computed for apo (blue) and l-citrulline-saturated
(green) DM-PaDDAH based upon the crystal structure coordinates PDB
code 1H70. In both (A) and (B), the difference
in S2 values between the two states is
plotted in orange. The secondary structure of PaDDAH is depicted at
the top of the figure.

For l-citrulline-saturated DM-PaDDAH, isolated instances
of a significant exchange contribution to 15N transverse
relaxation from exchange (Rex) at 800
MHz were detected for Thr71 (2.7 s–1), Leu145 (7.0
s–1), and Val160 (10.1 s–1). The
intensities of cross peaks for residues in the C-terminal portion
of loop L6, comprising His162-Thr165, are relatively weak in the spectrum,
suggesting the presence of residual 1H exchange line broadening,
and leading to an increase in the uncertainty in the heteronuclear
NOE measurement due to the reduced signal-to-noise ratio. Following
model-free analysis the profile of S2 values
for DM-PaDDAH saturated with l-citrulline was broadly flat
at the level of S2 &gt; 0.8 for the majority
of the length of the protein, with notable low values at Gly24 (S2 = 0.71) in the C-terminal portion of loop
L1 and Glu158 (S2 = 0.74) and Val160 (S2 = 0.66) in the N-terminal part of loop L6
(Figure A).

An essentially identical
pattern of dynamics parameters was detected
for apo and l-citrulline-bound TM-PaDDAH. Thus ligand binding
to DM- and TM-PaDDAH leads to ordering of the N-terminal portion of
loop L1, with quenching of the picosecond–nanosecond time scale
motion that gives rise to low S2 values
in the ligand-free state. The fast motion associated with Gly24 in
the C-terminal portion of loop L1 and residues Glu158 and Val160 in
the N-terminal part of loop L6 appeared to be unaffected by ligand
binding, as these residues exhibited relatively low S2 values in both the apo and l-citrulline bound
states. Notably, these residues exhibited small but significant chemical
shift changes in the presence of l-citrulline, but these
perturbations were not as great as those shown by neighboring residues
in loops L1 and L6 that were predicted from the crystal structure
to be in direct contact with the ligand (e.g., Leu18 in L1 and His162
in L6).

Dynamics by Molecular Dynamics Simulation
To provide
a real-space picture of the dynamic properties of PaDDAH, we performed
atomistic, explicit solvent MD simulations of apo and l-citrulline-bound
PaDDAH, based upon the X-ray coordinates of the protein/ligand complex.
For the apo protein trajectories the l-citrulline coordinates
were removed, and solvent water molecules were allowed to enter the
binding site, both during the artificial solvation stage and throughout
the energy minimization, equilibration, and production phases of simulation.
Consistently during multiple simulations at 25 °C, the L1 loop
was observed to detach from the main body of the protein and wander
around relative to the rest of the protein without returning to its
starting position (Figure A). On the other
hand, for simulations with bound l-citrulline, the N-terminal
part of the L1 loop remained close to its starting position. Of interest
with respect to the description of the ligand coordination described
in the introduction is the trajectory of Leu18 in the L1 loop. In
the case of the ligand-bound protein, Leu18 remains essentially locked
in van der Waals contacts with the bound l-citrulline with
maintenance of the χ1 and χ2 torsion angles (Figure B). On the other hand in the case of the apo protein,
the Leu18 side chain appeared to be almost unconstrained and could
also adopt orientations that point further away from the main body
of the protein (Figure A).

MD simulation of PaDDAH.
Twenty-five equally spaced snapshots of
100 ns atomistic explicit solvent molecular dynamics trajectories
computed for (A) apo DM-PaDDAH, and (B) l-citrulline bound
DM-PaDDAH. The position of loop L1 is indicated in each case. The
protein backbone atom coordinates have been best fit to the starting
structure to eliminate the effects overall rotation and translation. l-Citrulline is shown in green. In each snapshot, the side chain
of Leu18 in loop 1 is depicted in stick representation; red (start,
0 ns)-to-blue (100 ns) color gradation is used to indicate a sense
of the time course of the simulation.

Representative MD simulation trajectories were used to predict
the generalized order parameters for NH bond orientation (S2), for comparison with
those derived from NMR relaxation measurements (Figure B). Notwithstanding the inherent limitations of the force
field approximations, the overall profiles of measured and predicted S2 values were broadly similar, consistent with
other similar studies.,,− This suggested that the MD trajectory provided a
realistic picture for the differential dynamics of the apo and ligand-bound
states of PaDDAH, evidenced by the NMR measurements. MD-derived S2 values included residues for which NMR measurements
were not possible, for example, due to rapid NH/solvent exchange.
Plotting the difference between the values for apo and l-citrulline-bound
PaDDAH suggested that ligand binding quenched high-frequency, internal
motion in the N-terminal portion of the L1 loop (ΔS2 ∼0.33), accompanied by relatively minor effects
in some other parts of the protein chain (residues 88, 122, 187–189;
|ΔS2| &lt; 0.17).

Fluorescence
Measurements
Combined NMR and MD analysis
of PaDDAH showed that ligand binding was accompanied by a disorder-to-order
transition for the L1 loop. This transition was characterized further
by fluorescence, following chemical ligation of an environmentally
sensitive diethylaminocoumarin fluorophore to a cysteine, introduced
at specific locations by site-directed mutagenesis. The procedure
adopted was essentially identical to that described for the bacterial
actin homologue ParM. Single cysteines
were introduced at several sites in the TM-PaDDAH protein, including
Thr19Cys (L1), Ser20Cys (L1), Ser84Cys (L3), and Asp244Cys (L7). In
each case, the fluorescent MDCC label was coupled to the protein.
MDCC did not couple to the “wild-type” TM-PaDDAH protein
at all, consistent with the wild-type Cys residues (Cys45, Cys70,
Cys74, Cys205) being buried. Each of the fluorophore-labeled proteins
was titrated with l-citrulline, following the change in fluorescence
as shown in Figure . The fluorescence intensity
either increased (Ser20Cys) or decreased (Thr19Cys, Ser84Cys, Asp244Cys)
in the presence of l-citrulline. This suggested that, while
in each case the fluorophore was sensitive to occupation of the TM-PaDDAH
binding site, the nature of the change in the environment of the fluorophore
was dependent upon the site of modification. In each case, the dissociation
constant was in the low micromolar range. The value for MDCC-Ser20Cys
TM-PaDDAH, 7.2 ± 1.6 μM, was only 2-fold higher than that
obtained by heteronuclear NMR with unlabeled TM-PaDDAH (3.5 μM,
see above). The titration with MDCC-Ser20Cys TM-PaDDAH was accompanied
by an increase in MDCC fluorescence, consistent with the fluorophore
moving from a relatively solvent-exposed position in the apo state
to a more buried location upon l-citrulline binding. Thus,
PaDDAH, labeled at the Ser20Cys site in L1, provided a probe that
behaved in a manner consistent with ligand-dependent ordering of the
L1 loop, perhaps driven by contact of the neighboring Leu18 side chain
with l-citrulline, as suggested in the MD simulations. However,
there was no fluorescence change for ADMA interaction with MDCC-Ser20Cys-MDCC
TM-PaDDAH (fl-TM-PaDDAH), suggesting that affinity
of this DDAH substrate for this catalytically inactive (Cys249Ser)
variant was weak.

Change in fluorescence on titration of l-citrulline
with
MDCC-conjugated variants of TM-PaDDAH. Error bars reflect the standard
error of multiple fluorescence measurements. Nonlinear least-squares
fits were performed for: (A) MDCC-Thr19Cys DM-PaDDAH; (B) MDCC-Ser20Cys
DM-PaDDAH; (C) MDCC-Ser84Cys DM-PaDDAH; and (D) MDCC-Asp244Cys DM-PaDDAH.
The fitted values for the equilibrium dissociation constants are 10.8
± 1.1 μM, 7.2 ± 1.6 μM, 15.7 ± 2.8 μM,
and 23.5 ± 2.7 μM, respectively.

l-Citrulline was mixed with fl-TM-PaDDAH
under pseudo-first-order conditions and the time course of fluorescence
followed. There was a systematic rise in fluorescence emission with
monoexponential behavior (Figure  of the ). The kinetics were measured
over a range of l-citrulline concentrations (Figure A). The dependence of kobs on concentration was linearly fitted for the TM-PaDDAH/l-citrulline association reaction (see ), yielding koff(TM/l-cit) = 0.86 s–1, and kon(TM/l-cit) = 1.0
× 105 M–1 s–1. The predicted equilibrium dissociation constant, KD(TM/l-cit) (= koff(TM/l-cit)/kon(TM/l-cit)) was 8.4 μM.

Time-resolved
measurement of ligand binding to fluorescently labeled
PaDDAH. Plots of the fitted apparent first-order rate constants kobs for the time-dependent change in fluorescence
emission filtered at 455 nm in multiple independent stopped-flow rapid
mixing measurements of the interaction of (A) l-citrulline
with MDCC-Ser20Cys TM-PaDDAH (fl-TM PaDDAH) and (B)
ADMA with MDCC-Ser20Cys DM-PaDDAH (fl-DM PaDDAH).
Least squares fitting (see ) yields for (A) koff(TM/l-cit) = 0.86 s–1, and kon(TM/l-cit) = 1.0 × 105 M–1 s–1, and for (B) kon(DM/ADMA) = 1.8 × 105 M–1 s–1 and koff(DM/ADMA) + kcat = 2.5 s–1.

Conversely with MDCC-Ser20Cys DM-PaDDAH (fl-DM-PaDDAH),
there was no signal for binding l-citrulline, consistent
with the very weak interaction that was observed by NMR at higher
protein and ligand concentrations. However, there was a fluorescence
response to binding substrate, ADMA, and its time course was measured
by stopped-flow fluorescence. Several stopped-flow traces were recorded
for different concentrations of ADMA under pseudo-first-order conditions
(Figure B). Because fl-DM-PaDDAH
retains the critical catalytic Cys249 residue, it was expected to
convert ADMA to l-citrulline and dimethylamine (DMA). The
data were then analyzed in terms of a Michaelis–Menten enzyme
reaction scheme (see ). The plot of the kobs against ADMA concentration yielded
an essentially straight line graph (Figure B). Least-squares fitting gave kon(DM/ADMA) as 1.8 × 105 M–1 s–1 and koff(DM/ADMA) + kcat = 2.5 s–1.
Assuming kcat = 0.5 s–1, as estimated previously for the unmodified DM-PaDDAH,koff(DM/ADMA) = 2.0 s–1, and the predicted equilibrium dissociation
constant for fl-DM-PaDDAH binding to ADMA KD(DM/ADMA) (= koff(DM/ADMA)/kon(DM/ADMA)) = 110 μM.

Discussion
NMR
and fluorescence methods were used to probe the effects of
ligand binding to both active and catalytically inactive (Cys249Ser)
variants of bacterial DDAH. The combination of chemical shift assignments
and heteronuclear relaxation measurements indicate that the protein
maintains its overall ββαβ-propeller fold
in both apo and ligand-bound states. Furthermore, it behaves as a
pseudospherical monomer with rotational correlation time of 14 ns,
consistent with computer predictions of the hydrodynamic characteristics,
using the crystallographic coordinates of the l-citrulline-bound
protein.

Substrate binding to active DM-PaDDAH was accompanied
by conversion
to l-citrulline, which binds to the enzyme with relatively
weak affinity, KD(DM/l-cit) = 3.6 mM as measured by NMR. This value is in reasonable agreement
to that obtained by colorimetric inhibition kinetics for the wild-type
protein (Ki(l-cit) = 8.4 mM). Although TM-PaDDAH was previously
assumed to be inactive, the slow conversion of ADMA to DMA and l-citrulline was observed by 1D 1H NMR in the presence
of high concentration of TM-PaDDAH over a period of hours. This reaction
was likely to be due to the presence of a very low catalytic activity
of the mutant enzyme (∼0.04 h–1). Similar
instances of residual activity of enzymes mutated at “essential”
residues have been documented elsewhere reflecting the fact that the “inactive” site of such
variants can still retain properties that lower the activation barrier
to substrate conversion, albeit to a lesser degree than for the wild
type. Consistent with this interpretation, this activity only occurred
significantly at the high concentration of TM-PaDDAH required for
multidimensional NMR experiments. When ADMA was added to low concentrations
of TM-PaDDAH in fluorescence experiments, there was no evidence of
substrate binding or turnover.

It has been suggested that ADMA
binding to PaDDAH is accompanied
by substrate-assisted deprotonation of the active site Cys249 thiol
group, such that the positive charge of the buried dimethylguanidinium
group is balanced by the negative charge of the induced Cys thiolate. From our time-resolved fluorescence measurement
with fl-DM-PaDDAH, an apparent dissociation constant
for the interaction of ADMA (KD(DM/ADMA)) was obtained, indicating binding is 30-fold tighter than for the
reaction product, l-citrulline. This difference may be due
to the electrostatic interaction between the complementary charges
of the ADMA guanidinium moiety and Cys249 thiolate contributing to
the binding energy. The identity of the conjugate base that is responsible
for the removal of the Cys249 thiol proton in the presence of substrate
remains elusive.

In contrast l-citrulline binds relatively tightly to TM-PaDDAH
with KD(TM/l-cit) being 3.5 μM, as measured by NMR titration. Consistent with
this, l-citrulline binds to a series of fluorescently labeled
TM-PaDDAH variants with dissociation constants in the low micromolar
range, as assessed in both static (Figure ) and time-dependent (Figure B) measurements.
The PaDDAH Cys249 pKa is reported to be 8.8 in the
absence of ligand. Replacement of Cys249
with Ser in TM-PaDDAH substitutes the Cys thiol with a Ser hydroxyl
group with a significantly higher pKa.
Therefore, the hydroxyl proton is not likely to be removed in the
presence of a positively charged substrate by the same mechanism that
can take place with Cys in this position. This gives the active site
an electrostatic profile that is more resistant to binding the substrate
ADMA, since the Ser residue cannot be deprotonated to make a favorable
interaction with the positively charged methylguanidinium group but
apparently is better able to bind neutral l-citrulline: KD(TM/l-cit) is 3.6
μM as measured by NMR or 8.4 μM by measuring binding kinetics
for MDCC-Ser20Cys TM-PaDDAH.

The heteronuclear relaxation measurements
provide a picture of
apo DM-PaDDAH that exhibits relatively little internal motion. A clear
exception to this characterization is reflected in the NH bond S2 order parameters, which report on “fast”
internal motion, for the residues of loop L1 (Figure A). The lowest value of S2 is
0.55 for Thr19, well outside of the range typically associated with
ordered protein structure. This result, combined with the fact that
NH cross peaks of two other L1 residues are not detected in the NMR
experiments, suggests that the L1 region is dynamically disordered
on the pico- to nanosecond time scale. Upon the basis of a starting
model, derived from the PaDDAH crystal structure from which the l-citrulline has been removed, the unbiased MD simulation of
DM-PaDDAH provides a visual representation of the nanosecond time
scale dynamics of the protein. The profile of S2 order parameters, predicted by the MD trajectories, is similar
to that obtained experimentally, despite the known limitations of
the MD force fields. The MD results therefore
provide both a qualitative (Figure ) and quantitative
(Figure B) picture of the internal motion
of the protein. Thus, as Figure A demonstrates,
in the apo protein the L1 loop displays a high degree of flexibility
relative to the rest of the protein. In particular, both the backbone
and side chain of Leu18 move away from the body of the protein, providing
an uninterrupted access channel to the active site.

In contrast
in the presence of excess l-citrulline ligand,
the profile of NMR-derived S2 order parameters
possesses an even lower level of variance than for apo DM-PaDDAH.
Notably, the low S2 values in the L1 loop
region are elevated to normal levels, suggesting that in the bound
protein the fast time scale internal motion is largely quenched. This
characteristic is recapitulated in the MD simulations as depicted
in Figures B and B,
where the range of conformational states adopted by the L1 loop is
extremely limited compared to that exhibited in the case of the apo
protein. In particular, the position of Leu18 is essentially fixed,
and the side chain remains in van der Waals contact with the l-citrulline throughout. Importantly, 15N relaxation analysis
of either apo and l-citrulline-bound TM-PaDDAH, a complex
that exhibits much slower dissociation kinetics, shows an essentially
identical picture of ligand-dependent L1 dynamics to DM-PaDDAH. Intriguingly,
in the human DDAH-1 protein, substitution of Leu30 which corresponds
to Leu18 in PaDDAH with alanine raises the substrate KM 10-fold. This highlights
the importance of this evolutionarily conserved residue for ligand
interaction.

The observation that the L1 loop undergoes an apparent
disorder-to-order
transition upon ligand binding led us to consider whether we could
exploit this behavior to develop a fluorescence reporter of l-citrulline. It is possible that the rate determining step of the
DDAH reaction mechanism is release of the l-citrulline product
limited by the opening rate of the L1 loop. Development of an in situ
reporter of the presence of l-citrulline compatible with
time-resolved fluorescence measurements would enable us to address
this possibility. To these ends we built upon previous work, and conjugated the environmentally sensitive fluorescent label,
MDCC, to Cys residues introduced into various positions in the ligand
binding loops of DM- and TM-PaDDAH.

The fluorescence of the
TM-PaDDAH conjugates is sensitive to the
presence of l-citrulline (Figure ). In the case of the Cys20-MDCC-conjugated TM-PaDDAH, the fluorescence
increased, consistent with l-citrulline binding causing closure
of the L1-loop and introducing interactions of the fluorophore with
the protein surface. For the other three conjugates tested, namely,
Thr19Cys-, Ser84Cys-, and Asp244Cys-, l-citrulline induced
a decrease in emission intensity, perhaps consistent with ligand binding
causing a rearrangement that effects higher solvent exposure of the
coumarin. A full rationalization of the fluorescence behavior would
require detailed, structural studies of the apo and bound states of
the fluorescence conjugates. Nevertheless, these results suggest that
such reagents might provide the basis for further development of a
protein-based optical sensor for l-citrulline at micromolar
concentrations, a level that is appropriate to the range in which l-citrulline may behave as a biomarker of diseases of the human
gut. To our knowledge, measurement of l-citrulline concentration is currently obtained by one of two
methods: either a somewhat laborious colorimetric reaction, that can be confounded by the presence of other uriedyl-group containing
compounds and some other common reagents (sucrose and guanidinium
chloride) or by amino acid analysis or hybrid liquid chromatography
(LC)-mass spectrometry and LC-laser-induced fluorescence methods that
require expensive instrumentation.

The fluorescence signal was
used to measure the kinetic parameters
for the interaction of ADMA and l-citrulline with Ser20Cys-MDCC
DM- and TM-PaDDAH. From the stopped-flow measurements kon(TM/l-cit) = 1.0 × 105 M–1 s–1 and kon(DM/ADMA) = 1.8 × 105 M–1 s–1. However, as discussed
above, l-citrulline binding to DM-PaDDAH could not be measured
by this technique, but an NMR titration gives KD(DM/l-cit) = 3.6 mM. An estimate
of koff(DM/l-cit) is possible by combining this number and an estimate of kon(DM/l-cit). Assuming kon(DM/l-cit) is similar
to kon(TM/l-cit) and kon(DM/ADMA), then koff(DM/l-cit) is
predicted to be ∼500 s–1. This value is ∼1000-fold
higher than the turnover number for the enzyme, indicating in turn
that the rate limiting step is not product release or lid-opening.
Moreover for lid-opening to be rate determining, then the true value
of kon(DM/l-cit) would need to be ∼100 M–1 s–1, which is so small as to be extremely unlikely. The rate determining
step of the DDAH reaction must therefore be represented by an earlier
“chemical” step in the mechanism.,

In this study, we have characterized the equilibrium and kinetic
aspects of the interaction of substrate and reaction products with
PaDDAH, alongside both experimental measurement and computer simulation
of the molecular dynamics of apo and citrulline-bound proteins. Overall
the picture that emerges is that the lid to the active site chamber
of PaDDAH, represented by loop L1, is highly dynamic in the apo state
to facilitate substrate access. The lid is demonstrably more ordered
in the ligand bound state, in part as a result of contact between
the resident ligand and L1 loop residues, yet the opening rate of
the lid is much faster than the overall reaction rate for the enzyme-catalyzed
reaction, suggesting that the lid can detach from and rebind the bound
reaction product l-citrulline. It is difficult to assess
whether the L1 loop is more strongly constrained during the intermediate
steps of the reaction mechanism, such as during the lifetime of the
putative covalent thiouronium intermediate that is formed concomitant
with the scission of the substrate Cζ–Nη bond., Potentially the flexibility of
the loop allows the exchange of the released dimethylamine coproduct
for a water molecule that is required for the hydrolysis of the intermediate,
though there may be other exit routes for this as it is the smaller
of the reaction products, for example, via a narrow opening between
Leu161, Thr165, and Gly245. However, our conclusion that chemistry
(not product release) is the rate-limiting step would be in agreement
with earlier findings in which the covalent thiouronium intermediate
accumulates and is trapped in reactions during steady-state turnover.,

The fluorophore-TM-PaDDAH conjugates described in this work
provide
a platform for the development of a protein-based sensor of l-citrulline: the immediate aim of such work would be to enhance the
signal-to-noise ratio of the fluorescence change and to measure the
ligand selectivity. Given the rather unusual pentein propeller fold
of DDAH, and the coordination of bound ligand which appears to depend
upon specific H-bonding arrangement of the α-amino and -carboxylate
groups, it is intriguing to consider whether protein design or directed
evolution methods could be used to develop DDAH-based sensors for
other amino acids.

Supporting Information Available
15N nuclear relaxation
measurements for apo TM-PaDDAH (Figure S1), 15N nuclear
relaxation measurements for l-citrulline-saturated TM-PaDDAH
(Figure S2), and representative time-resolved stopped-flow fluorescence
traces for MDCC-labeled DM-PaDDAH with ADMA (Figure S3). This material
is available free of charge via the Internet at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bi4015924_si_001.pdf

Accession Codes
Backbone chemical
shift assignments and 15N nuclear relaxation rates described
herein have been deposited in the BioMagResBank: accession numbers 19743, 19744, 19615, and 19616. 

The authors
declare no competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
The authors gratefully
acknowledge the support and guidance
of the staff of the MRC Biomedical NMR Centre at NIMR, Stephen Martin
for help with fluorescence measurements, and John Bouquiere for assistance
with MD simulations. P.C.D. is grateful for discussions with Professors
Art Palmer and Rafael Bruschweiler regarding the calculation of order
parameters from MD trajectories.

Abbreviations
ADMAasymmetric Nη,Nη-dimethylarginine

AUCanalytical ultracentrifugation

DDAHdimethylarginine
dimethylaminohydrolase

DMdouble mutant

DTTdithiothreitol

fl-MDCC-Ser20Cys fluorescently labeled-

hNOEheteronuclear
Overhouser effect

l-citl-citrulline

l-NMMAl-Nη-monomethylarginine

MDmolecular dynamics

MDCCN-[2-(1-maleimidyl)ethyl]-7-(diethylamino)coumarin-3-carboxamide

NMRnuclear magnetic
resonance

NOSnitric
oxide synthase

NPTconstant atom number, pressure and temperature

PaDDAHPseudomonas aeruginosa DDAH

TMtriple
mutant

