Structure mapping, also known
as footprinting, provides a rapid means for probing nucleic acid conformation
at single-nucleotide resolution. New modification chemistries, higher-throughput
readouts, multidimensional expansions, error analysis, and resources
for sharing data are advancing the approach. Despite powerful insights from separate data sets, ad hoc choices
in data processing have precluded robust comparison of chemical reactivities
across RNAs and readouts.− For example, “hot spots” that might signal specific
noncanonical features, in one RNA cannot be confidently
established in other RNAs without universal reactivity scales, analogous
to problems in nuclear magnetic resonance chemical shift analysis
prior to the adoption of referencing samples.

In principle, establishing reactivities should be unambiguous.
Modification fractions ri of nucleotides i can be directly computed from
the numbers of “raw” observed products Fi by(derivation in the ). While F0, the number
of “full-length” products without chemical modification,
is visible for RNA domains of up to 500 nucleotides, accurate quantitation
is typically precluded by detector saturation of this strong band
in electrophoresis data or by ligation biases in deep sequencing data.
Our lab’s previous likelihood framework for F0 depended on a priori reactivity distributions
that were approximate. Aviran et al. explored
setting F0 to zero when it could not be
measured, a poor assumption under typical
“single-hit” conditions. Karabiber et al. proposed equalizing
reactivities observed in the 5′ half versus the 3′ half
of the data,, a generally inaccurate approximation.
Several recent studies have not applied eq . Further complicating cross-experiment
comparisons are differences in whether eq  is
applied to no-modifier control samples, in sequence alignment tools,
in error estimation, and in normalization procedures,,, as well as a lack of validation
protocols.

To address these issues, we implemented two straightforward
standardization
strategies: (1) dilution comparisons to mitigate saturation and (2)
use of universal internal controls (Figure A,B). To illustrate, Figure C gives capillary
electrophoresis (CE) data of primer extension products for the P4–P6
domain of the Tetrahymena ribozyme probed with dimethyl
sulfate (DMS) to methylate exposed N1/N3 atoms of A/C nucleotides. The saturated peak shape for the fully extended
product is apparent; 10-fold dilution of the same sample gave a weaker
signal-to-noise ratio overall but an unsaturated, Gaussian shape for
the F0 peak (Figure D; further dilutions verified the lack of saturation). Automated
scaling of these dilution data allowed unbiased measurement of F0 (Figure E,F). Application
of eq , background subtraction, and normalization
(see below) gave the reactivity profile in Figure F. The final results agreed within error with averaged data
collected by different experimenters (Figure F and Methods and Figure 1 of the ). Further, as expected (but not assumed), DMS reactivities
at G and U nucleotides were within error of zero. Tests comparing
data from 8-fold variations of DMS and reagents 1-cyclohexyl(2-morpholinoethyl)carbodiimide
metho-p-toluene sulfonate (CMCT, modifying G/U) and 1-methyl-7-N-isatoic anhydride
(1M7, modifying 2′-OH; SHAPE,) further confirmed
this standardization (Figure 2 of the ).

Independent validation of this procedure
came from incorporating
“reference” hairpins in 5′ and 3′ flanking
cassettes., GAGUA hairpin loops (Figure a) give strong signals for DMS (at the A’s), CMCT (at
the bulge U), and 1M7 (all five residues). “Raw” Fi counts were 5-fold lower
at the 5′ GAGUA than at the 3′ GAGUA (red bars in Figure E), as reverse transcriptases encountered stops
in between those segments (“overmodification”, also
called attenuation or signal decay). The equality of the GAGUA final
reactivities ri confirmed
accurate overmodification correction and background subtraction of
these data (red bars in Figure F) and supported
use of the GAGUA data as normalization standards.

Proposed steps to standardize
chemical mapping experiments (red
and blue text) read out by (A) capillary electrophoresis and (B) deep
sequencing (MAP-seq). CE profiles for the P4–P6–2HP
RNA probed with DMS at (C) standard dilution and (D) 10-fold dilution.
(E) Automated scaling matches diluted sample data to undiluted data.
(F) Final reactivity profile (black), validated by data taken at 4-fold
lower DMS concentrations (green, nearly indistinguishable) and equality
at GAGUA referencing hairpins (red). MAP-seq data for P4–P6
RNA without (F) and with (G) ligation bias correction determined from
internal referencing. (H) Overlay of CE and MAP-seq data; errors are
standard deviations of replicates (Figure 1 of the ).

An alternative readout, MAP-seq (multiplexed accessibility
probing),
follows nucleic acid modification and primer extension with ligation
of an Illumina adapter and deep sequencing, without bias-introducing
polymerase chain reaction amplification (Methods of the ). We previously observed (through CE) that ligation yields were systematically
low for full-length cDNA products. This effect led to underestimation
of F0 and to an apparent discordance between
the 5′ and 3′ GAGUA references (red bars, Figure G). Nevertheless, the requirement of equality at
these sequences allowed automated estimation of a ligation bias correction
factor [0.18 in this case (Methods of the )]. Despite involving rather different protocols,
the CE and MAP-seq results then agreed within errors estimated from
replicates (Figure H, and see below).

To comprehensively test the standardization protocol, we took measurements
with DMS, CMCT, and 1M7, using both CE and MAP-seq protocols on several
structured RNAs, including ligand-bound riboswitches and rRNA domains
(Figures 3–8 of the )., In the MAP-seq experiment, data for the
P4–P6–2HP domain established the ligation bias correction
factor and normalization for the coloaded RNAs. The agreement within
error between reactivities at GAGUA reference hairpins across all
constructs and general agreement between CE and MAP-seq data sets
confirmed the accuracy of the proposed standardization (Figure 1 of
the ). No length
bias was detected for MAP-seq, but a residual sequence bias was seen
in reactive purine-rich segments; these mostly occurred in flanking
sequences outside the structured RNA domains (Figures 3–8 of
the ). In both CE
and MAP-seq data, normalization to GAGUA references exposed limitations
of prior heuristics that normalize based on high percentile values
within each RNA (or in 5′ and 3′ halves);−,, these
values in fact vary by &gt;2-fold across the different RNAs.

The standardization procedures allowed the identification of 33
hot spot nucleotides, defined here as those giving DMS, CMCT, or 1M7
reactivity of &gt;1.5, well above control values (1.0) established
by
GAGUA references (Table 2 of the ). First, in agreement with conventional use of these data to infer
secondary structure, all 16 cases of
high DMS/CMCT/1M7 reactivities observed within stretches of more than
two residues corresponded to apical loops (Figure B) or unpaired “linkers” (Figure C). Second, three isolated adenosines with high 1M7 but low
DMS reactivity were stacked on one face, a structural feature previously
requiring differential SHAPE measurements for identification. Third, all seven isolated highly CMCT/1M7-reactive
uridines and two highly 1M7-reactive adenosines were extrahelical
bulges (Figure D), a powerful signature for guiding or validating tertiary structure
modeling. Most intriguing were five adenosines
with DMS reactivities of &gt;1.5 but negligible 1M7 reactivity (Figure E–G). Each of these adenosines showed Hoogsteen
edge burial and nucleobase stacking on both faces; such burial information
should be useful in tertiary structure modeling. The most DMS-reactive
nucleotide, A58 in Saccharomyces cerevisiae tRNA(phe)
(Figure E), is also methylated at the N1 position in vivo. The pocket around
DMS hot spot nucleotides may thus be under selection for electronegativity
to enhance enzymatic reaction or hydrogen bonding to partners. As
further examples, A198 and A207 (Figure F,G)
in the isolated P4–P6 domain are buried, but N1 atoms are available
for contacts in the full Tetrahymena ribozyme or
recognition by protein partners. These signatures could not be identified
unambiguously in prior work because of uncertain data scaling.

The inclusion of dilution samples and referencing hairpins allows
standardization, validation, and deeper analysis of structure mapping
experiments at negligible additional cost. For CE studies, obtaining
the necessary data simply involves diluting the prepared samples into
running buffer and repeating electrophoresis and HiTRACE/HiTRACE-Web
analysis (Figure A). Inclusion of GAGUA hairpins was used here to test the overmodification
correction and normalize CE data but was only strictly necessary in
MAP-seq experiments. In fact, just a single construct with flanking
reference hairpins needs to be doped into the MAP-seq RNA pool; standardization
is then automated via MAPseeker analysis (Figure B). The general adoption of simple
standardization steps, and their extension to very long transcripts
and to other solution conditions and modifiers, should help RNA structure
mapping data become more accurate and more transferrable between molecules
and experiments.

Three-dimensional environments associated with high chemical
reactivity
to Watson–Crick edge modifiers [DMS for A/C and CMCT for G/U
(base color)] and/or 2′-OH acylation [1M7 (backbone color)].
(A) GAGUA hairpin sets the normalization scale for DMS (A2 and A5),
CMCT (U4), and 1M7 (all nucleotides). (B) L6b from the P4–P6
domain. (C) Interdomain linker from the glycine riboswitch. (D) Bulge
in the ligand binding pocket of the adenine riboswitch. (E–G)
Pockets promoting high adenosine N1 reactivity and low 2′-OH
reactivity in tRNA (N1-methyl shown) (E) and the P4–P6 domain
(F and G). Hot spot nucleotides are labeled in panels B–G.
Protein Data Bank entries are listed in Table 1 of the .

Supporting Information Available
Derivation of eq , experimental methods, CE/MAP-seq
comparisons, and a table
of sequences, Protein Data Bank entries, and RNA Mapping Database
entries for deposited data. This material is available free of charge
via the Internet at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bi5003426_si_001.pdf

Author Contributions
W.K. and
T.H.M. contributed equally to this work.

Work was funded
by the Burroughs-Wellcome Foundation (CASI 1007236.01 to R.D.), a
Stanford Graduate Fellowship (S.T.), National Research Foundation
of Korea (No. 2011-0009963 to S.Y.), the National Institutes of Health
(5T32GM007276 to T.H.M. and R01GM102519 to R.D.), and the Keck Foundation.

The authors declare
no
competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
We thank P. Cordero, C. Cheng, B. Stoner,
and Das lab members
for helpful discussions and S. Mortimer and F. V. Cochran for assistance
with 1M7 synthesis.

