The structural dynamics of RNAs
play critical roles in pre-mRNA splicing, ribosome assembly, virus replication, and gene regulation by metabolite-responsive
riboswitches. Although proteins may bind
either transiently or tightly to facilitate these RNA structural transitions,, the ability to traverse varied conformational space is a fundamental
property of RNAs., Indeed, in vitro folding studies have demonstrated that RNAs in general fold through
rugged folding landscapes with several energetic minima, implying
the existence of distinct stable conformations during folding. Exchange
among these conformations can be slow or limited, however, because
of strong local base-pairing and stacking interactions present in
each state.

Fundamental insight
into RNA folding dynamics requires an understanding
of both thermodynamic and kinetic aspects of the process. A key role
is played by diffuse and site-specific Mg2+ ions. For several RNAs, Mg2+-induced folding
is hierarchical with distinct folding intermediates, and the rate-limiting
step occurs late in the folding pathway. The magnitude of the energetic barrier between the late intermediate
and final native states then determines the kinetics of folding. In
the Tetrahymena self-splicing RNA, the rate by which
a late intermediate is converted to the native state is decreased
at high Mg2+ concentration, presumably because the intermediate
is stabilized under these conditions. Determining the stability of the native RNA relative to the last
populated kinetic intermediate is a primary goal of RNA folding studies
since this controls which species predominates at equilibrium.

A common approach to determine the stability
of structured RNAs
is the monitoring of structure formation at specified Mg2+ concentrations, using biophysical methods such as gel shift, UV-absorbance
or fluorescence. The Mg2+ dependencies are then used to
calculate Hill coefficients, from which estimates of stability of
the RNAs are obtained. However, Mg2+-induced folding can
yield a variety of different structural intermediates possessing similar
free energies., Thus, these methods cannot accurately
determine the relative stabilities of native versus intermediate states
for structured RNAs, without an implicit two state-assumption., In contrast, by employing a combination of strategies, the native
state of the catalytic domain of bacterial RNase P was found to be
about 50-fold (2 kcal/mol) more stable than a kinetic intermediate, whereas that of the Tetrahymena group I ribozyme was 3.5 to 7 kcal/mol more stable. Both of these large RNA intermediates also refold slowly
to the native state, indicating the existence of kinetic barriers.,, These barriers may also prevent
unfolding of the native state to the intermediate in a simple two-step
reaction model, where the states possess comparable stabilities.

Small RNAs are known to form kinetically
trapped intermediates
during folding. Several misfold under low salt and low temperature
conditions, and then readily convert to native forms when heated or
when the ionic strength is increased.− For example, E. coli tRNATrp and 5S rRNA exist in both active
and inactive forms that require high activation energies for interconversion.,− While no experimentally determined values for the
relative stabilities of native versus intermediate states currently
exist for these RNAs, it may be reasonable to assume that they populate
the native states nearly exclusively if these states are highly stable.
However, for RNAs that possess relatively weak global stabilities,
it is unclear what native and non-native conformations are populated
and how folding dynamics in turn affects function. The dynamic motions
of small RNAs have been studied by a variety of methods;, for example, single-molecule fluorescence resonance energy transfer
(smFRET) studies demonstrated that the hairpin, hammerhead, and Tetrahymena ribozymes each interconvert among different
functional conformational states at equilibrium.− However, smFRET does not distinguish
between native and non-native states of an RNA because their structural
signatures can be highly similar.,, Additionally, because the non-native states retain
many native tertiary contacts, these methods require prior knowledge
about the folding pathways to elucidate the conformational transitions
that occur between the native and non-native states. A direct assay
of the native state achieved by exploiting catalytic properties of
the RNA alone, or a protein enzyme that acts upon it, is therefore
desirable.

Previously, we developed such a strategy to accurately
monitor
the kinetics and thermodynamics of tRNA folding based on the ability
of 32P-labeled tRNAs to be aminoacylated. We now apply this approach to probe the folding of a highly
destabilized disease-relevant mitochondrial tRNA. Mitochondrial tRNAs
are good models for studying the effects of weakly stable native structure
on the functional properties of the molecule since many of them lack
key conserved structural elements found in all canonical cytoplasmic
and bacterial species. For example, most mitochondrial tRNAs do not
possess one or more of the conserved nucleotides necessary to form
tertiary contacts between the D- and T-loops in the globular hinge
region of the molecule (Figure A). Some other
mitochondrial species, including all the mammalian tRNASer acceptors, are missing large portions of the D-arm that appear necessary
to the structural integrity of the tertiary core (Figure A)., The absence of these otherwise
highly conserved structural features correlates with the general instability
of mitochondrial tRNAs and may account for why none of these species
has been successfully crystallized.

Aminoacylation of hmt tRNALeuUAA. (A) Secondary
structure of Hmt tRNALeuUAA. A–U pairs
are highlighted in blue, A–C mismatches in yellow, and the
G–U pair in pink. (B) Hmt tRNALeuUAA was
incubated in 20 mM Mg2+, 2.5 mM ATP, and 10 mM leucine
for 5 min. The aminoacylation reaction was then initiated by the addition
of 5 μM LARS2. The inset shows a TLC image of the reaction following
P1 nuclease digestion of the tRNA to nucleotides and separation; Leu-Ap*
and Ap* represent leucylated and nonleucylated tRNALeuUAA, respectively. These spots were quantitated, and the fractions
of leucylated tRNAs were plotted over time to determine the maximum
plateau value for aminoacylation at 93% (∇). A small fraction
(about 5–10%) cannot be aminoacylated, most likely because
of 3′-end heterogeneity and/or damage during the synthesis
and labeling steps. (C) tRNA was first heat-denatured and then slow
cooled to 21 °C; (D) tRNA was folded at 21 °C without heat-denaturation.
Reactions in C and D were performed in the presence of 10 mM Mg(CH3COO)2 followed by the addition of 500 nM LARS2.
Data depicted in panels C and D are derived from aminoacylation reactions
performed at 15 °C (∇), 21 °C (Δ), 37 °C
(○), and 45 °C (□). The highest plateau levels
were obtained when the tRNA was both folded and aminoacylated at 21
°C. These experiments demonstrate that conventional refolding
by heat-denaturation followed by slow cooling or aminoacylation at
37 °C or higher each give low aminoacylation plateau levels.

We show here that the native state
stability of unmodified hmt
tRNALeuUAA is only about 7.3-fold higher than
that of a kinetic on-pathway, non-native intermediate. This intermediate
is unstable and readily refolds to the native state, but because the
native state is only marginally more stable than the intermediate,
there is a small but consistent accumulation of intermediate at equilibrium.
Strikingly, we show that the native state can also periodically unfold
to form the intermediate state even at high Mg2+ concentrations.
This creates a steady exchange of conformations where native and intermediate
states are constantly sampled. In contrast to the unmodified tRNA,
the dynamic exchange of conformations in the fully modified form of
bovine mitochondrial (bmt) tRNALeu is restricted. Our model
suggests that the dynamicity to populate native and non-native species
during folding is an important feature of weakly stable RNAs.

Experimental
Procedures
Hmt and bmt mitochondrial tRNALeuUAA were
prepared by in vitro transcription. In vivo, post-transcriptionally modified bmt tRNALeu was isolated
from fresh bovine liver as described previously.

LARS2 Purification
LARS2 was overexpressed in E. coli and purified as described previously. The vector was transformed into Rosetta 2(DE3)pLysS
competent cells (Novagen). The overnight culture was added to 1 L
of LB media in the presence of 35 μg/mL chloramphenicol and
34 μg/mL kanamycin. After the culture was grown at 37 °C
to A600 of 0.8, expression was induced
with 1 mM IPTG, and cells were then allowed to grow overnight at 15
°C. The cells from 1 L of saturated culture were centrifuged
and resuspended in 35 mL of lysis buffer containing 20 mM sodium Hepes
(pH 7.2) and 500 mM NaCl, followed by the addition of 150 μg
of DNase I, 50 mg of lysozyme, and one pellet protease inhibitor [Complete
Mini, ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA)-free protease inhibitor
cocktail tablets, Roche Diagnostics, GmbH, Germany]. The cells were
sonicated for 15 min with an alternating 10 s pulse on/pulse off mode.
The cell-free lysate was then centrifuged at 16,000 rpm for 45 min,
and the supernatant was applied to a 2 mL Ni-NTA matrix PerfectPro
Ni-NTA Agarose (5 PRIME) column pre-equilibrated in lysis buffer (20
mM sodium Hepes (pH 7.2), 500 mM NaCl, 10 mM imidazole, and 5 mM β-mercaptoethanol).
The column was then washed sequentially with 30 column volumes of
lysis buffer, 10 column volumes of buffer containing 20 mM imidazole,
and finally with 2 column volumes of buffer containing 30 mM imidazole.
Pure LARS2 was then eluted using a 250 mM imidazole. The protein was
dialyzed against and stored in a buffer containing 25 mM Hepes-KOH
(pH 7.2), 150 mM KCl, 5 mM β-mercaptoethanol, 0.2 mM EDTA, and
50% glycerol.

Purification and 3′-End Repair of
Bovine Mitochondrial
tRNALeuUAA
In vivo, fully post-transcriptionally modified bovine mitochondrial tRNALeuUAA was isolated from fresh bovine liver as described
previously. The isolated tRNA possessed
a truncated 3′-terminus possessing a cyclic phosphate (3′
CC &gt; p), which was hydrolyzed by treatment with 0.1 M HCl for 3
h
on ice. The acid-treated tRNA was then recovered by ethanol precipitation.
Next, the tRNA was denatured by heating at 70 °C for 7 min and
annealed at room temperature in a buffer containing 50 mM HEPES-KOH
(pH 7.5) and 10 mM MgCl2. After the addition of 5 mM DTT,
the 3′-end of tRNA was dephosphorylated by the action of the
3′-phosphatase activity in T4 polynucleotide kinase (30 U/1
OD unit of tRNA, Toyobo). The 3′-end of the tRNA was then repaired
with E. coli tRNA nucleotidyltransferase (5 μg/1
OD unit of tRNA) in a reaction consisting of 33.4 mM HEPES-KOH (pH
7.5), 100 mM KCl, 6.6 mM MgCl2, 1.67 mM DTT, 1 mM ATP,
and 1 mM CTP. The repaired tRNA was extracted
with Tripure Isolation Reagent (Roche) as instructed by the manufacturer
and gel-purified on a 10% polyacrylamide gel containing 7 M urea.
Finally, the tRNA was desalted by drop dialysis with MF-membrane filters
(Millipore, 0.025 μm VSWP membrane). To check the quality of
the 3′-terminus, the purified tRNA was digested by Interferase-MazF
(TaKaRa) and subjected to liquid chromatography–mass spectrometry
to observe the 3′-terminal fragments, confirming that the 3′-terminus of the tRNA was fully repaired.

Activity Assay to Probe Equilibrium and Kinetics of Folding/Unfolding
of tRNALeuUAA
32P-labeled
tRNALeu species with the label located at the 3′-internucleotide
linkage were prepared as described previously for the transcript of E.coli tRNAGln. All
aminoacylation reactions were performed in the presence of 100 mM
Na-Hepes (pH 7.0), 5 mM DTT, 10 mM leucine, 2.5 mM ATP-Mg(CH3COO)2, and the specified concentration of Mg(CH3COO)2. For equilibrium reactions, tRNALeuUAA was preincubated with Mg2+ (or Mg2+ and EDTA) for 30 min and the reaction initiated by the addition
of LARS2. For monitoring rate-limited folding to the native state,
tRNALeuUAA was preincubated in the absence of
Mg2+ ions, and the reaction was initiated with the simultaneous
addition of LARS2 and Mg2+. For monitoring the unfolding
reaction, a two-stage unfolding and aminoacylation reaction was set
up. In the first stage, unfolding of tRNALeu was initated
by the addition of EDTA to Mg2+-preincubated tRNALeu; in the second stage, aliquots from this mixture were aminoacylated
with the addition of LARS2 for 15 s. Reactions were quenched in 400
mM sodium acetate (pH 5.2) with 0.1% SDS, followed by the addition
of P1 nuclease to 0.1 mg/mL and incubation for 10 min. Aliquots were
spotted on previously water run and dried polyethyleneimine-cellulose
thin-layer chromatography plates (Sigma). The plates were developed
in 100 mM ammonium acetate and 5% (v/v) acetic acid, dried, and exposed
to phosphorimaging screens overnight. Spots corresponding to [32P]-labeled Leu-AMP and AMP were quantitated with ImageQuant
(version 5.2), and the data were plotted in Kaleidagraph (version
4.03). All experiments were repeated at least twice, and the error
rates are &lt;10%.

SHAPE Analysis of Transcript hmt tRNALeu
SHAPE analysis footprinting experiments were conducted
as described
previously.N-Methylisatoic
anhydride (NMIA) was purchased from Sigma. A final concentration of
10 mM NMIA, which produces single-hit conditions as judged by the
observation of full-length bands, was incubated with the tRNA construct
at 30 °C for 1 h before ethanol precipitation and primer extension
as described. 1M7 analysis was performed
similarly. DNA for in vitro transcription containing
a T7 RNA polymerase binding site, 5′ linker, tRNALeuUAA, 3′-linker, and reverse transcriptase binding
site, in that order, was constructed using an Assembly PCR oligo maker. Recursive gene synthesis was performed employing
VENT DNA polymerase. RNA was then prepared
using in vitro transcription and gel purification.

Results
To study the structural dynamics of a weakly stable
RNA in detail,
we selected the hmt tRNALeuUAA species that
has previously been examined by structure probing and aminoacylation
experiments., This isoacceptor is one of the
few mitochondrial tRNAs in humans possessing all of the conserved
elements required for canonical tRNA tertiary folding (Figure A). However, the unmodified
transcript nonetheless does not adopt a canonical L-shaped structure
at 37 °C and 12 mM Mg2+, perhaps owing to the presence of a high proportion of A–U
base pairs and a few A–C mismatches in the helical stem regions
(Figure A). Footprinting experiments showed
that under these conditions the acceptor and T stems are fully formed,
but the D and anticodon stems comprising the vertical arm were unstructured.
Despite this, the tRNA remained aminoacylable at levels up to 75%., These findings suggested two alternative possibilities for the aminoacylation
mechanism: (i) 75% of the partially structured transcript tRNA adopts
the native and functional structure upon binding to leucyl-tRNA synthetase
(LARS2) so that the enzyme functions as a folding chaperone; (ii)
75% of transcript tRNA is dynamic, such that unstructured tRNA transiently
populates a canonical native structure that is then captured and aminoacylated
by LARS2.

Optimal Folding and Aminoacylation of the hmt tRNALeu Unmodified Transcript
To address the folding dynamics of
tRNALeu, we employed a sensitive assay that accurately
distinguishes the native aminoacylable form of the tRNA from all other
conformers., The hmt tRNALeu transcript
was 32P-labeled at the 3′-internucleotide linkage
as described previously, and then allowed to
fold by incubation at 21 °C with the further addition of 20 mM
Mg2+(acetate). The capacity of the tRNA to serve as a substrate
for aminoacylation by LARS2 was then evaluated at 21 °C, in the
presence of 2.5 mM ATP and 10 mM leucine (Leu) (Figure B). These optimized reaction conditions permit maximum aminoacylation
plateau levels of 90–95%, higher than previously reported for
any organellar tRNA transcript. Further,
neither the rate nor amplitude of aminoacylation was affected by preincubation
of LARS2 with tRNA, suggesting that the enzyme does not function as
a folding chaperone. These optimized folding conditions allow accurate
determination of kinetic and thermodynamic parameters for tRNA folding,
as described below. More conventional refolding protocols involving
heat-denaturation and annealing steps, higher temperatures in aminoacylation,
or use of chloride as the counterion gave lower aminoacylation plateau
levels (Figure S1, ), perhaps in part because of structural destabilization at high
temperatures (Figures C,D and S2 ()). It is also known that
acetate anions are generally less inhibitory to protein–RNA
interactions as compared with chloride.

Stability of the hmt tRNALeuUAA Unmodified
Transcript
To evaluate the stability of hmt tRNALeu, we monitored the equilibrium fraction of native tRNA at varying
Mg2+ ion concentrations under our optimized solution conditions
(Figure A). Control experiments established
that incubation of the tRNA for 30 min sufficed to reach equilibrium
(data not shown). We then performed aminoacylation reactions on the
pre-equilibrated mixture. At all Mg2+ concentrations, we
observed biphasic kinetics with a rapid initial phase of aminoacylation
followed by a slower phase (Figure A). In
accordance with our detailed folding studies of archaeal tRNAGln, in which identical biphasic
behavior was observed, we infer that the fast phase represents aminoacylation
of already-folded species, while the slow phase represents aminoacylation
of species that fold to the functional, aminoacylable state after
the enzyme is added. The slow phases at lower Mg2+ concentrations
(below 20 mM) exhibit lower plateaus than the maximum value observed
at and above 20 mM Mg2+. This indicates that at equilibrium
larger fractions of tRNA do not fold to the native state at lower
Mg2+ concentrations. Below we demonstrate that LARS2 is
able to fully aminoacylate modified tRNA at low Mg2+; thus,
the lower plateau values do not represent enzyme inactivation under
these conditions. At the higher Mg2+ concentrations, the
maximum aminoacylable fraction is 94%, and the maximum burst amplitude
is 0.83. Because a small fraction, approximately 6%, represents damaged
and nonaminoacylable tRNA, the true fraction of native tRNA represented
in the burst amplitude is 0.88 ± 0.01 after normalization.

Mg2+-dependent folding of the unmodified hmt tRNALeuUAA transcript. (A) Results of leucylation reactions
performed at different concentrations of Mg2+ (as indicated
on the right panel). The tRNA was preincubated in 2.5 mM ATP, 10 mM
Leu, and the indicated concentrations of Mg2+ for 30 min
before initiating the reaction with the addition of 5 μM LARS2
at 21 °C. The maximum aminoacylable fraction is 94%, and the
maximum burst amplitude is 0.83. Because a small fraction, here 6%,
represents damaged and nonaminoacylable tRNA, the true fraction of
native tRNA at equilibrium is 0.88 after normalization. (B) Plot of
the normalized burst amplitudes from panel A against Mg2+ concentration, giving Mg1/2 of 6.55 mM. This represents
the concentration at which half the hmt tRNALeuUAA is in the native state. The data point X represents normalized burst
amplitude from the plot in Figure B.

Two sets of experiments were performed
to determine if the high
and stable maximum normalized burst amplitude of 0.88 ± 0.01
at 20 mM Mg2+ and higher represents the true equilibrium
for the native state (Figure ). We performed
aminoacylation reactions by first incubating tRNALeu in
the presence of 20 mM Mg2+ for 20 min and then adding varying
concentrations of EDTA, an agent that chelates divalent metal ions.
If the burst amplitudes indeed represent equilibrium fractions of
native species, then we would expect to observe a decrease in burst
amplitudes as EDTA concentrations are increased. In contrast, if bursts
arise from a kinetic effect, then EDTA concentrations should have
little or no influence on the amplitudes while perhaps affecting the
rate of the slow phase. The data demonstrate that a decrease in burst
amplitudes is indeed observed upon addition of EDTA, without any effect
on the slow phase rate (Figure A). Thus, the
amplitudes represent native fractions at equilibrium. The plot of
burst amplitudes against Mg2+ concentrations shows that
tRNALeu requires a very high concentration of Mg2+ ions (Mg1/2 = 6.55 mM) to fold to the native state (Figure B; a small fraction of Mg2+ may remain
associated with acetate at high concentrations (&gt;40 mM), thereby slightly overestimating the Mg1/2). These results are in striking contrast to those observed for several
canonical in vitro transcribed tRNAs in which Mg1/2 was found to be 0.02–1 mM., Thus, consistent with previous findings, these results suggest that
the hmt tRNALeu transcript is highly destabilized compared
to canonical tRNAs, despite its conventional cloverleaf secondary
structure.

Interpretation of the burst amplitudes. (A) tRNA was preincubated
in 20 mM Mg2+, 2.5 mM ATP, 10 mM Leu, and EDTA concentrations
of 0 mM (∇), 2.5 mM (Δ), 5 mM (○), 7.5 mM (□),
10 mM (◊), 12.5 mM (×), and 25 mM (●) for 30 min before initiating the reaction with the addition of
5 μM LARS2. The decrease in burst amplitudes reflects reduction
in prefolded native tRNAs due to the decrease in free Mg2+ ion concentration as the concentration of EDTA is increased. (B)
Transcript tRNALeuUAA was preincubated either
in the absence (○) or presence of 3 mM Mg2+ (Δ)
or 50 mM Mg2+ (∇), before simultaneously initiating
the reaction with 5 μM LARS2 and readjusting the Mg2+ concentration to 50 mM for all three reactions. Rate constants were
0.7 min–1 (○) and 1.3 min–1 (Δ). Rate constants for fast (measured separately) and slow
phases were 15 min–1 and 1 min–1 (∇), respectively. The normalized Y-intercepts
corresponding to prefolded tRNA are 0.86 (∇) and 0.34 (Δ).
(C) Rapid aminoacylation of preincubated tRNALeuUAA. tRNA was preincubated in 20 mM Mg(CH3COO)2, 10 mM Leu, 2.5 mM ATP-Mg(CH3COO)2, 5 mM DTT,
and 100 mM HEPES-KOH. The reactions were initiated by mixing with
either 1 μM (Δ) or 5 μM LARS2 (∇) using rapid
quenching. kobs were 0.22 s–1 (13.2 min–1) or 0.27 s–1 (16.2
min–1) for reactions at 1 μM and 5 μM
enzyme, respectively.

In the second set of experiments, we preincubated hmt tRNALeuUAA in K+-Hepes buffer before simultaneously
adding Mg2+ ions and LARS2, to initiate folding and aminoacylation
at the same time. These Mg2+-jump experiments isolate a
rate-limiting folding step: the biphasic plot (rapid phase of ∼15
min–1 followed by a slow phase of ∼0.75 min–1) (Figures A and A,C), is replaced by a uniphasic plot with a rate-constant
of 0.7 min–1 (Figure B).
This rate constant is about 15-fold lower than the aminoacylation
rate constant for the fast phase under the same conditions (Figure C), suggesting that a large fraction of the tRNA
either exists in non-native forms in the absence of Mg2+ ions or is converted to non-native forms immediately upon Mg2+ addition. The refolding data fits well to a single exponential
function (Figure B), suggesting that the non-native
species is either a unique misfolded form or multiple misfolded forms
that behave kinetically as a single species. The non-native fractions
depicted in Figure A represent this misfolded
species because these fractions also fold to the native state with
nearly the same slow (approximately 1 min–1) rate
constant (Figure B).

Because our results
indicate that native and misfolded tRNAs are
present as kinetically distinct species, we were able to quantitatively
determine the extent to which the native conformer is stabilized over
the misfolded conformer. Since the maximum fraction of native species
that can be prefolded at equilibrium corresponds to a burst amplitude
of 0.88, we calculate an equilibrium value of 7.3 for the native state
over the misfolded state [f = K/(1
+ K)] or a difference of 1.2 kcal/mol at 21 °C.
Thus, at equilibrium, a fraction corresponding to 7.3/8.3 (88%) is
in the native state, and 1/8.3 (12%) is misfolded. We previously used
the same strategy to obtain an equilibrium value of 2.5 for the native
state of an archaeal tRNAGln.

Kinetic Intermediate during the Folding of Unmodified hmt tRNALeu
The observed slow folding behavior in Mg2+-initiated reactions prompted us to further investigate the properties
of the nonaminoacylable species. Specifically, we wished to address
whether this species requires a large activation energy for folding
to the functional conformation, as would be generally expected for
a kinetic intermediate that must first undergo partial unfolding to
access the native state. To examine this, we measured the dependence
of folding on temperature (Figure A). The
rate constant for tRNA refolding in Na+-preincubated, Mg2+-initiated reactions is indeed highly dependent on temperature:
lower temperatures yielded lower rate constants for folding. The dependence
of rate on temperature gave an apparent activation enthalpy of 32.8
kcal/mol (Figure S3, ), consistent with disruption of 10–19 base-pairs. In contrast, the rates for aminoacylation (fast
phase) of prefolded tRNALeu appear to be identical at all
temperatures tested. Thus, the misfolded form is a kinetic on-pathway
intermediate that requires disruption of the secondary/tertiary structure
and partial unfolding to fold to the native state. Strikingly, the
rate constants for the slow phases of aminoacylation of the prefolded
tRNAs were comparable to the rate constants for refolding at all three
temperatures tested (Figure , legend). These
observations are highly consistent with the notion that the slow phase
indeed represents the rate-limiting folding step from the intermediate
to the native state.

Dependence of folding on temperature and denaturant. (A)
hmt transcript
tRNALeuUAA was either preincubated in 100 mM
Na+-Hepes (open symbols) or prefolded in 100 mM Na+-Hepes and 50 mM Mg2+ (solid symbols) at 10 °C
(blue), 15 °C (red), or 21 °C (green) before initiating
the reaction with the addition of 5 μM LARS2. Reactions preincubated
in the absence of Mg2+ fit well to single exponential functions
giving rate constants of 0.05 min–1, 0.16 min–1, and 0.5 min–1 at 10, 15, and 21
°C, respectively. The reactions preincubated in the presence
of Mg2+ (solid symbols) were best fit to double exponential
functions, with the rates of slow phases being 0.08 min–1, 0.13 min–1, and 0.7 min–1 at
10, 15, and 21 °C, respectively. (B) Hmt transcript tRNALeuUAA was allowed to refold at 10 °C as in
panel A (○) or was preincubated in 1 M urea before initiating
the reaction with LARS2 (●). kobs derived from the data are 0.03 min–1 (○) and 0.43 min–1 (●).

We also performed a partial urea-denaturation
experiment to determine
if the kinetic intermediate unfolds by disruption of base-pairs and
tertiary contacts. We monitored the refolding
of tRNALeu at 10 °C as depicted in Figure A, except that the tRNA was preincubated in 1 M
urea prior to aminoacylation. This low concentration was chosen based
on previous studies on GlnRS that demonstrated only negligible denaturing
effects of 1 M urea but required 18 h and much higher (&gt;3 M) concentrations
for substantial denaturation. As shown
in Figure B, we observed a 14-fold increase
in the rate constant for refolding of tRNA under these conditions.
This suggests that during the process of refolding of tRNA from the
intermediate to the native state there is substantial disruption of
secondary and/or tertiary contacts. Therefore, it seems clear that
addition of urea accelerates refolding to the native state. Additionally,
we observed that the plateau value in the presence of urea was reduced
from 0.86 to 0.59, suggesting that either the denaturant also partially
unfolds the native state under the solution conditions tested or that
urea stabilizes a completely unfolded fraction that is unable to fold
to the native state.

Dynamic Exchange of Conformations between
Native and Intermediate
States
The equilibrium value of 7.3 for the native state
relative to the intermediate, together with an observed rate of refolding
of 0.75 min–1 for conversion of the intermediate
to the native conformation (Figure A, ), allowed calculation of the individual forward
and reverse rate constants as 0.66 min–1 and 0.09
min–1, respectively. The data are consistent with
a two-step model in which addition of Mg2+ ions results
in formation of a kinetic intermediate, which then refolds to the
native state. However, because the native state is only marginally
more stable, and the kinetic barrier between states is low at 21 °C
or higher, it appears possible that the native state also may unfold,
albeit less frequently, to form the intermediate. This would generate
a steady sampling of conformations at defined rates at equilibrium
(Scheme ). In a two-state model, the approach
to equilibrium from native to intermediate should produce the same
observed rate constant as that for folding of the intermediate to
the native state (about ∼0.75 min–1).

To test this prediction, we directly monitored unfolding
of the
native state by taking advantage of the fact that addition of EDTA
reduces the free Mg2+ ion concentration but does not affect
the rates of the folding and unfolding transitions. Thus, we prefolded
the tRNA at a concentration of 20 mM Mg2+ and then titrated
EDTA into this prefolded mixture at 21 °C (Figure A). At each concentration of EDTA tested, we indeed observed
small but consistent decreases in the fraction of native state that
is populated over time, following EDTA addition. In each case, the
data fit well to a single exponential function yielding a rate constant
of about 1 min–1 (Figure B). Unfolding was observed at 5–12.5 mM EDTA concentrations;
at 2.5 mM EDTA, the equilibrium is not perturbed, and thus no unfolding
was observed. Thus, the native and intermediate states are engaged
in a dynamic exchange of conformations with the equilibrium slightly
favoring the native state over the intermediate.

Monitoring unfolding
of Hmt tRNALeuUAA. (A)
Scheme for unfolding experiment. (B) Unfolding was initiated by the
addition of 2.5 mM (◊), 5 mM (□), 7.5 mM (Δ),
10 mM (∇), and 12.5 mM (○) EDTA to tRNALeuUAA preincubated in the presence of 20 mM Mg2+ for 30 min. Aliquots from this folding reaction were added to LARS2
(5 μM) in separate tubes and incubated for exactly 15 s before
quenching with 1% SDS, followed by P1 nuclease digestion. The rate
constants were about 1 min–1 at all concentrations
of Mg2+.

To provide a structural
basis for the observed folding dynamics,
we next performed selective 2′-hydroxyl acylation analyzed
by primer extension (SHAPE) experiments, using N-methylisatoic
anhydride (NMIA) as a probe (Figure ). At
30 °C and 40 mM MgCl2, we observed extensive reactivities
of the anticodon stem and variable loops. Absolute reactivities at
these nucleotides are above 16% at both bases of a pair and thus are
more flexible (Figure ). We also performed
SHAPE experiments in the presence of the reagent 1M7, which is not
influenced by the presence of high MgCl2 (&gt;40 mM); these
reactions were performed at 0, 12, and 50 mM MgCl2 (Figure
S4, ). On the basis
of the presumption that base-pairs are stabilized at higher concentrations
of Mg2+, we inferred that bases showing decreased reactivity
as the Mg2+ concentration was increased are unpaired at
the lower concentrations. The structural model obtained from this
analysis shows an unpaired anticodon stem and variable loop region,
whereas other parts of the tRNA appear to be well formed. These data
are consistent with earlier findings for this tRNA, in which the anticodon
and D-stems showed extensive reactivities in nuclease footprinting
assays. Thus, the structural dynamics
are confined to the tRNA vertical arm. Analysis of this tRNA using
the secondary structure prediction algorithm MC-fold suggested that
an elongated structure containing an intact acceptor stem and T-stem,
but mispaired D and anticodon stems, is most stable. Predicted suboptimal
structures also exhibited these characteristics (Figure S5, ). Thus, we propose that
the kinetic intermediate features an intact acceptor stem and T-stem,
and non-native secondary structure in other parts of the molecule
(Figure ).

SHAPE footprinting with the sequencing
lanes (U, C, G, and A) labeled
at every 5 nucleotides. DMSO lane (solvent only) control lane and
NMIA (SHAPE reagent) lanes are also shown. The U, C, G, and A sequencing
ladder lengths are exactly one nucleotide longer than the corresponding
DMSO and +NMIA product lengths. (A) The experiment demonstrates extensive
reactivities of the D-stem, anticodon stem, and variable loops of
hmt tRNALeuUAA at 30 °C and 40 mM MgCl2. (B) Proposed structural model based on the SHAPE experiments.
Absolute SHAPE intensities were binned into 0–15%, 16–50%,
and &gt;50%, and corresponding nucleotides are color-coded. (C) Absolute
SHAPE reactivities were calculated from subtracting the intensities
in the DMSO lane from those in the +NMIA lane.

Proposed model for hmt tRNALeu dynamics. Nucleotide
residues are color-coded based on SHAPE intensities as described in
Figure .

Post-Transcriptional Modifications Stabilize the Native State
of Bovine Mitochondrial tRNALeu
The influence
of post-transcriptional modifications on dynamics was investigated
for the related bmt tRNALeu. This tRNA is structurally
very similar to hmt tRNALeu and possesses an identical
set of modifications in the globular core domain (Figure S6, ). The human enzyme LARS2
efficiently aminoacylates both the unmodified transcript and the fully
modified bmt tRNALeu isolated from bovine tissue (Figure ). The unmodified bmt tRNALeuUAA transcript exhibited dynamic folding behavior similar to hmt tRNALeuUAA, with a persistent slow phase of refolding
at equilibrium and in Mg2+-jump experiments (Figure A,B). Thus, the folding behavior of the bmt tRNA
is also consistent with a model of kinetic intermediates refolding
to the native state.

Effect of modifications on native state stability and
dynamics
of bmt tRNALeu. (A) Leucylation reactions of the bmt tRNALeuUAA transcript performed at different concentrations
of Mg2+. The tRNA was preincubated in 2.5 mM ATP, 10 mM
Leu, and the indicated concentrations of Mg2+ for 30 min
before initiating the reaction with the addition of 5 μM LARS2.
(B) Leucylation reaction of bmt tRNALeuUAA transcript
preincubated either in the absence or presence of 20 mM Mg2+, before simultaneously initiating the reaction with 5 μM LARS2
and readjusting the Mg2+ concentration to 20 mM Mg2+. Rate constants for the slow phases were 1.27 min–1 (Δ) and 1.42 min–1 (∇), and the Y-intercepts
were 0.53 and 0.86, respectively. The rate constants for the fast
phases were too fast to be measured by manual pipetting. (C) Leucylation
reactions of modified bmt tRNALeu isolated from cells,
performed as described for panel A. (D) Plot of the normalized fraction
of the native state as a function of Mg2+ concentration.
The half-maximum Mg2+ concentrations for folding to the
native state (Mg1/2) are 0.59 mM for modified tRNA and
2.23 mM for the unmodified transcript tRNA.

We compared the Mg2+ ion dependence of folding
between
modified and unmodified bmt tRNALeu. We observed that in vivo tRNA prepared in the absence of Mg2+ is
partially folded in the absence of externally added Mg2+ (Figure C). In contrast to the unmodified
tRNA, the time courses for folding of modified tRNA at all Mg2+ concentrations showed no slow phases within the 10–20
s time limit of manual pipetting. These results suggest that the post-transcriptionally
modified tRNA does not engage in slow exchange of conformations on
a time scale comparable to that of the unmodified transcript. Further,
the modified tRNA requires much less Mg2+ for folding to
the native state at equilibrium (Mg1/2 of 0.59 versus 2.23
mM) (Figure D). This effect is clearly attributable
to the increased stability afforded by the presence of the post-transcriptional
modifications.

Discussion
The structural dynamics
of weakly stable RNAs and the role of intermediates
during folding have not previously been well-documented. Here, we
exploited the known weak local stability of the anticodon arm of unmodified
hmt tRNALeuUAA (Figure A) to address these issues. Using a sensitive aminoacylation-based
folding assay, we show that the local structural fragility results
in a highly destabilized global structure, as the tRNA requires a
very high concentration of Mg2+ ions (Mg1/2 =
6.55 mM) to fold to the native conformation. We then demonstrate that
the degree of destabilization is such that the native state is only
about 7.3-fold (1.16 kcal/mol) more stable than a kinetic intermediate.
Thus, the unmodified hmt tRNALeu cannot populate the native
state exclusively. Our results also suggest that the physiological
temperature of 37 °C may be too high to stably populate native in vitro transcribed tRNAs for folding studies. Therefore,
optimal temperature and solution conditions may have to be empirically
determined for individual mitochondrial tRNAs as demonstrated in this
study.

Since LARS2 does not influence either the thermodynamic
equilibrium
between native and intermediate, or the rate of folding, it appears
unlikely that the enzyme functions as a chaperone. In the case of
hmt tRNALeu, pathological disease mutations are located
throughout the D and anticodon arms., It is possible
that the preponderance of disease mutations in these portions of the
tRNA arises because the mutations further destabilize the already
weakly stable native state, shifting the equilibrium to the misfolded
intermediate. Mutations might also affect the folding dynamics such
that both the native and intermediate are poorly populated, thereby
reducing the ability of modification enzymes to recognize either form
of the molecule. In fact, the most common disease-causing mutation,
the A3243G alteration that is implicated in MELAS disease, results
in the absence of a crucial taurine modification at position 34 without
any change in other modifications, possibly because A3243G selectively
alters the folding pathway.

We
also find that the kinetic barrier between the intermediate
and the native state is sufficiently low that the two species can
readily interconvert. The refolding of intermediate to the native
state is much faster at higher temperature, as expected for a kinetically
trapped species possessing non-native contacts. SHAPE analysis, structural
predictions using MC-fold, and prior data consistently demonstrate that the acceptor/T-stems of the unmodified
tRNA are stable so that the destabilization is localized to the vertical
anticodon arm. The non-native duplex structure predicted in the intermediate
requires unwinding to allow for the formation of the D and anticodon
stem structures in the native tRNA. This is consistent with the slow
temperature-dependent refolding observed during conversion of the
intermediate to the native state.

In general, in vivo folding of RNAs is faster
than transcription; therefore, a dynamic
structure may prevent RNAs from becoming trapped in a local conformation.
The sampling of conformations by unfolding to and refolding of a kinetic
intermediate is likely in vivo because the dynamics
we have observed occurs at physiological Mg2+ concentrations
of 1–5 mM. Our results suggest that at very low Mg2+ concentrations only a fraction of the tRNA folds to the native state,
while the remainder remains either unfolded or partially folded. Even
the small fraction that folds to the native state at low Mg2+ levels shows sampling of conformations between native and the intermediate
states. Thus, cells could modulate dynamics of tRNAs by altering concentrations
of Mg2+ or possibly also of polyamines such as spermine.

As we have also demonstrated, post-transcriptional
modifications
can affect the equilibrium distribution of unfolded, partially folded,
and native species in tRNA., We suggest then that
the recognition of bases and ribose sugars in the globular hinge domain
of tRNA may depend upon an intrinsic dynamic instability of the tertiary
structure in this region. For example, archaeosine tRNA-guanine transglycosylase
(ArcTGT) converts G15 in the core region to the archaeosine precursor
7-cyano-7-deazaguanine (preQ0). The cocrystal structure of ArcTGT
shows that the tRNA core region is completely disrupted, with the
tRNA adopting an extended conformation when bound to the enzyme. Dynamic unfolding and refolding of the unmodified
tRNA could thus play a central role in the efficiency of the enzyme.

The finding that weakly stable RNAs can dynamically exchange between
specific conformations may also have strong implications for functions
of RNAs that follow a simple two-step folding–unfolding processes,
including riboswitches. For example, the Trp terminator/antiterminator
element contains multiple CUG triplets thought to destabilize the
formation of stable duplexes and allow for efficient Trp-dependent
switching from antiterminator to terminator structures. Another example is translational frameshifting
on the ribosome, in which control by RNA depends not only on the formation
of a folded pseudoknot structure but also on partial unfolding of
the pseudoknot to hairpins. Thus, dynamic
exchange by lowering of stabilities might play an important role in
controlling the switch between two functional structures.

Supporting Information Available
Magnesium acetate
gives higher
plateau charging values for hmt tRNALeuUAA transcript
compared to magnesium chloride; aminoacylation plateau value is low
at higher temperature (&gt;37°C) for hmt tRNALeu;
log-linear
plot of the rate constant against 1/T (K) for folding
of the hmt tRNALeuUAA transcript; 1M7 SHAPE
analysis at different Mg2+ concentrations; predicted optimal
(upper left) and sub-optimal secondary structures of hmt tRNALeuUAA transcript tRNA; and predicted native secondary
structures (based on comparative sequence analysis) of human and bovine
transcript tRNALeuUAA. This material is available
free of charge via the Internet at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bi401449z_si_001.pdf

This work was supported by
a grant from the National Institutes of Health (GM 63713) to J.J.P.

The authors declare no
competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
We thank Michael King (Thomas Jefferson University)
for providing
the LARS2 expression vector.

