

   
BiochemistryBiochemistrybibichawBiochemistry0006-29601520-4995American
Chemical Society 10.1021/bi500657vArticleHydrogen Exchange Differences between Chemoreceptor
Signaling Complexes Localize to Functionally Important Subdomains Koshy Seena
S. †Li Xuni †Eyles Stephen J. ‡Weis Robert M. †§∥Thompson Lynmarie K. *†§†Department of Chemistry, ‡Department of Biochemistry
and Molecular Biology, and §Program in Molecular
and Cellular Biology, University of Massachusetts, Amherst, Massachusetts 01003, United States* Department of Chemistry, 122 LGRT,
710 N. Pleasant St., University of Massachusetts, Amherst, MA 01003.
E-mail: thompson@chem.umass.edu. Telephone: (413) 545-0827.24 11 2015 24 11 2014 16 12 2014 53 49 7755 7764 28 05 2014 24 11 2014 Copyright © 2014 American Chemical Society2014American Chemical SocietyThis is an open access article published under an ACS AuthorChoice License, which permits copying and redistribution of the article or any adaptations for non-commercial purposes.

The
goal of understanding mechanisms of transmembrane signaling,
one of many key life processes mediated by membrane proteins, has
motivated numerous studies of bacterial chemotaxis receptors. Ligand
binding to the receptor causes a piston motion of an α helix
in the periplasmic and transmembrane domains, but it is unclear
how the signal is then propagated through the cytoplasmic domain to
control the activity of the associated kinase CheA. Recent proposals
suggest that signaling in the cytoplasmic domain involves opposing
changes in dynamics in different subdomains. However, it has been
difficult to measure dynamics within the functional system, consisting
of extended arrays of receptor complexes with two other proteins,
CheA and CheW. We have combined hydrogen exchange mass spectrometry
with vesicle template assembly of functional complexes of the receptor
cytoplasmic domain to reveal that there are significant signaling-associated
changes in exchange, and these changes localize to key regions of
the receptor involved in the excitation and adaptation responses.
The methylation subdomain exhibits complex changes that include slower
hydrogen exchange in complexes in a kinase-activating state, which
may be partially consistent with proposals that this subdomain is
stabilized in this state. The signaling subdomain exhibits significant
protection from hydrogen exchange in complexes in a kinase-activating
state, suggesting a tighter and/or larger interaction interface with
CheA and CheW in this state. These first measurements of the stability
of protein subdomains within functional signaling complexes demonstrate
the promise of this approach for measuring functionally important
protein dynamics within the various physiologically relevant states
of multiprotein complexes.

National Institutes of Health, United Statesdocument-id-old-9bi500657vdocument-id-new-14bi-2014-00657vccc-price

   
Membrane
proteins perform key
life processes, including transmitting information into cells to allow
responses to the environment. Bacterial chemotaxis receptors make
up an ideal system for investigations of the mechanistic details of
transmembrane signaling. Bacteria sense chemicals in the environment
and relay a signal through the chemoreceptors that ultimately controls
the swimming response of the cell. The membrane-spanning receptors
form ternary complexes (Figure 1A) with two
cytoplasmic proteins, a scaffolding protein CheW and a histidine kinase
CheA; these complexes are found in large hexagonal arrays primarily
at the poles of the cell. On the basis of a wide variety of studies,
including Cys cross-linking, mutagenesis, electron paramagnetic resonance
(EPR), and solid-state
nuclear magnetic resonance, ligand binding to the receptor is thought
to cause an ∼2 Å piston motion of an α helix in
the periplasmic and transmembrane domains.1 It is less clear how the signal is then propagated through
the cytoplasmic domain to inhibit the kinase bound ∼200 Å
away at the membrane-distal tip of the receptor, and how methylation
of Glu residues in this domain restores kinase activation as part
of receptor adaptation to ongoing stimuli.

Figure 1 HDX-MS approach for testing
proposed changes in dynamics of chemoreceptors
within functional complexes during signaling. (A) Model of a single-transmembrane
chemoreceptor dimer
(gray surface) superimposed on one cytoplasmic fragment dimer within
a model of signaling complexes with CheW (cyan) and CheA (blue) in
the receptor array (coordinates kindly provided by B. Crane). One
hexagon of the array model is shown, containing six trimers of receptor
cytoplasmic fragment dimers, with magenta indicating receptor methylation
sites. Note that all 18 receptor dimers extend through the membrane,
but only a single intact
receptor dimer (gray surface model) is shown for the sake of clarity.
Ligand inhibition of the CheA kinase begins with a piston motion of
an α helix in the periplasmic and transmembrane domains. This
has been
proposed to cause the changes in dynamics listed at the left, with
blue representing decreased dynamics in the HAMP and signaling subdomains
and red representing increased dynamics in the methylation subdomain.
Note that the array model does not include the HAMP subdomain, because
it is not present in the CF construct used in this study. (B) HDX-MS
method for measurement of dynamics in functional
complexes of receptor cytoplasmic fragments that contain His tags
(yellow) that mediate binding to vesicles for assembly of complexes.
Assembled complexes were exchanged in D2O for various times
before quenching, pepsin digestion, and analysis by LC–ESI-MS.
HDX-MS measurements reported here demonstrate that a kinase-inhibited
state has increased exchange rates in peptides of the methylation
subdomain (orange on the array model) and decreased levels of protection
in peptides of the signaling subdomain (green on the array model).

A number of studies have suggested
that changes in dynamics in
the cytoplasmic domain may play a role in signaling, but it is difficult
to measure dynamics within membrane proteins and large functional
multiprotein
complexes. Previous studies from our laboratory have shown that
the cytoplasmic fragment is highly dynamic in solution,2 and small changes (mutation of a single residue
or protonation of a few residues) can lead to significant stabilization
of a large fraction of the protein.3 Proposals
that receptor signaling involves changes in dynamics3,4 have been corroborated by mutagenesis and cross-linking results.
For example, electrostatic interactions are thought to
affect the conformational dynamics of the methylation subdomain, with
charge-neutralizing mutations at the acidic methylation sites and
other sites favoring a less dynamic, kinase-activating state.5 On the basis of cysteine cross-linking and alanine
knob mutational studies, Falke and co-workers have recently proposed
that signaling involves antisymmetric changes
in dynamics in different subdomains of the cytoplasmic domain: the
kinase-inhibited state is proposed to be destabilized in the methylation
subdomain and stabilized in the signaling subdomain that interacts
with CheA and CheW, relative to the kinase-activating state.6 Also on the basis of mutagenesis studies, Parkinson
and co-workers have proposed a compatible model involving changes
in dynamics in
which the kinase-inhibited state again has a destabilized methylation
subdomain and also has a stabilized HAMP subdomain.7 What has been lacking until now is a means for direct measurement
of dynamics in functional receptor complexes to test these proposals
(listed in Figure 1A, left) and delineate the
role of changing dynamics in the signaling mechanism.

There
has been tremendous recent progress in mass spectrometry
of membrane proteins,8,9 including hydrogen exchange mass
spectrometry (HDX-MS) studies of dynamics of membrane proteins in
detergent micelles10−15 and nanodiscs.16 We have developed an
alternate approach, summarized in Figure 1B,
that can be applied for HDX-MS studies of a soluble domain of a membrane
protein in membrane-bound functional complexes with its partner proteins.
We have shown that vesicle template assembly can be combined with
HDX-MS to measure dynamics in membrane-bound functional complexes.17 The vesicle template assembly method18 employs vesicles containing a nickel-chelating
lipid to bind a His-tagged chemoreceptor cytoplasmic fragment (CF)
and assemble functional complexes with CheA and CheW in different
signaling states.19 The potential generality
of this assembly method has been demonstrated by its use to assemble
functional complexes of other systems such as eukaryotic receptor
tyrosine kinases.20−23 With HDX-MS, we have demonstrated that the rapid
global hydrogen exchange rates (exchange throughout the entire protein)
observed for the Asp receptor CF in solution are reduced by assembly
of functional CF complexes, but there are no large changes in CF global
exchange rates between samples representative of different signaling
states.17 Here we report measurements of
local exchange in functional CF complexes that mimic two signaling
states. Functional complexes are exchanged in D2O for various
times before quenching at low pH, pepsin digestion, and analysis by
LC–ESI-MS. This localizes the exchange information to the individual
peptide products of the pepsin digest. Our data show that stabilization
of the CF upon formation of functional complexes extends throughout
most of the protein, but that changes in dynamics between complexes
that mimic the signaling states localize to key regions of the receptor
critical to excitation (control of the CheA kinase) and adaptation
(mediated by methylation of specific Glu residues). In both subdomains,
there is some reduction in the exchange rate in the kinase-activating
state, which suggests that the mechanism of kinase activation involves
stabilization of two key features of the chemoreceptor, its methylation
subdomain involved in adaptation and its interactions between the
signaling subdomain and CheA and CheW involved in kinase activation
in the signaling array. These changes are measured within arrays that
are nativelike, with ∼100 nm dimensions24 and 12 nm hexagonal spacing,25 comparable to array properties observed in cells. These results
illustrate the promise of combining HDX-MS with vesicle template assembly
to reveal differences in structure and dynamics between physiologically
relevant states of membrane-bound multiprotein complexes and gain
insights into the role of dynamics in mechanisms
of complex systems.

Materials and Methods
Proteins were
purified according to published protocols.24,26−28 Vesicles consisting of mixtures
of DOPC and DGS-NTA-Ni2+ were extruded and used for vesicle
template assembly of functional complexes as previously described,19 except that excess CheA and CheW were used to
drive all of the CF into complexes, as judged by maximizing the kinase
activity under high-density conditions after overnight incubation.28 Functional complexes of 30 μM His-tagged
CF4E, 6 μM CheA, and 12 μM CheW with lipid
vesicles were assembled at 25 °C in kinase buffer [75 mM Tris,
100 mM KCl, 5 mM MgCl2,
2 mM TCEP, and 5% DMSO (pH 7.5)]. For high-density complexes, 580
μM
total lipids were used, with 50% nickel-chelating lipid (290 μM
DGS-NTA) and the remainder DOPC. For low-density complexes, 2900 μM
total lipids were used, with 10% nickel-chelating lipid (290 μM
DGS-NTA) and the remainder DOPC. Protein binding and kinase activity
were measured in all cases to ensure successful formation of functional
complexes.

Preparation of exchanged samples and MS analysis
was conducted
as previously described.17 A spin column
was used to accomplish transfer into deuterated buffer in ∼2.5
min, while avoiding dilution of the complex that could lead to protein
dissociation during the hydrogen exchange time course. To initiate
hydrogen exchange, 1 mL of the assembled complex was applied to a
2
mL G10 Sephadex Zeba desalting column (Pierce Biotechnology) pre-equilibrated
with a D2O kinase buffer at 25 °C. After centrifugation
(2000
rpm for 2 min at 25 °C in a Beckman Coulter Allegra 6R Tabletop
Centrifuge), complexes
were incubated in a 25 °C water bath for deuterium exchange.
After exchange times ranging
from 30 s longer (3 min total) to 16 h, 30 μL aliquots of the
exchanged complex were removed and added to 15 μL of quench
buffer [1% formic acid, 20% glycerol, and 1 M GuHCl (pH 1.6)] in a
0
°C water bath, to reach a final pH of 2.5. Our previous global
exchange
study showed that pH 2.5 quench conditions dissociated 70–80%
of CF from vesicles and also caused precipitation of CheA and CheW.17 Quenched samples were immediately flash-frozen
in liquid nitrogen and stored at −80 °C. Immediately prior
to MS analysis, each sample was thawed
for 3 min in an ice–water bath, digested for 1 min with a 1:1
pepsin/CF mixture, and then
analyzed by LC–ESI-MS on a QSTAR-XL hybrid quadrupole/time-of-flight
mass spectrometer (AB SCIEX) in positive ion mode at the UMass Mass
Spectrometry Center. Samples were injected at a rate of 200 μL/min
into the chilled C18 reverse phase column (Higgins Analytical) pre-equilibrated
in 95% buffer A (0.1% formic acid in water) and 5% buffer B (0.1%
formic acid in acetonitrile). Peptides were eluted into the mass spectrometer
with a gradient from 5 to 40% (v/v) buffer B over 4 min, 40% buffer
B for 2 min, and then 60% buffer
B for 1 min. Preparation of the next sample consisted of equilibration
in 95% buffer A and 5% buffer B for 8 min. The thawing, digestion,
and HPLC were conducted at 0 °C to minimize back exchange. Between
each HPLC injection, a blank sample was injected to ensure there was
no carryover of peptides into the subsequent injection.29 Also, after every five injections, the column
was disconnected from the mass spectrometer and washed with 100% buffer
B for 30 min to prevent accumulation of lipids in the column. Peptides
were previously
identified by tandem MS.17

Peptides
from a D2O-denatured CF control sample provided
values for 100% exchange that were used to calculate percentage deuterium
exchange. CF was exchanged using a spin column (2 mL G10 Sephadex
Zeba desalting column) into D2O renaturation
buffer [20 mM potassium phosphate (pD 7.5), 50 mM NaCl, and 5% DMSO]
and then
incubated at 80 °C for 1 h to thermally denature the protein.
This renaturation buffer was
used because it has been shown3 to support
reversible thermal denaturation of the CF (kinase buffer does not).
After cooling for 30 min on ice, the sample was subjected to the protocol
described above (quench, freeze, digest, and LC–MS) so that
its peptides would undergo equivalent back exchange. Back exchange
was computed as the difference between the total exchange observed
in peptides derived from the D2O-denatured CF sample and
the maximal possible exchange for each peptide. Back exchange for
all the peptides was 20% on average, with a range of 11–31%.17

The incorporation of deuterium into each
peptide was computed for
most cases by measuring the average mass of the isotopic clusters
over the full m/z range for the
peptide as follows. All of the m/z peaks
found in the spectrum between the initial and final exchange cluster
positions were selected manually, and a manual reconstruction was
done to compute the average molecular weight using Analyst software.
The number of incorporated deuterium atoms was then calculated by
subtracting the molecular weight of the unexchanged peptide. For all
peptides that displayed a significant rapidly exchanging fraction
(fully exchanged in 3 min), Gaussian deconvolution was used to estimate
this fraction. Analyst software was used to approximate the m/z spectrum by a series of centroid
functions (peak position and intensity). The centroid data were analyzed
in proFit, by fitting the rapidly exchanging and slower exchanging
populations to Gaussian distributions. The amplitude and width of
each Gaussian were used to compute its area. The fraction that had
fully exchanged did not change significantly at early time points
(3, 7, 10, and 15 min). The estimated rapidly exchanging fraction
is listed for each peptide in Table S1a of the Supporting Information. For peptides that showed a large (50–75%)
rapidly exchanging fraction (orange in Table S1a of the Supporting Information), the average mass method
could not be used to measure the exchange of the remaining fraction
because the mass would be shifted by the isotopic cluster of the fully
exchanged fraction. An alternative method was chosen for a more detailed
analysis of the exchange of these peptides (orange peptides in Table
S3 of the Supporting Information). The m/z of the most intense peak in the peak
cluster corresponding
to the fraction not yet fully exchanged was used to compute the average
molecular weight. Mass spectra that displayed overlap between the
peaks of the two fractions (beginning at 60 or 120 min) were omitted
from this analysis.

Results
Hydrogen Exchange Properties
of CF Subdomains Differ between
Signaling States
Figure 2 shows the
structure of a monomer of the Asp receptor CF dimer and the pepsin
peptides identified by MS/MS (listed in Tables S1a and S3 of the Supporting Information) that were used to monitor
hydrogen exchange. The Asp receptor fragment peptides are represented
in the figures within the crystal structure of the 75% identical Ser
receptor fragment [Protein Data Bank (PDB) entry 1qu7]. The CF4E construct begins in the methylation subdomain (CF4E is
the fully unmethylated state, with glutamic acid at all four methylation
sites colored magenta) and lacks the HAMP subdomain that would connect
the N-terminus to the transmembrane domain. The signaling subdomain,
distal to the membrane, interacts with the CheA kinase and CheW, and
the ∼30 C-terminal residues serve as a flexible link to the
binding site for the CheR methyltransferase. The 26 peptides identified
by MS/MS span all of these CF regions, providing overlapping coverage
of 87% of the CF sequence.17

Figure 2 Structure and
corresponding peptides of Asp receptor CF4E analyzed in
HDX experiments. A monomer model of the CF dimer is
shown, based on the Ser receptor CF crystal structure (PDB entry 1qu7) with an additional
∼30 amino acids of the receptor on the N-terminus, modeled
as an α helix that connects to the rest of the receptor, and
∼30
amino acids on the C-terminus as a flexible tail. The four glutamic
acid sites that are methylated as part of the adaptation of the receptor
to ongoing stimuli are colored magenta with magenta sequence numbers.
Peptides identified by MS/MS are labeled with Asp receptor sequence
numbers (Ser receptor sequence number minus 2) for the methylation
sites and many termini. Both the structure and peptides are colored
according to the fraction that is fully exchanged at 3 min, as listed
in Table S1b of the Supporting Information. Orange signifies peptides that are &lt;10% fully exchanged at 3
min in the low-density kinase-inhibited state and ∼60% fully
exchanged at 3 min in the high-density kinase-activating state (see
Table S1b of the Supporting Information). Gray signifies regions with no exchange data (no peptide was identified).

Hydrogen exchange experiments
were performed on complexes of CF4E, CheA, and CheW bound
to vesicles under conditions that
produce nativelike arrays of CF4Q25 and also of CF4E (A. Briegel, M. J. Harris, G. J. Jensen,
and L. K. Thompson, unpublished results) with activities that mimic
the kinase-activating or kinase-inhibited signaling state. Figure 1B summarizes the novel method used to measure hydrogen
exchange of functional complexes assembled on vesicles.17 After rapid transfer of the complex into deuterated
buffer using a spin column, hydrogen–deuterium exchange proceeds
until it is quenched by decreasing the pH to 2.5
and the temperature to 0 °C. Each sample is flash-frozen and
then later thawed for brief (1 min)
pepsin proteolysis and analysis of incorporation of deuterium into
the resulting peptides by LC–ESI-MS. Thus, exchange occurs
in the functional complex, and we have shown there
is limited back exchange during subsequent steps before the MS analysis.17

We chose to control the signaling state
using the density of CF4E assembly on the vesicles, which
is determined by the total
vesicle surface area containing nickel-chelating lipids that bind
the His-tagged CF. The high- and low-density complexes contain similar
amounts of CheA and CheW, as previously shown under limiting CheA
and CheW conditions19 and demonstrated
in Figure S1 of the Supporting Information for the excess CheA and CheW conditions used here to drive maximal
complex formation. High-density CF4E complexes (290 μM
nickel-chelating lipid is 50% of the total 580 μM lipid) mimic
the kinase-activating state, with high kinase activity
and low methylation activity, and low-density CF4E complexes
(290
μM nickel-chelating lipid is 10% of the total 2.9 mM lipid)
mimic the
kinase-inhibited state, with low kinase activity and high methylation
activity.19 Because electron cryotomography30 and receptor reconstitution studies31 indicate that receptor arrays do not dissociate
during signaling, it seems likely that high-density assembly forces
CF4E (a methylation state that does not normally activate
the kinase) to pack more closely to mimic the kinase-activating state,
consistent with shorter receptor–receptor distances shown by
Förster resonance energy transfer for kinase-activating cytoplasmic
fragments19 and for ligand-free intact
receptor (corresponding to the kinase-activating state, although the
intact receptor samples lacked CheA and CheW).32 Thus, perhaps ligand inhibition of kinase activity begins
with a subtle
2 Å piston in the periplasmic and transmembrane domains that
causes
a similarly subtle expansion of the cytoplasmic domain, undetectable
at the resolution of the electron cryotomography studies.33 This plausible mechanism and the observation
of consistent complex formation and inverse changes in kinase and
methylation activity support the use of high- and low-density template-assembled
preparations for an initial comparison of the two signaling states.
This choice is further supported by the high specific activities of
12–13
s–1 (per total CheA, equivalent to 25 s–1 for the typical 50% fraction of bound CheA under these conditions)
measured for the kinase-activating CF4E complexes.

Figures 2 and 3 and
Tables S1 and S2 of the Supporting Information provide
an overview of the hydrogen exchange behavior of CF in functional
complexes assembled at high and low densities to mimic the signaling
states. In Figure 2, the structure and peptides
are colored according to the fraction that undergoes complete exchange
in 3 min. The red peptides from the N- and C-terminal regions undergo
rapid
exchange that is complete in 3 min. This behavior is observed for
three peptides from the C-terminal tail, consistent with the known
flexibility of this segment that tethers the CheR binding site to
the receptor.34 Complete exchange in 3
min is also observed for four N-terminal peptides. This rapid exchange
suggests that stability of the CF in this region is compromised, perhaps
because of the truncation of the CF from the rest of the receptor.

Figure 3 Difference
in the time course of deuterium incorporation between
high- and low-kinase activity complexes. The monomer of the cytoplasmic
fragment dimer structure is shown for the sake of clarity and colored
according to the difference in the incorporation of deuterium into
CF4E assembled at a high density on 1:1 DGS-NTA-Ni2+/DOPC vesicles (kinase-activating) and CF4E assembled
at a low density on 1:9 DGS-NTA-Ni2+/DOPC vesicles (kinase-inhibited).
The percent deuterium incorporation was calculated using the average
mass method. Data for overlapping peptides were averaged for each
state (Table S2 of the Supporting Information) and then subtracted (high density minus low density).

All of the other peptides exhibit slower exchange,
indicating that
the reduced level of global exchange we observed in functional complexes17 extends throughout most of the CF. The small
error bars for the exchange data in the tables and figures show the
consistency between two independent data sets for each signaling state
(Figures 4 and 5 and
Figure S1 of the Supporting Information) and between the behavior of overlapping peptides (Tables S1b and
S2 of the Supporting Information). The
difference in deuterium incorporation levels at various exchange times
(Table S2 of the Supporting Information) is represented by the colors in Figure 3. This overview illustrates that this high-density kinase-activating
state has (1) increased exchange at 3 min (red), in part because of
a fraction that undergoes complete exchange in 3 min, and (2) decreased
exchange from 30 min to 16 h (blue, cyan) localized to the methylation
and signaling subdomains.

The Methylation Subdomain Exhibits both Increased
and Decreased
Exchange Rates in a High-Density Kinase-Activating State
Peptides of the methylation subdomain exhibit two distinct differences
in exchange behavior in the high- versus low-density signaling states.
This is illustrated by
the data shown in Figure 4A for a 16-residue
peptide (residues 473–488, highlighted in bright orange) and
in Figure 4B for a 13-residue peptide (residues
500–512, highlighted in pale orange). The high-density complex
exhibits both
slower exchange (compare arrows) and a rapidly exchanging fraction
with full exchange in 3 min (asterisk). Note that between each sample
injection for LC–ESI-MS a blank injection was performed to
ensure there was no carryover from the previous sample. We estimated
the fraction fully exchanged in 3 min for every peptide (Table S1a
of the Supporting Information, with averages
for overlapping peptides listed in Table S1b of the Supporting Information) as follows. Very large (90–100%)
and small (&lt;20%) fractions were estimated visually. Other cases
were estimated by fitting the intensities of the two isotopic distributions
to two Gaussian curves and using the two resulting areas to compute
the fully exchanged fraction. The estimated fractions fully exchanged
at 3 min (Table S1b of the Supporting Information) are represented by the colors of the CF monomer peptides and structure
in Figure 2. In addition to the peptides of
the N- and C-termini discussed above that fully exchange in 3 min,
most of the peptides on the C-terminal side of the methylation subdomain
(orange) have a 50–64% fraction that fully exchanges in 3 min,
but only in the high-density
state. A fully exchanged fraction that increases with time would suggest
EX1 exchange, in which each opening of the protein to an exchange-competent
state is long enough for complete exchange of protons to deuterium.35 The fully exchanged fraction of the methylation
subdomain peptides highlighted in orange does not increase significantly
at subsequent early time points (only 3–11% increase at 7,
10, and 15 min), indicating that this rapid exchange
(which could be EX1 or EX2) is essentially complete in the 3 min dead
time of our experiment. At long times, the m/z cluster for the gradually exchanging
fraction merges with that of the fully exchanged fraction.

Figure 4 Hydrogen exchange
rates change with signaling state in the methylation
subdomain. Mass spectra vs exchange time (top) and plots of deuterium
incorporation time course (bottom) for two representative peptides
of the methylation subdomain, (A) residues 473–488 (bright
orange on the structure) and (B) residues 500–512 (pale orange
on the structure). For both peptides, in the high-density
kinase-activating state, a large fraction undergoes complete exchange
in 3 min (asterisks, 64% in part A and 50% in part B). The negligible
increase in this fully exchanged fraction in subsequent time points
indicates that it is not an EX1 process occurring during the measured
time course. The remaining fraction exchanges more slowly in the kinase-activating
state than in the kinase-inhibited state (black dashed arrows), and
this exchange is quantified in the plots based on the most intense
peak in the isotopic cluster (ignoring the rapidly exchanging fraction).
The deuterium incorporation plots (bottom) show faster exchange in
the kinase-inhibited state (empty circles) than in the kinase-activating
state (filled circles). Data plotted are the means ± the standard
deviation of two independent experiments; the dashed line represents
complete exchange, and parameters resulting from the biexponential
fits (lines) are reported in Table S3 of the Supporting
Information. Three other peptides (residues 478–488,
479–488, and 499–512) show similar exchange.

A qualitative comparison of the mass spectra for
two peptides in
both states (Figure 4, top) shows that the
fraction of the sample with a measurable exchange rate exhibits significantly
slower exchange in the kinase-activating state than in the kinase-inhibited
state (arrows). The average mass of the isotopic profiles could not
be used for this analysis, because it includes the contribution of
the rapidly exchanging fraction. Therefore, exchange was quantified
by following the mass of the most intense
peak in the cluster (neglecting the cluster of the rapidly exchanging
fraction). These data are plotted in Figure 4 (bottom), which clearly demonstrates that peptides 473–488
(A, bright orange on the structure) and 500–512 (B, pale orange
on the structure) undergo faster exchange in the
low-density kinase-inhibited state. Biexponential fits to the data
are also shown in the plots, and the resulting
parameters for these fits and those for all of the other peptides
are listed in Table S3 of the Supporting Information (fractions f1 and f2 with rates k1 and k2, respectively). Five peptides from the methylation
subdomain (rows shaded in orange in Table S3 of the Supporting Information, average peptide length of 12 residues)
show significantly faster exchange in the low-density kinase-inhibited
state: the weighted average exchange rate constants, computed as k = (f1k1 + f2k2)/(f1 + f2), range from 2.6- to 5.5-fold faster, with the average being 3.8-fold
faster. Omitting peptide 473–488 (which is only 2.6-fold faster
and is the
only peptide that includes residues 473–477) brings the average
to 4-fold faster for the regions of residues 478–488 and 499–512.
It is not
clear why the behavior of the intervening 489–506 peptide exhibits
different exchange (Figure S2F of the Supporting
Information): both signaling states
have an ≈30% rapidly exchanging fraction, and the remaining
fraction has a comparable exchange rate in both signaling states.
With this one exception, peptides of the C-terminal side of the methylation
subdomain (the N-terminal side peptides exchange too quickly to measure)
exhibit two changes in the high-density kinase-activating state relative
to the low-density kinase-inhibited state: approximately half of the
CF exhibits much faster exchange (complete in 3 min), and the other
half exhibits 4-fold slower exchange.

The Signaling Subdomain
Shows Differential Protection from Exchange
with the Signaling State
Peptides from the signaling subdomain
that binds CheA and CheW in functional complexes show different degrees
of protection from exchange at long times in the high- and low-density
signaling states. The three peptides that include the membrane-distal
tip of the receptor (spanning residues 377–432) show similar
exchange rates in both states, which is evident qualitatively
in the series of mass spectra shown in panels A (residues 377–393)
and B (residues 381–432)
of Figure 5. Furthermore, the plotted
data (Figure 5A,B, bottom) have a similar slope,
and the weighted average exchange rate constants are within 30% of
each other. However, there is a clear difference in the extent of
exchange. Maximal exchange (black mass spectra) is determined using
a CF4E sample denatured in D2O at high temperatures,
refolded upon cooling, and subjected to the equivalent protocol so
that it undergoes the same degree of back exchange as experimental
samples. Both signaling states of these peptides show incomplete exchange
at 16 h, and the number of unexchanged protons (protected protons)
is greater
in the kinase-activating state. As listed in Table S4 of the Supporting Information, all three peptides from
this region exhibit a small degree of protection in the low-density
kinase-inhibited state (one to two protons) that is significantly
larger (five to eight protons) in the high-density kinase-activating
state.

Although
the majority of the protected sites (five protons) occur in the smallest
peptide from the cytoplasmic tip of the receptor within the signaling
subdomain, the other two much longer peptides that extend farther
into and beyond the signaling subdomain (see Figure 2) show additional protection of two to three protons. These
additional protons may be within the signaling subdomain
or may be in the adjacent coupling subdomain (C-terminal side). Interestingly,
only one other peptide, from the opposite N-terminal side of the coupling
subdomain [residues 327–362 (Figure S2B of the Supporting Information)], shows minor protection
(two
to four protons) from exchange at 16 h.

Figure 5 Protection from hydrogen
exchange changes with signaling state
in the signaling subdomain. Mass spectra vs exchange time (top) and
plots of deuterium incorporation time course (bottom) for two representative
peptides of the signaling subdomain, (A) residues 377–393 and
(B) residues 381–432 (each colored green on the adjacent structure;
peptide 384–432 shows similar behavior). Incomplete exchange
at the longest time
point is shown by the overlay with mass spectra of the maximally exchanged
peptide (black), which is the D2O-denatured control subjected
to back exchange after quenching. For the plots, exchange data are
quantified on the basis of the average mass over the full range, and
biexponential
fits (lines) show less protection from exchange at long times in
the kinase-inhibited state (empty circles) than in the kinase-activating
state (filled circles). Data plotted are the means ± the standard
deviation of two independent experiments; the dashed line represents
complete exchange, and parameters resulting from the fits are listed
in Table S3 of the Supporting Information. The number of hydrogens remaining in all three peptides at 16 h
(Table S4 of the Supporting Information) demonstrates consistently greater protection in the high-density
kinase-activating state.

Discussion
Changes in dynamics in the cytoplasmic domain
of bacterial chemoreceptors
have long been suggested to be important in the signaling mechanism.2−7 Previously, disulfide cross-linking has been used as a measure of
signaling-related changes in dynamics
in the intact receptor in the absence of CheA and CheW.5 Here we report the first measurements of signaling-related
changes in dynamics in functional complexes of the receptor CF, CheA,
and CheW, using a new approach17 that couples
vesicle template assembly18 with HDX-MS.
Our measurements demonstrate differences in exchange rates between
signaling states that localize to functionally important regions of
the chemoreceptor CF involved in excitation and adaptation mechanisms
of chemotaxis. These results begin to provide a direct test of proposed
models for the role of dynamics in transmembrane signaling and a promising
approach for understanding how multiprotein complexes operate in the
cell.

Global exchange measurements with this approach have demonstrated
significantly slower hydrogen exchange of the entire CF in membrane-bound
functional complexes relative to CF alone in solution.17 We have now used local exchange measurements
(localized to pepsin peptides after exchange) to show that this slower
exchange occurs throughout the protein. The rapid global exchange
of CF alone (∼75% exchange at 3 min)17 is slower in CF complexes in all regions other than the N- and C-termini
[∼30–70%
exchange at 3 min (Table S2 of the Supporting
Information)]. The rapid exchange of the C-terminal region
(red peptides in Figure 2) is consistent with
EPR evidence that this region (beginning at residue 520) is unstructured34 and serves as a flexible tether to the C-terminal
pentapeptide that binds the CheR methyltransferase for modification
of the methylation sites.36 The other rapidly
exchanging region at the N-terminus may be due to the absence of the
HAMP domain in this construct. The slower exchange measured throughout
most of the CF in functional complexes makes it possible to compare
the properties of signaling states. The primary differences in dynamics
between the high-density CF4E kinase-activating complexes
and low-density CF4E kinase-inhibited complexes occur in
the methylation and signaling subdomains of the cytoplasmic domain,
as represented by the orange and green colors, respectively, of the
CF in the model of CF complexes shown in Figure 1A.

Mass spectra and deuterium incorporation plots for representative
peptides throughout the rest of the CF show that only small changes
are observed between signaling states in other regions (Figure S2
of the Supporting Information). For instance,
the high-density state exhibits slightly faster exchange for the early
time points in several peptides in the range of residues 422–472
immediately preceding the C-terminal methylation peptides, but no
evidence of a subpopulation with complete exchange at 3 min (Figure
S2C,E of the Supporting Information). Together
with the rapidly exchanging subpopulation of the C-terminal methylation
peptides, this accounts for the red region in the 3 min difference
exchange map shown in Figure 3. Furthermore,
only one peptide outside of the signaling subdomain exhibits protection
at long exchange times (Figure S2B of the Supporting
Information), and its maximal protection of four protons is
more limited than the protection observed in signaling subdomain peptides
[maximal protection of eight protons (Table S4 of the Supporting Information)]. Because differences
in hydrogen exchange between signaling states are much smaller in
these other regions, we have focused our interpretation of this initial
study on the changes in exchange in the methylation and signaling
subdomain peptides, as illustrated in Figures 4 and 5.

Hydrogen exchange results for
the signaling subdomain (Figure 5) indicate
that interactions of this subdomain protect
a core of protons from exchange at long times (16 h) in both states,
and that this protected core is larger in the high-density
kinase-activating state. This protection could indicate that this
subdomain contains the most stable part of the CF and that it is further
stabilized in the kinase-activating state. However, previous studies
suggest the opposite occurs during signaling: mutations expected to
weaken receptor helix packing in the signaling subdomain have been
shown to favor the kinase-activating state.6 Therefore, we propose this protection is due to interactions with
CheA and/or
CheW, and that the interaction interface is tighter and/or larger
in the kinase-activating state, leading to protection of more protons
from exchange. Although the difference in protection could also be
due to a differential loss of bound CheA and CheW from the high- and
low-density complexes, sedimentation analysis (Figure S1 of the Supporting Information) suggests that the complexes
retain equivalent amounts of CheA at 16 h. We suggest that receptors
in the kinase-activating state bind tightly
to CheA and CheW and loosely to each other, and the opposite occurs
in the kinase-inhibited state. Unfortunately, it is not possible to
gain insight into the effect of CheA and CheW binding on hydrogen
exchange by performing HDX-MS experiments in their absence, because
assembly in the absence of CheA and CheW leads to vesicle aggregation.24

The methylation subdomain shows both increased
and decreased hydrogen
exchange rates for most of the C-terminal peptides in the high-density
kinase-activating state (Figure 4). Because
this heterogeneous behavior (two fractions with different exchange
behavior) occurs only in the methylation subdomain peptides, it is
not likely to be due to heterogeneity of the CF complexes (e.g., native
vs
denatured or complexed with CheA and CheW vs uncomplexed), which would
be expected to alter exchange of the entire
CF. Instead, it is interesting to consider the possibility that the
C-terminal methylation subdomain of each monomer in the CF dimer experiences
a different environment, consistent with the ≈60/40 fractions
observed to have different exchange behavior. For instance,
if the methylation subdomain is contracted in the kinase-activating
state, such that the CF occupies a smaller area of the membrane, this
could increase the level of interaction between the CF monomers with
the closest C-terminal helices in the methylation subdomain within
the trimer of dimers, leading to a decreased exchange rate. This could
leave the other monomer more solvent-exposed and undergoing very rapid
exchange, comparable to the rapid exchange of the N-terminal peptides
of the methylation subdomain. The decrease in exchange rate observed
in the methylation subdomain peptides for the other 40% fraction of
the CF may be due to stabilization of this subdomain in the kinase-activating
state, which would be consistent with proposals from the laboratories
of Falke and Parkinson.6,7 However, because
of the complex HDX behavior of these peptides, which is likely to
be influenced by multiple factors (see below), it is too early to
conclude whether this subdomain is stabilized in the kinase-activating
state.

Limitations of this initial study of exchange properties
of CF4E
in functional complexes include the possibility that low- versus high-density
assembly rather than signaling-state differences causes
some of the observed changes in HDX. Results of preliminary experiments
on low-density CF4Q complexes (data not shown), which are kinase-on
but have kinase activity lower than that of high-density CF4E, indicate
that the two detected signaling subdomain peptides (381–432
and 384–432) show protection from exchange at 16 h comparable
to that of the kinase-on high-density CF4E. This suggests
that the HDX differences we report in the signaling subdomain are
not due to low- versus high-density assembly differences and may be
due to the signaling
state. On the other hand, the HDX behavior of the methylation subdomain
peptides of low-density CF4Q is complex, seemingly intermediate between
the properties of high-density CF4E and low-density CF4E. Thus, it
appears that multiple factors (density of assembly, methylation
state, and kinase activity) influence the complex HDX properties in
the methylation subdomain.

HDX-MS of CF4E complexes with high
and low kinase activity modulated
by density of assembly reveals that changes localize to the functionally
important methylation and signaling subdomains, as represented by
the CF colors in the structural model of Figure 1A. Experiments are in progress to further optimize vesicle-assembled
samples and then compare HDX of a variety of CF complexes using other
means such as mutations and methylation state to alter the kinase
activity. These comparisons will reveal which changes in HDX properties
correlate with signaling state and will test models for changes in
dynamics of CF subdomains during signaling.

Measurements of
hydrogen exchange of subdomains of a protein within
functional complexes can provide insight into mechanistically important
changes in both conformation (exchange rates may decrease because
of a decreased level of solvent exposure) and dynamics (exchange rates
may decrease because of a decreased number of conformational fluctuations
or increased stability). The results of this initial study of exchange
in functional CF complexes suggest changes in both conformation and
stability. In the methylation subdomain, we suggest that one monomer
is rapidly exchanging because of increased solvent exposure and/or
instability and the other monomer is stabilized by closer interactions
within the trimer of dimers. In the signaling subdomain, we suggest
that a larger or more stable interaction with CheA and/or CheW reduces
exchange at long times. Future measurements will seek to determine
which observed differences in exchange best correlate with signaling
states and to determine the underlying cause of these differences.

HDX-MS, an important approach for characterizing the mechanistic
role of protein dynamics, has been applied in a few other cases to
multiprotein
complexes.10,11,37 The combination of vesicle template assembly with HDX-MS that we
have used for measurements of local exchange in nativelike chemoreceptor
complexes should be applicable to a wide variety of functional complexes
formed by membrane proteins. Indeed, vesicle template assembly has
been successful for assembly of functional complexes of cytoplasmic
domains of other membrane proteins such as receptor kinases.20−23 This provides a promising approach for measuring
functionally important dynamics to advance our understanding of mechanisms
of membrane proteins and their complexes.

Supporting Information Available
Rapidly exchanging
fractions (Table S1), the time course of deuterium incorporation (Table
S2), hydrogen exchange rates and protection factors for both high-
and low-density states (Table S3), numbers of protons protected from
exchange at long times in signaling subdomain peptides (Table S4),
sedimentation analysis of binding of CheA to complexes (Figure S1),
and mass spectra and plots of exchange for representative peptides
throughout the CF (Figure S2). This material is available free of
charge via the Internet at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bi500657v_si_001.pdf

 This research
was supported by National Institutes of Health Grant R01-GM085288.
S.S.K. was partially supported by a fellowship from the University
of Massachusetts as part of the Chemistry-Biology Interface Training
Program (National Research Service Award T32 GM08515).

The authors declare no competing
financial interest.

Author Status
∥ Deceased.

Acknowledgments
We thank Cedric Bobst, Guanbo Wang, Shunhai Wang, Serap Pektas,
and Cristina Martin for mass spectrometry advice and technical assistance,
Daniel Fowler and Yuzhou Tang for providing some CheA and CheW proteins,
past and present members of the Thompson and Weis groups for helpful
discussions, and Sandy Parkinson and Rick Dahlquist for helpful comments
on the manuscript.

Abbreviations
CFcytoplasmic fragment of Escherichia
coli aspartate chemotaxis receptor

DGS-NTA1,2-dioleoyl-sn-glycero-3-[N-(5-amino-1-carboxypentyl)iminodiacetic
acid] (Ni-chelating lipid)

DMSOdimethyl sulfoxide

DOPC1,2-dioleoyl-sn-glycero-3-phosphocholine

GuHClguanidine hydrochloride

HAMPhistidine kinases,
adenyl cyclases, MCPs, and some phosphatases

HDX-MShydrogen–deuterium exchange
mass spectrometry

HPLChigh-pressure
liquid chromatography

LC–ESI-MSliquid chromatography and electrospray ionization mass spectrometry

TCEPtris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine.



   
References
Falke J. J. ; Hazelbauer G. L.  (2001 ) Transmembrane
signaling in bacterial chemoreceptors . Trends
Biochem.
Sci. 
26 , 257 –265 .11295559 
Seeley S. K. ; Weis R. M. ; Thompson L. K.  (1996 ) The cytoplasmic
fragment of the aspartate
receptor displays globally dynamic behavior . Biochemistry 
35 , 5199 –5206 .8611504 
Murphy O. J. ; Yi X. ; Weis R. M. ; Thompson L. K.  (2001 ) Hydrogen Exchange Reveals a Stable
and Expandable Core within the Aspartate Receptor Cytoplasmic Domain . J. Biol. Chem. 
276 , 43262 –43269 .11553619 
Kim S.-H. ; Wang W. ; Kim K. K.  (2002 ) Dynamic and clustering model of bacterial
chemotaxis receptors: Structural basis for signaling and high sensitivity . Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 
99 , 11611 –11615 .12186970 
Starrett D. J. ; Falke J. J.  (2005 ) Adaptation Mechanism of the Aspartate Receptor: Electrostatics
of the Adaptation Subdomain Play a Key Role in Modulating Kinase Activity . Biochemistry 
44 , 1550 –1560 .15683239 
Swain K. E. ; Gonzalez M. A. ; Falke J. J.  (2009 ) Engineered Socket Study of Signaling
through a Four-Helix Bundle: Evidence for a Yin–Yang Mechanism
in the Kinase Control Module of the Aspartate Receptor . Biochemistry 
48 , 9266 –9277 .19705835 
Zhou Q. ; Ames P. ; Parkinson J. S.  (2009 ) Mutational analyses of HAMP helices
suggest a dynamic bundle model of input-output signalling in chemoreceptors . Mol. Microbiol. 
73 , 801 –814 .19656294 
Barrera N. P. ; Robinson C. V.  (2011 ) Advances in the mass spectrometry of membrane proteins:
From individual proteins to intact complexes . Annu. Rev. Biochem. 
80 , 247 –271 .21548785 
Laganowsky A. ; Reading E. ; Hopper J. T. S. ; Robinson C. V.  (2013 ) Mass spectrometry
of intact membrane protein complexes . Nat. Protoc. 
8 , 639 –651 .23471109 
Busenlehner L. S. ; Brändén G. ; Namslauer I. ; Brzezinski P. ; Armstrong R. N.  (2008 ) Structural
elements involved in proton
translocation by cytochrome c oxidase as revealed by backbone amide
hydrogen-deuterium exchange of the E286H mutant . Biochemistry 
47 , 73 –83 .18052347 
Orban T. ; Jastrzebska B. ; Gupta S. ; Wang B. ; Miyagi M. ; Chance M. R. ; Palczewski K.  (2012 ) Conformational dynamics of activation
for the pentameric complex of dimeric G protein-coupled receptor and
heterotrimeric G protein . Structure 
20 , 826 –840 .22579250 
West G. M. ; Chien E. Y. T. ; Katritch V. ; Gatchalian J. ; Chalmers M. J. ; Stevens R. C. ; Griffin P. R.  (2011 ) Ligand-dependent
perturbation of the conformational ensemble for the GPCR β2
adrenergic receptor revealed by HDX . Structure 
19 , 1424 –1432 .21889352 
Chung K. Y. ; Rasmussen S. G. F. ; Liu T. ; Li S. ; DeVree B. T. ; Chae P. S. ; Calinski D. ; Kobilka B. K. ; Woods V. L. ; Sunahara R. K.  (2011 ) Conformational
changes in the G protein Gs induced
by the β2 adrenergic receptor . Nature 
477 , 611 –615 .21956331 
Rey M. ; Man P. ; Clémençon B. ; Trézéguet V. ; Brandolin G. ; Forest E. ; Pelosi L.  (2010 ) Conformational dynamics
of the bovine mitochondrial ADP/ATP carrier isoform 1 revealed by
hydrogen/deuterium exchange coupled to mass spectrometry . J. Biol. Chem. 
285 , 34981 –34990 .20805227 
Mehmood S. ; Domene C. ; Forest E. ; Jault J.-M.  (2012 ) Dynamics of a bacterial
multidrug ABC transporter in the inward- and outward-facing conformations . Proc. Natl.
Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 
109 , 10832 –10836 .22711831 
Hebling C. M. ; Morgan C. R. ; Stafford D. W. ; Jorgenson J. W. ; Rand K. D. ; Engen J. R.  (2010 ) Conformational analysis of membrane
proteins in phospholipid bilayer nanodiscs by hydrogen exchange mass
spectrometry . Anal. Chem. 
82 , 5415 –5419 .20518534 
Koshy S. S. ; Eyles S. J. ; Weis R. M. ; Thompson L. K.  (2013 ) Hydrogen
Exchange
Mass Spectrometry of Functional Membrane-Bound Chemotaxis Receptor
Complexes . Biochemistry 
52 , 8833 –8842 .24274333 
Shrout A. L. ; Montefusco D. J. ; Weis R. M.  (2003 ) Template-Directed
Assembly of Receptor
Signaling Complexes . Biochemistry 
42 , 13379 –13385 .14621982 
Besschetnova T. Y. ; Montefusco D. J. ; Asinas A. E. ; Shrout A. L. ; Antommattei F. M. ; Weis R. M.  (2008 ) Receptor density balances signal stimulation and attenuation
in membrane-assembled complexes of bacterial chemotaxis signaling
proteins . Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 
105 , 12289 –12294 .18711126 
Zhang X. ; Gureasko J. ; Shen K. ; Cole P. A. ; Kuriyan J.  (2006 ) An allosteric
mechanism for activation of the kinase domain of epidermal growth
factor receptor . Cell 
125 , 1137 –1149 .16777603 
Shrout A. L. ; Esposito E. A. ; Weis R. M.  (2008 ) Template-directed
Assembly of Signaling
Proteins: A Novel Drug Screening and Research Tool . Chem. Biol. Drug Des. 
71 , 278 –281 .18221311 
Esposito E. A. ; Shrout A. L. ; Weis R. M.  (2008 ) Template-Directed Self-Assembly Enhances
RTK Catalytic Domain Function . J. Biomol. Screening 
13 , 810 –816 .
Shi F. ; Telesco S. E. ; Liu Y. ; Radhakrishnan R. ; Lemmon M. A.  (2010 ) ErbB3/HER3 intracellular domain is
competent to bind
ATP and catalyze autophosphorylation . Proc.
Natl.
Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 
107 , 7692 –7697 .20351256 
Montefusco D. J. ; Shrout A. L. ; Besschetnova T. Y. ; Weis R. M.  (2007 ) Formation and Activity
of Template-Assembled Receptor Signaling Complexes . Langmuir 
23 , 3280 –3289 .17286419 
Briegel A. ; Wong M. L. ; Hodges H. L. ; Oikonomou C. M. ; Piasta K. N. ; Harris M. J. ; Fowler D. J. ; Thompson L. K. ; Falke J. J. ; Kiessling L. L. ; Jensen G. J.  (2014 ) New insights into
bacterial chemoreceptor array structure and assembly from electron
cryotomography . Biochemistry 
53 , 1575 –1585 .24580139 
Asinas A. E. ; Weis R. M.  (2006 ) Competitive and cooperative interactions
in receptor
signaling complexes . J. Biol. Chem. 
281 , 30512 –30523 .16920717 
Kott L. ; Braswell E. H. ; Shrout A. L. ; Weis R. M.  (2004 ) Distributed subunit
interactions in CheA contribute to dimer stability: A sedimentation
equilibrium study . Biochim. Biophys. Acta 
1696 , 131 –140 .14726213 
Fowler D. J. ; Weis R. M. ; Thompson L. K.  (2010 ) Kinase-active
Signaling Complexes
of Bacterial Chemoreceptors Do Not Contain Proposed Receptor–Receptor
Contacts Observed in Crystal Structures . Biochemistry 
49 , 1425 –1434 .20088541 
Fang J. ; Rand K. D. ; Beuning P. J. ; Engen J. R.  (2011 ) False EX1 signatures
caused by sample carryover during HX MS analyses . Int. J. Mass Spectrom. 
302 , 19 –25 .21643454 
Briegel A. ; Beeby M. ; Thanbichler M. ; Jensen G. J.  (2011 ) Activated chemoreceptor
arrays remain intact and hexagonally packed . Mol. Microbiol. 
82 , 748 –757 .21992450 
Sferdean F. C. ; Weis R. M. ; Thompson L. K.  (2012 ) Ligand affinity and kinase activity
are independent of bacterial chemotaxis receptor concentration: Insight
into signaling mechanisms . Biochemistry 
51 , 6920 –6931 .22870954 
Vaknin A. ; Berg H. C.  (2007 ) Physical Responses
of Bacterial Chemoreceptors . J. Mol. Biol. 
366 , 1416 –1423 .17217957 
Briegel A. ; Ames P. ; Gumbart J. C. ; Oikonomou C. M. ; Parkinson J. S. ; Jensen G. J.  (2013 ) The mobility of
two kinase domains
in the Escherichia coli chemoreceptor
array varies with signalling state . Mol. Microbiol. 
89 , 831 –841 .23802570 
Bartelli N. L. ; Hazelbauer G. L.  (2011 ) Direct
evidence that the carboxyl-terminal sequence
of a bacterial chemoreceptor is an unstructured linker and enzyme
tether . Protein Sci. 
20 , 1856 –1866 .21858888 
Eyles S. J. ; Kaltashov I. A.  (2004 ) Methods to study protein dynamics
and folding by mass
spectrometry . Methods 
34 , 88 –99 .15283918 
Wu J. ; Li J. ; Li G. ; Long D. G. ; Weis R. M.  (1996 ) The receptor binding
site for the methyltransferase of bacterial chemotaxis is distinct
from the sites of methylation . Biochemistry 
35 , 4984 –4993 .8664291 
Xiao H. ; Wang H. ; Zhang X. ; Tu Z. ; Bulinski C. ; Khrapunovich-Baine M. ; Hogue Angeletti R. ; Horwitz S. B.  (2012 ) Structural evidence
for cooperative microtubule stabilization by Taxol and the endogenous
dynamics regulator MAP4 . ACS Chem. Biol. 
7 , 744 –752 .22270553 



