Post-translational modifications
(PTMs) are critical for life via their ability to regulate key cellular
processes, including chromatin architecture, gene expression, enzyme
activity, and protein stability. Among
the more than 200 known PTMs (e.g., acetylation, phosphorylation,
and methylation), citrullination involves the conversion of peptidyl-arginine
into peptidyl-citrulline, which effectively neutralizes the positive
charge of a guanidinium group by its replacement with a neutral urea. The enzymes that catalyze this modification,
protein arginine deiminases (PADs 1–4 and 6), are principally
found in mammals as well as a single bacterium, and their activity
regulates a number of cellular processes, including gene expression,
chromatin architecture, autophagy, and neutrophil extracellular trap
(NET) formation.−

Importantly, chronic NET formation, or NETosis, is a hallmark
of
diseases including rheumatoid arthritis, lupus, and numerous cancers.− For example, Demers and colleagues showed that in murine models
of chronic myelogenous leukemia, breast, and lung cancer, neutrophil
populations are sensitized by granulocyte colony stimulating factor
(G-CSF) to undergo NETosis. As a result,
excess DNA and decondensed chromatin prompts the occurrence of deep
vein thrombosis, the second leading cause of cancer deaths. PAD4 activity is required for this process,
as PADI4–/– mice do not form NETs and a pan-PAD
inhibitor, Cl-amidine, blocks NET formation in vitro and in vivo.(,) The ability to inhibit
NETosis provides a partial explanation for why Cl-amidine shows efficacy
in several preclinical models, including RA, lupus, and cancer.,− Beyond NETosis, PAD2 also plays a role in tumorigenesis. For example,
PAD2 is highly expressed in luminal breast cancers and helps define
a HER2+ gene expression signature in primary invasive tumors. Additionally, PAD2 is the fifth most correlated
gene with breast cancer recurrence and promotes HER2 expression via
its recruitment to the HER2 proximal promoter, establishing a positive
feedback loop as HER2 regulates PAD2 expression via PI3K signaling. Similar to its effect on ER target genes, the
increased expression of HER2 likely reflects the ability of PAD2 to
citrullinate histone H3. Further supporting a role for PAD2 in oncogenesis
is the fact that Cl-amidine slows the growth of MCF10DCIS xenografts,
a model of ductal carcinoma in situ in which PAD2
is highly expressed and promotes cellular growth. In total, these data suggest that the PADs, and PAD2 in
particular, are interesting therapeutic targets for a range of diseases.

In humans, there are five PADs (PADs 1–4 and 6). These isozymes
are highly conserved, with 50–55% overall sequence homology
and close to 70% identity within the catalytic domain. Early crystallographic studies with human PAD4 showed that
the PAD4 monomer consists of three distinct domains: the C-terminal
catalytic domain and two immunoglobulin-like domains (IgG1 and IgG2)
that are present within the N-terminal half of the protein. These structural studies also showed that PAD4
binds to five calcium ions: Ca1 and Ca2 are present in the catalytic
domain, whereas the remaining three calciums (Ca3–5) bind in
tandem within the IgG2 domain at the border of the catalytic domain. Although Ca1 and Ca2 bind within the catalytic
domain, they do not participate directly in catalysis. Instead, all
five calcium ions are important for triggering a series of conformational
changes that move key active site residues into positions that are
competent for catalysis.− In previous work with PADs 1,
3, and 4, we showed that calcium increases PAD activity by &gt;10 000-fold
and that the enzymes require near millimolar levels of calcium for
full activity.− We also demonstrated that these isoforms possess
similar, but nonidentical, substrate recognition motifs, and, on the
basis of solvent isotope effects, pH rate profiles, and measurements
of the pKa of the active site cysteine,
we provided evidence that these isozymes use a reverse-protonation
mechanism, wherein a fraction of the enzyme exists as the deprotonated
thiolate and protonated imidazole and, upon substrate binding, catalysis
proceeds via nucleophilic attack by the thiolate.,

Given its sequence similarity across mammalian species and
the
genomic organization of the PAD2 gene, PAD2 is predicted to be the
ancestral homologue of the PADs. Although
PAD2, the focus of this article, has long been known to play a role
in myelination, it has only recently
been linked to other cellular processes, including gene transcription
and macrophage extracellular trap formation.,,, For example,
PAD2 deiminates histone H3 at R26, and this PTM leads to the increased
transcription of more than 200 genes under the control of the estrogen
receptor. Given that our understanding
of PAD2 biology remains incomplete, we initiated mechanistic studies
on this enzyme to aid the development of PAD2-specific inhibitors.
Herein, we report that the substrate specificity and calcium dependence
of PAD2 is similar to those of PADs 1, 3, and 4. However, unlike those
isozymes, PAD2 appears to use a substrate-assisted mechanism of catalysis
in which the positively charged substrate guanidinium promotes catalysis
by depressing the pKa of the nucleophilic
cysteine.

Experimental Procedures
Chemicals
Dithiothreitol (DTT) was
acquired from Bioworld.
4-(2-Hydroxyethyl)-1-piperazineethanesulfonic acid (HEPES) was acquired
from Research Products International. Tris(2-carboxyethyl) phosphine
(TCEP) was acquired from AMRESCO. Ammonium iron(III) sulfate dodecahydrate,
diacetyl monooxime (DAMO), and thiosemicarbazide were acquired from
Sigma-Aldrich. Nα-Benzoyl-l-arginine
methyl ester (BAME) was obtained from MP Biomedicals. Nα-Benzoyl-l-arginine ethyl ester (BAEE) was acquired
from Sigma-Aldrich. Nα-Benzoyl-l-arginine
amide (BAA) was obtained from Pfaltz &amp; Bauer. Nα-Benzoyl-l-arginine (BA) was obtained from Acros.
D2O and H218O (95%) were obtained
from Cambridge Isotopes.

Cloning, Expression, and Purification of
Wild-Type PAD2
The human PAD2 gene was cloned into the pET16B
vector using NdeI/XhoI
sites after PCR amplification using the following primers: forward
5′-AAAAAACATATGCTGCGCGAGCGG-3′
and reverse 5′-AAAAAACTCGAGTCAGGGCACCATGTGCCA-3′.
The forward primer contains the NdeI restriction site (underlined)
and 15 base pairs that correspond to the 5′-coding region of
PAD2. The reverse primer contains the XhoI restriction site (underlined)
followed by 15 base pairs that correspond to the coding region of
the PAD2 gene. The resulting pET16b-PAD2 construct was sequenced to
ensure that no mutations were incorporated. The PAD2 expression construct
was then transformed into Escherichia coli BL21(DE3)pLysS cells (EMD Biosciences) for protein expression. The
PAD2 purification procedure was adapted from previously described
methods. Briefly, overnight cultures
were used to inoculate 4 × 2 L of LB (20 g/L bacto-tryptone,
20 g/L bacto-yeast extract, and 10 g/L NaCl), and these cultures were
grown at 37 °C and 250 rpm until the cultures reached an OD600 of 0.8. PAD2 expression was induced by the addition of
IPTG (0.4 mM final) and allowed to proceed overnight at 16 °C
and 200 rpm. Cells were harvested by centrifugation at 4800g for 10 min at 4 °C. The pellet was resuspended in
70 mL of lysis buffer (20 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.0, 1% Triton X-100, 500
μM TCEP, 5 mM imidazole, and 500 mM NaCl) and lysed by eight
cycles of sonication with an 8 s burst (duty cycle, 100%; output,
10). The lysate was clarified by centrifugation (15 min at 11 900g), and the supernatant was mixed with Ni-NTA–agarose
resin (Invitrogen) pre-equilibrated with lysis buffer. Initial binding
was carried out for 20 min at 4 °C with gentle stirring. The
column was washed with wash buffer 1 (50 mL of 20 mM Tris-HCl, pH
8.0, 10% glycerol, 500 μM TCEP, 20 mM imidazole, and 500 mM
NaCl) followed by wash buffer 2 (50 mL of 20 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.0,
10% glycerol, 500 μM TCEP, 50 mM imidazole, and 500 mM NaCl).
Elution buffer (20 mL of 20 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.0, 10% glycerol, 500
μM TCEP, 250 mM imidazole, and 500 mM NaCl) was then allowed
to equilibrate with the resin for 10 min, at which point the eluent
was collected.

Fractions from the Ni-NTA column were analyzed
by 12% SDS-PAGE and PAD activity assays (see below). The fraction
containing pure full-length PAD2 was concentrated using a Centricon
concentrator with a 10 kDa nominal molecular mass cutoff. Concentrated
protein was then dialyzed (20 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.6, 1 mM EDTA, 500
mM NaCl, 500 μM TCEP, and 10% glycerol), flash frozen in liquid
nitrogen, and stored at −80 °C. PAD2 stored in this manner
was stable for several months. Recombinant wild-type PAD2 was obtained
in an overall yield of 4 mg/L at ≥95% purity.

H218O Incorporation Studies
The
incorporation of 18O into BAEE was determined by performing
a PAD2-catalyzed deimination reaction in either normal or 18O-labeled water. For these experiments, PAD2 (500 nM final) was incubated
at 37 °C in reaction buffer (5 mM BAEE, 50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.6,
10 mM CaCl2, 2 mM DTT, and 50 mM NaCl) made with either
normal or 18O-labeled water. For the 18O experiments,
the mole percentage of 18O-labeled water was &gt;70% final.
After a 3 h incubation, the reaction mixture was analyzed by ESI mass
spectrometry using an Agilent Technologies 1220 Infinity LC 6120 quadrupole
LC/MS mass spectrometer in the positive ion mode. Formic acid (0.1%)
was used as the organic modifier.

Substrate Specificity Studies
Kinetic assays were performed
as described previously for PAD4. Briefly,
this discontinuous colorimetric assay measures the formation of urea-containing
compounds (e.g., citrulline, urea, methylurea, etc.). Steady-state
kinetic parameters were determined with variable amounts of the substrate
in reaction buffer (60 μL final volume). Peptide substrates
were dissolved in 50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.6. Reaction mixtures were preincubated
for 10 min at 37 °C, at which point PAD2 was added to a final
concentration of 500 nM to initiate the reaction. Reactions were quenched
by flash freezing in liquid nitrogen. For color development, 200 μL
of freshly prepared COLDER solution (2.25 M H3PO4, 4.5 M H2SO4, 1.5 mM NH4Fe(SO4), 20 mM diacetyl monoxime, and 1.5 mM thiosemicarbazide)
was added to the quenched reaction, and the mixture was vortexed to
ensure complete mixing and then incubated for 30 min at 95 °C.
The absorbance at 540 nm was then measured and compared to a citrulline
standard curve to determine the concentration of citrulline produced
during the reaction. All kinetic studies were performed in the linear
range of PAD2 activity with respect to time and enzyme concentration.
Assays were performed in duplicate. The initial rates were fit to
eq using the GraFit version 5.0.1.1
software
package.

Calcium Dependence Studies
Varying concentrations of
calcium (0–10 mM) were incubated in calcium-free reaction buffer
(50 mM NaCl, 2 mM DTT, 10 mM BAEE, and 100 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.6). Reactions
were preincubated at 37 °C for 10 min before the addition of
PAD2 (500 nM final). The reactions were allowed to proceed for 10
min and then flash frozen in liquid nitrogen. Citrulline production
was determined as described above in duplicate, and the data were
fit to eq where KD is the
dissociation constant and n is the Hill coefficient.
For these assays, PAD2 was dialyzed into EDTA-free long-term storage
buffer (20 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.6, 500 μM TCEP, 500 mM NaCl, and
10% glycerol).

pH Dependence Studies
pH profiles
for PAD2 were generated
by measuring the steady-state kinetic parameters for the deimination
of BAEE between pH 6.5–9.8. Stock concentrations of BAEE were
prepared in 50 mM buffer at the desired pH. Reaction mixtures containing
50 mM NaCl, 2 mM DTT, 100 mM buffer (Bis-tris, pH 6.5–7, or
Tris-HCl, pH 7–8, and HEPES, 8–9.8), 10 mM CaCl2, and BAEE at various concentrations (0–10 mM in a
final volume of 60 μL) were preincubated for 10 min prior to
the addition of PAD2. These assays were performed in duplicate. The
initial rates obtained from these experiments were fit to eq . The kcat and kcat/Km values obtained
from this analysis were plotted as a function of pH and fit to eq where ymax is
the amount of activity at the pH optimum.

Solvent Isotope Effects
Solvent isotope effects (SIE)
were measured in reaction buffer containing 100 mM Bis-Tris (pL 5.0–7.0),
100 mM Tris-HCl (pL 7.0–9.0), or 100 mM HEPES (pL 9.0–9.5)
as well as 10 mM CaCl2, 2 mM DTT, 50 mM NaCl, and 500 nM
PAD2 with various concentrations of BAEE (0–10 mM). The pL
values were determined using the correction pL = pH + 0.4, and the
final concentration of D2O was &gt;96%. The kinetic parameters
were determined using the methods described above.

Inactivation
Studies
Inactivation reactions containing
10 mM CaCl2 and 100 mM of buffer (pH 6.5–9.0) were
incubated with 5.0 μM PAD2 at 37 °C for 10 min before adding
either iodoacetamide or 2-chloroacetamidine (dissolved in 50 mM buffer)
to initiate the reaction (60 μL final volume). At various time
points (0–30 min), an aliquot (6 μL) was removed and
added to assay buffer, which was preincubated for 10 min at 37 °C
to measure residual PAD2 activity (60 μL total volume). Reactions
were allowed to proceed for 15 min before being flash frozen in liquid
nitrogen. Citrulline production was measured according to the methodology
described above, and the residual activity data were fit to eq .where v is the velocity, v0 is the initial velocity, k is the pseudo-first-order rate constant for inactivation,
and t is time. In the absence of inactivator saturation
in the v versus [I] plot, the second-order rate constants
of enzyme
inactivation, i.e., kinact/KI, were determined by fitting the data to eq where kinact is
the maximal rate of inactivation, KI is
the concentration of inactivator that yields half-maximal inactivation,
and [I] is the concentration of inactivator. When inactivator saturation
was observed, the data were fit to eq The kinact/KI values thus obtained were
then plotted versus
pH and subsequently fit to eq where ymin is
the minimum rate and ymax is the maximum
rate of inactivation.

Results
Calcium Dependence
To gain insights into the calcium
dependence of PAD2, we determined the concentration of calcium that
is required for half-maximal activity, i.e., K0.5. At the pH optimum (pH 7.6), the K0.5 is 200 ± 18.9 μM with a Hill coefficient of
2.2 ± 0.5 (Figure A). These values are
similar to those obtained for PAD4, and the fact that the Hill coefficient
is &gt;2 indicates that at least three calcium ions are required to
activate
the enzyme. To further explore the calcium dependence of PAD2, we
measured the K0.5 over a range of pH values
(pH 5.5–9.5). The results of these studies indicate that there
is a monotonic decrease in K0.5 as the
pH increases (pKa = 6.6 ± 0.3), which
is likely caused by deprotonation of one or more acidic residues (Asp
and Glu) that are required for calcium binding (Figure B). This result differs substantially from PAD4, where the K0.5 increases at pH values &gt; 7.6. The reason
for this difference is unclear but may reflect differences in the
catalytic mechanism or the mechanism of enzyme activation.

Calcium dependence
of PAD2 catalysis. (A) Calcium dependence of
PAD2 (500 nM final) measured at the pH optimum using reaction buffer
with varying concentrations of calcium (0–5 mM). (B) K0.5, the concentration of calcium that yields
half-maximal activity, plotted on a logarithmic scale against pH.

Substrate Specificity Studies
To initially characterize
the substrate specificity of PAD2, we evaluated a series of small
molecule substrate mimetics (e.g., BAEE, BAA, BAME, and BA) as well
as the free amino acid, l-arginine, and agmatine. The latter
two compounds were tested because they are processed by other members
of the guanindinum-modifying superfamily of enzymes., Consistent with previous results for PADs 1, 3 and 4, the deimination
rates for l-arginine and agmatine were nearly undetectable
and close to background levels (Table ). By
contrast, the benzoylated arginine series was efficiently processed,
indicating that an N-terminal amide is critical and sufficient for
substrate recognition. Among this series, PAD2 selectively deiminates
BAEE with a kcat/Km value of 11 700 M–1 s–1. By comparison, BAME, BAA, and BA were significantly poorer substrates;
the kcat/Km values are 1800, 680, and 390 M–1 s–1, respectively. Although the Km values
for these substrates are generally similar in value (BAEE, 270 ±
60; BAME, 240 ± 40; BAA, 480 ± 70; BA, 1600 ± 100 μM),
the kcat values are reduced 5–10-fold
(Table ). In the case of BAEE, this may suggest
that the guanidinium is better positioned for nucleophilic attack
by Cys647, the active site nucleophile. The greater than 10-fold preference
for BAEE over BAA also likely explains why Cl-amidine, whose structure
is based on the BAA scaffold, preferentially (∼10-fold) inhibits
PAD4 over PAD2.

Kinetic Parameters of Potential PAD2
Substrates
substrate	Km (μM)	kcat (s–1)	kcat/Km (M–1 s–1)	
l-arginine	ND	ND	&lt;9	
agmatine	ND	ND	&lt;9	
BAEE	270 ± 60	3.2 ± 0.1	11 700	
BAME	240 ± 40	0.43 ± 0.02	1800	
BAA	480 ± 70	0.32 ± 0.01	680	
BA	1600 ± 100	0.63 ± 0.02	390	
histone H3	ND	ND	1200	
histone H4	ND	ND	2400	
AcH4–5	850 ± 300	0.22 ± 0.05	290	
AcH4–15	1000 ± 70	1.4 ± 0.1	1400	
AcH4–15R3MMA	ND	ND	&lt;2	
AcH4–21	710 ± 100	0.72 ± 0.08	1000	
Estimated using the equation v = kcat/Km([Et][S]).

ND, not determined.

To
probe more physiologically relevant substrates, we next tested
histones H3 and H4 and showed that both proteins were deiminated with
comparable efficiency to that of BAME. Because histone H4 was a slightly
better substrate, we also evaluated a small series of histone tail
analogues (the sequences of these peptides are provided in ). Notably, these peptides were generally
deiminated with comparable efficiency to that of histone H4 (Table ). The one exception is the AcH4–5 peptide,
which showed a 3-fold decrease in kcat/Km, which suggests that longer-range
interactions may be important for substrate recognition. To determine
whether PAD2 could catalyze the hydrolysis of a methylated arginine
residue, monomethylated arginine was incorporated into the AcH4–15
peptide in place of arginine 3. The fact that the kcat/Km is decreased by ≥500-fold
indicates that PAD2 does not catalyze the so-called “demethylimination”
reaction, consistent with previous studies on PAD2 and other PAD isozymes.,,, In total, these studies indicate that like PADs 1, 3, and 4, PAD2
shows strong substrate promiscuity.,

Proposed Mechanism
of Catalysis
The PAD active site
contains a Cys–His catalytic dyad (Cys647 and His471 in PAD2),
which is reminiscent of the structures of cysteine proteases such
as papain. In addition, the PADs contain
two aspartyl groups (Asp345 and Asp374) that position the guanidinium
for nucleophilic attack by the active site cysteine. In the first
step, Cys647, the active site thiolate, attacks the guanidinum carbon
of arginine. In this step, His471 acts as a general acid, protonating
the guanidinium group with concomitant electrostatic stabilization
by Asp351 and Asp473. The newly formed S-alkyl tetrahedral intermediate
collapses as ammonia leaves. Within the third step, water is activated
for nucleophilic attack by His471, resulting in the formation of a
second tetrahedral intermediate, which ultimately collapses to form
the citrullinated product (Figure ). Consistent
with a hydrolysis mechanism, 18O was incorporated into
the product (BCEE) when the reaction was performed in 18O-labeled water ().

Proposed mechanism
of PAD2 catalysis. In the first step, the active
site thiolate, Cys647, attacks the guanidinum carbon of arginine.
Within this step, His471 acts as a general acid, protonating the guanidinium
group with concomitant electrostatic stabilization by Asp351 and Asp473.
The newly formed S-alkyl tetrahedral intermediate collapses as ammonia
leaves. Within the third step, water is activated for nucleophilic
attack by His471, which now acts as a general base. Attack of the
water molecule results in the formation of the second tetrahedral
intermediate, which ultimately collapses to form the citrullinated
product.

pH Profiles
To
provide insight into the PAD2 catalytic
mechanism, we determined the steady-state kinetic parameters for BAEE
over a range of pH values (5.5–9). The plots of kcat/Km versus pH are bell-shaped,
yielding apparent pKa values of 7.5 and
7.6 for the ascending and descending limbs, respectively (Figure A). The pKa values are
apparent because the narrowness of the profile precludes an accurate
determination of the individual pKa values.
Nevertheless, this data is consistent with other PAD enzymes, including
PAD4, and on the basis of the simple assumption that the reaction
rates will rise as the concentration of the more reactive thiolate
species increases with increasing pH, the ascending limb most likely
corresponds to the pKa of Cys647. By contrast, the descending limb likely corresponds
to His471, as a loss of activity is expected following deprotonation
of the imidazolium form of His471. In contrast to the narrow kcat/Km versus pH
profile, the kcat profile is relatively
flat over the entire pH range, with pKa values ≤ 4.9 and ≥ 9.2, indicating that the rate-limiting
step is relatively pH-insensitive (Figure B).

pH dependence of PAD2 catalysis. (A) pH rate profiles constructed
using PAD2 (0.5 μM final) in reaction buffer with varying concentrations
of BAEE (0–10 mM) at various pH values. The second-order rate
constant, kcat/Km, is plotted on a logarithmic scale versus pH. (B) kcat, which measures the rate-limiting step,
is plotted on a logarithmic scale versus pH.

Solvent Isotope Effects
To provide deeper insights
into the catalytic mechanism, we repeated the above experiments but
used D2O as the solvent in place of H2O (Figure ). Overall, the plots of both kcat/Km and kcat versus pH are similar to those obtained in H2O and are, in fact, nearly overlapping. The solvent isotope effects
(SIE) on kcat and kcat/Km are only 1.2 ± 0.06
and 0.8 ± 0.14-fold, respectively, at the pH optimum. The relatively
small SIE observed on kcat suggests that
proton transfer contributes minimally to the rate-limiting step of
the reaction. Most notable, however, is the relatively small inverse
SIE on kcat/Km. This result is in stark contrast to the large and inverse SIE observed
for PAD4 (SIE = 0.43 ± 0.07). A similarly large and inverse SIE
was obtained for PAD1. These results suggest that the PAD2 mechanism
differs from the one employed by these isozymes.

pH dependence of PAD2
catalysis in H2O and D2O. (A) pH rate profiles
constructed using PAD2 (500 nM final) in
reaction buffer with varying concentrations of BAEE (0–10 mM)
in H2O or ≥95% D2O. The second-order
rate constant, kcat/Km, is plotted on a logarithmic scale versus pL for both
H2O and D2O. (B) kcat is plotted on a logarithmic scale versus pL for both H2O and D2O.

pKa Determination
In light
of the previous data, we measured the pKa value of Cys647, the active site nucleophile, by measuring the rates
of inactivation afforded by both iodoacetamide and 2-chloroacetamidine
as a function of pH. Both compounds are well-studied nonspecific affinity
labels that preferentially modify the active site cysteine in the
PADs and related enzymes.,, The key difference between the two compounds is their overall charge:
iodoacetamide is neutral, whereas 2-chloroacetamidine, a guanidinium
mimetic, is positively charged. For these experiments, residual PAD2
activity was measured after incubation with different concentrations
of the two compounds to obtain values for kobs, the pseudo-first-order rate constant of inactivation. These experiments
were repeated over a range of pH values (6.5–9 for iodoacetamide
and 7.25–9 for 2-chloroacetamidine). The kobs values were then plotted against inactivator concentration
to obtain values for kinact/KI (Figure ). Note that the kobs versus inactivation plots were fit to eq  or  to obtain kinact/KI values from either
the slope of the line or from the ratio of kinact and KI, respectively. Plots
of kinact/KI versus pH were then generated and fit to eq  to obtain pKa values for the active
site cysteine. On the basis of the iodoacetamide inactivation experiments,
the pKa of the active site cysteine is
8.2. This result is consistent with the values obtained for the corresponding
cysteines in PADs 1 and 4, where, unlike other cysteine hydrolases
(e.g., papain), the architecture of the PAD active site does not promote
the formation of a highly reactive low pKa thiolate in appreciable quantities. Instead, these enzymes use a
reverse-protonation mechanism, wherein a fraction of the enzyme exists
as the deprotonated thiol and protonated imidazole. Although the concentration
of the thiolate form of the enzyme is low, catalysis still proceeds
via nucleophilic attack by the thiolate form., For PAD2, however, when using 2-chloroacetamidine as the inactivator,
the pKa value is reduced to 7.2, a full
log unit (Figure ). This result stands in
stark contrast to that obtained for PADs 1 and 4, where the pKa values obtained with iodoacetamide and 2-chloroacetamidine
are &gt;8 and similar in value. Because kinact/KI reports on all steps up to and including
the first irreversible step of the reaction, these data suggest that,
upon formation of the initial encounter complex, the positively charged
nature of 2-chloroacetamidine depresses the pKa of Cys647, likely via electrostatic stabilization, which
is predicted for a substrate-assisted mechanism of enzyme catalysis
(Scheme ).

Kinetics of inactivation by iodoacetamide
and 2-chloroacetamidine.
(A) Representative inactivation experiments when using iodoacetamide
(IA) (0–1 mM) and measuring the residual activity of PAD2 for
time points from 0 to 30 min. (B) Observed rates of inactivation, kobs, from panel A are plotted against inhibitor
concentration for subsequent calculation of the second-order rate
constant, kinact/KI. (C) Representative inactivation experiments when using 2-chloroacetamidine
(2-CA). (D) Concentration of 2-CA versus kobs from panel C.

pKa value of the active site thiolate,
Cys647, in PAD2. The log of the second-order rate constants, kinact/KI, obtained
from both the iodoacetamide and 2-chloroacetamidine inactivation experiments
is plotted against pH (6.5–9 for IA 7.25–9 for 2-CA).

Substrate-Assisted versus Reverse-Protonation
Mechanisms of Catalysis
Discussion
Guanidinium-modifying enzymes have been
suggested to use a variety
of mechanisms to promote catalysis at the guanidinium center. For
example, our group proposed that PAD4 used a reverse-protonation mechanism,
whereas the Fast group suggested that the positively charged nature
of the substrate guanidinium facilitates catalysis by depressing the
pKa of the active site cysteine in dimethylarginine
dimethylaminohydrolase (DDAH), a related enzyme. In this substrate-assisted mechanism, one would predict
that upon forming an initial encounter complex with a positively charged
inactivator, the pKa of Cys647 would be
similarly depressed (Scheme ). Our pKa studies with 2-chloroacetamidine, a positively
charged inactivator, show this predicted effect. This data suggests
that PAD2, like DDAH, uses a substrate-assisted mechanism rather than
a reverse-protonation mechanism. By contrast, no such pKa shift was observed for PAD4 with 2-chloroacetamidine,
which yielded a pKa value of 7.9 ±
0.2, nearly identical to the value obtained with iodoacetamide (8.2
± 0.1).

Although the molecular basis for this mechanistic
switch between
PADs 2 and 4 is unknown, it likely relates to subtle differences in
the active site architecture because the two enzymes adopt similar
conformations in the catalytically competent calcium-bound state.
For example, in the structure of the PAD4C645A–calcium complex,
the active site cysteine and histidine, Cys645 and His471, appear
to form a thiolate–imidazolium ion pair that is thought to
position the active site thiolate for nucleophilic attack on the substrate
guanidinium. PAD2 shows a similar active site arrangement when bound
to calcium (Slade et al. unpublished data). The distance between the
thiolate and imidazolium in PAD2 is quite long (4.7 Å), suggesting
that the strength of the thiolate–imidazolium ion pair is correspondingly
weak and may not provide sufficient energy to promote catalysis via
a reverse-protonation mechanism, and as a consequence, PAD2 must rely
on a substrate-assisted mechanism in which the positive charge of
the substrate depresses the pKa of Cys647
and further activates the enzyme. Although the specific reasons for
the divergent mechanisms are unclear, the requirement for substrate
to bind and facilitate thiol deprotonation may afford greater protection
against the nonspecific inactivation of PAD2 by reactive oxygen and/or
nitrogen species. Consistent with this notion is the fact that PAD2
is highly expressed in macrophages, which are known to generate a
highly oxidative environment upon activation.

Overall, our kinetic and mechanistic studies of PAD2 suggest
that,
unlike the other members of the PAD family, this isozyme uses a substrate-assisted
mechanism of catalysis. In addition to potentially affording greater
protection against reactive oxygen and nitrogen species, these results
suggest that PAD2-selective irreversible inhibitors can be identified
by simply modifying the identity of the electrophilic warhead. As
such, our studies bring us a step closer to identifying potent, selective,
and bioavailable inhibitors for PAD2, an important therapeutic target
for breast cancer.

Supporting Information Available
Sequences of histone H4 tail
peptides; PAD2 catalysis of the hydrolytic deimination of BAEE. This
material is available free of charge via the Internet at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bi500554b_si_001.pdf

Financial support
for this work was provided by NIH (grant GM079357 to P.R.T), TSRI,
and a graduate fellowship from the Scheller Foundation (to C.J.D.).

The
authors
declare the following competing financial interest(s): P.R.T. is a
cofounder of and consultant to Padlock Therapeutics.

Abbreviations Used
PADprotein
arginine deiminase

PTMpost-translational modification

BAEENα-benzoyl-l-arginine
ethyl ester

BAMENα-benzoyl-l-arginine methyl ester

BAANα-benzoyl-l-arginine
amide

BANα-benzoyl-l-arginine

SIEsolvent isotope effect

IAiodoacetamide

2-CA2-chloroacetamidine

