Huntington’s disease, (HD) is one of 10 known expanded CAG repeat diseases,, autosomal dominant genetic disorders in which polyglutamine (polyQ)
sequences above characteristic repeat lengths in specific disease
proteins trigger neurodegeneration. The molecular mechanism of HD
has not been elucidated, but the consensus is that polyQ expanded
forms of N-terminal fragments, typified by the translation product
of the huntingtin (HTT) gene’s first exon, are susceptible
to aberrant folding behaviors that somehow interfere with normal neuronal
function or survival. This protein fragment, which has become known
as HTT exon1, can be generated in the cell either by proteolytic fragmentation
of the full-length HTT protein or by translation
of an alternatively spliced version of HTT mRNA. Animal models based on overexpression of HTT exon1 exhibit
robust neurodegenerative phenotypes.

Regardless of polyQ repeat length, HTT exon1 itself is not stably
folded but rather is an amalgam of three sequence-defined segments
(Figure ), each of which exhibits aspects
of intrinsically disordered protein (IDP)
behavior. The N-terminal 16 or 17 amino acid segment, HTTNT, is disordered
in solution in the monomeric state but
takes on α-helical structure when it self-associates and when it interacts with membranes. The central polyQ segment exists in the monomer
in an energetically favored compact coil state,− consisting of fluctuating short segments of coil,
α, and β structure in which glutamine side chain amides
spend significant time H-bonded to main chain amide groups. The C-terminal proline-rich domain (PRD), consisting
of runs of P10 and P11 alternating with short
segments of mixed, Pro-rich sequence, favors polyproline type II (PPII)
structure but is not expected to exhibit a single, strongly favored
conformation., Whether and how these three disordered
sequence elements interact with each other, through the peptide backbone
and through space, to define or modulate the solution properties of
HTT exon1 is a challenging problem that is only beginning to be explored.,,

Sequences of peptides used in this study.

Under the umbrella of opinion
that HD is a protein misfolding disease,
there is a wide range of ideas about the nature of the toxic misfolded
species., Some research has been interpreted to indicate
that repeat expansion favors the time-dependent formation of an alternatively
folded state of polyQ in which the average monomer in solution possesses
β-hairpin structure., These ideas are hard
to reconcile, however, with our understanding of the energetic features
of the polyQ monomer conformational landscape,,,, and there
are reasonable alternative interpretations of the supporting data.,, In contrast, other results have
been interpreted to implicate the repeat length and time-dependent
formation of some kind of aggregated state of HTT exon1 as potential
toxic entities.− These ideas are consistent with the well-established
existence of large HTT exon1 containing inclusions in neurons of affected
individuals and in cell and animal models, and in
the similarities between the polyQ repeat length dependences of disease
risk and age-of-onset and in
vitro(,) and in vivo() aggregation behavior. Although compelling evidence
has been presented that the large inclusions that appear late in the
cellular aggregation time course are more likely to be protective
than toxic, it is now clear that smaller
amyloid fibrils as well as more difficult
to detect nonamyloid aggregates,− are also generated in cell and animal models. The undiminished feasibility
of the aggregation hypothesis makes it imperative that we continue
to work to understand molecular mechanisms of aggregation and how
different segments of HTT exon1 act and interact to propel or retard
these mechanisms.

Data on HTT exon1 self-assembly mechanisms
and products have been
generated using molecules from two different types of sources. One
source generates essentially full-length HTT exon1 made in bacterial,− or mammalian cell culture, using a
fusion protein approach that helps retain the aggregation-prone product
in solution in the cell but leads to compromises in the integrity
of the HTT exon1 N-terminus when the fusion partner is removed. The
other major approach is to use peptides obtained by solid phase peptide
synthesis, which, however, is limited by the length of peptides that
can be conveniently synthesized. For this reason, most synthetic peptide
studies have been constrained to relatively short (no longer than
the low 40s) polyQ repeat lengths and truncated C-termini.,− Thus, the choice of the source of HTT exon1 analogues for in vitro studies of self-assembly and toxicity is guided
in part by one’s perception of the relative importance of maintaining
absolute sequence integrity in the N-terminus vs the C-terminus.

Previous studies using chemically synthesized HTT exon1 fragments
led to development of a detailed mechanism (Figure ) for how peptides in this class self-assemble.−,,, The presence of a functioning HTTNT sequence leads to a dominant pathway (A) featuring early formation
of oligomers (b, c, d) consisting of superassembled tetramers that
are themselves held together by bundling of α-helical HTTNT segments (green cylinders). Oligomer formation leads to
very high local concentrations of compact coil polyQ segments (orange),
which favors stochastic amyloid nucleation events (e) that trigger
fibril elongation (f). This mechanism is supported by the identification
of early nonamyloid oligomers held together by HTTNT interactions, the observation of well-behaved tetramers and
octamers requiring the presence of HTTNT, the ability of HTTNT with or without added polyQ
to form α-helix in a concentration-dependent manner, and the ability of peptides consisting only
of the HTTNT segment to inhibit nucleation by coassembling
into mixed oligomers that reduce the local polyQ concentration (Figure i). Interestingly,
when such inhibitors compromise the HTTNT-mediated pathway
(A), the nucleation mechanism of polyQ amyloid reverts to the less
efficient pathway (B) favored by simple polyQ peptides. In contrast to the mechanism shown in Figure , studies based on recombinant HTT exon1 led to
a proposed alternative mechanism in which non-β oligomers are
assembled primarily via polyQ interactions., It is not clear whether the stark differences in these mechanistic
proposals and the data on which they are based stem from the structural
differences between the HTT exon1-like molecules being studied, their
synthetic source, the detailed methods used to initiate and monitor
reactions, or other factors.

Mechanisms of polyglutamine amyloid assembly.
Monomeric HTT exon1
analogues (a) can assemble into polyQ-core amyloid by two mechanisms,
nominally in competition. Pathway A.
Monomers assemble into tetramers via concerted α-helix formation
and bundling of the N-terminal 16–17 amino acid segment HTTNT (green) (b–d). Non-β oligomers assemble via
poorly understood self-association of tetramers. This reversible oligomerization
brings the polyQ chains (orange) close together in space at a very
high local concentration, facilitating sporadic amyloid nucleation
(e), which leads to amyloid elongation (f) into fibrils. The proline
rich C-terminal segment (black) tends to favor PPII conformations
throughout. Pathway B. If pathway A is compromised, for example, by
coassembly with HTTNT peptides (i) (see text), amyloid
nucleation can still occur by the classical nucleated growth polymerization
type mechanism previously described for simple polyQ sequences., Reproduced from ref (). Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society.

Previously, some of us reported the solid phase chemical
synthesis
of full-length HTT exon1 molecules containing repeats of 23 and 42
glutamine residues. The availability
of these well-defined molecules served as the basis for the direct
comparative studies reported here, allowing us to cleanly focus on
the question of the relative importance of sequences within the proline-rich
domain (PRD) downstream from the first 10 prolines. The results confirm
a number of key points in the mechanism devised previously based on
work with C-terminally truncated HTT exon1 peptides, suggesting that
for many studies C-terminally truncated HTT exon1 analogues can provide
information relevant to the behavior of full-length HTT exon1. The
results also provide new information on the role of the PRD on aggregate
assembly and stability.

Experimental Procedures
Materials and General Methods
Preparation of purified
full-length HTT exon1 peptides has been described. Other synthetic peptides were obtained from the Keck Biotechnology
Center at Yale University and were purified by reverse phase HPLC
as described., Mass spectrometry evaluation
of the purified peptides, which run as
a single peak in analytical reverse phase HPLC, gave absolute purities
in the 70–90% range. In addition, if peptides containing only
single deletions or insertions of glutamine or proline are included,
purities rise to the following levels: HTTNTQ23P10K2, 97%; HTT exon1-Q23, 94%;
HTTNTQ42P10K2, 86%; HTT
exon1-Q42, 93%. Peptides were disaggregated in a mixture
of trifluoroacetic acid and hexafluoroisopropanol immediately prior
to initiating aggregation kinetics analyses, as described previously., The effectiveness of the disaggregation was confirmed in each case
by the absence of aggregates and the absence of scatter above that
of buffer in the zero minute time points of the aggregation reactions.
Aggregation kinetics were monitored by determining for each time point
the amount of monomeric peptide remaining in solution, using an HPLC
sedimentation assay described previously. Determination of the equilibrium concentration of monomer in amyloid
formation reactions (Cr) was accomplished
by using the HPLC sedimentation assay to determine monomer concentrations
at each time. Reverse reactions were initiated by diluting part of
a nearly complete aggregation reaction in PBS and incubating, as described
previously., FTIR spectroscopy was conducted
on isolated aggregates, on an ABB Bomem FTIR spectrometer, as described. Dynamic light scattering measurements were conducted
on aggregation reaction time points on a Wyatt DynaPro, as described. Negative stain electron microscopy was conducted
on aggregation reaction time points using a Tecnai T12 microscope,
as described. Analysis of dimensions
of selected particles in the EM was done with the help of NIH ImageJ
software (http://imagej.nih.gov/ij/).

Results
Aggregation
Kinetics
To examine the roles of the polyQ
flanking sequences in HTT exon1-like peptides, we studied the peptide
sequences shown in Figure , where the polyQ
repeat length is either 23 or 42. The spontaneous aggregation kinetics
curves of PBS solutions of rigorously disaggregated samples of these
peptides are shown in Figure . As described
previously, K2Q23K2 (green star) aggregates imperceptibly at 40 μM
even after 1000 h (Figure A). In contrast,
aggregation of HTTNTQ23K2 (green
square) at a 10-fold lower concentration of 4 μM is essentially
complete after 75 h. As previously described, the addition of a P10 sequence to generate HTTNTQ23P10K2 slows aggregation in comparison
to HTTNTQ23K2, so that it takes about
1000 h for a 13 μM solution of this peptide to aggregate to
completion (red filled circle). Importantly, the aggregation kinetics
time course of an 11 μM solution of full-length HTT exon1-Q23 (■) is very similar to that of HTTNTQ23P10K2. The slight difference in shape,
which appears to be well within the error bars of the kinetics measurements
(Figure A), may be due to a combination of
differences in nucleation efficiency, elongation rate constants, and
critical concentration (see below).

Kinetics of spontaneous
aggregation and its inhibition. (A) Aggregation
kinetics of 11 μM HTT exon-Q23 alone (■) and
in the presence of 18 μM of HTTNT (□), 13
μM HTTNTQ23P10K2 alone (red filled circle) and in the presence of 18 μM of
HTTNT (red open circle), 18 μM HTTNT alone
(blue triangle), 40 μM K2Q23K2 (green star), and 4 μM HTTNTQ23K2 (green square). (B) Aggregation kinetics of 5.5 μM
HTT exon1-Q42 alone (■) and in the presence of 9.1
μM of HTTNT (□), 6.2 μM HTTNTQ42P10K2 alone (red filled circle)
and in the presence of 9.1 μM of HTTNT (red open
circle), 9.1 μM HTTNT alone (blue triangle), and
4.8 μM K2Q42K2 (green star).
All data points include error bars based on two measurements, except
for the simple polyQ (green star) data.

Similar results were obtained with the Q42 versions
of these peptides. The simple polyQ peptide K2Q42K2 aggregates relatively slowly at 4.8 μM (Figure B, green star; note different time scale compared
with panel A). Although we did not examine a HTTNTQ42K2 molecule, we previously reported that the peptide
HTTNTQ35K2 aggregates to completion
at 5 μM within about 3 h. In analogy
to the Q23 series, addition of a P10 sequence
to generate HTTNTQ42P10K2 extends the aggregation time course so that a 6.2 μM reaction
nears completion at about 70 h (Figure B,
red filled circle). The aggregation of a 5.5 μM solution of
full-length HTT exon1-Q42 (■) is somewhat slower
than that of HTTNTQ42P10K2, but their relationship is qualitatively similar to the Q23 series, in that both Q42 versions of HTT exon1 aggregate
faster than K2Q42K2 and more slowly
than HTTNTQ35K2. Interestingly, there
are some quantitative differences between the Q23 and Q42 series. First, the overall impact of the N- and C-terminal
flanking sequences on aggregation appears to be greater for Q23 than for Q42. This seems to be less due to the
impact of the HTTNT sequence, which is strong for both
polyQ repeat lengths, and more due to the ability of PRD sequences
to work against the rate enhancement by HTTNT. Second,
the presence of the full PRD sequence, in comparison to only a P10 sequence, has a measurable impact on Q42 kinetics
but not Q23 kinetics. This effect might be due to reductions
in non-β oligomer (Figure b,c,d) stability,
in the efficiency of nucleation within this oligomer (Figure e), or in nucleus or fibril elongation (Figure f). As suggested by Figure , the preferred aggregation mechanism of HTT exon1-like peptides
involves the initial formation of oligomeric intermediates, which
have been demonstrated in vitro from incubation of
both recombinant full-length HTT exon1 and chemically synthesized versions lacking full-length PRDs.

Electron microscopy examination of early
assembly intermediates
of chemically synthesized, full-length HTT exon1-Q23 shows
the existence of spherical oligomers (Figure D) and protofibril or fibril-like structures (Figure E) very similar in size and appearance to those described
previously for the initial stages of the aggregation of an HTTNTQ30P6K2 peptide. Nonamyloid (ThT-negative) oligomer formation
has also been observed previously in the initial stages of HTTNTQ20P10K2 aggregation. For a more direct comparison, we show here that
spherical oligomers are also formed in the early hours of incubation
of HTTNTQ23P10K2 (Figure A). Nonamyloid oligomers are also present in early
incubation time points of HTT exon1-Q42 incubation (Figure G). Interestingly, the HTT exon1-Q42 oligomers
exhibit qualitatively different staining properties in the EM. Despite
this staining difference, we believe the oligomers formed early by
both polyQ repeat length versions of full-length HTT exon1 are structurally
similar, because both aggregation reactions exhibit similar sensitivities
to inhibition by HTTNT peptides (Figure ; see below).

Negative stained electron micrographs of polyQ peptide
aggregates.
HTTNTQ23P10K2 at 7 h (10.5
± 2.1 nm and 19.2 ± 1.4 nm) (A); HTTNTQ23P10K2 at 1000 h (12.0 ± 1.1 nm) (B); K2Q23K2 at 300 h (C); HTT exon1-Q23 at 5 h (14.0 ± 2.3 and 24.0 ± 3.4 nm) (D); HTT
exon1-Q23 at 30 h (17.2 ± 2.5 nm) (E); HTT exon1-Q23 at 1000 h (12.5 ± 1.5 nm) (F); HTT exon1-Q42 at 10 min (G); HTT exon1-Q42 10 h (10.7 ± 1.5 nm)
(H); and HTT exon1-Q42 at 70 h (11.5 ± 1.4 nm) (I).
Scale bar = 50 nm. Diameters and standard deviations (parentheses)
were obtained from 11 measurements using NIH ImageJ software. In two
cases (images A and D) oligomers exhibited a broader size range and
were analyzed as two components.

Dynamic light scattering (DLS) analysis of early time points
of
these incubation reactions are shown in Figure . The DLS curves of aliquots of the reaction mixtures at t = 0 exhibit amplitudes in the range of 1.05 or less and
are indistinguishable from PBS buffer (not shown). The DLS time courses
give particle size progressions as expected from the EM analysis,
with rough agreement in absolute values at different time points.
Thus, for HTT exon1-Q23 at 5 h, EM shows a range of particle
sizes centered at 14 and 24 nm in diameter (Figure  legend), while at the same time point DLS gives a homogeneous
suspension of particles with ∼5 nm diameter (2.6 nm hydrodynamic
radius). At 30 h, EM shows a uniform population of protofibrils of
∼17 nm in diameter and 50–130 nm in length, while DLS
gives a hydrodynamic radius of 80 nm for a filament length in the
100–200 nm range, in good agreement with the EM analysis. HTT
exon1-Q42 incubated for only 30 min yields scatter from
a diverse population of particles that cannot be easily fit by the
software (Figure B). This is typical of amyloid
assembly reactions, in which time points associated with amyloid fibrils
give strong scattering in DLS that fails to give an interpretable
correlation.

Analysis of aggregation by dynamic light scattering. Particle
sizes
from the DLS curves are listed in parentheses, as hydrodynamic radii.
(A) Intensity correlation of 12 μM HTT exon1-Q23 at
different times: 0 h (1.2 nm); 5 h (2.6 nm); 30 h (80 nm); and 90
h (98 nm). (B) Intensity correlation of 5.2 μM HTT exon1-Q42 alone at 0 h (identical to buffer alone; not shown) and
30 min (no correlation); 5.2 μM HTT exon1Q42 with
10.7 μM HTTNT at 0 h (∼8 nm) and 30 min (∼8–10
nm); 10.7 μM HTTNT at 0 h (identical to buffer alone;
not shown).

Recently we described
the ability of isolated HTTNT peptides
to act as inhibitors of the nucleation phase of the amyloid formation
of HTT exon1-like peptides. This ability
appears to be due to the coassembly of the HTTNT peptides
with HTT exon1 during oligomer formation, by virtue of mixed helical
bundle formation as shown in Figure i. This
dilutes the average local concentration of polyQ chains within the
mixed oligomers, reducing nucleation efficiency. Once nucleation occurs,
however, amyloid formation proceeds unabated. Since we found that HTTNT in trans has no effect on simple
polyQ aggregation, we can use the sensitivity
of an aggregation reaction to HTTNT inhibition as a test
of mechanism.

In fact, we found that, to different extents,
both of the chemically
synthesized, full-length HTT exon1 peptides used in this study are
susceptible to HTTNT inhibition (Figure ). HTT exon1-Q23 is especially susceptible, showing
only about 10% aggregation in the presence of a 1.5-fold molar excess
of HTTNT (□) at 1000 h, a time when the peptide
without inhibitor has essentially aggregated to completion (Figure A, ■). Mirroring their overlapping aggregation
curves, HTTNTQ23P10K2 exhibits
inhibition kinetics (red open circle) very similar to the inhibition
of HTT exon1-Q23 (Figure A, □).
HTTNT inhibition of Q42 HTT exon1-like peptides
is somewhat less effective than for the Q23 peptides. At
a time when the uninhibited reaction of HTTNTQ42P10K2 (red filled circle) is 50% aggregated
(about 11 h), it is about 30% aggregated in the presence of a ∼1.5-fold
molar excess of HTTNT (Figure B,
red open circle). Full-length HTT exon1-Q42 is more susceptible
to inhibition, so in the presence of 1.5-fold HTTNT it
has aggregated only negligibly at 25 h (Figure B, □), when the uninhibited reaction is 50% aggregated (Figure B, ■). Consistent with the proposed mechanism
of HTTNT inhibition involving coassembly, the t = 0 time point of a mixture of HTTNT plus HTT exon1-Q42 exhibits more scattering intensity than the t = 0 time point of either component alone (Figure B). At the same time, oligomer size grows modestly within
the lag phase of the inhibited reaction, giving an interpretable DLS
curve after 30 min incubation (Figure B),
consistent with a buildup of larger, HTTNT-mediated oligomers.
As noted above, the same amount of HTT exon1-Q42 incubated
without HTTNT for the same time gives more scattering and
larger scattering particles (Figure B). As
noted above, the sensitivity of HTT exon1-Q42 aggregation
to inhibition by HTTNT peptides suggests that, as shown
for other HTT exon1 analogues, the amyloid
nucleation pathway must involve a required intermediate featuring
HTTNT-based, nonamyloid assembly. That is, this pathological
repeat length HTT exon1 must undergo amyloid nucleation via the A
pathway shown in Figure .

Aggregate Structure
We assessed the impact of the PRD
on polyQ amyloid structure by electron microscopy, dynamic light scattering,
FTIR, fibril stability measurements, and cross-seeding experiments.
By EM, the mature fibrils produced by both the Q23 (Figure F) and Q42 (Figure I) versions of chemically synthesized full-length HTT exon1 exhibit
similar morphologies, both to each other and to fibrils from both
chemically synthesized model peptides of the HTTNTQNP10K2 design (Figure B) and from recombinantly produced,
nearly exact full-length HTT exon1 peptides. One unexpected result is that at an intermediate time point in the
aggregation of the chemically synthesized HTT exon1 peptides, the
Q23 version, but not the Q42 version, exhibits
a remarkably uniform population of very short fibrils with lengths
in the 50–130 nm range (Figure E).
Interestingly, these particles have somewhat larger diameters than
mature fibrils in the EM, on the order of 17.2 nm compared with the
fibril diameter of 12.5 nm (Figure ). It is
possible that these structures are related to the protofibrils often
observed at intermediate times in the assembly of other amyloids.
As in the case of these other amyloids, the role of the structures
shown in Figure E in the assembly of mature
amyloid fibrils is not clear. As observed previously, the mature fibrils of polyQ peptides containing HTT flanking
sequences are substantially different in EM morphology from the amyloid
produced by simple polyQ peptides (Figure C).

The size distribution of HTT exon1 aggregation products
is of some interest, because of ongoing efforts to identify the toxic
molecular species that is presumably populated in a time- and repeat
length-dependent manner in the pathogenic mechanism of HD. In particular, it has become important to gauge
the size range of aggregates in the context of the limited ability
of fluorescence microscopy to detect aggregates smaller than inclusions
(see ). We therefore calculated
the number of HTT exon1 monomers that could be packed into some of
the smaller aggregates we observed from incubation of HTT exon1-Q23, using an estimate for the density of a folded protein of
1.37 g/cm3. For the spherical
oligomers observed at 5 h by EM (Figure D),
we calculated that the oligomers contain from 123 to 623 molecules,
while the short fibrils or protofibrils observed at 30 h (Figure E) contain from 530 to 2740 molecules.

Despite
the EM differences between HTT exon1 fibrils and simple
polyQ fibrils, there is substantial evidence that the polyQ amyloid
cores of these various aggregates are largely identical. For example,
the second derivative FTIR spectra of the truncated and full-length
HTT exon1 aggregates are essentially identical to the spectrum of
a simple polyQ peptide amyloid (Figure ).
In particular, the three bands characteristic of simple polyQ amyloid
[1605 cm–1 (glutamine side chain N–H bending),
1625 cm–1 (β-sheet), and 1659 cm–1 (glutamine side chain C=O stretch)] dominate all of the amyloid
fibrils derived from HTT exon1-related peptides. In addition, both
for Q23 and for Q42 versions, the FTIR spectra
of the full HTT exon1 and HTTNTQNP10K2 aggregates are superimposable (Figure ). The small differences that exist between spectra, located
in the broad region from 1610 to 1640 cm–1 that
is normally associated with β-structure, recur in other FTIR spectra of polyQ aggregates, without correlating with any obvious primary sequence feature, be
it polyQ repeat length or the presence or absence of flanking sequences.
We think it is likely that the fine structure sometimes observed in
this region, as seen in the spectra for the Q23 peptide
aggregates in Figure , is related to better
signal in these spectra due to the availability of larger amounts
of sample.

FTIR spectra of isolated final aggregates. The second derivative
spectra of aggregates collected, when the aggregation reaction was
judged complete, at the following times: K2Q23K2 (300 h); HTTNTQ23P10K2 (1000 h); HTT exon1-Q23 (1000 h); HTTNTQ42P10K2 (70 h); and HTT
exon1-Q42 (70 h).

A powerful measure of the relatedness of two amyloid systems
is
the ability of the fibrils of one to “cross-seed” the
elongation of monomers of the other. In
general, the efficiency of seeding elongation is thought to depend
on the structural compatibility between the monomer and the fibril
seed. We found excellent “cross-talk” between fibrils
of HTTNTQ23P10K2 and HTT
exon1-Q23. Thus, in an experiment with equal concentrations
of freshly disaggregated HTT exon1-Q23 monomers, the addition
of 20% by weight of amyloid fibrils gives essentially the same enhanced
aggregation kinetics for seeds of either HTT exon1-Q23 (red
filled circle) and HTTNTQ23P10K2 (blue triangle) amyloid, when compared with the spontaneous,
unseeded aggregation reaction (■) (Figure A). Similarly, with freshly disaggregated HTTNTQ23P10K2 monomers, 20% by weight
of HTTNTQ23P10K2 amyloid
(red filled circle) and HTT exon1-Q23 amyloid (blue triangle)
gives identical aggregation stimulation compared with monomer alone
(Figure B, ■). We take this to indicate
a strong similarity in the polyQ amyloid cores of these two peptide
fibrils.

Seeded aggregation kinetics. Monomer alone (■), self-seeding
(red filled circle), and cross-seeding (blue triangle): (A) 11 μM
HTT exon1-Q23 monomer alone (■) or seeded with 20%
by weight of amyloid fibrils of either HTT exon1-Q23 (red
filled circle) or HTTNTQ23P10K2 (blue triangle); (B) 13 μM HttNTQ23P10K2 monomer alone (■) or seeded with
20% by weight of amyloid fibrils of either HTTNTQ23P10K2 (red filled circle) or HTT exon1-Q23 (blue triangle). All data points have error bars based on
two measurements.

Another method for characterizing
amyloid structures is by the
stabilities of the fibrils against dissociation. Unless the monomers within a fibril are chemically cross-linked,
fibrils should generally be capable of dissociating to monomers in
native buffer until an equilibrium position is reached, and this position is a measure of fibril stability
with values that can be quite robust. Fibril stabilities as estimated by Cr determinations were previously successfully used to conduct several
comparative studies of amyloid stability, including a set of polymorphic
amyloid fibrils derived from the same Aβ40 sequence, fibrils generated from simple polyQ of different
repeat lengths, and fibrils generated
from polyQ molecules with or without β-hairpin encouraging mutations. Here we determined the equilibrium positions,
expressed as the concentration of monomer at equilibrium (the Cr value), for various Q23 versions
of HTT exon1 and compared the results with the previously published value for K2Q23K2. When HTT exon1-Q23 is incubated at ∼9 μM,
it aggregates slowly over a period of weeks, reaching an equilibrium
concentration of monomer after about one month (Figure A, ■). When this final aggregation reaction is diluted
to reduce the concentration of monomer and the diluted reaction is
further incubated, the monomer concentration increases as fibrils
dissociate (red square), until equilibrium is reestablished, also
after a period of about one month (Figure A, inset). The mean of the equilibrium positions measured for the
association and dissociation directions for this peptide is 0.44 ±
0.13 μM. This Cr value, the concentration
of monomer below which aggregation is thermodynamically disallowed,
is a convenient measure of fibril stability; the lower Cr, the more stable the fibril. A similar analysis of HTTNTQ23P10K2 (Figure B) gives a Cr value
of 0.28 ± 0.11. Thus, fibrils of full-length HTT exon1 and of
the C-terminally truncated version are of essentially equal stability.
Unfortunately, we could not obtain the corresponding values for the
Q42 peptides, since these appear to be below our level
of detection.

Determination of the equilibrium position of amyloid assembly
and
disassembly. Spontaneous aggregation (■) and dissociation (red
square) of amyloid fibrils of HTT exon1-Q23 (A; Cr = 0.44 ± 0.13 μM) and HTTNTQ23P10K2 (B; Cr = 0.28 ± 0.11 μM). Insets, dissociation shown
on expanded y-axis.

We obtained two additional Cr values.
Previously we reported a value of 3.0 μM for the Cr of K2Q23K2 amyloid. In the present study, we determined a Cr of ≤0.1 μM for HTTNTQ23K2 (the actual value may be lower, but the
limited sensitivity of our methods preclude measuring concentrations
below 0.1 μM for these peptides). These Cr values allow us to calculate a number of important ΔΔG values or limits. By comparing the values for K2Q23K2 and HTTNTQ23K2, we obtain a positive contribution of the HTTNT sequence to amyloid stability of ≥2.2 kcal/mol. This is consistent
with previous data, suggesting that HTTNT remains α-helical
in assembled fibrils and appears to self-associate in that context.,, By comparing the limit found
for HTTNTQ23K2 with the value of Cr found for HTT exon1-Q23, we can
conclude that the PRD of HTT exon1 destabilizes amyloid fibrils by
≥0.9 kcal/mol. This is consistent with previous results on
the effect of a short polyPro sequence on polyQ amyloid stability.

Discussion
In this paper, we provide
data showing that chemically synthesized
HTT exon1 peptides, containing precise Met-Ala-Thr N-terminal starts
and containing a complete C-terminus without any sequence tag extensions,
self-associate with very similar kinetics and aggregate morphologies
to HTT exon1 analogues containing only the P10 sequence.
We observed slightly slower aggregation kinetics in the Q42 background for full HTT exon1 compared with the P10 version.
The structures of the mature amyloid fibrils, the presence of oligomeric
intermediates in electron micrographs at early incubation times, and
the sensitivity to HTTNT inhibition of aggregation strongly
suggest that these full-length HTT exon1 analogues aggregate by the
same two-step mechanism deduced for C-terminally truncated HTT exon1
peptides.

If some kind of self-assembled,
aggregated state of HTT exon1 is
responsible for triggering HD, a drug discovery paradigm that cannot
be neglected is the search for inhibitors that prevent or slow this
process. Previously we showed that peptide-based inhibitors structurally
related to the HTTNT segment are effective agents for delaying
the nucleation of amyloid formation by HTT exon1 analogues with truncated
C-termini. We show here that HTTNT is equally or more effective at delaying nucleation in the
chemically synthesized full-length HTT exon1 peptides. In the case
of the Q42 repeat length HTT exon1, the onset of amyloid
formation is delayed by about 2 days compared with the uninhibited
reaction. Even short delays of nucleation may be effective in suppressing
the buildup of toxic aggregates, since theoretically it would allow
time for other cellular processes to remove aggregation-prone precursors.

Within the resolution of the FTIR technique, the polyQ amyloid
cores of all the polyQ peptides tested are remarkably similar, suggesting
that, despite differences in the mechanisms of assembly and mature
amyloid morphology, the underlying cross-β structure of the
polyQ amyloid is similar. At the same time, the presence of flanking
sequences can have profound effects, not only on fibril morphology
but also on fibril stability. The presence of HTTNT contributes
over 2 kcal/mol to the stability of the fibrils toward dissociation,
while, in contrast, the addition of some form of PRD reduces stability
by 1 kcal/mol or more. The exact nature of the PRD appears to make
a negligible difference in this stability effect, with the P10 sequence being sufficient to represent essentially the full fibril
destabilizing action of the PRD.

One interesting aspect of the Cr measurement
that generated the above stability values is the dissociation kinetics
of HTT exon1 amyloid. Previously we reported very slow dissociation
kinetics for simple polyQ amyloid fibrils, with K2Q23K2 fibrils requiring about 2 months to dissociate
to equilibrium. We show here that HTT
exon1 analogues feature a similarly slow dissociation rate, despite
the presence of flanking sequences that modulate the thermodynamic
stability of the fibrils. Thus, while Aβ40 amyloid
dissociates to equilibrium in PBS at 37 °C over a period of only
24 h, it takes about 4 weeks for HTT
exon1-Q23 (or HTTNTQ23P10K2) fibrils to dissociate to equilibrium (Figure ). These new data suggest that the slow kinetics
are relatively unaffected by flanking sequences and therefore are
likely be tied to the structure of the polyQ amyloid core. Interestingly,
aggregates of an HTT exon1-Q94 protein expressed in the
brains of a mouse model required 3 weeks to dissociate after HTT exon1
expression was turned off. The authors
reported data supporting a role of the ubiquitin proteasome system
in the clearance of these aggregates (as well as monomers). Together with those findings, our data are consistent
with the hypothesis that the dissociation rate of aggregates in the
mouse brain is driven primarily by the biophysical properties of the
HTT exon1 amyloid and not by cellular factors. The role of the proteasome
may be simply to help remove monomeric HTT exon1 from the thermodynamic
system, which would tend to drive dissolution by virtue of Le Chatelier’s
principle.

One issue that continues to plague the HD field is
our ignorance
of the potential size range of aggregated proteins in the cell. Although
evidence has been presented that the large inclusions observed in
HD cells and cell models are more likely to be protective than toxic, these data have no bearing on a possible role
for any smaller aggregated species that might exist in the cell. In fact, the inclusions easily observed in HD
brain tissue and cell models tend to be about 5 μm in diameter,
corresponding roughly to an HTT exon1 content of 109 molecules, and this allows for a huge range of smaller aggregate
sizes that will presumably be more difficult to detect in cells or
cell extracts. In fact, super-resolution fluorescence microscopy was
recently used to detect individual amyloid fibrils in a cell model
of HD. We calculate these fibrils to
have monomer contents in the range of 105 monomers per
aggregate. In the present paper, we show
that well-characterized full-length HTT exon1 peptides aggregated in vitro are capable of populating even smaller aggregates
during amyloid assembly: spherical oligomers with monomer contents
in the range of 100–600 and short, linear, protofibril-like
structures with monomer contents in the range of 500–2600.
These are in addition to much longer amyloid fibrils that develop
later in aggregation reactions. While our data do not prove that such
small aggregates exist or accumulate in the cell, it is clear that
these aggregates have sufficient kinetics of formation and stabilities in vitro that their formation in cells is energetically
feasible.

It is interesting to put these findings in the context
of results
of other studies. EM-characterized aggregates of similar sizes, much
smaller than inclusions but much larger than monomer, have been generated
either by in vitro incubation of recombinantly produced
HTT exon1 or by isolation from brain
homogenates of a HD mouse model. A variety
of aggregate sizes has been revealed by analysis of lysates of cell
or tissue from HD models or HD patients, which, in order of increasing
estimated number of peptide monomers per aggregate, are 4-mers (B.
Sahoo et al., msc submitted), 5-mers to 15-mers, ∼10-mers (assuming a composition of HTT exon1-sized
proteolytic fragments), 200-mers, and 50–10000-mers (B. Sahoo et al., msc
submitted).

Recombinant DNA methods of synthesizing useful amounts
of peptides
and proteins have revolutionized protein
biochemistry and biophysics research, oftentimes making studies possible
that otherwise simply could not be undertaken. The HTT exon1 peptide
lies at an intermediate size range, which, ironically, provides different
but equally significant challenges for both recombinant and chemical
synthesis, perhaps in particular in conducting aggregation studies.
While this peptide is somewhat longer than the typical upper limit
to solid phase synthesis, it is too small and aggregation prone for
successful cell production unless it is fused with a partner that
limits its aggregation. This fusion partner must then be removed chemically
or proteolytically in vitro.

For peptides with
lengths within the synthesis limits, chemical
synthesis can deliver precisely designed molecules. However, in addition
to the size limit, chemical synthesis can generate difficult-to-remove
peptide side products and other impurities, including d-amino acids from epimerization during synthesis
that can be very difficult to detect but that, even in small amounts,
can compromise amyloid formation. Recombinant
synthesis, in contrast, can generate peptides and proteins of much
greater length with relative ease and initially high sequence fidelity.
However, it appears that the properties of the same sequence produced
in different cell types can sometimes differ considerably, presumably
due to variations in post-translational modifications. Furthermore, exigencies of cloning or proteolytic
release of desired peptides from fusion partners can sometimes lead
to small but potentially significant modifications in the recombinant
product, such as in extensions,, or truncations of the HTTNT sequence. If the modifications occur in a portion of the molecule
that is critical to its solution properties, the seemingly small compromises
made to produce the recombinant peptide could have unintended consequences.
For example, the use of trypsin as one option for cleaving HTT exon1
from an N-terminal fusion partner almost
certainly leads to cleavage at one or more of the lysine residues
within HTTNT. This appears
to generate an amyloid fibril morphology that more resembles the ribbon-like aggregates produced from simple
polyQ peptides (Figure C) than the isolated filaments produced from HTT exon1-like
peptides with intact N-termini (Figure F,I).
In situations such as that presented by HTT exon1, it will continue
to be important to investigate the possible impact of the effects
of these compromises on experimental results.

Chemically accessible,
C-terminally truncated versions of HTT exon1
and related molecules have been utilized to deduce the mechanism of
the aggregation enhancing effect of the HTTNT N-terminal
segment of HTT,,,− assess the impact of serine phosphorylation within
HTTNT on that mechanism,, characterize
the magnitude and nature of the polyproline effect on aggregation,,, determine aspects of HTT exon1
amyloid structure, characterize aggregation
inhibition by HTTNT peptides, and monitor HTT exon1–membrane interactions. The recent availability of chemically synthesized, full-length
HTT exon1 peptides, has offered the possibility that,
given sufficient yields of pure material, systematic in vitro studies can now be conducted on molecules more accurately resembling
the HTT exon1 fragments generated in the cell. In this paper, we describe
in detail characterization of the aggregation properties of such chemically
synthesized full-length HTT exon1 containing both benign and pathological
polyQ repeat lengths. Our data show that the PRD of HTT exon1 beyond
the first 10 prolines contributes only modest quantitative differences
in some biophysical properties, while other properties seem to be
essentially unchanged. The data suggest that these truncated molecules
can be valuable substitutes for full-length HTT exon1 when chemically
precise versions of the latter are not available.

The authors declare no
competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
EMs were collected in the University of Pittsburgh School
of Medicine’s Structural Biology Department EM facility administered
by Drs. James Conway and Alexander Makhov.

