

   
BiochemistryBiochemistrybibichawBiochemistry0006-29601520-4995American
Chemical Society 10.1021/bi500986zArticleDoes Topology Drive Fiber Polymerization? Huang Lihong *†Hsiao Joe Ping-Lin ‡Powierza Camilla †Taylor Russell
M. II‡Lord Susan T. ††Department of Pathology
and Laboratory Medicine and ‡Department of Computer Science, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, North Carolina 27599, United States* Lineberger Cancer Center, University
of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, CB# 3290, Chapel Hill, NC 27599.
E-mail: lihongh@email.unc.edu. Telephone: (919)
518-7699. Fax: (919) 962-5467.24 11 2015 24 11 2014 16 12 2014 53 49 7824 7834 07 08 2014 24 11 2014 Copyright © 2014 American Chemical
Society2014American Chemical
SocietyThis is an open access article published under an ACS AuthorChoice License, which permits copying and redistribution of the article or any adaptations for non-commercial purposes.

We have developed new procedures
to examine the early steps in
fibrin polymerization. First, we isolated fibrinogen monomers from
plasma fibrinogen by gel filtration. Polymerization of fibrinogen
monomers differed from that of plasma fibrinogen. The formation of
protofibrils was slower and the transformation of protofibrils to
fibers faster for the fibrinogen monomers. Second, we used formaldehyde
to terminate the polymerization reactions. The formaldehyde-fixed
products obtained at each time point were examined by dynamic light
scattering and transmission electron microscopy (TEM). The data showed
the formaldehyde-fixed products were stable and representative of
the reaction intermediates. TEM images showed monomers, short oligomers,
protofibrils, and thin fibers. The amount and length of these species
varied with time. Short oligomers were less than 5% of the molecules
at all times. Third, we developed models that recapitulate the TEM
images. Fibrin monomer models were assembled into protofibrils, and
protofibrils were assembled into two-strand fibers using Chimera software.
Monomers were based on fibrinogen crystal structures, and the end-to-end
interactions between monomers were based on D-dimer crystal structures.
Protofibrils assembled from S-shaped monomers through asymmetric D:D
interactions were ordered helical structures. Fibers were modeled
by duplicating a protofibril and rotating the duplicate 120°
around its long axis. No specific interactions were presumed. The
two protofibrils simply twisted around one another to form a fiber.
This model suggests that the conformation of the protofibril per se
promotes the assembly into fibers. These findings introduce a novel
mechanism for fibrin assembly that may be relevant to other biopolymers.

National Institutes of Health, United Statesdocument-id-old-9bi500986zdocument-id-new-14bi-2014-00986zccc-price

   
Many studies
have provided insight
into the mechanisms that promote polymerization of fibrin monomers
into fibers. The classic light scattering studies of Hantgan and Hermans
showed polymerization occurs in two steps: end-to-end polymerization
of monomers into protofibrils and lateral association of protofibrils
into fibers.1 When the light scattering
data were correlated with electron microscopy images, the two polymerization
steps were identified as (1) the formation of half-staggered and double-stranded
protofibrils and (2) a dramatic increase in fiber diameter.2 Subsequent studies have confirmed this two-step
model and the structure of the protofibril intermediate. Of note,
modeling studies conducted by Weisel and co-workers also showed fibrin
assembly and fibrin structure are kinetically determined.3,4 In particular, kinetic analysis of images obtained by transmission
electron microscopy (TEM) showed that reactions between oligomers
are important for the polymerization of monomers into protofibrils.4 More recently, Bernocco et al. studied the early
stages of fibrin polymerization using stopped-flow multiangle laser
light scattering technology.5 They found
the first step of polymerization is compatible with the formation
of double-stranded, half-staggered semiflexible protofibrils of a
limited length, and subsequently, such protofibrils assemble into
fibers.

The molecular interactions that promote the polymerization
of monomers
into protofibrils are well-known.6 Fibrin
monomers contain three distinct structural regions: two distal D regions
linked by coiled-coil connectors to one central E region. The D regions
contain the polymerization sites known as holes “a”,
and the central E region contains two polymerization sites known as
knobs “A”. The knobs become exposed after thrombin cleaves
fibrinopeptide A (FpA) from fibrinogen. Because the E region lies
between two symmetric D regions, the reciprocal knob:hole, “A:a”,
interactions lead to a double-stranded protofibril with a half-staggered
overlap between molecules in different strands. The end-to-end alignment
of monomers in each protofibril strand forms the D:D interface. Even
though the adjoined D regions are identical, crystallography studies
have shown the D:D interface is asymmetric.

In contrast, the
molecular interactions that promote assembly of
protofibrils into fibers and the structures formed during this assembly
remain unresolved. Several studies support a role for “B:b”
knob:hole interactions and/or αC−αC interactions.6,7 Our experiments with recombinant fibrinogen variants indicate “B:b”
interactions support protofibril formation and thereby enhance protofibril
assembly,8 while αC−αC
interactions have an only modest influence on lateral aggregation.9 Doolittle’s group proposed a detailed
theoretical model of fibrin formation.10 In this model, two interactions support protofibril assembly: a
primary interaction between γ-chains and a concomitant if subsidiary
interaction between β-chains. These interactions were predicated
on the intermolecular packing arrangements observed in crystal structures
of fragment D from fibrinogen and the D-dimer isolated from cross-linked
fibrin. These hypothetical possibilities have not been tested experimentally.

For the studies described here, we developed a novel method to
“freeze” polymerization and provide “snapshots”
of the different polymerization phases. We monitored thrombin-catalyzed
polymerization of fibrinogen monomers, stopping the reactions at three
time points: when protofibrils are forming, when protofibrils are
growing, and when assembly of protofibrils into fibers is initiated.
Because we stopped polymerization by the addition of formaldehyde,
we were able to examine the polymer products by both dynamic light
scattering (DLS) and transmission electron microscopy (TEM). Our DLS
data showed that the formaldehyde-fixed products were stable and represented
snapshots of the real-time DLS measurements. Our TEM data indicate
fibrin monomers rapidly attached to protofibrils. We also developed
three-dimensional models that accurately matched the structure of
protofibrils and fibers seen by TEM in this study and in several other
studies (for example, refs (4) and (11)). These models were based on the crystal structures of fibrinogen
and the D-dimer isolated from fibrin. They suggest that the shape
of fibrinogen impacts the shape of the protofibril and the shape of
the protofibril per se promotes the assembly of protofibrils into
fibers. In contrast to previous models, no specific interactions were
stipulated for the assembly of two protofibrils into a fiber.

Experimental
Procedures
Protein Preparation
Human plasma fibrinogen (Enzyme
Research Laboratories, Inc.) was dialyzed overnight against 20 mM
HEPES (pH 7.4) and 150 mM NaCl (HBS). Prior to polymerization studies,
fibrinogen was diluted to 0.8 mg/mL in HBS with 1 mM CaCl2. Fibrinogen concentrations were determined from A280, using an extinction coefficient of 1.51 for a 1 mg/mL
solution.

Gel Filtration Chromatography
Fibrinogen monomers were
prepared as previously described.9 Briefly,
dialyzed fibrinogen was diluted to 8.0 mg/mL in HBS, filtered with
a 0.22 μm GV DURAPORE centrifugal filter, and injected into
a Superdex-200 column (GE Healthcare, Piscataway, NJ) equilibrated
with HBS. Fractions (120 μL/tube) were collected and analyzed
by DLS with a DLS plate reader (DynaPro, Waytt Technology, Santa Barbara,
CA) and the absorbance at 280 with a Nanodrop spectrophotometer (Nanodrop
2000, Thermo Scientific, Wilmington, DE). The peak fractions containing
fibrinogen monomers were combined together, adjusted to 0.8 mg/mL
in HBS with 1 mM CaCl2, and stored at 4 °C until they
were used within 48 h.

Fibrinogen Polymerization
All buffers
and fibrinogen
samples were filtered (0.22 μm GV DURAPORE centrifugal filter)
prior to use. Thrombin-catalyzed polymerization was monitored as the
increase in the average hydrodynamic radius in a DLS plate reader.
Reactions were conducted at ambient temperature with 0.4 mg/mL fibrinogen
and 0.01 unit/mL human thrombin in HBS with 1 mM CaCl2.
Reactions were initiated by adding 60 μL of thrombin to 60 μL
of fibrinogen and mixing thoroughly; the mixture was transferred into
the plate reader wells. Polymerization was monitored for 60 min after
the addition of thrombin. Data were collected every 10 s at 25 °C.

Formaldehyde “Stopped” Reactions
Reactions
were conducted under the same conditions described in Fibrinogen Polymerization. Polymerization was initiated by
mixing fibrinogen (0.8 mg/mL) with an equivalent volume of thrombin
(0.02 unit/mL) in HBS with 1 mM CaCl2 and immediately dividing
the samples into three tubes (100 μL/tube). Twenty microliters
of 0.5 M formaldehyde (prepared from paraformaldehyde, analyzed grade,
Fisher Scientific12) was added at 5, 8,
and 12 min, and the samples were rapidly mixed. The 0 min sample was
prepared by mixing 50 μL of HBS buffer with 1 mM CaCl2 with 50 μL of fibrinogen (0.8 mg/mL) and then adding 20 μL
of 0.5 M formaldehyde. Samples were kept at room temperature for 30
min and 24 h and examined in the DLS plate reader.

Immunoblot
Analysis of Fibrinogen
Polymerization was
performed using the same conditions described in Formaldehyde “Stopped” Reactions. Reactions
were stopped by adding SDS buffer under reduced conditions at 5, 8,
and 12 min. The 0 min sample was prepared by adding SDS buffer under
reduced conditions to fibrinogen. The samples were run on 8% polyacrylamide
gels, transferred onto a nitrocellulose membrane, and developed with
Aα chain specific monoclonal antibody Y-18 as previously described.13 The blot was developed with ECL Western blotting
detection reagents (GE Healthcare), and the bands were quantified
using ImageJ (http://rsbweb.nih.gov/ij/).

Transmission
Electron Microscopy (TEM)
Formaldehyde-treated
products were characterized by TEM. Formaldehyde-fixed polymer products
at 0, 5, 8, and 12 min were diluted and transferred onto the 400 mesh,
glow-discharged copper grids coated with Formvar/Carbon and then negatively
stained with filtered 2% aqueous uranyl acetate essentially as described
previously.4 The samples were observed
using a LEO EM-910 transmission electron microscope operating at 80
kV (Carl Zeiss SMT, Peabody, MA), and images were taken using a Gatan
Orius SC1000 CCD camera with Digital Micrograph version 3.11.0 (Gatan,
Inc., Pleasanton, CA) with a magnification of 100000×. We diluted
samples as needed to obtain good TEM images with appropriate numbers
of objects. We measured three aliquots of each sample, and the images
are reproducible. All images were analyzed with ImageJ to measure
the length and width of each object (monomer, oligomer, protofibril,
and fiber). All the data were the average values of each species at
different time points based on at least 10 images. The numbers of
each species were counted by visual observation.

Modeling
We used UCSF Chimera (http://www.cgl.ucsf.edu/chimera/) to model the structures seen by TEM.14 Molecular graphics images were produced using the UCSF Chimera package
from the Resource for Biocomputing, Visualization, and Informatics
at the University of California, San Francisco (supported by National
Institutes of Health Grant P41 RR001081). The crystal structures of
fibrinogen [Protein Data Bank (PDB) entries 3GHG and 1M1J] were used as a
base for the monomer, and the D-dimer crystal structures (PDB entries 3H32 and 1FCZ) were used as a
base for the end-to-end interactions between monomers. Chimera allowed
assembly of a composite model by producing multiple copies of a crystal
structure, each of which could be moved and turned without disturbing
the molecule’s shape.

We assembled a protofibril beginning
with the fibrin dimer. Two fibrinogens in the same orientation were
juxtaposed visually to mimic the D:D interaction of the D-dimer. The
juxtaposed molecules were then superimposed onto the D-dimer structures,
and manual adjustments were made to minimize the differences. The
transformation matrix between these two fibrinogens was repeated and
used in a Chimera command to generate more monomers, attaching one
monomer per iteration onto one end of the chain. This generated a
helix structure. Small adjustments were made in the transformation
matrix such that the chain more closely resembled the curvature seen
in the TEM images. These steps established the transformation matrix
of the D:D interaction in the dimer. The fibrin trimer was modeled
from the dimer by positioning the third monomer in an inverted orientation
such that the E region of the new monomer was centered over the D:D
interface and the “a” sites in the new monomer were
positioned as needed to form “A:a” interactions with
the two E regions of the dimer. Each chain of the trimer was then
elongated using the same transformation matrix that established the
D:D interaction in the dimer.

We assembled a fiber from two
protofibrils. One protofibril was
duplicated, and the duplicate was rotated along the long axis to separate
the two structures. A rotation of 120° generated a model that
closely resembled the TEM images.

Results
Polymerization
was monitored by DLS. Using the DynaPro DLS plate
reader, we determined that the average hydrodynamic radius of plasma
fibrinogen was 16.1 nm. A histogram of these data (Figure 1A) showed a relatively wide size distribution, indicating
polydispersity. Following gel filtration chromatography, DLS analysis
of the main peak (Figure 1B) showed a monodisperse
sample whose hydrodynamic radius corresponded to that of the fibrinogen
monomer (10.0 nm).15 The hydrodynamic radius
of monomeric fibrinogen remained constant for hours at ambient temperature,
several days at 4 °C, and several months at −20 °C.
Sodium dodecyl sulfate–polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS–PAGE)
analysis showed no degradation of the fibrinogen monomers during gel
filtration (Figure S1 of the Supporting Information). Immunoblot analysis showed Factor XIII eluted with the fibrinogen
monomers (Figure S2 of the Supporting Information).

Figure 1 Hydrodynamic radius determined by DLS. The plots show the percent
distribution of size in a representative fibrinogen sample (A) before
and (B) after gel filtration chromatography. DLS was performed on
samples of 0.4 mg/mL fibrinogen in HBS [20 mM HEPES and 150 mM NaCl
(pH 7.4)] as described in Experimental Procedures.

We measured thrombin-catalyzed
polymerization of fibrinogen before
and after gel filtration by DLS; the data are shown in Figure 2. Both curves can be characterized by three stages:
an early stage when the slope is relatively shallow, a midstage when
the slope is steep, and a final stage when the curves reach a plateau.
These stages reflect the steps of polymerization: the formation of
protofibrils, the assembly of protofibrils into fibers, and the stable
clot in which the fiber diameter remains constant. Both curves clearly
showed all three stages, but their shapes were markedly different
from one another. For polydisperse fibrinogen without gel filtration,
the slope was comparatively low for 10 min. Thereafter, the slope
became increasingly steeper until the average radius reached a plateau
at 28 min. For monodisperse fibrinogen after gel filtration, the slope
of the early stage was lower, around nearly zero. The midstage was
initiated later, at 14 min, and the hydrodynamic radius increased
dramatically. The curve reached a plateau sooner, around 22 min. Thus,
the transformation of the protofibril to the final fiber took only
8 min for the monomer sample. In contrast, with polydisperse fibrinogen,
the transformation of the protofibril to the fiber took ∼18
min. Finally, the diameter of fibers formed from fibrinogen monomers
was much larger than the diameter of fibers formed from polydisperse
fibrinogen. The average final radius for fibrinogen monomers (∼1500
nm) was approximately twice the average final radius for polydisperse
fibrinogen (∼800 nm). Note that the average radius was determined
by DynaPro software assuming a spherical particle, which of course
is not the case for fibrin polymers or fibers. Nevertheless, the difference
in the plateau values indicates the fibers formed from polydisperse
samples are thinner than fibers formed from monodisperse samples.
These data show that the aggregates present in plasma fibrinogen substantially
influence the kinetics of polymerization. This conclusion is consistent
with our recent studies that showed that polymerization was monitored
by turbidity.9 The physiological significance
of our findings is unknown. Nevertheless, as discussed previously,9 studies suggest that such aggregates indeed promote
thrombotic disease. In the subsequent experiments reported here, we
used only fibrinogen monomers.

Figure 2 Thrombin-catalyzed polymerization monitored
by DLS. Polymerization
was initiated by adding thrombin (0.1 unit/mL) to fibrinogens (0.4
mg/mL) in HBS with 1 mM calcium, as described in Experimental Procedures. Polymer formation was measured as
the average hydrodynamic radius as a function of time. The data are
the average of three independent experiments with fibrinogen samples
(■) before and (●) after gel filtration chromatography.
The inset expands the first 15 min of the reactions.

Formaldehyde is able to “freeze”
polymerization.
We performed polymerization using the conditions described in the
legend of Figure 2, adding formaldehyde to
samples without thrombin and 5, 8, and 12 min after the addition of
thrombin. As shown in Table 1, the average
hydrodynamic radius of the formaldehyde-treated samples increased
with time, similar to the increase in radius seen in real time. We
measured the radius of the fixed products 30 min and 24 h after the
addition of formaldehyde and found these were the same. Thus, the
addition of formaldehyde stops polymerization and “freezes”
the polymers as stable products.

Table 1 Average Hydrodynamic
Radii (nanometers)
of Formaldehyde-Fixed Productsa
samples analyzed by DLS	0 min	5 min	8 min	12 min	
fixed products measured after 30 min	10.1 ± 0.1	18.6 ± 0.6	37.5 ± 3.9	100.4 ± 5.4	
fixed products
measured after 24 h	10.2 ± 0.2	18.7 ± 0.3	35.8 ± 6.1	93.4 ± 7.0	
real-time polymerization	10.0 ± 0.1	13.0 ± 0.5	15.9 ± 0.5	20.5 ± 0.6	
a Formaldehyde was
added at different
times before (0 min) and after addition of thrombin to fibrinogen.
The radii for the formaldehyde-fixed products were determined 30 min
or 24 h after the addition of formaldehyde. The real-time data correspond
to those in Figure 2. The data are the mean
radii ± the standard deviation from three experiments.

The hydrodynamic radius of fibrinogen
(0 min) with formaldehyde
was the same as that without formaldehyde. This result shows that
the level of formation of intermolecular products by reaction of monomers
with formaldehyde was low, below the detection limit of DLS. This
result indicates that the addition of formaldehyde per se did not
impact the structure or distribution of complexes. For example, the
formaldehyde-fixed oligomers seen by TEM were formed by polymerization,
not by formaldehyde-induced cross-linking. The hydrodynamic radius
of the formaldehyde-treated polymerization products was larger than
the radius during real-time polymerization at the times of formaldehyde
addition. For example, the hydrodynamic radius of the formaldehyde-fixed
products at 5 min lies between the radii during real-time polymerization
at 8 and 12 min. These data suggest that there is a 3–7 min
delay to completely stop polymerization (see Table 1 and Figure 2). Considered altogether,
the DLS data indicate that polymerization continues after the addition
of formaldehyde, that formaldehyde links monomers that are within
one polymer, and that once polymerization is arrested the formaldehyde-linked
products are stable.

TEM provides clear snapshots of formaldehyde-fixed
products. Representative
TEM images of formaldehyde-fixed products (Figure 3) show the progression from monomers to oligomers, protofibrils,
and fibers. The morphologies of individual monomers and monomers within
each structure are evident. In particular, the half-staggered, double-stranded
morphology of the protofibril was unmistakable (Figure 3, 5 min), and fibers of two or more protofibrils were clearly
evident (Figure 3, 8 and 12 min). Our TEM images
of protofibrils are similar to but apparently more uniform than those
of Medved et al.11 This uniformity may
be a consequence of formaldehyde fixation prior to microscopy, the
use of fibrinogen monomers, or both. For quantitative analysis of
the images, we measured the length and width of each structure using
ImageJ. We defined three structures by their width: monomers with
a width between 4 and 6 nm, oligomers and protofibrils with a width
between 8 and 13 nm, and fibers with a width greater than 13 nm. Before
the addition of thrombin, only monomers were seen, as expected for
fibrinogen purified by size exclusion chromatography. Short oligomers
and protofibrils were observed when formaldehyde was added 5 min after
thrombin. At 8 min, the oligomers and protofibrils increased in both
size and number, and a small number of fibers appeared. At 12 min,
more fibers were observed and the length of the longest fibers reached
∼2 μm. The TEM data also showed that even at the earliest
time (5 min), the polymerization products were relatively heterogeneous
with a large distribution of sizes.

Figure 3 Transmission electron microscopy (TEM)
images of formaldehyde-fixed
products negatively stained with uranyl acetate. Polymerization was
performed as described in the legend of Figure 2 and stopped by addition of formaldehyde prior to (0 min) or 5, 8,
or 12 min after the addition of thrombin. A representative set of
“fixed” polymer samples is shown. The scale bar is 100
nm, which is approximately twice the length of a fibrinogen monomer.
Images below each field show individual structures on an expanded
scale. Schematic representations of structures seen in 5 min are shown:
(A) monomer, (B) trimer, (C) tetramer, and (D) hexamer.

A quantitative assessment of the TEM images is
shown in Figure 4. Figure 4A shows a histogram
of the structures plotted as the percent of the three forms: monomers,
oligomers including protofibrils, and fibers. Monomers decreased from
100% at 0 min to 94, 85, and 61% at 5, 8, and 12 min, respectively.
Oligomers and protofibrils increased from 6% at 5 min to 13 and 26%
at 8 and 12 min, respectively. Fibers first appeared at 8 min, increasing
from 2% at 8 min to 13% at 12 min. We note that ∼77% of the
fibers seen at 12 min were found in tangles, such as that shown in
Figure 3. We found that the percent of each
fibrin form did not change when the formaldehyde-stopped reaction
mixtures were diluted prior to analysis by TEM. Thus, the morphologic
data, like the DLS data, showed the formaldehyde-fixed products are
stable.

Figure 4 Quantitative assessment of the formaldehyde-fixed products. The
histograms show the time-dependent analysis for (A) the percentage
of each form (monomers, oligomers, and fibers) at each time, (B) the
average length of each form (nanometers ± the standard deviation)
at each time, and (C) the percentage of molecules found in each structure
(measured as the number of monomers) at each time (5 min, blue; 8
min, green; 12 min, red); data for the smallest structures defined
as protofibrils are colored yellow. The asterisk denotes molecules
in long protofibrils containing more than 25 monomers and fibers.

The average length of each form
at different times is shown in
Figure 4B. The length of the fibrin monomers
remained ∼48 nm throughout. The length of oligomers and protofibrils
increased continuously from ∼200 nm at 5 min to ∼550
nm at 12 min. Fibers increased in length from ∼600 nm at 8
min to ∼950 nm at 12 min. Considering all the TEM images, the
average widths (±standard deviation) for monomers, oligomers
including protofibrils, and fibers were 5.5 ± 1.3, 10.8 ±
2.2, and 22.3 ± 7.7 nm, respectively.

Surprisingly, only
a few short oligomers were observed in these
TEM images from 0 to 12 min. Figure 4C shows
the data as the percent of fibrin(ogen) molecules found in each form
at each time. Note that the Y-axis in panel C differs
from that in panel A; in panel C, the Y-axis is the
percentage of total molecules that are monomers, while in panel A,
the Y-axis is the percentage of each species out
of the total number of objects. We found oligomers were less than
5% of the molecules at all times if we defined oligomers with eight
or more monomers as protofibrils. As the reaction proceeded, the number
and length of protofibrils increased. At 5 min, the longest protofibrils
contained 20 monomers. Over time, an increasing number of molecules
were involved in long protofibrils (&gt;25 monomers) and thin fibers.
At 12 min, long protofibrils and thin fibers constituted ∼34%
of all molecules. The very low representation of oligomers (&lt;8
monomers) suggests that their lifetime is very short and that they
quickly become protofibrils.

Most monomers observed in TEM are
fibrinogen. To determine whether
the monomers observed in the TEM images were fibrinogen or fibrin,
we measured the fractional concentration of fibrinogen. We stopped
polymerization by adding SDS buffer and analyzed the products on immunoblots
developed with monoclonal antibody Y-18 that recognizes fibrinogen
but not fibrin. The data (Figure S3 of the Supporting
Information) showed that the concentrations of fibrinogen were
78, 63, and 31% of the total fibrin(ogen) molecules at 5, 8, and 12
min, respectively. These values were very similar to the relative
concentrations of monomers shown in Figure 4C (82, 53, and 28%, respectively). These findings indicate that the
monomers in the TEM images were almost all fibrinogen. The high concentrations
of fibrinogen are expected in our reaction mixtures in which thrombin
concentrations were low. Our findings indicate that once cleaved by
thrombin, fibrin monomers are quickly conjugated with other fibrin
forms.

Protofibrils twist to make fibers. Most interestingly,
some images
obtained after ≥8 min showed one special structure (Figure 5): fibers formed from two protofibrils twisted around
each other. At one end, the protofibrils were separated, indicating
they had not yet had a chance to form a complete fiber when polymerization
was stopped by the addition of formaldehyde. These images suggest
that the two protofibrils interacted at one end and twisted around
each other step by step to form a two-stranded fiber.

Figure 5 Special structure of
the two-strand fibers. Two images were selected
from the TEM images of formaldehyde-fixed products at 12 min. The
scale bar is 100 nm.

A three-dimensional model recapitulates the architecture
of the
protofibrils and two-stranded fibers. We developed models for protofibrils
and two-strand fibers using UCSF Chimera.14 Each model was based on one crystal structure of fibrinogen and
one crystal structure of the D-dimer. We used four crystal structures:
the human fibrinogen structure (PDB entry 3GHG), the chicken fibrinogen structure (PDB
entry 1M1J),
and two human D-dimer structures (PDB entries 3H32 and 1FZC) that have different
D:D interfaces. The four models developed from these structures were
remarkably similar. In particular, all models showed the curved and
twisted shapes that are described below. Considered together, the
protofibril and fiber models indicate that the assembly of protofibrils
into fibers is determined by the shape of the protofibril, which in
turn is determined by the shape of the monomer. We present the model
assembled from chicken fibrinogen (PDB entry 1M1J) using the D-dimer
interface from the structure that mimics the “knob:hole”
interactions found in human fibrin (PDB entry 1FCZ).

We modeled
the protofibril starting with a trimer, as shown in
Figure 6A. We first aligned the longitudinal
interface between two monomers (colored red) to match the D:D interface
in the D-dimer structure. We inserted the third (blue) monomer based
on the “A:a” “knob:hole” interactions
that are known to be critical to protofibril formation. Because knob
“A” is not visible in any crystal structure, one must
make assumptions about the orientation of the knobs “A”
in one monomer to the holes “a” in the adjacent monomer.
Similar assumptions were made in a previous model of the protofibril.10 We joined the knobs “A” from the
central regions of the two monomers (Figure 6A1, red) with the holes “a” from the distal ends of
a third monomer (blue), so this monomer faced the dimer. The trimer
was expanded into a double-stranded protofibril in two stages, each
of which repeatedly added one monomer at a time to the structure.
In the first stage, red monomers were appended to form more D:D interactions.
In each iteration, the left-hand monomer of the new D:D interaction
was positioned adjacent to the right-hand monomer of the previous
D:D interaction such that their relative positions and orientations
matched those of the two original red monomers. Note that this added
monomers onto the strand of the initial trimer and maintained the
asymmetry that is found in the D:D interaction. In the second stage,
we replicated blue monomers in the second protofibril strand and appended
these one by one onto the original blue monomer using the relative
transformation determined in stage 1. Thus, the second strand was
identical to the first strand. Using this transformation repeatedly,
it was a simple process to grow the double-stranded structures. As
a consequence of this, all of the monomers’ relative pairwise
positions (and thus interactions) are identical throughout the protofibril.

Figure 6 Models
of (A) the protofibril and (B) the two-strand fiber. The
models were generated with UCSF Chimera using the crystal structures
of fibrinogen (PDB entry 1M1J) and the fibrin D-dimer (PDB entry 1FCZ). Two monomers (red)
were joined to make a dimer by mimicking the D:D interface of the
D-dimer. The trimer (A1) was made by adding a third monomer (blue)
to align the “knobs” in the dimer with the “holes”
in the third monomer. The double-stranded protofibril was formed by
applying a transformation matrix that elongated the trimer by one
monomer per iteration, as described in the text. The individual strands
of the protofibril are colored blue and red. Four views are shown
(A2–A5): front (A2), top (A3), close-up of the front (A4),
and a perspective angle (A5). The model protofibril was scaled to
and compared with a representative TEM protofibril (A6). The model
of the two-strand fiber was developed by superimposing two protofibrils
(one red, one blue) and rotating one of these 120° along its
long axis (B1). Four views of the fiber are shown (B2–B5):
front (B2), top (B3), close-up of the front (B4), and a perspective
angle (B5). The model fiber was scaled to and compared with a representative
TEM fiber (B6). Videos of these two models are provided in the Supporting Information.

Images of this model are shown in Figure 6A2–A5; videos showing rotation around the long axis
and the
center point of the model are available in the Supporting Information (Movies V1 and V2). When the structures
are viewed from different perspectives, their shapes in the model
vary; some segments appear as single strands, and some segments show
gaps between the two strands. Of note, the strands in the model protofibril
twist around one another (Figure 6A2–A4)
with a pitch of two monomers, and the protofibril itself is spirally
curved (Figure 6A5) with a pitch of seven monomers.
The twist of the strands and the spiral curvature of the protofibril
were present in all of our models, including those based on a different
D:D interface (PDB entry 3H32) or on the human fibrinogen structure (PDB entry 3GHG). These modeling
experiments indicate that the twist and the spiral curvature of the
structure are inherent properties of a double-stranded protofibril
that is uniformly assembled from the S-shaped fibrin monomers appended
through asymmetric D:D interactions. These shapes are similar to the
shapes of the protofibrils seen in our TEM images, as illustrated
in Figure 6A6.

We also used the UCSF
Chimera assembly tools to generate a model
of a fiber constructed from two protofibrils. Images from this model
are shown in Figure 6B; videos showing rotation
around the long axis and the center point of the model are available
in the Supporting Information (Movies V3
and V4). We duplicated the original protofibril, superimposed the
two images, and then rotated the duplicate 120° around its long
axis to separate the two strands as shown in Figure 6B1. The resultant structure was a two-strand fiber in which
the two protofibrils twisted around one another with the same seven-monomer
pitch as the protofibril (Figure 6B2–B5).
It is not an accident that the two-strand fiber has the same pitch
as a protofibril. Technically, the helix in the protofibril dictates
the twist in the fiber. This simple modeling step suggests that the
assembly of two protofibrils into a fiber reflects the twist and spiral
curvature of the protofibril. The model fiber is similar to the two-strand
fibers seen in our TEM images, as illustrated in Figure 6B6.

Discussion
Advantages of the “Formaldehyde-Fixed”
Approach
In previous studies of fibrin structures formed
during the early
stages of polymerization, the reaction products were not fixed prior
to TEM such that the experimental conditions might influence the outcome.2,11 For example, oligomers could dissociate when reaction mixtures are
diluted prior to application onto the microscopy grid. To overcome
this potential flaw, we stopped the reactions by adding formaldehyde.
We found the TEM images of the formaldehyde-fixed products were unchanged
by dilution in buffer. DLS of the fixed products confirmed that formaldehyde
stopped the reactions and showed that the formaldehyde-fixed products
were stable. Thus, the TEM images reflect the morphology of the products
present at the time of addition of formaldehyde. Our images are reminiscent
of images of protofibrils and fibers whose reactions were arrested
by dilution into 0.05 M ammonium acetate and immediately placed on
the microscopy grid.4 This morphological
similarity indicates that formaldehyde treatment per se did not substantially
alter the polymer structures.

Comparing the DLS of the fixed
products to the DLS of real-time samples at the time of fixation suggests
a time delay in stopping the reactions. Because DLS measures changes
with time, it may be misleading to compare the real-time data, where
the structures are not only moving but also changing with time, to
those of the formaldehyde-stopped reactions, where the structures
are stable. Nevertheless, we note that this time delay suggests the
structures in the fixed samples are indeed different from those at
the equivalent real time. One might anticipate this difference if
the larger structures were more likely to be fixed by formaldehyde.
This suggests that the smaller structures are very short-lived relative
to the time needed to covalently link the monomers. The tangled structure
seen at 12 min in Figure 3 should also be considered
when comparing the real-time DLS to that of the fixed samples. Such
large structures would have a disproportionate influence on the value
of the average DLS, as such structures would be less mobile than the
same structures moving independently. We conclude that formaldehyde-fixed
approach provides an accurate representation of the structures formed
early in polymerization.

Implications of the Quantitative TEM Results
The data
shown in Figure 4C differ from similar histograms
reported by Weisel et al.4 These differences
could all arise from differences in experimental conditions. We saw
a larger fraction of monomers, mostly fibrinogen, at all times, consistent
with the low thrombin concentration (0.25 unit/mg of fibrinogen) used
here. In contrast, the monomer peak in the previous study is undoubtedly
fibrin, as the thrombin concentration was high (100 units/mg of fibrinogen).
Thus, the previous histograms provide a more accurate estimate of
the lifetime of the fibrin monomer. We saw a small and relatively
uniform fraction of oligomers and protofibrils; they report dips and
peaks indicating accumulation of specific intermediates. Weisel et
al. used plasma fibrinogen in their studies. Our gel filtration data
suggest histograms of this fibrinogen would show oligomers. Thus,
the oligomer intermediates that change during the reaction could reflect
the presence of larger species in the starting material. We saw no
evidence of stable oligomers. This finding indicates that specific
intermediates do not accumulate during thrombin-catalyzed polymerization
of monomeric fibrinogen. Lastly, our histogram peaks are shifted to
the right, indicating assembly into large structures occurred more
rapidly in our experiments. This difference would be anticipated from
the DLS data (Figure 2). The DLS curves show
larger species accumulate earlier during polymerization of plasma
fibrinogen relative to polymerization of fibrinogen monomers. Irrespective
of these differences, both analyses showed oligomers were quickly
assembled into protofibrils and fibers.

In recent studies, Weisel
and his colleagues have compared quantitative TEM data with structures
visualized by spinning disc confocal microscopy. These complementary
approaches allowed the visualization of real-time polymerization of
hydrated samples alongside the high-resolution characterization of
the structures present at specific times. These studies used kinetic
conditions similar to ours, 0.07 unit of thrombin/mg of fibrinogen,
though with plasma fibrinogen. We compared the snapshots at our three
time points to the three earliest time points in this study where
the percents of monomers are nearly the same: 81, 52, and 28% for
our studies and 78, 55, and 40% for theirs, respectively. This comparison
shows the results from the two studies are quite similar. At the earliest
time, both samples were heterogeneous though more so in our sample.
We saw small amounts (≤2%) of every species, monomer through
dodecamer, plus a few larger, while they saw a decreasing fraction
with increasing size, i.e., fewer trimers than dimers. They did not
see oligomers of five, six, or seven monomers, while we saw these
species in essentially all our samples. In both studies, fibers were
first observed at the second time, and the fractions of fibers were
similar, ∼10%. The spinning disc confocal microscopy data confirmed
that fibers were present, but not the primary structure at this time.
In both studies, the fraction of fibers increased and the fraction
of protofibrils decreased when comparing the third time to the second
time. This finding suggests that the assembly of protofibrils into
fibers was the dominant process when the third sample was obtained.
That is, the fibers are growing in diameter more rapidly than protofibrils
are forming. Both analyses show a small fraction of oligomers are
present throughout these times, indicating that these oligomers assemble
rapidly and that they add to both protofibrils and fibers. Neither
set of data could distinguish whether oligomers add to fibers by assembling
alongside or elongating the protofibrils existing within the fibers.

Implications of Modeling
We developed models based
on the S-shape of fibrinogen and the asymmetric D:D interface. We
assembled a trimer and added monomers to build a half-staggered, double-stranded
protofibril. Examination of the model protofibril illustrates that
the varying TEM images seen here and in published reports can arise
from different perspectives of the same structure. The constraints
used in building this model induced a twist of one chain around the
second. Several early studies have also noted a twisted structure.
Indeed, a hint of twisting was first perceived more than 40 years
ago.16 In 1990, Medved et al.17 published remarkable TEM images that clearly
showed crossover points of the chains within a protofibril as expected
if the chains twist around one another. Our model also showed the
twisted strands form a spiral structure. This suggests that protofibrils
are ordered helical structures. Both the twisted strands and the spiral
structure arise from the asymmetric D:D interface that is evident
in almost all crystal structures. Indeed, the one variant fibrinogen,
γN308 K, whose crystal structure showed a symmetric D:D interface
does not form stable protofibrils.18

We then assembled a fiber by simply rotating one of two identical,
superimposed protofibrils. The similarity between the model fiber
and the fibers seen in TEM leads us to hypothesize that the modeling
recapitulates the assembly of two protofibrils into a fiber. The modeling
suggests that it is the conformation of the protofibril per se, both
its twisted surface and its spiral curvature, that promotes the assembly.
The protofibril surfaces must be compatible, but specific interactions
between protofibrils were not stipulated. The structures shown in
Figure 5 are consistent with this model: the
two protofibrils assembled from one end, twisting around one another
to form the two-protofibril fiber. The assembly was stopped by the
addition of formaldehyde before the two protofibrils were fully annealed,
forming the Y-shaped structures.

Our model shows the protofibril
and the fiber have the same helical
pitch. Indeed, the helical pitch of the protofibril, seven monomers,
sets the helical pitch of the fiber. In 1987, Weisel et al. observed
a similar helical structure in fibers and measured the average pitch
as 1930 ± 280 nm, equivalent to 43 ± 6 monomers.19 This pitch is much larger than the pitch of
our model and the structures shown in our TEM images. The difference
may arise from the conditions of polymerization, as these conditions
will affect the morphology of the fibers. The earlier studies were
completed at much higher thrombin and fibrinogen concentrations. Further,
it is possible that addition of formaldehyde preserved the steeper
pitch observed in our fibers.

All previous models of the assembly
of protofibrils into fibers
stipulate specific intermolecular interactions. Assembly occurs after
the protofibrils reach a specific length, approximately 16 monomers.
This observation suggests that multiple weak interactions between
protofibrils are required to initiate assembly. As FpB release correlates
with the growth in fiber diameter, “B:b” interactions
were the first implicated in assembly.20 However, even this early study showed “B:b” interactions
were not required. Fibers were formed when fibrinogen was cleaved
by snake venoms that released only FpA, such that “B:b”
interactions were not present. Subsequent studies resolve this apparent
inconsistency.21 These suggest the release
of FpB per se and “B:b” interactions enhance the formation
of protofibrils and consequently enhance assembly of protofibrils
into fibers. Many studies have shown the αC domains influence
polymerization and fiber diameter.22 Gorkun
et al. correlated electron microscopy and turbidity studies using
fibrinogen preparations missing one or both of these domains. These
experiments led to an appealing model in which the αC regions
interact intramolecularly in fibrinogen but intermolecularly in fibrin.
These intermolecular interactions promote assembly. Studies with recombinant
fibrinogen lacking the αC regions indicate these regions do
indeed influence polymerization, but the effect is modest.9,23,24 Without αC, the fiber diameter
was slightly smaller, indicating the assembly of protofibrils was
inhibited but not eliminated. Thus, like the “B:b” interactions,
the αC:αC interactions were not required for the assembly
of protofibrils.

These findings naturally evoke the hypothesis
that two, or more,
types of specific interactions work together to support the assembly
of protofibrils into fibers. This hypothesis has been tested with
recombinant fibrinogens that combined the loss of the αC domain
with other changes that influence polymerization: BβD398A and
γE132A (L. Huang, L. Ping, O. V. Gorkun, and S. T. Lord, unpublished
data). The individual variants showed little or no change in turbidity
that could reflect changes in the assembly of protofibrils, while
the double mutations (αC/BβD398A and αC/γE132A)
show only modest changes in turbidity. These data show that the loss
of both αC:αC and “B:b” interactions, or
other pairs of interactions, did not eliminate the assembly of protofibrils
into fibers. Perhaps an additional, unidentified specific interaction
is also required. We examined the interface between the two protofibrils
(orange and blue) in our model fiber. We used UCSF Chimera to determine
the point of closest approach and identified the atom pair: the side
chain oxygen for chain residue Thr 358 and the backbone amide for
chain reside Glu 270. Thr 358 lies within one half of the primary
interacting site, residues 350–360, in the molecular model
of fibrin assembly proposed by Doolittle’s group.10 Residue Glu 270, however, is not within the
proposed complementary segment of residues 370–380. Thus, assembly
of the protofibrils in our model does not recapitulate the previously
proposed interface. For those interested in additional molecular details,
our model can be accessed via the CISMM web server (http://cismm.cs.unc.edu/wp-content/uploads/2014/10/fiber_pdb.zip).

The only variant fibrinogen whose protofibrils appear to
be unable
to assemble into fibers is a hybrid molecule in which the normal human
αC domain was replaced with the analogous chicken αC domain.25 Light scattering studies indicate that protofibrils
formed with this hybrid; however, fibers did not form, and no fibrin
clot was evident. It is difficult to interpret these data. TEM studies
showed the hybrid fibrinogen structure differs from that of normal
fibrinogen. Approximately 89% of the hybrid molecules are U-shaped
or complicated shaped under conditions where 90% of normal fibrinogen
is S-shaped (L. Huang, L. Ping, C. Powierza, O. V. Gorkun, and S.
T. Lord, unpublished data). This observation supports our model in
which the S shape of fibrinogen has a critical role in polymerization.
It should be noted, however, that natural chicken fibrinogen is slow
to polymerize when tested under similar conditions. The natural protein
does form a fibrin clot, although one with relatively thin fibers
(L. Huang, L. Ping, O. V. Gorkun, and S. T. Lord, unpublished data).
These studies suggest that αC regions do have a role in fiber
assembly, although in this case, an inhibitory role.

Alternatively,
the long-held premise that protofibril assembly
requires specific interactions may be incorrect. We propose a model
in which assembly of protofibrils is driven by topology rather than
multiple specific interactions. There is no clear precedence for such
a conformation-driven assembly. A critical role for conformation has
been suggested in two earlier studies that also examined electron
microscopy images. In a study with modified fibrin, Wade et al. proposed
that the protofibril has a tendency to twist and assemble with other
protofibrils to form an ordered twisted fibril.26 They noted that tensions in the right-handed twist of the
protofibril are partially relieved when it assembles into a left-handed
coil. In other words, the authors proposed the driving force for fiber
assembly is the tension introduced by the twist in the protofibril.
One year later, Ferry’s group examined images that showed branching
junctions in fine clots.27 These authors
suggest the strength of the junctions is enhanced because of topological
constraints provided by twisting rather than the noncovalent interactions
between protofibrils. Thus, these authors limit the role of conformation
to the branch points. We propose that the spiral conformation of the
twisted protofibril drives assembly of protofibrils into fibers. We
note that the spiral of the model protofibril is right-handed while
the coil of the model fiber is left-handed. Thus, tension in the protofibril
could be reduced by assembly into the fiber. This discussion suggests
a possible precedence for our model, the assembly of α-helices
into coiled coils. This assembly is also dependent on conformation.
Again, right-handed structures, the α-helices, are assembled
in a left-handed coil. We also note a recent study that may be relevant
to our model. This study suggests the “A:a” interactions
could provide stability to a protofibril structure under tension.
The data showed “A:a” interactions exhibit “catch-slip”
kinetics, indicating that these interactions exist in two states.28 Perhaps the assembly of monomers into protofibrils
is supported by the “catch” bond, providing stability
to a right-handed, twisted, spiral. During subsequent assembly into
a left-handed fiber, the “A:a” interaction “slips”
into the alternative state that is stable within the fiber. This idea
is highly speculative. Nevertheless, it seems reasonable to propose
that the “A:a” interactions in protofibrils differ from
those in fibers.

In conclusion, our data are consistent with
many previous studies.
They show protofibrils are twisted structures and protofibril assembly
into fibers can lead to fiber branching. In contrast, our model is
unique. This model shows protofibrils are ordered helical structures
and suggests that the assembly of protofibrils into fibers is driven
by geometry rather than specific intermolecular interactions.

Supporting Information Available
Nonreduced
SDS–PAGE
gel results of fibrinogen before and after purification (Figure S1),
immunoblot analysis of fibrinogen fractions from size exclusion chromatography
(Figure S2), immunoblot analysis of the fibrinogen monomer at different
polymerization time points to quantify the remaining monomers (Figure
S3), and rotation videos of the protofibril and fibers around the
long axis and the center point of the models (Movies S1–S4).
This material is available free of charge via the Internet at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bi500986z_si_001.pdf

 bi500986z_si_002.avi

 bi500986z_si_003.avi

 bi500986z_si_004.avi

 bi500986z_si_005.avi

 Author Contributions
L.H. designed
and performed experiments, analyzed data, prepared figures, and wrote
the manuscript. J.P.-L.H. performed the modeling experiment and wrote
the manuscript. C.P. performed experiments, analyzed the data, and
modified the manuscript. R.M.T. supervised the experiment design and
performance of modeling part and wrote the paper. S.T.L. supervised
the study, designed experiments, analyzed data, and wrote the manuscript.

This work was
supported by research funding from National Institutes of Health Grant
HL031048 to S.T.L.

The authors
declare no
competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
We thank Lifang Ping and Oleg V. Gorkun for their
thoughtful
advice and technical assistance, Michael Falvo for his helpful comments
on the manuscript, and the Macromolecular Interactions Facility (University
of North Carolina at Chapel Hill) for use of the DynaPro DLS plate
reader.

Abbreviations
TEMtransmission electron microscopy

DLSdynamic light scattering

ODoptical density

FpAfibrinopeptide
A

HBS20 mM HEPES
(pH 7.4) and 150 mM NaCl

SDSsodium dodecyl sulfate.



   
References
Hantgan R. R. ; Hermans J.  (1979 ) Assembly of fibrin. A light scattering study . J. Biol. Chem. 
254 , 11272 –11281 .500644 
Hantgan R. ; Fowler W. ; Erickson H. ; Hermans J.  (1980 ) Fibrin assembly: A
comparison of electron microscopic and light scattering results . Thromb. Haemostasis 
44 , 119 –124 .6162207 
Weisel J. W. ; Nagaswami C.  (1992 ) Computer modeling of fibrin polymerization kinetics
correlated with electron microscope and turbidity observations: Clot
structure and assembly are kinetically controlled . Biophys. J. 
63 , 111 –128 .1420861 
Weisel J. W. ; Veklich Y. ; Gorkun O.  (1993 ) The sequence of cleavage of fibrinopeptides
from fibrinogen is important for protofibril formation and enhancement
of lateral aggregation in fibrin clots . J. Mol.
Biol. 
232 , 285 –297 .8331664 
Bernocco S. ; Ferri F. ; Profumo A. ; Cuniberti C. ; Rocco M.  (2000 ) Polymerization of rod-like macromolecular
monomers studied by stopped-flow,
multiangle light scattering: Set-up, data processing, and application
to fibrin formation . Biophys. J. 
79 , 561 –583 .10866981 
Lord S. T.  (2007 ) Fibrinogen
and fibrin: Scaffold proteins in hemostasis . Curr. Opin. Hematol. 
14 , 236 –241 .17414213 
Weisel J. W.  (2005 ) Fibrinogen
and fibrin . Adv. Protein Chem. 
70 , 247 –299 .15837518 
Mullin J. L. ; Gorkun O. V. ; Lord S. T.  (2000 ) Decreased
Lateral Aggregation of
a Variant Recombinant Fibrinogen Provides Insight into the Polymerization
Mechanism . Biochemistry 
39 , 9843 –9849 .10933802 
Huang L. ; Lord S. T.  (2013 ) The isolation of fibrinogen monomer
dramatically influences
fibrin polymerization . Thromb. Res. 
131 , e258 –e263 .23622556 
Yang Z. ; Mochalkin I. ; Doolittle R. F.  (2000 ) A model of fibrin formation based
on crystal structures of fibrinogen and fibrin fragments complexed
with synthetic peptides . Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
U.S.A. 
97 , 14156 –14161 .11121023 
Medved L. ; Ugarova T. ; Veklich Y. ; Lukinova N. ; Weisel J.  (1990 ) Electron microscope
investigation of the early stages of fibrin assembly. Twisted protofibrils
and fibers . J. Mol. Biol. 
216 , 503 –509 .2258925 
Kiernan J.  (2000 ) Formaldehyde,
formalin, paraformaldehyde and glutaraldehyde: What they are and what
they do . Microsc. Today 
1 , 8 –12 .
Gorkun O. V. ; Veklich Y. I. ; Weisel J. W. ; Lord S. T.  (1997 ) The conversion of
fibrinogen to fibrin: Recombinant fibrinogen typifies plasma fibrinogen . Blood 
89 , 4407 –4414 .9192765 
Goddard T.
D. ; Huang C. C. ; Ferrin T. E.  (2005 ) Software extensions to UCSF chimera
for interactive visualization of large molecular assemblies . Structure 
13 , 473 –482 .15766548 
Cardinali B. ; Profumo A. ; Aprile A. ; Byron O. ; Morris G. ; Harding S. E. ; Stafford W. F. ; Rocco M.  (2010 ) Hydrodynamic and mass
spectrometry analysis of nearly-intact human fibrinogen, chicken fibrinogen,
and of a substantially monodisperse human fibrinogen fragment X . Arch. Biochem. Biophys. 
493 , 157 –168 .19853574 
Krakow W. ; Endres G. F. ; Siegel B. M. ; Scheraga H. A.  (1972 ) An electron microscopic
investigation of the polymerization of bovine fibrin monomer . J. Mol. Biol. 
71 , 95 –103 .4564302 
Medved L. ; Ugarova T. ; Veklich Y. ; Lukinova N. ; Weisel J.  (1990 ) Electron microscope
investigation of the early stages of fibrin assembly. Twisted protofibrils
and fibers . J. Mol. Biol. 
216 , 503 –509 .2258925 
Bowley S. R. ; Okumura N. ; Lord S. T.  (2009 ) Impaired protofibril
formation in
fibrinogen γ N308K is due to altered D:D and “A:a”
interactions . Biochemistry 
48 , 8656 –8663 .19650644 
Weisel J. W. ; Nagaswami C. ; Makowski L.  (1987 ) Twisting of fibrin
fibers limits
their radial growth . Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
U.S.A. 
84 , 8991 –8995 .3480524 
Blombäck B. ; Hessel B. ; Hogg D. ; Therkildsen L.  (1978 ) A two-step
fibrinogen–fibrin transition in blood coagulation . Nature 
275 , 501 –505 .692730 
Lord S. T.  (2007 ) Fibrinogen
and fibrin: Scaffold proteins in hemostasis . Curr. Opin. Hematol. 
14 , 236 –241 .17414213 
Weisel J. W. ; Medved L.  (2001 ) The structure and function of the αC domains
of fibrinogen . Ann. N.Y. Acad. Sci. 
936 , 312 –327 .11460487 
Gorkun O. V. ; Henschen-Edman A. H. ; Ping L. F. ; Lord S. T.  (1998 ) Analysis of Aα251
fibrinogen: The αC domain has a role in polymerization, albeit
more subtle than anticipated from the analogous proteolytic fragment
X . Biochemistry 
37 , 15434 –15441 .9799505 
Collet J.-P. ; Moen J. L. ; Veklich Y. I. ; Gorkun O. V. ; Lord S. T. ; Montalescot G. ; Weisel J. W.  (2005 ) The αC domains of fibrinogen
affect the structure of the fibrin clot, its physical properties,
and its susceptibility to fibrinolysis . Blood 
106 , 3824 –3830 .16091450 
Ping L. ; Huang L. ; Cardinali B. ; Profumo A. ; Gorkun O. V. ; Lord S. T.  (2011 ) Substitution of
the human αC region with the
analogous chicken domain generates a fibrinogen with severely impaired
lateral aggregation: Fibrin monomers assemble into protofibrils but
protofibrils do not assemble into fibers . Biochemistry 
50 , 9066 –9075 .21932842 
Hewat E. A. ; Tranqui L. ; Wade R. H.  (1983 ) Electron
microscope
structural study
of modified fibrin and a related modified fibrinogen aggregate . J. Mol. Biol. 
170 , 203 –222 .6631961 
Müller M. F. ; Ris H. ; Ferry J. D.  (1984 ) Electron microscopy of fine fibrin clots and fine and
coarse fibrin films. Observations of fibers in cross-section and in
deformed states . J. Mol. Biol. 
174 , 369 –384 .6716483 
Litvinov R. ; Weisel J.  (2013 ) Shear strengthens fibrin:
The knob–hole interactions
display “catch-slip” kinetics . J. Thromb. Haemostasis 
11 , 1933 –1935 .23937213 



