The human
genome contains highly
conserved repetitive G-rich sequences that are located in strategic
regions of chromosomes and are important for biological functions
such as transcriptional promoter regions and at the telomeric ends
of eukaryotic chromosomes.− The human telomeric DNA at the
terminal ends of chromosomes is a single-stranded region with a 3′-end
overhang containing tandem repeats of d(TTAGGG)n. This noncoding overhang is composed of ∼150–200
nucleotides and is thought to protect genomic DNA from end fusion
and for the maintenance of chromosomal integrity during replication., There is evidence to suggest that telomeres serve as a biological
clock, determining the lifespan of the cell, and the loss of telomeric
DNA upon replication ultimately leads to apoptosis as the telomeres
become critically shortened.− Telomeric DNA has been implicated
in cancer progression because of the upregulation of telomerase activity
in cancer cells and subsequent lengthening of telomeres leading to
cellular immortality as observed in malignant cells.− The nucleotide sequences that compose telomeric DNA have been shown
to readily form G-quadruplex structural motifs in vitro and serve as novel targets for the development of new classes of
anticancer agents.− The formation of higher-order DNA structures within telomeric sequences
lends confidence to the idea that these structures serve regulatory
roles for telomere extension and maintenance.−

Several proteins and enzymes
such as TRF2, POT1, and telomerase
have been demonstrated to associate with telomeric DNA and exert a
number of biological functions.,, Telomerase is an enzyme composed of a reverse transcriptase and
telomeric RNA transcript that function to elongate the repetitive
sequence at the telomeric ends of the chromosomes. Telomerase requires that the telomeric region be in the
single-stranded conformation for binding and elongation to occur.
The presence of the intramolecular folded G-quadruplex structural
motif inhibits this interaction. The
discovery of proteins and helicases that specifically recognize and
destabilize the G-quadruplex structural motif has strong implications
on the dynamic nature and function of G-quadruplex structures within
the genome.,

Destabilizing proteins
unfold G-quadruplex DNAs in a nonenzymatic
manner and do not require ATP hydrolysis for activity. Among these,
hnRNP A1 is a member of a class of ribonucleoproteins that have been
reported to be involved in RNA transport and alternative splicing
and is closely associated with DNA polymerase transcripts., hnRNP A1 contains two nucleic acid binding domains that strongly
interact with either RNA or DNA sequences. Unwinding protein 1 (UP1)
is a 196-amino acid proteolytic product of hnRNP A1 that retains the
two nucleic acid binding domains. UP1
has been shown to bind and destabilize G-quadruplex structures and
potentially serve as a DNA chaperone responsible for the unfolding
of the G-quadruplex structure into single-stranded DNA to facilitate
the binding of telomerase for lengthening of the telomere., In 2002, Fakuda and co-workers reported that UP1 binds to and destabilizes
G-quadruplex structures in mouse minisatellite repeats as well as
human telomeric DNA. This work was further
supported by Shamoo and co-workers in 2003. In 1999, Ding and co-workers presented the structure of UP1 complexed
with single-stranded DNA, providing a detailed characterization of
the UP1–DNA complex. In this X-ray crystallographic structure,
the protein formed a complex with short deoxyoligonucleotides (12-mers)
with sequences consistent with those telomeric DNA regions in a single-stranded
antiparallel conformation complexed with two UP1 proteins. The two nucleic acid binding domains (BD1 and
BD2) are composed of residues that participate in the formation of
noncovalent interactions, including hydrogen bonding, stacking, van
der Waals, and electrostatic interactions, with approximately four
nucleotides [d(TAGG)] in the telomeric DNA sequence.

It is clear that UP1 actively functions as a G-quadruplex-destabilizing
protein; however, the nature through which UP1 recognizes the G-quadruplex
structure and the unfolding mechanism(s) remain unknown. This work
provides a detailed biophysical examination of the binding of UP1
to the human telomeric (Tel-22) G-quadruplex structural motif in both
Na+ and K+ forms. These studies examine the
energetics associated with formation of a complex between UP1 and
human telomeric G-quadruplex DNA by isothermal titration calorimetry
(ITC) and concomitantly follow the unfolding process upon complex
formation by circular dichroism (CD) spectroscopy. These results provide
a direct method for binding equilibrium measurements that results
in an energetic characterization of the interaction and provide key
insights into the recognition, affinity, and destabilization of G-quadruplex
structures by UP1.

Materials and Methods
Deoxyoligonucleotides and
Sample Preparation
The 22-base
human telomeric sequence 5′-d(AGGGTTAGGGTTAGGGTTAGGG)-3′
(Tel-22), and the 22-mer non-G-quadruplex-forming control sequence
(where the third G is mutated to an A) 5′-d(AGGATTAGGATTAGGATTAGGA)-3′
(Tel-22ss) were obtained from Midland Certified Reagents (Midland,
TX). DNA samples were prepared by dissolving the deoxyoligonucleotides
in Tris buffer [0.02 M Tris-HCl (pH 8.0) and 0.1 M NaCl or 0.1 M KCl],
followed by an annealing process in which the DNA solution was heated
to 85 °C and slowly cooled to 4 °C at a rate of 1.0 °C/min
using an MJ Research thermocycler. Stock concentrations of DNAs were
determined by the UV absorbance at 85 °C. Molar extinction coefficients
(ε260) for the sequences were 228500 M–1 cm–1 per strand for Tel-22 and 240900 M–1 cm–1 per strand for Tel-22ss as determined by
the nearest neighbor method. The formation
of the G-quadruplex structural motif and topologies were evaluated
for both sequences at a concentration of 5 μM (strand) in 1
cm path length cells using an Aviv 400 CD spectrophotometer. Wavelength
scans from 325 to 225 nm were examined for a positive ellipticity
signal at 295 nm, which is the characteristic signature of antiparallel
G-quadruplex DNA structure.,

Preparation of UP1
The cDNA of UP1 (amino acid residues
1–196 of hnRNP A1) was cloned into vector pET28-SMT3, resulting
in an N-terminal SUMO tag and a six-His tag, and expressed in Escherichia coli BL21-Gold(DE3) cells. Cells were grown
in Luria-Bertani medium for 3 h at 37 °C until an optical density
at 600 nm of 0.6 was achieved. Induction using 0.1 mM isopropyl β-d-1-thiogalactopyranoside (IPTG) was performed followed by overnight
incubation at 18 °C, and then the cells were harvested. The cells
were washed with phosphate buffer (PBS) and resuspended in 5 mL of
binding buffer [20 mM Tris (pH 8.0), 0.5 M NaCl, and 25 mM imidazole]
per 100 mL of culture. The cells were disrupted by Emulsiflex-C3 cell
homogenizer (Avestin Inc.) followed by centrifugation for 40 min at
16000 rpm and 4 °C. The supernatant was loaded on a 5 mL His-Trap
column (GE-Health) and then eluted with buffer [20 mM Tris (pH 8.0),
0.5 M NaCl, and 500 mM imidazole]. The eluted protein was digested
with SUMO protease and dialyzed overnight against 20 mM Tris (pH 8.0)
and 0.5 M NaCl, followed by treatment with a second pass through the
His-Trap column. The protein was further purified by being passed
over a heparin column to exclude proteins that form complexes with
nucleic acids. UP1 was then fractionated by gel filtration using a
Superdex-75 16/60 column (GE Healthcare) and the concentration of
UP1 determined by UV–visible spectroscopy.

Isothermal
Titration Calorimetry
Isothermal titration
calorimetry (ITC) experiments were performed using a Microcal VP-ITC
instrument (GE Healthcare, Piscataway, NJ) at 25 °C. All samples
were thoroughly degassed while being stirred prior to use. Forward
and reverse ITC titrations were conducted with both the G-quadruplex-forming
(Tel-22) and non-quadruplex-forming 22-mer (Tel-22ss) deoxyoligonucleotides.
In the forward titrations, the sample cell was filled to capacity
with a dilute solution of DNA ([DNA] ≈ 5 μM strand) and
titrated with UP1 protein (≈100–200 μM UP1). For
the reverse ITC titrations, the sample cell was filled to capacity
with a dilute solution of UP1 (≈5 μM UP1) and titrated
with DNA at concentrations ranging from 50 to 100 μM (strand).
A typical titration involved the injection of 25 (6–12 μL)
aliquots of titrant with titrant injections made at 400 s intervals.
The integrated heat data were corrected for the heat of dilution and
blank effects and the corrected data fit for a binding model by nonlinear
regression. The binding isotherms obtained in the forward titrations
of the G-quadruplex-forming DNA were nonsigmoidal and could not be
fit with any of the standard binding models incorporated into the
Microcal Origin VP-ITC software. The binding isotherms obtained in
the reverse titrations of the G-quadruplex-forming DNA as well as
both the forward and reverse titrations for control DNA were sigmoidal
and well fit with the standard one-site binding model incorporated
into the Microcal Origin VP-ITC software.

It was apparent from
the shape of the ITC isotherm that multiple events were present in
the forward titrations for both the Na+ and K+ human telomere quadruplexes. The multiple-event titrations were
fit using a model developed by a combination of the mass balance and
equilibrium constant expressions expanded to n-independent
site binding expressions. Lewis and co-workers previously reported
the details regarding the development of the fitting algorithm used
to describe the complex ITC binding isotherms obtained in the forward
titrations., The forward titration of the
non-quadruplex-forming sequence and the reverse titrations for all
three systems, Tel-22 (Na+), Tel-22 (K+), and
Tel-22ss, were sigmoidal and described with a simple one-site binding
model.

Circular Dichroism Titrations
Examination of changes
in structural features of the human telomere G-quadruplex resulting
from UP1 binding were performed using CD spectrophotometry. CD titrations
were conducted using an AVIV 400 CD spectrophotometer (Aviv, Inc.).
Experiments were performed in 1 cm path length rectangular cells at
25 °C. Wavelength scans were conducted from 225 to 325 nm at
every nanometer with an averaging time of 2 s. Initial concentrations
of the Tel-22-mer quadruplex DNAs were 5 μM (strand) and titrated
with the UP1 protein. After each addition of UP1, the sample was allowed
to equilibrate for 10 min while being constantly stirred. Contributions
of the buffer were subtracted from each wavelength scan and the data
normalized to molar ellipticity (degrees square centimeter per mole)
to account for dilution effects of the initial DNA concentration in
the cell.

Results
Characterization of G-Quadruplex
Structure by Circular Dichroism
Spectroscopy
Before investigating the interactions of UP1
with G-quadruplex DNA, we found it was necessary to characterize the
structure of each of the deoxyoligonucleotide sequences. CD provides
a powerful tool for detecting the presence of the G-quadruplex structural
motif., The G-quadruplex structural motifs exhibit
characteristic positive ellipticity at wavelengths between 280 and
300 nm, primarily because of the stacking interactions of the guanine
bases in the G-tetrads.

The human telomere base sequence (Tel-22)
prepared in Na+ buffer forms a G-quadruplex structure with
the characteristic CD spectrum shown in Figure A. The Na+ form G-quadruplex is characterized by strong
positive maxima at 295 and 245 nm and a minimum at 265 nm. In contrast,
this same Tel-22 G-quadruplex prepared in K+ buffer reveals
a markedly different CD spectrum as shown in Figure B with a positive ellipticity at 295 nm but with a broad shoulder
at 265 nm. There are multiple conformations that could give rise to
a number of strand orientations; however, there are no determining
factors to unambiguously define parallel and/or antiparallel strand
orientations based on CD measurements alone.− However, the
unique nature of the G-quadruplexes in either Na+ or K+ environments as reflected by the CD spectra provides a valuable
tool for assessing the presence and disappearance (unfolding) of the
Na+ or K+ form of the G-quadruplex structural
motif. The control deoxyoligonucleotide (Tel-22ss) was designed to
be unable to fold into the G-quadruplex structure and remain in a
random coil wherein the third guanine in each of the four repeats
was mutated to an adenine to prevent the formation of the G-tetrad
and the subsequent formation of the G-quadruplex structure. The CD
spectrum reveals an unstructured DNA with no positive ellipticity
at 280 or 295 nm as shown in Figure C.

(A) Circular
dichroism spectrum of the Na+ form of the
G-quadruplex formed by the Tel-22-mer deoxyoligonucleotide sequence.
(B) Circular dichroism spectrum of the K+ form of the G-quadruplex
formed by the Tel-22-mer deoxyoligonucleotide sequence. (C) The control
deoxyoligonucleotide (Tel-22ss) was designed to be unable to fold
into the G-quadruplex structure wherein the third guanine in each
of the four repeats was mutated to an adenine preventing the formation
of the G-tetrad and the subsequent formation of the G-quadruplex structure.
The CD spectrum reveals unstructured DNA with no positive ellipticity
at 280 or 295 nm.

The thermodynamic stabilities
of the Na+ and K+ forms of the Tel-22 G-quadruplexes
were examined by CD melting studies.
The molar ellipticities for each of the DNA structural motifs were
monitored as a function of temperature, and the resulting changes
in the CD signal at 295 nm revealed sigmoidal melting curves. The
melting temperatures, Tm, were derived
from the midpoint of these transitions and are shown in Figure . The Na+ form of the Tel-22-mer G-quadruplex
exhibits a Tm of 59 °C in 100 mM
NaCl and 0.01 M Tris buffer (pH 8). In contrast, the K+ form of the G-quadruplex was markedly more stable than the Na+ form. The Tel-22 (K+) G-quadruplex exhibited a Tm of 68 °C in 100 mM KCl buffer and 0.01
M Tris (pH 8.0), unfolding at a temperature approximately 10 °C
higher than the unfolding temperature of its Na+ counterpart.−

Circular
dichroism spectropolimetry melts of Tel-22 (Na+) (□)
and Tel-22 (K+) (○). Melting studies
were conducted in 0.01 M Tris-HCl (pH 8.0), 0.001 M EDTA, and either
0.1 M NaCl or 0.1 M KCl. The change in ellipticity was monitored at
295 nm from 10 to 90 °C. The melting temperature (Tm) for each of the G-quadruplexes was calculated as the
first derivative of the melting curve and found to be 59 °C for
Tel-22 (Na+) and 68 °C for Tel-22 (K+).

Binding and Unfolding of
Telomeric G-Quadruplex DNA by UP1
Previous studies have reported
that UP1 binds and unfolds G-quadruplex
structures;, however, these studies provide
limited information regarding the energetics associated with the interaction
beyond an estimated equilibrium constant. The studies presented here
examine the fundamental thermodynamic properties associated with the
binding and unfolding of human telomeric G-quadruplex DNA by directly
measuring the binding enthalpy (ΔHbind) upon complex formation utilizing isothermal titration calorimetry
(ITC) and CD spectroscopy and allow us to derive relevant thermodynamic
parameters that provide a more direct understanding of the binding
mechanism(s) associated with complex formation and unfolding.

Forward ITC titrations are conducted by placing the G-quadruplex
DNA in the sample cell and UP1 in the injection syringe. The results
of the binding of UP1 to the Tel-22 (Na+) G-quadruplex
are shown in Figure A and summarized in Table . Panels A and B of Figure  depict the raw ITC data for the binding of UP1 to the Na+ and K+ forms of G-quadruplex DNAs, respectively. The
insets of panels A and B of Figure  represent
the integration of the measured heats associated with complex formation
for each injection. The bottom panels of Figure  (C and D) show the CD spectra for the titrations of UP1 into the
DNA solution at specific molar ratios that coincide with the ITC titrations.
For the Na+ form of G-quadruplex DNA, the binding isotherm
shown in Figure A (inset) reveals a complex
binding process, indicative of three events. The solid line drawn
through the data points (in red) represents the best fit to the data
by a three-event model and results in three distinct enthalpic components
of the interaction. At low UP1 concentrations
(initial injections), K1 is estimated
to be 8.5 × 108 M–1 (strand). Two
additional equilibrium constants, K2 and K3, are determined to be 6.1 × 107 and 6.3 × 106 M–1 (strand), respectively.
The overall stoichiometry for binding of UP1 to the Tel-22 Na+ G-quadruplex was determined to be 2 protein units per G-quadruplex
DNA. Binding enthalpies for the three events observed for the Na+ form of the G-quadruplex were determined to be ΔH1 (−45.4 kcal/mol), ΔH2 (−6.3 kcal/mol), and ΔH3 (−29.6 kcal/mol), indicative of a highly enthalpically
favored binding for event 1, a markedly reduced favorable enthalpy
for event 2, and favored enthalpically driven binding for event 3.

Isothermal
titration calorimetry (ITC) binding isotherms for the
interactions of UP1 with the Tel-22 (Na+ form) G-quadruplex
(A) and the Tel-22 (K+ form) G-quadruplex (B). Both the
raw heat rate and the integrated heat data are shown along with the
nonlinear regression fit (red). The titrations were conducted in Tris
buffer [0.02 M Tris-HCl (pH 8.0) and 0.1 M NaCl (Na+ form)
or KCl (K+ form)] at 25 °C. The solid lines (red)
drawn through the data points in the insets represent the best fits
for a three-event model (Na+ form) in panel A and a two-event
model (K+ form) in panel B. Thermodynamic parameters for
these binding processes are listed in Table . The bottom panels (C and D) show the concomitant CD spectra for
the titration of the Tel-22 G-quadruplex with UP1 (the Na+ and K+ forms for panels C and D, respectively). In Panels
C and D, the molar ratio (r) of UP1 to G-quadruplex
spans the range of 0–2.5. The black arrows represent the directionality
of the change in ellipticity at 295 nm with increasing concentrations
of UP1.

Thermodynamic Parameters
Derived from
the Nonlinear Least-Squares Fit of the Isothermal Titration Calorimetry
Binding Studies in Which UP1 Was Titrated into G-Quadruplex DNA
 	ntot	no.
of events	n	Keq (M–1)	ΔG (kcal/mol of protein)	ΔH (kcal/mol)	–TΔS (kcal/mol)	
Tel-22 (Na+)	2	3	0.2	8.5 × 108 ± 1.9	–12.1 ± 0.2	–45.4 ± 2.1	33.2 ± 2.1	
 	 	 	0.8	8.4 × 107 ± 3.7	–10.6 ± 0.2	–7.3 ± 1.9	–3.5 ± 1.7	
 	 	 	1.2	6.3 × 106 ± 0.2	–9.3 ± 0.1	–29.6 ± 0.9	20.0 ± 0.9	
Tel-22 (K+)	2	2	0.2	2.8 × 107 ± 2.2	–10.4 ± 0.5	–23.4 ± 3.0	15.1 ± 2.5	
 	 	 	1.8	1.3 × 106 ± 0.6	–8.5 ± 0.4	–7.8 ± 1.0	–0.6 ± 1.3	
Tel-22ss	2	1	2	4.1 × 106 ± 1.9	–9.0 ± 0.1	–37.0 ± 1.2	98.2 ± 1.5	
The Gibbs free
energy was calculated
from the relation ΔG° = −RT ln K.

The entropy (−TΔS°) was calculated from the rearrangement
of the equation ΔG° = ΔH° – TΔS°
to −TΔS° = ΔG° – ΔH°.

To aid in the interpretation of
the complexity of the observed
binding isotherm, CD experiments that allowed us to monitor the structural
characteristics and/or changes of the G-quadruplex by observing the
changes in the molar ellipticity of the G-quadruplex DNAs as a function
of UP1 binding were conducted in parallel. The results are presented
in Figure C for the Na+ form and
Figure D for the K+ form of Tel-22
G-quadruplex DNA. The decrease in ellipticity at 295 nm is indicative
of UP1-mediated unfolding of the G-quadruplex structure. A complete
unfolding of the Na+ form of the G-quadruplex is achieved
by a molar ratio of 2:1 (UP1:G-quadruplex). On the basis of these
results, we conclude that the third binding event that is observed
in the isotherm corresponds to the interaction of an additional UP1
molecule with the unfolded G-quadruplex. Therefore, the enthalpic
contributions to the first two events must be a combination of binding
of UP1 to the G-quadruplex structure (i.e., recognition) and the subsequent
unfolding of the G-quadruplex. The sigmoidal portion of the binding
isotherm is indicative of the second UP1 molecule interacting with
the unfolded G-quadruplex sequence.

The binding of UP1 to the
more stable Tel-22 K+ G-quadruplex
results in a binding isotherm with features markedly different from
those observed for the Na+ form of the G-quadruplex, as
shown in Figure B. The UP1-induced unfolding
of the K+ G-quadruplex was found to be incomplete even
at ratios of &gt;4:1 (UP1:G-quadruplex) as shown by the CD spectra
in
Figure D. The binding isotherm for the interaction
of UP1 with the K+ form of the G-quadruplex could be adequately
described using a two-event binding model with estimates of K1 and K2 of 4.3
× 107 and 1.7 × 106 M–1, respectively. The enthalpy of the first event for the interaction
of UP1 with the K+ form of the G-quadruplex (ΔH1) was significantly reduced and determined
to be −23.4 kcal/mol. The enthalpy change for the second event
was also less favorable with a ΔH2 of −7.8 kcal/mol; however, the saturation stoichiometry for
the K+ form of the G-quadruplex remained 2.0 (UP1 per G-quadruplex).

The control deoxyoligonucleotide (Tel-22ss) was designed by replacing
the d(TTAGGG) repeat with d(TTAGGA),
resulting in a deoxyoligonucleotide that is comparable in sequence
but incompatible for folding into a G-quadruplex structure under Na+ or K+ buffer conditions. Binding of UP1 to this
single-stranded deoxyoligonucleotide under Na+ buffer conditions
is shown in Figure  and reveals UP1 to bind
to the single-stranded DNA in a single event with a binding affinity
of 4.1 × 106 M–1 and an enthalpy
change (ΔH) of −37.0 kcal/mol and a
stoichiometry of 2:1 (UP1:G-quadruplex strand).

(A) Isothermal titration
binding isotherm or the titration of Tel-22ss
with UP1. Experiments were performed in Tris buffer [0.02 M Tris-HCl
(pH 8.0) and 0.1 M KCl] at 25 °C. (B) Integration of the raw
data to provide the binding enthalpy. The solid lines drawn through
the data points represent best fits of a nonlinear least-squares model
from which thermodynamic binding parameters can be estimated as described
in the footnotes of Table .

Under conditions where multiple binding sites or
multiple equilibria
exist, unusual binding isotherm shapes are often encountered in the
forward titrations. In such cases, the ITC experiment can be designed
so that the ligand and target molecules are reversed, and in this
case, DNA in the injection syringe is titrated into UP1 in the sample
cell. We refer to this experimental method as a “reverse”
ITC titration.− For simple binding interactions, it is expected that
the shape of the binding isotherm should remain consistent after the
direction of the titration is reversed. However, in more complex cases
as observed in Figure , a binding isotherm
consisting of multiple events may be simplified into an isotherm that
is an approximate average of all events as shown in Figure . In Figure A, the Tel-22
Na+ G-quadruplex is titrated into UP1. Having a large excess
of UP1 in the sample cell results in the multievent reaction proceeding
to completion with the formation of the UP1-saturated unfolded complex
with each injection. As the free UP1 concentration is decreased, endothermic
peaks that are indicative of unfolding are observed. The binding constant, Keq, of 7.4 × 107 M–1 (DNA strand) is estimated by fitting a single-site model to the
data shown in Figure A. This is an approximate
value for the average of the association constants as derived from
the forward ITC titration. Similarly, the ΔH of binding (−17.4 kcal/mol) for the reverse ITC titration
is in good agreement with the approximate average of the three individual
components as estimated from the forward ITC titration. Figure B shows the results of the reverse titration for
the interaction of the K+ form of the G-quadruplex with
UP1. A binding affinity of 2.6 × 107 M–1 (DNA strand) and an enthalpy change (ΔH)
of −9.5 kcal/mol were determined. The values for the thermodynamic
parameters for the reverse titrations are listed in Table .

Reverse ITC titration of Tel-22 G-quadruplex DNA titrated
into
an excess of UP1. Experiments were performed in Tris buffer [0.02
M Tris-HCl (pH 8.0) and either 0.1 M NaCl (A and B) or 0.1 M KCl (C
and D)] at 25 °C. Both the raw heat data and the integrated heat
data are shown along with the nonlinear regression fits (red) to the
data. The raw data in panels A (Na+) and B (K+) show that a large excess of UP1 in the sample cell results in driving
the multievent reaction(s) to completion, and with each injection,
there are both binding and unfolding of all G-quadruplex DNA that
is added.

Hess’s law description of the energetics
of UP1 binding
and unfolding of the Na+ form of the Tel-22 G-quadruplex
DNA structure. The favorable binding enthalpy (ΔH1) of −45.4 kcal/mol reflects the initial binding
of UP1 to the G-quadruplex DNA. This is coupled with the energetically
unfavorable UP1-induced unfolding of the G-quaduplex enthalpy change
of 38.1 kcal/mol, resulting in an overall favorable driving force
(ΔH2) of −7.3 kcal/mol.

Thermodynamic Parameters
Derived from
the Best Fit Line of the Isothermal Titration Binding Studies in Which
G-Quadruplex DNA Was Titrated with UP1
 	n	Ka (mol–1)	ΔG (kcal/mol)	ΔH (kcal/mol)	–TΔS (kcal/mol)	
Tel-22 (Na+)	0.5 ± 0.01	3.3 × 107 ± 0.8	–10.2 ± 0.1	–35.8 ± 3.5	25.6 ± 3.6	
Tel-22 (K+)	0.5 ± 0.02	2.6 × 107 ± 0.8	–10.1 ± 0.1	–18.9 ± 0.1	8.8 ± 0.2	
The Gibbs free
energy was calculated
from the relation ΔG° = −RT ln K.

The entropy (−TΔS°) was calculated from the rearrangement
of the relation ΔG° = ΔH° – TΔS°
to −TΔS° = ΔG° – ΔH°.

Discussion
This
work describes the energetics of binding of UP1 with two distinct
G-quadruplex conformations, Tel-22 (Na+ form) and Tel-22
(K+ form), and a control single-stranded nucleic acid sequence
(Tel-22ss) that has a similar sequence but is unable to fold into
a G-quadruplex. Earlier studies by Fiset and Chabot as well as Zhang
and co-workers reported UP1 to bind with high affinity to d(TTAGGG)n-containing sequences that could form G-quadruplex
structures, resulting in the destabilization of the G-quadruplex structure., Fakuda and co-workers reported that UP1 could bind and unfold G-quadruplex
structures formed by the sequence d(GGCAG)n and by the human telomeric sequence d(TTAGGG)n., Shamoo and co-workers reported that substitution
of 2-aminopurine, nebularine, or 7-deazaquanine for the first guanine
residue in the sequence d(TAGGG)n was
poorly tolerated and greatly reduced the binding affinity of UP1. These results, in conjunction with the crystal
structure reported by Ding and co-workers, led to the emergence of
a consensus binding sequence for UP1 of d(nYAGn), where Y is either
a thymine or cytosine residue, and is stabilized by hydrogen bonding,
base stacking, and hydrophobic effects.,

Until
now, there has been limited information regarding the energetic
forces that characterize the binding and unfolding of the telomeric
G-quadruplex by UP1. The focus of this work is to provide a thermodynamic
description of the interaction of UP1 with Tel-22 G-quadruplex structural
motif. The sequences and G-quadruplex structures used for our study
all contain the d(TAG) binding site but differ in folding topology.
The G-quadruplex structures and stabilities were characterized by
CD spectroscopy to demonstrate that the 22-nucleotide sequence (Tel-22)
was folded into G-quadruplex structures under the Na+ and
K+ buffer conditions that were used and exhibited thermal
stabilities and folding topologies comparable to those previously
published., The greater stability of the
Tel-22 K+ G-quadruplex is indicated by an increase in the
melting temperature of 10 °C versus that of the Tel-22 Na+ G-quadruplex. This increase in stability is partially responsible
for the limited unfolding of the Tel-22 K+ G-quadruplex
upon binding of UP1. In the forward ITC titrations, small aliquots
of protein were injected into a large excess of nucleic acid. The
binding isotherms for these experiments are indicative of multiple
enthalpic contributions and reveal a complex binding isotherm for
the Na+ and K+ G-quadruplexes. The unusual shapes
of the isotherms that are observed for the binding of UP1 to the Tel-22
Na+ G-quadruplex solutions (at molar ratios of &lt;1:1)
suggest two overlapping events with enthalpy changes that are opposite
in sign (i.e., exothermic and endothermic) are simultaneously occurring.
The observation of endothermic peaks (ΔH &gt;
0) at the early stages of the titration for the Tel-22 Na+ G-quadruplex (shown in peaks 4–9 in Figure A) suggests that there is an entropically favored process
associated with either the binding of UP1 or the unfolding of the
quadruplex structure upon binding of UP1. The complex shape that is
observed for the complete binding isotherm results from the heat change
being the sum of the three enthalpy changes composed of the binding
of 2 mol of UP1 and unfolding of the G-quadruplex structure. Concomitant
CD experiments demonstrate the unfolding of the Tel-22 Na+ G-quadruplex to be largely complete after a molar ratio of 1:1 (UP1:G-quadruplex)
is reached. Binding of the second mole of UP1 to the UP1–Tel-22
Na+ G-quadruplex complex is accompanied by only small changes
in the CD spectrum. We postulate a thermodynamic model to describe
the interaction of UP1 with the Na+ form of the Tel-22
G-quadruplex to include three events: (1) the initial binding interaction
of 1 mol of UP1 with the G-quadruplex, (2) the coupling of the UP1
binding energy to the UP1-induced unfolding of the G-quadruplex structure,
and (3) the binding of the second UP1 molecule to the unfolded G-quadruplex.
The thermodynamic model includes the free energy change (ΔGi), the enthalpy change (ΔHi), and the entropy change
(−TΔSi) parameters for the three overlapping events. The first event
corresponds to the recognition and binding of UP1 to the Tel-22 G-quadruplex
without significant unfolding. The third event corresponds most closely
to the binding of UP1 to unstructured (i.e., unfolded) DNA. From analyses
of the ITC data, the binding affinity for the first event (K1) is estimated to be 8.5 × 108 M–1 while the affinity for the third event is
approximately 2 orders of magnitude lower (K3 = 6.3 × 106 M–1). UP1 clearly
exhibits preferential binding to the G-quadruplex structure as compared
with its binding to unfolded or unstructured DNA. The change in binding
enthalpy for the first event is far more favorable when compared with
the change in the binding enthalpy for the third event (ΔH1 = −45.4 kcal/mol, and ΔH3 = −29.6 kcal/mol).

Our interpretation
of the complex isotherm for the interaction
of UP1 with the Na+ form of the Tel-22 G-quadruplex is
illustrated by the Hess’s law diagram that is presented in
Figure . The second event is a composite of
UP1 quadruplex recognition binding and unfolding of the G-quadruplex.
In effect, the UP1 quadruplex binding enthalpy change, ΔH1, is coupled to the quadruplex unfolding enthalpy
change, ΔHunfold, and ΔH2 corresponds approximately to the summation
of the favorable enthalpy change for binding the first mole of UP1
to the G-quadruplex with the unfavorable enthalpy change for the unfolding
process. Using this model, the following equations for the overall
interaction of 2 mol of UP1 with 1 mol of the Tel-22 G-quadruplexand the measured values of ΔH1,
ΔH3, and
ΔHrev listed in Tables  and , we can estimate the
value of the enthalpy change for UP1-induced unfolding of the Tel-22
quadruplex (ΔHunfold) to be 38.1
kcal/mol. The enthalpy change (ΔHDSC) for the unfolding of the Na+ Tel-22 G-quadruplex was
also measured by DSC (data not shown) and found to be 39.6 kcal/mol,
in excellent agreement with the value for ΔHunfold as calculated from the ITC data and the Hess’s
law analysis. One caveat would be that ΔHunfold is the apparent enthalpy change for the unfolding of
the G-quadruplex with 1 mol of bound protein (UP1–Tel-22) while
ΔHDSC is the measured enthalpy change
for unfolding of the G-quadruplex in the absence of any bound UP1
(Tel-22).

The complete binding isotherm observed for the interaction
of UP1
with the K+ form of the Tel-22 G-quadruplex is simpler
in that only two events are required to model the shape of the isotherm.
None of the individual integrated heats contained the endothermic
“hook”. The absence of the endothermic hook is attributed
to the fact that the Tel-22 K+ G-quadruplex is only partially
unfolded by the binding of UP1 or the kinetics for the unfolding results
in a more complete overlap of the UP1 binding event. CD studies reveal
that the Tel-22 K+ G-quadruplex never achieved complete
unfolding, even at molar ratios as high as 4:1 (UP1:G-quadruplex).
The binding affinity for the first event (K1 = 1.7 × 106 M–1) was markedly
lower than that observed for the Na+ G-quadruplex and exhibited
a reduced binding enthalpy change (ΔH1 = −26 kcal/mol). The K+ form of the Tel-22 G-quadruplex
is a more stable structure, having a melting temperature of 68 °C,
and the energetics for the UP1 interaction appear to be insufficient
to destabilize the G-quadruplex structure completely. The fact that
the UP1–Tel-22 K+ G-quadruplex binding isotherm
is described well by only two events is the result of the partial
unfolding. The thermodynamic parameters for event 1 most closely describe
the binding of the first mole of UP1 to the Tel-22 K+ G-quadruplex
without significant unfolding. The thermodynamic parameters for event
2 are the combination of the binding and partial unfolding with the
unfolding continuing to saturation. This idea is supported by a recently
published report that makes a similar observation for the binding
and unfolding of the K+ conformation. The authors examined the bound conformation of the potassium
form of the G-quadruplex with a single-molecule fluorescence technique
and observed that the oligonucleotide was still in a compacted state
after complex formation and not fully unfolded.

Via comparison
of the interactions of UP1 with the Na+ and K+ Tel-22 G-quadruplexes, several differences are
noted. First, the Na+ G-quadruplex is almost completely
unfolded upon binding of 1 mol of UP1/mole of DNA, whereas the K+ G-quadruplex is only partially unfolded at saturation. Second
and more importantly, UP1 exhibits Tel-22 G-quadruplex structural
recognition in that the binding constant is on the order of 108 for Tel-22-Na+, 107 for Tel-22-K+, and 106 for Tel-22ss. Finally, the enthalpy change
for the binding of the first UP1 to the Tel-22 Na+ form
is large enough to drive the complete unfolding of the G-quadruplex,
whereas the enthalpy change for the binding of UP1 to the K+ Tel-22 G-quadruplex is insufficient to drive complete unfolding
of the G-quadruplex structure. Obviously, the biological activity
of UP1 could be caused at least in part by these energetic differences.

A model for understanding the recognition of the d(TTAGGG)
sequence by UP1 was proposed by Shamoo et al., and it was noted that the base composition, stereochemistry,
and steric properties of the bases making up the 5′-TAG-3′
nucleic acid sequence are critical for UP1 binding and even slight
modifications to this sequence are detrimental to the binding affinity.
The NMR solution structure of the G-quadruplex DNA reported by Wang
and Patel shows adenine and guanine stacking
interactions between the loop sequence and the adjacent guanine in
the sequence that forms one the four guanines in the G-tetrad. The
steric properties of the bases in the single-stranded conformation
may be such that strong interactions of UP1 with the d(nTAGn) sequence
are not formed, thus reducing the binding affinity and binding enthalpy
change for the control single-stranded sequence used in this study.

The results presented here represent the first examination of the
energetic characteristics of the binding and unfolding of G-quadruplex
DNA by UP1. Our results provide key insights into the enthalpic contributions
to the binding and coupling of the binding enthalpy to the unfolding
interaction. We have found the binding and unfolding of the Tel-22
G-quadruplex structure by UP1 to be influenced by both the structure
and stability of the deoxyoligonucleotide. Because the G-quadruplex
unfolding process is noncatalytic, the energy requirement for unfolding
is directly coupled to the binding energetics. The recognition aspects
and the exact mechanism by which UP1 facilitates G-quadruplex unfolding
remain speculative and difficult to interpret based on these data
alone; however, additional research is underway to determine recognition
determinants, binding energetics, and further insights into the unfolding
mechanism.

The authors declare no
competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
We thank Dr. Jinbiao Ma for
his contributions to the project.

Abbreviations
hnRNP A1heterogeneous nuclear ribonucleoprotein
A1

UP1unfolding
protein 1

Telhuman
telomere

ITCisothermal
titration calorimetry

DSCdifferential scanning calorimetry

CDcircular dichroism.

