Cellular locomotion, cell shape changes, and other important cellular processes require selective cell membrane protrusion in response to extracellular signaling cues. This protrusion is powered by localized actin polymerization. Morphogens, extracellular matrix molecules, or chemotactic factors stimulate cell surface receptors and trigger specific signaling cascades to activate proteins known as nucleation promoting factors (NPFs) by overcoming autoinhibition or inhibitory factors (,). Active NPFs bind to the actin-related protein (Arp) 2/3 complex and promote its binding to the side of an existing actin filament, a reaction that allows the Arp2/3 complex to nucleate a new actin filament as a branch on the old filament (,). Actin filaments at the cell periphery are predominantly oriented with the growing barbed end toward the cell membrane, so an increased level of actin polymerization results in a pushing force against the inside of the cell membrane that drives the formation of protrusive structures ().Abbreviations: Arg, Abl-related gene; N-WASp, Neural-Wiskott Aldrich syndrome protein; NPF, nucleation promoting factor; Arp, actin-related protein; PDGF, platelet-derived growth factor; WBE, whole brain extract; SH3, Src homology 3; SH2, Src homology 2; SDS, sodium dodecyl sulfate; PAGE, polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis; MALDI-TOF, matrix-adsorbed laser desorption ionization time-of-flight; GST, glutathione S-transferase; β-ME, β-mercaptoethanol; pN-WASp, phosphorylated N-WASp; PCR, polymerase chain reaction; IPTG, isopropyl β-d-1-thiogalactopyranoside; DTT, dithiothreitol; EDTA, ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid; Kd, dissociation constant; KM, Michaelis constant; WASp, Wiskott Aldrich syndrome protein; F-actin, filamentous actin; BSA, bovine serum albumin; EGTA, ethylene glycol bis(2-aminoethyl ether)-N,N,N′,N′-tetraacetic acid; YFP, yellow fluorescent protein; WT, wild type.



Binding of the extracellular matrix protein fibronectin to integrins or platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF) to PDGF receptors activates intracellular signaling cascades that lead to the formation of actin-based cellular protrusions. Both pathways impinge on Arg, an Abl family nonreceptor tyrosine kinase, which mediates formation of actin-rich protrusions (−). The importance of Arg in these pathways has been described, and a number of the downstream targets of Arg signaling have been identified (,,,); however, the mechanism through which Arg affects actin polymerization and cellular protrusion has not yet been fully characterized. We previously reported that cortactin, a weak NPF, is a kinase substrate and binding partner of Arg (,), but it is unclear whether cortactin engagement is sufficient to promote actin polymerization or if other factors are required.

Here we identify the NPF N-WASp (,) as a potential effector of Arg. We show that the Arg SH3 domain binds directly to N-WASp and that the Arg SH3 domain activates N-WASp-dependent actin polymerization in vitro. Phosphorylation of N-WASp by Arg modestly enhances binding of the Arg SH3 domain to N-WASP and actin polymerization. We also demonstrate that Arg and N-WASp colocalize to adhesion-dependent cell protrusions and that Arg with a mutation that compromises binding to N-WASp is unable to support cell edge protrusion. Thus, Arg interacts with N-WASp through both binding and phosphorylation events to stimulate N-WASp-dependent actin polymerization, pointing to this interaction as a mechanism through which Arg mediates stimulus-dependent actin-based protrusion.

Experimental Procedures
Identification of Proteins That Interact with Arg
Whole adult mouse brains were homogenized in homogenization buffer (HB) [20 mM HEPES (pH 7.4), 25 mM potassium acetate, 320 mM sucrose, 1% Triton X-100, protease inhibitors (aprotinin, benzamidine, chymostatin, leupeptin, phenylmethanesulfonyl fluoride, and pepstatin A), and phosphatase inhibitors (sodium fluoride and sodium orthovanadate)] using 1.67 mL of HB/brain. The homogenate was incubated on ice for 30 min and centrifuged at 100000g for 1 h at 4 °C. The supernatant, or whole brain extract (WBE), was aliquoted and snap-frozen until it was used.

GST or GST-Arg-SH3SH2 coupled to glutathione agarose beads at 1 mg/mL was equilibrated with HB and added to WBE at a bead:WBE ratio of 1:100 by volume. The mixture was incubated with end-over-end rotation at 4 °C for 2 h, and beads were pelleted at 1000 rpm for 10 s. The beads were washed with HB for 3 × 5 min. Proteins were eluted from the beads by addition of an equal volume of 4× Laemmli sample buffer () and being boiled for 10 min, separated by SDS−PAGE using a 10% acrylamide gel, and visualized by Coomassie Brilliant Blue staining. Protein bands that were pulled down by GST-Arg-SH3SH2 but not by GST were excised from the acrylamide gel, subjected to trypsin digestion, and identified using MALDI-TOF mass spectrometry ().

Molecular Cloning and Purification of Recombinant Proteins
Murine Arg and human N-WASp cDNA were cloned with an engineered His6 tag into the pFastbac1 vector (Invitrogen). A His6-tagged N-WASp(Y256F) construct was created using PCR-based mutagenesis. Protein was expressed using the Bac-to-Bac baculovirus expression system using a modification of a previously described protocol (). Cells were lysed in detergent-containing lysis buffer [50 mM HEPES (pH 7.25), 5 mM β-ME, 500 mM KCl, 0.01% NP-40, 5% glycerol, 1% Triton, and protease inhibitors]. His6-Arg was purified over an SP-Sepharose column, using a step salt gradient to elute, followed by a Ni affinity column, using ArgEB buffer [20 mM HEPES (pH 7.25), 5 mM β-ME, 500 mM KCl, 0.01% NP-40, 5% glycerol, 100 mM imidazole, and protease inhibitors] to elute. His6-N-WASp and His6-N-WASp(Y256F) were purified over a Ni affinity column using NWEB buffer (identical to ArgEB, but with 150 mM KCl) to elute.

Phosphorylated N-WASp (pN-WASp) was obtained via co-expression of untagged Arg and His6-N-WASp in the same insect cell cultures and purification over a Ni affinity column following the same procedure outlined for unphosphorylated N-WASp. The phosphorylation status of N-WASp was verified by immunoblotting 30 ng of purified protein with a cocktail of anti-phosphotyrosine antibodies [4G10 (Upstate) and PY20 (Santa Cruz)]. Anti-N-WASp immunoblotting was performed as a loading control using anti-N-WASp rabbit antiserum from a rabbit immunized regularly with full-length N-WASp and adjuvant over a period of several months according to standard protocols.

PCR-based mutagenesis was used to clone Arg protein fragments and point mutants into pGEX-4T-1 (GE Healthcare) (the amino acid numbering corresponds to the myristoylated form of murine Arg): GST-Arg-SH3SH2, GST-Arg-SH3, GST-Arg-SH2, GST-Arg-SH3SH2(W145K), GST-Arg-SH3SH2(R198K), GST-Arg-SH3(W145K), and GST-Arg-SH2(R198K). PCR-based mutagenesis was also used to create a constitutively active GST-Cdc42(G12V) construct from a GST-Cdc42 construct in pGEX-2TK. The GST-tagged proteins were all expressed in Escherichia coli using 0.5 mM IPTG and overnight incubation at 26 °C. Bacteria were lysed at 4 °C in lysis buffer [20 mM Tris (pH 8.0), 1 mM DTT, 150 mM KCl, 2 mM EDTA, and protease inhibitors] using a French press. The lysate was clarified by being spun at 100000g for 30 min and purified over a glutathione agarose column, using glutathione elution buffer [20 mM Tris (pH 8.0), 1 mM DTT, 150 mM KCl, 2 mM EDTA, and 10 mM glutathione] to elute. The proteins were buffer exchanged over a Sephadex G-25 column into NWEB.

Determination of Binding Affinity
Arg was immobilized on Affigel 10 beads (Bio-Rad) according to the manufacturer’s directions, and GST-tagged Arg fragments and mutants were bound to glutathione agarose beads at a concentration of 20 μM (moles of protein per volume of beads). We assessed binding by mixing 20 μL of beads in NWEB with 500 μL of NWEB containing a range of concentrations of N-WASp, giving a final Arg concentration of 0.8 μM (moles of protein per volume of reaction mixture). These binding reaction mixtures were mixed by end-over-end rotation for 30 min at 4 °C. The beads were washed quickly with binding buffer (NWEB), and bound proteins were eluted from the beads with 4× LSB, resolved by SDS−PAGE, and visualized by Coomassie Brilliant Blue staining. Gels were scanned on an ImageQuant densitometer (Bio-Rad), and protein bands were quantitated using Quantity One (Bio-Rad). The data were plotted and fit to a binding isotherm, and Kd values were determined using Prism (GraphPad).

Kinase Assays
Kinase assays were performed as previously described (,) with Arg and N-WASp or cortactin in the absence and presence of constitutively active GST-Cdc42(G12V), actin, and the Arp2/3 complex.

Actin Polymerization Assays
Native bovine Arp2/3 complex was purified from bovine calf thymus using a modification of a previously described protocol (). Native monomeric actin was purified from chicken skeletal muscle as described previously (−). A portion of the actin monomers were labeled with pyrenyliodoacetamide (,). Actin polymerization assays were performed and barbed end concentrations calculated as previously described ().

Cell Culture and Retroviral Expression
Wild-type (WT) and arg−/− cells were maintained as previously described (). The ArgW145K point mutation was introduced by PCR and site-directed mutagenesis using murine type IV myristoylated Arg as a template. The sequence was cloned into N1-EYFP (Clontech Laboratories, Inc.). The tagged sequence was then subcloned into retroviral expression vector PK1 (a gift from A. M. Pendergast, Duke University, Durham, NC). mCherry was cloned in frame to human N-WASp, and the mCherry-N-WASp fusion was cloned into the pLXSN retrovirus (Clontech, Inc.). Retrovirus and reconstituted cell lines were generated as described previously (,), and Arg/Arg(W145K)-YFP expression levels were determined by quantitative immunoblotting using wild-type fibroblast extracts and purified recombinant Arg as standards. Arg-YFP and Arg(W145K)-YFP were expressed in reconstituted cells at 2.0- and 2.5-fold endogenous levels, respectively.

Fluorescence Microscopy
For colocalization experiments, FACS-sorted arg−/− + Arg-YFP fibroblasts were infected with mCherry-tagged N-WASp. Cells were plated on glass coverslips coated with 1 μg/mL fibronectin. Cells were fixed and imaged as previously described ().

Time-Lapse Microscopy and Kymography
Time-lapse microscopy and kymography were performed as previously described (,). Briefly, cells were plated on fibronectin-coated coverslips (1 μg/mL) and imaged from 30 min to 2 h postplating. Images were collected every 10 s for a period of 10 min. Kymography was performed using ImageJ (National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD), and statistical analysis of cell edge dynamics data was performed using analysis of variance (ANOVA) with StatView (SAS Institute).

Results
Identification of N-WASp as an Arg-Interacting Protein in Mouse Brain Extract
Arg contains an SH3 domain and an SH2 domain upstream of its kinase domain. We used a recombinant protein fragment consisting of glutathione S-transferase (GST) fused to this SH3SH2 region of Arg (GST-Arg-SH3SH2) to affinity purify interacting proteins from extracts of whole mouse brains. Several proteins bind to GST-Arg-SH3SH2 beads but not to control GST beads (Figure A). Mass spectrometry of the proteins identified the band running at 65 kDa as N-WASp, a ubiquitously expressed nucleation promoting factor that binds the Arp2/3 complex and stimulates its ability to nucleate actin polymerization (). This finding suggested that N-WASp might be part of a pathway coupling Arg to the formation of actin-based protrusions.

Arg binds directly to the actin nucleation promoting factor N-WASp. (A) Identification of N-WASp as a GST-Arg-SH3SH2 domain-binding protein. Proteins pulled down from mouse whole brain extracts were visualized by SDS−PAGE followed by Coomassie staining: lane 1, standards; lane 2, proteins pulled down by GST control beads; lane 3, proteins pulled down by GST-Arg-SH3SH2 beads; lane 4, GST-Arg-SH3SH2 beads alone (not exposed to extract). The arrowhead indicates the band identified as N-WASp by mass spectrometry. The two-higher molecular mass bands in lane 4 represent contaminating proteins present in early preps of GST-Arg-SH3SH2, but panel B demonstrates that these contaminants are not essential for Arg−N-WASp binding. (B−E) Mapping interactions between N-WASp and Arg. Arg or Arg fragments were immobilized on beads and incubated with a range of concentrations of N-WASp or phosphorylated N-WASp (pN-WASp) to measure binding affinities (Kd). (B) Representative binding assay gel showing binding of immobilized GST-Arg-SH3SH2 to increasing concentrations of soluble N-WASp. (C and D) Quantitation of binding between GST fusion Arg fragments and N-WASp or pN-WASp. Data were normalized to 100% at maximum binding, which was determined from the plateau of the best-fit binding isotherm. Data were fit to binding isotherms to determine Kd values using GraphPad Prism. (E) Table depicting Arg and Arg fragments used in N-WASp and pN-WASp binding experiments, Arg fragment domain structures, and Kd values of each interaction. In cases where the highest concentration tested was not greater than 10 times the determined Kd, the Kd values are reported as lower limits.

The Arg SH3 Domain Mediates Direct Binding to N-WASp
Purified recombinant His6-tagged N-WASp binds to beads coated with GST-Arg-SH3SH2 in a concentration-dependent manner with a Kd of ≥3.7 ± 0.4 μM (Figure B,C). This affinity is a lower limit based on the highest concentration of N-WASp that could be achieved in the reaction, which was not 10 times the Kd. Similar results were obtained when the binding assay was also conducted by measuring the amount of N-WASp depleted from the supernatant (data not shown), indicating that the off rate of this interaction is slow and validating the results of the pull-down method. N-WASp binds with a similar affinity to full-length Arg (Kd ≥ 3.8 ± 0.7 μM) (Figure E), suggesting that the Arg SH3SH2 region alone mediates binding to N-WASp. N-WASp does not bind appreciably to GST alone. The Arg GST-SH3 domain binds N-WASp with a higher affinity (Kd = 1.4 ± 0.2 μM) than the GST-Arg-SH3SH2 domain, but the Arg GST-SH2 domain does not detectably bind N-WASp (Figure C,E). GST-Arg-SH3SH2 with a binding-defective point mutation in the SH3 domain (W145K) fails to bind N-WASp, while a binding-defective mutation in the SH2 domain (R198K) does not affect the affinity of GST-Arg-SH3SH2 for N-WASp (Figure C,E). These observations show that the Arg SH3 domain is necessary and sufficient to bind N-WASp. Consistent with these findings, SH3 domains bind to proline-rich regions with P-x-x-P motifs (), and N-WASp contains an extensive proline-rich region, including several P-x-x-P motifs, known to bind SH3 domains of other proteins (−). The low micromolar affinity of Arg-SH3 for N-WASP is similar to the affinities of other SH3 domains for P-x-x-P motifs (−).

Arg Phosphorylates N-WASp on Y256
Phosphorylation of N-WASp on Y256 potentiates its ability to stimulate actin nucleation by the Arp2/3 complex (−), and the Arg paralog Abl phosphorylates N-WASp at Y256 (). N-WASp is heavily tyrosine phosphorylated when co-overexpressed in insect cells with Arg but not when it is expressed alone (Figure A). N-WASp(Y256F) is not tyrosine phosphorylated when co-overexpressed with Arg, strongly suggesting that Y256 is the primary site of Arg-mediated N-WASp phosphorylation. Purified recombinant Arg phosphorylates purified recombinant N-WASp with a KM of 110 ± 10 nM (Figure B−E), similar to other substrates of Arg (,,). In addition, Arg phosphorylates N-WASp with a kcat of 0.036 ± 0.001 min−1 and a catalytic efficiency kcat/KM of (3.3 ± 0.3) × 105 min−1 M−1 (Figure E), values that are both within the range of known physiological Arg substrate concentrations (,). Consistent with previous reports of N-WASp tyrosine phosphorylation, robust in vitro phosphorylation of N-WASp by Arg is observed only in the presence of an N-WASp binding partner capable of keeping N-WASp in its open state, in this case constitutively active GST-Cdc42(G12V) (,). GST-Cdc42(G12V) does not directly influence Arg kinase activity, as Arg had a similar KM for cortactin in the presence and absence of GST-Cdc42(G12V) (Figure C,E), similar to the KM that we reported previously (). Because Arg and N-WASp both bind actin and because N-WASp interacts with the Arp2/3 complex (,), we also investigated whether actin or the Arp2/3 complex could stimulate Arg phosphorylation of N-WASp, both in the presence and in the absence of GST-Cdc42(G12V). Neither actin (3 μM) nor the Arp2/3 complex (10 nM) stimulates N-WASp phosphorylation by Arg, either in the presence or in the absence of added GST-Cdc42(G12V) (Figure D,E).

Arg phosphorylates N-WASp on Y256F. (A) His6-N-WASp or His6-N-WASp(Y256F) was expressed alone or co-expressed with (untagged) Arg in insect cells as indicated. N-WASp species were purified over a Ni affinity column, and 30 ng of purified protein was immunoblotted with anti-phosphotyrosine antibodies (anti-pY, top) or N-WASp antibodies (bottom). N-WASp with the Y256F substitution was not phosphorylated in insect cells. (B) Cdc42 is required for Arg to phosphorylate N-WASp. Purified recombinant N-WASp (0.01−1.0 μM) was incubated in kinase buffer [25 mM HEPES (pH 7.25), 5% glycerol, 100 mM NaCl, 1 mM NaVO4, and 20 μg/mL BSA] at 30 °C with 10 nM Arg in the presence of Mg2+ or Mn2+ and [γ-32P]ATP, with or without 7 μM constitutively active GST-Cdc42(G12V), for 5 min. Phosphorimages of representative kinase assays show phosphorylation of N-WASp by Arg in the absence or presence of GST-Cdc42(G12V). (C) Cdc42 stimulates phosphorylation of N-WASp by Arg. Phosphorylation of a range of concentrations of N-WASp or cortactin by Arg in the absence or presence of 5.7 μM GST-Cdc42(G12V). Arg requires GST-Cdc42(G12V) to phosphorylate N-WASp but not cortactin. (D) Effects on Arg-dependent phosphorylation of N-WASp by combinations of 3 μM actin, 10 nM Arp2/3 complex, and 5.7 μM GST-Cdc42(G12V). (E) Data from panels C and D fitted to the Michaelis−Menten equation to determine KM and kcat values. Dashes represent values that were too high or too low to measure.

Arg Binds Phosphorylated N-WASp with Higher Affinity
SH2 domains bind to phosphotyrosine residues, so we examined whether phosphorylation of N-WASp by Arg might create an additional binding site for the SH2 domain of Arg. The affinity of GST-Arg-SH3SH2 for pN-WASp is higher (1.7 ± 0.1 μM) than for nonphosphorylated N-WASp (≥3.7 ± 0.1 μM) (Figure E) and similar to the affinities of Arg GST-SH3 for phosphorylated or unphosphorylated N-WASp. Interestingly, the SH3 mutation (W145K) completely abrogates binding of GST-Arg-SH3SH2 to pN-WASp, while the SH2 mutation (R198K) does not affect the affinity of GST-Arg-SH3SH2 for pN-WASp (Figure D,E). This observation suggests the higher affinity of GST-Arg-SH3SH2 for pN-WASp is not due to a new SH2−phosphotyrosine interaction, but rather to an increased affinity of the Arg SH3 domain for pN-WASp. The increased affinity of the tested Arg fragments for pN-WASp may indicate that N-WASp phosphorylation alters its conformation to allow tighter binding of Arg fragments (see the ).

Arg Stimulates N-WASp-Dependent Actin Polymerization in Vitro
We used fluorescence enhancement of pyrenyl-actin to measure the ability of Arg fragments, N-WASp, and pN-WASp to stimulate actin polymerization by the Arp2/3 complex. Actin alone polymerizes slowly after an initial lag (Figure A). The Arp2/3 complex with or without N-WASp does not stimulate polymerization, showing that our N-WASp preparation is fully autoinhibited. Consistent with previous reports (−), pN-WASp is slightly more active than N-WASp at high concentrations, suggesting that pN-WASp is less autoinhibited (data not shown). GST-Arg-SH3SH2 stimulates actin polymerization with the Arp2/3 complex and N-WASp or pN-WASp in a concentration-dependent manner by reducing the initial lag and increasing the maximum rate of polymerization (Figure A,B). GST-Arg-SH3SH2 stimulates N-WASp and pN-WASp with similar potency in spite of the higher affinity of GST-Arg-SH3SH2 for pN-WASp (Figure C). The SH3 binding-defective GST-Arg-SH3SH2(W145K) mutant does not stimulate actin nucleation by N-WASp or pN-WASp and the Arp2/3 complex. In contrast, mutation of the SH2 domain has no effect on the ability of GST-Arg-SH3SH2 to stimulate actin nucleation (Figure B). These results indicate that Arg uses its SH3 domain to bind to and activate N-WASp and pN-WASp, thereby promoting their interaction with the Arp2/3 complex and stimulating actin polymerization. The difference in activation plateaus of GST-Arg-SH3SH2 and GST-Arg-SH3SH2(R198K) likely reflects the different specific activities of the protein samples.

GST-Arg-SH3SH2 stimulates actin polymerization by N-WASp and the Arp2/3 complex. (A) Time course of actin polymerization with N-WASp, the Arp2/3 complex, and a range of concentrations of GST-Arg-SH3SH2. Conditions: modified KMEI buffer [63 mM KCl, 1 mM MgCl2, 1 mM EGTA, and 19 mM imidazole (pH 7.0)] at 25 °C, 3 μM actin monomers, with or without 10 nM Arp2/3 complex, with or without 4 nM N-WASp and 0−1.3 μM GST-Arg-SH3SH2. N-WASp was strongly autoinhibited, because it had no effect on the time course of polymerization compared with actin alone or actin with the Arp2/3 complex. GST-Arg-SH3SH2 accelerated the time course of polymerization in a concentration-dependent fashion. (B and C) Dependence of the number of actin filament barbed ends produced by 10 nM Arp2/3 complex and 4 nM N-WASP on the concentration of GST-Arg-SH3SH2 domain constructs. The number of filaments was calculated from the rate of polymerization when 80% of the actin monomers had been consumed (): (B) unphosphorylated N-WASp and (C) phosphorylated N-WASp. GST-Arg-SH3SH2 activates N-WASp and pN-WASp similarly. GST-Arg-SH3SH2(R198K) is activated in a manner similar to that of the wild type, but GST-Arg-SH3SH2(W145K) does not activate either N-WASp species.

Arg and N-WASp Colocalize to Adhesion-Dependent Cell Edge Protrusions
We previously showed that adhesion of fibroblasts to fibronectin stimulates localization of Arg to the cell periphery, where it promotes dynamic adhesion-dependent cell edge protrusions (,,). To test whether Arg might interact with N-WASp to mediate these protrusions, we co-expressed Arg-YFP and mCherry-N-WASp in arg−/− fibroblasts and monitored their localization during fibroblast adhesion and spreading on fibronectin-coated coverslips. Arg-YFP and mCherry-N-WASp colocalize to actin-rich protrusive structures at the cell periphery when plated on fibronectin-coated coverslips (Figure  A), consistent with a possible role for Arg−N-WASp interactions in mediating adhesion-dependent cell edge protrusions.

Arg and N-WASp colocalize to cell edge protrusions, and the Arg SH3 domain is required for efficient adhesion-dependent cell edge dynamics. (A) Arg-YFP and mCherry-N-WASp colocalize to actin-rich cell edge protrusions when co-expressed in arg−/− cells. Panels E−H are enlargements of the region boxed in panel A. (B) Graphical depiction of full-length Arg and the ArgW145K mutant used in this experiment. Arg contains SH3, SH2, and kinase domains at its N-terminus. The C-terminus of Arg contains a proline (P)-rich region, two F-actin, and a microtubule (MT) binding site. (C−F) Representative images taken from a 10 min time-lapse video. Kymographs were recorded at eight different positions as indicated in panel C, and three representative kymographs for each cell are presented: (C) WT cells (n = 20 cells), (D) arg−/− cells (n = 22 cells), (E) arg−/− cells expressing Arg-YFP (n = 34 cells), and (F) arg−/− cells expressing ArgW145K-YFP (n = 34 cells). (G and H) Quantification of cell edge protrusions (G) and retractions (H). Values are means ± the standard error of the mean. ANOVA between all cell types: protrusions, P &lt; 0.0001; retractions, P &lt; 0.0001. Fisher’s PLSD for all cells versus arg−/−: *P &lt; 0.01. Bars are 10 μm.

An Arg Mutant Defective for N-WASp Binding Does Not Support Cell Edge Protrusion
Wild-type (WT) fibroblasts exhibit robust dynamic cell edge protrusion during adhesion to fibronectin-coated surfaces. Kymographs of the cell edge reveal a “rolling hill” profile that reflects these dynamic protrusions and retractions (,) (see also Figure C,G,H). In contrast, arg−/− fibroblasts exhibit significant deficits in adhesion-dependent cell edge protrusion, yielding flat “prairie”-like kymographs (,) (see also Figure  D,G,H). Retroviral-mediated re-expression of Arg-YFP in arg−/− fibroblasts restores adhesion-dependent cell edge protrusion to those of WT fibroblasts (Figure E,G,H), as we have shown previously (,). In contrast, retroviral-mediated re-expression of the SH3 point mutant defective in binding N-WASp (ArgW145K-YFP) was unable to complement the protrusion deficits of arg−/− cells (Figure B,F,G,H). Together with the colocalization studies, these data suggest that Arg:N-WASp interactions are important for efficient adhesion-dependent cell edge protrusion.

Discussion
Arg interacts with N-WASp through both binding and phosphorylation events. These interactions allow Arg to regulate N-WASp function and provide a direct pathway through which Arg can regulate actin polymerization.

Direct Interaction of Arg and N-WASp: Binding and Phosphorylation
We show that Arg interacts with N-WASp in two ways. First, the Arg SH3 domain binds N-WASp, presumably to a P-x-x-P motif. Second, Arg phosphorylates N-WASp with a KM similar to those of other endogenous substrates of Arg. This is the second example of multimodal interaction between Arg and an actin-binding protein. The SH3 domain of cortactin binds an Arg P-x-x-P motif, and this interaction is strengthened by an interaction between the Arg SH2 domain and phosphotyrosine residues on cortactin subsequent to Arg phosphorylation of cortactin (,). We hypothesized that the Arg SH2 domain might bind phosphorylated N-WASp similarly, but this turned out not to be the case.

We observed two levels of binding affinity between the Arg SH3 and SH2 constructs and N-WASp. The isolated SH3 domain bound pN-WASp and N-WASp with the same high affinity, but all of the larger Arg constructs containing both the SH3 and SH2 domains had a lower affinity for N-WASp than pN-WASp. Steric hindrance due to the added bulk of the Arg SH2 domain and the closed conformation of unphosphorylated N-WASp may explain why the affinity of the Arg SH3 domain for the P-x-x-P binding site in N-WASp is decreased. With both of these steric factors present, interaction of the SH3 domain and P-x-x-P site is weakened, but full binding affinity is restored when either of these factors is removed, either by deletion of the SH2 domain or by opening of the N-WASp conformation through phosphorylation.

Steric interactions are also important in regulating the accessibility of N-WASp to the kinase domain of Arg. Binding partners that release WASp family proteins from their autoinhibited, conformationally closed state make them better substrates for tyrosine kinases by exposing a buried tyrosine that is the target of these kinases (,). Although stoichiometric concentrations of GST-Arg-SH3SH2 activate N-WASP, low, catalytic concentrations of Arg are unable to phosphorylate autoinhibited N-WASp. However, in the presence of an excess of GST-Cdc42(G12V), a constitutively active Rho family GTPase known to bind to and open N-WASp, Arg phosphorylates N-WASp with a KM similar to those of other Arg substrates.

Regulation of N-WASp-Dependent Actin Polymerization by Arg
Consistent with our binding data showing that the Arg SH3 domain binds N-WASp, we find that the Arg SH3 domain also activates N-WASp to promote actin polymerization by the Arp2/3 complex. The SH3 domains of other proteins, including Nck and Grb2, also stimulate N-WASp (,). Torres and Rosen proposed that once opened by Cdc42 binding, phosphorylation keeps WASP or N-WASp in an active configuration, a form of “molecular memory” (). We find that Arg-SH3SH2 binding is sufficient to activate N-WASp, or phospho-N-WASp, even in the absence of Cdc42. This Arg-dependent activation may represent a novel activation mode in which Arg-SH3SH2 binding, rather than phosphorylation, keeps N-WASp open.

Dimers of WASp family constructs are much more active NPFs than monomeric constructs () because of their ability to occupy both NPF binding sites on the Arp2/3 complex (). GST-induced dimerization presumably contributes to the ability of proteins with two SH3 domains such as our GST-Arg-SH3 constructs to activate N-WASp (). Although full-length Arg contains only one SH3 domain, Arg binds cooperatively to actin filaments, which promotes clustering of Arg on actin filaments in vitro and likely helps concentrate Arg within protrusive structures in cells (,). In this manner, two adjacent Arg molecules, cross-linked by actin filaments, may act as a functional unit with two SH3 domains to efficiently activate N-WASp. In addition, since Arg contains multiple protein−protein interaction domains, Arg likely further facilitates N-WASp stimulation by putting it in the proximity of its other binding partners, including actin filaments, cortactin, and the Nck adaptor protein.

Our in vitro experiments describe a mechanism by which Arg regulates actin polymerization through interaction with N-WASp. We also show that Arg and N-WASp colocalize at the cell periphery in response to adhesive cues. The Arg SH3 domain, which mediates binding of Arg to N-WASp, is required for this adhesion-dependent protrusion, pointing to this interaction as a mechanism through which Arg mediates stimulus-dependent actin-based protrusion. We propose a model in which Arg and cortactin weakly associate at the cell periphery until PDGF or integrin signaling activates Arg to phosphorylate both cortactin and N-WASp. These phosphorylation events facilitate binding of Arg to phosphorylated cortactin via its SH2 domain () and pN-WASp via its SH3 domain. In this way, Arg may act in a scaffolding capacity, bringing cortactin and N-WASp together in close proximity to each other and allowing them to bind to each other, the Arp2/3 complex, the actin filament, and an actin monomer, thereby initiating the actin polymerization to drive cell edge protrusion.

Acknowledgments
We thank Xianyun Ye and Hongli Chen for technical assistance; S. Boyle, B. Bradley, R. Mahaffy, B. Nolen, and A. Paul for experimental advice; B. Bradley, B. Couch, C. Mader, and D. Wetzel for critical comments on the manuscript; and members of the Koleske lab and Pollard lab for helpful discussions and feedback. M.M.M. created expression constructs and performed the biochemistry. S.L. performed Arg and N-WASp localization experiments and kymographic analysis of cell edge behavior. M.M.M. and S.M.M. performed in vitro kinase assays. M.K.S. conducted pull downs from brain extract and identified N-WASp, and A.J.K. created expression constructs and cell lines in A.J.K.’s laboratory. M.M.M. purified actin and the Arp2/3 complex and performed actin polymerization assays in T.D.P.’s laboratory. M.M.M. and A.J.K. wrote the manuscript, and all others edited. T.D.P. also provided guidance on the design and interpretation of experiments.

