Cell death
has been actively studied
in the medical research field for several decades due to its importance
and involvement in many human diseases such as cancer and neurodegenerative
diseases., As a result, it is now known that there
are two major types of programmed cell death, apoptosis and necroptosis.− Apoptosis is a major molecular program to eliminate potentially
dangerous and unnecessary cells by intrinsic (mitochondrial) or extrinsic
(death ligand-mediated) pathways. Necroptosis (also called programmed
necrosis) contributes to the regulation of the immune system, cancer
development, and stress-mediated cellular responses.− Necrotic cell death was initially viewed as an accidental and unregulated
event. However, many studies have shown that necrotic cell death can
be programmed and regulated via unique signaling pathways.,,,

Apoptosis and necroptosis may be intertwined. For example, signaling
events initiated by the binding of secreted and cell surface death
ligands such as TNFα, FasL, and TRAIL to death receptors may
lead to either apoptosis or necroptosis under different cellular contexts.
Receptor interaction protein kinase 1 (RIP1) and 3 (RIP3), Fas-associated
protein with death domain (FADD), and caspase-8 are the main downstream
signaling components., RIP1, FADD, and caspase-8 assemble
into a complex termed the RIPoptosome, which is responsible for apoptosis
induction., However, when caspase activity
is inhibited by pharmacological agents or during viral infections,
RIP1 associates with RIP3 to form a complex termed the necrosome,
which activates necroptosis.,

RIP1 contains
a C-terminal death domain (DD) that allows the recruitment of FADD
through homotypic DD–DD interactions (Figure A). FADD is an adaptor protein that contains an N-terminal
death effector domain (DED) and a C-terminal DD. The N-terminal DED
of FADD interacts with the caspase-8 DED. DED and DD both belong to
the death domain superfamily, which also includes the caspase recruitment
domain (CARD) and pyrin domain (PYD).− While previous structural
studies of the necrosome formed by RIP1 and RIP3 revealed a functional
amyloid-like organization, the structural
basis for the assembly of RIP1 and FADD within the RIPoptosome remains
completely unknown.

In vitro reconstitution and EM analysis
of the RIP1 DD/FADD DD complex. (A) Domain organization of RIP3 and
the RIPoptosome components, RIP1, FADD, and caspase-8. Interacting
domains are indicated by blue circles. DD, death domain; DED, death
effector domain. (B) Gel filtration profiles of RIP1 DD alone (black
dotted line), FADD DD alone (black solid line), and the complex (red
solid line). The inset shows an SDS-PAGE gel of the peak fractions
of the complex. (C) Determination of the molar mass of the complex
by multiangle light scattering (see also Supplementary Figure 4).
(D) The 20 ISAC class averages with the highest cross correlation
with the homology model of the RIP1 DD/FADD DD complex are shown (top
rows), together with the corresponding projections from the model
(bottom rows) and the cross-correlation coefficients. The averages
show different projection views of the complex, indicating that it
adsorbed to the grid in different orientations. The side length of
the individual panels is 20.4 nm.

In this study, we reconstituted the RIP1 DD/FADD DD complex,
the core of the RIPoptosome, and elucidated the overall structure
of the complex by negative-stain electron microscopy (EM) and modeling,
providing new insight into the mechanism underlying RIP1-mediated
apoptosis and necroptosis. Our study shows that RIP1 DD and FADD DD
form a stable complex in vitro with a structure similar
to that of the Fas DD/FADD DD complex. The structure of the RIP1 DD/FADD
DD complex is another example of the conserved interactions between
domains in the DD superfamily. The results presented here suggest
that a helical assembly using three distinct types of interactions
is the general mechanism that underlies the assembly of domains of
the DD superfamily.

Materials and Methods
Protein Expression and
Purification
The death domains of RIP1 (residues 583–664)
and FADD (residues 93–184) were subcloned into the plasmid
vector pET26b (Novagen) with a C-terminal hexa-histidine tag. In another
construct, glutathione S-transferase (GST) was added to the N terminus
of RIP1. The domains were individually expressed in Escherichia
coli CodonPlus strain BL21(DE3)-RIPL (Stratagene) following
overnight induction at 20 °C, after which they were purified
using Ni-NTA affinity resin (Qiagen). The RIP1 DD and FADD DD proteins
were subsequently mixed at a molar ratio of approximately 1:1. Following
incubation at room temperature for 1 h, the protein solution was concentrated
to 8–10 mg/mL and applied to a Superdex 200 gel-filtration
column HR 10/30 (GE Healthcare). The complex eluted at around 12–13
mL and was concentrated to 6–8 mg/mL.

Multiangle Light Scattering (MALS)
The molar mass of the
RIP1 DD/FADD DD complex was determined by MALS using complexes formed
either with His- or with GST-tagged RIP1. The complex was injected
onto a Superdex 200 HR 10/30 gel-filtration column (GE Healthcare)
that had been equilibrated in a buffer containing 20 mM Tris, pH 8.0,
and 50 mM NaCl. The chromatography system was coupled to a three-angle
light scattering detector (mini-DAWN EOS) and a refractive index detector
(Optilab DSP) (Wyatt Technology). Data were collected every 0.5 s
at a flow rate of 0.2 mL/min and analyzed using the ASTRA program,
which gave the molar mass and mass distribution (polydispersity) of
the sample.

Electron Microscopy and Image Processing
The RIP1 DD/FADD DD complex sample was diluted to a final concentration
of 0.01 mg/mL in 50 mM NaCl and 20 mM Tris, pH 8.0, and then negatively
stained with uranyl formate as previously described. Images were recorded with an FEI Tecnai T12 electron microscope
(FEI, Hillsboro, OR) equipped with a LaB6 filament and
operated at an acceleration voltage of 120 kV. Images were recorded
using low-dose procedures on a 2000 × 2000 pixel CCD camera (Gatan,
Pleasanton, CA) using a defocus of −1.5 μm and a nominal
magnification of 52000×. The calibrated magnification was 70527×,
yielding a pixel size of 2.13 Å on the specimen level.

BOXER, the display program associated with the EMAN software package, was used to interactively select 16368 particles
from 283 CCD images, and the SPIDER software package was used to window the particles into 96 × 96 pixel
images. To perform iterative stable alignment and clustering (ISAC) in SPARX, the size
of the particle images was reduced to 64 × 64 pixels, and the
particles were prealigned and centered. ISAC was run on the Orchestra
High Performance Computing Cluster at Harvard Medical School (http://rc.hms.harvard.edu), specifying 200 images per group
and a pixel error of 2. After 12 generations, 185 classes were obtained,
accounting for 6066 particles (37% of the entire data set). Averages
of these classes were calculated using the original 96 × 96 pixel
images. The particles were also subjected to 10 cycles of multireference
alignment in SPIDER. Each round of multireference alignment was followed
by K-means classification, specifying 200 output classes. The references
used for the first multireference alignment were randomly selected
from the raw images.

To compare the class averages with the
homology model of the RIP1 DD/FADD DD complex (see below), the model
was Fourier transformed, filtered to 20 Å with a Butterworth
low-pass filter, and transformed back. Evenly spaced projections were
calculated at 4° intervals and subjected to 10 cycles of alignment
with masked EM class averages. The 20 class averages with the highest
cross correlation and the corresponding projections from the model
are presented in Figure D.

Sequence Alignment
The amino acid sequences of DDs were analyzed using Clustal W (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/Tools/msa/clustalw2/).

Homology Modeling
A homology model of RIP1 DD was constructed
using the SWISS-MODEL homology modeling server. The previously solved Fas DD structure (PDB id 3OQ9) was used as the modeling template. The stereochemical quality
of the constructed model was validated with a Ramachandran plot generated
using PROCHECK. Electrostatic surfaces
and ribbon diagrams were generated using the PyMOL program (DeDeLano,
W. L. (2002) The PyMOL Molecular Graphics System,
DeLano Scientific, San Carlos).

Mutational Analysis of
Complex Formation in Vitro
Site-directed mutagenesis was
performed using the Quikchange kit (Stratagene) and confirmed by sequencing.
Purified wild-type or mutant RIP1 DD and FADD DD proteins were first
mixed and then incubated at room temperature for 1 h, after which
the protein solutions were incubated with Ni-NTA resin for 1 h at
room temperature. The protein samples were then loaded onto SDS-PAGE
gels. The gels were stained with Coomassie Blue.

Complex Formation
Assay by Gel-Filtration Chromatography
Purified wild-type
or mutant RIP1 DD and FADD DD proteins were mixed, incubated for 1
h at room temperature, and concentrated to 8–10 mg/mL using
a concentration kit (Millipore). The concentrated protein solutions
were then applied to a Superdex 200 gel-filtration column 10/30 (GE
healthcare) that had been pre-equilibrated with a solution of 20 mM
Tris, pH 8.0, and 50 mM NaCl. Assembly of the complex was evaluated
based on the positions of the eluted protein peaks monitored at 280
nm followed by SDS-PAGE.

Results
In Vitro Reconstitution
and the Overall Structure of the RIP1 DD/FADD DD Complex
Recent studies have shown that RIP1 works as a molecular switch of
cell fate. Upon death receptor–ligand
interaction, RIP1 forms a complex with FADD and caspase-8, the RIPoptosome,
which induces apoptosis. However, when caspase activity is inhibited
under certain conditions, RIP1 instead forms a complex with RIP3,
the necrosome, which triggers necroptosis (Figure A). RIP1 contains a C-terminal DD, which allows the recruitment
of FADD through homotypic DD–DD interactions (Figure A). FADD is an adaptor protein that contains an
N-terminal DED and a C-terminal DD. The N-terminal DED of FADD interacts
with the tandem DED of caspase-8 (Figure A).

To elucidate the molecular basis of RIPoptosome formation, we expressed
and purified RIP1 DD and FADD DD. Although RIP1 DD and FADD DD were
both monomeric in solution; the two proteins formed an oligomeric
complex when they were mixed together (Figure B). The complex eluted at ∼120 kDa from a gel-filtration column
(Figure B). The molecular mass of the complex
was measured at 118.7 kDa (2% fitting error) by multiangle light scattering
(MALS) (Figure C). Since FADD DD and Fas DD
also form a large oligomeric complex, we hypothesized that RIP1 DD may interact with FADD DD in a similar
fashion.

Electron microscopy (EM) of negatively stained RIP1
DD/FADD DD complexes revealed a monodispersed and homogeneous particle
population (Supplementary Figure 1). Analysis of about 16000 particle
images by the iterative stable alignment and clustering (ISAC) procedure
yielded 185 classes (Supplementary Figure 2). K-means classification
of all the particles into 200 classes using SPIDER (Supplementary Figure 3) confirmed that the ISAC averages
are a good representation of the entire particle population. The ISAC
averages depict molecules of similar size (∼9 nm) with structural
features similar to those of the recently published Fas DD/FADD DD
complex (Figure D, upper panels). Projections
from a homology model of the RIP1 DD/FADD DD complex based on the
structure of the Fas DD/FADD DD complex (see below) are in good agreement
with the experimental class averages (Figure D, lower panels).

The Fas DD/FADD DD complex consists of five
to seven Fas DD and five FADD DD molecules in solution. The sixth
and seventh Fas DD molecules are least tightly bound resulting in
the crystallization of the core 5:5 Fas DD/FADD DD complex. The apparent similarity with the Fas DD/FADD
DD complex under EM prompted us to determine the exact stoichiometry
in the RIP1 DD/FADD DD complex. The MALS measurement of 118.7 kDa
(Figure C) already suggested a five RIP1 DD
(10.6 kDa) and five FADD DD (11.79 kDa) complex, which has a calculated
molecular mass of 111.3 kDa. However, because of the similar molecular
weights of the RIP1 and FADD DDs, the same molecular mass is also
consistent with other stoichiometries such as 4:6 or 3:7. To increase
the accuracy of the stoichiometry determination, we performed MALS
experiments on a complex that contains GST-tagged RIP1 DD. The added
GST increases the difference in the molecular weights of RIP1 DD and
FADD DD and thus results in a better discrimination index (Supplementary
Figure 4A). GST-tagged RIP1 formed a complex with FADD DD in solution,
and the complex eluted at ∼200 kDa from a gel-filtration column
(Supplementary Figure 4B). MALS measurement gave a molecular mass
for this complex of ∼244.2 kDa (2.3% fitting error) (Supplementary
Figure 4C). This value is consistent with a complex of five GST-tagged
RIP1 DD (each 37.3 kDa) and five His-tagged FADD DD (each 11.8 kDa),
which has a calculated molecular mass of 245.4 kDa.

Structure-Based
Modeling of RIP1 DD and Comparison with the Structure of the Fas DD/FADD
DD Complex
Alignment revealed that RIP1 DD and Fas DD share
a high sequence similarity, with 25% sequence identity (Figure A). Structural information is available for three
death domain complexes, the PIDDosome (RAIDD DD/PIDD DD), the MyDDosome
(MyD88 DD/IRAK2 DD/IRAK4 DD), and DISC (Fas DD/FADD DD). All three
complexes assemble via a unique oligomerization mechanism that uses
three types of interactions (types I, II, and III) at six unique interfaces
(types Ia, Ib, IIa, IIb, IIIa, and IIIb)., The type Ia surface is primarily formed by residues at the H1 and
H4 helices and interacts with the type Ib surface, which is formed
mainly by residues at the H2 and H3 helices. The type IIa surface
formed by residues at the H4 helix and the H4–H5 loop interacts
with the type IIb surface formed by the H6 helix and the H5–H6
loop. The type IIIa surface formed by residues at the H3 helix interacts
with the type IIIb surface formed by residues at the H1–H2
and H3–H4 loops (Figure B). A previous
structure-based mutation study showed that Fas mutations E272K (type
Ia), R250E (type Ib), Q283K (type IIa), K287D (type IIa), T305K (type
IIb), N302K (type IIb), E261K (type IIIa) and T270K (type IIIb), which
change key residues for each type of interaction, all disrupt complex
formation except for mutations at the type IIb surface (T305K and
N302K).

Analyses of the putative interfaces involved
in the assembly of the RIP1 DD/FADD DD complex. (A) Alignment of the
Fas DD and RIP1 DD sequences. Amino acid residues in Fas DD that have
been identified to be important for interaction with FADD DD are shown
in red. The corresponding residues in RIP1 DD are also shown in red.
(B) The top panel shows a schematic diagram of the three types of
contacts in DD/DD complexes. The bottom panel shows the structure
of the Fas DD/FADD DD complex, a representative DD/DD complex, which
was determined at neutral pH. (C) Homology model of the RIP1 DD. The
model was generated using the homology modeling server SWISS-MODEL
and the Fas DD structure (PDB id 3OQ9) as the template. (D) Surface of RIP1
DD. RIP1 DD residues corresponding to the Fas DD residues that are
critical for interaction with FADD DD are shown in red.

Residues in Fas DD that upon mutation disrupt complex
formation are well conserved in the sequence of RIP1 DD (Figure A). Therefore, we modeled the RIP1 DD structure
based on the structure of Fas DD (PDB id 3OQ9) (Figure C) and
mapped the mutations that might disrupt the formation of the RIP1
DD/FADD DD complex on the modeled structure of RIP1 DD (Figure D). A representative type Ia mutation in Fas DD,
E272K, corresponds to the E626K mutation in RIP1 DD, while the R250E
(type Ib) mutation in Fas DD corresponds to R603E in RIP1 DD. Similarly,
Q283K (type IIa) in Fas DD corresponds to M637K in RIP1 DD, K287D
(type IIa) in Fas DD corresponds to K642D in RIP1 DD, E261K (type
IIIa) in Fas DD corresponds to E614K in RIP1 DD, and T270K (type IIIb)
in Fas DD corresponds to G623K in RIP1 DD.

Mutations Generated Based
on the Fas DD/FADD DD Structure Disrupt RIP1 DD/FADD DD Complex Formation
To study the assembly of RIP1 DD and FADD DD into the RIPoptosome,
which may be similar to that of the Fas DD/FADD DD complex, we generated
sequence- and structure-based mutations at the six potential interfaces
used in the three interaction modes and analyzed complex formation
by a His tag pull-down assay followed by gel-filtration chromatography.
Our experimental data showed that the mutations disrupted complex
formation as expected. Although untagged wild-type RIP1 DD coeluted
with His-tagged FADD DD when the proteins were mixed and loaded onto
a Ni-NTA affinity column (Figure A), RIP1
carrying the R603E (type Ib disruption), E614K (type IIIa disruption),
G623K (type IIIb disruption), E626K (type Ia disruption), M637K (type
IIa disruption), and K642D (type IIa disruption) mutations did not
coelute with FADD DD (Figure B). As a control,
the K604E mutant, carrying a mutation at a residue not involved in
complex formation, comigrated with FADD DD (Figure B). RIP1 DD with the D660K mutation at the type IIb surface
still formed a strong complex with FADD DD (Figure B). This finding is consistent with the previous observation
that disruption of the type IIb interface on Fas DD did not block
formation of the Fas DD/FADD DD complex. The results of the present
study support the notion that the assembly mechanism of the RIP1 DD/FADD
DD complex is essentially identical to that of the Fas DD/FADD DD
complex.

Mutagenesis of RIP1 DD residues at surfaces implicated in the interaction
with FADD DD. (A) Untagged wild-type RIP1 DD is pulled down with His-tagged
FADD DD. M, size marker; E, elution fraction. (B) Pull-down analysis
of the effect of mutations of residues in putative interaction surfaces
of RIP1 DD on the in vitro association with His-tagged
FADD DD. (C) Gel-filtration chromatography analysis of the association
of RIP1 DD mutants with FADD DD. The black arrow indicates the position
in the gel-filtration chromatograph where the RIP1 DD/FADD DD complex
elutes.

The inability of RIP1 DD mutants
to form complexes with FADD DD was further confirmed by gel-filtration
chromatography (Figure C). Although pull-down
analysis showed that RIP1 DD D660K could still form a complex with
FADD DD, gel-filtration analysis did not show a peak for this complex
(Figure A). This result suggests that the
D660K mutation weakens but does not completely disrupt complex formation.
Interestingly, the D660K mutant formed a smaller sized complex with
FADD DD that eluted around 15 mL in gel filtration, suggesting that
it may form a stable intermediate complex or may exist in an equilibrium
between an unstable large complex, intermediate complex, and even
monomers. However, because smaller complexes were never seen in previously
studied DD complexes, further investigations are required to address
the effects of the D660K mutation at the type IIb interface.

Pull-down experiments were also performed with His-tagged FADD mutants
and untagged RIP1. Mutations introduced in FADD included R117E (type
Ib), D123R (type IIIa), R135E (type IIIb), R142E (type Ia), L172K
(type IIb), K153E (type IIa), N150K (type IIa), and D175K (type IIb)
(Figure A). Although untagged RIP1 DD coeluted
with His-tagged wild-type FADD DD, the RIP1 mutants did not coelute
with FADD DD (Figure B). As in the Fas DD/FADD
DD complex, disruption of the type IIa interface by the N150K mutation
did not show a distinct effect on complex formation (Figure B). In summary, the mutagenesis results presented
here are fully consistent with the structure of the RIP1 DD/FADD DD
complex that was modeled based on the structure of the Fas DD/FADD
DD complex.

Pull-down analysis of untagged RIP1 DD with His-tagged wild-type
and mutant FADD DD. (A) Surface of FADD DD. Residues are indicated
that are critical for the interaction with Fas DD and were mutated
in this study. (B) Pull-down analysis of the effect of mutations of
residues in putative interaction surfaces of His-tagged FADD DD on
the in vitro association with untagged RIP1 DD.

Model for the RIP1 DD/FADD
DD Complex, The Core Oligomerization Platform of the RIPoptosome
Given their apparent similarity in assembly, we modeled the structure
of the RIP1 DD/FADD DD complex based on the previously determined
structure of the Fas DD/FADD DD complex. We superimposed the modeled
RIP1 DD with Fas DD in the Fas DD/FADD DD complex structure. All five
Fas DDs superimposed well with the RIP1 DDs, with an average RMSD
of 1.5 Å. In our model of the RIP1 DD/FADD DD complex, the top
layer is formed by five RIP DDs and the bottom layer by five FADD
DDs (Figure A,B). Finally, to create a schematic
model of the full RIPoptosome, we added the C-terminal DED of FADD
and the C-terminal kinase domain of RIP1. Since the C termini of the
DDs are located at the periphery of the complex, these additional
domains can easily be accommodated by the RIP1 DD/FADD DD assembly
(Figure C).

Model of the RIPoptosome. (A) Side view
of the model for the RIP1 DD/FADD DD complex. The top layer of the
complex contains five RIP1 DDs (cyan), and the bottom layer contains
five FADD DDs (pink). (B) Top view of the model of the RIP1 DD/FADD
DD complex. (C) Schematic model of the full RIPoptosome containing
the C-terminal death effector domain (DED) of FADD and the C-terminal
kinase domain of RIP1. (D) Schematic planar diagram showing the construction
of RIP1 DD/FADD DD complex. The positions of the three different types
of contacts are shown. The locations of two different subtypes of
type II contacts are also shown as IIa and IIb on the representative
RIP1 DD and FADD DD molecules.

Discussion
The DD superfamily is one of the largest
domain classes that mediate protein interactions. The DD superfamily
is divided into four subfamilies: the death domain (DD), death effector
domain (DED), caspase recruitment domain (CARD), and pyrin domain
(PYD) families. Proteins that contain domains of the DD superfamily
play critical roles in a number of cellular functions, including apoptosis,
inflammation, and necrosis. Structural and biochemical studies revealed
that domains of the DD subfamily assemble into large oligomeric protein
complexes. The prototype of the DD complexes is the PIDDosome, which
consists of RAIDD DD and PIDD DD. More
recently, the structures of the MyDDosome and the Fas/FADD DD complex
became available.,,

It is well-known that RIP1 is involved in both apoptosis and
necroptosis via formation of large molecular complexes with FADD,
caspase-8, and RIP3. In this study, we characterized the overall structure
of the RIP1 DD/FADD DD complex, the central core of the RIPoptosome.
Our biochemical studies showed that RIP1 DD and FADD DD can form a
stable complex under neutral pH conditions. Assuming that RIP1 DD
and FADD DD assemble in a similar way as Fas DD and FADD DD, we propose
that the RIP1 DD/FADD DD complex consists of five RIP1 DDs and five
FADD DDs. This notion is corroborated by EM averages of the RIP1 DD/FADD
DD complex that revealed structural features similar to those of the
Fas DD/FADD DD complex. A 5:5 stoichiometry of the RIP1 DD/FADD DD
complex is also supported by molecular mass measurements by MALS,
which yielded 118.7 kDa for the wild-type complex. We therefore modeled
the structure of the RIP1 DD/FADD DD complex based on the available
structure of the Fas DD/FADD DD complex. The model was tested by mutagenesis,
and the results were consistent with the model. The model for the
structure of the RIP1 DD/FADD DD complex presented in this study provides
structural information for another DD/DD complex and highlights the
general assembly mechanism used by domains of the DD superfamily.
Because DD, DED, CARD, and PYD share similar structural features,
we expect that these domains assemble into large complexes similar
to those formed by DDs.

Interestingly, while some DD superfamily
domains form helical filaments,− the RIP1 DD/FADD DD complex,
as well as a number of other DD complex structures we determined previously,,, appears to exhibit a defined
size. A plausible explanation is that the type IIb surface of RIP1
DD does not have sufficient affinity for binding additional domains
above (Figure D). Similarly, the type IIa
surface of FADD DD does not have sufficient affinity for binding additional
domains below (Figure D), preventing stable
association of more subunits and thus limiting the size of the helical
assembly. It should be noted that the type IIb surface of RIP1 DD
and the type IIa surface of FADD DD do not participate in the assembly
of the core 5:5 RIP1 DD/FADD DD complex. The oligomeric helical assembly
of the DDs is important for the regulation of apoptosis initiation
by providing the platform for caspase-8 dimerization and activation.
The cooperativity in the complex formation may itself serve the purpose
to set up a threshold for the tight regulation of caspase activation
and apoptosis.

Supporting Information Available
Representative raw image of RIP1 DD/FADD
DD complex in negative stain, 185 class averages of negatively stained
RIP1 DD/FADD DD complex obtained from 12 generations of the iterative
stable alignment and clustering (ISAC) procedure, averages obtained
by classifying all 16368 particles of negatively stained RIP1 DD/FADD
DD complex into 200 classes using K-means classification, and analysis
of the complex formed by GST-tagged RIP1 DD and FADD DD. This material
is available free of charge via the Internet at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bi500585u_si_005.pdf

Author Present Address
▽ Department
of Otolaryngology, Massachusetts Eye and Ear Infirmary, and Department
of Otology and Laryngology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02114,
USA.

The authors declare no competing
financial interest.

Acknowledgments
We thank Dr. Pawel Penczek
for guidance in the use of SPARX and ISAC. The Orchestra High Performance
Computing Cluster at Harvard Medical School is a shared facility partially
supported by NIH Grant NCRR 1S10RR028832-01. 

