Protein and
peptide aggregation
and amyloid formation are commonly associated with various pathological
disorders− and, thus, have been the subject of many studies.
In addition, aggregation poses a major obstacle in de novo protein design and also in mechanistic studies of protein folding
where relatively high protein or peptide concentrations are required.
While it is easily recognized that many factors can come into play
in determining the aggregation propensity of a given protein or peptide
system, in practice the most commonly used strategy in protein design
is to incorporate a certain number of charged residues to prevent
or alleviate aggregation.− For example, Marqusee and Baldwin have shown that the solubility
of alanine-based α-helical peptides in aqueous solution can
be significantly increased by dispersing either lysine or glutamate
residues in the peptide sequence of interest., For β-sheet systems, however, the situation can be much more
complicated, as the edge strands are often poised for further intermolecular
strand–strand association,,− and as a result, only a small difference in peptide sequence could
lead to a significant difference in aggregation propensity.− One distinctive example, which is also the focus of this study,
is that two designed, closely related β-hairpins, Trpzip1 and
Trpzip2, show very different aggregation
behaviors. Previous studies− indicated that Trpzip2 remains completely monomeric in the concentration
range of 5–12 mM at acidic pH, whereas Trpzip1 has previously
shown measurable aggregation at concentrations of &gt;500 μM., For this reason, Trpzip2 has been extensively used as a model to
study the mechanism of β-hairpin folding,,,,− whereas the stronger aggregation propensity of Trpzip1 has made
it a less attractive system. As shown (Table ), these two β-hairpins differ only in the order of the two
amino acids in the turn region (i.e., NG vs GN). Considering the fact
that both peptides adopt a stable β-hairpin conformation in
solution at room temperature and their sequences are almost identical,
this difference is surprising.

Sequences and Thermal
Melting Temperatures
(Tm) of the Peptides Studied Herein
peptide	sequence	Tm (°C)	
Trpzip1	SWTWEGNKWTWK	49.8 ± 0.3	
Trpzip2	SWTWENGKWTWK	71.9 ± 0.1	
Trpzip2-K	SWTWENG(K*)WTWK	56.8 ± 0.5	
Trpzip2-W4A	SWTAENGKWTWK	23.7 ± 2.1	
Trpzip2-KK	SWTWENG(K*)WTW(K‡)	–	
K* represents lysine-4,5-dimethoxy-2-nitrobenzyloxycarbonyl,
and K‡ represents the acylated lysine (Scheme ).

From
ref ().

Figure S1 of the .

As shown (Figure ), a comparison of the
averaged nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) structures of Trpzip1 and Trpzip2 indicates that the major structural
variation between these two β-hairpins is in the relative orientation
of the Lys8 side chain. Specifically, in Trpzip1, the side chain of
Lys8 is oriented orthogonal to the β-hairpin axis so that it
points straight outward, and away from the Trp hydrophobic cluster,
whereas in Trpzip2, the same side chain points in an upright parallel
direction with respect to the β-hairpin axis. It is well-known
that a solvent-exposed Lys side chain is relatively flexible and can
fluctuate among several rotamer conformations. Therefore, to obtain
a more quantitative assessment of the difference in the Lys8 orientations
of these two peptides, we measured the dihedral angles of Lys8 in
an ensemble of 20 NMR structures obtained from the Protein Data Bank
(PDB) using built-in functions in Visual
Molecular Dynamics (VMD). The results
indicate that the greatest angle disparity arises from the difference
in χ2, which describes the angle between the Cα–Cβ and Cγ–Cδ planes. For Trpzip1, the Lys8 side chain always adopts
a trans configuration along χ2 (171
± 11°). However, for Trpzip2, χ2 fluctuates
between a trans and gauche(+) configuration.
When the averaged structure of all frames of Trpzip2 was evaluated,
χ2 of Lys8 is ∼70 ± 10°, indicative
of a gauche(+) rotamer along the Cβ–Cγ bond., Thus, we hypothesize
that the difference in the aggregation propensities of Trpzip1 and
Trpzip2 can be explained by this variation in χ2.
In other words, Lys8 in Trpzip2 is an effective aggregation gatekeeper,− which prevents edge-to-edge β-hairpin association through
unfavorable electrostatic interactions between neighboring Lys8 contacts.
To this end, we further point out that our hypothesis is based on
the assumption that the β-hairpin unit in the peptide aggregates
possesses a native or nativelike turn structure, which, in conjunction
with the confinement effect induced by peptide association, would
place Lys8 in a specific configuration that could disfavor aggregation.

NMR structures
of Trpzip1 (PDB entry 1LE0) and Trpzip2 (PDB entry 1LE1), as indicated,
and the proposed dimerization scheme, showing the difference in the
orientations of the Lys8 side chains.

To test this hypothesis, we examined the aggregation kinetics
of
both peptides under different concentration and pH conditions. In
addition, for Trpzip2, we also used a chemical approach to eliminate
the positive charge of Lys8 by replacing it with Lys(4,5-dimethoxy-2-nitrobenzyloxycarbonyl)., The latter is a lysine analogue [hereafter termed Lys(nvoc)] with
a photolabile hydrophobic moiety and has been used to control the
disassembly of peptide aggregates and hydrogels via illumination., Should Lys8 indeed serve as an aggregation gatekeeper of Trpzip2,
we expect that this Trpzip2 mutant (hereafter termed Trpzip2-K) will
exhibit a significantly stronger aggregation propensity.

Materials and
Methods
Materials and Sample Preparation
D2O (D,
99.96%) and deuterium chloride (D, 99.5%) were purchased from Cambridge
Isotope Laboratories (Andover, MA). Fmoc-Lys(4,5-dimethoxy-2-nitrobenzyloxycarbonyl)-OH
[Fmoc-Lys(nvoc)-OH] was purchased from Anaspec, Inc. (Fremont, CA),
and used without further purification. Fmoc-protected amino acids
were purchased from Advanced Chem Tech (Louisville, KY). All peptides
were synthesized on a PS3 peptide synthesizer (Protein Technologies,
Woburn, MA) and purified by reverse-phase high-performance liquid
chromatography (HPLC). The identity of each peptide was further verified
by matrix-assisted laser desorption ionization (MALDI) mass spectrometry.
Residual trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) from peptide synthesis was removed
by multiple rounds of lyophilization against a 0.1 M DCl solution.
All peptide samples were prepared by directly dissolving the lyophilized
peptide solid in D2O, and the pH of the peptide samples
was approximately 3, unless explicitly indicated separately. The peptide
concentration was determined optically using the absorbance at 280
nm, with an ε280 of 22760 cm–1 M–1.

Acylation of Lys12
Lyophilized peptide
was first dissolved
in 100 mM phosphate buffer (pH 7.4) to a final peptide concentration
of 250 μM. This peptide solution was then mixed with a 30 mM N-acryloxysuccinimide (Sigma-Aldrich) solution prepared
in 100 mM phosphate buffer (pH 7.4) containing 10% dimethyl sulfoxide
with a final N-acryloxysuccinimide:peptide concentration
ratio of 8:1. The reaction mixture was stirred for 9 h at 4 °C.
The resulting peptide product was purified by HPLC and verified by
MALDI mass spectrometry.

Circular Dichroism (CD) and Fourier Transform
Infrared (FTIR)
Measurements
CD data were collected on an Aviv 62A DS spectrometer
(Aviv Associates) using a 1 mm sample cuvette. FTIR spectra were collected
on a Magna-IR 860 spectrometer (Nicolet) at 2 cm–1 resolution using a temperature-regulated, 52 μm CaF2 sample cell.

Photocleavage Experiments
Irradiation of samples was
conducted by placing the sample in the optical path of a FluoroLog
fluorometer (HORIBA Jobin Yvon), at room temperature. The excitation
wavelength was set to 355 nm with a slit width of 0.75 cm. The excitation
intensity is approximately 8.8 mW cm–1, estimated
on the basis of the measured power of the excitation light and the
beam diameter. The nvoc moiety has an extinction coefficient (ε350) of 5485 M–1 cm–1 and a photochemical yield (Φ365) of 0.023.−

Atomic Force Microscopy (AFM) Measurements
AFM experiments
were performed in air at room temperature, using a multimode atomic
force microscope (model 5500, Agilent, Santa Clara, CA), equipped
with a 90 μm closed loop piezoscanner. Five microliters of a
sample solution was applied to a freshly cleaved mica surface and
allowed to sit for ∼10 s, rinsed with 100 μL of Millipore
water, and subsequently dried with a slow stream of N2 gas.
Tapping-mode imaging was conducted with a silicon cantilever, where
the tip radius was &lt;10 μm and the force constant was 40 N/m
(Ted Pella, Redding, CA). Height and deflection images were obtained
with a scan rate of 1.6 Hz and a tapping frequency of 285 kHz. Multiple
images were obtained for each sample at different locations on the
mica substrate to confirm the presence of fibrils.

Results and Discussion
Aggregation
Kinetics of Trpzip1 and Trpzip2
The aggregation
kinetics of Trpzip1 and Trpzip2 were examined using FTIR and CD spectroscopy.
In particular, the amide I′ band (amide I band in D2O) of the peptide was used as an IR probe of the aggregation process,
as this band has proven to be sensitive to intermolecular β-sheet
association. For example, the development of a narrow amide I′
band at approximately 1615 cm–1 is indicative of
peptide aggregation to form parallel β-sheets, whereas the appearance of a pair of narrow bands, i.e.,
a strong one at ∼1618 cm–1 and a weak one
at ∼1685 cm–1, signifies the formation of
antiparallel β-sheets.,

As shown (Figure ), the amide I′ bands of Trpzip1 obtained
at different concentrations indicate that its aggregation rate is
concentration-dependent, as expected. For example, at ∼2 mM
and 25 °C, the peptide sample becomes almost completely aggregated
after 24 h, as judged by the full development of the 1616 cm–1 band, whereas at ∼350 μM, aggregate formation becomes
detectable after just 1 day. In comparison, even at a much higher
concentration (i.e., ∼10 mM), Trpzip2 does not show any signs
of aggregation under the same conditions (Figure , inset). As shown (Figure ), further
time-dependent measurements indicate that the aggregation kinetics
of Trpzip1 at a concentration of 1.2 mM, determined by the growth
of the 1616 cm–1 band, follow a biexponential function;
the magnitude of the signal increases quickly within the first 10
h and then slowly reaches a plateau over ∼150 h. Repeating
this measurement at a higher peptide concentration, which results
in a faster overall aggregation rate, reproduces this biphasic kinetic
pattern (Figure S3, ). Similar biphasic growth kinetics have been observed in other peptide
aggregation studies,− which were attributed to a separation in the time
scales of the fibril nucleation and elongation processes.

Amide I′
spectra of Trpzip1 at different concentrations,
as indicated. Shown in the inset is the amide I′ band of Trpzip2
at 10 mM. These data were collected after the peptide samples had
been incubated for 24 h at 25 °C.

Intensity of the 1616 cm–1 band of Trpzip1 (1.2
mM, pH 3) as a function of incubation time, showing the aggregation
kinetics of this peptide at acidic pH. For comparison, the aggregation
data of Trpzip1 (0.7 mM) obtained at pH 13 are shown in the inset.
The corresponding FTIR spectra are presented in Figure S2 of the .

Aggregation Mechanism and Gatekeeper
In principle,
the initial aggregation step can occur through interactions between
two folded β-hairpins or two unfolded peptides. However, a simple
calculation, based on the thermal stabilities of Trpzip1 and Trpzip2, indicates that at 25 °C the unfolded concentrations
of Trpzip1 (at a total concentration of 350 μM) and Trpzip2
(at a total concentration of 10 mM) are 89 and 900 μM, respectively.
Thus, these results strongly suggest that the aggregation of these
β-hairpins is not initiated by association of two unfolded peptides;
instead, it is triggered by dimerization of two folded β-hairpins.
This notion is consistent with that put forward by Richardson and
Richardson, who showed that naturally
occurring β-sheets can cause aggregation via edge-to-edge β-sheet
interactions and that an effective strategy used by nature to defend
against this is to place a charged side chain (or gatekeeper residue)
on the hydrophobic face of an edge β-strand to mask the aggregation-prone
regions with a solvent favorable interaction. In the current case,
we hypothesize that Lys8 in both peptides acts as an aggregation gatekeeper
residue; however, it is more effective to prevent Trpzip2 from aggregating.
Because Lys8 in Trpzip1 and Trpzip2 appears on the opposite face of
the hydrophobic core (i.e., the four Trp residues), we note that the
aggregation gatekeeper role of this charged residue is somewhat different
from that discussed by Richardson and Richardson, but the overall
idea remains the same: a charge is used to disfavor the process of
intermolecular association. As proposed in Figure , in the early stages of the aggregation process, should two
Trpzip2 β-hairpins stack to form a dimer in a parallel fashion,
the positively charged Lys8 side chains can lead to a more unfavorable
intermolecular electrostatic interaction, because of their upward-pointing
rotamer geometry and thus greater proximity. As a result, the aggregation
propensity of Trpzip2 is weaker than that of Trpzip1. To test this
hypothesis, we employed two strategies to eliminate the charge of
Lys8 and then investigated how this change affects the aggregation
propensities of these β-hairpins. In the first case, we used
pH to neutralize the charge, whereas in the second case, we replaced
Lys8 with a neutral Lys derivative, Lys(nvoc). The added advantage
of using Lys(nvoc) is that the nvoc group can be removed via light,
converting the mutant back to its parent sequence. In other words,
we expect that the Lys(nvoc) modification in Trpzip2 not only will
enhance the aggregation propensity of the peptide considerably but
also can render the aggregates thus formed photodissociable, a feature
that may find important applications in bioengineering.

As shown
(Figure , inset), at a concentration of 0.7
mM and pH 13, the aggregation process of Trpzip1, as judged by the
intensity of the 1616 cm–1 band, is complete within
the first 10 h of dissolution, which is faster than the aggregation
rate of Trpzip1 at acidic pH. Similarly, the aggregation of Trpzip2
can also be induced by increasing the pH to 13 (Figure ). Taken together, these results provide strong evidence supporting
the gatekeeper role of Lys8 mentioned above. However, unlike that
of Trpzip1, the aggregation process of Trpzip2 does not seem to be
complete even after incubation for 6 days, indicating that there are
other factors that also play a role in determining the aggregation
kinetics.

Amide I′ spectra of Trpzip2 (∼6 mM) at pH 13 measured
after the peptide sample had been incubated for 1 and 6 days, as indicated.

It is well-documented that the
β-hairpin structure in peptide
fibrils tends to have extended and flat β-strands as opposed
to the twisted conformations characteristically observed in native
monomeric β-sheet proteins.− Thus, for the initially formed peptide dimer or oligomers consisting
of native or nativelike β-hairpins to further propagate to produce
well-ordered and stacked parallel β-sheets, many native side
chain–side chain interactions need to be broken to facilitate
new intermolecular interactions, such as hydrogen bonding among neighboring
monomers. In other words, the native β-hairpin must partially
unfold to relax into a flat β-sheet unit, a structure required
for the growth of the aggregate nucleus into long fibrils. Indeed,
as shown (Figure S4, ), the CD spectrum of the aggregated Trpzip1 lacks the distinctive
positive band at 227 nm observed for the folded Trpzip1,, indicating that the native edge-to-face Trp–Trp packing is
disrupted upon the formation of aggregates. This observation is consistent with an aggregation mechanism that
requires flattening of the native β-hairpin structure upon incorporation
of the peptide into a tightly packed and well-organized fibrillar
matrix. While this study does not allow us to describe further structural
details, it is reasonable to assume that the Trp residues play an
important role in aggregate formation, presumably via non-native hydrophobic
stacking. This requirement of native structural change or relaxation
would argue that the higher the β-hairpin stability, the more
difficult it becomes for the aggregate nucleus to propagate to form
mature aggregates or fibrils. Thus, we attribute the slow aggregation
growth rate of Trpzip2 at pH 13 to its high stability (Tm = 72 °C).

Because there is another Lys residue
(i.e., Lys12) in the peptide
sequence, the results obtained at pH 13 may not entirely reflect the
effect of Lys8. Therefore, in the second study, we examined the aggregation
kinetics of a Trpzip2 mutant wherein Lys8 is replaced with a photolabile
lysine analogue, Lys(nvoc).− As shown (Figure ), the amide I′ band of this mutant (Trpzip2-K) indicates
that it aggregates quickly at very low peptide concentrations. Interestingly,
the aggregates thus formed adopt an antiparallel β-sheet structure,
as judged by the pair of bands centered at 1616 and 1685 cm–1. Because both Trpzip1 and Trpzip2 form parallel β-sheet aggregates,
these results not only support the notion that Lys8 is an effective
aggregation gatekeeper in Trpzip2 but also indicate that this non-natural
lysine residue, which is strongly hydrophobic, can alter the aggregation pathway. In addition, the CD
spectrum of the aggregated Trpzip2-K sample shows clearly the presence
of a positive band at 228 nm (Figure ), indicating
that the native Trp–Trp packing is preserved to a certain extent
in the aggregates. This is an interesting finding considering that
the aggregates formed by the wild-type peptide do not support native
Trp–Trp interactions and hence corroborates the aforementioned
notion that Lys(nvoc), because of its higher hydrophobicity, can play
a key role in determining the aggregation rate and pathway. This result
further substantiates our initial hypothesis. Previously, the vertically
pointing Lys8 side chains served as an aggregation deterrent because
of the repulsive electrostatic interaction, but in the mutant case,
having Lys(nvoc) in this orientation provides another or possibly
stronger avenue for aggregation-prone hydrophobes to associate. Moreover,
as shown (Figure S6, ), upon removal of the nvoc group using light,, which converts Lys(nvoc) to Lys, the aggregates formed by Trpzip2-K
spontaneously disassemble to yield Trpzip2 monomers. Thus, this result
provides additional evidence supporting the aggregation gatekeeper
role of Lys8 in Trpzip2.

Representative amide I′ spectra of Trpzip2-K
(0.5 mM, pH
3) obtained after different sample incubation times, as indicated.
Shown in the inset is the intensity of the 1616 cm–1 band as a function of incubation time. The band intensities were
obtained from the FTIR spectra shown in Figure S5 of the .

CD spectra of monomeric and aggregated Trpzip2-K samples (40 μM,
pH 3), as indicated. The aggregated sample was prepared by diluting
a more concentrated peptide sample (0.5 mM) that had been incubated
for 14 days to allow aggregate formation.

To further verify the notion that it is Lys8, not Ly12, that
plays
a key role in mediating the aggregation process, we conducted another
photocleavage experiment on an aggregate sample formed by a Tripzip2-K
derivative wherein the charged Lys12 side chain was converted to a
neutral species. Specifically, the amine group of Lys12 in Trpzip2-K
was allowed to react with a common acylation agent, N-hydroxysuccinimide (NHS) ester, to form an amide bond (Scheme ),, and the resulting peptide is
termed Trpzip2-KK. Similar to Trpzip2-K, this peptide readily aggregates
at low concentrations, as expected. As shown (Figure ), however, when the native side chain of Lys8 is recovered
via photocleaveage of the nvoc group, the aggregates formed by Trpzip2-KK
disassemble. Because the resulting peptide contains only one charged
Lys side chain at position 8, this result thus substantiates our hypothesis
that Lys12 does not play a significant role in preventing Trpzip hairpins
from aggregating.

Amide I′ bands of an aggregated Trpzip2-KK sample
(2.2 mM,
D2O) obtained under different conditions, as indicated.
These spectra show that photocleavage of the nvoc group on Lys8 results
in aggregate disassembly. The band located near 1700 cm–1 arises from the C=O stretching vibration of the Lys12 side
chain acrylamide.

Acylation of the
Primary Amine of Lys12 in Trpzip2-K
The resulting peptide is termed
Trpzip2-KK.

Finally, to rule out the possibility
that the weaker aggregation
propensity of Trpzip2 is a direct outcome of its higher thermal stability,
we tested a second variant in which Trp4 was mutated to Ala (hereafter
termed Trpzip2-W4A). As expected (Figure S1, ), this mutation significantly decreases the thermal
stability of the β-hairpin (Tm of
∼23 °C). However, as indicated (Figure ), Trpzip2-W4A (10 mM) does not show any detectable aggregation
even after incubation for 5 days. Thus, this result further corroborates
the proposed notion that the difference in the aggregation propensities
of Trpzip1 and Trpzip2 stems from the difference in the Lys8 orientations
and is not due to their difference in stability. Furthermore, this
result suggests that any interactions between Lys8 and Trp4 are not
critical in preventing the β-hairpin from aggregating.

Amide I′
bands of Trpzip2-W4A (10 mM, pH 3) obtained at
two incubation times, as indicated.

It is well-known that a stronger turn-promoting sequence
can increase
the stability of β-hairpins. However, the effect of turn sequence
on the aggregation propensity of β-hairpins has not been systematically
examined. On the basis of results obtained from this study, we can
begin to think of several possible scenarios. If aggregation proceeds
from an unfolded conformation, and the native turn structure is not
preserved in the aggregates, the effect of a specific turn sequence
on aggregation would be directly correlated with its effect on the
β-hairpin stability. On the other hand, if aggregation is initiated
by association of folded or partially folded β-hairpins, then
the effect of a specific turn sequence on aggregation becomes more
subtle. Depending on how it directs the distribution of key charged
residues, a turn sequence could prevent or retard β-hairpin
aggregation by creating unfavorable intermolecular electrostatic interactions
or facilitate aggregate formation by weakening any repulsive interactions.
To this end, the aggregation gatekeeper notion used in this study
should not be simply interpreted as an independent action of one amino
acid; rather, it should be discussed in the context of the underlying
aggregation mechanism and aggregate structures.

Aggregate Stability
and Morphology
Because both the
strength of hydrophobic interactions and the unfolded population increase
with an increase in temperature, many proteins and peptides show a
stronger tendency to aggregate at higher temperatures.− Interestingly, temperature has the opposite effect on Trpzip1 aggregation.
As shown (Figure ), Trpzip1 aggregates readily
dissociate at higher temperatures. On the other hand, the aggregates
formed by Trpzip2-K do not show any detectable heat-induced dissociation
(Figure ). These results suggest that the
aggregates formed by Trpzip1 are less stable and less rigid than those
formed by Trpzip2-K, which is corroborated by AFM measurements. As
shown (Figure ), the AFM image of a Trpzip2-K
aggregate sample shows a well-defined fibrillar network, with a homogeneous
distribution of fibrils approximately 3.8 nm wide, consistent with
previously engineered β-hairpin aggregates. In comparison, the AFM image of a Trpzip1 aggregate sample
reveals a more heterogeneous morphology, with the presence of variously
sized fibrils and amorphous aggregates (Figure ). Thus, taken together, the FTIR and AFM results indicate that the
nvoc moiety in Lys(nvoc) not only significantly increases the aggregation
rate of the peptide by eliminating the native aggregation gatekeeper
in Trpzip2 but also guides the β-hairpins in the fibrils to
stack in an antiparallel fashion. In other words, these results suggest
that intermolecular Lys(nvoc) interactions can provide a strong driving
force for peptide association and thus a new avenue for fibril formation.
We believe this is an important finding as it suggests that it is
possible to use Lys(nvoc) to control the fibrillization rate, as well
as the fibrillar architecture, of the peptide of interest. In addition,
another advantage of using Lys(nvoc) is that it makes the fibrils
photoresponsive, a feature that could be exceedingly useful in certain
bioengineering applications.−

Amide I′ band of Trpzip1 (2.4 mM, pH 3) as a function
of
temperature.

Amide I′ band
of Trpzip2-K (4 mM, pH 3) as a function of
temperature.

Representative AFM image
of the peptide fibrils formed by Trpzip2-K
after an incubation period of 14 days.

Representative AFM image of the peptide fibrils and aggregates
formed by Trpzip1 after an incubation period of 14 days.

Conclusion
Protein and peptide aggregation
can have dire biological consequences.
For example, it may lead to degenerative diseases in vivo and dysfunction of protein and peptide therapeutics in vitro. Therefore, many studies have been conducted in the past, with the
aim of understanding the important factors that control protein and
peptide aggregation and devising strategies to prevent it from happening.
Herein, we study the aggregation properties of two closely related
β-hairpins, Trpzip1 and Trpzip2, seeking to gain further insight
into the mechanism of this phenomenon. Despite the minor difference
in their turn sequences (i.e., NG vs GN), these two peptides exhibit
totally different aggregation propensities; at acidic pH, Trpzip1
readily aggregates at micromolar concentrations, while under the same
conditions, Trpzip2 does not show detectable aggregation even at concentrations
of tens of millimolar. On the basis of the difference in their NMR
structures and the fact that both peptides form aggregates rich in
parallel β-sheets, we propose that (1) aggregation is initiated
by association of two folded β-hairpins via edge-to-edge interactions
and (2) Lys8 acts as an aggregation gatekeeper in both cases and its
higher efficiency in preventing Trpzip2 from aggregating arises from
the vertically pointing side chain rotamer preference. To test this
hypothesis, we utilized two strategies, one by increasing the pH and
the other by mutating Lys8 to a non-natural amino acid, Lys(nvoc),
to examine how elimination of the positive charge on Lys8 affects
the aggregation kinetics. We found that at pH 13 both Trpzip1 and
Trpzip2 aggregate faster, which is consistent with the notion that
Lys8 behaves as an aggregation gatekeeper. Further evidence in support
of this hypothesis is that the Lys(nvoc) Trpzip2 mutant aggregates
quickly, even at submillimolar concentrations, to form antiparallel
amyloid-like fibrils that can be disassembled via photocleavage of
the nvoc group. Moreover, our findings are consistent with an aggregation
mechanism in which folded β-hairpins first associate to form
a nucleus and the subsequent growth of this nucleus requires partial
unfolding of the native structure. Finally, our results indicate that
Lys(nvoc), because of its high hydrophobicity, can alter the aggregation
mechanism and, hence, can be used to control, in conjunction with
light, the morphology and structure of peptide fibrils.

Supporting Information Available
Additional CD and FTIR
spectra.
This material is available free of charge via the Internet at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bi401568a_si_001.pdf

The authors declare no
competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
We thank Yue Zhang, Ethan Glor, and Prof. Zahra Fakhraai
at
the University of Pennsylvania for assistance with AFM measurements.

