It was first
observed in 1899 that isolated skeletal
muscle reversibly contracts
at high temperatures. This phenomenon was attributed to the contraction
of elastin, the main protein component
of elastic tissues, at high temperatures. Elastin is a nonpolar protein consisting of a repeating pentapeptide
Val-Pro-Gly-Xaa-Gly (VPGXG) sequence, where the fourth residue, termed
the guest residue, can be any amino acid other than proline. Elastin-like
polypeptides (ELPs) are genetically engineered polypeptides that are
derived from the physiological protein elastin and consist of the
same pentapeptide repeats. ELPs also exhibit the hyperthermia-induced
aggregation that is observed in endogenous elastin. Urry extensively studied the aggregation process in ELPs
and determined that at low temperatures ELP adopts a disordered, solvated
structure. In response to hyperthermia, ELP undergoes a structural
transition to a series of repeating type II β-turns, forming
a β-spiral, and aggregates in a process driven by the hydrophobic
effect., The temperature at which the structural
transition and aggregation occur is now termed the transition temperature
(TT). The TT is inversely related to both the hydrophobicity
of the guest residue and the number of pentapeptide repeats. The identity of the guest residue is commonly
adjusted to control the overall hydrophobicity and, therefore, the TT of a specific ELP.

The thermoresponsive properties of ELP are currently being
explored
as a potential means of physically targeting systemically delivered
drugs, with the hypothesis that a precisely engineered ELP will be
soluble at physiological temperature (TP) but will aggregate when an area, such as a tumor, is heated (TH). The aggregation will therefore concentrate
a systemically delivered ELP–drug conjugate to a heated tumor.
This hypothesis was originally explored in 2001,, with an ELP sequence that was engineered
to have a TT greater than the physiological
temperature but lower than the temperature of a heated tumor (TP &lt; TT &lt; TH). This sequence was also engineered with a
lysine residue for drug attachment (Lys-ELP1). Very promising results
were obtained, and ELP has been used in more than 30 cell and animal
studies to deliver small molecule drugs and peptide therapeutics to
a variety of cancers, including brain tumors. In many of these studies, cell-penetrating peptides (CPPs) were
added to the N-terminal end of ELP to induce endocytosis and increase
the level of tumor uptake., Because of the lysine
content of CPPs, this lysine residue was replaced with a cysteine
(Cys-ELP) in these constructs to provide selectivity during labeling
reactions.

We previously characterized Lys-ELP1 using a variety of complementary biophysical techniques
to understand
and predict its behavior as a drug delivery vector. It was determined
that in solution at low temperatures (5 °C) and concentrations,
Lys-ELP1 is monomeric and adopts an extended, disordered conformation
with large f/fo (2.88)
and RH (6.8–6.9 nm) values. As
the temperature is increased, Lys-ELP1 exhibits weak association below
the TT that increased with temperature.
The percent β-turn structure was observed by CD to increase
with an increasing level of association. Above the TT, a previously unreported critical concentration (CC) that decreased with an increase in temperature
was observed. This was in contrast with the predominant theory that
ELP was soluble below the TT and then
became ordered and aggregated in an all-or-none manner. These results
suggested that the concentration dependence of TT is actually a measure of the solubility constant of ELP.
This has important implications for understanding the behavior of
ELP in serum as a drug delivery vector. Because ELP will not fully
aggregate at the TT, a constant concentration
will circulate systemically below the TT. In this study, we examine how the addition of basic CPPs affects
the measured biophysical properties of ELP.

Materials and Methods
Protein
Purification
The constructs were designed in silico and constructed using standard molecular biology
techniques on pUC19 and pET25b vectors. After confirmation of construct
integrity by sequencing, the expression plasmids were transformed
into Escherichia coli BLR(DE3) cells for protein
expression. The expression strains were grown by innoculating a 500
mL sample of TB Dry medium with a 500 μL aliquot of bacterial
culture and 2 mL of Amp. This culture was then grown for 18 h and
then harvested using centrifugation (F9S-4X 1000Y, 5K rpm, 10 °C,
10 min). The bacterial pellet was resuspended in a small volume of
1× PBS, and this suspension was frozen at −80 °C
until the protein was needed.

The frozen cell culture was thawed
and lysed using sonication with six 10 s bursts at 70% amplitude interrupted
by a 10 s pause. This mixture was centrifuged for 45 min at 13K rpm
(Thermo Scientific, F21S 8X 50Y). The supernatant was collected and
1 mL of 10% PEI added to each tube (∼35 mL) to precipitate
negatively charged macromolecules. This solution was centrifuged for
30 min at 13K rpm. The supernatant was collected and filtered using
vacumn filtration to remove any large impurities. The filtered solution
was heated to 60 °C for 10 min to aggregate the ELP protein.
The solution was centrifuged for 10 min at 10K rpm. This served to
pellet and remove the ELP protein from the solution but leave the
remainder of the soluble proteins in solution.

The protein was
further purified to &gt;99% purity through four rounds
of thermal cycling. One thermal cycle consists of resuspending the
pelleted protein into fresh 1× PBS by cooling the solution on
ice. The solution is then spun for 2 min to pellet any large impurities.
The supernatant is then transferred to a fresh tube and the tube heated
in a water bath at 60 °C for 5 min and spun in a tabletop microcentrifuge,
and the supernatant is discarded. This cycle is repeated three more
times to fully purify the protein. When the protein is fully purified,
the pellet should be completely translucent in the aggregated state.
Certain constructs (Bac-Cys-ELP1) will have a slight yellowish tint;
however, SynB1-Cys-ELP1 and Cys-ELP1 are completely clear, and the
only differentiation between the solution and aggregated protein is
the visible refractive index change. At the end of the purification,
there are no observable contaminants on an sodium dodecyl sulfate–polyacrylamide
gel electrophoresis, although in AUC absorbance experiments at 280
nm there was a small raised baseline observed. Therefore, the protein
was always equilibrated into fresh buffer using the spun column method
of Penefsky.

Analytical Ultracentrifugation
All analytical ultracentrifugation
(AUC) experiments were performed using a Beckman XLA instrument retrofitted
to include a fluorescence detection system (AU-FDS, AVIV Biomedical).
For experiments using absorbance detection, data were acquired using
Proteome (Beckman). For fluorescence detection experiments, the centrifuge
parameters and data collection were controlled by AU-AOS (AVIV). The
focal depth of the FDS laser was calibrated to the height of the sample,
and not the calibration cell, to improve the linearity of the measured
plateau. The meniscus position for all
fluorescence experiments was determined by taking four intensity scans
using the absorbance detection system after the run was complete.
The intensity scans were then analyzed in DCDT2+ to select the correct meniscus. All experiments were performed
using Spin-Analytical sedimentation velocity cells with 1.2 cm centerpieces
at 50K rpm. The temperature of the AUC was calibrated using the method
of Li and Stafford, so that 5, 10, 20,
30, and 35 °C correspond to 4.62, 9.65, 19.69, 29.73, and 34.76
°C, respectively. After the samples had been loaded into the
centrifuge, the temperature was equilibrated for at least 1 h prior
to starting the sedimentation.

The density of the buffer was
measured at each temperature using an Anton Parr DMA 5000 densitometer.
The partial specific volume and buffer viscosity at each temperature
were estimated using SedNTerp. Sedimentation
velocity data were analyzed with DCDT2+, both to choose
an objective meniscus position and to produce a g(s*) sedimentation coefficient distribution. The
data were analyzed with Sedfit to produce
a continuous c(s*) distribution
up to 30 S to look for any stronger association that may have been
missed by a g(s*) analysis. For
isodesmic Kiso (M–1)
fitting, the data were imported into SEDANAL for direct boundary analysis.

Protein Labeling with Fluorescein
To use the fluorescence
detection system, all three constructs were covalently labeled with
the small fluorescent dye fluorescein. The purified protein (stock
solutions kept at ≈2 mM) was dissolved to a concentration of
100 μM in NaCO3 buffer. A small amount of fluorescein-5-EX
succinimidyl ester (Life Technologies) was dissolved in DMSO and the
concentration determined by absorbance measurement of a dilution in
NaCO3 buffer. The dissolved fluorescein-5-EX succinimidyl
ester was added to the protein solution to achieve a final protein:dye
ratio of 1:6. The reaction was allowed to proceed for 2 h at room
temperature. To facilitate the reaction, the mixture was placed on
a slowly rotating turntable. The reaction was stopped by performing
three thermal cycles to remove free dye. To fully equilibrate the
protein back into PBS buffer from the NaCO3 buffer, the
final cold supernatant was passed over a Penefsky column. An amino specific probe is used rather than
a Cys acting fluorescent probe to allow labeling of both sites in
future experiments with drugs like paclitaxel and doxorubicin.

Dynamic
Light Scattering
Prior to DLS measurements,
an ELP stock solution was diluted to the appropriate concentration
and 200 μL of the diluted sample was used to overfill the 10
μL volume DLS quartz cuvette. The DLS cuvette was inspected
for air bubbles; if any were present, the cuvette was emptied and
refilled. After the cuvette had been placed in the DLS instrument
(DynaProTM NanoStar, Wyatt Technology), the temperature was allowed
to equilibrate for 5 min. All DLS data were collected at 658 nm using
a 10 s acquisition time. The data were typically collected at 1 °C
intervals from 5 to 60 °C, although repeat measurements were
collected at 0.25 °C to estimate uncertainties in RH values at 5–6 °C and to avoid temperature
overshoot effects near TT (see ). At each temperature, the system was equilibrated
for approximately 2 min prior to measurement. The laser power was
set to 50%; the autoattenuation mode was disabled, and the hydrodynamic
radius values, RH, were analyzed in regularization
mode. The data were analyzed using DYNAMICS version 7.1.0, which was
included with the instrument.

Differential Scanning Calorimetry
All DSC experiments
were performed using a Microcal (Northampton, MA) VP-DSC instrument.
For all experiments, both the sample and reference cells were filled
with the appropriate buffer for baseline calibration, and the sample
cell was refilled with the appropriate ELP solution. The protocol
was set to ramp the temperature from 283 to 343 K (10–70 °C)
at a rate of 1 °C/min and then rapidly cool the solution to 10
°C over 5 min. This was repeated twice to examine the reversibility
of the ELP phase transition. Enthalpy ΔH was
calculated by integrating the baseline-corrected excess heat capacity
signal from 10 °C on either side of the phase change.

Turbidity
All turbidity measurements were performed
using a Cary 100 Bio UV–vis spectrophotometer with an external
Peltier temperature controller and a 1 cm path length cuvette. The
temperature was monitored using a probe that was placed inside a reference
cuvette. The accuracy of the probe was verified by using an external
temperature probe to manually check the temperature over a range of
20–60 °C. To measure the TT, the temperature was ramped at a rate of 0.1 °C/min. To examine
the reversibility of aggregation, the temperature was ramped from
20 to 50 °C at a rate of 1 °C/min. The increase in rate
was necessary as ELP forms aggregates above the TT that will pellet under the force of gravity. The TT was calculated by taking the derivative of
the heating profile.

Circular Dichroism
All circular
dichroism data were
collected in a Jasco 720 instrument with a Jasco model PTC-423S single-position
Peltier attachment controller using a 0.1 mm path length cuvette.
Data were collected on each construct at two concentrations (0.75
and 1.25 mg/mL). At each concentration, three spectra were recorded
and averaged at 10 °C intervals from 5 to 65 °C. The ellipticity
at 196 nm was also measured at 1 °C intervals from 5 to 65 °C
to compare the effect of temperature and concentration on β-turn
formation.

Results
Analysis of Protein Sequences
The sequences of the
three constructs examined in this study are summarized in Table . For reference, the sequence of Lys-ELP1, the construct
previously analyzed, is also presented.
These constructs have a cysteine residue located at the N-terminal
end of ELP., This results in approximately
30–50% of the population existing as disulfide-linked dimers
as measured by sedimentation velocity [SV (data not shown)]. Thus,
all biophysical measurements were initially performed in the presence
of 1 mM TCEP. The cysteine is engineered solely to covalently attach
small molecule drugs and, therefore, during treatments will be occupied
by therapeutics and not available for disulfide-linked dimers. Serum contains glutathione reductase and other
reducing agents; therefore, any remaining disulfides should, in principle,
be reduced. By examining the biophysical properties of the reduced
constructs, we can examine the contributions caused by the modifications
without the added complication of the MW increasing due to the presence
of disulfide-linked dimers.

Introduction to Construct Sequences
and a Summary of Basic Properties
Abbreviated Sequences	
Lys-ELP1	N′-MS-K-GPG(VPG[VGAVVVGAGV]G)150WP-C′	
Cys-ELP1	N′-M-C-GPG(VPG[VGAVVVGAGV]G)150WP-C′	
Bac-Cys-ELP1	N′-M-RRIRPRPPRLPRPRPRPLPFPRPG-C-GPG(VPG[VGAVVVGAGV]G)150WP-C′	
SynB1-Cys-ELP1	N′-M-RFFRLSYSRRRFSTSTGR-C-GPG(VPG[VGAVVVGAGV]G)150WP-C′	
Molecular Parameters	
 	N	MW
(Da)	pI	extinction
coefficient (M–1 cm–1)	average disorder	⟨H⟩	charge at pH 7	RH, compact (nm)	RH, unfolded (nm)	
Lys-ELP1	758	59546.61	8.875	5690	0.9902	0.5894	0.69	3.26	8.88	
Cys-ELP1	757	59337.39	5.622	5690	0.9902	0.5905	–0.31	3.25	8.75	
Bac-Cys-ELP1	781	62397.16	12.544	5690	0.9901	0.5830	8.69	3.29	9.57	
SynB1-Cys-ELP1	775	61739.16	12.002	6970	0.9901	0.5866	5.69	3.27	9.17	
The MW, pI, charge at pH 7, and
extinction coefficient were calculated from the amino acid sequence
using SedNTerp.N is
the total number of residues. The average disorder measures the probability
of disorder on a scale of 0 (highly ordered) to 1 (no predicted order)
using PONDR. The mean hydrophobicity was calculated from the amino
acid sequence using the method of Kyte and Doolittle. The hydrodynamic radius for a compact or unfolded shape
was calculated as explained in the text.

The MW and mean hydrophobicity
(⟨H⟩) of
all constructs are similar, with all MWs
consistent with each other within 5% (Table ). We previously calculated the compaction index (CI) of ELP by calculating
the hydrodynamic radius of a polypeptide of the same MW of ELP adopting
either a globular or unfolded conformation and compared these values
to the hydrodynamic radius of ELP measured by DLS and SV. The hydrodynamic
radius (RH) of a globular protein was
calculated using the simple power law:where N is the total
number
of residues and R0 and v are constants determined by Wilkins et al. (R0 = 4.75, and v =
0.29). The expected hydrodynamic radius for intrinsically disordered
proteins with a high proline content was calculated using the formula
described by Marsh and Forman-Kay:where Q is the charge, Ppro is the fraction of prolines, SHis = 1 because no histidine tag is present, and A, B, C, D, R0, and v are constants
(A = 1.24, B = 0.904, C = 0.00759, D = 0.963, R0 = 2.49, and v = 0.285, 0.549, or 0.509 for the
folded, denatured, or IDP state, respectively).

The MW, ⟨H⟩, and calculated hydrodynamic
radius of all constructs are essentially unchanged by the substitution
of a lysine with a cysteine or the addition of CPPs. However, because
the lysine residue contributed the only charge present at physiological
pH, the overall charge and polarity are changed by modifications involving
charged residues. At physiological pH, Lys-ELP1 has an overall calculated
charge of 0.69. Replacement of the lysine residue with a cysteine
lowers the overall calculated charge to −0.31. The addition
of Bac or SynB1 raises the overall calculated charge to 8.68 or 5.68,
respectively, at pH 7. It is important to note that the addition of
CPPs to the N-terminal end also results in an asymmetric charge distribution.

Because of the overall charge at physiological pH, we expected
to observe a change in the solubility of the ELP constructs. We hypothesized
that as the magnitude of the overall charge increased, the solubility
might correspondingly increase because of interactions with the solvent
in the soluble state. This would be observed as an increase in the TT. This obviously neglects the potential affect
of asymmetric charge and stabilization of the aggregated state. To
test this hypothesis, we performed solubility measurements.

Effect
of CPPs on ELP Solubility and Reversibility
The use of ELP
as a drug delivery vector is fundamentally dependent
upon the construct remaining soluble at normal physiological temperatures
(TP) but reversibly aggregating at therapeutically
attainable heated temperatures (TH, i.e., TP &lt; TT &lt; TH).,,, Therefore, there are two major
questions. (1) Do the modified constructs retain the ability to thermally
aggregate in a reversible manner? (2) How do the modifications affect
the TT?

The reversibility of ELP
aggregation for all three constructs was examined in PBS and 95% FBS
by heating and cooling a solution of 50 μM ELP and monitoring
the turbidity, (Figure ). For all constructs, the aggregation was observed to be reversible
and repeatable in both PBS and 95% FBS. The effect of the basic CPPs
on the TT was examined by measuring the TT as a function of concentration for each construct.
For all constructs, the TT was observed
to decrease linearly with the logarithm of the ELP concentration.
The results were plotted on a logarithmic concentration scale and
fit using linear least-squares regression (LLSR) (Figure  and Table S1 of the ). Note that by fitting the data on a logarithmic
micromolar scale, the reported y-intercept is the TT at 1 μM. All constructs exhibit similar
trends between buffer conditions. The TT in PBS and in 95% FBS is increased by approximately 4 °C with
the addition of TCEP. This trend is expected because it has been demonstrated
that the TT of ELP is inversely related
to the MW. Therefore, the reduction of
disulfide-linked dimers by TCEP serves to lower the average MW and
increase the TT. Another interesting possible
explanation is that the disulfide-linked dimers are serving as “early”
nuclei and nucleating the aggregation process, similar to the nucleation
of microtubules or Hb-S. The TT is increased by approximately
1 °C in 95% FBS compared to PBS. Because macromolecular crowding
would be expected to lower the TT, this suggests that all ELP constructs could
be weakly associating with serum components. This trend is consistent
with the results obtained for Lys-ELP. All constructs exhibit a significant decrease (approximately 4 °C)
in the TT when they are covalently labeled
with fluorescein (approximately 5–10% labeling efficiency),
consistent with previous analyses.,

Testing the
ability of constructs to reversibly aggregate. A 50
μM solution was heated and cooled at a rate of 1.0 °C/min.
The solution was heated from 20 to 50 °C (■), cooled (□),
reheated to 50 °C (●), and then cooled (○). (A)
Cys-ELP1 in 1× PBS and 1 mM TCEP. (B) Cys-ELP1 in 95% FBS. (C)
Bac-Cys-ELP1 in 1× PBS and 1 mM TCEP. (D) Bac-Cys-ELP1 in 95%
FBS. (E) SynB1-Cys-ELP1 in 1× PBS and 1 mM TCEP. (F) SynB1-Cys-ELP1
in 95% FBS. All constructs reversibly aggregate in both PBS and FBS.

Measuring the TT as a function of concentration:
(A) Cys-ELP1, (B) Bac-Cys-ELP1, and (C) SynB1-Cys-ELP1. For each construct,
the TT was measured as a function of concentration
in PBS (□), FBS (○), PBS with 1 mM TCEP (■),
FBS with 1 mM TCEP (●), the sample labeled with fluorescein
in PBS with 1 mM TCEP (▲), and the sample labeled with fluorescein
in FBS (▼). The concentration dependence of the TT was fit using LLSR and is summarized in Table S1 of
the .

The observed decrease in solubility with an increase
in charge
is opposite of the hypothesized effect. The asymmetric addition of
basic residues could be lowering the solubility of ELP in two ways;
either the charges are decreasing the stability of the soluble state,
or the aggregated state is being stabilized. The addition of asymmetric
charges could be causing the ELP polymers to adopt a more extended
conformation in the soluble state. This would cause an increase in
the surface area exposed to solvent and a decrease in the number of
intrachain (van der Waals) interactions. This would serve to decrease
the energy required to aggregate the ELP polymers by decreasing the
intrachain interactions broken or increasing the entropic gain of
the interaction and thus be observed as a decrease in the TT. This hypothesis would be supported by an
increase in the hydrodynamic radius below the TT. Alternatively, it is possible that the asymmetric charges
are stabilizing the aggregated state. Similar to the formation of
micellar structures, this could be through orienting the hydrophobic
chains inward and leaving the polar CPPs exposed to solvent. To differentiate
between these possibilities, we examined the hydrodynamic radius and
enthalpy of the aggregation reaction by DLS and DSC.

Effect on Size
and Thermodynamics
The hydrodynamic
radius of each construct was measured as a function of temperature
at three concentrations using DLS (Figure  and summarized in Table ). All three constructs
exhibit a hydrodynamic radius at 5 °C of approximately 6.4 nm
and are consistent within experimental error of each other at each
concentraion. Two of the constructs, Cys-ELP1 and SynB1-Cys-ELP1,
and the control, Lys-ELP1, exhibit a significant increase in size
as a function of concentration and temperature below the TT. The Lys, Cys, and SynB1 constructs are significantly
larger at 300 μM, approaching 11.4, 9.7, and 8.5 nm, respectively,
just below the TT. The size of the Bac-Cys
construct increases with temperature but only slightly, from 6.5 to
6.7 to 6.9 nm, with concentration. At and above the TT, all constructs aggregate and form large particles that
are approximately 2.5 orders of magnitude larger than those below
the TT.

Examination of the aggregation process
using DLS, DSC, and turbidity.
This experiment was performed for three concentrations of each construct.
Pictured are the results for 300 μM Synb1-Cys-ELP1. For each
concentration, a 2 mL sample was prepared and 500 μL used for
turbidity (□), 500 μL for DLS (■), and 1 mL for
DSC (◇). All experiments were performed in PBS with 1 mM TCEP
added. The results of this experiment and all others are summarized
in Table . Note that the aggregates formed
above the TT will sediment to the bottom
of the cuvette under the force of gravity. Because turbidity measurements
were taken in the middle of the cuvette, the turbidity can be observed
to decrease over time as the aggregates pellet. In DLS measurements,
where the measurement is made at the bottom of the cuvette, this effect
is attenuated.

Summary
of the DLS and DSC Data for
Each ELP Construct
construct	concn (μM)	RH (nm) at 5 °C	RH (nm)
below the TT	RH (μm) above the TT	ΔH (kcal/mol)	
Lys-ELP1	130	6.95 ± 0.13	8.60 ± 1.09	2.32 ± 0.39	46.4	
 	260	6.87 ± 0.20	9.40 ± 0.32	2.67 ± 0.46	45.5	
 	390	6.77 ± 0.12	11.45 ± 0.67	2.39 ± 0.84	45.7	
Cys-ELP1	150	6.34 ± 0.27	6.92 ± 0.16	2.47 ± 0.54	50.0	
 	300	6.49 ± 0.70	8.69 ± 0.55	2.78 ± 0.65	49.9	
 	450	6.43 ± 0.42	9.81 ± 1.69	2.43 ± 0.36	50.9	
Bac-Cys-ELP1	100	6.23 ± 0.38	6.55 ± 0.22	3.18 ± 0.46	39.0	
 	200	6.54 ± 0.15	6.74 ± 0.24	3.11 ± 0.10	37.1	
 	300	6.60 ± 0.18	6.92 ± 0.09	3.88 ± 0.34	38.0	
SynB1-ELP1	100	6.13 ± 0.76	6.67 ± 0.11	3.70 ± 0.38	44.0	
 	200	6.50 ± 0.72	7.76 ± 0.12	4.09 ± 0.28	45.6	
 	300	6.67 ± 0.12	8.55 ± 0.16	3.93 ± 0.29	44.5	
The
DLS data are presented at
temperatures below and above the TT. The
DSC data exhibit no concentration dependence, and average values are
plotted in Figure  vs TT at 1 μM.

Plot of enthalpy
as a function of TT. For each construct,
the enthalpy was measured at three concentrations
ranging from approximately 100 μM to approximately 450 μM
and appeared, over this concentration range, to be concentration-independent.
Therefore, the enthalpy presented here is the average enthalpy of
each construct. The T°T presented
is the transition temperature at protein concentration of 1 μM.
The linear fit has an R2 of 0.986.

The hydrodynamic radius observed
in these experiments for all three
constructs is slightly shorter than that observed for Lys-ELP (Table ). This indicates that each construct is adopting
a more compacted conformation than Lys-ELP (see ). This suggests that the decrease in TT observed is not caused by ELP adopting a more extended conformation
where the level of intrachain interactions is decreased and the solvent-exposed
surface area is increased. These data also suggest that ELP is not
forming small spherical micelles, as these would be observed in the
DLS data as intermediate sizes between monomers and the fully aggregated
state.

The change in enthalpy of
the reaction was measured using DSC as
a function of temperature at three concentrations (Figure  and summarized in Table ). Consistent with the measurements on Lys-ELP, the aggregation reaction
for each construct is endothermic and, over the concentration range
examined, concentration-independent. The transition from the weakly
associated state to the aggregated state must involve a similar cooperative
process that does not reflect the fraction of weakly associated molecules.
This may simply mean the weakly associated state is highly solvated
or not a significant fraction of the total protein.

The enthalpy
of Cys-ELP1 is 50.3 kcal/mol (averaged over the three
concentrations measured). This is greater than the enthalpy previously
measured for Lys-ELP1 (45.9 kcal/mol). As the overall charge is increased
by the addition of the SynB1 and Bac CPP, the enthalpy decreases to
44.7 and 38.0 kcal/mol, respectively. The magnitude of the enthalpy
exhibits an inverse correlation with the TT extrapolated to a concentration of 1 μM (Figure ). This correlation supports the hypothesis that the decrease
in the solubility is due to the stabilization of the assembled state
with an increase in charge density. This suggests that the asymmetric
charges are orienting to the exterior of the aggregates, and therefore,
more water remains bound. It will be very interesting to see if this
trend holds for additional ELP constructs with different overall charge
densities.

Effect on Secondary Structure
The
secondary structure
of each construct was examined using circular dichroism as a function
of temperature and concentration (Figure ).
The spectra measured are essentially identical to the CD structure
that was obtained for Lys-ELP1 and CD
spectra on ELPs of different lengths and guest residue compositions.− All three constructs exhibit the same spectral features (Figure A–C). At low temperatures, there is a minimum
at approximately 195 nm that is characteristic of a random or disordered
polypeptide structure. At high temperatures,
there is a maximum at approximately 210 nm that is characteristic
of type II β-turns. The magnitude
of the minimum at 195 nm decreases with an increase in temperature
(Figure D). The magnitude of the 195 nm minima
also decreases with an increase in concentration (Figure D), suggesting that weak self-association is occurring
and that this association promotes ordered β-turn structures.
This weak self-association below the TT is also observed in the DLS data as an increase in the hydrodynamic
radius with an increase in temperature. These results are consistent
with the biophysical properties of Lys-ELP1. The increase in the maximum
at approximately 210 nm with an increase in temperature is consistent
with increasing percent β-turn conformation. All three constructs
exhibit virtually identical molar ellipticities and temperature dependencies,
suggesting that the addition of CPPs is not affecting the secondary
structure of the majority of the polypeptide. The quantitative deconvolution
of the CD spectra into specific structural elements is difficult because
no satisfactory reference set exists for IDPs. Current efforts are
focused on collecting laser Raman data to complement CD data and quantitatively
estimate secondary structures, along with molecular dynamics simulations.
Preliminary Raman data collected on 200 μM Lys-ELP1 show predominantly
β-turn and very little or no random coil (J. Benevides, data
not shown), consistent with a concentration-dependent folding of ELP
below the TT.

Examination of the secondary
structure using circular dichroism.
(A) CD spectra of 0.64 mg/mL Cys-ELP1 and 1 mM TCEP in PBS as a function
of temperature. (B) CD spectra of 0.71 mg/mL Bac-Cys-ELP1 and 1 mM
TCEP in PBS as a function of temperature. (C) CD spectra of 0.69 mg/mL
SynB1-Cys-ELP1 and 1 mM TCEP in PBS as a function of temperature.
(D) Temperature dependence of the magnitude of the molar ellipticity
at 196 nm plotted for Cys-ELP1 (■), Bac-Cys-ELP1 (●),
and SynB1-Cys-ELP1 (▲). The ellipticity was also measured at
1.4 mg/mL (empty symbols).

Examining the Hydrodynamic Properties
In our previous
study of Lys-ELP1, we quantified the weak self-association observed
in the DLS and CD data by performing SV analysis. We found that at
a low temperature (5 °C) Lys-ELP1 behaved as an extended, nonideal
monomer. As the temperature was increased, the s°20,w increased, consistent with self-association. By globally
fitting all of the raw data obtained at five temperatures, we determined
that the association was best explained by an indefinite isodesmic
association model. This suggested that no distinct stable species
were formed (i.e., trimers, pentamers, etc.) but the association was
best described as indefinite with a constant Kiso between each step. We hypothesized that the three constructs
examined here should exhibit the same properties (i.e., indefinite,
isodesmic association that is enhanced with an increase in temperature)
exhibited by Lys-ELP1. Furthermore, we hypothesized that the magnitude
of the association should be inversely related to the extrapolated TT (i.e., as the solubility decreases, we would
observe a greater strength of association at each temperature). This
suggests a connection among weak association, possible nucleation,
inversion temperature, and phase change.

The sedimentation coefficient
of all three constructs examined in this study decreases with concentration
at 5 °C (Figure  and summarized in Table
S2 of the ). This
is caused by hydrodynamic nonideality and is consistent with the behavior
observed with Lys-ELP1, an extended protein with a large excluded
volume. The f/fo values
at 5 °C are 2.86, 2.90, and 2.89, consistent with an extended
shape. The extrapolated sedimentation coefficients (s°20,w) were used to calculate the RH values for each construct (7.46 nm for Cys, 7.70 nm
for Bac, and 7.64 nm for SynB1). The RH values measured by SV are similar but ∼16% larger than the RH values measured by DLS [∼6.4 nm on
average (Table )]. To further address this
discrepancy, DLS data were repeated at 300 μM and a finer (0.25
°C) temperature spacing, and the low-temperature data (5, 5.25,
5.5, and 5.75 °C) were averaged. The data were consistent among
the constructs (Lys, 6.78 ± 0.22 °C; Cys, 6.89 ± 0.30
°C; Bac, 7.02 ± 0.81 °C; SynB1, 6.80 ± 0.76 °C)
and consistently smaller than the SV estimates, although within one
or two standard deviations of the mean. A major difference between
the DLS and SV data is that the s values are extrapolated
to zero ELP concentration, while these DLS data above are measured
at 100–450 μM. Thus, the discrepancy, an ∼10%
lower RH value derived from these more
precise DLS measurements versus SV, may be due to a concentration
or nonideality effect. To resolve this discrepancy, we collected DLS
data at 5 °C on the SynB1 form at 2, 4, 6, and 8 mg/mL (32–128
μM) and extrapolated to 0 °C. However, there was no upward
trend, and the extrapolated RH values
are consistent with the previous measurements. Given the scatter in
the DLS measurements (data above and Table ), we must conclude a large uncertainty and not nonideality is the
cause of this apparent discrepancy.

Examining the hydrodynamic properties
of polypeptide constructs.
The sedimentation coefficient for each construct was measured as a
function of concentration and temperature and plotted as 1/s vs c mg/mL to extract apparent Ks and extrapolated f/fo values: (A) Cys-ELP1 and 1 mM TCEP in PBS,
(B) Bac-Cys-ELP1 and 1 mM TCEP in PBS, and (C) SynB1-Cys-ELP1 and
1 mM TCEP in PBS. The decrease in the sedimentation coefficient with
concentration at low temperatures is caused by hydrodynamic nonideality.
As the temperature is increased, the magnitude of the apparent Ks is decreased as weak self-association masks
the nonideality. The nonideal isodesmic sedimentation analysis with
Sedanal is summarized in Table .

For all Cys constructs, the magnitude of the apparent
nonideality
(Ks or the apparent slope) observed in
the SV experiments decreases with an increase in temperature (Figure ), consistent with weak self-association occurring
below the TT. At each temperature, there
is no significant difference in the hydrodynamic properties among
the three constructs (Table S2 of the ), suggesting that the addition of a Bac or SynB1
CPP has a minimal effect on the hydrodynamic properties of ELP (s20,w, Ks, and f/f0).

The raw SV data
from each temperature were fit to indefinite, isodesmic
association models (summarized in Table ).
The hydrodynamic properties at 5 °C were used to define baseline,
nonassociative properties of ELP. It was assumed, as described previously, that there is no change in the shape or nonideality
with an increase in temperature. This is a reasonable starting point
because all the f/fo values
for each Cys construct and temperature examined are between 2.53 and
2.90. This allows us to attribute all of the temperature-dependent
change in the concentration dependence to weak self-association. At
10 °C, all constructs demonstrate virtually the same extent of
self-association, −3.59 ± 0.03 kcal/mol. This trend continues
with an increase in temperature (−4.24 ± 0.07 kcal/mol
at 20 °C, −4.88 ± 0.19 kcal/mol at 30 °C, and
−5.30 ± 0.19 kcal/mol at 35 °C), although Bac-ELP1
and SynB1-ELP1 exhibit a slightly greater extent of association than
Cys-ELP1. These values are consistent with the Lys-ELP1 data as a
function of temperature (−3.30, −4.41, −5.17,
and −5.58 kcal/mol), although the Kiso values of the Lys construct are consistently larger at higher temperatures.
To test the hypothesis that self-association is linked to the phase
change, these data are compared with the TT data for PBS in Table S1 of the . Note that the absence of TCEP lowers the extrapolated T°T for all three Cys constructs in PBS, consistent
with a role for cross-linked dimers (increased MW) affecting aggregation.
The ToT data with TCEP follow
the trend of 48.05, 45.23, and 46.68 °C for Cys, Bac, and SynB
constructs, respectively. While this is consistent with our hypothesis,
it does not prove the suggestion that these weak complexes nucleate
or are directly involved in the aggregation or phase change process.
The data for Lys-ELP1 reveal slightly more association at 35 °C
(−5.58 kcal/mol) but a higher TT (46.75 °C). Thus, additional factors like stabilization of
large aggregates must play a role.

Summary
of Global Isodesmic Fitting
of SV Data at Each Temperature for Each Cys-ELP Construct
 	Kiso (M–1)	
 	Cys-ELP1	Bac-Cys-ELP1	SynB1-Cys-ELP1	
10 °C	
best fit	6.07 × 102	5.52 × 102	5.97 × 102	
95% confidence
interval	⟨5.93 × 102, 6.21 × 102⟩	⟨5.22 × 102, 5.81 × 102⟩	⟨5.78 × 102, 6.12 × 102⟩	
standard
deviation	0.00821	0.00446	0.005783	
20 °C	
best fit	1.61 × 103	1.29 × 103	1.48 × 103	
95% confidence
interval	⟨1.58 × 103, 1.64 × 103⟩	⟨1.27 × 103, 1.30 × 103⟩	⟨1.21 × 103, 1.73 × 103⟩	
standard
deviation	0.00452	0.00499	0.00537	
30 °C	
best
fit	2.30 × 103	4.08 × 103	3.75 × 103	
95% confidence
interval	⟨2.20 × 103, 2.41 × 103⟩	⟨4.06 × 103, 4.10 × 103⟩	⟨3.48 × 102, 3.89 × 102⟩	
standard
deviation	0.00644	0.00536	0.00593	
35 °C	
best
fit	4.11 × 103	7.50 × 103	6.03 × 103	
95% confidence
interval	⟨4.09 × 103, 4.13 × 103⟩	⟨7.47 × 103, 7.54 × 103⟩	⟨5.79 × 103, 6.21 × 103⟩	
standard
deviation	0.00588	0.00626	0.00513	
The uncertainties in Kiso were determined by Fstat at a 95% confidence
interval.

Serum Analyses
In an attempt to study the hydrodynamic
properties in serum, all constructs were fluorescently labeled with
fluorescein (abbreviated F-construct) and sedimented at varying levels
of FBS. All data sets exhibited the J–O or Johnston–Ogston
effect,,− a classic boundary sharpening
anomally caused by high concentrations of other components. All three
constructs demonstrate a decrease in the weight average sedimentation
coefficient with an increase in the level of FBS (Figure S1 of the ). This is attributed to
hydrodynamic nonideality and indicates that none of the constructs
are forming strong associations with serum components, which would
be observed as an increase in the sedimentation coefficient with concentration.
Separate investigations do suggest that ELP weakly associates with
some IgG component(s) (manuscript in preparation). As the temperature
is increased to 30 °C, the magnitude of the apparent nonideality
in serum decreases. This is consistent with the temperature-dependent
behavior observed in PBS and suggests that ELP also exhibits weak
association in serum.

Discussion
In this study, the structural,
thermodynamic, and hydrodynamic
properties of three ELP derivatives being investigated for drug delivery
are presented. These constructs are designed to deliver drugs through
systemic delivery at physiological temperatures, where the drug–ELP
conjugates will be soluble, and subsequent localization is achieved
through the use of applied heat. The polypeptides vary from the construct
previously examined (Lys-ELP1) by the replacement of a lysine residue
with a cysteine to the subsequent addition of either a Bac or SynB1
CPP to the N-terminus. The cysteine residue was engineered for the
attachment of small drugs through thiol–ether linkages, and
the CPPs provide enhanced uptake into tumor cells by induction of
endocytosis. There are two specific questions to be investigated.
(1) What are the effects of CPP modifications on the biophysical properties?
(2) Will these changes impact the therapeutic role of ELPs as a drug
delivery vector?

The reversibility of thermal aggregation was
investigated for all
three constructs in PBS and FBS and found to be completely reversible.
The TT was then examined as a function
of concentration. Consistent with previous results, the TT was a linear function of the logarithm of the concentration.
Surprisingly, the replacement of lysine with a cysteine increased
the TT by 1.30 °C, which is the opposite
of the expected effect, as removing the only charge would have been
expected to lower the solubility. This trend was continued as adding
charged CPPs, which was thought to increase the solubility, actually
lowered the TT for SynB1- and Bac-Cys-ELP1.
This could be explained by the asymmetric charge addition either destabilizing
the soluble state or stabilizing the aggregated state. The addition
of asymmetric charges could be acting to lower the solubility by causing
ELP to adopt a more extended conformation and expose more surface
area to solvent. This hypothesis was explored by examining the hydrodynamic
radius through the use of DLS and AUC. The hydrodynamic radii measured
by SV for all constructs at 5 °C were similar to each other within
experimental error and to that of the previously characterized Lys-ELP1
construct (6.92 nm for Lys, 7.46 nm for Cys, 7.70 nm for Bac, and
7.64 nm for SynB1).

Previously, we calculated the CI of Lys-ELP1
(0.349) using the
method of Brocca et al. The CI of each
construct suggests a moderate compact conformation (0.424 for Cys-ELP,
0.464 for SynB1-Cys-ELP1, and 0.497 for Bac-Cys-ELP1), consistent
with the high proline contents (∼150/750 or 20%). This suggests
that Cys-ELPs are not on average adopting a fully extended conformation
and that the decrease in the TT is caused
by the addition of charges making the aggregated state more stable.
The aggregated state may become more ordered where the hydrophobic
regions are buried and the polar regions are left exposed to solvent,
similar to a micelle formation. This is supported by the decrease
in the ΔH observed with a decrease in T°T. Future studies will examine the role
of water release during the phase change by titrating with osmolytes
to lower water activity. (Preliminary data for the SynB1 form suggest
50 ± 5 water molecules are released during the phase change.)

The effect on the structural and hydrodynamic properties was examined
by CD and SV. In our previous analysis of Lys-ELP1, we observed weak
association that became stronger with an increase in temperature.
This weak association appeared to cause an increase in the level of
β-turn structure. These analyses suggested that the TT of ELPs is more accurately described as a
solubility constant, where the increase in temperature causes ELP
to undergo a structural transition to an ordered structure. These
same biophysical properties were observed for all three constructs.
Weak association below the TT was observed
in both the DLS data, through an increase in the hydrodynamic radius
with temperature, and the CD data, through a decrease in the magnitude
of the minima at 195 nm. The magnitude of the ellipticity is the same
as that observed for the Lys-ELP1 construct, which suggests that the
CPP addition has a minimal effect on the secondary structure. SV was
used to quantify the extent of the association observed below the TT. The strength of the association correlated
with the TT, where a lower TT suggested an increased level of association occurring
in the sample, although the Lys construct does not follow the same
quantitative trend as the Cys constructs. When Cys-ELP1 was sedimented
in serum, two important features were observed. Consistent with a
previous study, the sedimentation coefficient decreases with an increase
in the level of FBS. This suggests that none of the constructs are
forming strong associations with serum components, which would be
observed as an increase in the sedimentation coefficient with an increase
in concentration. Second, the magnitude of the nonideality decreases
with an increase in temperature. This suggests that all constructs
are still exhibiting weak association below the TT, consistent with the behavior in PBS.

It is worth
noting that the simple idea of a disordered to ordered
transition is too simple to describe the data because the loss of
disorder and the formation of β-turn occur with an increase
in concentration (see CD data) and an increase in temperature below
the TT. Laser Raman data collected on
a 200 uM sample (J. Benevides, to be presented elsewhere) reveal very
little disordered structure and exclusively β-turn. The concentration
dependence of SV and DLS data suggests this structural transition
is coupled to weak association. This is in part the basis of the idea
that these weak complexes may serve as nuclei for the phase change.
Other factors may play a role, for example, a more concerted release
of water, the formation of a more ordered β-spiral, and more
extensive or stabilized condensation or coacervate formation. The
nature of the weak association is not known in part because ELPs lack
a definite structure that might be used for docking experiments. One
could imagine random hydrophobic intermolecular interactions along
many regions of each molecule that statistically sum to a weak isodesmic
complex. This model would predict complexes with similar nonideality
per gram, an assumption of our isodesmic fitting, if the monomers
in these weak complexes retained the same degree of compaction. Future
experiments and simulations will attempt to test these hypotheses.

The goal of this research is to examine the biophysical properties
of CPP–ELP constructs and how the behavior as a drug delivery
vector might be affected. Modifying the construct to replace a lysine
residue with a cysteine was performed to provide greater selectivity
in the presence of basic CPPs. The addition of the basic CPPs is designed
to induce endocytosis and enhance drug delivery. In a concentration-
and buffer-dependent manner, one could ask how these modifications
affect the solubility and delivery of aggregated protein. This comparison
can be calculated from the fits summarized in Table S1 of the . For example, in PBS at
42 °C, the soluble concentrations are 9.8 μM for Lys-ELP,
11.8 μM for Cys-ELP, 1.4 μM for Bac-ELP, and 1.3 μM
for SynB1-ELP. The Cys constructs are tested in 1 mM TCEP to avoid
disulfide formation effects. In 95% FBS at 42 °C, the soluble
concentrations are 27.3 μM for Lys-ELP, 8.6 μM for Cys-ELP,
4.2 μM for Bac-ELP, and 7.1 μM for SynB1-ELP. In general,
the Cys constructs are similar to or slightly better than the Lys-ELP
construct in terms of their effect on solubility. As discussed previously, these trends clearly have consequences
for dosage and therapeutic delivery, although
we must stress the importance of directly testing the influence of
physiologic buffers and drug labeling on TT and solubility. In general, the biophysical properties (SV, CD,
DLS, and DSC) are not significantly affected by these modifications.
Furthermore, from a therapeutic and pharmagological perspective, the
dose and clinical efficiacy must still be evaluated empirically for
different drugs and tumor models.

We are continuing our biophysical
analyses in three directions:
(1) optimizing ELP as a drug delivery vector, (2) elucidating the
mechanism of the aggregation process, and (3) quantitative analysis
of the hydrodynamic properties of ELPs in serum. ELP has been precisely
engineered so that TP &lt; TT &lt; TH. Our analyses suggest
that the aggregation of ELPs is more accurately defined as a solubility
constant; therefore, a low concentration will circulate systemically
and not aggregate above the TT. With a
decrease in the MW of the polymer, and an increase in the hydrophobicity,
the TT can remain in the ideal range while
lowering the concentration that will circulate systemically. In addition,
we demonstrate for the first time a significant correlation between
the transition temperature and the enthalpy of the reaction. We are
in the process of examining the role of water in the aggregation process
by repeating our analyses as a function of osmolyte concentration.
This should allow us to quantify the relationship between the TT and the enthalpy of the reaction. We are also
complementing our use of CD with laser Raman spectroscopy to examine
the secondary structure of aggregated ELP. Finally, we have been investigating
the hydrodynamic properties in serum and have been able to accurately
describe the sedimentation properties of ELP in physiological concentrations
of BSA and IgG (manuscript in preparation). Our current investigations
will attempt to elucidate the role of lipids and fatty acids alone
and bound to albumin, with the goal of systematically characterizing
all the major components of serum so that the hydrodynamic properties
can be quantitatively investigated. How this impacts drug delivery
and whether it is improved by altering the CPP–ELP sequence
are the questions.

Supporting Information Available
Fitting of TT versus
log(C) (Table S1), fitting of
1/s20,w versus concentration (Table S2),
and 1/s20,w data as a function of the
level of FBS (Figure S1). This material is available free of charge
via the Internet at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bi400955w_si_001.pdf

The authors
declare the
following competing financial interest(s): D.R. owns a company called
TTT that is funded by an SBIR grant.

Abbreviations
CDcircular dichroism

Cccritical concentration

CPPcell-penetrating peptide

DLSdynamic light scattering

DSCdifferential scanning
calorimetry

ELPelastin-like polypeptide

f/fofrictional
coefficient ratio

J–OJohnston–Ogston

RHradius of hydration

SVsedimentation velocity

TTtransition temperature.

A concern with lowering the solubility
concentration is that it may promote aggregation at off-targets. Off-target
accumulation is unavoidable, and this is being extensively studied
in the Raucher lab by various whole animal scanning methods. Previous
work has described the occurrence of ELP occlusions that block blood
flow in the extremeties. The appropriate approach to dealing with
this situation would be to test various doses to find an effective
and safe dose.

