Lipopolysaccharide (LPS) is
the major constituent of the outer leaflet of the outer membrane of
Gram-negative bacteria and essential for the integrity of the outer
membrane, making it a potential target for the development of novel
therapeutics. The general features of many LPS structures have been
characterized; it is composed of lipid A (the hydrophobic membrane
anchor), the core region (a nonrepeating oligosaccharide), and O-antigen
(a distal, repeating oligosaccharide).−

The core oligosaccharide
(OS) can be further divided into two structurally
distinct regions: the inner (lipid A proximal) and outer core OS.
The inner core typically contains residues of 3-deoxy-d-manno-oct-2-ulosonic acid (Kdo) and l-glycero-d-manno-heptose and is less variable among Gram-negative bacteria. The outer core
OS, in contrast, varies considerably and helps define five distinct
core structures in Escherichia coli, termed K-12
and R1–R4, and at least two core structures in Salmonella isolates., Nevertheless, the overall outer core OS
structure shows conserved
structural themes as shown in the simplified outer core structures
of E. coli K-12 and Salmonella typhimurium in Figure . Both have three connected hexose
residues on the main chain, and the first and third hexose residues
are branched with other sugars. In all of the E. coli and Salmonella outer core OS, HexI, the first hexose
on the main chain, is a glucose residue. WaaG has been identified as the UDP-glucose:(heptosyl)
lipopolysaccharide α-1,3-glucosyltransferase in E. coli K-12 and S. typhimurium., In E. coli K-12, HexII and HexIII are
both glucose residues, and in S. typhimurium, HexII
is a galactose residue and HexIII is a glucose residue (Figure ). WaaO [UDP-glucose:(glucosyl) lipopolysaccharide
α-1,3-galactosyltransferase] from E. coli K-12,
WaaI [UDP-galactose:(glucosyl) lipopolysaccharide α-1,3-galactosyltransferase]
from S. typhimurium, and WaaJ [UDP-glucose:(galactosyl)
lipopolysaccharide α-1,2-glucosyltransferase] are responsible
for the transfer of these hexose residues.,,,

E.
coli K-12 and S. typhimurium LPS outer core oligosaccharides (OS’s). The enzymes proposed
to catalyze each glycosylation are shown. The linkages among the sugars
are indicated; all are α linkages
except sugars added by WaaU from E. coli K12, which
are β linkages. The dashed line attached to HepII indicates
where the rest of the inner core and lipid A is attached. The location
at which the O-antigen is attached to the outer core OS is indicated.

In both E. coli K-12 and S. typhimurium, branched sugars are added
to the outer core OS. In both organisms,
galactose is added to HexI in an α-1→6 linkage by WaaB,
the UDP-galactose:(glucosyl) lipopolysaccharide α-1,6-galactosyltransferase. HexIII is appeneded with an α-1→2-linked N-acetylglucosamine residue in S. typhimurium by WaaK, the UDP-N-acetyl glucosamine:(glucosyl)
lipopolysaccharide α-1,6-N-acetyl glucosamine
transferase. E. coli K-12 differs at this position;
it is partially substituted at the C-6 position with a β-d-GlcNAc-(1→7)-l-α-d-Hep disaccharide,
both of which are proposed to be added by WaaU.,

The presence of an intact inner and outer core OS is critical for
cell function in both E. coli and S. typhimurium. The outer membranes of E. coli cells possessing
a mutated waaG have a decreased level of phosphorylation
of the inner core heptose, leading to decreased membrane stability;
this phosphorylation increases membrane stability by mediating cross-linking
with divalent cations. In Salmonella
enterica serovar Typhi, the outer core terminal
glucose residue (Glc II)
is required for the entry of the bacteria into epithelial cells. In addition, the inner and outer core OS links
lipid
A and the O-antigen, both of which are potent modulators of innate
immunity.,

Detailed analysis of the outer core
OS glycosyltransferases
of E. coli and S. typhimurium has
been limited
by the lack of biochemical data derived from purified enzymes and
structurally defined acceptors and structural characterization of in vitro reaction products. Previously, only WaaJ from E. coli R3 has been characterized in vitro using pure enzyme and substrates., Previous work
on the biochemical characterization of the other outer
core OS glycosyltransferases has relied on in vivo complementation of chromosomal insertion mutations. In these studies,
the LPS was characterized using polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis,
not by directly assessing the required lipid acceptors and sugar donors
required., In this work, we generated an outer core
OS acceptor that is easily
isolated by extraction with organic solvents and has a defined structure.
The overexpression of the lipid A late acyltransferase lpxM() and lipid A 1-phosphatase, in the ΔwaaG E. coli strain yields a lipid
A OS, with decreased hydrophilicity due to removal of the 1-phosphate
(by lpxE), a decreased level of phosphorylation of
the inner core heptoses (due to ΔwaaG), and
a higher proportion of secondary acyl chains (due to lpxM). Using this lipid acceptor and commercially available sugar nucleotides,
we report the in vitro characterization of six outer
core glycosyltransferases, E. coli WaaG, WaaB, and
WaaO and S. typhimurium WaaI, WaaJ, and WaaK, and
demonstrate the assembly of the entire S. typhimurium outer core OS in vitro.

Materials and Methods
Materials
Reagent grade chloroform, methanol, and silica
gel 60 thin-layer chromatography (TLC) plates (layer thickness of
150–200
μm) were obtained from EMD Chemicals Inc. (Gibbstown,
NJ). [32P]Pi, UDP-[U-14C]glucose,
UDP-[U-14C]galactose, and GDP-[U-14C]mannose
were from
PerkinElmer Life and Analytical
Sciences, Inc. (Waltham, MA). Yeast extract, agar, and tryptone were
from BD Biosciences. Sodium chloride and 4-(2-hydroxyethyl)-1-piperazineethanesulfonic
acid (HEPES) were from VWR International (West Chester, PA). Triton
X-100 was from Thermo Fisher Scientific (Waltham, MA). Isopropyl 1-thio-β-d-galactopyranoside (IPTG) was from Invitrogen Corp. (Carlsbad,
CA). UDP-glucose, UDP-galactose, UDP-glucuronic acid, UDP-galacuronic
acid, ADP-glucose, GDP-glucose, UDP-N-acetylglucosamine,
and ADP-mannose were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich.
The P-10 desalting column was from GE. All other chemicals were reagent
grade and were purchased from either Sigma-Aldrich (St. Louis, MO)
or Mallinckrodt Baker, Inc. (Phillipsburg, NJ).

Bacterial Strains
and Molecular Biology Applications
All bacteria were grown
in Luria-Bertani broth (LB, 10 g of NaCl, 10 g of bacto-tryptone,
and 5 g of yeast
extract per liter at 37 °C). When
required
for the selection of plasmids, cells were grown in the presence of
100 μg/mL ampicillin, 30 μg/mL chloramphenicol, or 30
μg/mL kanamycin. Plasmids were prepared using the
Qiagen mini-prep kit (Qiagen). Restriction endonucleases (New England
Biolabs) and T4 ligase (Invitrogen) were used according to the manufacturers’
instructions. Genomic DNA was isolated using the protocol for bacterial
cultures in the Easy-DNA kit (Invitrogen). Transformation-competent E. coli cells were prepared by the method of Inoue et al. Double-stranded DNA sequencing was performed
with an ABI Prism 377
instrument at the Duke University DNA Analysis Facility. Primers were
purchased from Integrated DNA Technologies, Inc.

Cloning, Overexpression,
and Purification of E.
coli K-12 WaaG, WaaB, and WaaO and S. typhimurium WaaI, WaaJ, and WaaK
E. coli K-12 waaG, waaB, and waaO were
amplified via PCR from genomic DNA of W3110 using the primers described
in Table S1 of the . For each gene, an NdeI site was incorporated at the N-terminus
and a BamHI or XhoI
site was incorporated at the C-terminus. Each PCR product was digested
with NdeI and BamHI or XhoI and ligated into a similarly digested
pET-21b
or pET-28b expression vector as indicated in Table . S. typhimurium waaI, waaJ, and waaK were
similarly cloned from genomic DNA of S. typhimurium into the pET-28b expression vector.

Bacterial
Strains and Plasmids
strain or
plasmid	description	source or
reference	
strains	 	 	
S. typhimurium	 	 	
LT2	wild type	Salmonella
Genetic Stock
Center (University of Calgary, Calgary, AB)	
E. coli	 	 	
W3110	wild type, F-λ	E. coli Genetic
Center (Yale University, New Haven, CT)	
BL21(DE3)	F–ompT hsdSB(rB–, mB–) gal dcm (DE3)	Novagen	
CWG303	E. coli F470 (waaG::Gen)	gift from C. Whitfield	
JQ2	W3110 (waaG:: Gen) pWFnlpxE, pBAD-lpxM	 	
plasmids	 	 	
pWSK29	low-copy
number vector, lac promoter,
AmpR	()	
pWFnlpxE	pWSK29 harboring Francicella novicida lpxE	()	
pBAD33	medium-copy
number vector,
CamR	()	
pBAD-lpxM	pBAD33 harboring lpxM	gift
from D. Six	
pECG28	pET28b
harboring E. coli K-12 waaG	 	
pECB21	pET21b harboring E. coli K-12 waaB	 	
pECI21	pET21b harboring E. coli K-12 waaO	 	
pSTI28	pET28b harboring S. typhimurium waaI	 	
pSTJ28	pET28b
harboring S. typhimurium waaJ	 	
pSTK28	pET28b harboring S. typhimurium waaK	 	
lpxM was subcloned
out of the pET vector and into the pBAD vector using the SacI and
XbaI sites, yielding a fragment that included the pET-21a(+) ribosome
binding site.

Each plasmid
was transformed into BL21(DE3)
for overexpression of the respective protein. LB (750 mL) containing
the appropriate antibiotics was inoculated from a 50 mL overnight
culture to a final A600 of 0.02 and grown
to an A600 of 0.7 at 37 °C. Protein
expression was induced by the addition of IPTG (final concentration
of 1 mM). For JQ2, arabinose (0.2%) was also added for the induction.
The cultures were grown for an
additional 4 h and then harvested at 4 °C by centrifugation at
4000g for 20 min. The cell pellet was washed with
phosphate-buffered
saline (PBS) [137 mM NaCl, 2.7 mM KCl, 10 mM Na2HPO4, and 1.8 mM KH2PO4 (pH 7.5)], and the
cells were harvested by centrifugation. This and all subsequent steps
were conducted at 4 °C. Cell debris and unbroken cells were removed
by centrifugation at 27000g for 30 min. The final
cell pellet was resuspended in 30 mL of buffer A [50 mM Hepes (pH
7.5) containing 300 mM KCl]
with 0.5% Triton X-100 and disrupted by being passed through a French
pressure
cell at 18000 psi.

Each of the overexpressed proteins was purified
using Ni-NTA chromatography.
The membrane-free cytosol (derived from a 750 mL culture of E. coli overexpressing an outer core glycosyltransferase)
was loaded onto 1 mL of Ni-NTA resin at 4 °C and washed with
30 column volumes of buffer A with 30 mM imidazole and 1 column volume
of buffer A with 120 mM imidazole. The enzyme was eluted with buffer
A with 500 mM imidazole. The imidazole was removed from the enzyme
preparation using a P10 desalting column. Purified, desalted enzymes
were stored at −80 °C until they were needed.

Preparation
of Radiolabeled Substrates
A 10 mL culture
of G56 medium containing 100 μg/mL
ampicillin, 30 μg/mL chloramphenicol, 1 mM IPTG, and 0.02% arabinose
was inoculated with 100 μL of an overnight culture of JQ2 (Table ).
The culture was incubated at 37 °C while being shaken at 225
rpm until A600 reached 0.5. Cells were
collected by centrifugation at 4 °C and 2000g for 20 min and then resuspended in 10 mL of G56 medium without phosphate.
The cell suspension was
centrifuged again, the supernatant discarded, and the cell pellet
resuspended
in 10 mL of fresh G56 medium without phosphate. [32P]Pi (1 mCi) was added, and the cells were grown at 37 °C
for 4 h. The radiolabeled cells were pelleted by centrifugation in
a clinical centrifuge for 15 min. The cell pellet was resuspended
in 3.8 mL of a neutral single-phase Bligh–Dyer extraction mixture
[1:2:0.8 (v/v/v) CHCl3/CH3OH/PBS] and incubated at room temperature for 30 min.
The cell debris was pelleted by centrifugation as described above.
The supernatant was transferred to a fresh tube, and 1 mL of CHCl3 and 1 mL of PBS were added to generate a two-phase neutral
Bligh–Dyer
extraction mixture [2:2:1.8 (v/v/v) CHCl3/CH3OH/PBS]. After the mixture had been
vortexed, the phases
were resolved by centrifugation for 15 min as described above. The
lower phase was transferred to a fresh glass tube. The remaining upper
phase was extracted a second time by the addition of the fresh, pre-equilibrated
neutral lower phase. The two lower phases were pooled and dried under
a stream of N2. The dried lipid films were redissolved
in a CHCl3/CH3OH mixture [4:1 (v/v)] and spotted
onto a 10 cm × 20 cm TLC plate. The TLC plate was developed in
the CHCl3/CH3OH/CH3COOH/H2O solvent system
[25:15:4:4 (v/v/v/v)]. The plate was dried under a cold air stream
and exposed
to X-ray film for 30 s to locate the [32P]heptose2-1-dephosphorylated-KDO2-lipid A (Hep2-1-deP-KLA).
The region of the silica plate containing
the product was dampened with H2O, removed by scraping,
transferred to a thick-walled glass tube, and resuspended in 4 mL
of a neutral single-phase Bligh–Dyer mixture. The suspension
was vigorously mixed and subjected to sonic
irradiation in a sonicator bath for 30 s. The silica particles were
pelleted by centrifugation as in a clinical centrifuge for 10 min.
The supernatant containing the 32P-labeled Hep2-1-deP-KLA was removed and passed through a 4 mL glass-wool column
to remove the remaining silica particles. The solution was converted
to a neutral two-phase Bligh–Dyer mixture by the addition of
CHCl3 and PBS. The phases
were separated in a clinical centrifuge as described above. The lower
phase was transferred to new glass tubes. The upper phases was extracted
a second time by the addition of 1.8 mL of fresh, pre-equilibrated
neutral lower phase. The lower phases
were pooled and dried under a stream of N2. The [32P]Hep2-1-deP-KLA was resuspended in buffer B [25 mM Tris-HCl
(pH 7.8) containing 1 mM EDTA, 1 mM
EGTA, and 0.1% Triton X-100] and then stored at −20 °C.
Typically, the yield of [32P]Hep2-1-deP-KLA
recovered was ∼0.6% of the total input 32[P]Pi.

Radiolabeled Hep2-1-deP-KLA was used to
prepare [32P]Gal-Glc-Hep2-1-deP-KLA using WaaG
and WaaB. WaaG (0.2 mg/mL) was incubated
with 3 μCi of [32P]Hep2-1-deP-KLA and
5 mM UDP-Glc in
the presence of 50 mM Hepes (pH 7.5) and 0.1% Triton X-100 for 2 h
at 25 °C in a total volume of 100 μL. The reaction mixture
was converted to a one-phase neutral Bligh–Dyer mixture by
the addition of CHCl3 and CH3OH.
After a brief centrifugation, the single-phase mixture was transferred
to a fresh tube and converted to a two-phase neutral Bligh–Dyer
mixture by the addition of CHCl3 and PBS. After centrifugation
to resolve the phases, the upper phase was washed as described above
and the two lower phases were combined. After being dried under a
stream of N2, the lipid films were dissolved in 50 μL
of buffer B. WaaB (0.2 mg/mL) and 5 mM UDP-Gal were added to the extracted
WaaG product, producing
a final volume of 100 μL, and incubated at 25 °C for 3
h.
The reaction mixture was spotted onto a 10 cm × 20 cm TLC plate
and developed in a CHCl3/CH3OH/CH3COOH/H2O system [25:15:4:4 (v/v/v/v)]. The plate was dried
under a cold air stream and exposed
to X-ray film for 3 min to locate the [32P]Gal-Glc-Hep2-1-deP-KLA. The region of product was scraped, extracted,
and purified as described above for the purification of [32P]Hep2-1-deP-KLA, with a yield of ∼10% of the starting
lipid.

Large-Scale Preparation of Hep2-1-deP-KLA
JQ2 cells were grown under conditions similar to those described
above for the expression of the outer core enzymes. A 3 L culture
of JQ2 was grown to an A600 of 1.8 and
harvested by centrifugation at 4000g for 10 min at
4 °C. The cell pellet was washed once with 40 mL of PBS and the
centrifugation repeated. The final cell pellet was resuspended in
40 mL of PBS, and 50 mL of CHCl3 and 100 mL of CH3OH were added to generate a neutral single-phase Bligh–Dyer
mixture. The extraction mixture was incubated for 1 h at room temperature.
The cell debris was removed by centrifugation at 4000g for 15 min at room temperature. The supernatant was transferred
to a clean 250 mL Teflon bottle and converted to a two-phase neutral
Bligh–Dyer
system by the addition of 50 mL of CHCl3 and 50 mL of
PBS. The phases were resolved by centrifugation as described above.
The upper phase was removed and re-extracted with 90 mL of the fresh,
pre-equilibrated neutral lower phase. The lower phases were pooled
and dried by rotary evaporation. Next, the dried lipid film was redissolved
in 25 mL of a CHCl3/CH3OH/H2O mixture
[2:3:1 (v/v/v)] and applied to a 5 mL diethylaminoethyl (DEAE) cellulose
(acetate form) column equilibrated with
the same solvent mixture. The column was washed with 10 column volumes
of the CHCl3/CH3OH/H2O mixture [2:3:1
(v/v/v)]. The bound phospholipids and LPS were eluted using 25 mL
steps of the CHCl3/CH3OH/CH3COONH4 mixture [2:3:1 (v/v/v)], with successive CH3COONH4 concentrations
of 60, 120, 240, and 480 mM in the aqueous component. For each elution
step, 5 mL fractions were collected. The fractions containing Hep2-1-deP-KLA were identified by spotting 10 μL portions
of each fraction onto a TLC plate. The plate was developed
in a CHCl3/CH3OH/CH3COOH/H2O system [25:15:4:4 (v/v/v/v)]. Lipids were visualized by spraying
the plate with 10%
sulfuric acid in ethanol and charring on a hot plate. All fractions
containing Hep2-1-deP-KLA were pooled and the appropriate
amounts of CHCl3 and H2O added to generate a
2:2:1.8 (v/v/v) CHCl3/CH3OH/aqueous mixture.
The lower phase was dried under a stream of N2. The collected
lipid was redissolved in a CHCl3/CH3OH mixture
[4:1 (v/v)] and spotted along the bottom of a 10 cm × 20 cm TLC
plate. A 10 μL sample was separately spotted onto the same TLC
plate as a control
to identify the location of the Hep2-1-deP-KLA. After the
plate had been developed in the CHCl3/CH3OH/CH3COOH/H2O solvent system [25:15:4:4 (v/v/v/v)],
the plate was dried under cold air, and the portion of
the plate containing the control was charred. The region of the TLC
plate containing the Hep2-1-deP-KLA was scraped, extracted,
and purified as described above. Typically, 3 mg of Hep2-1-deP-KLA was isolated from 3 L of JQ2 grown to an A600 of 1.8.

The concentration of Hep2-1-deP-KLA was determined as follows. UDP-[14C]Glc (1
mM) and different concentrations
of Hep2-1-deP-KLA
(from 0.01 to 0.05 mM) were reacted with 0.2 mg/mL WaaG
for 30 min as described above until all of the Hep2-1-deP-KLA
had
been completely consumed. Assays with [32P]Hep2-1-deP-KLA showed that WaaG can convert most of the Hep2-1-deP-KLA to Glc-Hep2-1-deP-KLA at high UDP-Glc concentrations
(Figure ). By following the incorporation
of [14C]Glc into [14C]Glc-Hep2-1-deP-KLA,
we could determine the concentration of the unlabeled Hep2-1-deP-KLA.

In Vitro Assay Conditions
The standard
reaction mixtures contained purified glycosyltransferase(s) (0.1 mg/mL),
50 mM Hepes (pH 7.5), 0.1% Triton X-100, 10 μM [32P]Hep2-1-deP-KLA, and 1 mM UDP-hexose donor(s).
Reactions were initiated by the addition of enzyme and mixtures incubated
at 25 °C for the times indicated. For coupling reactions of WaaG,
WaaB, and WaaO from E. coli K-12, WaaG (0.01 mg/mL)
was reacted with UDP-Glc for 15 min using the standard assay conditions
described above (final volume of 50 μL). Next, WaaB (0.1 mg/mL)
and 1 mM UDP-Gal were added to the reaction mixture (final volume
of 52 μL) and incubated at 25 °C for 30 min. WaaO (0.1
mg/mL)
and 1 mM MgCl2 were added to the reaction solution after
WaaB reacted at 25 °C for 30 min (final volume of 54 μL).

For reactions of E. coli K-12 WaaO and S. typhimurium WaaI with Gal-Glc-Hep2-1-deP-KLA,
the product of the reaction of WaaG and WaaB, only the [32P]Gal-Glc-Hep2-1-deP-KLA product (final concentration
in the nanomolar range) was included as the LPS acceptor along with
the appropriate UDP-hexoses and 1 mM MgCl2. The preparation
of [32P]Gal-Glc-Hep2-1-deP-KLA is described
above.

Reactions were stopped by spotting 3–5 μL
portions of the reaction mixtures onto a TLC plate. After being
dried in a stream of cold air, plates were developed in the CHCl3/CH3OH/CH3COOH/H2O solvent
[25:15:4:4 (v/v/v/v)]. The amount of product formed was calculated
from the percent
conversion of radioactive substrate to product, quantified using a
Molecular Dynamics PhosphoImager.

Data Fitting
To
determine the kinetic parameters for
outer core enzymes, one substrate, either a sugar donor or an acceptor,
was varied from approximately 5-fold below to 5-fold above the predicted Km while the other substrate was held constant
5-fold above the predicted Km. The data
were fit to the Michaelis–Menten equation using Kaleidagraph
(Synergy Software, Reading, PA).

Electrospray Ionization
Mass Spectrometry
Mass spectra
were acquired on an ABI QSTAR XL tandem quadrupole time-of-flight
mass spectrometer (ABI/MDS-Sciex, Toronto, ON) equipped with an electrospray
ionization (ESI) source. Spectra were acquired in the negative ion
mode and typically were the accumulation of 60 scans collected from m/z 200 to 2000. Typically,
lipids were dissolved in 200 μL of a CHCl3/CH3OH mixture [2:1 (v/v)], supplemented with 1% piperidine, and
immediately infused into the ion source at a rate
of 5–10
μL/min. The negative ion ESI was conducted at −4200 V. The acquisition and analysis of data were performed
using Analyst QS (ABI/MDS-Sciex).

Results
Preparation
of the E.
coli WaaG Substrate, Hep2-1-deP-KLA
An
LPS lacking an outer core OS accumulates in CW303, an E. coli strain with the gentamycin gene inserted into the waaG gene. The lipid A 1-phosphatase lpxE() and the lipid A late acyl
transferase lpxM() were
introduced into CW303
to generate strain JQ2 and promote the accumulation of a modified
LPS that contains a fully hexa-acylated lipid A portion that is dephosphorylated
at the 1-position and the inner core sugars, two Kdo and two heptose
residues (Hep2-1-deP-KLA). The accumulating Hep2-1-deP-KLA (Figure ) was purified as described
in , and the structure
was confirmed using negative ion electrospray ionization mass spectrometry
(ESI-MS) (Figure A). The major ions at m/z 1269.73 and 846.15
correspond to the [M – 2H]2– and [M –
3H]3– ions of Hep2-1-deP-KLA, respectively
(expected values of m/z 1269.7409
and 846.1582, respectively).

Structure of Hep2-1-deP-KLA. The
structure of the lipid
A OS purified from JQ2 is shown.

Glycosylations catalyzed by E. coli WaaG and WaaB.
[32P]Hep2-1-deP-KLA (marked A) was incubated
with WaaG and/or WaaB (0.01 mg/mL each) for the times indicated as
described in . Both UDP-Glc
(1 mM) and UDP-Gal (1 mM) were included in the reaction mixture. B
marks the location of the WaaG product, Glc-Hep2-1-deP-KLA.
C marks the location of the WaaB product, Gal-Glc-Hep2-1-deP-KLA.

Negative ion ESI-MS of the lipid A OS’s,
Hep2-1-deP-KLA, Glc-Hep2-1-deP-KLA, and Gal-Glc-Hep2-1-deP-KLA. Panel A shows the mass spectrum from m/z 800 to 1600 for the Hep2-1-deP-KLA
isolated from JQ2. The [M – 2H]2– ion at m/z 1269.73 and the [M – 3H]3– ion at m/z 846.15
correspond by mass to Hep2-1-deP-KLA (expected values of m/z 1269.7409 and 846.1582, respectively).
Panel B shows the mass spectrum from m/z 800 to 1600 for the product isolated from the reaction catalyzed
by WaaG using Hep2-1-deP-KLA and UDP-Glc as substrates.
The [M – 2H]2– ion at m/z 1351.34 and the [M – 3H]3– ion
at m/z correspond by mass to the
expected WaaG product, Glc-Hep2-1-deP-KLA (expected values
of m/z 1351.2690 and 900.1758, respectively).
Panel C shows the mass spectrum from m/z 800 to 1600 for the product of the WaaG and WaaB coupled reaction.
The product, Gal-Glc-Hep2-1-deP-KLA, is detected as an
[M – 2H]2– ion at m/z 1431.78 (expected value of m/z 1431.7937). Unreacted substrate, Hep2-1-deP-KLA,
is also detected as an [M – 2H]2– ion at m/z 1269.73.

WaaG Transfers the Outer Core HexI
When purified E. coli WaaG was incubated in an in vitro reaction mixture with UDP-Glc as the sugar donor and [32P]Hep2-1-deP-KLA (A, Figure ) as the lipid acceptor, a more slowly migrating
product is formed (B, Figure ), consistent
with the addition of a glucose to the Hep2-1-deP-KLA to
form Glc-Hep2-1-deP-KLA. This product was purified and
analyzed by negative ion ESI-MS (Figure B). The two predominant ions at m/z 1351.34 and 900.23
correspond to the [M – 2H]2– and [M –
3H]3– ions expected for Glc-Hep2-1-deP-KLA,
respectively (expected values of m/z 1351.2690 and 900.1758, respectively).

Using this in vitro reaction, WaaG was further characterized. The Glc-Hep2-1-deP-KLA product was formed in a time-dependent manner (Figure ). No Glc-Hep2-1-deP-KLA was formed when
other sugar donors, such as UDP-galactose, UDP-glucuronic acid, UDP-galacuronic
acid, GDP-mannose, ADP-glucose, and GDP-glucose, were used in place
of UDP-Glc (Figure S1A,B of the ). The apparent Km values for UDP-Glc
and Hep2-1-deP-KLA are 0.162 ± 0.028 mM and 3.85 ±
1.80 μM, respectively, and the kcat is 0.5 s–1, similar to the values reported previously
when WaaG was characterized
in crude extracts.,

The Triton X-100 dependence
of the WaaG-catalyzed formation of
Glc-Hep2-1-deP-KLA was investigated (Figure S2 of the ). The activity of WaaG
increased as the Triton X-100 concentration was increased from 0 to
0.2%; higher concentrations of detergent were inhibitory. On the basis
of these results, 0.1% Triton X-100 was used in subsequent in vitro assay reactions of WaaG.

The WaaG activity
is dramatically decreased by inclusion of Mg2+ in the in vitro assay reaction mixture
(Figure S3 of the ). Less than 20% of WaaG activity is left when 0.8 mM Mg2+ is added to the assay. WaaG was similarly inhibited by other divalent
metal ions such as Mn2+, Ca2+, Zn2+, Co2+, Ni2+, and Cu2+ (Figure S4
of the ).

WaaG
can hydrolyze the sugar donor, UDP-Glc, in the absence of
a lipid acceptor as shown in Figure . When 14C-labeled UDP-Glc is incubated with WaaG, glucose is released
in a WaaG-dependent reaction (in Figure ,
compare lanes 1 and 2). The Km and kcat values for this hydrolysis reaction are
3.6
± 0.8 mM and 0.014 s–1, respectively. WaaG
was not able to catalyze the release of
the 4-epimer of glucose, galactose, from UDP-Gal (Figure S5 of the ).

WaaG hydrolyzes UDP-Glc
in the absence of a lipid acceptor. UDP-[U-14C]Glc was
incubated in the presence (lane 1) or absence (lane
2) of WaaG (0.25 mg/mL) and then displayed using TLC as described
in . [U-14C]Glc was spotted as a control in lane 3 to indicate the migration
of free glucose.

WaaB Catalyzes the Transfer
of Galactose to the E.
coli K-12 Outer Core
Using the product
of WaaG, Glc-Hep2-1-deP-KLA, the ability of E.
coli WaaB to catalyze the transfer of galactose from UDP-Gal
to the outer core glucose was assessed. When purified WaaB was coupled in vitro with the WaaG reaction, a more slowly migrating
product was formed (product C, Figure ), consistent
with the addition of galactose to Glc-Hep2-1-deP-KLA. This
product, Gal-Glc-Hep2-1-deP-KLA, was isolated and analyzed
using negative ion ESI-MS (Figure C). The
ion at m/z 1431.78 is consistent
with the [M – 2H]2– ion of Gal-Glc-Hep2-1-deP-KLA (expected value of m/z 1431.7937). No product was formed when Hep2-1-deP-KLA
was used as the sugar acceptor. This strongly indicates that the galactose
added by WaaB depends only on the glucose added by WaaG. In addition,
no activity was observed for other sugar nucleotides, such as UDP-glucose,
UDP-glucuronic acid, UDP-galacuronic acid, GDP-mannose, ADP-glucose,
and GDP-glucose (Figure S5A,B of the ). As with WaaG, in the absence of a lipid acceptor,
WaaB can hydrolyze its sugar donor, UDP-galactose, to UDP and galactose
but was not able to hydrolyze UDP-Glc (Figure S5A,B of the ).

E.
coli K-12 LPS Outer Core HexII Is Transferred by WaaO
In E. coli K-12 LPS, the outer core HexII is a glucose
residue,
which is transferred by WaaO. When purified E. coli WaaO is coupled
to the reaction of WaaG and WaaB, several more slowly migrating products
were detected (Figure ). When 0.1 mM Mg2+ was included in the assay, low levels of only one product,
presumably Glc-[Gal]-Glc-Hep2-1-deP-KLA ([Gal] indicates
the branched galactose added to the 6-position of the glucose as shown
in Figure ), was detected (D, Figure ). As the concentration of Mg2+ is increased,
the number of products increased (D*, Figure ). These glucosylated products (Glcn-[Gal]-Glc-Hep2-1-deP-KLA) were detected only when Mg2+ was included
in the reaction mixture (Figure ), indicating
that WaaO activity is dependent on divalent metal ions. Taken together,
these data strongly suggest that WaaO is capable of adding multiple
sugars to the outer core OS. As seen in Figure , the formation of these multiglucosylated products, Glcn-[Gal]-Glc-Hep2-1-deP-KLA, increases with
time in the presence of WaaO and 1 mM
Mg2+.

Mg2+ concentration affects the activity of E.
coli K-12 WaaO. Hep2-1-deP-KLA (labeled A) was
reacted with WaaG (0.01 mg/mL) for 15 min to first produce Glc-Hep2-1-deP-KLA (labeled B). WaaB (0.1 mg/mL) was then added and
incubated for an additional 135 min to produce Gal-Glc-Hep2-1-deP-KLA (labeled C). WaaO was added (0.1 mg/mL) in the presence
of various concentrations of Mg2+ as indicated after WaaB
reacted as indicated. When Mg2+ was excluded, no WaaO-dependent
glycosylation was detected. However, when Mg2+ was included,
a product with migration consistent with glucose addition was detected.
At a low Mg2+ concentration (0.1 mM), one product is detected
(labeled D), but as the Mg2+ concentration is increased,
multiple products (labeled D*) are detected, consistent with the addition
of multiple glucoses to Gal-Glc-Hep2-1-deP-KLA.

Time dependence of the E. coli K-12 WaaO
reaction.
Hep2-1-deP-KLA (labeled A) was reacted with WaaG (0.01
mg/mL) and WaaB (0.1 mg/mL) for 285 min as described in the legend
of Figure . E. coli K-12
WaaO (0.1 mg/mL) and 1 mM MgCl2 were added, and a portion
of the reaction mixture was spotted onto a TLC plate at the times
indicated. WaaO catalyzes the formation of a single glucose addition
(labeled D) and at increased times additional glucoses (labeled D*).

To determine if the galactose
added by WaaB was
necessary for the glucosylation catalyzed by WaaO, we coupled the
WaaO reaction to only the WaaG reaction. In the presence of WaaO,
multiple products whose migration is consistent with glucosylation
of the WaaG product Glc-Hep2-1-deP-KLA to Glc2-Hep2-1-deP-KLA [product CO (Figure )] and Glcn-Hep2-1-deP-KLA [CO* (Figure )] are formed. The glucosylation of Glc-Hep2-1-deP-KLA
by WaaO was similarly dependent on Mg2+ (data not shown);
multiple glucosylated products were observed only in the presence
of Mg2+. These results confirm the divalent cation dependence
of WaaO and indicate that WaaO does not require the branched galactose
added by WaaB. These data also strongly suggest that UDP-Glc is the
sugar donor for the multiple sugar additions catalyzed by WaaO (Figure ) because there is no UDP-galactose present in this
reaction mixture.

E. coli K-12 WaaO does not require the
galactose
added by WaaB. Hep2-1-deP-KLA (labeled A) was reacted with
WaaG (0.01 mg/mL) for 270 min to produce Glc-Hep2-1-deP-KLA
(labeled B). WaaO (0.1 mg/mL) and 1 mM MgCl2 were added
to the WaaG reaction mixture and incubated for the times indicated.
Initially, the product, Glc2-Hep2-1-deP-KLA
(labeled CO), is formed. The products labeled CO* indicate the addition of multiple sugars by WaaI.

To exclude the possibility that the products
observed in the presence of WaaO might be due to the coupling enzyme
WaaG or WaaB, Gal-Glc-Hep2-1-deP-KLA, the product of WaaG
and WaaB, was isolated (C, Figure ) and used
directly as the substrate for WaaO. As shown in Figure , multiple products consistent with the addition of a single
glucose (product D, Figure ) but also multiple
glucoses (D*, Figure ) were observed, indicating
that WaaO alone is responsible for the formation of those lipid A
OS’s.

E. coli K-12 WaaO glycosylates Gal-Glc-Hep2-1-deP-KLA, the product of WaaG and WaaB. Purified Gal-Glc-Hep2-1-deP-KLA (labeled C), produced from Hep2-1-deP-KLA
by WaaG and WaaB as described in , was reacted with WaaO in the presence of 1 mM MgCl2 and
UDP-Glc to verify that the products attributed to WaaO were not due
to WaaG or WaaB. Products consistent with the addition of one glucose
(labeled D) and then additional glucoses (labeled D*) are formed.

Like WaaB and WaaG, WaaO can hydrolyze
its sugar
donor, UDP-Glc, but not UDP-Gal (Figure S5A,B of the ). The Km for UDP-Glc in this hydrolysis reaction is 1.95 ± 0.4 mM, and
the kcat is 0.013 s–1.

S. typhimurium LPS Outer Core
HexII Is Transferred by WaaI
The LPS outer core structure
of S. typhimurium is similar to that of E.
coli K-12; both HexI and the branched substitution for HexI
are the same (Figure ). HexII, added by WaaO
in E. coli and WaaI in S. typhimurium, differs between the two organisms; in S. typhimurium, a galactose is added instead of glucose. This suggests the S. typhimurium WaaI will preferentially add a galactose
to Gal-Glc-Hep2-1-deP-KLA, the product of the coupled reaction
of E. coli K-12 WaaG and WaaB. To test this, S. typhimurium WaaI was purified and reacted with Gal-Glc-Hep2-1-deP-KLA in the presence of UDP-galactose or UDP-glucose.
Similar to E. coli WaaO, S. typhimurium WaaI catalyzed the formation of a product consistent with the addition
of a sugar to Gal-Glc-Hep2-1-deP-KLA (Ds, Figure ). The glycosylation occurred only in the presence
of UPD-galactose, not UDP-glucose, consistent with the predicted specificity
for the HexII glycosyltransferase based on the outer core OS structure.

S. typhimurium WaaI uses UDP-Gal
but not UDP-Glc. S. typhimurium WaaI (0.1 mg/mL)
was incubated with Gal-Glc-Hep2-1-deP-KLA (labeled C),
in the presence of UDP-Gal or UDP-Glc and 1 mM MgCl2 as
indicated. The major product, Gal-[Gal]-Glc-Hep2-1-deP-KLA,
is indicated by Ds. No product was formed when UDP-Glc
was used as the sugar donor.

Like E. coli WaaO, S.
typhimurium WaaI also requires magnesium ions for optimal
activity. When the S. typhimurium WaaI was reacted
with Glc-Hep2-1-deP-KLA through coupling only to the WaaG
reaction, a faint product consistent with Gal*-Glc-Hep2-1-deP-KLA (the asterisk indicates this Gal is added in a linkage
different from that of the Gal added by WaaB) is observed, suggesting
that WaaI does not require the branched α1→6 galactose
added by WaaB (Figure S6 of the ).

The S. typhimurium LPS Outer
Core HexIII Is Transferred by WaaJ
S. typhimurium WaaJ is proposed to add the outer core HexIII. To test this, purified S. typhimurium WaaJ was coupled to the reaction of S. typhimurium WaaI with Gal-Glc-Hep2-1-deP-KLA
in the presence of UDP-Gal or UDP-Glc (Figure ). S. typhimurium WaaJ shows some promiscuous activity
when UDP-Gal was used as the only sugar donor; however, the activity
is greatly increased when UDP-Glc is added as the sugar donor. The
enhanced formation of what is presumed to be Glc-Gal-[Gal]-Glc-Hep2-1-deP-KLA (Es in Figure , last two lanes) is consistent with the structure of the S. typhimurium LPS outer core, though WaaJ likely has some ability to catalyze the addition of
HexIII using UDP-Gal as the sugar donor.

S. typhimurium WaaJ preferentially
uses UDP-Glc but not UDP-Gal. Gal-Glc-Hep2-1-deP-KLA (labeled
C) and UDP-Gal were reacted with S. typhimurium WaaI
(0.1 mg/mL) to produce Gal-[Gal]-Glc-Hep2-1-deP-KLA (labeled
Ds). After 90 min, S. thyphimurium WaaJ
was added and incubated for the times indicated in the presence of
UDP-Gal or UDP-Glc. The product labeled Es is proposed
to be Glc-Gal-[Gal]-Glc-Hep2-1-deP-KLA.

The S. typhimurium LPS Outer
Core HexIII Substitution with UDP-GlcNAc Is Catalyzed by WaaK
The ability of S. typhimurium WaaK to add a GlcNAc
residue to Glc-Gal-[Gal]-Glc-Hep2-1-deP-KLA was tested.
Gal-Glc-Hep2-1-deP-KLA, the product of E. coli WaaG and WaaB, was isolated using preparative TLC. S. typhimurium WaaI and WaaJ were reacted with Gal-Glc-Hep2-1-deP-KLA
in the presence of UDP-Glc and UDP-Gal to form Gal-[Gal]-Glc-Hep2-1-deP-KLA (Figure , product Ds) and then Glc-Gal-[Gal]-Glc-Hep2-1-deP-KLA (Figure , product Es). When S. typhimurium WaaK was added to the reaction mixture in the absence of UDP-GlcNAc,
a faint band was observed, suggesting WaaK has some activity using
UDP-Glc or UDP-Gal as a sugar donor. However, when UDP-GlcNAc is added,
WaaK activity is dramatically enhanced, strongly suggesting that UDP-GlcNAc
is a preferred sugar donor. The formation of product Fs, GlcNAc-Glc-Gal-[Gal]-Glc-Hep2-1-deP-KLA, is dependent
on WaaK. The formation of this product demonstrates, for the first
time, the in vitro assembly of the entire S. typhimurium outer core OS using purified proteins and
defined substrates.

In vitro synthesis of the entire S. typhimurium outer core OS. Gal-Glc-Hep2-1-deP-KLA
(labeled C) was
reacted with S. typhimurium WaaI (0.1 mg/mL) for
30 min to generate Gal-[Gal]-Glc-Hep2-1-deP-KLA (labeled
Ds). Next, WaaJ (0.1 mg/mL) was added to generate Glc-Gal-[Gal]-Glc-Hep2-1-deP-KLA (labeled Es). S. typhimurium WaaK (0.1 mg/mL) was added in the presence or absence of 1 mM UDP-GlcNAc
and incubated for the times indicated. Only in the presence of UDP-GlcNAc
was the product labeled Fs formed. This product represents
the in vitro formation of the entire outer core on
a defined lipid acceptor.

Discussion
This work relates several leaps forward
for the biochemical characterization
of the enzymes involved in outer core OS synthesis in Gram-negative
bacteria. First, we have developed a method for the production of
a lipid A OS to use as an acceptor for the enzymes involved in outer
core OS assembly. The LPS isolated from CWG303, an E. coli strain deficient in waaG, possesses only the inner
core sugars and decreased the level of phosphorylation of the inner
core heptoses. However, the major lipid
A OS in CWG303 is still too
hydrophilic to be easily purified using standard lipid extraction
protocols. The incorporation of lpxE, the Francisella novocida lipid A 1-phosphatase, into a strain lacking waaG decreases the
hydrophilicity of the major LPS species. Furthermore, the incorporation
of lpxM, the lipid A late acyltransferase, increases the proportion of hexa-acylated lipid
A. All of these modifications result in a high yield of a lipid A
OS, Hep2-1-deP-KLA (Figure ), that
is structurally defined, can be isolated via organic extraction, and
can be radiolabeled efficiently with 32P.

Detailed
analysis of outer core glycosyltransferases has been limited
by the purity of the LPS acceptor and the assay method. Usually, assays depended on following the incorporation
of [14C]glucose or [14C]galactose with scintillation
counting into the LPS acceptor. The availability of Hep2-1-deP-KLA allows us to follow the addition of the outer core sugars in vitro using TLC analysis. These reactions can be followed
either by labeling the lipid A OS acceptor with 32P or
by using 14C-labeled sugar donors. The increased sensitivity
afforded by the use of radiolabeled substrates allows us to fully
define the biochemical properties of the outer core glycosyltransferases
by detecting expected and unexpected products.

We purified three E. coli and three S.
typhimurium outer core glycosyltransferases previously shown
through numerous genetic and in vivo experiments
to be involved in outer core biosynthesis.,,, Each protein
was efficiently overexpressed in E. coli and purified
to homogeneity using Ni
affinity chromatography.

Combining the purified enzymes with
a defined lipid acceptor and
sugar donors, we characterized the biochemical activity of each of
these enzymes from E. coli and S. typhimurium. We have demonstrated by TLC and ESI-MS that WaaG can add a glucose
residue to its LPS acceptor, Hep2-1-deP-KLA (Figures  and ). While E.
coli WaaG is inhibited by Mg2+ (Figure S2 of the ), E. coli WaaO can add multiple sugars under similar conditions (Figure ). Because the physiological concentration of Mg2+ in E. coli could be in the millimolar range,
these in vitro activities may be physiologically
relevant.,

WaaB has not been characterized previously
in pure enzyme
form in vitro. The obvious activity of WaaB is observed
onlywhen
UDP-Gal is used as the sugar donor for addition to the WaaG product,
Glc-Hep2-1-deP-KLA (Figure S5 of the ). ESI-MS (Figure ) of the WaaB in vitro product is consistent with
the addition of a galactose residue to Glc-Hep2-1-deP-KLA.
The role of WaaB as the second enzyme to act in the LPS outer core
assembly in E. coli K-12, is supported by these in vitro results. Furthermore,
both HexII glycosyltransferases, E. coli K-12 WaaO
and S. typhimurium WaaI, have much lower activity
toward Glc-Hep2-1-deP-KLA than toward Gal-Glc-Hep2-1-deP-KLA, the product of WaaG and WaaB, suggesting that the addition
of HexII occurs after HexI substitution by WaaB in vivo (compare Figures  and  for E. coli WaaO and Figure S6 of the  and Figure  for S. typhimurium WaaI).

As expected,
WaaI from S. typhimurium can add
a galactose residue to the E.
coli K-12 WaaG, WaaB product, Gal-Glc-Hep2-1-deP-KLA
(Figure ). It can also
add a second galactose residue to its first product, though the activity
is low; after reaction for 30 min, a faint second product band can
be observed
(Figure ). Building off of the major WaaI
product, the S. typhimurium WaaJ adds a glucose residue
(Figure ), and S. typhimurium WaaK adds a GlcNAc residue to yield a fully assembled S.
typhimurium LPS outer core (Figure ). This defined, in vitro-assembled S. typhimurium LPS outer core on a defined lipid A anchor can serve as a substrate
for investigating the ligation of the O-antigen.

Previously,
it has been reported that only one hexose residue was
observed in the outer core of the majority of LPS isolated from E. coli K-12 waaB and Δgal mutants, but both mutants still produce minor LPS bands that migrate
as though they have additional sugars added to the core. The authors proposed that E. coli K-12
WaaO cannot work unless the branched galactose added by WaaB is present
and that the HexIII glycosyltransferase (WaaR in E. coli K-12) might mistake the GlcI added by WaaG for GlcII added by WaaO
and inefficiently add a terminal glucose. Our in vitro data for S. typhimurium WaaI do not support this proposal. However, WaaI can add, with a
low efficiency, glucose to Glc-Hep2-1-deP-KLA (Figure , slight spot that appears after 30 min). This
suggests that the more glycosylated LPS species detected in
the waaB and Δgal mutants
are due to WaaI adding glucose to Glc-Hep2-1-deP-KLA. This
is also consistent with previous observations with an S. typhimurium
waaB mutant. Despite lacking
the branched
galactose, additional core
sugars were detected in a fraction of the isolated LPS molecules.
Our work clearly shows that the branched galactose added by WaaB is
not absolutely necessary for the action of other enzymes involved
in outer core biosynthesis, consistent with the LPS structures observed
in waaB mutants.

WaaB and WaaG are members
of glycosyltransferase carbohydrate-active
enzyme (CAZy) family 4,− characterized by a GT-B fold
as well as retention of
configuration. WaaO and WaaR from E. coli K12 and
WaaJ and WaaR from S. typhimurium, however, belong
to CAZy family 8,− typified by LgtC being a retaining
glycosyltransferase of CAZy family 8 that has been well characterized
enzymatically and structurally., These glycosyltranferases
are characterized by the GT-A fold, a DXD
motif that is implicated in coordination of catalytically important
divalent metal ions involved in sugar binding, and by retention of
configuration at the anomeric carbon of the donor sugar., One LgtC mechanism invokes an aspartate fairly distant (∼9
Å)
from the sugar binding site and structural
dynamics. Like LgtC, E. coli K-12 WaaO
is capable
of specifically hydrolyzing their uridine diphosphate sugar donors
in the absence of a lipid acceptor, perhaps suggesting a similar reliance
on dynamic structural changes for catalysis. No obvious hydrolysis
activity was observed for S. typhimurium outer core
enzymes, indicating that sugar nucleotide hydrolysis is not necessarily
a shared characteristic of GT-A fold glycosyltransfereases. The comparison
of these similar, yet catalytically distinct, glycosyltransferases
may shed further light on the mechanism of this class of enzymes.

WaaO from E. coli K-12 was originally proposed
to be a nonprocessive
enzyme. However, we have shown that, in vitro, WaaO can
add several sugars (at least three) to Gal-Glc-Hep2-1-deP-KLA
and Glc-Hep2-1-deP-KLA, especially in the presence of MgCl2. Similar results have been observed previously; Shibayama
et
al. reported that
overexpression of E. coli K-12 waaO in the waaO-inactivated E. coli K-12 C600 strain revealed a minor slow-migrating band besides the
prominent band of LPS in sodium dodecyl sulfate polyacrylamide gel
electrophoresis (SDS–PAGE), both of which could be the WaaO
product, and the minor band may be due to the overexpression of waaO adding an additional glucose residue due to overexpression
of waaI. In addition,
Schnaitman et al. reported a
doublet band on the SDS–PAGE gel for LPS of E. coli K-12 lacking waaR. Given our observation that WaaO
can add multiple glucoses, the additional sugars observed in vivo may be due to the processive activity of WaaO and
deserve further investigation. S. typhimurium WaaI,
which, like E. coli WaaO, also transfers a HexII
to Gal-Glc-Hep2-1-deP-KLA, does not add multiple sugars
(Figure ). As E. coli WaaO
and S. typhimurium WaaI are quite similar (∼56%
identical and ∼75% similar), further
comparisons will
yield insights into the mechanism by which E. coli WaaO adds multiple sugars to Gal-Glc-Hep2-1-deP-KLA.

The synthesis of these defined lipid A OS’s opens the possibility
for careful characterization of the glycosyltransferase mechanisms
of these enzymes as well as glycosyltransferases from other Gram-negative
bacteria. The synthesis of the entire S. typhimurium OS on a defined lipid anchor opens the possibility for careful biochemical
characterization of enzymes involved in O-antigen ligation.

Further experiments might focus on creating novel lipid A OS’s
by using outer core glycosyltransferases from other Gram-negative
bacteria that have different sugar nucleotide specificities. Both
Hep2-Kdo2-lipid A and the various in
vitro-synthesized lipid A OS’s we report here may
be useful clinically as vaccine adjuvants. 4′-Monophosphoryl-lipid A, prepared by chemical
hydrolysis of LPS, is routinely used
as a vaccine adjuvant; Salmonella with 1-dephosphorylated
LPS were attenuated for virulence, yet their
ability to elicit an immune response was not diminished. Here we demonstrate the ability to produce 1-dephosphorylated
lipid A OS’s that can be tested for their ability to modulate
the immune response.

Supporting Information Available
A list of oligonucleotides
used in cloning (Table S1), abbreviations used for lipid A OS’s
(Table S2), WaaG sugar-nucleotide dependence (Figure S1), Triton X-100
dependence (Figure S2), divalent cation dependence (Figures S3 and
S4), WaaB sugar dependence (Figure S5), and WaaI UDP-Gal dependence
(Figure S6). This material is available free of charge via the Internet
at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bi4015665_si_001.pdf

Author Present Address
§ J.Q.: General Atomics, San Diego, CA 92121.

The
research
was supported by National Institutes of Health Grant GM-51310 to C.R.H.R.

The authors declare no competing
financial interest.

Abbreviations
LPSlipopolysaccharide

OSoligosaccharide

l,d-Hepl-glycero-d-manno-heptose

KOknockout

ESI-MSelectrospray ionization
mass spectrometry

HEPES4-(2-hydroxyethyl)-1-piperazineethanesulfonic acid

TLCthin-layer chromatography

IPTGisopropyl β-d-1-thiogalactopyranoside

PBSphosphate-buffered saline

PCRpolymerase chain reaction

UDP-Glcuridine diphosphate
glucose

UDP-Galuridine diphosphate galactose

Hep2-1-deP-KLAheptose2-1-dephospho-Kdo2-lipid A (see Table S2 of the  for full abbreviations of other lipid A OS’s)

EDTAethylenediaminetetraacetic
acid

EGTAethylene
glycol
tetraacetic acid

Hexhexose.

