Eukaryotic
translation initiation
factor 2 (eIF2) is a G-protein that in its
GTP-bound form binds to the initiator methionyl-tRNA (Met-tRNAi), yielding a ternary complex (TC), which is then recruited
to the translation initiation complex. Upon start codon recognition,
eIF2 hydrolyzes GTP and is released from the initiation complex (reviewed
in refs (−)).

The eIF2 TC is regenerated after every cycle
of translation initiation
through a process catalyzed by the guanine nucleotide exchange factor
(GEF) eIF2B, which is one of the main targets for the regulation of
translation. Phosphorylation of serine 51 in the α subunit of
eIF2 converts eIF2 from a substrate into a competitive inhibitor of the
GEF eIF2B. eIF2α phosphorylation is mediated by a group of related
kinases: the dsRNA-activated protein kinase (PKR), PKR-like ER kinase
(PERK), heme-regulated inhibitor (HRI), and general control nonderepressible
2 (GCN2). eIF2α is phosphorylated in response to a number of
different stress factors, such as viral infection, unfolded protein
response, hypoxic stress, heme deficiency, amino acid starvation,
etc., collectively known as the integrated stress response (ISR).
The result is inhibition of translation in the cell, which can range
from modestly slowing to nearly completely shutting off protein synthesis
and induction of apoptosis. At the same time, translation of the mRNA
encoding
transcription factor ATF4, which mediates the stress response, is
turned on through a mechanism called translation reinitiation. Phosphorylation
of eIF2α by PKR in response to viral infection causes translation
shut-off and apoptosis and serves as a powerful defense mechanism
in the cell. The ISR triggered by amino acid starvation or heme deficiency
typically causes more modest translation inhibition (mediated by GCN2
or
HRI activation, respectively) and serves to balance the supply and
demand of metabolites. PERK is involved in controlling the accumulation
of misfolded proteins as part of the unfolded protein response (UPR).
Persistent PERK activation leads to cell death in prion diseases and
other neurodegenerative disorders, and PERK inhibition was recently
shown to have neuroprotective effects in mice. ISR induction via PERK in the hypoxic environment inside solid tumors
is important for cancer cell survival (reviewed in refs (−)).

The yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae has only one
of the eIF2α kinases, GCN2, whose main role is in balancing
amino acid supply and demand. Phosphorylation of eIF2α by GCN2,
in response to amino acid starvation, not only decreases translation
rates but also turns on translation of a number of proteins, including
the transcription factor GCN4, which in turn stimulates expression
of amino acid biosynthetic enzymes (reviewed in refs () and ()).

eIF2B is composed
of five different subunits (α–ε).
eIF2Bγ and eIF2Bε form the catalytic subcomplex. eIF2Bα,
-β, and -δ form the regulatory subcomplex., The α, β, and δ subunits of eIF2B are homologous
to each other over the entire eIF2Bα sequence; eIF2Bδ
has an N-terminal tail (NTT) not found in the other two subunits.
All the eIF2B subunits except for eIF2Bα are essential in S. cerevisiae (reviewed in refs () and ()). The essential functions
of eIF2Bβ, -γ, and -ε are in nucleotide exchange,
whereas eIF2Bδ is important for the recruitment of Met-tRNAi to eIF2-GTP. While eIF2Bα
plays an accessory role in the GEF function, it is required for the
regulation of eIF2B activity by phosphorylation of its substrate eIF2.
The eIF2Bα subunit is not tightly associated with the rest of
eIF2B, especially when eIF2B is not bound to its substrate eIF2, and
is sometimes partially or completely lost during purification (see,
for example, refs (−)). α-Less
eIF2B has been
reported to have activity either lower than or similar to that of intact eIF2B
and is not inhibited by phosphorylated eIF2 [eIF2(α-P)].,

Mutations that decrease the activity of eIF2B in S.
cerevisiae lead to lower TC concentrations, mimicking the
effect of eIF2α
phosphorylation and derepressing the translation of GCN4 in the absence
of amino acid starvation. Such a phenotype is called general amino
acid control derepressed (Gcd–), and Gcd– mutations have been found in all five eIF2B subunits. Mutations
that prevent derepression of GCN4 translation by amino acid starvation,
called general amino acid control nonderepressible (Gcn–), have been found in all three subunits of the eIF2Bα/β/δ
regulatory subcomplex. The Gcn– mutations in eIF2Bα,
-β, and -δ prevent
inhibition of eIF2B activity by eIF2(α-P) (reviewed in refs () and ()).

Mutations in human
eIF2B have been associated with a genetic neurodegenerative
disorder known as childhood ataxia with CNS hypomyelination (CACH)
or leukoencephalopathy with vanishing white matter (VWM). The CACH/VWM
mutations seem to lead to decreased eIF2B levels or activity in the
cell; however, the underlying molecular mechanisms are not understood
(reviewed in refs (), (), and ()).

Despite decades
of research, the architecture of eIF2B remains
unknown. It has typically been reported to have an apparent molecular
mass between 250 and 350 kDa, based on size exclusion chromatography
(SEC) and analytical ultracentrifugation (AUC) experiments (see, for
example, refs (−)). Because the combined
mass of
its five subunits is ∼260 kDa, it has always been thought to
be a heteropentamer composed of one each of the five subunits. More
recently, mass spectrometry data have confirmed that the five subunits
are present in equimolar amounts. Models
for the architecture of the catalytic eIF2Bγε
subcomplex have been proposed, based on distantly related enzymes., However, no viable model exists for the regulatory eIF2Bα/β/δ
subcomplex, and it is not known how the individual subunits interact
with each other (see also the ).

Because eIF2B is believed to be a heteropentamer, the regulatory
eIF2Bα/β/δ subcomplex is presumed to be a 1:1:1
trimer, and all three subunits (α, β, and δ) are
presumed to be monomers. However, it is difficult to reconcile this
notion with recent data about the structures of homologous proteins,
all of which are dimers. More recently, when the crystal structure
of human eIF2Bα was determined, the authors did not discuss the possibility of eIF2Bα
being a dimer, likely because that would conflict with the notion
that it is a monomer (because eIF2Bα/β/δ is believed
to be a trimer). However, close inspection of the deposited structure
reveals that the eIF2Bα molecules found in the asymmetric unit
appear to form dimers.

Here we show that eIF2Bα is indeed
a homodimer, like all
its homologs with known structures, using the same dimerization
interface. We
also present evidence indicating that the interaction between eIF2Bβ
and -δ likely occurs along the same interface, forming a heterodimer
similar to the eIF2Bα2 homodimer. These results allow
us to propose a model about the possible architecture of the regulatory
eIF2Bα/β/δ subcomplex. They also provide insights
into the molecular basis of a number of mutations in human eIF2B that
cause leukoencephalopathy with vanishing white matter. While this
article was being prepared, Proud and co-authors reported that eIF2Bα
is a dimer and eIF2B as a whole is a
decamer, at odds with a number of previous
reports,− but in line with the results
presented here. While the interactions between eIF2Bβ and -δ
were not addressed in this recent report, the data presented there are consistent with our conclusions.

Experimental
Procedures
Vectors, Protein Expression, and Purification
Human
eIF2Bα was cloned in a pET21a derivative vector with a short
11-residue C-terminal His tag. The eIF2BαI210E/V217E/A221D triple mutant (eIF2Bα-TM) and the eIF2Bα deletion mutant
missing residues 256–266
(eIF2Bα-Δarm) were derived from the wild-type
(WT) eIF2Bα plasmid using site-directed mutagenesis. Human eIF2Bβ
was cloned in a pET21a derivative vector with an N-terminal protein
G IgG-binding domain 1 (GB1) tag, followed by a His tag and a TEV
cleavage site (GH-eIF2Bβ), or in a pRSFDuet-1 vector (Novagen)
with a short 16-residue N-terminal His tag (H-eIF2Bβ). The eIF2Bβ1–143 construct (eIF2Bβ-NTD) was derived from
the WT eIF2Bβ
plasmid using site-directed mutagenesis.

WT eIF2Bα and
its derivatives were expressed in Rosetta2(DE3) cells overnight (O/N)
at 20 °C. eIF2Bβ and eIF2Bβ-NTD were expressed in
Rosetta2(DE3)pLysS cells. eIF2Bβ was grown for 3 h at 37 °C;
eIF2Bβ-NTD was grown O/N at 20 °C. 15N-labeled
eIF2Bβ-NTD was expressed in minimal medium using a standard
protocol, as described previously, under
the same conditions that were used for the expression of the unlabeled
proteins. Proteins were purified using His tag affinity chromatography
on TALON CellThru resin (Clontech), followed by SEC on a Superdex
75 column (GE Healthcare) in 10 mM sodium phosphate buffer (pH 7.0),
150 mM NaCl, 2 mM DTT, 1 mM EDTA, and 0.1 mM AEBSF. The short C-terminal
His tag of WT and mutant eIF2Bα (34.9 kDa) and the short N-terminal
His tag of H-eIF2Bβ (40.7 kDa) are not cleavable. The GB1/His
tag of GH-eIF2Bβ and GH-eIF2Bβ-NTD was cleaved with TEV
protease, yielding untagged eIF2Bβ (39.0 kDa) and eIF2Bβ-NTD
(16.2 kDa). The tag was removed using His tag affinity chromatography
on TALON resin or GB1 affinity chromatography on IgG resin (GE Healthcare).

Size Exclusion Chromatography (SEC)
Analytical SEC
of WT and mutant eIF2Bα (∼35 kDa) and of untagged eIF2Bβ
(∼39 kDa) was performed on a Superdex 75 10/300 GL column (GE
Healthcare). Apparent molecular weights (MWapp) were estimated
using a set of protein standards: bovine serum albumin (BSA, 67 kDa),
ovalbumin (44 kDa), and myoglobin (17 kDa). Proteins showing concentration-dependent
increases in MWapp were run at a series of concentrations,
and their MWapp was plotted as a function of concentration.
Apparent KD values for dimerization were
calculated as described previously. In
cases in which the protein was mostly or entirely dimeric at the lowest
concentration tested, only an upper limit of the KD could be obtained.

Small Angle X-ray Scattering (SAXS)
SAXS data of eIF2Bα
(∼35 kDa) were measured on beamline X9 at the National Synchrotron
Light Source (Brookhaven National Laboratory, Upton, NY). No reference
protein was used, and therefore, no absolute MW was determined. SAXS
data at three concentrations (57, 143, and 287 μM) were measured
for eIF2Bα. The low-angle region of the SAXS
profile at low concentrations was merged with the high-angle region
of the high-concentration profile to compensate for interparticle
repulsion. The SAXS data were processed using the ATSAS software suite. The radius of gyration (Rg) was measured using PRIMUS, and the maximum dimension (Dmax) was determined from the pair distance distribution
function P(r) calculated using GNOM.
The SAXS profile of eIF2Bα was used for fitting dimer and tetramer
assemblies from the eIF2Bα crystal structure [Protein Data Bank
(PDB) entry 3ecs] using FoXS.

Size Exclusion Chromatography–Multiangle
Laser Light
Scattering (SEC–MALLS) Determination of Native Protein Molecular
Weights
SEC–MALLS of eIF2Bα (∼35 kDa)
and H-eIF2Bβ (∼41 kDa) was performed at the W. M. Keck
Biotechnology Resource Facility at Yale University (New Haven, CT).
The samples were run on a Superdex 200 HR10/300 GL SEC column (GE
Healthcare), connected inline to a DAWN-EOS LS detector and an RI
detector (Wyatt Technology). Absolute molecular weights (MWs) were
calculated using ASTRA (Wyatt Technology). Proteins showing concentration-dependent
self-association were run at a series of concentrations, and their
MW was plotted as a function of concentration. The starting sample
concentration was used for plotting, instead of the estimated concentration
at the apex, because it was impossible to determine the degree to
which the complexes were able to reequilibrate at the gradually decreasing
concentrations during the SEC run.

Nuclear Magnetic Resonance
(NMR) Spectroscopy
NMR spectra
were recorded at 298 K on a Bruker 500 MHz instrument. Samples for
NMR measurements were in buffer containing 10 mM sodium phosphate
buffer (pH 7.0), 150 mM NaCl, 2 mM DTT, 1 mM EDTA, 0.1 mM AEBSF, and
10% D2O. NMR chemical shift perturbation assays were performed
as previously described.1H–15N heteronuclear single-quantum coherence (HSQC)
spectra
of 15N-labeled eIF2Bβ-NTD were recorded in the presence
and absence of excess eIF2Bα and compared.

Bioinformatics,
Modeling, and Structure Analysis
To
obtain multiple-sequence alignments for eIF2Bα, -β, and
-δ families, as well as among the three families, we performed
sequence homology searches with PSI-BLAST., A representative set of complete sequences with &lt;90% pairwise
sequence identity was obtained with the help of HHfilter from the
HHsuite.− Multiple-sequence alignments
were obtained using CLUSTAL W and T-COFFEE. Sequence alignments among eIF2Bα, -β,
and -δ were also obtained with HHpred from the HHsuite.− All alignment approaches yielded
essentially the same results for the C-terminal Rossmann fold domain
(CTD) of eIF2Bα, -β, and -δ. The sequence alignments
for the N-terminal helical domain (NTD) obtained from CLUSTAL W and
T-COFFEE were different from each other and from the HHpred and PSI-BLAST
results and showed poor agreement with the eIF2Bα structure
(insertions and/or deletions in secondary structure elements, buried
uncompensated charges), as well as with the multiple-sequence alignments
within the eIF2Bα, -β, and -δ families. HHpred and
PSI-BLAST yielded comparable sequence alignments for the NTD, which
were in good agreement with the eIF2Bα crystal structure and
with the multiple-sequence alignments within the eIF2Bα, -β,
and -δ families. The resulting eIF2Bα/β and eIF2Bα/δ
pairwise sequence alignments were used to generate homology models
for the structures of eIF2Bβ and -δ with the alignment
mode of SWISS-MODEL. eIF2Bβ and
-δ segments that had no counterparts in the eIF2Bα sequence
or corresponded to segments not visible in the eIF2Bα structure
were modeled de novo (colored black in Figure A). Their predicted conformation was thus
considered unreliable. Sequence alignments were colored with ESPript, using the BLOSUM62 homology scoring matrix.

Structure analysis was conducted in MOLMOL. Structure alignments between the CTDs of eIF2Bα, aIF2B, MTNA, and RBPI structures were created in MOLMOL using structure
alignments from the DALI server. One
CTD from each dimer was used for the alignment, while the rest of
the dimer was not used in the alignment and was aligned indirectly.
This approach allowed for an unbiased analysis of the similarity between
two dimers, which could have been overemphasized by global alignment
over the entire dimers. In all cases, the alignment between the indirectly
aligned second pair of CTDs (from the second subunits in the dimer)
was almost as good as that between the directly aligned CTDs, illustrating
the remarkably high degree of conservation of the dimer interface
among eIF2Bα, aIF2B, MTNA, and RBPI structures.
The angle between the NTD and the CTD varies slightly among the different
families, as has been previously observed. The buried surface area was calculated using PISA. The eIF2Bα structure and the eIF2Bβ and -δ
models were colored by conservation with the help of ProtSkin, based on multiple-sequence alignments of ∼50
to ∼90 sequences with &lt;90% pairwise sequence identity. The
coloring scheme was from white (&lt;30% conservation) to yellow (65%
conservation) to green (100% conservation), similar to that used by
the Burley lab (see, e.g., ref ()). The BLOSUM62
matrix was used to calculate sequence homology scores. Figures were
generated in MOLMOL.

Molecular Docking
Model
Building
Models of eIF2Bβ and -δ
used for molecular docking were based on chain C (the most complete
chain) in the X-ray crystal structure of eIF2Bα (PDB entry 3ecs). We used Modeller
version 9v8 and modeled only residues at positions that were present
in the X-ray structure of eIF2Bα. This was done for two reasons.
First, the conservative approach improves the reliability of the model.
Second, because all the systems have the same number of residues (i.e.,
differ only by side chains), the calculated relative affinity scores
are comparable across the different pairs. No further energy minimization
was performed for the model structures prior to docking.

Docking
Models of subunits were docked using the ClusPro
protein docking server, which consists of systematic global sampling
of all mutual orientations of the two proteins on a rotational/translational
grid. The conformations are evaluated
using an energy-based scoring function that includes attractive and
repulsive contributions to the van der Waals interaction energy, an
electrostatic energy term, and a pairwise interaction potential representing
desolvation effects. The N (≥1000) lowest-energy
structures are clustered using the pairwise rmsd as the distance measure
and a 9 Å clustering radius. The
biophysical
meaning of clustering is isolating highly populated low-energy basins
of the energy landscape. The largest
clusters indicate the most likely models, as shown previously using
approximate partition functions.

Stability
Analysis Using Focused Sampling
As stable
structures are expected to be located at energy minima surrounded
by a funnel-shaped energy distribution, the stability of a model can be investigated by focused sampling
of structures in its neighborhood, thereby determining the local energy
landscape. The resampling is based on the same algorithm as global
docking but uses a denser rotational grid, and the translational space
is limited to the region defined by the cluster of interest identified
in the docking stage. We have previously shown that focused sampling
provides detailed information about the energy landscape and improves
relative affinity estimation.

Results
The Human eIF2Bα Crystal Structure Indicates That It Is
a Dimer
Most archaeons with an eIF2Bα/β/δ
homolog
have a single protein, archaeal translation initiation factor 2B
(aIF2B), which is a homodimer. Throughout this paper,
the “a” in aIF2B is in bold,
to aid in the distinction between aIF2B and eIF2B. aIF2B dimerization is mediated by the C-terminal domains (CTDs)
of the two subunits (Figure A and Figure S1B
of the ). A long
loop (“arm” region) protrudes from
each subunit and packs against the other subunit in the dimer, effectively
extending its β-sheet. More distant
relatives, such as ribose-1,5-bisphosphate isomerases (RBPIs) and methylthioribose-1-phosphate isomerases
(MTNAs),, are also dimeric and utilize the same dimer
interface as aIF2B, including the arm region (Figure
S1C,D of the ).
All these dimeric structures cast doubt on the widely held view that
the regulatory eIF2Bα/β/δ subcomplex is a trimer,
which requires the eIF2Bα, -β, and -δ
subunits to be monomers.

eIF2Bα dimerizes along the same interface
as all its homologs
with known structures. (A) Crystal structure of the archaeal eIF2Bα/β/δ
homolog, aIF2B (PDB entry 1vb5), which is a homodimer. The two aIF2B subunits are colored red and
yellow. The arm regions, which interact with the other subunit in
the dimer, are labeled with arrows. (B) Crystal structure of eIF2Bα
(PDB entry 3ecs) showing a dimer with a large buried
surface. One subunit is colored cyan and the other blue. The arm regions,
which interact with the other subunit in the dimer, are labeled with
arrows. (C) eIF2Bα dimerizes using the same interface as aIF2B. Structure alignment of aIF2B and eIF2Bα,
with the same orientation and coloring as in panels A and B, respectively.
The CTDs of the eIF2Bα and aIF2B subunits were
aligned [Cα rmsd of 1.38 Å (excluding the arm region)].
The interdomain orientations differ somewhat between eIF2Bα
and aIF2B, as noted previously, and the NTDs of the proteins were not used in the alignment. Structure
alignments were done in MOLMOL. (D) The
eIF2Bα dimerization surface is highly conserved among eIF2Bα
homologs. eIF2Bα is shown in surface representation. Amino
acids are colored by sequence conservation from white (&lt;30% conservation)
to yellow (65% conservation) to green (100% conservation). The dimerization
interface is marked with a light blue line. One subunit is omitted
in the middle panel, to show the dimerization surface. (E) The eIF2Bα
dimerization surface is highly hydrophobic. The display is as in panel
D, except that the surface is colored by hydrophobicity and charge.
Backbones are colored dark gray, hydrophobic side chains yellow, positively
charged side chains blue, negatively charged side chains red, and
the remaining side chains light gray. The three residues at the dimerization
surface, whose mutation (designated eIF2Bα-TM) abolishes dimerization
(see Figure ), are labeled.

The crystal structure of human eIF2Bα was
published recently. The authors reported
that eight molecules were found in the asymmetric unit but did not
discuss the subject further. Close inspection of the eIF2Bα
structure shows that the eight molecules in the asymmetric unit form
four identical dimers (shown in different colors in Figure S1E of
the ). Dimerization
is along the same interface as in all homologs with known structures
(Figure B,C and Figure S1 of the ). The
arm region (marked with arrows in Figure B)
is also part of the dimerization interface,
again as in all homologous structures. The dimer interface is extensive,
with &gt;1500 Å2 of buried surface area. The dimerization
surface observed
in the crystal structure is among the best-conserved surfaces in the
protein, with significant hydrophobicity, as expected for a protein–protein
interaction surface (Figure D,E). Hydrophobic
amino acid side chains
are typically found in the protein core and at protein interaction
surfaces, because exposing them is unfavorable and burying them contributes
to the binding energy. Hydrophobic side chains also contribute to
the specificity of interaction, because the binding energy is proportional
to the sixth power
of the distance and helps “lock” the complex into place,
compared to electrostatic interactions, which are proportional to
the first power of the distance. Compared
to the highly conserved putative eIF2α-P binding surface, the eIF2Bα dimerization surface shows
a comparable degree of sequence conservation and even greater hydrophobicity,
consistent with both surfaces being important for protein–protein
interactions and the dimerization surface being constitutively buried.
These observations led us to hypothesize that eIF2Bα is a homodimer,
utilizing the same dimerization surface as all its homologs with
a known structure.

eIF2Bα Is a Dimer at Physiological
Concentrations
To test our hypothesis that eIF2Bα is
a dimer, we used SEC.
We found that eIF2Bα (∼35 kDa) migrates with an apparent
molecular weight (MWapp) of ∼60 kDa, roughly as
expected for a dimer (Figure A). The MWapp of eIF2Bα
did not change as its concentration was varied between 0.6 and 3 μM
(Figure B), indicating that there is no significant
fraction of monomer within this concentration range. While these results
do not allow us to estimate the KD of
dimerization, the absence of detectable amounts of monomer (below
a few percent) provides an upper limit of ∼1 nM for the KD: if there is no detectable monomer at 0.6
μM,
the protein concentration must be more than 2 orders of magnitude
higher than the KD of dimerization. Therefore,
eIF2Bα is a dimer at physiological
concentrations, estimated to be in the low micromolar range. The MWapp of eIF2Bα
gradually increased as its concentration was varied between 3 and
230 μM (Figure B), indicating that the
dimer was in equilibrium
with higher-order species at concentrations above 3 μM. To corroborate
the SEC results, we used SAXS at concentrations of 57, 143, and 287
μM
to characterize the oligomeric state of eIF2Bα (Figure S2 of
the ). The
radius of gyration (Rg) and the maximum
dimension (Dmax) of the eIF2Bα particle
at 57 μM could be determined from SAXS data to be ∼44
and
∼150 Å, respectively (Figure S2 of the ). Comparison
of these results with the values calculated from the crystal structure
for a monomer (Rg = 21 Å; Dmax = 78 Å) and dimer (Rg = 31 Å; Dmax = 132
Å)
showed that the average complex size in the eIF2Bα sample
at 57 μM was greater than a dimer. Because there are eight molecules
in the
asymmetric unit in the eIF2Bα crystal, forming four identical
dimers, there is more than one possible tetrameric arrangement (and
it is also possible that the interdimer orientations could be different
from those observed in the crystal). The calculated values of Rg and Dmax for two
of the possible tetrameric arrangements found in the crystal are 37
and 133 Å
(both values smaller than experimentally determined) and 41 and 163
Å
(Dmax larger than experimentally determined),
respectively. For reference, the values of Rg and Dmax calculated for the octameric
arrangement in the crystal were 45 and 167 Å, respectively. We
were unable to fit the SAXS data to a dimer, a tetramer, or a
mixture thereof with a χ2 of better than 6 by using
FoXS. Nevertheless, the calculated Rg and Dmax show
that at the high protein concentrations
used for SAXS, eIF2Bα is clearly not a monomer and is larger
than a dimer, in agreement with the SEC results.

Size exclusion chromatography
(SEC) of eIF2Bα and -β.
(A) SEC traces of WT eIF2Bα (blue) and eIF2Bα-TM (green)
at a concentration of 15 μM. The theoretical MWs for WT eIF2Bα
and eIF2Bα-TM monomers are both ∼35 kDa. The apparent
molecular weights (MWapp) from SEC are 60 kDa for WT eIF2Bα
(dimer) and 33 kDa for eIF2Bα-TM (monomer). The positions of
the markers used to calculate MWapp are shown with vertical
dashed lines. (B) Calculated MWapp as a function of protein
concentration. WT eIF2Bα (data from two independent sets of
experiments are colored blue and light blue) is dimeric up to 3 μM,
but its MWapp starts to gradually increase at higher concentrations,
indicative of the formation of larger complexes. eIF2Bα-Δarm
(red) is in equilibrium between the monomer and dimer, and possibly
higher-order complexes, in the concentration range tested; eIF2Bα-TM
(green) is clearly monomeric. (C) SEC trace of untagged eIF2Bβ
at a concentration of 15 μM. The theoretical MW for an eIF2Bβ
monomer is 39 kDa. The apparent molecular weight (MWapp) from SEC is 41 kDa (monomer). The positions of the markers used
to calculate MWapp are shown with vertical dashed lines.

To determine unambiguously the
oligomeric state
of eIF2Bα in solution, we used SEC–MALLS, which allows the determination
of absolute molecular weights and can also be performed at physiological
protein concentrations. The SEC–MALLS experiment was performed
at three different eIF2Bα concentrations: at a physiological
concentration of 1 μM [within the
concentration range in which eIF2Bα mobility in
SEC is independent of concentration (see Figure B)] as well as at 10 and 100 μM [within the concentration range
in which there is a concentration-dependent
increase in MWapp as determined via SEC (see Figure B)]. When eIF2Bα was loaded at a concentration
of 1 μM, the MW determined by SEC–MALLS was 67 kDa, as
expected for
a dimer (Table ). At starting concentrations
of 10 and 100 μM, the MWs determined at the apex of the peak
by SEC–MALLS were
83 and 195 kDa, respectively [at these concentrations, the MW decreased
toward the tail side of the peak, likely because of the lower eIF2Bα
concentrations leading to partial complex dissociation (see Figure
S3 of the )]. Therefore,
the average complex size in the eIF2Bα samples was larger than
a dimer at 10 μM and corresponded to a hexamer at 100 μM.
Comparison of the SEC–MALLS results with those from the SEC
and SAXS experiments shows that SEC and SAXS results qualitatively
agree with SEC–MALLS results, with SEC results (both stand-alone
and the SEC portion of the SEC–MALLS) tending to underestimate
the size of the eIF2Bα oligomers. These results also explain
our inability to fit the SAXS data to a structure model, because
at the concentrations used in SAXS (57–287 μM), eIF2Bα
likely exists as a mixture of dimers, tetramers, hexamers,
and possibly also octamers. In conclusion, these results show that
eIF2Bα is a dimer at physiological concentrations and oligomerizes
at higher concentrations.

Native Molecular
Weights of eIF2Bα
and eIF2Bβ Determined by SEC–MALLS
protein	starting
concentration (μM)	theoretical
MW (monomer) (kDa)	MW at the
apex (kDa)	
eIF2Bα	1	34.9	66.7 (dimer)	
eIF2Bα	10	34.9	83.0 (&gt;dimer)	
eIF2Bα	100	34.9	195 (∼hexamer)	
H-eIF2Bβ	1	40.7	39.5 (monomer)	
H-eIF2Bβ	10	40.7	39.7 (monomer)	
Concentration at which the samples
were loaded onto the SEC column. Sample dilution at the end of the
run was estimated to be between 2- and 20-fold.

Calculated on the basis of the protein
sequence.

The SEC peak of
eIF2Bα at
10 and 100 μM was polydisperse, with the MW determined by MALLS
gradually decreasing along the tail of the peak, likely because of
the lower protein concentrations in the tail affecting the average
oligomer size (see also Figure S3 of the ).

eIF2Bα
Dimerizes through the Same Interface as Its Homologs
As
described above, the dimer interface observed in the
crystal structure of eIF2Bα, as well as all of its homologs
with known structures, is composed of a large interface between the
CTDs of two subunits and a long
loop (or arm), which protrudes across the dimer interface and packs
against the other subunit in the dimer (Figure ). To confirm that eIF2Bα dimerizes
through the interface observed in the crystal structure, we used site-directed
mutagenesis. We replaced three hydrophobic residues at the predicted
dimerization surface of the CTD with negatively charged residues (I210E,
V217E, and A221D) to generate an eIF2BαI210E/V217E/A221D triple mutant (eIF2Bα-TM). Using SEC, we found that eIF2Bα-TM
migrated with an MWapp of ∼33 kDa, as expected for
a monomer (Figure A). To assess the contribution
of the arm
to eIF2Bα dimerization, we generated an eIF2Bα deletion
mutant missing residues 256–266
(eIF2Bα-Δarm). SEC shows that at 1.25 μM, eIF2Bα-Δarm
migrates with an MWapp of ∼50 kDa (Figure B), a value intermediate between that of
a monomer (∼33 kDa) and that of a dimer (∼67 kDa), indicating
that at this concentration eIF2Bα-Δarm is in equilibrium
between monomers and dimers. As the eIF2Bα-Δarm concentration
is increased to 12.5 and 125 μM, its MWapp gradually
increases to ∼67 kDa (Figure B). These
results show that both the main
dimer interface and the arm play important roles in eIF2Bα dimerization.

Models
for the structure of eIF2Bβ and -δ. (A) Model
for the proposed dimeric structure of eIF2Bβ (yellow) and eIF2Bδ
(red), based on the structure of eIF2Bα2 and the
sequence alignment shown in Figure S4 of the . The first eight residues of eIF2Bβ and the
first 200 residues of eIF2Bδ were not modeled. Segments that
have no counterpart in eIF2Bα or are not visible in the eIF2Bα
crystal structure were modeled de novo and are colored
black, because their real conformation is unknown. (B) The putative
eIF2Bβ and -δ dimerization surfaces are highly conserved
among eIF2Bβ and eIF2Bδ homologs. The eIF2Bβδ
dimer model is shown in surface representation. Amino acids are colored
by sequence conservation from white (&lt;30% conservation) to yellow
(65% conservation) to green (100% conservation). To show the dimerization
surfaces, eIF2Bδ was omitted from the middle left panel and
eIF2Bβ from the middle right panel. The dimerization interface
is marked with a light blue line. The conserved surface unique to
eIF2Bδ is circled in the right panel. (C) The putative eIF2Bβ
and -δ dimerization surfaces are highly hydrophobic. The display
is as in panel B, except that the surface is colored by hydrophobicity
and charge. Backbones are colored dark gray, hydrophobic side chains
yellow, positively charged side chains blue, negatively charged side
chains red, and the remaining side chains light gray.

eIF2Bβ Is a Monomer
Having
determined that eIF2Bα
is a dimer, we explored the possibility that the homologous eIF2Bβ
and eIF2Bδ subunits could also dimerize through their corresponding
surfaces. We generated homology models for the structures of eIF2Bβ
and eIF2Bδ (Figure ), using the eIF2Bα
structure as a template and the sequence alignment shown in Figure . The ∼200-residue eIF2Bδ N-terminal
tail is not homologous to eIF2Bα and -β and was not modeled.
As noted previously,, the level of homology among eIF2Bα,
-β, and -δ was greater for the Rossmann fold C-terminal
domain (CTD) than for the helical N-terminal domain (NTD) (Figure ). Analysis of the putative dimerization
surfaces in the CTDs of the eIF2Bβ and -δ homology models
shows that they are among the best-conserved surfaces in the proteins
(Figure B). They exhibit significant hydrophobicity
(Figure C), similar to the corresponding surface
of eIF2Bα (Figure DE), as expected for
a protein–protein interaction surface (see also the sequence
alignment in Figure ). The putative dimerization
surface of eIF2Bδ
is particularly hydrophobic (Figure C). Both
eIF2Bβ and -δ have the
arm region (Figure A), which in eIF2Bα
and the more distant homologs forms part of the dimer interface.
The conservation and charge and
hydrophobicity patterns of the rest of eIF2Bβ and -δ are
also similar to those of eIF2Bα (Figure D,E), including the highly conserved putative
eIF2α-P binding surfaces, where
a number of Gcn– mutations in yeast eIF2Bα,
-β, and -δ have
been found, (Figure B,C, left panels, and Figure D,E; see also
Figure ). A notable exception is the surface
in
eIF2Bδ visible in the right panels of panels B and C of Figure , which shows a greater degree of conservation
than its counterparts in eIF2Bα (Figure D,E, right panels) or eIF2Bβ (Figure B,C, right panels).

Sequence alignment of human eIF2Bα, -β, and
-δ.
Identical positions are shown as white letters on a red background;
conserved positions are shown as red letters. The secondary structure
and residue numbering above the alignment are for eIF2Bα. Amino
acids located at the dimer interface are marked with a black asterisk
below the alignment. The position of V183 in eIF2Bα is marked
with a red asterisk. V183 is buried just under the dimerization surface
and surrounded by residues that are part of the dimer interface (see
also Figure A). The V183F mutation causes
CACH/VWM, and was recently shown to affect eIF2Bα
dimerization. The sequence alignment
was obtained with HHpred from the HHsuite.− This figure
was generated with ESPript, using the
BLOSUM62 homology scoring matrix.

Using SEC, we found that eIF2Bβ (∼39
kDa) migrates with an MWapp of ∼41 kDa, as expected
for a monomer (Figure C). This result was
later confirmed using
SEC–MALLS, which yielded an MW of ∼40 kDa, as expected
for a monomer, at both 1 and 10 μM (Table ). Unfortunately, we were unable
to express eIF2Bδ in soluble form in Escherichia coli and thus could not determine whether it is monomeric or study its
interaction with eIF2Bβ.

Molecular Docking Indicates
an eIF2Bβδ Heterodimer
along the Same Interface as eIF2Bα2
Unlike
eIF2Bα, free eIF2Bβ is a monomer (Figure C), despite a high degree of conservation
in its putative dimerization surface. The interaction between eIF2Bβ
and -δ is important for the stability of eIF2Bδ in vivo in S. cerevisiae, because eIF2Bβ
depletion causes codepletion of eIF2Bδ. Therefore, we considered
the possibility that eIF2Bβ and -δ form a heterodimer
using the same extensive dimerization surfaces as eIF2Bα2. Because we were unable to produce soluble eIF2Bδ,
we could not test this hypothesis directly.

Because eIF2Bα,
-β, and -δ are homologous, we built models of β
and δ subunits based on the crystal structure of eIF2Bα
(PDB entry 3ecs). Residues were modeled only at positions present in the eIF2Bα
structure. We used molecular docking with the ClusPro server to evaluate the potential for homo- or heterodimerization
of all combinations of eIF2Bα, -β, and -δ. For the
eIF2Bα2 homodimer, the highest-scoring model differs
by only a 3.5 Å interface root-mean-square deviation (rmsd) from
the dimer interface seen in the crystal structure (Figure A), thus reproducing the experimentally confirmed
eIF2Bα2 homodimer. The calculated interaction energy
values show a funnel-shaped distribution in the vicinity of this best
model (Figure B), indicative of a stable structure.
The
interface in the highest-scoring model of the eIF2Bβδ
heterodimer was the same as seen in the eIF2Bα2 homodimer,
with a funnel-like local energy landscape (Figure C). This supports the hypothesis that eIF2Bβ
and -δ interact with each other along an interface corresponding
to the homodimerization interface in eIF2Bα2 (Figure B), forming a stable heterodimer similar
to the eIF2Bα2 homodimer. In contrast, docking generated
relatively few models with the putative interface for eIF2Bδ2, eIF2Bαβ, and eIF2Bαδ, placing the
highest-scoring models at least 25 Å interface rmsd away in each
case, confirming that these combinations
do not form dimers. The remaining combination, eIF2Bβ2, was found to be an interesting case: although the best-scoring
model included the putative dimer interface, the energy values did
not exhibit any funnel-like behavior (Figure D). This indicates that interactions between
two eIF2Bβ proteins do not result in the formation of a stable
homodimer, in good agreement with the experimental data.

Molecular docking
indicates an eIF2Bβδ heterodimer
utilizing the same interface as the eIF2Bα2 homodimer.
(A) Highest-scoring model of the eIF2Bα2 dimer superimposed
on the eIF2Bα2 dimer observed in the crystal structure
of eIF2Bα (PDB entry 3ecs). The left subunits from
each dimer (model and crystal structure) are aligned (colored gray).
The second subunit in the modeled dimer is colored blue; the second
subunit in the dimer found in the crystal structure is colored yellow.
The interface rmsd between the two structures is 3.5 Å. None
of the high-scoring models showed any similarity to any other crystal
contacts observed in the eIF2Bα structure (PDB entry 3ecs). (B) Local energy landscape of the eIF2Bα2 models generated by docking, plotted with a model having
the observed eIF2Bα2 crystal interface placed at
the origin. The plot shows that such models are surrounded by a well-defined
energy funnel. (C) Local energy landscape of the eIF2Bβδ
models generated by docking, plotted with a model having the eIF2Bα2 crystal interface placed at the origin. The plot shows that,
along the energy funnel, the models converge to ones with the interface
seen in the eIF2Bα2 structure. (D) Local energy landscape
of the eIF2Bβ2 models generated by docking, again
plotted with a model having the eIF2Bα2 crystal interface
placed at the origin. Unlike for the dimers shown in panels B and
C, no funnel-shaped energy distribution is observed in the vicinity
of such models, indicating that no stable eIF2Bβ2 homodimer is formed.

All eIF2Bα/β/δ homologs with known structures
are dimers utilizing the same dimer interface
as we show here for eIF2Bα2 (Figures  and  and Figure
S1 of the ). Therefore,
this dimerization interface has been conserved through evolution of
the eIF2B homolog and distantly related metabolic enzymes. Because
the corresponding
surfaces in eIF2Bβ and -δ are also well-conserved (Figure B), it is logical to expect that they are
not exceptions to the rule and are also involved in dimerization (either
homo- or heterodimerization). The molecular docking results presented
here are in full agreement with our experimental data and indicate
that, while eIF2Bα is a homodimer, eIF2Bβ and -δ
form a heterodimer.

Model for the interaction of eIF2Bα2β2δ2 with eIF2α-P. (A) Positions of Gcn– mutations (red) on the surface of the eIF2Bα2 dimer. The orientations are the same as in panels D and E
of Figure . The dimerization interface is
marked with a light blue line. In the central panel, only one eIF2Bα
subunit is shown, to show the dimerization surface. Only mutations
of surface-exposed residues that do not involve a glycine or a proline
are shown, because these are least likely to affect the protein structure
or stability. The approximate position of V183 (invisible because
it is buried under the surface) is labeled in the central panel with
a dashed arrow. (B) Positions of Gcn– and CACH/VWM
mutations on the surface of the eIF2Bβδ dimer, in the
same orientation as the eIF2Bα2 dimer in panel A.
The eIF2Bβδ dimer is in the same orientation as in Figure . The dimerization interface is marked with a light
blue line. The two central panels show the dimerization surfaces of
eIF2Bβ (left) and eIF2Bδ (right). Sites of Gcn– mutations are colored red (eIF2Bβ) and orange (eIF2Bδ),
and CACH/VWM mutations are colored navy (eIF2Bβ) and blue (eIF2Bδ).
The clusters of CACH/VWM mutations at the eIF2Bβ and eIF2Bδ
dimerization surfaces are visible in the two central panels. The cluster
of CACH/VWM mutations in eIF2Bδ-NTD can be seen in the right
panel (circled). Residues discussed in the text are labeled. The position
of V316 (buried under the surface) is labeled in the left central
panel with a dashed arrow. (C) Model for the interaction of eIF2Bα2β2δ2 with eIF2α-P.
One eIF2Bα subunit is colored light blue, the other dark blue,
eIF2Bβ yellow, and eIF2Bδ red. eIF2α-P (light gray)
binds in a pocket (circled on the left) formed between one eIF2Bα
subunit and one eIF2Bβδ dimer. The proteins are represented
by solids, drawn approximately to scale with their respective sizes.
Unphosphorylated eIF2α should bind to an overlapping surface
on eIF2Bα2β2δ2.

Discussion
Implications for the Architecture of eIF2B
Since it
was first discovered, eIF2B has been presumed to be a heteropentamer
with equimolar amounts of its α, β, γ, δ,
and ε subunits. Accordingly, the regulatory eIF2Bα/β/δ
subcomplex has always been presumed to be a 1:1:1 heterotrimer. However,
the architecture of eIF2B and its regulatory subcomplex has remained
a mystery, despite decades of research.

The results presented
here show that eIF2Bα is a homodimer and eIF2Bβ is a monomer.
Our data also indicate that that eIF2Bβ and -δ form a
heterodimer along the same interface as the eIF2Bα2 dimer. What is then the architecture of eIF2B and the regulatory
eIF2Bα/β/δ subcomplex in particular? There are two
alternative models that are consistent with eIF2Bα being a homodimer
and eIF2Bβ a monomer, as well as with the utilization of the
conserved hydrophobic C-terminal surfaces of eIF2Bβ and -δ
for dimerization. One possible model is that the regulatory subcomplex
is an eIF2Bα2βδ tetramer, made up of
an eIF2Bα2 dimer and an eIF2Bβδ dimer,
which would imply that eIF2B as a whole is a hexamer (α2βδγε). This model fits well with the
majority of previously published SEC and AUC data about the size of
eIF2B, which has been reported to have an MWapp of 250–350
kDa.− However, it contradicts a recent
mass spectrometry study, which showed that all eIF2B subunits are
present in equimolar amounts. Alternatively,
the eIF2B regulatory subcomplex could
be an α2β2δ2 hexamer
built up of one α2 homodimer and two βδ
heterodimers, which would imply that eIF2B is a decamer. Such a model
is at odds with most SEC and AUC data− but is consistent with
the recent
mass spectrometry report about the stoichiometry of eIF2B subunits. The results presented here alone cannot distinguish
between these two models. However, Proud and co-authors recently reported
that eIF2B is a decamer. Therefore, in
view of their results and the earlier mass spectrometry
report, we favor the latter model: a
hexameric eIF2B regulatory subcomplex, composed of an eIF2Bα2 homodimer and two eIF2Bβδ heterodimers. These
authors also found that eIF2Bα is a dimer, in agreement with
the results presented here. While they did not study the interactions
of eIF2Bβ and eIF2Bδ, their observation that eIF2Bα
stabilizes the interaction between two eIF2Bβγδε
tetramers is consistent with the existence
of two eIF2Bβδ heterodimers, rather than an eIF2Bβ2 and an eIF2Bδ2 homodimer in eIF2B.

Alternative
Models for the Architecture of eIF2Bα/β/δ
The only attempt to date for a structure model for the regulatory
eIF2Bα/β/δ subcomplex was by Kakuta and co-authors,
based on crystal packing contacts in the structure of the archaeal
eIF2Bα/β/δ homolog aIF2B from Pyrococcus horikoshii (which
is a dimer in solution). As discussed
above, the structure shows dimerization along the same interface as
all other homologs.,− Therefore,
when looking for possible
implications for the structure of the presumed trimeric eIF2Bα/β/δ
complex, the authors had to ignore the known dimerization interface
(&gt;1500 Å2 of buried surface area, light blue line
in Figure S4A,B of the ).
Instead, they focused on hexameric-like crystal packing contacts among
three dimers (red line in Figure S4B of the ) to
propose that the eIF2Bα/β/δ complex forms a symmetrical
trimer, leaving the conserved hydrophobic dimerization surfaces unoccupied.
Any trimeric model of the eIF2Bα/β/δ regulatory
subcomplex in general is incompatible with the results presented here,
because an even number of subunits is needed to occupy all dimerization
surfaces. An eIF2Bα/β/δ trimer would leave at least
one of the extensive conserved and hydrophobic dimerization surfaces
in eIF2Bα, -β, and -δ unoccupied, while the model
of Kakuta and co-authors specifically would leave all three dimerization
surfaces unoccupied.
In view of the data presented here and in the recent report by Proud
and co-authors, the Kakuta model could
be considered
in the context of a hexameric eIF2Bα2β2δ2 regulatory subcomplex: as a possible interface
between three dimers, instead of three monomers, especially because
it was in fact based on crystal packing contacts among three dimers
(Figure S4B of the ). However, although the coordinates
for the proposed
trimeric arrangement were not deposited, it is clear from Figure S4B
of the  that
the buried surface area is small and insignificant. It is thus highly
unlikely that such a small interface could produce a stable complex.
In support of this conclusion, we found using an NMR chemical shift
perturbation assay that eIF2Bα does not bind to eIF2Bβ-NTD,
because adding unlabeled eIF2Bα did not affect the NMR spectra
of 15N-labeled eIF2Bβ-NTD (Figure S4C of the ). Therefore,
this possibility is not supported by experimental data.

Implications
for eIF2B Function and Interactions with Its Substrate,
eIF2
Most Gcn– mutations in eIF2Bα,
-β, and -δ map to the
same conserved surface in the CTD, (Figure A,B, left panels)
and have been proposed to be the binding sites for phosphorylated
eIF2α (eIF2α-P). How these
putative eIF2α-P binding surfaces on the eIF2Bα, -β,
and -δ subunits come together to simultaneously interact with
eIF2α has remained an open question. Remarkably, in the eIF2Bα2 dimer, the C-terminal surfaces from each subunit are adjacent
to each other across the dimer interface (Figure A, left panel). Likewise, the two C-terminal
surfaces of eIF2Bβ and -δ end up adjacent to each other
in the model of the proposed eIF2Bβδ dimer (Figure B, left panel). The important implication
of this observation is that bringing these surfaces closer together
in eIF2Bα2 and eIF2Bβδ makes it much
easier for eIF2α-P to contact them simultaneously, as indicated
by the mutational studies. Binding between an eIF2Bα2 dimer and two eIF2Bβδ dimers can form two binding sites
by bringing the putative eIF2α contact surfaces close together
(Figure C). It should be noted that because
the mutual
orientation of eIF2Bα2 and eIF2Bβδ is
not known, their arrangement in Figure C is
purely hypothetical and not based on
experimental evidence. We did not observe a stable interaction between
eIF2Bα and eIF2Bβ using SEC and affinity pull-down experiments
(data not shown). Therefore, in the model, eIF2Bα contacts mainly
eIF2Bδ. eIF2Bβ likely also binds to eIF2Bα, but
with an affinity too low to observe by these assays in the absence
of eIF2Bδ. Although in the model shown in Figure C the two eIF2Bβδ dimers do not
contact each other, they could do so, depending on the actual architecture
of the eIF2B regulatory subcomplex.

Gcn– mutations
map to several additional surfaces in the regulatory
eIF2Bα2βδ subcomplex. However, it is
likely that not all of these regions contact eIF2 directly: some of
the mutations could have indirect effects. We did not include in our
analysis the vast number of Gcd– mutations, because
a Gcd– phenotype could arise not only from an impaired
mode of binding to unphosphorylated eIF2 but also from lower eIF2B
activity or stability. Accordingly, most Gcd– mutations
in eIF2Bβ and eIF2Bα affect buried residues
(not shown in Figure ) and are thus likely
to affect the structure
or stability of the protein, consistent with a loss-of-function mutation
lowering the amount or activity of eIF2B.

CACH/VWM Mutations Map
to the Proposed eIF2Bβ/δ
Dimer Interface
The results presented here help explain the
molecular basis of CACH/VWM mutations found in the human eIF2Bα/β/δ
regulatory subcomplex. All known CACH/VWM mutations reported to date
are recessive: either homozygous or heterozygous with another mutation
or complete deletion of the gene. Therefore, it is clear that they
lower eIF2B activity. Because complete disruption or inactivation
of the eIF2B complex would be lethal, the mutant eIF2B complexes must
retain at least a certain level of activity. For those mutations that
affect a residue buried in the hydrophobic core of a folded domain,
one can speculate that their effect on eIF2B is mediated by destabilization
of protein structure. It is thus more interesting to consider mutations
in surface-exposed residues. Only three CACH/VWM mutations have been
reported in eIF2Bα,, two of them affecting
a buried residue and the third affecting a proline. One of these CACH/VWM
mutations, V183F,, was recently reported to disrupt
eIF2Bα dimerization in vitro. This mutation affects a residue buried under the eIF2Bα
dimerization surface (its approximate location is marked with a dashed
arrow in the central panel of Figure A).

As shown in Figure B (center panels), a number
of CACH/VWM mutations
in eIF2Bβ and -δ map to the predicted dimerization surfaces
of these two subunits. Therefore, they most likely weaken the interaction
between eIF2Bβ and -δ. Two of these mutations, eIF2Bδ-R357W
and eIF2Bδ-R483W, both causing a severe form of the disease,
were reported to destabilize the association of eIF2Bδ with
the rest of eIF2B. Another mutation,
eIF2Bβ-V316D (not visible in Figure B), affects a residue buried just under the
predicted eIF2Bδ-binding surface of eIF2Bβ and was reported
to weaken interactions with the rest of eIF2B. The corresponding mutation in yeast was found to destabilize
association with other subunits, especially eIF2Bδ, and to have
a slow-growth phenotype that was partially rescued by eIF2Bδ
overexpression. Therefore, not only does
our model for eIF2Bβδ dimerization help explain the phenotypes
of many CACH/VWM mutations, but these phenotypes in turn support the
model.

A small group of CACH/VWM mutations map to residues in
eIF2Bδ-NTD,
which appear to cluster on one surface of the domain, away from the
proposed eIF2α interface (circled in Figure B, right panel). These mutations could interfere
either with binding to other eIF2B subunits or with the role of eIF2Bδ
in promoting eIF2 ternary complex formation. Consistent with this
hypothesis, the surface of eIF2Bδ where these mutations map
shows a high degree of sequence conservation and hydrophobicity (circled
in Figure B,C, right panels), unlike the corresponding
surfaces of eIF2Bβ (Figure B,C, right
panels) and eIF2Bα (Figure D,E, right
panels). The sequence conservation
in this surface and the clustering of CACH/VWM mutations there have
not been previously identified. Thus, our results indicate that surface-exposed
CACH/VWM mutations in the regulatory eIF2Bα/β/δ
subcomplex affect eIF2B complex assembly or stability, with the majority
of them mapping to the predicted eIF2Bβδ interaction interface.

In summary, we show here that eIF2Bα is a dimer at physiological
concentrations while eIF2Bβ is a monomer. We also present evidence
that eIF2Bβ and -δ likely use the same evolutionarily
conserved dimer interface as eIF2Bα2 to form a heterodimer
similar to the eIF2Bα2 homodimer. These findings
indicate that the eIF2B regulatory subcomplex is most likely an α2β2δ2 hexamer composed of
an eIF2Bα2 homodimer and two eIF2Bβδ
heterodimers. While this conclusion contradicts a number of previous
reports about the size of eIF2B (see, for example, refs (−)), it is consistent with most
of the remaining experimental data about eIF2B and its homologs.,,,− The resulting model for the architecture of the eIF2Bα/β/δ
regulatory subcomplex shows how all the surfaces in the regulatory
complex predicted to play a direct role in eIF2α binding could
indeed contact eIF2α simultaneously and also helps explain the
molecular basis for a number of CACH/VWM mutations in eIF2Bβ
and -δ. These mutations map at or near the proposed eIF2Bβ/δ
dimer interface and are thus likely to affect eIF2B complex formation
and/or stability. A key question that remains unanswered is how the
regulatory eIF2Bα2β2δ2 subcomplex discriminates between the substrate eIF2 and the
inhibitor eIF2(α-P). More work is needed to elucidate the architecture
of eIF2B and its interactions with phosphorylated and unphosphorylated
eIF2 as well as to understand the detailed molecular mechanisms of
the action and regulation of eIF2B.

Supporting Information Available
Supplemental
Figures S1–S4. This material is available free of charge via
the Internet at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bi500346u_si_001.pdf

The authors
declare no competing
financial interest.

Acknowledgments
We thank Boriana Marintcheva, Katherine Edmonds, and Nabanita
Nag for helpful discussions. We thank Ewa Folta-Stogniew (Director
of Biophysics Resource of Keck Laboratory, Yale School of Medicine)
for running the SEC–MALLS experiments and for thorough analysis
of the results.

Abbreviations
eIFeukaryotic translation initiation
factor

Met-tRNAiinitiator methionyl-tRNA

TCternary complex

GEFguanine nucleotide exchange factor

PKRdsRNA-activated protein
kinase

PERKPKR-like
ER kinase

HRIheme-regulated
inhibitor

GCN2general
control nonderepressible 2

ISRintegrated stress response

NTTN-terminal tail

CACHchildhood ataxia with CNS hypomyelination

VWMleukoencephalopathy with
vanishing white matter

SECsize exclusion chromatography

SEC–MALLSsize exclusion chromatography–multiangle
laser light scattering

AUCanalytical ultracentrifugation

eIF2Bα-TMeIF2BαI210E/V217E/A221D triple mutant

eIF2Bα-DMeIF2BαV217E/A221D double mutant

eIF2Bα-ΔarmeIF2BαΔ256–266 deletion mutant

NTDN-terminal domain

CTDC-terminal domain

MWappapparent molecular
weight

HSQCheteronuclear
single-quantum coherence

aIF2Barchaeal
translation initiation
factor 2B

RBPIribose-1,5-bisphosphate
isomerase

MTNAmethylthioribose-1-phosphate
isomerase

rmsdroot-mean-square
deviation

eIF2α-Pphosphorylated eIF2α

eIF2(α-P)eIF2 phosphorylated on its α-subunit.

