Substrate
reduction by the molybdenum-dependent
nitrogenase involves two protein components, the molybdenum iron protein
(MoFe-protein), containing the active site for substrate reduction,
and the iron protein (Fe-protein), serving as the unique ATP-dependent
reductant for the MoFe-protein.− A striking feature of the nitrogenase-catalyzed
reaction is that the electron flux through the system is independent
of the substrate that is being reduced; under a given set of conditions, the number of electrons transferred
to substrate per active site per unit time is the same for the reduction
of dinitrogen to ammonia (the physiological reaction), the reduction
of acetylene to ethylene (commonly used to assay nitrogenase activity),
or the reduction of protons to dihydrogen, which occurs in the absence
(or sufficiently low concentrations) of other reducible substrates.
An important characteristic of the nitrogenase reaction is that substrates
can bind only to forms of the MoFe-protein reduced by two or three
electrons relative to the “as-isolated” form, which
can be efficiently generated only in the presence of the reduced Fe-protein
and ATP., Efforts to generate significant populations
of more highly reduced forms of the MoFe-protein for biophysical or
structural characterizations are confounded by the ubiquitous presence
of protons that are reduced to dihydrogen with the concomitant return
to the initial stages of the catalytic cycle.

While protons
cannot be eliminated from the aqueous solution environment,
their concentration can be reduced by working at higher pHs. The pH
dependence of nitrogenase activity may be described as a bell-shaped
curve,− with optimal activity occurring around pH 7–8 and decreasing
at both lower and higher pHs (half-maximal pHs of ∼6.5 and
8.5, respectively). While it is not surprising that nitrogenase activity
decreases at high pH, Pham and Burgess reported that the MoFe-protein is “irreversibly damaged by
preincubation above pH 8.65” in a 3 min incubation, through
a process suggested to arise from “a critical group on the
MoFe protein with a pK in that range whose deprotonation
leads either to cluster destruction or to an irreversible change in
the structure of some critical part of the protein.” Indeed,
the idea that the MoFe-protein denatures at pHs outside the optimal
range has been reflected in the subsequent design of pH-dependent
experiments of nitrogenase activities (see ref ()). However, while attempting
to trap substrates and inhibitors of nitrogenase for crystallization
studies, we observed a distinct type of high-pH inactivation of the
MoFe-protein that was not simple denaturation. As we report here,
inactivation of the MoFe-protein at higher pHs is not due to protein
instability but is rather the consequence of a complex, mechanism-based
reaction with the potential to provide insight into the mechanism(s)
of nitrogenase.

Materials and Methods
Preparation of Nitrogenase
Proteins
The MoFe-protein
and Fe-protein from Azotobacter vinelandii (designated
Av1 and Av2, respectively) were isolated under anaerobic conditions
as previously described. The specific
activities for acetylene reduction were ∼2200 nmol of ethylene
min–1 mg–1 for Av1 and ∼1800
nmol of ethylene min–1 mg–1 for
Av2. Unless otherwise noted, all operations were conducted anaerobically
by appropriate manipulations using a Schlenk line connected to oxygen-scrubbed
argon or in an anaerobic chamber.

The component ratio (CR) of
Fe-protein to MoFe-protein is defined as the moles of Av2 per mole
of Av1 active site (with two active sites per Av1 tetramer). The CR
may be calculated from the concentrations of Av1 and Av2 through the
relationship CR = 1.82(cAv2/cAv1), where cAv1 and cAv2 are the protein concentrations in the final
reaction mixture, given in milligrams per milliliter, based on molecular
masses of 233 and 64 kDa for Av1 and Av2, respectively. The protein
concentration was determined by absorbance at 410 nm using extinction
coefficients of 76 and 9.4 mM–1 cm–1 for Av1 and Av2, respectively.

Tribuffer Systems
Because the kinetics of reduction
of the substrate by nitrogenase are sensitive to both pH− and ionic strength,, it is critical to use solution
conditions under which the two parameters may be varied independently.
For the pH range of 7.8–10 utilized in this study, a tribuffer
system developed by Ellis and Morrison was employed, composed of three components: 100 mM N-(2-acetamido)-2-aminoethanesulfonic acid (ACES), 50 mM tris(hydroxymethyl)aminomethane
(Tris), and 50 mM ethanolamine, with pKa values of 6.67, 8.0, and 9.5 at 30 °C, respectively. Over the
pH range from 8 to 10, the ionic strength of this buffer ranges from
0.096 to 0.100 M. We note that this is a buffer system different from
that employed in the study by Pham and Burgess {75 mM [bis(2-hydroxyethyl)amino]
tris(hydroxymethyl)methane (Bis-Tris), 38 mM N-(2-hydroxyethy1)piperazine-N′-propanesulfonic acid (HEPPS), and 38 mM 2-(cyclohexylamino)ethanesulfonic
acid (CHES)} that exhibits a calculated
ionic strength variation over the same pH range from 0.023 to 0.070
M.

Nitrogenase Activity Assays
The activity of the nitrogenase
proteins was determined by the reduction of acetylene to ethylene
as expressed in the head space gas equilibrated with the reaction
solution. The assay contained 20 mM sodium dithionite (the source
of reducing equivalents and also to maintain anaerobic conditions)
and an ATP regeneration system (5 mM MgCl2, 5 mM ATP, 20
mM creatine phosphate, and 23 units/mL creatine phosphokinase). For the standard assay, the reaction mixture
was buffered with 50 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.8), while for reactions above
pH 8, the tribuffer system described above was utilized. The pH of
the tribuffer with ATP and creatine phosphate was adjusted by adding
6 M NaOH to a value higher than the target pH, so that the final pH
was 9.5 (or other target pH) after processing, in order, addition
of the kinase and MgCl2, multiple cycles of degassing,
addition of dithionite, and finally introduction of the component
proteins. Because these common buffers are strongly dependent on temperature,
the final pH was verified by measurement at 30 °C for a test
vial with all components. No inhibitory effects on acetylene reduction
by nitrogenase were observed for the tribuffer when compared to the
standard assay. For the kinetic studies, the reduction of acetylene
was initiated by the addition to the reaction assay of premixed Av1
and Av2 to achieve the desired concentrations and component ratio.
The volume of the added Av1/Av2 mixture was kept constant by addition
of 50 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.75), 200 mM NaCl, and 5 mM sodium dithionite,
so that the final ionic strength was independent of the CR. The anaerobic
assay reactions were conducted at 30 °C and for 10 min in 8.9
mL serum vials with a 1.0 mL assay solution and an argon atmosphere
containing 1.0 mL of acetylene gas. The reaction was terminated by
the addition of 0.25 mL of 1 M citric acid, and ethylene in the gas
phase was quantified by gas chromatography.

In addition to the
standard assay described above, two types of activity measurements
were used: the “head space” and “specific activity”
assays. In the head space assay, the activity was monitored by the
rate of appearance of ethylene in the gas phase of the reaction vial
while allowing the reaction to continue. Ethylene and acetylene were
quantified by gas chromatography of gas aliquots (50 μL) removed
from the head space at the designed time points. The specific activity
of Av1 in the reaction vial was monitored by removing liquid samples
from the assay mixture at specified time points, for immediate transfer
into a pH 7.8 standard assay solution containing excess additional
Av2 (CR of ∼60). The transfer time was &lt;10 s, and the transfer
initiated the standard 10 min, pH 7.8 assay. SigmaPlot version 11.0
(Systate Software, Inc.) was used for curve fitting and display of
the experimental data.

Analytical Column Chromatography
The proteins in a
reaction mixture were analyzed by size exclusion chromatography on
a 1 cm × 30 cm column of Superdex S-200, run under anaerobic
conditions. The elution profile was monitored by the absorbance at
either 390 or 410 nm, as indicated.

ATP Hydrolysis As Measured
by Creatine
Because 1 mol
of creatine is produced by the creatine kinase-catalyzed phosphorylation
of 1 mol of ADP by creatine phosphate, the amount of ATP hydrolyzed
was established by measuring the change in creatine concentration
in the reaction mixture., These reactions were
identical to the acetylene reduction assay, except the reaction was
quenched by 0.25 mL of 0.5 M Na2EDTA (pH 8.0).

Formation of
the Av1–Av2–ADP-AlF4– Complex
The ADP-AlF4–-stabilized Av1–Av2
complex was prepared following the protocols
of Renner and Howard. Inactive Av1 at
a final concentration of 0.066 mg/mL and Av2 at a CR of ∼4
were incubated in 100 mM MOPS, 50 mM Tris, and 100 mM NaCl (pH 7.3)
with 10 mM sodium dithionite, 4 mM NaF, and 0.2 mM AlCl3. For the reaction in the presence of ATP, 1 mM ATP, 8 mM MgCl2, and the creatine kinase-based ATP regenerating system were
added. For reactions with ADP, 1 mM ADP and 8 mM MgCl2 were
added, without an ATP regenerating system. The reactions were allowed
to proceed for 30 min at 30 °C and the products analyzed by analytical
column chromatography.

Metal Analysis
The molybdenum and
iron contents of
Av1 were determined by inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometry
(ICP-MS) using a Hewlett-Packard 4500 ICP-MS system. Iron and molybdenum
standards (Ultra Scientific Analytical solutions for ICP-MS) over
concentration ranges comparable to and overlapping with those of the
protein were analyzed in tandem with the protein samples. Proteins
and standards were prepared in ultrapure H2O containing
1% nitric acid (ICP-MS grade, Fluka) with appropriate reagent and
buffer blanks. The protein concentration was determined by absorbance
at 410 nm prior to 1:400 dilution in nitric acid to give a concentration
of 35–50 μg/mL for aspiration by the ICP-MS instrument.
The Fe and Mo concentrations were determined using 56Fe
and 96Mo isotopes and normalized for the Av1 concentration.
The values were verified using the other natural abundance isotopes
for both elements.

Determination of the Crystal Structure for
Native Av1 at pH
9.5
Av1 was crystallized at 22 °C in an anaerobic chamber
using the sitting drop method with mixed drops containing 2 μL
of a 42 mg/mL Av1 solution and 4 μL of the precipitant. The
precipitant contained 150 mM ACES, 75 mM Tris, 75 mM ethanolamine
(pH 9.79), 17–18% PEG 3350, 0.8 M NaCl, and 1 mM sodium dithionite.
Upon addition of the protein, the final pH of the mixed drop was 9.5.
For cryoprotection, crystals of native Av1 grown at pH 9.5 were successively
transferred into the reservoir solution with increasing concentrations
of 2-methyl-2,4-pentanediol (MPD) up to 20%. Diffraction data were
collected on beamline 12-2 at the Stanford Synchrotron Radiation Lightsource
(SSRL), processed with XDS, and scaled
with SCALA. The structure was determined
by molecular replacement with MOLREP, using as a search model the Av1 structure determined at 1.16 Å
resolution [Protein Data Bank (PDB) entry 1M1N]. The refinement was performed with REFMAC and PHENIX, while
graphics program COOT was used for displaying
maps and rebuilding the model. Data and refinement statistics are
summarized in Table .

Data and
Refinement Statistics for
the Determination of the Crystal Structure of Native Av1 at pH 9.5
Crystal Parameters	
space group	P21	
a (Å)	76.53	
b (Å)	127.92	
c (Å)	107.08	
β (deg)	108.9	
Data Processing	
resolution range (Å)	39.3–2.0 (2.11–2.00)	
total
no. of observations	356532 (52041)	
no. of unique observations	124962 (18522)	
completeness (%)	95.3 (96.8)	
multiplicity	2.9 (2.8)	
Rmerge (%)	10.7 (0.733)	
mean I/σ(I)	8.3 (1.7)	
Refinement	
resolution range (Å)	36.7–2.0 (2.023–2.00)	
Rwork	0.156 (0.255)	
Rfree	0.204 (0.300)	
root-mean-square deviation for bond lengths (Å)	0.012	
root-mean-square deviation for
bond angles (deg)	1.69	
Ramachandran
plot [favored, allowed, outliers (%)]	96.5, 3.3, 0.2	
Rmerge(I) = ∑hkl[(∑i|Ihkl,i – ⟨Ihkl⟩|)/∑iIhkl,i], where Ihkl is
the intensity of an individual measurement of the reflection with
indices hkl and ⟨Ihkl⟩ is the mean intensity of that reflection.

Residue 440 of the α-chain
was corrected to Gln rather than
the Glu reported in all previous structures to reflect the correct A. vinelandii nifD gene sequence; this discrepancy was highlighted by a recent analysis of 95 MoFe-protein
sequences demonstrating that all but two had Gln and Asn at this position,
with no examples of Glu.

Results
Time Course
of Acetylene Reduction at High pH
The initial
test of nitrogenase activity well above its pH optimum was conducted
at pH 9.5 using the head space measure of ethylene formation with
time as shown in Figure A. The rate curve
indicated a progressive loss of product formation with complete cessation
well before depletion of any component of the assay. Supplementing
the reaction mixture at longer times with fresh aliquots of dithionite,
Av2, or components of the ATP regenerating system did not result in
further substrate reduction, which confirmed that the loss of acetylene
reduction activity was not due to depletion of any of these components.
Together, these studies implicated progressive inhibition of the Av1
that can be described by a first-order process characteristic of slow
inhibitors such as the aluminum fluoride
inhibition of nitrogenase activity:where v0, ki, and P(t) are the
initial rate of product formation (the enzyme catalytic
activity expressed in nanomoles per minute), the observed first-order
inactivation rate constant (inverse minutes) of Av1, and the time-dependent
amount of ethylene in the head space (nanomoles), respectively. v0/ki is the total
amount of product produced at the limit t = ∞.
The solid lines in Figure  represent the nonlinear
curve fitting of the data points based on eq . For this type of inhibition, the cessation of product formation
at long time points (the plateau in Figure ) implies a quasi-irreversible state of inhibition of the enzyme,
at least under the pH 9.5 conditions of the assay., For a slowly reversible reaction, a flat line plateau would not
be observed and the kinetic expression would have additional elements
to include the slower back reaction.

Acetylene
reduction activity as measured in the head space assay.
Assays contained 0.25 mg of Av1 with a CR of 2.5 at 30 °C. (A)
Time course of ethylene production in the head space generated at
pH 9.5. The solid line was generated by curve fitting time points
using eq . (B) Time course of ethylene production
at various pHs over the range of 8.80–9.68. (C) Initial rate
(v0) and inhibition rate constant (ki) calculated according to eq  for the assays that generated the data depicted in panel
B. Error bars show standard errors estimated from the curve fitting.

The generality of the progressive
inhibition as a consequence of
pH was demonstrated by a series of experiments using the head space
assay in the upper range of pH 8.8–9.8 that has been previously
reported for various nitrogenase studies.− The data were fit using eq  shown as the solid lines in Figure B, with
the calculated ki and v0 values given in Figure C. Consistent
with the accepted nitrogenase pH activity dependence, the initial
velocity, v0, decreases with an increased
pH. More significantly, the observed inactivation rate, ki, increases with an increased pH, suggesting that a deprotonated
state of the enzyme is a precursor for the inhibition. This clearly
separates the two phenomena: the enzymatic activity follows a pH-dependent
decline, while the inhibition process increases with a higher pH.

Turnover Conditions Are Required for High-pH Inactivation of
Av1
Inhibition of the enzymatic activity as a consequence
of Av1 inactivation was established by the specific activity assay
that determines the amount of active Av1 at a saturating Av2 concentration
in the pH 7.8 assay. Following initiation of the reaction at pH 9.5,
aliquots of the reaction mixture were sampled at designated time points
and the Av1 specific activity was determined. As shown in Figure , Av1 from the pH 9.5 incubation was progressively
inactivated as indicated by the loss of specific activity measured
at pH 7.8. The time-dependent loss of Av1 specific activity at pH
9.5 required turnover of the complete system that was established
by a series of changes in the pH 9.5 reaction conditions. If Av2 or
the ATP regenerating system was omitted or if AMP-PNP, a nonhydrolyzable
ATP analogue, was used, no acetylene reduction was detected at pH
9.5 (as expected), and through the first 2 h of incubation at pH 9.5,
there was an only ∼10% decrease in Av1 specific activity as
determined at pH 7.8, a time in which there was ∼90% inactivation
under the full turnover conditions. Most importantly, incubation of
Av1 or Av2 alone at pH 9.5 showed only minimal activity loss even
after 4 h. Although acetylene reduction was the most convenient way
to monitor enzyme activity, the inactivation proceeded equally well
when dinitrogen replaced the acetylene or when there was no added
substrate beyond the protons in the solution (see Figure S1 of the ). Furthermore, the inhibitor
of all substrates except protons, carbon monoxide, did not block the
inactivation of Av1.

Specific activity of Av1 measured by the standard assay
at pH 7.8
following incubation at pH 9.5 and 30 °C for the indicated times.
The reactions at pH 9.5 were variations of the full turnover conditions
with 0.25 mg of Av1: (●) Av1 and Av2 at a CR of 2.5 with the
ATP regenerating system, (◆) Av1 and Av2 at a CR of 2.5 with
the nonhydrolyzable ATP analogue AMP-PNP, (▲) Av1 with the
ATP regenerating system (without Av2), and (■) Av1 and Av2
at a CR of 2.5 without nucleotide. Error bars indicate the standard
deviation for duplicate experiments.

Component Ratio and Protein Concentration Effects on the pH
9.5 Reaction
Central to the understanding of the complex
kinetic properties of the two-protein component system of nitrogenase
is that the activity is dependent on the total protein concentration
and component ratio as important factors controlling the electron
flux during turnover., As one example, for a fixed concentration
of the MoFe-protein, the initial velocity for acetylene reduction
increases with an increasing CR until a plateau level of activity
is obtained, indicative of saturation kinetics; the specific activity
of the MoFe-protein is determined from the plateau level of activity
upon titration with the Fe-protein at pH 7.8. The same general behavior
was also observed upon titration of a fixed amount of Av1 with different
CRs of Av2 at pH 9.5, although the amounts of product formed per time
are much smaller than at pH 7.8 (Figure ).
By fitting the head space data (Figure A)
to eq , we can determinie initial velocity v0 as a function of CR, and v0 is presented in the form of an Av1 titration curve.
As shown in Figure B, the initial velocity
exhibits a strong CR dependence similar in form to that observed at
pH 7.8, suggesting the initial rate correctly reflects the nitrogenase
reaction and its pH dependence. At the saturation of Av1 by Av2, the
specific activity of Av1 at pH 9.5 was estimated to be 100 nmol min–1 mg–1, or ∼5% of the value
at pH 7.8. As also observed at the optimal pH,− the Av1 titration
curve at pH 9.5 is not fully hyperbolic and has a “lag”
at low concentrations of Av2 (CR &lt; ∼1). This is consistent
with a similar process of interactions between the MoFe-protein and
Fe-protein that is observed at the optimal pH and is maintained at
the higher pH. One measure of the association of Av2 and Av1 is the
CR at half-saturation that at pH 9.5 is ∼4 and similar to that
at pH 7.8 (an absolute comparison is obviated by the necessary protein
concentration differences with the approximately 2 order of magnitude
difference in v0). An additional test
that shows that the enzymatic substrate reduction at pH 9.5 reflects
a turnover mechanism similar to that at pH 7.8 is the protein concentration
dependence of the reaction rate. As shown in Figure C, over an 8-fold protein concentration range and at a constant
CR, v0 increased ∼6-fold, a relative
increase comparable to that observed at pH 7.8.−

Component ratio and protein
concentration dependence of Av1 inactivation
monitored by the head space assay at pH 9.5 and 30 °C. (A) Time-dependent
ethylene formation at various CRs with the Av1 concentration fixed
at 0.25 mg per reaction. Solid lines are nonlinear curve fits to the
data points by eq . (B) Initial rate (v0) and inhibition rate (ki) calculated according to eq . Error
bars indicate standard errors from the curve fitting. (C) Initial
rate (v0) and inhibition rate (ki) determined from progress curves at various
protein concentrations and at a constant component ratio of 2.5. The
data are plotted in terms of the Av1 concentration using an average
of two determinations for each data point.

In contrast to the clear similarity of the patterns in turnover
parameters at pH 9.5 and at the optimal pH, the inactivation rate
constant, ki, showed a fully different
pattern with these variables (Figure B,C).
Namely, ki is substantially independent
of CR and protein concentration and was calculated to be ∼0.07
min–1 (corresponding to a half-life of ∼10
min). The small variance of ∼20% for ki is in contrast to ≥1 order of magnitude changes in v0 values for the same CR. The implication is
that whatever mechanism of inhibition is occurring, it is a first-order
process that is independent of the overall nitrogenase turnover rate
as measured by product formed.

Effects of the Component
Ratio on Specific Activity
In contrast to the apparent first-order
inhibition kinetics observed
for the head space assay at pH 9.5, the inactivation kinetics monitored
by the specific activity measured at pH 7.8 cannot be modeled by a
single kinetic phase. As shown in Figure ,
the kinetics of inactivation measured by specific activity are quite
sensitive to the CR used in the pH 9.5 reaction; e.g., for a CR of
0.15, incubation for ∼3 h is required to eliminate 50% of the
specific activity, while for CRs of &gt;1, the corresponding time
is
∼30 min. Most importantly, the loss of specific activity is
significantly slower than the inhibition observed at pH 9.5 based
on the direct measure of product in the head space. As seen via comparison
of Figures  and ,
for all CRs at 60 min, acetylene reduction at pH 9.5 has stopped while
the specific activity ranges from 25 to 75%. This strongly implies
that the inhibited state at pH 9.5 is partially reversible at pH 7.8.
The time of incubation at pH 7.8 before initiating the specific activity
assay showed no effect on the measured value, which suggests the reversible
step must be fast compared to the minimal time for sampling of the
pH 9.5 reaction into the pH 7.8 assay.

Time course of the specific
activity measured at pH 7.8 of Av1
from the inactivation reactions at pH 9.5 with various CRs. At the
indicated times, aliquots were removed from the inactivation reaction
mixture at pH 9.5 and the specific activity of the Av1 was measured
at pH 7.8 with saturating concentrations of Av2. The pH 9.5 inactivation
reaction mixtures contained 0.25 mg of Av1. Error bars indicate the
standard deviation from triplicate reactions.

ATP Hydrolysis during Turnover
The kinetic properties
of the reaction at pH 9.5 versus the loss of specific activity measured
at pH 7.8 suggested that some level of interactions between Av1 and
Av2 proceeds after cessation of the observed product formation in
the head space gas. ATP hydrolysis occurs only in the complex between
Av1 and Av2, although ATP hydrolysis is independent of the oxidation
state of the two proteins.,, Indeed, while Av2 can bind MgATP, a conformational change stabilized
by complex formation with Av1 is required for hydrolysis., The number of ATP equivalents turned over by the enzyme can be conveniently
measured by following the formation of creatine in the ATP regenerating
system., The results for the correlation of ATP equivalents
used and product formation at pH 9.5 are plotted in Figure A for CRs of 0.3 and 1.0. The clear result is that
ATP hydrolysis initially tracks the substrate reduction yet continues
long after product formation has reached completion. Even for those
low component ratios (e.g., CR = 0.3) where the level of ethylene
production is below the threshold of detection at pH 9.5, ATP hydrolysis
readily occurs long into the time course for inactivation and provides
evidence that the Av2 is still active. Indeed, the ability of the
various forms of Av1 generated during turnover at pH 9.5 to support
ATP hydrolysis is unmistakably shown in Figure B for the changes in specific activity over the time course of inactivation.
For a CR of 1.0 where at 240 min the Av1 is nearly fully inactivated,
ATP hydrolysis is still supported at ∼40% of the rate of native
Av1 at saturation with Av2. The initial time points show an ATP:ethylene
ratio of ∼5, in keeping with the accepted value of 4–5
with dithionite as the terminal reducing agent, but the ratio rapidly
increases to &gt;50 for the later time points as the Av1 is inactivated.
These high ratios represent the small fraction of active enzyme plus
the increasing amount of inactive enzyme that is still capable of
supporting substantial ATP hydrolysis.

Time course of ethylene
production and ATP hydrolysis during inactivation
at pH 9.5. (A) Formation of ethylene and ATP hydrolysis (measured
as the production of creatine from the creatine kinase-based ATP regenerating
system) in the inactivation reaction at pH 9.5 for CRs of 0.3 and
1.0. Assays contained 0.5 mg of Av1. (B) Ethylene production and ATP
hydrolysis in specific activity assays at pH 7.8 for samples from
the time course of the pH 9.5 inactivation. Values are normalized
to the values at time zero. Error bars indicate the standard deviation
from duplicate reactions.

Characterization of Native Av1 Incubated at pH 9.5
The activity
studies clearly indicated that Av1 was not denatured
with loss of activity at pH 9.5. To directly assess the structural
consequences of incubation of Av1 at pH 9.5 (in the absence of turnover)
and to provide a control structure for future work at higher pHs,
the crystal structure at pH 9.5 was determined. Single crystals were
obtained and reached their maximal size in 3 days. X-ray diffraction
data were collected to 2.0 Å resolution, and the resulting structure
of native Av1 at pH 9.5 was found to adopt the same overall conformation
as that crystallized at pH 8.0, (Figure ). The root-mean-square deviation (rmsd) in positions of main
chain atoms between the pH 9.5 structure and that refined at 1 Å
resolution (PDB entry 3U7Q()) was 0.3 Å, with
little differences observed in the metalloclusters (Figure ). Some repositioning of side chains was indicated
that may reflect deprotonation at high pH, including the C1 carboxyl
group of the FeMo-cofactor homocitrate. This carboxyl group interacts
with Glnα191, and intriguingly, diastereomers of fluorohomocitrate
substituted at the methylene group of this arm of homocitrate support
significantly different nitrogen reduction activities; a previous analysis of the diastereomer results
in terms of the Av1 structure suggested a possible role for the C1
arm of homocitrate in proton transfer reactions.

Electron density map around the FeMo-cofactor and homocitrate of
the A. vinelandii MoFe-protein crystallized at pH
9.5. The map is calculated at 2.0 Å resolution and contoured
at 1.5 times the standard deviation. The yellow bonds and colored
atoms represent the Av1 structure at pH 9.5, while the black bonds
and atoms indicate the structure of Av1 at pH 8.0 as determined by
Spatzal et al. at 1.0 Å resolution (PDB entry 3U7Q()). Overall, the two structures are quite similar (rmsd of
0.3 Å), although a displacement of the C1 carboxyl arm of homocitrate
is indicated in the pH 9.5 structure compared to the pH 8.0 structure.

Characterization of Modified
(inactive) Av1
To characterize
the inactive protein, we isolated Av1 from the pH 9.5 reaction mixture
after incubation for 4 h (specific activity of &lt;10%) using the
size exclusion chromatography column at pH 7.3. Intriguingly, as shown
in Figure A, the peak position of inactive
Av1 shifted to an earlier elution time, relative to the position observed
for native Av1 or for Av1 incubated at pH 9.5 in the absence of turnover
components. The shift in elution position indicates that the hydrodynamic
radius of inactive Av1 has increased relative to that of native Av1.
The observed shift in the hydrodynamic radius was a consequence of
the pH 9.5 turnover as shown in Figure A;
incubation of Av1 alone or in combination with Av2 without ATP did
not cause a shift in the elution position. Indeed, the complete recovery
of both Av1 and Av2 (as measured by the absorbance at 410 nm) from
a 4 h incubation at pH 9.5, either alone or under turnover conditions,
further substantiates the stability of the proteins at pHs as high
as 9.5. This form of Av1, hereafter termed Av1-mod, is stable to multiple
cycles of rechromatography at pH 7.3–8.0 in 100–200
mM NaCl.

Anaerobic size exclusion chromatography of Av1 on a 1 cm ×
30 cm column of Superdex S-200. The flow rate was 0.5 mL/min at 22
°C. (A) Reaction mixtures (1.0 mL) containing 1.0 mg of Av1,
with or without Av2 at a CR of 3.4 and with or without the ATP regenerating
system, were incubated at pH 9.5 in tribuffer and 50 mM NaCl at 30
°C for 3.5 h; 0.8 mL of the reaction mixture was injected from
the reaction mixture onto the column that was equilibrated with 50
mM Tris buffer (pH 7.5) containing 200 mM NaCl and 5 mM sodium dithionite:
elution line 1 (red), Av1 and Av2 incubated without the ATP regenerating
system; elution line 2 (blue), Av1 alone; elution line 3 (black),
complete turnover conditions, Av1 and Av2 with the ATP regenerating
system. Elution was monitored at 410 nm. (B) Same column as in panel
A equilibrated with 50 mM MOPS buffer (pH 7.3) containing 100 mM NaCl,
1 mM MgCl2, 5 mM NaF, 0.25 mM AlCl3, and 5 mM
sodium dithionite. Av1-mod was prepared as described for line 3 of
panel A and re-isolated in MOPS buffer (pH 7.3) without AlCl3 or NaF. Av1-mod (∼0.2 mg) was incubated with Av2 (CR = 4.6)
in 2.4 mL of MOPS buffer containing 5 mM NaF, 0.25 mM AlCl3, and either no nucleotide [elution line 1 (black)], 1 mM ATP regenerating
system [elution line 2 (purple)], or 1 mM ADP [elution line 3 (green)].
After incubation at 25 °C for 30 min to form the complex, 0.9
mL of each reaction mixture was applied to the column. The absorption
of the eluate was monitored at 390 nm.

The absorption at 410 nm arises from the metalloclusters,
and the
integrated peak areas for Av1 were similar for all samples, irrespective
of pH and precise conditions of the turnover (the same total amounts
of Av1 were initially used in the compared chromatographs). This observation
implies that the metalloclusters in Av1-mod are not significantly
changed through either loss of iron, rearrangement of clusters, or
other changes in the metal environment. This latter conclusion was
substantiated by the results of Fe and Mo analysis of native and Av1-mod
as given in Table . Within the experimental
uncertainty of the analysis, there are two important findings: incubation
of native Av1 at pH 9.5 does not lead to metal loss as might be expected
for a denatured protein, and likewise, inactivation of Av1 is not
due to general denaturation with the loss of either iron or molybdenum.

Fe and Mo Contents of Native and Modified
Av1
sample	Fe	Mo	Fe:Mo ratio	
native Av1, 1	29.7 ± 0.5	1.99 ± 0.03	14.9 ± 0.5	
native Av1, 2	29.7 ± 0.5	1.98 ± 0.03	15.0 ± 0.5	
Av1-mod, 1	29.1 ± 0.5	1.99 ± 0.03	14.6 ± 0.5	
Av1-mod,
2	29.0 ± 0.5	1.99 ± 0.04	14.6 ± 0.5	
Av1-mod was generated at pH 9.5
by incubation of Av1 and Av2 (CR = 4.0) under turnover conditions
at 30 °C for 4 h. The protein was isolated by size exclusion
chromatography at pH 9.5 using the same tribuffer that was used for
the inactivation. The control sample of Av1 alone was isolated by
chromatography at pH 7.5. Full duplicate reactions and isolations
were prepared for both proteins. The metal content was determined
by ICP-MS performed in triplicate for each sample. The standard deviation
for 56Fe was ±0.56% and for 96Mo was ±0.22%,
while for the protein, the concentration varied from ±1.5 to
±1.8%. The results are normalized to the protein concentration
for each individual sample and given with the standard deviation based
upon multiple determinations of an individual sample.

The results of monitoring ATP hydrolysis
during the two assay procedures
(see the preceding section) clearly demonstrated that the inactive
Av1 retained the ability to interact with Av2 in a way that induces
the Av2 conformation necessary for nucleotide hydrolysis. To further
evaluate the integrity of Av1-mod with respect to binding of ATP-bound
Av2, the established ability of Av1 and Av2 to form a complex stabilized
by ADP-AlF4– was investigated., For native Av1 and Av2, the complex can be formed by reaction of
either MgADP or MgATP as the nucleotide component with AlF4–. The reaction with
MgATP is faster than with MgADP but leads to the same final complex.,, As shown in Figure B, Av1-mod forms a faster-migrating species when it is incubated
with Av2, ATP, and AlF4–. On the basis
of this earlier elution time compared to that of Av1-mod, a stable
complex is inferred. This peak contained Av2 (by sodium dodecyl sulfate–polyacrylamide
gel electrophoresis) and is estimated to be a 2:1 complex (assuming
the tetramer of Av1-mod). Under similar conditions, MgADP also induced
a stable complex that was intermediate in elution time between Av1-mod
and the putative 2:1 Av1-mod–2Av2[ADP-AlF4–]4 complex. However, in contrast to the similar study
with the native Av1, formation of the complex with MgADP appears to
give only a 1:1 Av2–Av1 complex (based upon elution position).
The assumption for the native proteins is that AlF4– stabilizes a hypothetical transition state in electron
transfer between Av2 and Av1 and that ATP hydrolysis leads to this
state; by microscopic reversibility, ADP reaches the same state. For
Av1-mod, the path by microscopic reversibility for ADP appears to
be much slower, and only partial conversion to the complex is observed
even after reaction for 30 min.

Discussion
Protons
have multiple roles in the catalytic mechanism of enzymes
as reflected in the variation of activity with pH. Among these roles
for nitrogenase are the proper protonation state of catalytic residues,
the ionic state of residues in the nucleotide binding site, ionic
states of residues involved in binding the Fe-protein to the MoFe-protein,
and, most importantly, protons as a cosubstrate for all known nitrogenase
reactions, including the direct reduction to dihydrogen. The latter
reaction poses a particular challenge for mechanistic studies of nitrogenase
because the ubiquitous presence of protons in aqueous solutions necessarily
precludes the preparation of more reduced states of the MoFe-protein.
Although protons cannot be completely removed from nitrogenase-containing
solutions, the use of higher-pH conditions can significantly reduce
their concentration. However, the conclusion of Pham and Burgess that
Av1 is irreversibly inactivated by protein denaturation at higher
pHs would preclude this potentially promising
approach.

We have reinvestigated the effect of increased pH
on Av1 with significantly
different results and conclusions. First among our results is the
finding that Av1 is neither denatured nor inactivated when it is incubated
alone at pHs as high as 9.5. Av1 exhibited only minimal change in
specific activity after incubation for several hours at pH 9.5 and
30 °C and could be crystallized at pH 9.5 with no important changes
in the structure even after the several days needed to form the crystals.

As Pham and Burgess found, we did observe
a pH-dependent inactivation of Av1, but in contrast to their conclusions,
we found that the inactivation is a consequence of catalytic turnover
resulting in a modified but structurally intact protein; inactivation
of Av1 requires both Av2 and ATP hydrolysis. At pH 9.5, the model
condition studied here, the enzyme activity, while turning over, decreased
with time with a pattern similar to that of “slow inhibitors”
such that both the initial rate, v0, and
the inhibition rate constant, ki, could
be determined by following the product in the gas phase of the reaction.
Evaluation of the changes in v0 with protein
concentration and component ratio indicated this rate was measuring
the true enzyme reaction and was consistent with a decrease in catalytic
activity expected over a measured pH range. Hence, we find that some
forms of activity can be reliably studied at higher pHs when they
are limited to appropriately determined initial rates, a condition
generally applicable to all steady state enzyme kinetics.

While
the inhibition at pH 9.5 requires enzyme turnover and, hence,
is related to turnover, the inactivation was distinctly different
from the enzyme activity. The inhibition rate increased as the rate
of enzyme turnover decreased; that is, the inhibition rate increases
with an increase in pH as activity decreases. The following characteristics
summarize the observations with some of the implications.

(i)
The inactivation reaction, being turnover-dependent, suggests
a process involving states of the MoFe-protein that are distinct from
the as-isolated form, mostly likely a different redox state. Because
the inactivation is independent of which added substrate is present,
one of the first enzymatically reduced states of the MoFe-protein
may be sufficient to lead to inactivation.

(ii) The inhibition
at pH 9.5 appears to be first-order when it
is monitored by the decrease in the rate of ethylene formation with
time at pH 9.5 in the head space assay.

(iii) The rate of inhibition, ki (eq ), appears to be
independent of the component ratio,
protein concentration, and the amount of product produced (at least
for CRs above ∼1). This indicates that the probability of inhibition
is distinct from the probability of product formation.

(iv)
Although there are insufficient data to assign reliable apparent
pKa values for the groups associated with
the v0 and the ki, the results in Figure C clearly
show them to be different and, hence, derived from different functional
groups.

(v) The decrease in specific activity upon turnover
at pH 9.5 as
measured at pH 7.8 follows a more complex kinetic pattern involving
multiple phases and requiring significantly longer times (hours) for
completion versus the time needed for the pH 9.5 inhibition.

(vi) The observed difference in the two inactivation/inhibition
rates suggests that the inhibited state of Av1 at pH 9.5 is different
from, although likely on the path to, the ultimately inactive Av1-mod.
The first state must be somewhat reversible for activity to be seen
at pH 7.8. For any CR used in Figure  at pH
9.5 and at 60 min, product formation has ceased, while at the same
time point and pH 7.8, the specific activity retains 25–75%
of the initial value, depending on the CR at pH 9.5. The final state,
however, is irreversibly inactive in substrate reduction.

(vii)
Turnover at pH 9.5 continues past the cessation of product
formation as determined by continued ATP hydrolysis. For the fully
inactive Av1-mod, the rate of associated ATP hydrolysis is ∼40%
of that of the native protein with a saturating Av2 concentration.

Av1-mod has an expanded conformation (increased hydrodynamic radius)
that maintains structural integrity. The new conformation is stable
over time, retains metal content within the limits set by the analytical
methods, and has the ability to associate with Av2. The latter is
demonstrated by supporting ATP hydrolysis and the formation of a tight
complex mediated by nucleotide-AlF4–.
Together, these observations suggest a mechanism-based reaction with
multiple forms of Av1 that can interconvert during the turnover at
pH 9.5, some of which lead to inactivation. Although a comprehensive
model that describes the kinetic behavior of this system under all
these conditions would be desirable, we have demurred in such a construction
because there are an enormous number of potential pH-dependent ionic
states relating the multiple components. To assign pKas, activity levels, inhibition rates, and association
constants for the two components and for the nucleotides would be
outside the number of parameters that we have collected. Indeed, although
the pH 9.5 inhibition rate is first-order and follows “slow
inhibitor” rate law, we have not found a simple, rational kinetic
measure of the specific activity decrease that would follow from the
pH 9.5 inhibition rate.

Most importantly, our work identifies
some of the conditions promoting
a mechanism-based inactivation of the MoFe-protein. This should provide
both a new direction for probing the catalytic mechanism(s) and the
conditions to evaluate studies at pH &gt;8.5, e.g., the reported changes
in electron allocation with pH or the trapping of intermediates.,, While the focus of this paper
has been on the inactivation reaction at pH 9.5, the process carries
to lower pHs; it is only that the inhibition at the higher pH is sufficiently
fast to facilitate kinetic characterization. One may anticipate that
the phenomenon of inactivation would also take place at more physiologically
relevant pHs, albeit with a slower rate. For example, the inactivation
process may be particularly sensitive to amino acid residues in the
cofactor environment such that differences in apparent substrate reduction
rates for mutant nitrogenase with amino acid substitutions may be
a consequence of changes in inactivation rates even when they are
studied at the native protein pH optimum. Just as the generation of
highly oxidizing species in photosystem II during water oxidation
leads to protein inactivation with subsequent adaptations for protein
turnover, the generation of highly reducing
species in nitrogenase during substrate reduction is also associated
with protein inactivation, which may require protein turnover adaptations in vivo.

Supporting Information Available
Inactivation rates for Av1
with different substrates and inhibitors at pH 9.5 (Figure S1). This
material is available free of charge via the Internet at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bi4014769_si_001.pdf

Accession Codes
Coordinates and
structure factors have been deposited in the Protein Data Bank as
entry 4ND8.

Author Present Address
∥ K.-Y.Y.:
1676 S. Blaney Ave., San Jose, CA 95129.

Author Present Address
⊥ C.A.H.:
Booz Allen Hamilton, Washington, DC 20024.

This work was
supported by National Institutes of Health Grant GM045162.

The authors declare no
competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
The assistance of
Dr. Jens Kaiser and Dr. Nathan Dalleska
is appreciated. We acknowledge the Gordon and Betty Moore Foundation,
the Beckman Institute, and the Sanofi–Aventis Bioengineering
Research Program at Caltech for their generous support of the Molecular
Observatory at Caltech. This project benefited from the use of instrumentation
made available by the Caltech Environmental Analysis Center. Portions
of this research were conducted at the Stanford Synchrotron Radiation
Lightsource (SSRL), a Directorate of SLAC National Accelerator Laboratory
and an Office of Science User Facility operated for the U.S. Department
of Energy Office of Science by Stanford University. The SSRL Structural
Molecular Biology Program is supported by the Department of Energy
Office of Biological and Environmental Research and by the National
Institutes of Health, National Center for Research Resources, Biomedical
Technology Program (P41RR001209), and the National Institute of General
Medical Sciences.

Abbreviations
Av1 and Av2MoFe-protein and Fe-protein
from A. vinelandii, respectively

Av1-modstable form of the inactive
MoFe-protein that can be isolated after incubation under turnover
conditions at pH 9.5

ACESN-(2-acetamido)-2-aminoethanesulfonic acid

Bis-Tris[bis(2-hydroxyethyl)amino]tris(hydroxymethyl)methane

CHES2-(cyclohexylamino)ethanesulfonic
acid

CRcomponent
ratio or molar ratio of active sites in Fe-protein and MoFe-protein

HEPPSN-(2-hydroxyethyl)piperazine-N′-propanesulfonic
acid

ICP-MSinductively
coupled plasma mass spectrometry

MPD2-methyl-2,4-pentanediol

Tristris(hydroxymethyl)aminomethane.

