Protein-based radicals are involved
in the redox chemistry of various metalloproteins. Tryptophans and tyrosines can play a crucial role in facilitating
electron transfer between redox centers, when behaving as transient
radicals, and also can be true intermediates
in the catalytic cycle of enzymes, when reacting in a concerted way
with the metal active site. Cytochrome c peroxidase (CcP) and its catalytic reaction have been
extensively characterized for more than two decades (reviewed in refs (−)). For a long time, CcP was the sole heme peroxidase
in which a Trp-based radical intermediate, the [Fe(IV)=O Trp191•+] species,− was identified as the
reactive intermediate for the oxidation of an unusual substrate, cytochrome c() (for a recent review, see
ref ()). At variance
with the typical heme-edge reaction of peroxidases with small substrates
(for a recent review, see ref ()), the reaction of CcP with the surface-bound substrate
cyt c occurs via a well-defined electron transfer
pathway between Trp191 and the heme site in cyt c() (for a recent review, see ref ()).

EPR and ENDOR spectroscopic
characterization unequivocally showed
that the broad EPR spectrum at 4 K of the Trp radical in CcP originates
from the distinct magnetic properties of the [Fe(IV)=O Trp191•+] intermediate, due to the exchange
coupling interaction between the radical and the heme iron moiety.− The contribution of a narrow radical signal to the EPR spectrum
of the high-valent intermediate in CcP was also reported.,, The signal, assigned to a Tyr
radical, could possibly reflect different pathways in radical translocation,
from the heme to surface tyrosines, related to an antioxidant role
in CcP under conditions of excess hydrogen peroxide. A number of studies using either direct measurement of
the radical spectra by EPR techniques,, or indirect detection by spin traps and/or spin-labels
and mass spectrometry,, of the tyrosyl radicals resulted in multiple assignments. Accordingly,
the unambiguous identification of the site(s) for the formation of
tyrosyl radical(s) in CcP has been elusive, as has been their biological
role in substrate oxidation.

Interestingly, CcP (and the more
recently reported peroxidase from Leishmania major()) appears to
be the only member(s) of the monofunctional peroxidase family allowing
the formation of a high-valent ferryl intermediate comprising a radical
delocalized on the heme proximal-side tryptophan (Trp191 in CcP),
as in the case of their ancestor enzymes KatGs, (Trp330 in BpKatG and Trp321 in MtKatG). It could then be anticipated
that CcP might also exhibit a protein-based radical mechanism related
to the oxidation of remote substrates, similar to the case of Burkholderia pseudomallei KatG. A recent report of the crystal structure of a CcP–guaiacol
complex obtained by soaking the CcP crystals in a substrate solution showed that guaiacol does not bind at the typical
heme-edge binding site of monofunctional peroxidases (reviewed in
ref ()). One of the
two binding sites described for guaiacol is located more than 20 Å
from the heme and from Trp191. On the basis of the long distance between
this substrate binding site and the heme, and assuming a heme-edge
typical peroxidase reaction, Raven and co-workers concluded that the
remote binding site should be catalytically inactive, despite the
fact that both guaiacol and phenol were found to bind there and not
at the typical δ-heme edge of peroxidases.

To explain the reported efficient reaction of CcP
with guaiacol
as the substrate, we hypothesized the involvement of a Tyr as redox-active
amino acid in the peroxidase reaction, similar to the cases of the
Tyr•-mediated oxidation of ABTS substrate in lactoperoxidase, and the Trp•-mediated oxidation
of veratryl alcohol in lignin peroxidase. Therefore, in this work, we conducted a systematic investigation
of the localization and putative role in guaiacol oxidation of the
Tyr residues formed in CcP using multiple-site Trp/Tyr variants and
multifrequency EPR spectroscopy. We have now identified Tyr71 and
Tyr236 as those residues contributing primarily to the EPR Tyr• signal in CcP. Our findings confirm the previous assignment
of Tyr236, a surface-exposed amino acid, that was based on indirect
detection using MNP labeling and protein cross-linking, as well as covalent modification upon reaction
of W191G CcP with 2-aminotriazole. In
contrast, the radical on Tyr71 has never been detected probably because
the site is not readily accessible to spin-labels or cross-linking
reactions. More importantly, we show that [Fe(IV)=O Tyr71•] is the reactive intermediate in the
oxidation of guaiacol binding at the site remote from the heme, and
that Trp51 is involved in the electron transfer pathway between Tyr71
and the heme.

Experimental Procedures
Sample Preparation
Construction, expression, and purification
of site-directed mutant proteins of CcP were performed as described
previously. The CcP-MI protein used as
a template for site-directed mutagenesis reported in this work differs
from the yeast wild-type CcP protein at positions 53 and 152 (T53I
and D152G) and contains a Met-Ile pair preceding the first amino acid.
The mutations were screened by restriction digestion and confirmed
by DNA sequencing and mass spectrometry of the purified proteins.
Guaiacol (extra pure) was purchased from Fisher Scientific and hydrogen
peroxide from Fluka Analytical.

EPR Spectroscopy
The 9 GHz EPR spectra were recorded
on a Bruker EleXsys E500 spectrometer equipped with a standard Bruker
ER 4102 X-band resonator and a liquid helium cryostat (Oxford Instruments,
ESR 900). The home-built high-field EPR spectrometer (95–285
GHz) has been described previously. EPR
quartz tubes with an external diameter of 4 mm were used for measurements
on both EPR spectrometers. Initial (heme) concentrations of 1.5 mM
of the CcP samples were used for recording the 9 and 285 GHz EPR spectra.
All EPR samples were prepared by mixing, manually and directly in
the EPR tubes, the ferric CcP [100 mM potassium phosphate (pH 6.0)]
with a 2-fold excess of hydrogen peroxide [100 mM potassium phosphate
(pH 6.0)] in equal volumes. The mixing was conducted on ice for 10
s, and then the EPR tube was flash-frozen in liquid nitrogen. Little
difference in the type and yield of the EPR signals of the Trp and
Tyr radicals was observed for the reaction of the CcP-MI samples with
hydrogen peroxide when using mixing times of 5, 15, and 60 s, in contrast
to the case of CcP-MKT previously reported. The 9 GHz EPR experiments on the reaction of CcP (wild type and
Y236F variant) with the guaiacol substrate were conducted using 40
μL of enzyme at 0.5 mM (initial concentration) and adding 2
μL of substrate at 1 M (initial concentration) to produce a
final excess of 100-fold. Smaller excesses were also tested. The incubation
of CcP with guaiacol was conducted at room temperature for 20 min
and prior to the reaction with a 2-fold excess of hydrogen peroxide
(10 s mixing time on ice). The EPR spectra of ferric CcP samples were
recorded before and after incubation with guaiacol. No spectral changes
were observed upon binding of guaiacol (and using a 100-fold excess).

Results and Discussion
The previous reports from different
groups with respect to the
identification of the site(s) of the Tyr radical(s) in CcP by characterizing
single Tyr mutations clearly demonstrated the complexity of the case.
Such studies naturally led to the general consensus that once a putative
site for the formation of a Tyr radical is suppressed (by site-directed
mutagenesis) the radical could be formed on other Tyr(s), with the
underlying interpretation that the formation of Tyr radicals in CcP
may be a rather random event, with no specific electron transfer pathway
and/or catalytic function involved. Later, a more inclusive approach
using multiple-site Tyr and Trp mutations on CcP was conducted by
one of our laboratories. Such CcP variants
were designed to incorporate, in an additive fashion, some of the
Tyr sites proposed from the previous reports of single-site mutations,
as well as the two Trp residues of the proximal and distal heme sides.
The kinetic characterization of such CcP multiple mutants by stopped-flow
UV–vis spectroscopy showed that the sequential removal of Tyr
residues resulted in an increased stability of the otherwise very
short-lived Fe(IV)=O Por•+ species (the so-called
Compound I intermediate in peroxidases), making possible its detection
in the millisecond time range and through its distinct electronic
absorption spectrum. The subsequent changes
observed in the heme absorption spectrum of the reacted CcP were consistent
with the spontaneous decay of the Fe(IV)=O Por•+ intermediate to a ferryl species (so-called Compound II). However,
as we have shown previously, it is not possible to discriminate between
the absorption spectra of an Fe(IV)=O species and an [Fe(IV)=O
Tyr•] intermediate in heme enzymes.− Therefore, in this work, we have applied multifrequency EPR spectroscopy
to the same set of CcP multiple (Tyr and Trp) variants, as the starting
point for the specific characterization of the Tyr• sites formed in CcP and their putative role in substrate oxidation,
and in the context of the recently reported crystal structure of CcP
with bound guaiacol.

EPR Spectroscopic Characterization of the
Tyr Radicals Formed
in Multiple Tyr/Trp Mutants in CcP
Figure  shows the 285 GHz (panel A) and 9 GHz (panel B) EPR spectra
of the multiple-Tyr/Trp variants upon reaction with a 2-fold excess
of hydrogen peroxide. These variants include substitutions of the
Trp residues that are close to the heme, on the proximal and distal
sides (Trp191 and Trp51), and also incorporate, in an additive fashion,
putative Tyr• sites. The EPR spectra shown in panels A and B of Figure  correspond to those of W191F (top, black trace), W191F/W51F
(middle, magenta trace) and W191F/W51F/Y187F/Y229F/Y236F (bottom,
purple trace). The EPR spectra of two other CcP multiple-site variants,
W191F/W51F/Y187F and W191F/W51F/Y187F/Y229F/Y236F/Y36F/Y39F/Y42F,
were identical to those of W191F/W51F and W191F/W51F/Y187F/Y229F/Y236F,
respectively (Table ).

(A) 285 GHz and (B) 9
GHz EPR spectra of Tyr radicals formed in
the W191F (top, black), W191F/W51F (middle, magenta), and W191F/W51F/Y187F/Y229F/Y236F
(bottom, purple) variants of cytochrome c peroxidase
upon reaction with a 2-fold excess of hydrogen peroxide, using a mixing
time on ice of 10 s. (A) The 285 GHz spectra (shown in g scale) were recorded at 10 K, using a frequency modulation of 30
kHz; a field modulation of 5 G was used for the top and middle spectra,
while a field modulation of 10 G was used for the bottom spectra because
of the much lower radical yield. The top and middle spectra result
from averages of four scans, while 10 scans on average were used for
the bottom spectrum. (B) The 9 GHz spectra (top and middle) were recorded
at 40 K, with a modulation amplitude of 1 G, a microwave power of
0.08 mW, and a modulation frequency of 100 kHz. For the bottom spectrum,
a modulation amplitude of 3 G and a microwave power of 0.2 mW were
required because of the much lower radical yield.

Assignments of the Sites for the Two
Primary Tyr• Intermediates in Cytochrome c Peroxidase (CcP) and the Reaction with the Guaiacol Substrate,
Based on the EPR Characterization of the Designed CcP Variants Shown
in Panels A and B of Figures  and 
The colors highlight
the four different
Tyr radical signals that correspond to those in Figures  and .

The percentage of Tyr radical(s)
yield for the variants was estimated by comparison of the signal intensity
with that of the wild-type CcP with H2O2 (considered
the 100% yield).

Tyr sites
that contribute to the
Tyr• EPR signal in each sample.

The underlined residues are those
inducing EPR spectral changes, consistent with suppression of the
primary Tyr radical sites. The W51F variant indirectly impeded the
formation of Tyr71• by the disruption
of the long-range electron transfer pathway, while the F89L variant
destabilized radical formation on Tyr71 by inducing steric
effects on its microenvironment (see the text).

The advantageous resolution of the
EPR spectra of organic radicals
when they are recorded at high magnetic fields (285 GHz and 10 T)
showed that the intrinsic g values and g anisotropy, defined as |gx – gz|,
of all five CcP variants (Figure A) were those
expected for tyrosyl radicals., The HF-EPR spectra
of the W191F variant (Figure A, black trace)
could be best simulated with g values of 2.0066,
2.0041, and 2.0020 for gx, gy, and gz, respectively, including a distribution
in gx values with a Gaussian
width of 0.0007, to account for the broad low-field edge of the spectrum.
The Tyr• spectra of the W191F/W51F and W191F/W51F/Y187F
variants (Figure A, magenta trace) showed
small, yet significant, differences compared to those of the W191F
sample (Figure A, black trace). In particular,
the gx component of the
HF-EPR spectrum was narrower, thus requiring a smaller distribution
of gx values (Gaussian
width of 0.0005) in the spectral simulations. Also, proton hyperfine
couplings were well-resolved on the high-field edge of the spectrum
(gz component) of the
W191F/W51F and W191F/W51F/Y187F variants (Figure A, magenta trace; better shown in Figure S2 of the ).

The Tyr• spectra of the W191F/W51F/Y187F/Y229F/Y236F
and W191F/W51F/Y187F/Y229F/Y236F/Y36F/Y39F/Y42F variants (Figure A, purple trace) showed detectable differences on
the gy component of the
HF-EPR spectra (better shown in Figure S1 of the ).

Consistently, the 9 GHz EPR
spectra of the same CcP samples (Figure B)
showed small, yet significant, differences in
the overall shapes related to their proton hyperfine couplings, which
dominate the EPR spectra of the tyrosyl radicals at this lower frequency.
In addition, the W191F/W51F/Y187F/Y229F/Y236F and W191F/W51F/Y187F/Y229F/Y236F/Y36F/Y39F/Y42F
variants showed a narrower Tyr radical signal [peak to trough of 16
G (Figure B, purple trace)] compared to the
signals of the others [peak to trough of 19 G (Figure B, black and magenta traces)]. It is of note that the Tyr• yield of the W191F/W51F sample was 50% of that of
the W191F CcP sample, while that of the W191F/W51F/Y187F/Y229F/Y236F
variant was much lower (15% of that of the W191F CcP sample). The
radical yield could be directly estimated from the intensities of
the EPR signals because the EPR samples had the same final volume,
were prepared using the same conditions (described in ), and were measured using the same
instrument settings. As mentioned in the legend of Figure , because of the much lower yield of the Tyr• in the case of the W191F/W51F/Y187F/Y229F/Y236F and
W191F/W51F/Y187F/Y229F/Y236F/Y36F/Y39F/Y42F variants, the spectra
shown in Figure  (purple traces) were recorded
using a larger number of scans (at 285 GHz) or a higher modulation
amplitude (at 9 GHz) compared to those of W191F, W191F/W51F, and W191F/W51F/Y187F
variants.

Taken together, the differences in yields, g values,
and proton hyperfine couplings detected in the EPR spectra of the
multiple-Tyr/Trp variants of CcP recorded at both 285 and 9 GHz are
consistent with two predominant, and chemically different, Tyr radicals
contributing to the wild-type Tyr• EPR spectrum
of CcP with a minor contribution of a third species, as summarized
in Table .

Assignments of the Tyr
Radical Sites
To rationalize
our findings, it was crucial to take into account the fact that the
Tyr• EPR spectra of the multiple-substitution variants
were identical in a two by two fashion and for both frequencies (see
Table ). Specifically, the W191F variant showed
the same Tyr• spectrum as wild-type CcP, thus indicative
of no effect of the Trp191 mutation [heme proximal side (see Figure )] on the formation of the Tyr radicals, as we have
previously shown for the CcP-MKT protein. However, a different Tyr• spectrum with half-signal
intensity (Figure , magenta trace) was observed
when substituting Trp51 on the heme distal side in addition to Trp191
(W191F/W51F variant). Because the HF-EPR spectra are inconsistent
with a Trp radical,, this result clearly indicates
that substitution of Trp51 (see Figure ) impeded
the formation of one of the two primary Tyr radicals in CcP.

Heme site in
cytochrome c peroxidase (CcP), including
the catalytically relevant residues of the proximal and distal sides
(yellow), and the two binding sites for guaiacol (labeled GUA1 and
GUA2) recently reported by Raven and co-workers. Tyr71 and Tyr236, the Tyr radical sites identified in this
work, as well as the well-characterized Trp191 radical site for the
[Fe(IV)=O Trp191•+] intermediate
are all colored green. The proposed electron transfer pathway between
Tyr71 (the oxidizing species for binding of guaiacol at GUA1) and
the heme, including Trp51 and based on the multifrequency EPR study
in this work, is shown as blue dotted lines. This figure was made
using the published structure of the CcP–guaiacol complex (Protein
Data Bank entry 4A6Z).

We have previously reported a
comparable situation in the case
of BpKatG, the bifunctional peroxidase
from B. pseudomallei (see Figure ). Indeed, Trp111 (equivalent to Trp51 in CcP) on the heme
distal side was shown to be part of the extended H-bonding network
(white dotted trace) that plays a crucial role in the electron transfer
pathways (blue dotted traces) to the two remote protein-based radical
sites, Trp139 and Trp153. Specifically,
the EPR characterization of the W111F variant in BpKatG showed that
the substitution of Trp111 with Phe hindered the formation of both
Trp139• and Trp153•, the experimental evidence being the disappearance of the Trp• signals from the EPR spectrum of the W111F variant
(see Figure 5 of ref ()). It is of note that previous reports of CcP mutants showed cross-links
between Trp51 and the heme, in the case of the W191F variant, and between Trp51 and Y52, in the case of the
H52Y variant, indicating that Trp51 is
prone to forming a transient radical species as in the case of Trp111
in BpKatG.

Crystallographic structure
of the N-terminal domain of B. pseudomallei catalase-peroxidase
(BpKatG) with bound
isoniazid (INH), showing the environment of the heme cofactor. Trp330, Trp139, and Trp153 (green) are the radical
sites identified in a previous multifrequency EPR spectroscopic characterization. The electron transfer pathways (blue dotted
lines), including the extended H-bonding network of the heme distal
side (white dotted lines) and Trp95, Trp94, and Trp111 (all colored
blue), are also shown. This figure was made using the published structure
of BpKatG cocrystallized with INH (Protein Data Bank entry 3N3N).

Comparison of the W191F/W51F and W191F/W51F/Y187F
variants in CcP
allowed us to rule out Tyr187 as a radical site, because both variants
showed the very same EPR spectrum (g values, distribution
in gx values, and proton
hyperfine couplings) and radical yields (see Table ). In contrast, the distinct Tyr• signal
of the W191F/W51F variant clearly disappeared when two other Tyr mutations
(Tyr229 and Tyr236) were added (Figure A,B,
magenta traces), thus revealing a different, and much lower in yield,
Tyr• spectrum for the W191F/W51F/W187F/Y229F/Y236F
variant (Figure , purple traces). This result
indicates that substitution of Tyr236 or Tyr229 specifically suppressed
the other primary Tyr• site in CcP, leaving just
the minor species (also Tyr radical, &lt;15% contribution to the wild-type
spectrum).

In conclusion, the EPR spectroscopic characterization
of the multiple-Tyr/Trp
variants in CcP showed that there are two primary Tyr radicals accounting
for 85% of the EPR signal detected in the wild-type sample, forming
independently of each other and also independently of the Trp191• species. The EPR results also indicated
that one of the Tyr• sites should be either Tyr236
or Tyr229 (both located on the heme proximal-side region) and that
the other Tyr• site should be on the heme distal-side
region of the protein (see Figure ), because
Trp51 was required for its formation.

(A) 9 GHz EPR
spectra of Tyr radicals formed in wild-type CcP (black),
Y236F (red), and Y236F/F89L (purple) variants, upon reaction with
a 2-fold molar excess of hydrogen peroxide. (B) Reaction of wild-type
CcP and the Y236F variant with guaiacol monitored by the 9 GHz EPR
spectrum of their Tyr radicals. The ferric samples of wild-type CcP
and the Y236F variant were incubated with a 100-fold molar excess
of guaiacol, prior to being mixed with a 2-fold molar excess of hydrogen
peroxide. The resulting spectrum in both cases shows a narrower radical
signal (solid line, gray) representing 10% of the Tyr radical signal
of wild-type CcP (solid line, black), as estimated from their EPR
signal intensities. It is of note that because of the very low radical
yield upon reaction in the presence of guaiacol, the spectrum (solid
line, gray) was recorded using a modulation amplitude of 3 G and a
microwave power of 0.2 mW instead of the modulation amplitude of 1
G and the microwave power of 0.08 mW used for the control (solid line,
black). The EPR spectra of the A170W/R166E/Y251M variant of CcP (dashed
line, black), which does not form any Tyr radical intermediate upon
reaction with hydrogen peroxide (see text), show the g ≈ 2 background signal arising from the gz component of the [Fe(IV)=O Trp191•+] species, because this component is
not affected by the exchange coupling interaction. The experimental conditions for recording the 9 GHz spectra
were the same as those in Figure B, except
for the temperature (40 K).

Identification of the Two Tyr• Sites in CcP
On the basis of the conclusions from the EPR spectroscopic characterization
of the multiple-Tyr/Trp variants (summarized in Table ), we then designed and constructed simplified CcP variants
to pin down the two primary Tyr• sites. The Tyr236
substitution was then expected to remove the radical site on the heme
proximal-side region. As shown in Figure A, the Tyr• signal of the Y236F variant (red trace) showed measurable differences
in the overall shape related to the proton hyperfine couplings of
the radical, and a clear lower yield (45%) when compared to the wild-type
CcP Tyr• signal (black trace), consistent with the
lack of a contribution from the Tyr236• species due to the mutation.

To narrow the list of possible
candidates for the other Tyr radical site, remote from the heme and
located in the distal-side region as indicated by the effect of the
Trp51 substitution, we took into consideration the existence of the
substrate binding site remote from the heme recently reported by Raven
and co-workers. Specifically, the crystal
structure of CcP with bound guaiacol (named GUA1 and GUA2 in Figure ) revealed two binding sites, neither of which was
the typical binding site for aromatic substrates in peroxidases (namely,
close to the δ-heme edge) or the surface binding site for cyt c in CcP. One of the guaiacol molecules (named GUA1 in Figure ) is found to bind more than 20 Å from the
heme. The presence of a potentially redox-active residue, Tyr71, with
a distance of 10.2 Å between the phenolic oxygen of Tyr71 and
guaiacol (see Figure  and Figure S2 of the ), makes the overall configuration
strikingly comparable to that of BpKatG-INH, in which the three-dimensional
structure of the enzyme cocrystallized with isoniazid revealed an INH binding site more than 20 Å from the
heme (see Figure ), but close enough for a
one-step electron transfer to the protein-based site of the [Fe(IV)=O
Trp139•] intermediate. Moreover, the presence of a structural water within H-bonding
distance of the phenolic oxygen of Tyr71 (see Figure S2 of the ) is consistent with the
electropositive microenvironment of the Tyr radical shown by the HF-EPR
spectrum, thus making Tyr71 a good candidate for the other (primary)
Tyr• site in CcP.

A different strategy was
chosen to probe the radical on Tyr71.
We designed a mutation that would destabilize the radical formation
without actual substitution of the Tyr site, the advantage being to
avoid changes on the electron transfer pathways related to the radical
formation that could result in the formation of a new radical. We
have previously shown that changes in the microenvironment of the
protein-based radical sites in KatGs, in particular disruption of H-bonds, destabilize radical formation., In CcP, a structural water molecule is within H-bonding distance
of Tyr71 (see Figure S2 of the ). Accordingly, the substitution of Phe89 was expected to induce
subtle steric effects on the microenvironment of Tyr71 and the water
(Figure S2 of the ), which in turn would compromise the formation of the radical. In
addition, and to have an unambiguous EPR result, we combined the substitutions
on Phe89 and Tyr236 (see above). Then, the Y236F/F89L double substitution
was expected to suppress both primary Tyr• sites
in CcP (Tyr236• and Tyr71•) and consequently their contribution to the EPR spectrum.
This was indeed the case, with the Y236F/F89L variant (Figure A, purple trace) showing a very low yield (10%)
of a narrower radical spectrum and a peak to trough of 16 G, as in
the case of the multiple-site variant W191F/W51F/Y187F/Y229F/Y236F
(Figure B, purple trace).

It is of note
that the contribution of the minor Tyr radical (10–15%)
was always present despite the increasing number of Tyr mutations
in CcP, indicating that the electron transfer pathway for its formation
is uncorrelated to the two primary sites, Tyr71 and Tyr236. Only in
the case of the A170W/R166E/Y251M variant was the minority Tyr• signal not detected (Figure B, black dashed trace). This triple mutant served to engineer a new
Trp radical site on the enzyme surface, thus mimicking the lignin
peroxidase case. The inhibition of the
formation of the naturally occurring Tyr radicals in CcP induced by
the A170W/R166E/Y251M variant can be rationalized by the creation
of a new and preferential electron flow to the engineered Trp radical
site, because the single mutation of Tyr251 showed that this amino
acid residue does not contribute to the Tyr• EPR
signal. The substitutions of Tyr251 and Arg166 were necessary to make
sufficient space for the insertion of Trp at position 170 in CcP,
as well as reproducing the microenvironment of the catalytically active
surface Trp in lignin peroxidase. The
EPR spectrum of the A170W/R166E/Y251M variant upon reaction with hydrogen
peroxide showed the formation of the exchange-coupled Trp191 radical
as in wild-type CcP, and no other radical signal was detected (Figure B, black dashed trace), indicating that the putative
Trp170• radical was most probably too
short-lived to be trapped, as in the case of lignin peroxidase.

Reaction of CcP with Guaiacol Monitored by
EPR Spectroscopy
CcP is known to utilize the typical heme-edge
peroxidase mechanism
to oxidize small (aromatic) substrates binding at the δ-heme
edge, by means of the Fe(IV)=O Por•+ intermediate
(reviewed in ref ()). In addition, the subsequent [Fe(IV)=O Trp191•+] intermediate serves for the oxidation of cyt c, a substrate binding to the enzyme surface (recently reviewed
in ref ()). Our findings
show that the hitherto elusive sites for the formation of the Tyr• intermediates in CcP are Tyr71 and Tyr236, and given
the recent report of guaiacol having a binding site close to Tyr71
(Figure ), we investigated its putative role
in guaiacol oxidation.

As we have previously shown, EPR spectroscopy
is the technique of choice for assessing and selectively monitoring
the reactivity with substrates of the [Fe(IV)=O Trp•] and/or [Fe(IV)=O Tyr•] species, formed
as alternative intermediates to the Fe(IV)=O Por•+ intermediate in certain peroxidases.,,, As in the previous
cases, CcP was incubated with guaiacol (100-fold excess) at room temperature
and prior to the reaction with hydrogen peroxide (2-fold molar excess),
to prevent competition between the fast formation of the radical intermediates
and the binding of guaiacol. The 9 GHz EPR spectra of CcP, recorded
at 4 K and upon reaction with a 2-fold excess of H2O2, showed that the yield of the Trp191 radical was the same
in the absence and presence of guaiacol (see Figure S3A of the ), clearly indicating that
the [Fe(IV)=O Trp191•+] intermediate
was neither involved nor affected by the reaction with guaiacol. In
contrast, the disappearance of the major Tyr radical signal in the
40 K EPR spectrum of the wild-type CcP sample preincubated with guaiacol
(Figure B, gray trace) indicated that Tyr71
and/or Tyr236 was either involved in or affected by the reaction with
guaiacol. Then, the EPR characterization of the reaction, with a 2-fold
excess of H2O2, of the Y236F variant preincubated
with a 100-fold excess of guaiacol allowed us to rule out Tyr236• as the reactive species. The resulting
EPR spectrum was also that of the narrower minority species, as in
the case of wild-type CcP (Figure B, gray
trace). The location of Tyr71, with an OTyr71–Ogua1 distance of 10.2 Å (see Figure S2 of the ), is quite advantageous
for a direct oxidation of guaiacol at the site named GUA1, while Tyr236
is 41 Å distant. In addition, the reported steady-state kinetic
data showed that the kcat values for guaiacol
oxidation were essentially the same for wild-type CcP (4.1 s–1) and the M119W variant (5.9 s–1), in which guaiacol
binds only at a site close to Tyr71 (GUA1), as shown by the crystal
structure of the mutant CcP. The corresponding
reported Km values for wild-type CcP and
the M119W variant are 53 and 26 mM, respectively. Taken together, this is strong evidence of Tyr71• being the reactive species with the guaicol that
binds at GUA1, the site more remote from the heme (see Figure ). It is worth mentioning that in the report showing
the crystal structure of guaiacol bound to CcP, Raven and co-workers concluded that the catalytic binding
site for guaiacol is the δ-heme edge, despite the fact that
it was not observed at such a site, the rationale being a crystallographic
artifact and/or weak binding. However, our EPR characterization of
the reaction in solution of the CcP high-valent intermediates with
guaiacol rules out both the [Fe(IV)=O Trp191•+] intermediate and the preceding [Fe(IV)=O
Por•+] intermediate being the reactive species with
guaiacol. Consistently, the reported kcat for guaiacol oxidation by the W191F variant (14 s–1) is ∼3 times higher than that of wild-type CcP (4.1 s–1), with KM being essentially
the same. This shows that suppressing
the preferred electron transfer pathway between Trp191 and the heme
by the Trp191 substitution results in an enhancement of the alternate
pathway to Tyr71, the latter then becoming more efficient in the oxidation
of guaiacol.

Conclusions
The two primary sites
for Tyr radical formation in CcP, Tyr71 and
Tyr236, were identified using multiple-site Trp/Tyr variants of CcP
and multifrequency EPR spectroscopy. Our identification of the surface-exposed
Tyr236, with the phenolic oxygen pointing outward, as one of the two
radical sites in CcP agrees well with previous reports that were based
on MNP labeling and protein cross-linking and on its covalent modification upon reaction of W191G CcP with
2-aminotriazole. The unprecedented radical
site identified in this work as Tyr71 is close to the surface, but
not necessarily accessible to spin-labels or cross-linking reactions.
Tyr71 is located in an advantageous position to mediate the oxidation
of substrates binding at a site, rather distant from the heme (named
GUA1 in Figure ), which has been recently
reported in the CcP crystal structures with bound guaiacol and phenol
molecules. The EPR characterization of
the multiple-site Trp/Tyr variants also showed that Trp51, located
on the heme distal side, is involved in the electron transfer pathway
between Tyr71 and the heme. The overall configuration of the substrate
binding site (GUA1) and the associated radical intermediate on Tyr71
(see Figure ) is thus reminiscent of the situation
in BpKatG (see Figure ). In the latter, the
isoniazid binding site is also remote from the heme but close to Trp139, and the heme distal-side Trp (Trp111) is essential
for the formation of the [Fe(IV) Trp139•] intermediate.

Furthermore, our finding that Tyr71• is the oxidizing intermediate for guaiacol,
as shown by monitoring
the reactivity of CcP with guaiacol using EPR spectroscopy, indicates
different roles for each Tyr radical. Accordingly, Tyr71 is a true
reactive intermediate for substrate oxidation, while the surface-exposed
Tyr236 is more likely related to oxidative stress signaling, as previously
proposed by English and co-workers. Despite
the fact that yeast does not naturally produce phenolic compounds
as secondary metabolites, the central metabolism provides the necessary
amino acid precursors for an introduced phenolic biosynthetic pathway,
obtained in engineered yeast strains. Accordingly, phenol-producing Saccharomyces and non-Saccharomyces yeast
(so-called phenolic yeast) have been characterized as producing volatile
phenols, which are released during yeast
autolysis and impart specific flavors to wine and beer during the
fermentation process. It is possible
then that the [Fe(IV)=O Tyr71•] intermediate in CcP could play a role equivalent to that of the
[Fe(IV)=O Trp171•] intermediate
of the lignin peroxidase from white-rot fungi, in which the secondary
metabolite, veratryl alcohol, is oxidized by the peroxidase. Other endogenous compounds, such as indole-3-acetic
acid and flavin-type molecules, that have been extracted from yeast could be also metabolized by the Tyr71-based
radical intermediate of CcP.

Finally, our findings reinforce
the view of CcP being the monofunctional
peroxidase that most closely resembles their ancestor enzymes KatGs, in terms of the more elaborate strategy for
the peroxidase reaction, and includes stabilization of the heme proximal-side
Trp• as well as well-defined electron transfer pathways
for the oxidation of substrates remote from the heme. The strategy
used for identifying the elusive Tyr radical sites in CcP, in particular
the design of mutations that destabilize formation of the Tyr• radical without actual substitution of the Tyr site,
may be generalized to other heme enzymes containing a large number
of Tyr and Trp residues and for which Tyr (or Trp) radicals have been
proposed to be involved in their peroxidase or peroxidase-like reaction.

Supporting Information Available
285 GHz
EPR spectra of Tyr
radicals formed in the multiple-Trp/Tyr CcP variants (Figure S1),
the microenvironment of Tyr71 showing the nearby binding site of guaiacol
in CcP (Figure S2), and the 9 GHz EPR spectra, recorded at 4 and 40
K, of the radicals formed upon reaction of wild-type CcP and the Y236F
variant with hydrogen peroxide in the presence and absence of guaiacol
(Figure S3). This material is available free of charge via the Internet
at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bi500353p_si_001.pdf

Author Present Address
∥ T.D.P.:
Leidos Biomedical Research, Inc., Frederick National Laboratory
for Cancer Research, P.O. Box B, Frederick, MD 21702.

Author Contributions
K.D.M. and
T.D.P. contributed equally to this work.

This work was
supported by the French CNRS (UMR 8221), CEA-Saclay, and the CNRS
Program PICS-Canada (PICS-05865) (to A.I.), the Natural Sciences and
Engineering Research Council (NSERC) of Canada (Discovery Grant 9600)
and the Canada Research Chair Program (to P.C.L.), and the National
Institutes of Health (Grant GM06221 to Y.L.).

The authors declare
no
competing financial interest.

Abbreviations
CcPcytochrome c peroxidase

KatGcatalase-peroxidase

BpKatGB. pseudomallei catalase-peroxidase

MtKatGMycobacterium tuberculosis catalase-peroxidase

LiPlignin peroxidase

cyt ccytochrome c

EPRElectron Paramagnetic Resonance

HF-EPRhigh-field Electron Paramagnetic Resonance

ENDORelectron nuclear
double resonance

MNDOmodified neglect of diatomic overlap

MNP labelinglabeling with 2-methyl-2-nitrosopropane

INHisoniazid (isonicotinic
acid hydrazide)

guaiacol2-methoxyphenol

ABTS2,2′-azino-bis[3-ethylbenzothiazoline sulfonate(6)] diammonium
salt.

Tyr236 was proposed
to be the radical
site based on the detection of its covalent modification in the reaction
of W191G CcP with 2-aminotriazole. Later,
Tyr236 was ruled out under the consideration that there was no Asp
or Glu H-bond donor or positively charged residue to provide with
the electropositive microenvironment predicted by the gx value in the Tyr• HF-EPR spectrum, yet the presence of two structural waters within
H-bonding distance of the phenolic oxygen of Tyr236 (Figure ) could account for the low gx value of the Tyr• spectrum (Figure A, magenta trace), as shown by the semiempirical
MNDO calculations on the variation of the gx values of a p-methylphenoxy radical as a function
of the H-bonding distance to two water molecules (Figure 6 of ref ()) and experimentally shown
for the Tyr• radical in ribonucleotide reductase.

