In bacteria,
a majority of secretory
preproteins are translocated through a general secretion (Sec) pathway
that contains a Sec translocase complex comprising the integral membrane
channel, SecYEG, and the cytosolic ATPase motor protein, SecA., SecA binds preproteins, associates with the SecYEG channel, and
harnesses energy from ATP hydrolysis to drive conformational changes
that lead to preprotein translocation.− SecA is a large, 102 kDa multifunctional
protein that is composed of several domains: nucleotide binding domains
I and II (NBD I and II, respectively), a preprotein binding domain
(PBD), and a C-domain that is composed of an α-helical scaffold
domain (HSD), an α-helical wing domain (HWD), and a carboxyl-terminal
linker (CTL) (Figure ). The PBD and HWD contribute to the formation of a binding
groove for the signal peptide region of the preprotein.−

Structural
domains of SecA. The structure of Escherichia
coli SecA (PDB entry 2VDA) with domains
indicated by color: blue for NBD I, purple for PBD, green for NBD
II, red for HSD, and cyan for HWD. In this monomer structure, the
PBD adopts an open conformation.

SecA exists in a monomer–dimer equilibrium that is
sensitive
to salt concentration and temperature.− The cellular concentration of
SecA is 5–8 μM,, and its dissociation
constant is 0.28 μM in 200 mM KCl. Thus, in the absence of ligands, SecA likely exists as a dimer in
the cytoplasm., It has been suggested that SecA
functions as a dimer during preprotein translocation because a cross-linked
SecA dimer, and a genetically produced SecA
dimer are active for translocation. Nevertheless,
the oligomeric state of SecA during preprotein translocation remains
controversial. Some studies indicate that dissociation of SecA is
favored in the presence of phospholipids, or synthetic signal peptides, and upon
SecYEG binding. Other reports support
an active monomeric form of SecA, indicating that the monomeric SecA
mutant is functional, whereas a disulfide
cross-linked dimer is nonfunctional and its reduced monomeric counterpart
functional.

The relative positioning
of the two protomers in the SecA dimer
is also unclear. Although the structure of the SecA protomer obtained
from different bacterial species is highly conserved in crystal structures,
multiple dimeric interfaces have been identified− among the five crystal structures of the SecA dimer
reported to date (Figure ). Both parallel and antiparallel,,, dimer orientations
are observed, and these structures contain different dimerization
interfaces. For example, the dimer interface of Escherichia
coli SecA (PDB entry 2FSF) lies on
the opposite side relative to the dimer interface in one of the Bacillus subtilis SecA structures (PDB entry 1M6N). It is difficult to distinguish crystal packing contacts
from biologically relevant protein–protein interfaces,,, and it remains unclear which
of these crystal structures, if any, corresponds to the physiologically
relevant SecA dimer. Single-particle cryo-electron microscopy measurements
support an antiparallel dimer structure, and fluorescence resonance energy transfer distance measurements
show the greatest agreement with the 1M6N antiparallel dimer., A cross-linking study led to the proposal of a novel interface that
involves residues from NBD I, the PBD, and the HSD.

Alternative dimer interfaces in SecA. The dimer interfaces in different
structures of SecA are colored blue with the protomers in two orientations.
(A) E. coli SecA (PDB entry 2FSF), (B) Thermus thermophilus (PDB entry 2IPC), (C) B. subtilis (PDB entry 1M6N), (D) B. subtilis (PDB entry 2IBM), and (E) Mycobacterium tuberculosis (PDB
entry 1NL3). The cyan circles in panels B and C indicate
the location of the N-terminal region.

Interestingly, the PBD is found to adopt multiple conformations.
A closed form that brings the PBD and HWD into the proximity of each
other is found in several SecA dimer crystal structures− and in a structure of a SecA monomer complexed with ADP, whereas an open conformation in which the PBD
is solvent accessible exists in a crystal structure of a monomeric
form and in one dimer structure. In the open state, the groove between the PBD
and NBD II forms a polypeptide-binding clamp., Binding of a non-signal sequence peptide in this region results
in movement of the PBD toward NBD II. Interaction of SecA with SecYEG induces further movement of the
PBD toward NBD II, closing the clamp. Nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) analysis indicates that SecA interconverts
between open and closed states in solution, with the equilibrium favoring
the open state. Cysteine cross-linking
indicates that movement of the PBD from the open state to the closed
clamp state is required for the initiation of translocation.

To resolve these conflicting interpretations,
we report here the
use of three biophysical strategies to identify the dimer interface
of SecA in solution and to characterize the conformational changes
associated with dimerization. First, we used hydrogen–deuterium
exchange mass spectrometry (HDX MS) to identify regions on SecA that
are protected from exchange upon dimerization and to probe conformational
changes associated with dimerization. To allow studies of the monomer
and dimer at comparable concentrations, we took advantage of the extreme
salt dependence for dimerization of SecA to preferentially form either
the SecA monomer or the dimer. Second, to complement the result from
HDX and gain site-specific information about the dimer interface,
we selected amino acids for alanine substitution that are predicted
to make significant energetic contributions to SecA dimerization based
on alternative dimer interfaces. Each alanine-substituted protein
was then analyzed by sedimentation velocity analytical ultracentrifugation
(AUC) to measure SecA dimerization affinity. Third, we conducted normal
mode analysis of the SecA monomer and dimer and defined conformational
changes linked to dimerization. This combined strategy locates the
likely SecA dimer interface and provides a link between closure of
the PBD–HWD groove and SecA dimerization.

Materials and Methods
Wild-Type
SecA Expression and Purification
Wild-type,
native E. coli SecA was expressed and purified as
previously described. SecA samples were
exchanged by using spin columns in a working buffer containing 20
mM 4-(2-hydroxyethyl)-1-piperazineethanesulfonic acid (HEPES) (pH
7.5), 0.5 mM ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA), 0.1 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine
(TCEP), and 100–500 mM KCl. The SecA concentration was determined
by absorbance at 280 nm, using a molar absorptivity (ε280) of 75750 M–1 cm–1 calculated
with Sednterp.

HDX MS Protocol
Given the high sensitivity of SecA
dimerization to salt concentration (Kd increases from 0.014 μM at 100 mM KCl to 40.4 μM at
500 mM KCl), this effect was exploited
to permit comparison of HDX of the SecA dimer (low salt) and monomer
(high salt). Stock solutions of untagged, wild-type SecA were prepared
at 6 μM in either low-salt (100 mM KCl) or high-salt (500 mM
KCl) pH 7.5 buffer, each containing 20 mM HEPES, 0.5 mM EDTA, and
0.1 mM TCEP. Samples were equilibrated at 25 °C for 1 h before
HDX analysis. Continuous labeling with deuterium was initiated by
diluting 4 μL of the stock solution into 16 μL of D2O with an identical KCl concentration. On the basis of the
measured dissociation constants, the low-salt samples were 93% dimer
and the high-salt samples were 95% monomer. HDX was measured at 10
s, 30 s, 1 min, 2 min, 15 min, 1 h, and 4 h. Two proteases, pepsin
and fungal XIII, were used for protein digestion to achieve high peptide
coverage. For measurement, the exchange reaction was quenched at various
times by mixing with 30 μL of 3 M urea and 1% trifluoroacetic
acid (TFA) at ∼1 °C. The mixture was then passed over
a custom-packed pepsin column (2 mm × 20 mm) at a rate of 200
μL/min. For fungal XIII digestion, the exchange reaction was
quenched with 30 μL of 1.2 mg/mL fungal XIII and 1% formic acid
(FA) in water and the mixture placed on ice for 2 min. Prior to liquid
chromatography–mass spectrometry analysis, the digested peptides
were captured on a 2 mm × 15 mm C8 trap column (Agilent, Santa
Clara, CA) and desalted with a 3 min flow at a rate of 200 μL/min
(H2O containing 0.1% TFA). Peptides were then separated
by using a 2.1 mm × 50 mm reversed-phase C18 column (1.9 μm
Hypersil Gold, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA) with an 11.5
min linear gradient from 4 to 40% CH3CN in 0.1% FA at a
rate of 50 μL/min with a nanoACQUITY UPLC system (Waters, Milford,
MA). Protein digestion and peptide separation were conducted in a
water–ice bath to minimize back exchange. MS detection was
performed on an LTQ-Orbitrap (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Santa Clara,
CA) with the following instrument parameters: spray voltage of 4 kV,
capillary temperature of 225 °C, capillary voltage of 44 V, and
tube lens of 100 V. Data were collected with a mass resolving power
of 100000 at m/z 400. Each experiment
was conducted in duplicate.

HDX Data Analysis
To identify the
products of pepsin
or fungal XIII digestions and to provide a list of peptides to be
followed during HDX, product ion mass spectra were acquired in a data-dependent
mode, with the six most abundant ions from each scan selected for
MS/MS. The MS/MS *.raw files were then converted to mzXML files and
submitted to MassMatrix for peptide identification. This search was also performed against a decoy (reversed)
sequence, and ambiguous identifications were discarded. The final
peptide list generated from MassMatrix was output as *.csv files.

The peptide list *.csv files and Thermo *.raw files were then input
into HDX workbench to calculate the centroid
masses of isotopic envelopes (m) and deuterium level
(D%). As described previously, D% = {[m(P) – m(N)]/[m(F) – m(N)]} × 100%, where m(P) and m(N) are the centroid values of partially
deuterated peptide and nondeuterated peptide, respectively. The term m(F) is the calculated mass of the fully exchanged peptide.
The retention time window used for calculation of the m of each peptide in each sample was manually inspected and adjusted
for accurate calculation of D%, and peptides that showed interference
by isotopic peaks from other peptides were discarded. The deuterium
level was finally adjusted by dividing the equation given above by
0.8, because the exchange medium had a deuterium content of 80%. The
data were not corrected for back exchange because two states were
compared.

SecA Mutagenesis
Robetta was used to identify residues lying within potential dimerization
interfaces in SecA crystal structures and to guide the selection of
residues at which single-alanine substitutions are expected to most
strongly destabilize dimerization. The algorithm computes the binding
free energies of the wild-type and mutant complexes to afford the
destabilization as ΔΔG = ΔGmutant – ΔGwild-type. Residues for which ΔΔG is predicted to be &gt;1 kcal/mol within the dimer interfaces
were identified from the following SecA crystal structures: E. coli (PDB entry 2FSF),Thermus thermophilus (PDB entry 2IPC),B. subtilis (PDB
entry 1M6N),B. subtilis (PDB entry 2IBM), and Mycobacterium tuberculosis (PDB entry 1NL3). Sequence and structure alignments using BLAST and PDBeFold
were performed to map the selected residues onto E. coli SecA.

Mutations were introduced by using the QuikChange method
as described by the manufacturer (Stratagene/Agilent Technologies,
Santa Clara, CA). The SecA mutants contained a C-terminal His6 tag to facilitate purification without contamination from
endogenous, wild-type SecA. The mutants were expressed and purified
as described previously.

Analytical
Ultracentrifugation
Sedimentation velocity
analytical ultracentrifugation measurements were performed using interference
optics at 20 °C and 40000 rpm using an An-50 Ti rotor in a Beckman-Coulter
XL-I analytical ultracentrifuge. Samples were loaded into synthetic
boundary, aluminum-filled Epon cells equipped with sapphire windows.
To facilitate analysis of the monomer–dimer equilibrium, sedimentation
velocity measurements were performed in 300 mM KCl at 20 °C,
where Kd lies in the low micromolar range. Data were initially analyzed by using DCDT+ to obtain g(s*) distributions for visual inspection. Multiple data sets were globally
fit using SEDANAL to obtain the monomer–dimer
equilibrium constants. Molecular masses, partial specific volumes,
solvent densities, and viscosities were calculated by using Sednterp.

Because mutants were generated with a
C-terminal His6 tag, dimerization of wild-type SecA was
compared with and without a His6 tag over a concentration
range of 0.5–10 μM in 300 mM KCl by using sedimentation
velocity with interference optics. Under these conditions, the dimer
dissociation constants of wild-type SecA and SecA containing a C-terminal
His6 tag are 4.3 ± 0.9 and 3.7 ± 0.2 μM,
respectively, indicating that the His6 tag does not significantly
affect dimerization.

Normal Mode
Analysis
To perform normal mode analysis
(NMA) to examine the modal description of the opening and closing
transitions, we first had to define the open and closed states of E. coli SecA in the monomer and dimer forms. The open monomer
form was taken as the structure of E. coli SecA determined
by NMR (PDB entry 2VDA). A closed monomer form was generated
by building a homology model for the E. coli sequence
based upon the B. subtilis X-ray structure (PDB entry 1M6N) using the Chimera interface to Modeler version 9.11. The closed state model (CSM) had an overall
structural topology consistent with the 2VDA structure; however, there was a region
in NBD II in which the CSM did not reproduce the secondary structural
elements present in the 2VDA structure. The long helix-spanning residues 532–553
as well as the short helix-spanning residues 518–525 in 2VDA were unstructured
in the CSM. We chose to model these missing helical segments into
the CSM, as our purpose was to examine interdomain conformational
changes, not intradomain changes. The modeling of the helical segments
into the CSM was done by performing a local structural alignment over
residues 500–510 and 553–558 between the 2VDA structure and the
CSM. The coordinates for residues 515–552 were copied from
the 2VDA structure
into the CSM, and then the CSM structure was energy minimized for
500 steps using the steepest descent algorithm with harmonic restraints
(100 kcal mol–1 Å–2) on the
backbone atoms. The helical segment modeling and energy minimization
were performed in CHARMM (version 37a1) using the CHARMM27/CMAP force field., Models for
the dimer in open and closed states were constructed by aligning the 2VDA and CSM structures
with each of the monomers in the 1M6N dimer, using the Chimera MatchMaker tool.
The dimer structures had both monomers in open or closed configurations;
models with mixed open–closed dimers were not considered.

NMA was performed on four structures: open monomer, closed monomer,
open dimer, and closed dimer. The calculations were conducted using
ProDy, in which a Cα-based anisotropic
network model (ANM) was constructed with
harmonic springs between atoms separated by &lt;12 Å. The modes
were determined and projected onto the displacement vector describing
the structural change between open and closed states (or vice versa).
Overlap values were calculated by taking the square of the normalized
dot product between the displacement and mode vectors. The ability
of a mode to change the separation between the PBD and HWD was quantified
by normalizing the modes such that the maximal displacement of any
atom was 1 Å. The structures were then displaced by the normalized
modes, and the change in the separation between the centers of geometry
of the PBD and HWD was calculated.

Results
Analysis of
the SecA Dimer Interface by HDX MS
Because
the oligomeric state of SecA depends on the KCl concentration, and
the intrinsic exchange rate of amide protons is largely unaffected
by different salt concentrations, we
prepared samples of SecA containing predominantly the monomer or dimer,
at the same protein concentration, by simply varying the KCl concentration.
Any measured changes in HDX rates would then reliably reflect any
dimerization-induced changes in the protein. We previously determined
that the Kd for SecA dimerization at 20
°C varies from 0.014 μM at 100 mM KCl to 40.4 μM
at 500 mM KCl. We also found that Kd decreases monotonically by a factor of approximately
2 for every 5 °C increase in temperature; thus, at 25 °C,
where we conducted HDX, the Kd values
of SecA in 100 and 500 mM KCl are approximately 0.007 and 20.2 μM,
respectively. For each incubation in our continuous HDX experiments,
the SecA stock solution was diluted from 6 to 1.2 μM with D2O buffer. Under these conditions, 93% of the SecA is dimeric
at 100 mM KCl and 95% is monomeric at 500 mM KCl.

To obtain
high coverage of SecA in the digestion following HDX, we supplemented
the traditional pepsin digestion with a separate one using acidic
protease, fungal XIII. Pepsin digestion alone gave 86% coverage; missing
were 35 residues at the N-terminus and 30 residues at the C-terminus
(Figure S1A of the ). Fungal XIII digestion, however, allowed us to recover many peptides
covering the N-terminus (Figure S1B of the ). Combining the peptides from the two digestions
provided high (96%) coverage for the total of 901 amino acid residues
in this large protein.

We expect that regions on the protein
with defined secondary structures
will undergo HDX that is slower than that of unstructured regions
or loops because protein backbone amide hydrogen exchange rates are
highly dependent on local fluctuations in structure and solvent accessibility. We mapped for visual convenience the HDX results
for the SecA monomer onto the NMR structure of E. coli SecA (PDB entry 2VDA). The time-dependent deuterium uptake for the SecA peptides from
pepsin and fungal XIII digestion, measured at seven time points, was
used in the mapping (Figure S2 of the ).

In general, the peptides located completely
in α-helical
or β-sheet regions exhibit slower HDX (&lt;40% at short time
points) and are more protected than those at loops and termini. One
exception is the peptide covering residues 602–609. Although
this region is an α-helix in NBD II, it is dynamic with &gt;70%
of the amide hydrogens exchanged after 10 s. Judging from the NMR
structure, we see that this helix is located at the periphery of NBD
II and is detached from the main body by two loops, imparting greater
solvent accessibility and more frequent local conformational fluctuations
to this region. Noticeably, the N-terminal peptides covering residues
1–6 and 7–15 were also found to be highly dynamic, with
maximal exchange within 10 s. Upon examination of different exchange
behavior from 10 s to 4 h, most of the peptides contained within α-helical
or β-sheet regions underwent increases of &lt;40%. Interestingly,
unlike most others, peptides derived from the long α-helix in
HSD covering residues 627–666 showed an increase in the level
of deuterium uptake of &gt;80%. This may reflect the relatively higher
dynamics of this α-helical region, also named the “transducer
helix”, which, as indicated by
its name, is important for allosteric communication among NBD I, NBD
II, the PBD, and the C-domain.

To determine the dimerization interface of SecA, we applied comprehensive
differential HDX analysis of the monomer and dimer. In this approach,
the HDX kinetics of peptic/fungal peptides derived from the SecA monomer
and dimer were compared [all the percentage of deuterium incorporated,
D%, vs time (log scale) plots are presented in the  (Figures S3 and S4)]. As expected,
some regions in the dimer became more protected against exchange than
in the monomer. The average differences in D% (ΔD%) for the
duplicate analysis of seven exchange time points were calculated,
and regions with significant differential deuteration levels are listed
in Table . The differences between the monomer
and dimer in these regions are considered significant because all
peptic and fungal peptides covering the same region showed consistent
HDX kinetics, smooth curves, and similar ΔD% values. These regions
are categorized into two groups: those that show a large difference
[ΔD% ≥ 6 (red)] and those that show a small difference
[3 &lt; ΔD% ≤ 5 (magenta)]. We realize that this categorization
gives a minimal value for the difference because the extent of exchange
at some times can be nearly identical even for a region that shows
a large difference at other times. This problem is compensated in
part by the choice of the small value of 3 as the threshold for distinguishing
regions that change upon dimerization. This value, admittedly arbitrary,
would distinguish curves that are nearly parallel and modestly separated
and curves that show large differences at early time points, for example,
and deviate considerably at long times from those that are nearly
identical. Those latter regions in SecA have insignificant ΔD%
values [&lt;3 (not listed in Table )]. The
value of 6 distinguishes regions showing small but real changes from
those that show large changes. For example, Figure D shows some HDX kinetic plots of regions that are unaffected
by SecA dimerization. This consistency over most regions in SecA serves
as a negative control in showing that the HDX rate is unaffected by
KCl concentration and indicates there are large regions of the protein
that show little change in HDX upon dimerization.

Peptide-level HDX kinetics
of SecA. A comparison between the monomer
(black) and dimer (red) shows significant changes in HDX at the transducer
helix from the HSD (A), regions in the PBD (B), and two helix fingers
from HSD (C) and no differences in HDX at regions undergoing little
structural change (D). The corresponding regions for panels A–C
are marked in Figure A.

SecA Peptides Showing Different Levels
of Deuterium Incorporation Induced by Dimerization
Not available.

The ΔD% values represent
the
average difference in D incorporation across all
HDX times for the monomer and dimer. The number of peptides is the
number of overlapping peptides covering corresponding regions, all
of which show consistent ΔD% values. The red and magenta colors
correspond to large (ΔD% ≥ 6) and small (3 &lt; ΔD%
≤ 5) differences, respectively. For a more detailed breakdown
of the HDX data, see Figures S3 and S4 of the .

In contrast, several regions that show significant ΔD% values
(Table ) must have different structures or
interactions in monomer and dimer states. The largest differences
are observed for peptides within the region of residues 627–671
in the HSD (Figure A) and within the regions
of residues 313–338 and 350–374 in the PBD (Figure B). Peptides encompassing residues 758–774
and 815–830 in the HSD show small changes in ΔD%, but
a large difference is detected for residues 775–783 (Figure C). The kinetic curves for the dimer typically come
together at long times with that of the monomer, suggesting that the
dimer has a relatively large off rate and allowing the protomer to
be freed from the dimer and ultimately to undergo the exchange of
the monomer (recall that there is 7% monomer in the solution in which
the dimer is largely formed).

To help understand the interface
that forms upon SecA dimerization,
we mapped the regions identified in Table  onto the NMR structure of SecA using the same color code (Figure A,B). The three locations exhibiting the greatest
difference in HDX (Figure A–C) are
denoted with a′–c′, respectively, on the crystal
structure shown in Figure A. Region a′
corresponds to the long transducer helix in HSD. Region b′
lies within the PBD and includes two antiparallel β-strands
and the following α-helix. Region c′ contains the two-helix
finger from the HSD. Other regions within the HWD, NBD I, and NBD
II also show some differential ΔD% and are highlighted in Figure .

Structural analysis of SecA HDX kinetics. (A and B) Exchange
rates
mapped onto the E. coli SecA (PDB entry 2VDA) structure. Regions
exhibiting a large difference (ΔD% ≥ 6) are colored red,
and regions exhibiting a small difference (3 &lt; ΔD% ≤
5) are colored magenta (as in Table ). (A)
Ribbon diagram. Regions denoted a′–c′ correspond
to peptides in panels A–C of Figure , respectively. (B) Surface representation. (C and D) Exchange rates
mapped onto the closed form model of E. coli SecA.
(C) Dimer structure. The coloring of the left protomer corresponds
to that in panels A and B. (D) Interface of the PBD and the C-domain.
Generation of the closed form model is described in .

The regions of SecA that show reduced HDX upon dimerization
lie
on multiple faces of the protomer surface, suggesting that large conformational
changes accompany dimerization. Using the crystal structure of 1M6N as a reference,
we attribute the decreased HDX in the transducer helix (region a′)
to dimer interface formation; this is also consistent with our AUC
results described below. We assign the decreased HDX in the PBD (region
b′) to an induced allosteric effect caused by dimerization.
Corresponding HDX changes are also evident within region c′
and the HWD, supporting a model in which SecA dimerization induces
movement of the PBD into a closed conformation where it interacts
with the C-terminal portion of SecA. This model is consistent with
the previous observation of open and closed conformations of the PBD.,,,,,, In the closed conformation structures, the PBD interacts
extensively with the C-terminal domain and forms a compact structure,
whereas in the open conformation, the PBD is more solvent-exposed
and would, therefore, undergo a greater extent of HDX. Because of
its proximity to the transducer helix, the altered HDX in the two-helix
finger may arise from dimerization or altered interactions with the
PBD. The small ΔD% of the short peptide of residues 427–437
located in NBD II opposite the HSD may be due to an allosteric effect.

Analysis of the SecA Dimer Interface by AUC
To complement
our analysis of the dimer interface by HDX, we used AUC to probe the
energetic contribution of individual surface residues to SecA dimerization.
We chose residues for substitution with alanine using the dimer interfaces
observed within the SecA crystal structures from multiple bacterial
species.− Although the SecA fold is largely conserved in these structures,
they reveal very different interfaces (Figure ). We used Robetta to identify residues
lying within potential dimerization interfaces and to guide selection
of single-alanine substitutions that are expected to strongly destabilize
the SecA dimerization. We focused on residues for which Robetta predicts
a destabilization of ΔΔG &gt; 1 kcal/mol
for the interface (Tables S1–S5 of the ).− We chose to characterize SecA dimerization in the
context of the E. coli protein because its biophysical
properties are the most well-characterized.,,,,−

Previous studies,,,, suggested that the N-terminus of SecA is involved in dimerization.
The two crystal structures from B. subtilis SecA
(PDB entry 1M6N) and T. thermophilus SecA (PDB entry 2IPC) support these conclusions that the
N-termini form part of the dimer interface. We previously found that
substitution of N-terminal residues based on the B. subtilis1M6N dimer
interface strongly inhibits SecA dimerization. For example, L5A and
L6A (E. coli) substitutions decrease the level of binding by 3- and 5-fold, respectively, corresponding
to a dimer destabilization of 0.6–1 kcal/mol (Table ). These effects follow the trend but are somewhat
smaller than those predicted by Robetta for the antiparallel B. subtilis dimer interface [PDB entry 1M6N (Table S3 of the )].

Dimer Dissociation Constants of Single-Alanine
Substitution Mutants of SecA
residue	Kd (μM)	ΔG (kcal/mol)	ΔΔG (kcal/mol)	
wild-type	3.7 ± 0.2	–7.29 ± 0.03	0	
L5	11.0 ± 2.2	–6.65 ± 0.12	0.64	
L6	19.5 ± 4.8	–6.31 ± 0.14	0.98	
K8	8.6 ± 0.5	–6.79 ± 0.03	0.50	
R342	3.7 ± 0.2	–7.28 ± 0.03	0.01	
D568	4.8 ± 0.8	–7.14 ± 0.09	0.15	
K625	2.7 ± 2.4	–7.47 ± 0.44	–0.18	
N629	2.3 ± 0.4	–7.55 ± 0.09	–0.26	
K633	3.6 ± 0.1	–7.30 ± 0.02	–0.01	
E635	2.3 ± 0.8	–7.56 ± 0.19	–0.27	
D640	1.6 ± 0.01	–7.78 ± 0.005	–0.49	
Q662	0.10 ± 0.01	–9.38 ± 0.06	–2.09	
E665	12.7 ± 0.3	–6.57 ± 0.01	0.72	
K800	3.2 ± 0.3	–7.37 ± 0.05	–0.08	
Q801	2.6 ± 0.3	–7.48 ± 0.06	–0.19	
E802	3.3 ± 0.3	–7.35 ± 0.05	–0.05	
F811	2.3 ± 0.1	–7.56 ± 0.03	–0.27	
L815	2.2 ± 0.03	–7.58 ± 0.01	–0.29	
L818	3.4 ± 0.1	–7.33 ± 0.02	–0.04	
ΔG = RT ln Kd.

ΔΔG = ΔGmutant –
ΔGwild-type.

Previously reported in ref ().

The T. thermophilus SecA dimer interface
(PDB
entry 2IPC)
contains two salt bridges, R732–D675 and R736–E742,
that may contribute to stabilization. Robetta predicts that substitution of these residues with alanine
should destabilize the dimer by at least 1 kcal/mol (Table S2 of the ). Substitution of the
corresponding E. coli residues with alanine (D568A,
K625A, N629A, and E635A), however, does not significantly affect the
SecA dimerization affinity (Table ). However,
it should be noted that one of the salt bridge residues (R736) is
not conserved in E. coli (N629). Furthermore, the
Q801A (E. coli) substitution also has little effect
on the dimerization, as its Kd value is
similar to that of wild-type SecA. This is in contrast to substitutions
of the corresponding residue (R750) in B. subtilis that cause monomerization of SecA.,,

On the basis of the results described above,
we selected additional
residues derived from the B. subtilis SecA dimer
interface (PDB entry 1M6N) according to the following criteria: (1) residues interacting with
the N-terminus (E665, F811, L815, and L818), (2) those commonly located
at interfaces (R342), (3) those creating salt bridges (K8–E665,
D640–K800, and K633–E802), and (4) residues found to
lie in several alternative interfaces (K8 and K633). Of these, we
found two residues at which alanine substitution significantly affected
SecA dimerization: K8 and E665 (Table ). Global
analysis of SecA E665A dimerization in 300 mM KCl (Figure ) yields a dimer Kd of
12.6 ± 0.3 μM, indicating that the E665A substitution induces
a 3.5-fold reduction in dimerization affinity (ΔΔG = 0.72 kcal/mol). The Q662A substitution strongly enhances
dimerization, decreasing Kd by 36-fold
(ΔΔG = −2.1 kcal/mol), although
Robetta predicts that this mutation should moderately destabilize
dimerization by ∼0.5 kcal/mol (Table S3 of the ). The locations of the
single-alanine mutations that affect SecA dimerization are indicated
in Figure .

Sedimentation velocity analysis of SecA
E665A self-association
in 300 mM KCl. Global analysis of sedimentation velocity difference
curves obtained with interference optics. The data were subtracted
in pairs to remove the time-independent noise. SecA E665A concentrations
of (A) 0.5, (B) 1, (C) 5, and (D) 10 μM. Conditions: rotor speed,
40000 rpm; temperature, 20 °C. The data were fit to a monomer–dimer
equilibrium plus incompetent tetramer model. The best-fit Kd = 12.8 ± 0.5 μM with a root-mean-square
deviation of 0.017 fringe.

Single-alanine substitution mutants. Residues selected for alanine
substitution are mapped on the E. coli SecA (PDB
entry 2VDA) structure. Residues that affect dimerization
are colored red, while those that are neutral are colored orange.
Residues 5, 6, and 8 were not resolved in this structure and are denoted
with a red circle.

Because we found that
N-terminal residues are important for dimerization,
we analyzed this region in greater detail. Some studies using deletion
constructs suggested that the N-terminus is part of the SecA dimerization
interface,,,,, whereas others
concluded the opposite., To address this issue,
we deleted residues 2–8, 2–9, and 2–10 (Δ2–8,
Δ2–9, and Δ2–10, respectively) from wild-type
SecA and examined the effects on dimerization. SecA dimerization affinity
decreases with the number of residues deleted from the N-terminus
(Table ). Deleting residues 2–8 decreased Kd by 5-fold (∼1 kcal/mol), whereas deleting
residues 2–10 decreased Kd by 27-fold
(∼1.9 kcal/mol).

Dimer Dissociation
Constants of N-Terminal
Mutants of SecA
SecA mutant	Kd (μM)	ΔG (kcal/mol)	ΔΔG (kcal/mol)	
Δ2–8	20.3 ± 1.0	–6.29 ± 0.03	1.00	
Δ2–9	17.1 ± 1.2	–6.39 ± 0.04	0.90	
Δ2–10	97.5 ± 18.7	–5.38 ± 0.11	1.91	
L2A/I3A/L5A/L6A	62.0 ± 7.0	–5.64 ± 0.07	1.65	
L2A/I3A/L5A/L6A/V9A	ND	–	–	
I3A/L5A/L6A/V9A/F10A	ND	–	–	
K4Q/K8Q	9.2 ± 0.7	–6.75 ± 0.05	0.54	
ΔG = RT ln Kd.

ΔΔG = ΔGmutant –
ΔGwild-type.

Dimerization was not detectable.

It is possible that the N-terminal
deletion mutants form a dimer
interface different from that of wild-type SecA. The E. coli structure (PDB entry 2FSF) was determined using
SecA lacking residues 2–8, whereas the SecA construct used
for the antiparallel B. subtilis structure (PDB entry 1M6N) contains residues 2–8. These differences may explain
the different interfaces observed in these structures (Figure ).

To further probe the nature of the interactions
at the N-terminus
without introducing deletions, we also generated SecA constructs containing
multiple alanine substitutions at the N-terminus. Noting that residues
2–10 (LIKLLTKVF) are mostly
hydrophobic, we created multiple alanine substitutions of the hydrophobic
residues in this region. We simultaneously substituted four (L2A/I3A/L5A/L6A)
and five (L2A/I3A/L5A/L6A/V9A and I3A/L5A/L6A/V9A/F10A) residues at
the N-terminus with alanine and analyzed SecA dimerization in 300
mM KCl. We found that dimerization affinity decreases as additional
alanine substitutions are introduced, such that with five alanine
substitutions, no dimerization occurs (Table ). If the alanine substitution and deletion mutants had the same
dimer interfaces, the dimerization of SecA Δ2–8 would
be weaker than, if not similar to, that of SecA L2A/I3A/L5A/L6A. We
observed, however, that dimerization of SecA L2A/I3A/L5A/L6A is 3-fold
weaker than that of SecA Δ2–8. This result suggests that
the dimer interfaces of these constructs may be different, assuming
that alanine substitutions at the N-terminus do not cause greater
destabilization of the dimer interaction than deletion. We also determined
the role of hydrophilic residues at the N-terminus using SecA K4Q/K8Q.
These substitutions have an impact on SecA dimerization similar to
that of K8A but have an impact smaller than that of the hydrophobic
substitutions (Table ).

Normal Mode
Analysis
To explore the possibility of
an allosteric mechanism in which SecA dimerization mediates structural
changes, we performed normal mode analysis on the monomer and dimer
in the open and closed states. Normal mode analysis is a structure-based
method for understanding how the dynamics of proteins are encoded
by the structure. For many large macromolecular
complexes, it has been shown that the displacements required for a
system to undergo a transition between states can be described by
a few normal modes.− Furthermore, it is the low-frequency modes, which are related to
the large scale, collective motions, that typically describe large
conformational changes.

Figure  shows
the projection of the normal modes onto the displacement vector describing
the structural differences between the open (PDB entry 2VDA) and closed (homology
model based upon PDB entry 1M6N) states of E. coli SecA for both
the monomer and the dimer. The structural difference between the open
and closed states for the monomer is shown in Figure B. It can be seen that the major change is related to the
separation between the PBD and HWD regions. What we can observe from
Figure A is that the open to closed transition
is more robustly described by the low-frequency modes than the closed
to open transition, indicating that the closing transition requires
less energy (lower-frequency modes) than the opening transition. When
we compare the dimer and monomer closing transitions, the dimer has
slightly larger projections, indicating the transition for the dimer
requires less energy. Interestingly, this trend is reversed for the
opening transition, wherein the monomer has larger projections (takes
less energy) than the dimer. These results point toward the energy
landscape, in the opening direction, to be steeper (i.e., deeper well)
for the dimer than for the monomer (i.e., the closed configuration
of the dimer is stabilized). In Figure C,
we focus our attention on the low-frequency end of the mode spectrum,
and the ability of these modes to change the separation between the
PBD and HWD. We observe that the dimer has a mode that couples much
more strongly to the PBD–HWD domain separation than any mode
in the monomer. That mode (mode 7) is shown as a porcupine plot in
Figure D, displaying those residues that have
the most significant displacements. The presence of this mode, which
does not appear (as a single mode) in the monomer, indicates our proposed
dimer interface is influencing the global dynamics of SecA and providing
flexibility to the PBD and HWD regions of the structure. These regions
are distal to the proposed dimer interface, and this observation is
consistent with an allosteric mechanism in which dimerization is linked
to an open to closed transition. The results from normal mode analysis
are consistent with the regions that undergo protection from HDX in
the dimer state.

Normal mode
analysis of SecA monomer and proposed dimer configurations.
(A) Normal modes are calculated for the open and closed states for
both the dimer and the monomer. The cumulative overlaps (normalized
squared dot product) of the modes onto the displacement vector are
shown for the slowest 20% of the mode spectra. λ is the eigenvalue
of each normal mode. (B) The open state (PDB entry 2VDA) is shown as a surface
representation in gray, and the modeled closed state is shown as a
red ribbon. (C) The slowest 100 modes were examined to detect their
ability to change the PBD–HWD separation distance. (D) Mode
7 from the open dimer structure is shown as a porcupine plot (mapped
onto the open monomer for the sake of clarity), where the arrow lengths
represent the relative magnitudes of displacement. The arrows on residues
with small displacements were removed to highlight the most dynamic
regions.

Discussion
In
this study, we utilized complementary experimental approaches,
HDX MS and site-directed mutagenesis with AUC, to probe the dimer
interface of SecA in solution. HDX examines the effects of dimerization
based on changes in peptide backbone solvent accessibility, with spatial
resolution limited by digestion coverage and peptide size, whereas
site-directed mutagenesis with AUC measures the energetic contributions
of individual residues to dimerization. The HDX measurements were
performed with a limited (10 s) time resolution and are, thus, insensitive
to faster processes.

The HDX MS and AUC data together indicate
that the HSD is a component
of the dimer interface. Site-directed mutagenesis with AUC shows that
residues Q662 and E665 lying at the C-terminus of the long transducer
helix in the HSD are involved in dimerization. The HDX results implicate
a larger region within the HSD, including the entire transducer helix
and the two-helix finger. The difference in the extent of HSD involvement
in the dimer interface detected by these methods may arise because
some of the interfacial residues do not provide a large energetic
contribution to dimerization. Alternatively, the transducer helix
is known to be mobile, and changes in
the accessibility of this helix upon dimerization may be communicated
to regions lying distal from the dimer interface. With the exception
of the E. coli structure (PDB entry 2FSF), each of the SecA
crystal structures includes N-terminal portions of the transducer
helix within the dimer interface (Figure ).
However, only the B. subtilis1M6N interface also encompasses
the C-terminal region of this helix identified by AUC.

The AUC
data indicate that the N-terminus contributes to the SecA
dimer interface, whereas HDX does not detect differences in this region
between the monomer and dimer states. This discrepancy is likely associated
with the flexible nature of the N-terminus. In this region, the deuterium
uptake reaches a maximum at the shortest exchange time point (10 s),
precluding detection of an interface by HDX (Figure S4 of the ), consistent with high
on and off rates for the interaction. Our data demonstrating the involvement
of the N-terminus in the SecA dimer interface disagree with three
dimer structures (PDB entries 2FSF, 1NL3, and 2IBM) that do not include the N-terminus as
part of the dimer interface. Note that these three structures were
determined using SecA deletion mutants. Specifically, the E. coli SecA (PDB entry 2FSF) structure was determined using an N-terminal
deletion mutant (residues 9–861). In contrast, the dimer interfaces
from T. thermophilus (PDB entry 2IPC) and B.
subtilis (PDB entry 1M6N) structures contain the N-terminus.

Overall,
the HDX and AUC data appear to be most consistent with
the B. subtilis SecA 1M6N antiparallel dimer arrangement. However, only five of 14 alanine substitutions
predicted to diminish dimerization affinity based on the 1M6N interface actually
reduced the level of dimerization of E. coli SecA,
despite the 50% identical sequences of these orthologs. This discrepancy
may indicate that the solution interface dimer is similar, but not
identical, to that found in the 1M6N structure, and thus, none of the crystal
structures may correspond to the interface adopted by cytoplasmic
SecA. Alternatively, it was recently reported that SecA adopts multiple
dimeric interfaces during translocation, and these may exist in equilibrium in solution. Both proposed dimer
interfaces, based on the 1M6N structure and an interface found in the M.
tuberculosis1NL3 crystal form (but different from that depicted in
Figure E), include the N-terminal region and
portions of the HSD and HWD. However, the latter interface does not
include residues Q662 and E665 that we found to affect SecA dimerization
or the N-terminal portions of the transducer helix that are protected
from HDX by dimerization. In agreement with our results, interprotomer
distances derived from fluorescence resonance energy transfer measurements
are also most consistent with the 1M6N interface.,

The
HDX data also reveal that dimerization induces movement of
the PBD into a closed conformation where it interacts with the HWD.
Normal mode analysis supports such an allosteric mechanism in which
dimerization is linked to an open to closed transition. We identified
a low-frequency mode in the dimer but not in the monomer that is coupled
to the PBD–HWD separation. Consistent with correlation of SecA
dimerization with a closing transition of the PBD, B. subtilis SecA adopts an open conformation in a monomeric crystal form (PDB
entry 1TF5), whereas closed forms are found in two dimeric
crystal forms of the same enzyme., Cryo-electron
microscopy analysis of dimeric E. coli SecA reveals
a closed state. However, this correlation
is not always observed, as a monomeric complex of Thermotoga
maritima SecA with ADP can be crystallized in a closed state and a crystal structure of dimeric E.
coli SecA (PDB entry 2FSF) reveals an open state. Crystal packing forces may influence the conformation of
the PBD. Consistent with a low barrier for this transition, solution
NMR suggests that dimeric SecA rapidly interconverts between a closed
state and a predominant open state. Förster
resonance energy transfer measurements indicate that signal peptide
binding induces dimeric SecA to adopt a more open conformation. Binding of a non-signal sequence peptide in
the groove between PBD and NBD II results in the rotation of the PBD
toward NBD II, and interaction of SecA
with SecYEG induces further movement of the PBD to close the clamp.

Our analysis can be interpreted in the
context of the closed state
model of the E. coli SecA dimer based on the 1M6N structure (Figure C). The dimer interface is primarily contributed
by the HSD and the N-terminus, two regions that lie on the same side
of the protomer. The C-terminal domain regions that form an interface
with the PBD become less dynamic upon dimerization (Figure D). However, the corresponding colored regions in
the PBD are not in close contact with the C-terminal domain. Most
of the colored residues in the PBD are also removed from the interprotomer
interface; however, a short loop does contribute to dimerization [residues
338–342 (Table S3 of the )], and a portion of the reduced HDX in the PBD may be directly associated
with dimerization. The two regions in the PBD making close contact
with the C-terminal domain, residues 263–268 (loop) and 304–314
(α helix), do not show significant ΔD% between the monomer
and dimer. The region of residues 263–268 is a flexible loop
that reaches 60% deuterium exchange at the shortest HDX time point,
10 s, and 80% at 4 h (Figure S4 of the ). In contrast, the helix in the region of residues
306–314 is rigid and shows &lt;5% deuterium exchange at the
longest HDX time point, 4 h (Figure S3 of the ). Thus, the absence of a detectable
difference in monomer and dimer HDX for these regions can be ascribed
to very fast and very slow exchange, respectively, that lie outside
the time resolution of this study.

Several studies show that
SecA is dimeric when driving translocation
of preprotein across SecYEG,,,,,, whereas others report that the functional
form of SecA is monomeric.,, Regions within the PBD and C-domain of SecA interact with the C-terminal
region of SecY. When SecA binds to SecYEG,
the PBD moves away from the HWD and closer to NBD II. The B. subtilis (PDB entry 1M6N) dimer interface
supported by the data presented here does not overlap with the SecA–SecYEG
interface, so that the intact dimer could interact with SecYEG. Interaction
with SecYEG and subsequent ATP hydrolysis may induce SecA dimer dissociation
during the translocation cycle., In this context, the
movement of the PBD to an open conformation upon SecA dimer dissociation
may facilitate transfer of the preprotein to the SecY pore.

Conclusions
Our data indicate that the SecA dimer interface encompasses portions
of the helical scaffold domain, including the long transducer helix,
and the N-terminus. These results agree most closely with the dimer
interface observed in the 1M6N crystal structure of B. subtilis SecA. Additional regions are protected from HDX upon
dimerization because of the closure of the PBD–HWD groove.
Normal mode analysis supports an allosteric mechanism in which dimerization
is linked to an open to closed transition.

Supporting Information Available
Peptide coverage map for pepsin
digestion and fungal XIII digestion (Figure S1), dynamics of the SecA
monomer (Figure S2), HDX kinetics of SecA peptic peptides (Figure
S3), HDX kinetics of SecA fungal peptides (Figure S4), and sedimentation
velocity analysis of SecA Q662A self-association in 300 mM KCl (Figure
S5). This material is available free of charge via the Internet at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bi500348p_si_001.pdf

Author Contributions
A.J.W. and
Y.Y. contributed equally to this work.

The National
Institute of General Medical Sciences supported the preparation of
SecA and the AUC measurements (GM037639 to D.A.K.) and HDX MS experiments
(8 P41 GM103422-36 to M.L.G.).

The authors declare no
competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
We thank Ping Zhao for generating some of the SecA mutants.

Abbreviations
AUCanalytical ultracentrifugation

CTLC-terminal linker

HDXhydrogen/deuterium
exchange

HSDhelical
scaffold domain

HWDhelical wing domain

MSmass spectrometry

NBDnucleotide binding domain

NMAnormal mode analysis

PBDpreprotein binding domain

PDBProtein Data Bank.

