More than
two decades ago, the
discovery that certain polyketide natural products are synthesized
by enzymatic assembly lines laid the foundation for a fundamentally
new chapter in understanding antibiotic biosynthesis. Since the cloning
of the genes encoding the 6-deoxyerythronolide B synthase, [DEBS (Figure )], there has been explosive
growth in the pace of discovery of assembly line polyketide synthases.
According to a recent estimate, the NCBI database now includes sequences
of ∼1000 assembly line polyketide synthases, the vast majority
of which are “orphans” that synthesize products of as
yet unknown structure. Whereas most of
these synthases are encoded within the genomes of soil bacteria, they
can also be found in eukaryotes such as protozoa and nematodes.

Assembly line
organization of the 6-deoxyerythronolide B synthase
(DEBS). (A) DEBS is an ∼2 MDa α2β2γ2 protein assembly that harbors six elongation
modules (modules 1–6) flanked by a loading didomain (LD) and
a thioesterase (TE). It catalyzes the conversion of 1 equiv of propionyl-CoA
and 6 equiv of (2S)-methylmalonyl-CoA into 6-deoxyerythronolide
B, using 6 equiv of NADPH as a cofactor. Each module harbors the necessary
enzymatic activity for one round of chain elongation and associated
modifications of the growing polyketide chain. The reaction intermediates
shown attached to the ACP domain of each module correspond to the
final products of each of the respective modules. (B) Module 3 is
a representative catalytic module within the DEBS assembly line. Its
active sites are shown, as is the overall transformation catalyzed
by this set of active sites. ACP is the acyl carrier protein, AT acyltransferase,
KS ketosynthase, and KR0 a ketoreductase homologue that
lacks NADPH-dependent reductase activity but retains epimerase activity.

Two fundamental features of assembly
line polyketide synthases
have motivated an interest in these unusual multienzyme systems for
more than 25 years. First, assembly line polyketide synthases are
able to program the construction of exceptionally intricate stereochemical
patterns on the carbon chain backbones of their products. For example,
the macrolide aglycone product of DEBS, 6-deoxyerythronolide B, with
10 stereogenic centers, is generated with striking stereospecificity
as only one of 1024 theoretically possible diastereomers. Second,
the multimodular architecture of polyketide synthases must allow the
precise vectorial channeling of each biosynthetic intermediate with
concomitant control of intermediate trafficking and reagent flux.
In the vast majority of cases, the product of an assembly line polyketide
synthase results from a uniquely defined catalytic cycle in which
the active site of each catalytic component operates once and only
once on each growing polyketide chain.

Our goal in this review
is not simply to review the present-day
state of knowledge of the control of reaction stereospecificity and
vectorial processing in assembly line synthases. More importantly,
we wish to propose testable structural and dynamic hypotheses based
on the insights that have already been gained that might lead to general
models of polyketide synthase structure and function, with the further
possibility of allowing their rational and efficient engineering.
We start with a brief overview of DEBS structure and then discuss
stereochemical control and vectorial processing separately.

Structure
and Catalytic Chemistry of DEBS, the Prototypical
Assembly Line Polyketide Synthase
A fundamental understanding
of the operation and specificity of
any assembly line must be built upon knowledge of its structure. As
shown in Figure A, DEBS is composed of six
multifunctional protein modules, each of which is responsible for
a single round of polyketide chain elongation and functional group
modification. Each module is in turn composed of specific combinations
of catalytic domains that catalyze the individual biochemical steps
of chain elongation and processing. The domain organization of module
3 of DEBS is shown in Figure B, as is the
acyl carrier protein (ACP) domain from the upstream module that supplies
module 3 with its substrate and the ketosynthase (KS) domain from
the downstream module that receives its product. By now, the atomic
structures of one or more prototypical members of every domain family
found within DEBS have been determined (Figure ).− In addition to providing snapshots of the components of the biosynthetic
assembly line, these structures also allow deeper analysis of the
catalytic chemistry mediated by each domain.

Ribbon diagram representations
of atomic structures of prototypical
domains and didomains from assembly line polyketide synthases. In
figures showing KR and ER domains, the bound NADPH cofactor is also
shown. All structures were derived from components of DEBS itself,
with the exception of the ER-KR didomain obtained from the spinosyn
synthase. For details, see refs (−).

While the representative structures
of all the component domains
have now been established, there are still major gaps in our knowledge
of polyketide synthase structural biology. At the most basic level,
the three-dimensional relationships among the individual domains and
modules of an assembly line polyketide synthase remain largely unknown.
The few available X-ray structures of multidomain fragments, exemplified
by the ketosynthase–acyltransferase and ketoreductase–enoylreductase
fragments shown in Figure , highlight the
importance of elaborate domain–domain interactions, thus belying
an overly simplistic image of these protein assembly lines as merely
enzymatic “beads on a string”, in which the individual
beads represent autonomously folded and independently functioning
domains that dynamically self-assemble to support polyketide chain
growth and modification. Although some insight into the possible quaternary
architectures of the six elongation modules of DEBS can be derived
from the crystal structure of the homologous vertebrate fatty acid
synthase, such models must be regarded
with caution in light of the considerable evolutionary distance between
the biochemically distinct polyketide and fatty acid synthase systems.
Even once the three-dimensional organization of a single polyketide
synthase module is resolved, there is still no experimentally based
structural prototype for a bimodular not to mention a multimodular
polyketide synthase. Thus, the relative spatial dispositions of adjacent
DEBS modules cannot yet be predicted with any confidence. As a first
step in addressing these critical gaps in our knowledge, we have analyzed
a systematic series of (smaller) structurally characterized and (larger)
uncharacterized DEBS fragments using small-angle X-ray scattering
(SAXS). These inherently low-resolution
SAXS data have nonetheless already revealed molecular envelopes of
intact modules and bimodules under conditions in which each protein
is assuredly active. Other methods such as cryoelectron microscopy
may also be applied to this problem, while X-ray crystallography remains
the only tool capable of yielding satisfactory atomic-level insights.

Moving beyond the study of static protein structures, however complex,
we find a second major structural challenge involves the development
of a comprehensive description of the dynamics of an assembly line
polyketide synthase as it conducts its unidirectional, multistep catalytic
task. Even once there are complete atomic-resolution crystallographic
snapshots of the entire DEBS protein, complementary approaches will
be essential to visualize and understand the biosynthetically relevant
conformational dynamics of this complex biochemical machine. At a
minimum, it is already evident that each of the acyl carrier protein
(ACP) domains must undergo large translational, rotational, and conformational
changes in conjunction with the numerous successive chain elongation,
modification, and translocation events (Figure ). For example, each ACP domain within a homodimeric module of DEBS
must interact with one ketosynthase and one acyltransferase domain
during the course of polyketide chain elongation; the active sites
of these paired catalytic domains are located ∼80 Å from
each other on an evidently rigid protein scaffold based on a network
of relatively conserved interdomain interactions. This same ACP must also then interact with the ketoreductase
domain during subsequent α-methyl epimerization and/or β-carbonyl
reduction of the tethered polyketide chain elongation substrate and
finally be able to interact specifically with the appropriate ketosynthase
domain of the immediately downstream module to facilitate high-fidelity
intermodular chain translocation. Virtually nothing is known about
how these dynamics are mediated by the assembly line polyketide synthase
or even by the programmatically much simpler vertebrate fatty acid
synthase. It is conceivable that the “DEBS movie” might
involve highly coordinated motions within as well as between modules,
akin to the movement of robotic arms along multiple way stations of
an automobile assembly line! While X-ray crystallography could in
principle yield critical snapshots of this versatile assembly line,
a definitive view of this movie will undoubtedly require a combination
of new kinetic, spectroscopic, and computational tools to understand
the workings of this remarkable biosynthetic machinery, representing
one of the most exciting frontiers in 21st Century enzymology.

Individual
reactions in the catalytic cycle of DEBS module 3. Each
module of DEBS catalyzes a set of reactions that can be categorized
as follows: (1) intermodular chain translocation involving transthioesterification
from the ACP domain of the upstream module to the KS domain of the
target module, (2) transfer of an acyl group from an α-carboxyacyl-CoA
extender unit to the ACP domain of the target module, (3) chain elongation
involving decarboxylative condensation of the growing polyketide chain
onto the extender unit, (4) modification of the newly elongated chain
at the α- and β-carbon atoms, and (5) intermodular chain
translocation involving transthioesterification from the ACP domain
of the target module to the KS domain of the downstream module. In
the case of the representative DEBS module 3 shown here, chain modification
simply involves epimerization of the α-carbon, a reaction that
is catalyzed by KR0. Note that the three proposed states
of the ketosynthase are highlighted as KS, KS*, and KS**. For details,
see the text.

Stereochemical Programming
of the Product Structure
The specific reaction stereochemistry
has now been determined for
essentially every DEBS catalytic domain. Each module is known to catalyze
decarboxylative condensation of (2S)-methylmalonyl-ACP
and the incipient polyketide chain with net inversion of configuration
at the methyl-bearing carbon to generate the corresponding (2R)-2-methyl-3-ketoacyl-ACP chain elongation intermediate
(Figure , elongation step). This intermediate can then be epimerized and reduced (as
occurs in DEBS module 1), reduced without epimerization (as by DEBS
modules 2, 5, and 6), or epimerized without reduction (DEBS module
3).

There are 10 stereogenic centers in the final 6-deoxyerythronolide
B product. The stereochemistry of nine of these centers is directly
set by ketoreductase domains. These domains can catalyze 2-methyl
epimerization and/or diastereospecific reduction of their (2R)-2-methyl-3-ketoacyl-ACP substrates.− Notably, reductively
inactive ketoreductase domains, such as that found in module 3 of
DEBS (Figure ), harbor an intrinsic epimerase
activity, giving rise to the (8S)-methyl-9-keto segment
of the eventual polyketide product, 6-deoxyerythronolide B (A. Garg,
X. Xie, A. T. Keatinge-Clay, C. Khosla, and D. E. Cane, submitted
for publication). For cases in which both reduction and epimerization
take place, epimerization occurs immediately after ketosynthase-catalyzed
C–C bond formation and precedes β-ketoreduction., The only stereocenter not set directly by a ketoreductase, corresponding
to the (6S)-methyl of 6-deoxyerythronolide B, is
established by the sequential action (Figure ) of three enzymatic domains of DEBS module 4, reduction by ketoreductase,
followed by syn dehydration of the resulting β-hydroxy
intermediate by a dehydratase, and finally
reduction of the resulting trans-trisubstituted double
bond by an enoylreductase. Each enzymatic
domain in DEBS exercises complete control of substrate and reaction
stereospecificity to ensure the formation of a unique product of each
catalytic cycle, before translocation of the transiently formed polyketide
intermediate to the next module in the synthase.

Transformations
catalyzed by module 4 of DEBS. Postelongation chain
modification reactions include (3) ketoreduction, (4) dehydration,
and (5) enoyl reduction.

Although the stereochemistry of the reactions catalyzed by
essentially
all of the constituent domains of DEBS has now been determined, fundamental
gaps in our understanding of the protein structural basis for this
exquisite stereochemical control remain. For example, it has been
recognized that the observed stereospecificity of ketoreductase domains
correlates with the presence or absence of certain conserved sequence
motifs., These structural features are thought to
be somehow involved in directing the ACP-tethered substrate into the
ketoreductase active site in a single orientation. While such models, in principle, can be tested via structure-based
protein engineering, the extent to which ketoreductases (or, for that
matter, any enzymatic domain of an assembly line polyketide synthase)
can be mutagenized without the loss of stereochemical control remains
unknown. Further understanding will require structures of ketoreductase
domains bound to actual substrates or close analogues. Although the
precise origin or sequence of the ACP domain does not seem to significantly
influence either the observed ketoreductase-catalyzed reaction rate
or stereospecificity, it appears that the polyketide substrate must
be covalently tethered to an ACP domain to ensure the intrinsically
high level of stereochemical control.,, Thus, it will be critical to overcome the significant
challenges to obtaining crystal structures of noncovalent complexes
of ketoreductase domains with ACP-bound substrates to understand the
essential protein–protein and protein–substrate interactions
that contribute to ketoreductase specificity.

Vectorial Channeling of
Biosynthetic Intermediates
What mechanisms does nature use
to ensure that an assembly line
polyketide synthase invariably catalyzes precisely the same sequence
of chemical transformations with control of product structure and
stereochemistry? An understanding of the kinetic, thermodynamic, catalytic,
and structural principles that govern the operation of these complex
biosynthetic assembly lines will have profound implications. On the
bioinformatic level, such knowledge would allow decoding of the vast
and rapidly growing spectrum of orphan assembly line synthases recorded
in the sequence databases, many of which can be presumed to control
the biosynthesis of hitherto undiscovered antibiotics in their bacterial
or eukaryotic host. Moreover, from the synthetic biology perspective,
such conceptual advances might make possible the effective recombination
of naturally occurring polyketide synthase modules for the achievement
of the longstanding goal of engineering assembly lines that selectively
synthesize virtually any imaginable polyketide product.

Polyketide
biosynthesis by an enzymatic assembly line is intrinsically
a vectorial process, in which each module catalyzes a defined set
of reactions before passing its product to a unique downstream module.
The demands on this biosynthetic system are highlighted by the fact
that each module must conduct a set of biochemical reactions that
are superficially similar to those of other modules but in detail
completely distinct, in which there is likely a highly coordinated
flow of incoming chain elongation substrates and outgoing chain elongation
products passing through successive modules. More than 30 years ago,
William P. Jencks articulated an elegant theoretical framework for
understanding coupled vectorial processes in biology. Jencks presented “rules” needed to provide
efficient coupling of chemical reactions to work, as in motor protein
function or the pumping of ions against a gradient. The same principles
formulated by Jencks to differentiate coupled vectorial processes
from the more common reversible enzyme-catalyzed metabolic pathways
may in fact provide a conceptual thermodynamic and kinetic framework
for understanding vectorial channeling of biosynthetic intermediates
along assembly line polyketide synthases. Of greatest interest is
the argument that enzymes catalyzing coupled vectorial processes must
undergo large changes in substrate specificity associated with different
conformational states.

As summarized in Figure , we have now extended
the original analysis of Jencks to propose a simple model that can
explain assembly line polyketide biosynthesis as a coupled, three-dimensional
vectorial process. Our model, which relates the conformational state
of a module to the substrate specificity of its ketosynthase domain,
is based on the following rules.

(1) During the catalytic cycle
controlled by each polyketide synthase
module, the ketosynthase domain can assume three distinct conformational
states, depicted as KS, KS*, and KS**. (This model is conceptually
analogous to the well-known three-state model for the FoF1 ATP synthase,, although the specific
chemistry of each system is completely different.) In the vectorial
model for polyketide biosynthesis, each ketosynthase state would exhibit
distinct specificity for ACP domains. Thus, KS** has high specificity
for the ACP from the same module, whereas KS* prefers the ACP domain
of the upstream module. The KS state lacks affinity for either ACP.

(2) KS State. Only when a module is in the KS
state can its unoccupied ACP domain undergo acyltransferase-catalyzed
loading of its characteristic (methyl)malonyl extender unit. When
the module is in the KS state, the ACP-bound polyketide chain is also
accessible to the individual ketoreductase, dehydratase, and/or enoylreductase
domains as well as to the ketosynthase domain of the downstream module.

(3) KS* State. In the KS* state, both the ketosynthase
and the ACP domain of the module must be unoccupied. In this state,
the ketosynthase is receptive to intermodular chain translocation
from the ACP of the proximal upstream module, while acylation of the
intramodular ACP by the extender unit is precluded.

(4) KS** State. In the KS** state, the ketosynthase
catalyzes decarboxylative chain elongation. In this state, the growing
polyketide chain is covalently bound to the ketosynthase, and the
extender unit is tethered to the ACP.

The model described above,
which tacitly acknowledges the important
role of domain–domain interactions in allowing vectorial polyketide
biosynthesis, is consistent with several experimental observations.
For example, intermodular docking domains (Figure ), which buttress ketosynthase-ACP recognition during chain
translocation,, can be regarded as recognition
motifs whose engagement contributes to the KS* state. Similarly, the
ketosynthase has been shown to recognize its upstream ACP partner
during chain translocation through interactions (Figure , translocation steps) that are distinct from those implicated
in intramodular chain elongation with its paired ACP (Figure , elongation step),, consistent
with the operation of distinct KS* and KS** states, respectively.
Although there has been no direct experimental evidence to support
the postulated existence of the additional KS* state (which we believe
to be the more transient of the two states in which the ketosynthase
binds to the ACP), the proposed KS** state is supported by nuclear
magnetic resonance detection of specific ketosynthase–ACP interactions
that can be observed only when substrates or substrate mimics are
covalently tethered to both the ACP and the ketosynthase. According to this three-state model, vectorial
chain translocation from an ACP to a ketosynthase can occur only if
the recipient domain is in the KS* state (Figure ). Because this KS* state requires that both the ketosynthase
and the intramodular paired ACP be unoccupied (rule 3 above), the
thermodynamically competitive “back-transfer” reaction
of the growing polyketide chain by transthioesterification to the
ketosynthase within the same module is precluded. (By contrast, such
back-transfer is essential for the operation of a vertebrate fatty
acid synthase, in which a single module with the full set of elongation
and modification domains must iteratively catalyze repetitive rounds
of chain elongation and chain reduction to synthesize the full-length
saturated fatty acid product.) It therefore follows that if a mutation
were to markedly shift the equilibrium toward the KS* state, it might
allow the occupancy of this state even when the polyketide is tethered
to the ACP from the same module. Such a mutation would allow back-transfer
of the growing chain. Indeed, we recently engineered an ACP domain
that was predicted to enhance the affinity of these two domains, based
upon our understanding of ketosynthase–ACP recognition principles.
This mutation resulted in significant levels of back-transfer in contrast
to that of the wild-type system, for which the level of back-transfer
was not appreciable.

Parenthetically,
we note that although the model described above
is based on conformational changes that occur in the ketosynthase
domain, the ACP domain could also undergo additional (perhaps complementary)
changes, as suggested for the case of nonribosomal peptides by Marahiel
and co-workers.

There are several
experimental approaches that can test and further
refine the model for vectorial assembly line polyketide biosynthesis
described above. For example, the main difference between an assembly
line polyketide synthase and its iterative counterparts should lie
in the decarboxylative condensation step. Specifically, we hypothesize
that the KS** state harnesses the energy derived from this thermodynamically
favorable reaction, coupling it to a conformational exchange that
results in the expulsion of the ACP-tethered elongation product from
the ketosynthase. By contrast, in an iterative polyketide synthase,
the growing polyketide chain is most likely partially retained at
all times in the ketosynthase binding pocket. Tight association would
favor back-transfer via ACP–ketosynthase thioester exchange
before the ACP dissociates from the ketosynthase, thereby initiating
another round of chain elongation catalyzed by the same module. Indeed,
experiments with the actinorhodin polyketide synthase have established
that the growing polyketide chain undergoes back-translocation prior
to dissociation of the ACP from the ketosynthase. Although it is conceivable that the newly elongated chain
must leave the ketosynthase active site along with the ACP prior to
reactions involving the ketoreductase, dehydratase, and/or enoylreductase
domains, to the best of our knowledge, this point has never been rigorously
tested for any “reducing” iterative polyketide synthase
or even for a fatty acid synthase under conditions of chain turnover.
Experiments involving suitably labeled precursors and ketosynthases
could resolve this issue. It must be re-emphasized that an appropriate
test of this hypothesis requires robust turnover conditions because,
as Jencks pointed out so elegantly, enzyme states that are well populated
in a coupled vectorial process may not be evident under conditions
that are restricted to only isolated, partial reactions.

Because DEBS has recently been fully reconstituted
under conditions
that support robust turnover, it should
now be possible to test the vectorial model critically using this
prototypical assembly line polyketide synthase. For example, the vectorial
model requires that, under turnover conditions, no ketosynthase–ACP
pair from the same module be simultaneously occupied by two growing
polyketide chains. Similarly, the model also predicts that ketosynthase
acylation by the incoming polyketide chain will ordinarily precede
acylation of the ACP by a cognate methylmalonyl or malonyl extender
unit. In principle, further experiments can be designed to verify
quantitatively or refute both predictions. For example, a numerical
estimate of the fractions of each DEBS module that are occupied by
zero, one, or two polyketide chains under steady-state turnover conditions,
or the fraction of each DEBS module that has an unoccupied ketosynthase
but an extender unit bound to its ACP, should allow a statistically
rigorous assessment of this coupled vectorial process. Experiments
of this nature have been performed with the first two modules of the
yersiniabactin synthetase, the first
module of DEBS, and an iterative polyketide
synthase and could, in principle, be
extended to the entire DEBS assembly line.

Most intriguingly
from a biological perspective, the mechanistic
model for assembly line polyketide synthase function leads to a provocative
prediction about the evolution of these remarkable biosynthetic machines.
Comparison of the sequences of numerous assembly line polyketide synthases
has already suggested that these multimodular systems arose by multiple
gene duplication events. Dissimilar systems
like DEBS and the rifamycin polyketide synthase would therefore presumably
have each evolved through duplications of distinct ancestral modules.
If that were indeed the case, then the requirements of the vectorial
model suggest that these ancestral modules must already have evolved
the salient characteristics summarized in Figure . A primordial assembly line polyketide synthase would thus
have been fashioned from two or more copies of a homodimeric protein
that associated in an ACP → ketosynthase dovetailed manner
and to satisfy the set of vectorial rules that we have outlined. If
that were the case, then the breathtaking diversity of Nature’s
polyketide assembly lines would suggest that such proto-modules may
well still exist in modern-day genomes and might themselves be subject
to induced duplication, recombination, and mutation to evolve new
biosynthetic assembly lines under appropriate selective pressures.
We look forward to future reports that might identify, analyze, and
engineer such proto-modules.

Assembly Line Biosynthesis of Nonribosomal
Peptides and Hybrid
Molecules
Many antibiotics, such as the antitumor agent epothilone
and the
immunosuppressant rapamycin, are of mixed polyketide–nonribosomal
peptide origin. The responsible hybrid assembly lines include polyketide
synthase modules interspersed with nonribosomal peptide synthetase
modules, which can therefore harbor both nonribosomal peptide synthetase
→ polyketide synthase as well as polyketide synthase →
nonribosomal peptide synthetase junctions (Figure ). These two types of junctions pose different challenges
and constraints for chain elongation and translocation and raise analogous
questions regarding assembly line mechanisms in nonribosomal peptide
synthetases and hybrid systems.

Key reactions catalyzed by the first three
modules of the hybrid
assembly line responsible for epothilone biosynthesis. The first three
modules of this synthetase comprise a polyketide synthase (PKS) module
(light green), followed by a nonribosomal peptide synthetase (NRPS)
module (yellow), followed by another PKS module (dark green). The
first module harbors a KS0 domain that catalyzes the decarboxylation
of malonyl-ACP, yielding acetyl-ACP. (This reaction is not explicitly
shown.) The condensation (C) domain of the second module then catalyzes
condensation between acetyl-ACP on module 1 and cysteinyl-PCP on module
2; this reaction is accompanied by concomitant translocation of the
growing chain from the PKS to the NRPS module. The NRPS module also
catalyzes chain modification via cyclization (Cy) and oxidation (Ox),
yielding a PCP-bound thiazole moiety. This intermediate then undergoes
translocation onto the KS domain of the downstream PKS module in a
manner that is entirely analogous to the downstream translocation
event shown in Figure .

Analogous to polyketide synthases, nonribosomal peptide synthetase
modules also have carrier protein domains with phosphopantetheine
prosthetic groups and use tethered acyl thioester intermediates. The
incoming monomer is attached as an aminoacyl thioester, and the growing
chain exists as a peptidyl thioester. The key difference is that the
condensing enzyme domains of nonribosomal peptide synthetase modules
lack a Cys active site onto which the peptide is transiently translocated.
Thus, both the monomeric extender unit and the growing peptide chain
are bound to peptidyl carrier (PCP) domains at all times.

At
nonribosomal peptide synthetase → polyketide synthase
junctions [e.g., between modules 2 and 3 of the epothilone synthetase
(Figure )], chain elongation is catalyzed
by a ketosynthase, which presumably undergoes equivalent conformational
transitions to those described in the legend of Figure . In contrast, at polyketide synthase → nonribosomal
peptide synthetase junctions [e.g., between modules 1 and 2 of the
epothilone synthetase (Figure )], the attacking
nucleophile (which is now the primary amine of an aminoacyl-S-PCP)
and its electrophilic partner (i.e., the polyketidyl-S-ACP intermediate)
are ligated while being attached to separate modules. The condensation
domain must therefore harbor orthogonal registers for these two substrates
to catalyze amide bond formation. Indeed, structural analysis has
provided clear evidence of such a bisubstrate binding pocket. However, it remains unknown whether geometric
considerations alone preclude the back-transfer of intermediates from
the downstream to the upstream PCP, or if condensation domains also
have conformationally driven differential-state recognition of acylated
(aminoacyl and peptidyl) and unoccupied PCP domains. The latter case,
for which some evidence is already beginning to emerge, would require formulation of a new set of rules
to relate these conformational states to domain specificity. A particularly
relevant recent precedent has been identified in ubiquitin thioester
transfer, in which elaborate conformational changes are observed as
ubiquitin is transferred from the E1 enzyme to the E2 enzyme.

Conclusion
Since the discovery of
polyketide biosynthetic assembly lines,
these modular megasynthases have attracted considerable scientific
and engineering interest. In this review, we have summarized the state
of knowledge regarding two of their most interesting features, their
stereospecificity and their capacity for directional biosynthesis.
With the recent identification of individual catalytic domains that
control stereochemistry, the former problem has been reduced to a
challenge in mainstream enzymology. In contrast, the phenomenon of
vectorial biosynthesis is more appropriately considered a systems-level
phenomenon for which testable mechanistic hypotheses are only just
beginning to emerge. The problem will require substantially deeper
insights into the architecture, dynamics, and coupling of polyketide
assembly lines. We believe that the formalism developed more than
three decades ago by William Jencks offers a particularly powerful
conceptual framework for visualizing and analyzing this extraordinarily
successful evolutionary strategy for complex molecule biosynthesis. In that spirit, we have provided some initial
questions and models framed from this perspective and look forward
to vigorous discussions in the literature and incisive experiments
to further our understanding of the fundamental operational rules
for these fascinating enzyme machines.

The authors declare no
competing financial interest.

