Our interest
in the relative
thermodynamic energetics of competing secondary structures has led
us to examine the relative energies and enthalpies of various secondary
structures and the relative effects of single-amino acid mutations
in models of these secondary structures based upon peptide structures
made from all Ala residues. We have already published a study of the
effects of such mutations to nonpolar residues in α-helices. We continue to work on a more general paper that
will appear elsewhere. In the course of this work, we noticed an unusual
effect of mutations of Ala to Pro in parallel β-sheets. Most
amyloids, including the amyloid of the protein tau (which is implicated
in Alzheimer’s disease), form parallel in-register β-sheets,− although exceptions are known., As this mutation might
have significant use in arresting parallel β-sheet growth, the
potential for control of amyloid formation seems obvious. This result
surprised us as all other mutations of Ala to Pro in various β-sheets
and α-helices substantially destabilized these structures. This
has convinced us to publish this short account. When finished, we
intend to report our general studies of the effects of amino acid
mutations in different secondary structures elsewhere.

We describe
ONIOM and density functional theory (DFT) calculations
on the mutations of several specific Ala’s to Pro’s
in β-sheets containing five strands of acetyl(Ala)6NH2. We have included both parallel (P) and antiparallel
(AP) structures for comparison.

Methods
We used
the ONIOM, method as programmed in the Gaussian09 suite of computer programs. ONIOM divides the
system into up to three segments that can be treated at different
levels of calculational complexity. Thus, one can treat the essential
part of the system at the high level, while the less critical parts
of the system might be calculated at the medium or low level. For
this study, we used only two levels (high and medium). We treated
the backbones of the peptides (equivalent to a corresponding peptide
containing only glycines) at the high level, with only the methyl
side chains that distinguish the Ala residues from that of glycine
and the acetyl methyl being treated at the medium level. The high
level used hybrid DFT methods at the B3LYP/D95(d,p) level. This method
combines Becke’s three-parameter functional with the nonlocal correlation provided by the correlation
functional of Lee, Yang, and Parr. In
the ONIOM method, there are unsatisfied valences in the high level
at the interface between it and the medium level. These valences were
satisfied by using the default method of capping them with a hydrogen
atom in the direction of the connecting atom in the medium level with
a C–H distance of 0.723886 times the C–C distance. We
used the AM1 semiempirical molecular
orbital method for the ONIOM medium level. We have shown B3LYP to
be preferable to several functionals specifically parametrized to
treat diffusion for calculations on peptides, as the functionals that
specifically treat dispersion overestimate the interaction energies
in α-helices and predict incorrect geometries in β-sheets. Dispersion interactions weaken in the presence
of induction. Also, dispersion interactions
do not appear to be important for most H-bonds, as illustrated by
the fact that the dispersion-corrected functionals give results similar
to those of B3LYP for H-bonds− but overestimate π-stacking
interactions.−

All geometries were completely optimized in
all internal degrees
of freedom and vibrational calculations performed to ensure the geometries
are true minima on the potential energy surfaces (PESs), as there
are no imaginary vibrational frequencies, for both the single extended
strands and β-sheets containing four or five strands. We also
used the vibrational frequencies to calculate the enthalpies at 298
K.

In a previous study of five 17-amino acid peptides, we found little difference in relative energies
between this procedure and another in which the side chains (in this
case, the methyls) were subsequently optimized using DFT, with the
(previously optimized) peptide chain held fixed. The current procedure
also gave relative energies that agreed well with complete DFT optimizations
for a series of five small 310-helical peptides. We have used this procedure with success for
several previous studies of peptide structures,− and have shown it to compare favorably with other functional/basis
set combinations for calculations in the gas phase water dimer.

The counterpoise correction (CP) for the
basis set superposition
error (BSSE) has been applied to all interaction energies and enthalpies
using the single-point a posteriori procedure,− as optimization of such large
structures on a CP-corrected surface would
have been too computationally intensive and the ONIOM and CP optimization
cannot be performed simultaneously using the Gaussian09 program. Balabin
has recently emphasized the importance of BSSE correction for biochemical
and other calculations.,

Because the model
for these calculations is solid state (the amyloids
are not soluble), no solvation energies have been calculated.

Results
Proline is the only naturally occurring amino acid that lacks an
N–H bond. This restricts Pro residues to forming H-bonds only
using their C=O groups as H-bond acceptors, which contributes
(along with the lack of conformational mobility caused by the five-membered
ring) to the disruptive influence of Pro residues on α-helical
and β-sheet secondary structures. However, we have determined
that one type of parallel β-sheet structure in which the Pro
residue is not disruptive exists. In this structure, illustrated by
a sheet containing four acetyl(Ala)6NH2 strands
capped at the edge with a similar strand with one Ala mutated to Pro,
where the latter uses its C=O acceptor to H-bond (see Figure ), its N faces away from the rest of the sheet that
does not disrupt the H-bonding of this strand to the rest of the sheet.
However, the lack of a donor N–H group on this (terminal strand)
will inhibit further sheet growth by another acetyl(Ala)6NH2 strand. To illustrate this, we have capped the [acetyl(Ala)6NH2]4 sheet with either acetyl(Ala)2Pro(Ala)3NH2 (AAPAAA), which can form
seven H-bonds, or acetyl(Ala)3Pro(Ala)2NH2 (AAAPAA), which can form only six H-bonds (see Figures  and ).

Structure of (AAAAAA)5 capped with AAPAAA. The backbones
are shown as tubes and the methyls (calculated at the medium level)
as a wire frame, and the Pro and its H-bonding partner are highlighted
in ball and stick format. Note that all seven H-bonds between the
AAPAAA and the rest of the sheet remain intact.

Structure of (AAAAAA)5 capped with AAAPAA. The backbones
are shown as tubes and the methyls (calculated at the medium level)
as a wire frame, and the Pro and its actual and putative H-bonding
partners are highlighted in ball and stick format. Note that one H-bond
between AAAPAA and the remainder of the sheet is lost.

We have calculated the isomeric structures that
have the Pro on
the other position on the edge strand (where it forms no H-bond) and
another with the Pro-containing strand in the middle of the sheet
(see Figure ). The last structure is equivalent
to that obtained by moving two all Ala strands from one edge and adding
them to the edge with the Pro-containing strand. This costs ∼9
kcal/mol, which would be much more than enough to prevent additional
all Ala strands from attaching to the edge containing a Pro.

Structure of
(AAAAAA)4 with AAAPAA inserted in the middle.
The backbones are shown as tubes and the methyls (calculated at the
medium level) as a wire frame, and the Pro and its actual and putative
H-bonding partners are highlighted in ball and stick format. Note
that a H-bond is lost on one side of the AAAPAA.

Discussion
Because peptides containing a Pro can bind to
parallel polyalanine
β-sheets as well as (or slightly better than) an Ala, placing
one or more Pro’s might be useful as a design feature for peptides
to be used as anti-amyloid medications. While the computed preference
for binding of the strand containing Pro might be slight, the impediment
to further binding by other strands is quite large. If more than one
Pro is to be used, they must be spaced so that each one can form a
H-bond to the sheet, requiring that all the Pro’s used be on
the even- or odd-numbered positions of that region of the peptide
meant to cap the amyloid. While this study does not represent a useful
capping agent in itself, we have demonstrated a principle that could
be combined in peptides with other residues that enhance selective
binding to the amyloid in question. For example, because Gln (Q) has
been shown to be important to the formation of many amyloids, Pro
might be used in conjunction with Q as part of such designs. We also
note that Eisenberg has identified other peptide-based inhibitors
of amyloid fibrils, and that we are evaluating other
possibilities that will be described elsewhere. The data in Table  indicate the slight binding preference of the AAPAAA
strand to be due to the lower distortion energies of both the strand
and the four-stranded sheet. In fact, the ΔEHB’s show that the AAAAA strand binds with a slightly
more favorable interaction. Thus, we attribute the added stabilization
to the relative rigidity of the Pro-containing strand that keeps it
in a conformation energetically closer to that it attains when in
the sheet.

Comparison of the Energetics for Adding
an AAPAAA or AAAPAA Cap versus an AAAAA Cap to a Four-Stranded Parallel
β-Sheet of AAAAA
cap	ΔHint	relative ΔHint	ΔEHB	Edist(total)	Edist(cap)	Edist(sheet)	
Residue 3 at the
High Level	
AAPAAA	–26.5	–1.4	–43.5	13.0	6.7	6.3	
Residue 4 at the
High Level	
AAAPAA	–21.9	3.0	–38.8	13.2	7.1	6.1	
Residue 3 or 4
at the High Level	
AAAAAA	–25.1	0	–45.0	15.5	9.0	6.5	
The ΔHint is decomposed into ΔEHB, the energy of the H-bonds calculated by breaking those
between
the cap and the four-stranded sheet keeping both in their optimized
capped (five-stranded) sheet geometry, and Edist(total), which is the sum of Edist(cap) and Edist(sheet), which represent
the energies required to distort the relaxed strand and four-stranded
sheet, respectively, to the geometry taken in the capped sheet. As
noted in the text, the Pro and the specific Ala it replaces (in position
3 or 4) have been calculated at the high (DFT) level.

We should also note that a parallel
β-sheet of acetyl(Ala)6NH2 can be considered
as a linear crystal with
a repeating unit of acetyl(Ala)6NH2 (in contrast
to antiparallel β-sheets that have a repeat unit of two strands). As such, another peptide strand can bind to
either edge to increase the crystal length. In this paper, we have
considered the binding at only one of the edges. AAPAAA (but not AAAPAA)
binds favorably to that edge. However, we note that AAAPAA (and not
AAPAAA) would bind favorably with an (almost) equivalent interaction
had we considered the other edge as the binding site.

The attachment
of a strand to a growing amyloid β-sheet involves
a phase change for the strand, as it is in solution before and in
the solid state after attachment. This presents a problem as solvation
should be considered for the strand in solution, but not the amyloid
solid. A useful peptide inhibitor would need to be modified to adjust
its solubility. For example, the solubility of a poly Q peptide can
be adjusted by substituting H’s for Q’s, thereby controlling
the peptide’s ability to form aggregates.

From the foregoing, we can see that if a longer Pro-containing
peptide were to interact with a β-sheet of a hexapeptide, it
could bind favorably to either side by shifting the Pro interaction
by an odd number of residues when binding to the different edges of
the growing sheet.

At the request of a reviewer, we add a detailed
discussion of the
possible errors that theoretical studies such as this might encounter
and the steps that we have taken to minimize these possible errors.
If the method used to calculate the optimized structures be faulty,
the results would not be credible. For this reason, we have used the
results from our extensive experience in conducting similar calculations
on peptides of various types.,,,−,− We have also tested some more recent methods that use functionals
that have been parametrized to include “dispersion”
interactions. Pure dispersion (as in rare gas dimers) is poorly estimated
by some of the more traditional functionals (such as B3LYP). In our
tests, we observed several important results. Perhaps most important
is that these new dispersion-corrected functionals systematically
overestimate the interaction enthalpies of folding per residue for
all alanine α-helices by a factor of ∼4 as compared to several experimental studies,− while the methods that we use here remain in reasonable agreement
with those experiments. For example, our calculated values of the
enthalpy of folding per residue for folding of acetyl(Ala)17NHCH3 into the helix are −0.7, −0.8, and
−1.2 kcal/mol using ONIOM/B3LYP, B3LYP, and X3LYP, respectively,
compared to experimental values that range from −0.9 to −1.1
kcal/mol,− and experimental estimates for polylysine and polyglutamic acid give similar values (−1.1 and −1.2 kcal/mol, respectively).
Also, the structures of the β-sheets (as judged by the Ramachandran
dihedral angles) formed by all alanine hexapeptides fall outside the
accepted range of experimental databases,,,while the structures calculated using the
methods used here remain within the acceptable limits of these databases.
Thus, in performing these tests of the methodology, we have demonstrated
that different methods will give different results and that some methods
give results that do not agree with experimental data. Clearly, we
chose methods that appear to work best, although we cannot know that
they work perfectly as we do not always have experimental data that
are sufficiently precise and reliable.

We have shown that the
methods that we use have successfully calculated
the amide I vibrational modes of α-helices and β-sheets, as well
as the trans-H-bond J couplings in peptides.,

Errors in differences calculated by the same method (be that
method
accurate or not) will always be more reliable (within the limits of
the method) as one would expect many systematic errors to cancel.
The foregoing will be particularly true when one compares isomeric
structures (as we do in this study) as each structure has the same
number of atoms. Our experience with DFT and MO calculations on geometrically
optimized structures suggests that energy differences between isomers
can be reliably calculated with a precision of ∼0.1 kcal/mol
for small systems and a slightly higher value for larger ones. These
errors tend to be due to the acceptable error in energy for convergence
to an optimized geometry (one never reaches the absolute minimum on
the potential energy surface). Thus, the 1.4 kcal/mol preference for
the structure for the first structure of Table  falls well withing the error of the precision of the calculation.
The foregoing does not mean that this preference might not change
or disappear when it is evaluated by another method or by experiment.
That is why we stated that our observation is not sufficient for the
design of a therapeutic agent. Rather, it could be used as one factor
(a design principle) that could be combined with others to design
such an agent.

In principle, theoretical calculations using
MO or DFT methods
treat the isolated system. Although some methods allow for periodic
calculations (as in crystal structures), these are often termed gas
phase calculations, as the average distance between molecules in the
gas phase is large. Clearly, the results of such calculations will
change somewhat if the environment changes (for example, putting the
system in a solvent). However, the foregoing will also be true for
the experimental system. Using theory to simulate dissolved molecule(s)
requires some method for evaluating the effects of the solvent in
addition to the structure and energy of the molecule(s) in question.

Conclusion
Peptides containing Pro can bind to parallel β-sheets as
illustrated by the interaction of AAPAAA with one edge of [acetyl(Ala)6NH2]4. This suggests that Pro can be
used as one factor (presumably accompanied by others) in the design
of peptides that might be used as medications to arrest the growth
of amyloids, some of which cause debilitating diseases.

Supporting Information Available
Cartesian coordinates
for all
optimized structures. This material is available free of charge via
the Internet at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bi401366w_si_001.pdf

The authors
declare no
competing financial interest.

