The vast majority of secretory
and integral membrane proteins acquire asparagine (N)-linked glycans
during biosynthesis to ensure proper folding, assembly, and trafficking
out of the endoplasmic reticulum (ER). The covalent attachment of
the 14-sugar oligosaccharide to a nascent chain at an N-X-T/S consensus
site, where X can be any amino acid except proline, is catalyzed by
the oligosaccharyltransferase (OST)., This ER luminal
membrane protein complex is composed of seven or eight individual
subunits in eukaryotes and undergoes a vast array of diverse functions,
including positioning the lipid-linked oligosaccharide donor and scanning
and positioning a peptide chain for N-glycosylation. N-Glycans can
be added cotranslationally to the growing peptide while it is inserted
into the ER via the translocon (Sec61 complex) or post-translationally after the peptide is fully synthesized.−

OST catalytic subunit STT3 is the only domain of the complex
that
is conserved from eukaryotes to eubacteria. High-resolution structures have been determined for the bacterial
and aracheal OST STT3 homologues., Despite having
sequences that are only 20% identical, these structures are remarkably
similar. For vertebrates, plants, and most insects, there are two
known eukaryotic isoforms of the OST catalytic subunit designated
STT3A and STT3B. Utilizing kinetic assays, the OST STT3A isoform has
been shown to predominantly perform cotranslational N-glycosylation
while the OST STT3B isoform preferentially N-glycosylates peptides
post-translationally.− Intriguingly, STT3B was found to perform cotranslational
N-glycosylation if STT3A is depleted, but STT3A does not perform post-translational
N-glycosylation in the absence of STT3B, indicating affinity differences between these different OST isoform
complexes. While STT3A and STT3B isoforms are ∼60% conserved,
their N-glycosylation kinetics and variations in peptide sequence
recognition are not well understood.

The primary sequence context
of an N-linked glycosylation consensus
site has been known to affect OST N-glycan attachment efficiency,
including the consensus site hydroxyl and middle residues,− specific residues upstream or downstream of or the residue immediately
following the consensus site,− and the proximity of a consensus
site to other consensus sites and the
C-terminus. Although several molecular
factors affect N-glycosylation efficiency, particularly for NXS consensus
sites that have been shown to be more sensitive to sequence elements
than NXT sites,, a plausible mechanism for this
disparity has not been determined, nor have the biophysical ramifications
of these differences been characterized in the context of the OST
STT3A and STT3B isoforms.

Here, we use a type I transmembrane
glycopeptide (KCNE2) as a scaffold
to determine the co- and post-translational N-glycosylation distributions
for all amino acids in the middle residue of an NXS consensus site.
We found that middle residues with small hydrophobic, positively charged,
and polar side chains are efficiently cotranslationally N-glycosylated.
In contrast, consensus sites with bulky hydrophobic or negatively
charged middle X residues are often skipped during protein translation,
resulting in a higher percentage of N-glycans being added after protein
synthesis. Similar to water-soluble and type II transmembrane proteins,, the STT3A and STT3B isoforms were primarily responsible for co-
and post-translational N-glycosylation of type I transmembrane peptides,
respectively. By comparing the amount of cotranslational N-glycosylation
to the rate of post-translational N-glycosylation, we found that STT3A
and STT3B isoforms modify NXS sites at similar efficiencies, suggesting
that these isoforms have a conserved catalytic mechanism that is influenced
by the side chain of the middle residue in the consensus sequence.

Experimental
Procedures
Cloning and Plasmids
Human KCNE2 and KCNE4 were cloned
into the pcDNA3.1(−) vector such that five additional
methionine residues and an HA tag (YPYDVPDYA)
were added to the C-terminus of each KCNE peptide., The second N-glycosylation consensus site was removed in KCNE2 by
mutation to glutamine (N29Q). Mutations for creating different X residues
in NXS or NXT sites were introduced using traditional polymerase chain
reaction cassette mutagenesis (Syzygy Biotech Taq 2x MeanGreen Master
Mix) between the 5′ KpnI and 3′ BglII sites. All constructs were confirmed by DNA sequencing
the entire gene.

Cell Culture and Plasmid Transfection
Chinese hamster
ovary K1 (CHO) cells were maintained in Gibco-F12K Nutrient Mixture,
Kaighn’s Modification (with l-glutamine) medium, supplemented
with 10% FBS (Sigma) and 1% penicillin/streptomycin. Cells were passaged
using 0.5% Trypsin-EDTA and plated onto 35 or 100 mm dishes at 80%
confluency for Western blots or pulse–chase experiments, respectively.
After 24 h, the cells (35 or 100 mm dishes) were transiently transfected
with a mixture of 1.5 or 3.0 μg of KCNE DNA and 8 or 16 μL
of Lipofectamine in 1 or 2 mL of OptiMem, respectively. After 6 h
at 37 °C, the transfection cocktail was removed and F12K medium
with supplements was added.

siRNA Transfection for Pulse–Chase
and Western Blot Experiments
Cells at 80% confluency were
transiently transfected with a mixture
of small interfering RNA (siRNA): scrambled A, GAGAACUAACGCAAGAGAAdTdT;
scrambled B, GAAGGCACCGGUUAUUAGUdTdT;
STT3A, GAAGACACAUCAAGGAGAAdTdT;
STT3B, GGACUACUCUGGUGGAUAAdTdT.
The different siRNA mixtures (100 nmol of A; 150 nmol
of B) were incubated (5 min) before being combined with
16 μL of Lipofectamine 2000 in OptiMem (400 μL) for 30
min and then diluted into 2 mL of OptiMem. After 6 h at 37 °C,
the transfection cocktail was removed and 2 mL of F12K medium with
supplements was added, and the cells were incubated for 40–45
h. Another round of siRNA transfection was performed as described
above with the addition of 3 μg of E2 DNA (NFT or NFS) to the
transfection cocktail. After 6 h at 37 °C, the transfection cocktail
was removed and 2 mL of F12K medium with supplements was added, and
the cells were incubated for an additional 40–45 h.

Pulse–Chase
Assays and Cell Lysis
Pulse–chase
experiments and cell lysis were performed as previously described. Briefly, transfected cells were washed with
PBS and incubated for 35 min at 37 °C in Gibco DMEM High Glucose
Media (4.5 g/L d-glucose, lacking l-methionine and l-cysteine), supplemented with 10% FBS, 1% Pen Strep, and 2
mM l-glutamine. The medium was removed, and the cells were
incubated at 37 °C for 2 min in DMEM High Glucose Media containing
100 μCi/mL EasyTag EXPRESS [35S] Protein Labeling
Mix (PerkinElmer). The radioactive medium was removed, and the cells
washed with PBS and chased with F12K medium for 3, 6, 9, or 12 min
at 37 °C. The cells were then washed with PBS and lysed with
750 μL of low-salt lysis buffer [50 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.4), 150
mM NaCl, 20 mM NaF, 10 mM Na3VO4, 1% NP-40,
and 1% CHAPS], which was supplemented with protease inhibitors: 1
mM phenylmethanesulfonyl fluoride (PMSF) and 1 μg/mL leupeptin,
1 μg/mL pepstatin, and 1 μg/mL aprotinin (LPA). Cells
were lysed for 30 min while being vigorously shaken at 4 °C,
and the cell debris was scraped and pelleted at 14000 rpm for 10 min
at room temperature.

Radioimmunoprecipitation and Electrophoresis
Radioimmunoprecipitation
and electrophoresis for pulse–chase experiments were performed
as previously described. Briefly, Protein
G agarose beads (Pierce) were prepared by being washed in low-salt
lysis buffer. After the cell debris had been pelleted, the supernatant
was precleared with 50 μL of beads for 2 h at 4 °C. The
beads were then spun down, and the supernatant was transferred to
new tubes containing 25 μL of beads preincubated with 1 μL
of monoclonal anti-HA antibody (Sigma). After an overnight incubation
at 4 °C, the beads were pelleted, the supernatant was removed,
and the beads were subjected to three washes of low-salt lysis buffer,
one wash of high-salt buffer [50 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.4), 500 mM NaCl,
1% NP-40, 1% CHAPS, 20 mM NaF, and 10 mM Na3VO4], and a final wash with low-salt lysis buffer. For enzymatic deglycosylation
assays, 1 μL of Endo Hf (New England Biolabs) was
added to beads in 50 μL of low-salt lysis buffer and incubated
at 37 °C for 1 h. Peptides were eluted from the beads with 100
mM DTT and 2× SDS gel loading buffer at 55 °C for 15 min.
Samples were analyzed by 15% sodium dodecyl sulfate–polyacrylamide
gel electrophoresis (SDS–PAGE), and the gels were dehydrated
for 1 h in a 30% ethanol/2% glycerol solution. Gels were dried for
2 h at 80 °C, applied to a photostimulable phosphor plate, and
analyzed for photostimulated luminescence with a Typhoon FLA-9000
phosphoimager after 14–42 days.

Western Blots
Cells were washed in PBS (3 × 750
μL) and lysed with RIPA buffer [10 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.4), 140
mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA (pH 7.4), 1% Triton X-100, 0.1% SDS, and 1% sodium
deoxycholate], supplemented with protease inhibitors (PMSF and LPA).
After the sample had vigorously shaken for 30 min at 4 °C, the
cell debris was scraped and pelleted at 14000 rpm for 10 min at room
temperature. The total protein in each sample was determined by a
bicinchonimic acid (BCA) assay and 60 μg of protein utilized
for electrophoresis. Samples were prepared by adding 100 mM DTT and
2× SDS gel loading buffer to the lysis sample to yield a total
volume of 50 μL. Samples were analyzed by 8% SDS–PAGE,
transferred to a nitrocellulose membrane, and incubated for 30 min
in blocking buffer [5% nonfat dry milk in Tris-buffered saline containing
0.2% Tween 20 (western wash buffer)]. STT3 primary antibodies were
obtained from R. Gilmore, diluted in blocking
buffer (1:2500 for STT3A or 1:6000 for STT3B), and allowed to incubate
overnight at 4 °C. Membranes were washed in western wash buffer
(3 × 6 mL) for 5 min each and incubated for 45 min at room temperature
with the rabbit anti-STT3 antibody (1:4000 for STT3A or 1:10000 for
STT3B) in western blocking buffer. After
being washed (3 × 6 mL) with western wash buffer, the membrane
was incubated (5 min) with SuperSignal West Dura Extended Duration
Substrate (Pierce); the chemiluminescence was captured using an LAS-3000
CCD camera and quantified by Multi Gauge software (Fujifilm).

Data Analysis
All signals were quantified using Image
Gauge software (Fujifilm). The percentage
of glycosylation for every time point was determined by dividing the
signal of the glycosylated species by the total amount of signal (0-Gly
+ 1-Gly). The 12 min time point served as the percent total N-glycosylation
for every NXS and NXT construct. To determine the cotranslational
N-glycosylation contribution for each construct, we divided the percent
N-glycosylated at 0 min by the percent N-glycosylated at 12 min. Our
simplified calculation for cotranslational N-glycosylation assumes
that the peptide substrates are fully synthesized before the 3 min
time point and that the observable rates
for co- and post-translational N-glycosylation are substantially different
for this class of peptides. To calculate
the post-translational N-glycosylation contribution, we subtracted
the cotranslational component (0 min) from the total N-glycosylation
(12 min) and divided it by the total N-glycosylation (12 min). The
percent total N-glycosylation bar graphs show the cotranslational
(solid) and post-translational (slashed) contributions with the errors
between the interface representing the errors associated with cotranslation
(up error bar) and post-translation (down error bar). Post-translational
N-glycosylation kinetic rates (k) were determined
by fitting the data to the single-exponential equation y = y0 + (plateau – y0)(1 – e–kx).

PyMOL Model Generation
Middle X residue models were
generated from the PglB crystal structure [Protein Data Bank (PDB)
entry 3RCE].
Surface representations and stick models are shown for PglB residues,
and stick and sphere models are shown for peptide residues. To ascertain
the middle X residue fit into the peptide binding site, the crystallized
X residue (alanine) was mutagenized to serine (three rotamers, no
steric clash), threonine (two rotamers, no steric clash), lysine (17
rotamers, four with steric clash), glutamine (11 rotamers, three with
steric clash), arginine (19 rotamers, six with steric clash), cysteine
(three rotamers, one with steric clash), valine (three rotamers, one
with steric clash), asparagine (12 rotamers, four with steric clash),
aspartic acid (nine rotamers, three with steric clash), methionine
(nine rotamers, three with steric clash), glutamic acid (14 rotamers,
six with steric clash), isoleucine (two rotamers, one with steric
clash), leucine (five rotamers, four with steric clash), histidine
(seven rotamers, seven with steric clash), phenylalanine (four rotamers,
four with steric clash), tyrosine (four rotamers, four with steric
clash), and tryptophan (nine rotamers, nine with steric clash). Rotamers
shown in Figure  had either no steric clash
or the smallest amount of steric clash (Trp).

Results
To determine the effects of the middle X residue on the kinetics
of N-glycosylation, we needed to identify a kinetically sensitive
consensus site that would allow for the highest resolution of co-
and post-translational N-glycosylation events using rapid metabolic
pulse–chase experiments., Previously, we have
shown that members of the KCNE family (E1–E5) of type I transmembrane
peptides possess several consensus sites where the N-glycosylation
kinetics can be flipped from co- to post-translational (and vice versa)
by simply switching the hydroxyl residue in the consensus site., We chose E2 and E4 as test substrates because they incorporate more 35S radiolabel and the attachment of the N-glycan to these
peptides depends on the consensus site hydroxyl group. Because N-glycosylation efficiencies of NXS
consensus sites are more sensitive to the middle X residue, we settled on E2 and E4 constructs that had
a single N-terminal NXS consensus site, which (i) simplifies the kinetic
measurements and (ii) eliminates any cooperativity caused by the presence
of multiple consensus sites.

On
the basis of previous consensus site X residue efficiencies, we compared the N-glycosylation kinetics at
three sites that are efficiently (NSS), moderately (NFS), and poorly
(NWS) glycosylated. Figure A shows the unglycosylated
(0-Gly) and singly glycosylated (1-Gly) species for each construct,
which were confirmed by endoglycosidase H digestion (Figure 1A of
the ). The percentage
of glycosylated protein was then calculated by normalizing the 1-Gly
intensity to the total protein for each time point and graphed as
shown in Figure B. To determine the co- and
post-translational components, we exploited the significant kinetic
difference between co- and post-translational N-glycosylation and used a simplified convention in which co-
is defined as the glycosylated protein present at the start of the
chase period (0 min) and post- is defined as the increase in glycosylation
measured over the experimental time course (Figure B, top). Using these conventions, we compared the amount of
cotranslational, post-translational, and total N-glycosylation for
each NXS construct (Figure C). This initial
comparison demonstrated that the middle X residue strongly influences
the kinetics of attachment of the N-glycan to NXS consensus sites.

Middle
X residue in NXS consensus sites alters the distribution
of co- and post-translational N-glycosylation of type I transmembrane
peptides. (A) Representative fluorographs from pulse–chase
experiments of E2 and E4 constructs containing a single NXS consensus
site (E2, N6; E4, N8). Glycosylated (1-Gly) and unglycosylated (0-Gly)
species are labeled for the NSS, NFS, and NWS consensus sites. (B)
The top panel is a plot of total N-glycosylation for the NSS sites
in E2 (black triangles) and E4 (gray triangles). The co- and post-translational
N-glycosylation distributions are demarcated. The bottom panel is
a kinetic comparison of all six NXS sites: E2 NSS (black triangles),
E4 NSS (gray triangles), E2 NFS (black squares), E4 NFS (gray squares),
E2 NWS (black circles), and E4 NWS (gray circles). (C) Quantification
of the cotranslational (solid bars), post-translational (hatched bars),
and total N-glycosylation for the E2 (black) and E4 (gray) consensus
sites. The error bars show the standard error of the mean for three
experiments; n.d. means not detected. The errors in the combined bar
graph are denoted as follows: cotranslational (middle bar, up), post-translational
(middle bar, down), and total N-glycosylation (top bar, up).

Because the test NXS consensus
sites in the E2 construct displayed
the widest range of cotranslational, post-translational, and total
N-glycosylation, we subsequently used this E2 construct to compare
the N-glycosylation kinetics for all middle X residues (except proline)
(Figure  and Figure 1B of the ). The cotranslational,
post-translational, and total N-glycosylation quantifications are
shown for each construct in Figure B. Cotranslational
N-glycosylation ranged from ∼20 to 85% with the most efficient
NXS consensus sites containing either small (polar and hydrophobic)
or positively charged middle X residues (Figure B, left). Conversely, NXS consensus sites with either large hydrophobic
or glutamic acid middle X residues were poorly (&lt;50%) cotranslationally
N-glycosylated. In agreement with the temporal divisions between co-
and post-translational N-glycosylation, the largest post-translational
contributors to total N-glycosylation, for the most part, were the
NXS consensus sites that were skipped during protein translation (Figure B, middle). NWS and NLS were the two exceptions,
as these were bad substrates for both co- and post-translational N-glycosylation.
This inverse relationship between co- and post-translational N-glycosylation
likely arises from the availability of a larger pool of unglycosylated
substrates available for post-translational N-glycosylation. Nonetheless,
under these experimental conditions, post-translational N-glycosylation
did not fully compensate for NXS consensus sites containing middle
F, I, E, or M residues, keeping the total N-glycosylation efficiency
for these consensus sites significantly below the predominately cotranslational
consensus sites (Figure B, right).

Large hydrophobic
and negatively charged middle X residues in NXS
but not NXT sites hinder cotranslational N-glycosylation. (A) Representative
fluorographs from pulse–chase experiments for all middle X
residues (except proline) in an E2 NXS consensus site. Glycosylated
(1-Gly) and unglycosylated (0-Gly) species are labeled. Fluorographs
for NGS, NNS, NCS, and NRS are shown in Figure 1B of the . (B) Bar graphs of cotranslational
(solid), post-translational (hatched), and total N-glycosylation for
the consensus site X residues. Polar and small hydrophobic amino acids
are colored purple, large hydrophobic amino acids green, and positively
and negatively charged amino acids blue and red, respectively. (C)
Representative fluorographs (left and middle) from pulse–chase
experiments for middle X residues in NXT sites. Glycosylated (1-Gly)
and unglycosylated (0-Gly) species are labeled. Bar graph comparison
(right) of cotranslational (solid), post-translational (hatched),
and total N-glycosylation for consensus site X residues in NXS (black)
and NXT (blue) sites. All error bars show the standard error of the
mean for three experiments; n.d. means not detected. The errors in
the combined bar graph are denoted as follows: cotranslational (middle
bar, up), post-translational (middle bar, down), and total N-glycosylation
(top bar, up).

In contrast to NXS consensus
sites, previous studies have shown
that NXT sites are efficiently N-glycosylated regardless of the middle
X residue., Therefore, we converted the most inefficient
NXS sites into NXT sites to determine which kinetic component of N-glycosylation
was responsible for the improved N-glycan attachment. As expected,
the N-glycosylation efficiency for all four NXT sites was significantly
improved compared to those of their NXS counterparts (Figure C). Dissection of the kinetic components of N-glycosylation
revealed that the increase in the extent of attachment of N-glycans
to these NXT sites occurred primarily during translation. For NWT
consensus sites, post-translational N-glycosylation was also markedly
improved. Thus, attachment of N-glycans to NXT sites is unaffected
by the middle X residue because these sites are efficiently cotranslationally
glycosylated.

To determine the influence of the middle X residue
on post-translational
N-glycosylation kinetics, we fit the pulse–chase data for each
NXS consensus site to a single-exponential equation and compared the
observed post-translational N-glycosylation rates to cotranslational
N-glycosylation efficiency (Figure ). Similar
to cotranslational N-glycosylation efficiency (Figure B), the kinetics of post-translational N-glycosylation depended
on the middle X residue, where large hydrophobic residues had the
slowest rates of post-translational N-glycosylation (Figure B and Table ). To compare
co- and post-translational N-glycosylation for each middle residue,
we plotted the observed post-translational N-glycosylation rate constant
(kobs) versus the percentage of cotranslational
N-glycosylation (Figure C). Despite the large
errors associated with the inability to control substrate, enzyme,
and competitor concentrations as well as the rate of protein degradation
in living cells, these N-glycan attachment data (R2 = 0.76) suggest that the OST STT3 isoforms associated
with co- and post-translational N-glycosylation operate at similar
efficiencies and by similar mechanisms.

Consensus
Site Middle Residue N-Glycosylation
 	% co	% post	% total	post kobs (min–1)	
E2 NXS	
W	17 ± 4	nd	17 ± 4	nd	
L	15 ± 2	9 ± 2	24 ± 1	–	
F	31 ± 3	28 ± 3	59 ± 1	0.10 ± 0.03	
I	38 ± 3	23 ± 3	61 ± 1	0.06 ± 0.02	
E	40 ± 4	23 ± 5	63 ± 3	0.18 ± 0.04	
M	46 ± 1	26 ± 1	72 ± 1	0.12 ± 0.02	
D	64 ± 3	19 ± 4	83 ± 2	0.18 ± 0.08	
K	61 ± 4	23 ± 5	84 ± 3	0.12 ± 0.02	
Y	60 ± 2	26 ± 3	87 ± 3	0.21 ± 0.07	
G	71 ± 2	17 ± 3	88 ± 2	0.19 ± 0.06	
N	74 ± 1	14 ± 4	89 ± 4	0.25 ± 0.07	
V	64 ± 1	25 ± 1	89 ± 1	0.19 ± 0.02	
C	85 ± 7	5 ± 7	89 ± 3	0.22 ± 0.11	
Q	75 ± 5	16 ± 5	91 ± 1	0.19 ± 0.03	
R	67 ± 6	24 ± 6	91 ± 1	0.25 ± 0.02	
H	81 ± 7	10 ± 8	92 ± 5	0.23 ± 0.05	
S	77 ± 4	15 ± 4	92 ± 1	0.28 ± 0.05	
T	72 ± 4	21 ± 4	93 ± 2	0.20 ± 0.04	
A	73 ± 2	20 ± 3	93 ± 1	0.15 ± 0.05	
E2
NXT	
W	42 ± 2	31 ± 3	72 ± 2	0.08 ± 0.03	
L	68 ± 1	18 ± 2	86 ± 2	0.28 ± 0.05	
E	71 ± 1	17 ± 6	88 ± 6	0.43 ± 0.14	
F	74 ± 3	18 ± 4	93 ± 3	0.20 ± 0.01	
E4 NXS	
W	nd	nd	nd	nd	
F	24 ± 4	20 ± 4	44 ± 1	–	
S	22 ± 2	22 ± 2	44 ± 1	–	
Cotranslational,
post-translational,
total N-glycosylation, and post-translational rates shown for each
E2 or E4 NXS or NXT middle residue consensus site. The percentages
of co- and post-translational N-glycosylation were determined as described
in . Values are means
± the standard error of the mean for three pulse–chase
experiments.

p &lt; 0.05 (two-way
analysis of variance; NXT sites compared to their equivalent NXS sites).
This indicates significance by Tukey’s multiple-comparison
test (E2 NXT values compared to equivalent E2 NXS sites). Post-translational
rates were averaged from independent pulse–chase experiments
in which the association rate (kobs) was
determined by fitting the data to a single-exponential equation; nd
means not detected. A dash means kobs &lt;
0.05, indicating post-translational rates were too slow to accurately
fit.

Post-translational N-glycosylation
rates of NXS consensus sites
mirror cotranslational N-glycosylation efficiency. (A) Post-translational
N-glycosylation kinetics for each NXS consensus site except tryptophan.
Data are fit to a single-exponential equation, and the rates are plotted
in panel B. (B) Polar and small hydrophobic amino acids are colored
purple, large hydrophobic amino acids green, and positively and negatively
charged amino acids blue and red, respectively. (C) Correlation plot
of co- and post-translational N-glycosylation (R2 = 0.76). The coloring is the same as in panel B. All error
bars show the standard error of the mean from three experiments; n.d.
means not detected.

Previous studies with
water-soluble and type II transmembrane peptides
have shown that as the protein is threaded into the ER lumen the OST
STT3A isoform performs cotranslational N-glycosylation whereas the
STT3B isoform is responsible for post-translational N-glycosylation., Because the N-terminus of type I transmembrane peptides without
a cleavable signal sequence is inserted into the ER en masse, we wanted
to ensure that OST STT3 enzyme specificity was not affected by the
ER insertion mechanism. To identify the OST STT3 isoform(s) associated
with co- and post-translational N-glycosylation of the NXS and NXT
substrates, we specifically reduced the protein levels of either STT3
isoform or both using small interfering RNAs (siRNAs) and then compared
the N-glycosylation kinetics for NXS and NXT sites containing a middle
phenylalanine residue. Because the STT3 proteins are relatively stable
and do not turn over quickly, we performed two sequential siRNA transfections
() as previously described
for STT3 isoform-specific knockdowns in HeLa cells., This
sequential knockdown reduced the levels of STT3A protein 74 ±
3% when STT3A was targeted and 57 ± 4% when STT3A and STT3B were
targeted. A similar reduction in the level of STT3B protein (63 ±
6 and 70 ± 2%) was observed when siRNAs targeted to STT3B were
used and siRNAs targeted to STT3B and STT3A were used, respectively.
Scrambled sequences or siRNAs for the opposite isoform had no significant
effect on STT3 protein levels (Figure 2 of the ).

Using this siRNA transfection
strategy, cells expressing the NFS
substrate were pulsed with 35S-labeled amino acids and
chased for 0−12 minutes (Figure A,
left). For the NFS site, reduction of either STT3A or STT3B protein
did not affect cotranslational N-glycosylation (Figure B, left). The lack of an effect was expected because previous
studies have shown that the STT3B isoform performs cotranslational
N-glycosylation when STT3A protein levels are reduced. Simultaneous knockdown of STT3A and STT3B (Figure A,B) confirmed that both OST isoforms must be reduced
to significantly reduce cotranslational N-glycosylation. In contrast
to cotranslational N-glycosylation, post-translational N-glycosylation
of the NFS site was not detectable by selectively knocking down the
STT3B isoform compared to scrambled and STT3A controls (Figure B, left).

Co- and post-translational N-glycosylation of
NXS and NXT sites
in type I transmembrane peptides is performed by catalytic OST isoforms
STT3A and STT3B, respectively. (A) Representative fluorographs from
pulse-chased, siRNA-treated cells expressing either an NFS or NFT
site. The STT3 specificity of each siRNA is shown on the left: scrambled
STT3A and STT3B (scr. A+B), STT3A (A), STT3B (B), and STT3A and STT3B
(A+B). Glycosylated (1-Gly) and unglycosylated (0-Gly) species are
labeled. (B) Bar graphs for cotranslational (solid), post-translational
(hatched), and total N-glycosylation of NFS (black) and NFT (gray)
consensus sites for the different siRNA treatments. All error bars
show the standard error of the mean from three experiments; n.d. means
not detected. *p &lt; 0.05. The errors in the combined
bar graph are denoted as follows: cotranslational (middle bar, up),
post-translational (middle bar, down), and total N-glycosylation (top
bar, up).

We then challenged the robustness
of the isoform-specific siRNA
experiments by examining the more efficiently N-glycosylated NFT site
(Figure , right panels). Similar to the NFS
site, reduction of STT3A protein levels had no effect on cotranslational
N-glycosylation; reduction of STT3B protein levels significantly reduced
post-translational N-glycosylation, and reduction of both isoforms
substantially reduced both co- and post-translational N-glycosylation
(Figure B, right panels). Surprisingly, knockdown
of STT3B also led to a small but reproducible reduction in cotranslational
N-glycosylation of the NFT site (Figure B,
top right panel). Although experimentally significant (Table 1 of
the ), the STT3B-linked
reduction in cotranslational N-glycosylation likely stems from our
simplified definition (the zero time point), which for the NFT site,
is likely (compared to the NFS site) to contain faster post-translational
events that occur during the 2 min pulse (vide infra). If we exclude the NFT site anomaly, our results with type I transmembrane
peptides are consistent with previous findings, where STT3A modifies
N-linked consensus sites cotranslationally and STT3B modifies the
skipped consensus sites post-translationally.

Models of middle X residues
in the PglB oligosaccharyltransferase
crystal structure. The top left panel shows a close-up view of the
bent NAT consensus site peptide in the PglB peptide binding site (PDB
entry 3RCE): N, green; A, yellow; T, pink. The remaining panels
show NXT consensus site peptide models for middle X residues with
various N-glycosylation efficiencies. The middle X residue in the
crystal structure (Ala) was mutated, and a rotamer with no steric
clashes is shown for each mutant except tryptophan, which cannot be
positioned without introducing a steric clash. The three PglB residues
(N55, D465, and M318) that surround the consensus site middle X residue
are denoted. Numbers in the alanine panel are given in angstroms.

The recently determined eubacterial
and aracheal OST homologue
structures, afford an opportunity to glean a structural
rationale for the effect of the middle X residue on co- and post-translational
N-glycosylation. Figure  (top left) shows a close-up view of the eubacterial PglB
crystal structure in which the peptide
substrate containing an NAT consensus site bends to tightly pack within
the peptide recognition site of the enzyme. Using PyMOL, we substituted
middle X residues and visually inspected each rotamer for steric and
electrostatic clashes (). The remaining panels in Figure  depict
the wild-type structure and middle X residue rotamers with minimal
steric clashes for the most efficiently glycosylated site (cysteine),
oppositely charged residues (arginine and glutamic acid), and the
worst consensus site (tryptophan). Although definitive conclusions
using a static structure are limited and lack any kinetic information
about the binding site interactions, substituting the middle X residue
into the structure provides a qualitative picture of the molecular
gyrations needed to accommodate the differently charged and sized
amino acid side chains. In all of the panels, the middle X residue
α-carbon sits just below three PglB bottleneck residues: N55,
D465, and M318 (Figure ). In the crystal structure,
the alanine side chain sits squarely in the pocket consisting of these
three PglB residues. When alanine is mutated to cysteine, almost all
rotamers effectively maneuver around this bottleneck, and polar residues
have the potential to form hydrogen bonds with PglB residue N55 or
D465. In contrast, large hydrophobic residues have very few rotamers
in which steric clashes do not exist and tryptophan cannot be accommodated
in any rotamer (Figure ), highlighting the
intolerance of bulky side chains in this constrained region.

Most rotamers of the charged residues (Figure , Arg and Glu) avoid the PglB bottleneck by extending their
side chains into a larger cavity between the polar (N55) and negatively
charged (D465) side chains of PglB, which may explain why negatively
charged NXS sites are less efficiently N-glycosylated. On the basis
of sequence alignments with the mammalian OST STT3A and STT3B isoforms,
N55 is predicted to be a glutamic acid and serine, respectively; D465
is part of the conserved WWD sequence that is thought to form a hydrogen
bond to the hydroxyl residue of the consensus site. Thus, the greater negative charge in the STT3A pocket may
underlie the subtle differences we observed between co- and post-translational
N-glycosylation of the similarly charged (i.e., D vs E or R vs K)
residues (Figure C). Although PglB is a prokaryotic
homologue that modifies a slightly different consensus sequence, its peptide binding site provides a structural
basis for the mammalian OST co- and post-translational N-glycosylation
kinetics of the different NXS consensus sites.

Discussion
Previous
studies have shown that N-glycan efficiency is influenced
by the middle X residue in NXS, but not NXT sites. Here, we determined
the kinetic and enzymatic basis for the effect of the X residue on
N-glycosylation efficiency. Using rapid pulse–chase experiments
with a type I transmembrane peptide model substrate expressed in N-glycosylation
proficient cells, we found a wide range of cotranslational efficiencies
(∼15–85%) for NXS consensus sites. In general, consensus
sites containing large hydrophobic residues (W, L, F, I, and M) and
glutamic acid were skipped (&gt;50%) by the OST during translation
whereas
small and polar residues were the most efficiently modified. For NXS
sites that acquire the majority of their N-glycans during translation,
post-translational N-glycosylation effectively modified the skipped
sites, yielding 80–95% glycosylated protein (Table ). However, the post-translational N-glycosylation
machinery cannot compensate for severe cotranslational inadequacies;
thus, the worst NXS sites, in particular NWS and NLS, remain hypoglycosylated
at the end of the time course. For the corresponding NXT sites, the
addition of the methyl group to the consensus site significantly improved
cotranslational N-glycosylation, completely ameliorating the effect
of the X residue on all consensus sites except NWT, which requires
post-translational N-glycosylation to yield ∼70% glycosylated
protein.

For the most part, our kinetic investigation of the
consensus site
middle X and hydroxyl residues is in harmony with previous in vitro glycosylation efficiency studies:− large hydrophobic and negatively charged middle X residues in NXS
sites are poorly glycosylated, and conversion to NXT significantly
improves their overall N-glycosylation efficiency. However, on an
amino acid by amino acid basis, there are subtle differences. The
most noticeable is that negatively charged X residues are poorly glycosylated in vitro, whereas in our cell-based
system, NES and NDS have efficiencies comparable to those of the intermediately
modified hydrophobic NXS consensus sites (NMS, NIS, and NFS). Given
that two different substrates and assays were used, the congruence
of the results indicates that the effect of the middle X residue on
NXS sites (and lack thereof on NXT sites) is general and does not
depend on the protein substrate.

The rapid pulse–chase
experiments also allowed us to determine
whether co- and post-translational N-glycosylation were equally affected
by the middle X and hydroxyl residues (Figure  and Table ). Although the measured kobs values for the individual NXS sites were
not significantly different from each other (Table ), a significant correlation between co- and post-translational
N-glycosylation was observed (Figure ). In
addition, switching the consensus site hydroxyl group from serine
to threonine also improved co- and post-translational N-glycosylation
similarly, yielding more cotranslational N-glycosylation and concomitantly
increasing kobs such that the level of
post-translational N-glycosylation was significantly increased for
NET and measurable for NWT and NLT (Table ). Together, these data suggest that co- and post-translational N-glycosylation
machineries utilize a conserved N-glycan attachment mechanism that
is similarly affected by consensus site X and hydroxyl residues. Thus,
both co- and post-translational N-glycosylation underlie the NXS and
NXT N-glycosylation efficiencies previously observed in in
vitro translation assays.−

Because the consensus site
middle X and hydroxyl residues similarly
affected N-glycan attachment during and after translation, we used
RNAi to identify the OST STT3 isoforms responsible for co- and post-translational
N-glycosylation of these type I transmembrane peptide substrates.
As in previous studies with water-soluble and type II transmembrane
peptides,, we found that STT3A predominantly performs
cotranslational N-glycosylation whereas STT3B predominantly performs
post-translational N-glycosylation and will perform cotranslational
modifications in the absence of STT3A (Figure ).

Curiously, the STT3B knockdown also significantly reduced
cotranslational
N-glycosylation of the NFT substrate (Figure  and Table 1 of the ). Given that it is unlikely that the STT3B isoform is specifically
modifying the NFT, but not the NFS construct during protein translation,
we attribute this apparent reduction in cotranslational N-glycosylation
to post-translational (STT3B) events occurring during the zero time
point because the type I transmembrane substrates are small (∼150
amino acids), spend approximately 10 s in the ER translocon during
translation of the C-terminus, and require
a 2 min pulse to achieve experimentally tractable amounts of radiolabeled
protein. For comparsion, hemagglutinin, which is twice the size of
the constructs used in our study, is readily detected ∼1 min
after radiolabel treatment of CHO cells. Thus, any consensus sites that are skipped during translation can
be modified post-translationally during the pulse period. Because
NFT sites are post-translationally modified twice as fast as NFS sites,
the NFT zero time point will contain more STT3B modifications, which
is what was observed in the OST knockdown experiments (Figure B).

In contrast, we do not expect the chase
time points (3–12
min) to be contaminated with any cotranslational events because of
the rapid (&lt;1 min) depletion of the metabolic radiolabel that has
been observed during chase times using proteins with evenly distributed
methionines. Moreover, our methionine-poor
type I transmembrane substrates are intentionally “back loaded”
with five methionines in the C-terminus such that any partially synthesized
proteins will have minimal radioactive signals when chased with cold
media. A less precise measurement of cotranslational but not the post-translational
events predicts that the most efficiently N-glycosylated consensus
sites will have an artificially higher cotranslational N-glycosylation
efficiency when compared to their post-translational rates. The data
in Figure C are consistent with this prediction,
as the highly efficient polar X residues cluster above and to the
left of the linear trend. In addition, a similar shift is observed
for the other KCNE type I transmembrane peptides where the more efficiently
N-glycosylated consensus sites cluster higher and to the left of the
fit (Figure 3 of the ). Overall, our knockdown studies with type I transmembrane peptides
are consistent with the previous co- and post-translational roles
assigned to the OST STT3A and STT3B isoforms and further underscore
the importance of post-translational N-glycosylation of NXS and NXT
consensus sites skipped during protein translation.

Utilizing
the known eubacterial STT3 homologue structure PglB,
we gleaned a potential structural explanation for the spectrum of
kinetic rates observed for different X residues in consensus sites
(Figure ). A conserved bottleneck of PglB
residues around the middle X residue in the peptide recognition site
may account for limitations in N-glycan attachment efficiency for
larger hydrophobic residues, where significant rearrangement is required
to accommodate the more voluminous side chains. To fully elucidate
the molecular nuances associated with co- and post-translational consensus
site recognition, future high-resolution structures and/or computational
docking studies with various NXS and NXT consensus sites are needed.

This study adds to the previously identified molecular determinants of co- and post-translational N-glycosylation
of the KCNE family of type I transmembrane peptides, where mutations
that shift the kinetics of N-glycosylation give rise to cardioauditory
diseases. Previously, we could not adequately
explain why co- and post-translational N-glycosylation of KCNE5 consensus
sites did not strongly depend on the consensus site hydroxyl group. A retrospective glance at the KCNE5 consensus
sites suggests that this discrepancy is due to the middle X residues,
which are cysteine and alanine, two of the most efficiently cotranslationally
N-glycosylated NXS sites. This implies that KCNE5, unlike the other
KCNE peptides that contain mostly NXT sites, evolved an efficient
middle X residue versus a more efficient hydroxyl residue and implicates
multiple avenues of evolution to ensure a high N-glycan occupancy
rate. In evidence, post hoc analysis of a recent
computational study showed that among
middle X residues in mouse glycoprotein consensus sites determined
to by occupied in vivo, cysteine is overrepresented.

Examination of the middle X and hydroxyl residues in previous studies
utilizing water-soluble and membrane proteins also suggests that our
results with a type I transmembrane peptide scaffold may be general
for all full-length proteins. The middle X residues in these post-translationally
identified consensus sites,,, were leucine, phenylalanine,
isoleucine, and aspartic acid, the consensus sites most frequently
skipped by the cotranslational machinery (STT3A) in our study. Moreover,
all of the post-translational consensus sites in these prior studies
contained a serine hydroxyl residue, except for consensus sites located
at the extreme C-terminus of the protein and factor VII. These exceptions underscore
the need for future studies that carefully define the molecular determinants
important for co- and post-translational N-glycosylation of NXS and
NXT consensus sites in other topologically distinct transmembrane
peptides, polytopic membrane proteins, and water-soluble proteins.

Supporting Information Available
Additional observations. This
material is available free of charge via the Internet at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bi500681p_si_001.pdf

Author Contributions
H.L.H.M.
and W.R.K. designed the experiments and wrote the manuscript. H.L.H.M.
performed all of the experiments and data analysis.

The authors declare no
competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
We thank Drs. Reid Gilmore and Natalia Cherepanova for the
siRNA sequences for targeting STT3A and STT3B in CHO cells.

Abbreviations
OSToligosaccharyltransferase

ERendoplasmic reticulum

E1–E5KCNE1–KCNE5,
respectively.

Unpublished data from R. Gilmore (University
of Massachusetts Medical School) by personal communication.

