DNA within the nuclei of cells is packaged and organized into highly
ordered structures collectively called chromatin. The basic level
of chromatin is the nucleosome, which consists of the wrapping and
packaging of DNA around positively charged proteins called histones., There are four core histones (H2A, H2B, H3, and H4), and two of
each of these proteins interact with each other forming a stable octamer
around which ∼147 bp of DNA is wrapped. In addition to protecting and organizing the DNA within the cells,
the compaction of DNA into chromatin plays essential roles in DNA
replication and gene expression., The rearrangement of
chromatin structure can be achieved through two known mechanisms;
one mechanism involves the epigenetic modification of the nucleosomes
by chromatin-modifying enzymes,, and the other mechanism
involves an ATP-dependent rearrangement of the chromatin by a group
of enzymes called chromatin remodelers.− On the basis of sequence
and functional properties, chromatin remodelers are classified as
part the SNF2 family of proteins, which in turn is part of helicase
superfamily II (SF-II). All chromatin
remodelers share a highly conserved ATP-hydrolyzing domain and are
further categorized into four subfamilies (ISWI, SWI/SNF, CHD, and
INO80) on the basis of additional domains that confer specific functional
properties.,, The conserved ATP-hydrolyzing domains within the catalytic subunit
of chromatin remodelers are significantly homologous to those in the
helicase family of proteins.,, The ability of helicases to translocate along DNA is necessary,
but not sufficient, for their double-stranded DNA unwinding activity.− Similarly, chromatin remodelers have been shown to lack helicase
activity but to retain the ability to
translocate along free or nucleosomal DNA in an ATP-dependent manner,
a property essential for their nucleosome repositioning activity.−

The 135 kDa ISWI (imitation switch) ATPase from Xenopus
laevis is a member of the ISWI subfamily of chromatin remodeling
enzymes; ISWI homologues have also been
identified in humans,Drosophila
melanogaster, and Saccharomyces
cerevisiae.Xenopus ISWI interacts with other protein subunits to form three additional
chromatin remodeling complexes (ACF, CHRAC, and WICH), and its nucleosome repositioning strategy has been shown
to vary depending upon the complex with which it is associated.,− ISWI has also been shown to be a conditional ATPase; DNA substrates
cause only low levels of activation, while nucleosomes allow for maximal
stimulation of activity.,, This suggests that ISWI recognizes specific motifs presented by
the nucleosomes. Indeed, several studies have demonstrated that interactions
between the remodeler and histone tails, the H4 tail in particular,
play an essential role in this regulation of ISWI ATPase activity.,− Nevertheless, ISWI is capable of translocating along both single-
and double-stranded DNA. The ability
of chromatin remodelers to translocate along DNA is fundamental to
their nucleosome repositioning activity.,,, During these processes
of DNA translocation and nucleosome repositioning, the remodeler continually
experiences repeated cycles of ATP binding, ATP hydrolysis, release
of ADP and inorganic phosphate, and possibly additional conformational
changes.,,− However, processive translocation and efficient movement along the
DNA, and hence effective repositioning of nucleosomes, require that
the remodeler alternate between a DNA-bound state and a DNA-unbound
state while simultaneously maintaining contact with the histone octamer.
Identifying how the binding of ISWI to both DNA and nucleosomes is
allosterically regulated by ATP binding and hydrolysis is essential
not only for determining the catalytic cycle associated with nucleosome
repositioning but also for understanding how DNA translocation and
nucleosome repositioning are regulated.

Furthermore, a quantitative
characterization of the equilibrium
binding of ISWI to both DNA and nucleosomes under conditions of known
stoichiometry is required to determine the kinetic mechanism of nucleosome
repositioning by ISWI (i.e., the associated microscopic and macroscopic
rate constants, the stoichiometry of the active oligomeric state,
etc.). Indeed, currently accepted models for nucleosome repositioning
by ISWI were based on the results of experiments performed with nucleosome
substrates with increasing lengths of flanking DNA,, and under conditions that had been shown
to increase the stoichiometry with which ISWI complexes bind to these
substrates.− Variations in the stoichiometry of the remodeler–nucleosome
interaction in these experiments may have contributed to the apparent
sensitivity of the repositioning rate of these enzymes to the length
of the flanking DNA. In addition, and perhaps because of this, studies
aimed at obtaining quantitative descriptions of remodeler–nucleosome
binding or allosteric regulation of these interactions unfortunately
yielded conflicting reports.,,,

Here we report our determination
of the equilibrium constants associated
with binding of ISWI to DNA, mononucleosomes, and nucleotides. Utilizing
a fluorescence anisotropy-based assay, we quantitatively investigated
the equilibrium binding of ISWI to fluorophore-labeled DNA and to
nucleosomal substrates with short flanking DNA and found that ISWI
can bind to these substrates with high affinity. Furthermore, to improve
our understanding of the mechanisms of DNA translocation and nucleosome
repositioning by ISWI, we determined the effect of nucleotide analogues
on substrate binding by ISWI. Interestingly, we found that while the
affinity of ISWI for nucleosome substrates with short flanking DNA
is not affected by the presence of nucleotides, the binding of ISWI
to DNA is weakened in the presence of nonhydrolyzable ATP analogues
but not by ADP. These results suggest that high-affinity, non-nucleotide-regulated
contacts between ISWI and histones form an anchor about which DNA
translocation by ISWI results in nucleosome repositioning. Furthermore,
we demonstrate that the affinity with which ISWI interacts with nucleosomes
is independent of the length of the flanking DNA. These findings are
further discussed in context of the current knowledge of nucleosome
binding and repositioning by ISWI and ISWI-containing complexes.

Experimental
Procedures
Recombinant ISWI Expression and Purification
cDNA encoding X. laevis ISWI (A kind gift from P. Wade) was amplified
using polymerase chain reaction (PCR) with primers containing a BglII
restriction site at the 5′ end and an EagI restriction site
at the 3′ end into the pCR4-TOPO vector (Invitrogen). The insert
was then further subcloned into the BamHI- and NotI-digested pPIC3.5-CBP-Xpress-zz
yeast expression vector. All recombinant constructs were confirmed
by sequencing. The ISWI-containing recombinant construct was then
transformed into Pichia pastoris strain GS115 through
electroporation followed by recombinant ISWI expression according
to the manufacturer’s protocol (Invitrogen). Briefly, cells
were grown in buffered glycerol complex medium (Invitrogen) until
OD600 reached 10, and the cells were then resuspended in
buffered methanol medium and allowed to shake for 6 h at 30 °C
to induce protein expression. Cells were harvested by centrifugation
at 3000g for 5 min at 4 °C. Cell paste was loaded
into a syringe, dispensed into liquid nitrogen, and stored at −80
°C until ready for use. A mixture of dry ice and frozen yeast
cells was mechanically lysed followed by addition of lysis buffer
[50 mM Tris (pH 8.0), 300 mM NaCl, 0.1% Triton X-100, 2 mM CaCl2, 2 mM MgCl2, 10% glycerol, 10 mM PMSF, and 1.3
mM β-mercaptoethanol] and centrifugation at 15000g for 30 min at 4 °C. The supernatant containing 1 mM CaCl2 was then incubated with Calmodulin Sepharose 4b resin (GE
Healthcare) for 4 h. CBP-tagged ISWI was then eluted using 10 mM EGTA-containing
buffer. Collected elutions were examined using 8% sodium dodecyl sulfate–polyacrylamide
gel electrophoresis analysis, and ISWI-containing fractions were further
purified using a heparin column (GE Healthcare) followed by buffer
exchange [20 mM HEPES (pH 7.8), 100 mM NaCl, 10 mM MgCl2, 5% glycerol, and 0.5 mM DTT] and stored at −80 °C.
The protein concentration was determined through measurements of A280 and the extinction coefficient and further
confirmed using a Bradford assay. Subsequent analysis using dynamic
light scattering confirmed that ISWI was monomeric under these solution
conditions. The purity of our recombinant ISWI is demonstrated in
Figure 5A of the . As shown in Figure 5A of the , the recombinant ISWI is larger than the endogenous 135 kDa ISWI
because of the presence of necessary affinity tags for the purification
process. ISWI activity and properties were not affected by the presence
of affinity tags as demonstrated by our control experiments in Figure
5B of the  and as
reported by others.

Nucleosome
Reconstitution Reactions
pET28 plasmids
containing untagged H2A, H2B, H3, and H4 (a kind gift from B. Cairns)
were transformed into BL21(DE3)pLys cells. Recombinant yeast histone
expression, purification, and octamer assembly were performed as described
previously., DNA fragments containing the
148 bp 601 high-affinity nucleosome positioning sequence (the sequence-containing plasmid was a kind
gift from T. J. Richmond) and an additional length of flanking DNA
were amplified using large scale PCR followed by purification of the
amplified fragment. Either nonlabeled primers or Alexa488 end-labeled
primers (IDT) were used to reconstitute the mononucleosome substrates
with the desired fluorophore label and flanking DNA length. Samples
containing a mixture of DNA fragments and histone octamer in high-salt
buffer [10 mM Tris (pH 7.5), 2 M KCl, 1 mM EDTA, 0.05% Tween-20, and
10 mM β-ME] were subjected to slow gradient dialysis against
low-salt buffer [10 mM Tris (pH 7.5), 50 mM KCl, 1 mM EDTA, 0.05%
Tween-20, and 10 mM β-ME] using peristaltic pumps as described
previously., Reconstituted mononucleosomes
were evaluated using a 5% native polyacrylamide–bisacrylamide
gel (60:1) run at 100 V in 0.25× Tris-Borate-EDTA (TBE) buffer
followed by staining using SYBR gold or exposed for fluorescence and
imaging using a Typhoon imager (GE Healthcare).

Nucleosome
and DNA Binding Studies
A 20 bp 5′-FITC
or Alexa488-labeled double-stranded DNA substrate (5′ CCATGTCCATGGATACGTGG
3′) (IDT) was titrated with increasing concentrations of ISWI
in reaction buffer [10 mM HEPES (pH 7.0), 20 mM KCl, 10 mM MgCl2, 4% glycerol, 0.1 mg/mL BSA, and 0.5 mM DTT] at 25 °C.
Binding of ISWI to this DNA substrate was measured by monitoring changes
in the anisotropy of the fluorophore using a Syergy2 fluorescence
spectrophotometer (BioTek) set at 485 nm excitation and monitoring
emission at 520 nm. To test the effect of nucleotide analogues on
ISWI–DNA interactions, similar experiments were performed in
the presence of varying total concentrations of ADP (Sigma-Aldrich),
ATP-γ-S (Roche), or AMP-PNP (Roche) already present in solution
prior to ISWI titration. Binding of ISWI to 5′ Alexa488-labeled
nucleosomal substrates was performed under the same conditions. All
concentrations are indicated in the figures and figure legends.

Electrophoretic Mobility Shift Assay
Reaction mixtures
containing 50 nM nucleosomes were incubated with increasing concentrations
of ISWI (12–300 nM) in reaction buffer [10 mM HEPES (pH 7.0),
20 mM KCl, 10 mM MgCl2, 4% glycerol, 0.1 mg/mL BSA, and
0.5 mM DTT] for 30 min at 25 °C. The reaction mixtures were then
analyzed using a 5% native polyacrylamide–bisacrylamide gel
(60:1) run at 100 V in 0.25× TBE buffer followed by staining
using SYBR gold or detecting Alexa488 fluorescence using a Typhoon
imager depending on the utilized nucleosomal substrate.

ISWI ATPase
Activity Assay
To screen for effective
nonhydrolyzable ATP analogues, reaction mixtures containing 250 nM
50 bp DNA substrate were incubated with 500 nM ISWI in reaction buffer
[10 mM HEPES (pH 7.0), 20 mM KCl, 10 mM MgCl2, 4% glycerol,
0.1 mg/mL BSA, and 0.5 mM DTT] at 25 °C. Additional sets of reaction
mixtures contained 1 mM ADP, AMP-PNP, or ATP-γ-S. The reactions
were initiated by addition of 1 mM ATP containing 7.5 μCi of
[α-32P]ATP. Aliquots were withdrawn at specific time
points and mixed with an equal volume of 0.5 M EDTA to stop the reaction.
To separate ADP from ATP species, reaction mixtures were analyzed
using thin liquid chromatography PEI-cellulose plates (EMD chemicals)
in 0.6 M potassium phosphate (pH 3.4) buffer, quantified using a Typhoon
Phosphor imager. Mixtures used to assess the nucleotide concentration-dependent
inhibition of nucleosome-stimulated ATPase activity contained 50 nM
ISWI along with 250 nM 10NF5 nucleosomes and increasing concentrations
of nucleotide ranging from 50 to 500 μM. Reactions were initiated
by adding 200 μM ATP containing [α-32P]ATP.
Reactions were stopped and mixtures analyzed as described above.

Data Analysis
The simplest model consistent with our
measured equilibrium ISWI–DNA binding isotherms is a 1:1 binding
model; analysis of these isotherms with respect to alternative models
is shown in Table 1 of the . The simplest model consistent with the equilibrium binding of ISWI,
DNA, and nucleotides is shown in Scheme .
In Scheme , a single ISWI (P) can bind to
a single DNA molecule (D) with a stoichiometric macroscopic equilibrium
constant β1, ISWI can bind to nucleotide with a stoichiometric
macroscopic equilibrium constant βA, and a complex
of ISWI and nucleotide (PA) can bind to DNA with a stoichiometric
macroscopic equilibrium association constant β1,A. This model is in agreement with previous mutagenesis studies showing
that ISWI contains only one nucleotide binding site.,

ISWI (P) Binding to DNA (D) and the Nucleotide Analogue (A)
β1, βA, β1,A, and βA,1 represent
the stoichiometric macroscopic equilibrium constants.

Initial EMSA experiments demonstrated a stoichiometry
of two ISWIs
bound to each nucleosome, which thus provided an initial estimate
of the stoichiometry in the analysis of equilibrium ISWI–nucleosome
binding isotherms monitored using the fluorescence anisotropy-based
assay; analysis of these isotherms with respect to alternative models
is shown in Table 2 of the . The simplest model consistent with these data and this stoichiometry
is shown in Scheme . In this model, a single
ISWI (P) can bind a single nucleosome (N), to form a singly bound
complex (PN) with an associated stoichiometric macroscopic equilibrium
constant β1, and two ISWIs can bind a single nucleosome
to form a doubly bound complex (P2N) with an associated
stoichiometric macroscopic equilibrium constant β2. Simultaneous global analyses of equilibrium binding isotherms with
respect to the analytical expressions associated with Schemes  and  were performed using
Mathematica (Wolfram Research) to determine the equilibrium constants
and anisotropy signal changes associated with the PD (for DNA binding)
or PN and P2N (for nucleosome binding) species; these analytical
expressions were also determined using Mathematica and are too burdensome
to reproduce here. Separate independent analysis of these equilibrium
binding isotherms through simultaneous implicit analysis using Conlin produced identical results. For this implicit
fitting, the following equations were used for Scheme :where [Ptotal], [Dtotal], and [Atotal] are the total concentrations of ISWI,
DNA, and nucleotide, respectively, in solution, β1, βA, β1,A, and βA,1 are the stoichiometric macroscopic equilibrium constants as defined
in Scheme , [P] is the concentration of free
ISWI, [D] is the concentration of free DNA, and [A] is the concentration
of free nucleotide. The observed change in anisotropy can be determined
from free concentrations of ISWI, DNA, and nucleotide using the following
equationwhere s is the signal
change
associated with the formation of the PD complex and C is the ratio of the signal change associated with the formation
of the PDA complex to that associated with the formation of the PD
complex.

ISWI (P) Binding to Nucleosomes (N)
β1 and β2 represent the stoichiometric
macroscopic equilibrium constants.

For equilibrium
nucleosome binding, the implicit fitting equations
arewhere [Ptotal] and [Ntotal] are the total concentrations
of ISWI and nucleosomes, respectively,
in solution, β1 and β2 are the stoichiometric
macroscopic equilibrium binding constants as defined in Scheme , [P] is the concentration of free ISWI, and [N]
is the concentration of free nucleosomes. The observed change in anisotropy
can be determined from free concentrations of ISWI and nucleosomes
using the following equationwhere s is the signal
change
associated with the formation of the PN complex and C is the ratio of the signal change associated with the formation
of the P2N complex to that associated with the formation
of the PN complex.

Unless otherwise noted, all traces presented
in the figures have
been normalized to the final asymptotic value of the anisotropy change
as determined from this analysis. Finally, unless otherwise noted,
all uncertainties represent 68% confidence intervals (±1 standard
deviation) as determined by Monte Carlo analysis.

Results
DNA Binding
Studies of ISWI
ISWI is able to translocate
along both single- and double-stranded DNA, a trait necessary for
its nucleosome repositioning activity., However, a
quantitative description of ISWI’s ability to bind to and translocate
along DNA is required for further delineation of the role of DNA translocation
in the mechanism of nucleosome repositioning by ISWI. Perhaps more
importantly, because ISWI has been demonstrated to bind to DNA flanking
the nucleosome core particle,, identifying the affinity
for ISWI–DNA interactions, and how these interactions are affected
by the presence of nucleotides, is critical for the interpretation
of data obtained in nucleosome repositioning experiments with ISWI.

We monitored the binding of ISWI to DNA using a fluorescence anisotropy-based
assay., Previous studies have shown that ISWI is
unable to bind a 15 or 18 bp DNA substrate but is able to bind to
a 23 bp DNA substrate., Furthermore, both 32 and 35 bp
DNA substrates have been shown to accommodate more than one bound
ISWI., To avoid the possibility of multiple ISWIs
being bound to the DNA, we therefore used a fluorophore-labeled 20
bp double-stranded DNA. The titration of this DNA substrate with increasing
concentrations of ISWI resulted in an increase in the fluorescence
anisotropy of the fluorophore (Figure A);, similar increases were detected regardless of whether the DNA was
labeled with FITC or Alexa488 (data not shown). This increase in the
fluorescence anisotropy is consistent with the formation of an ISWI–DNA
complex. Through simultaneous global least-squares analysis of equilibrium
binding isotherms conducted at two different total DNA concentrations
(10 and 25 nM) using Scheme , we determined
that the simplest model consistent with the data was a 1:1 stoichiometry
with an affinity (1/β1) of 18 ± 2 nM (Figure A and Table 1 of the ). This result is also in agreement with previous
reports of contact and occluded site sizes of 15–23 bp for
ISWI and with an affinity of approximately
15 nM for ISWI binding cooperatively to a 35 bp DNA substrate. It is worth mentioning that we and others have
previously shown that the presence of fluorophore labels can have
an effect on the affinity of the protein for the substrate., We performed competition experiments and found that the presence
of the fluorophore increased the affinity of the interaction by a
factor of ∼3 (Figure 6 of the ).

Fluorescence anisotropy measurements (Δr) of binding of ISWI to DNA and nucleosome substrates. (A) A 20 bp
FITC-labeled DNA substrate [(●) 10 and (◆) 25 nM] was
titrated with ISWI concentrations ranging from 6 to 183 nM, and changes
in fluorescence anisotropy were monitored. Isotherms were analyzed
using Scheme  as described in . The solid line represents the fit
of the data to this scheme, which returned a 1/β1 value of 18 ± 2 nM. (B) Electrophoretic mobility shift assay
performed by titrating a nonlabeled 10N5 nucleosome substrate (50
nM) with increasing ISWI concentrations ranging from 12 to 200 nM.
Samples were analyzed using a 5% TBE–acrylamide native gel.
Gels were stained using a DNA staining dye and imaged using a Typhoon
imager. Independent experiments showed that high-molecular weight
smearing is caused by interaction of ISWI with free DNA present (&lt;2%)
in the reconstituted nucleosome sample. (C) Fluorescence anisotropy
measurements of binding of ISWI to doubly labeled Alexa488 (F10N5F)
and singly labeled Alexa488 (F10N5) nucleosomal substrates. Nucleosomes
at 2.5 nM (● and ▲) and 10 nM (◆ and ■)
were titrated with increasing concentrations of ISWI ranging from
3 to115 nM. Equilibrium binding isotherms were analyzed using Scheme  as described in . The solid line represents the fit of the data to this scheme, which
returned a 1/β1 value of 1.3 ± 0.6 nM and a
1/β2 value of 13 ± 7 nM2. (D) Computer
simulations according to Scheme  of the fraction
of free nucleosome (N), singly bound nucleosome (PN), and doubly bound
nucleosome (P2N) species present as a function of the concentration
of ISWI. In these simulations, the total nucleosome concentration
was 10 nM, and a 1/β1 value of 1.3 ± 0.6 nM
and a 1/β2 value of 13 ± 7 nM2 were
taken from the analysis of the data in panel C.

Nucleosome Binding Studies of ISWI
Previous native
gel-based binding studies demonstrated that only low levels of binding
were reported for ISWI, and ISWI-containing complexes
ACF,, and ISW2,, interacting with nucleosomes
containing no flanking DNA. On the other hand, multiple ISWI–nucleosome
complexes were detected upon interaction of ISWI with nucleosomal
substrates with longer stretches of flanking DNA.,, Taken together, these results indicate both
that flanking DNA affects the affinity of ISWI for nucleosome binding
and that the presence of long flanking DNA on the nucleosome might
provide an additional ISWI binding site that may not be in direct
contact with the histones. Because any mechanistic study of the nucleosome
repositioning activity of a remodeler requires the determination of
the oligomeric state associated with the remodeler–nucleosome
interaction, we sought to quantify the stoichiometry and affinity
of the ISWI–nucleosome interaction.

To accomplish such
analysis, we reconstituted mononucleosomal substrates using the high-affinity
Widom 601 nucleosome positioning sequence. This sequence contains 146 bp, which allows for the positioning
of the histone octamer to one major site on the DNA fragment., The positioning of the nucleosomes reconstituted with yeast histones
and the 601 sequence or the significantly weaker 5S sequence has been
demonstrated by several groups through nuclease digestion assays.−

To minimize the possibility of ISWI binding to only the flanking
DNA, and not contacting the histones, we restricted the length of
the flanking DNA to &lt;23 bp, the approximate occluded site size
for ISWI–DNA binding., In our initial experiments,
we monitored the binding of ISWI to a nucleosome substrate with 10
bp DNA flanking one side of the nucleosome core particle and 5 bp
flanking the other side; we refer to this substrate as 10N5. The binding
of ISWI to a non-fluorophore-labeled 10N5 was monitored using a native
gel electrophoretic mobility shift assay (EMSA). As shown in Figure B, upon ISWI titration, we detect the formation
of two major slow mobility bands consistent with ISWI bound to each
10N5 in a 2:1 stoichiometry at saturation. It is worth noting that
EMSA experiments that we performed using fluorophore-labeled nucleosomes
yielded the same stoichiometry of ISWI–nucleosome binding,
eliminating the possibility of effects of the fluorophore on stoichiometry
(data not shown).

To confirm this stoichiometry and to more
readily determine the
equilibrium constants associated with the binding of ISWI to nucleosomes,
we monitored the binding interaction using a fluorescence anisotropy-based
assay and a nucleosome substrate in which
the 5′ end of the flanking DNA and both 5′ ends of the
flanking DNA were labeled with Alexa488; we refer to these substrates
as F10N5 and F10N5F, respectively. In these experiments, the titration
of the nucleosome substrates with increasing concentrations of ISWI
resulted in an increase in the fluorescence anisotropy of the fluorophore,
consistent with the formation of ISWI–nucleosome complexes
(Figure C)., The simplest
model consistent with the observed 2:1 stoichiometry of binding of
ISWI to these substrates is shown in Scheme . Through the global least-squares analysis using Scheme  of equilibrium binding isotherms collected with
two different total F10N5F concentrations, we determined the following
associated overall equilibrium constants: 1/β1 =
1.3 ± 0.6 nM, and 1/β2 = 13 ± 7 nM2. Using these parameters, we simulated the species distribution
for the equilibrium binding of ISWI to F10N5F nucleosomes (Figure D). As indicated in Figure D, cooperativity in the binding of ISWI to this substrate, if it
exists, is weak. Additional models, including one postulating that
ISWI can exist as a dimer in solution and thus bind the substrate
as either a monomer or a dimer, were also tested but were not consistent
with the binding isotherms (see Table 2 of the ).

ISWI Binding to DNA and
Nucleosomes in the Presence of ADP and
ATP Analogues
We repeated our equilibrium binding studies
in the presence of ADP and nonhydrolyzable ATP analogues to investigate
the effect of the ATP hydrolysis cycle on DNA and nucleosome binding.
Such information is critical for the proper modeling of the nucleosome
repositioning activity of ISWI [the following paper ()]. To determine the proper analogue
for these experiments, we measured the DNA-stimulated ATPase activity
of ISWI in the presence of ADP and the nonhydrolyzable ATP analogues,
ATP-γ-S and AMP-PNP; in these experiments, the concentration
of the ADP or ATP analogue was equal to the concentration of the ATP
in solution. We found that ATP-γ-S was the most effective in
competing with ATP for binding to ISWI as demonstrated by its ability
to inhibit the ATPase activity of ISWI (Figure 1 of the ). Similarly, we found
that at 1:1 equimolar concentrations ADP was effectively competing
with ATP for ISWI binding and consequently inhibiting ISWI ATPase
activity. Next, we performed equilibrium DNA binding studies in the
presence of concentrations of ADP and ATP-γ-S ranging from 0.5
to 2 mM. The presence of ADP had no effect on ISWI–DNA interactions
(Figure B). In contrast, in the presence of
ATP-γ-S, the affinity of ISWI for DNA was reduced significantly
(Figure A). We globally fit the equilibrium
DNA binding isotherms in the presence of this analogue using Scheme . This analysis returned the following values: 1/βA = 140 ± 30 μM, 1/βA,1 = 390 ±
70 μM, and 1/β1,A = 42 ± 8 nM (indicating
that the affinity of ISWI for binding DNA is reduced by a factor of
3 in the presence of ATP-γ-S). It is worth noting that our estimate
of 1/βA (140 ± 30 μM) is consistent with
a recent report of a Km of 150 ±
50 μM for the steady-state ATPase activity of Drosophila ISWI in the presence of DNA. We observed a similar decrease in the affinity
of DNA binding in the presence of ATP-γ-S in additional experiments
conducted with a 60 bp DNA substrate (data not shown), confirming
that this effect is not a DNA length effect (i.e., resulting from
the partial contact of ISWI with the DNA). Interestingly, as shown
in panels C and D of Figure , the affinity
of nucleosome binding by ISWI was independent of the presence of ADP
and ATP-γ-S. To confirm that nucleosome bound ISWI can still
bind ATP-γ-S and ADP, we performed nucleosome-stimulated ATPase
assays in the presence of increasing concentrations of ATP-γ-S
or ADP. We found that both nucleotides inhibit the ATPase activity
of ISWI in a concentration-dependent manner, demonstrating the ability
of nucleosome-bound ISWI to bind to these nucleotides (Figure 2A,B
of the ).

Fluorescence
anisotropy measurements (Δr) of equilibrium
binding of ISWI to DNA and nucleosomes in the presence
of nucleotides. (A) Equilibrium binding to a 20 bp FITC-labeled DNA
substrate (25 nM) in the presence of ATP-γ-S. These data were
analyzed using Scheme  as described in . The solid lines in the
figure represent the fits of the data to this scheme, which returned
the following values: 1/βA = 140 ± 30 μM,
1/βA,1 = 390 ± 70 μM, and 1/β1,A = 42 ± 8 nM. (B) Equilibrium binding to a 20 bp FITC-labeled
DNA substrate (25 nM) in the presence of ADP. The solid line in this
figure represents the fit of equilibrium DNA binding data collected
in the absence of nucleotide (Figure A). (C)
Equilibrium binding to an Alexa488-labeled 10N5 nucleosome substrate
in the presence of ATP-γ-S. (D) Equilibrium binding to an Alexa488-labeled
10N5 nucleosome substrate in the presence of ADP. The solid lines
in panels C and D are the fits of the equilibrium nucleosome binding
data collected in the absence of nucleotides (Figure C).

ISWI Binding to Nucleosome
Substrates with Long Flanking DNA
Recent studies of the nucleosome
repositioning activity of the
ISWI-containing remodeling complex ACF have suggested that the dependence
of the affinity of ACF for nucleosomes on the length of the DNA flanking
the core particle results in ACF generating evenly spaced nucleosome
arrays.− Similarly, the affinity of the ISWI-containing complex
ISW2 for nucleosome binding has been shown to increase with an increasing
length of the DNA flanking the nucleosome core particle, with a minimal
length of 20 bp required for any binding and optimal binding requiring
at least 60 bp of DNA. Because of these
results, we sought to determine whether ISWI has a different affinity
for binding to nucleosomal substrates with longer flanking DNA and
whether the binding to these substrates is regulated by nucleotides
in a manner that is similar to the regulation observed for our free
DNA substrate (Figure ).

To address
this question, we redesigned our previous nucleosomal substrate by
increasing the length of the flanking DNA on one side from 5 to 18
bp; this new substrate is denoted F10N18F. We chose this length of
flanking DNA to minimize the possibility of an additional ISWI binding
to the flanking DNA alone (i.e., not in contact with the histones);
furthermore, a similar length of flanking DNA was shown by photochemical
cross-linking assays to be contacted by the catalytic subunit (Isw2)
of the ISW2 complex and is a length that
is below the ISWI–DNA occluded site size. We monitored binding of ISWI to this substrate using the
same native gel analysis and fluorescence anisotropy assay; the resulting
data suggest that ISWI binds to this substrate with the same affinity
and stoichiometry as the F10N5F substrate (Figure A,B). Binding studies performed with 10N24 and with symmetrical
substrates (18N18F or 24N24) yielded similar outcomes (Figure 4A,B
of the ). Similar
to the F10N5 substrate, the presence of nucleotides had no effect
on the affinity of ISWI for the F10N18 substrate (Figure B) or the F10N24 substrate (Figure 4A of the ). In contrast, when using
a substrate with very long flanking DNA, 5N71, we found additional
ISWI can be accommodated as demonstrated in our EMSA experiment (Figure C). Furthermore, the affinity of ISWI for this substrate
was reduced in the presence of ATP-γ-S (Figure 7A,B of the ). Overall, these findings
suggest that the presence of additional flanking DNA is not required
for stable ISWI binding or the nucleotide regulation of the binding
to the nucleosome core, which is evident upon comparison of the binding
to the 10N5 and 10N18 substrates. Furthermore, the presence of very
long flanking DNA can provide an additional binding site for an ISWI
molecule that may be regulated by nucleotides.

ISWI binding to nucleosome
substrate with long flanking DNA. (A)
EMSA performed by titrating a 10N18 nucleosome substrate (50 nM) with
increasing concentrations of ISWI ranging from 12 to 300 nM. Samples
were analyzed using a 5% TBE–acrylamide native gel. Gels were
stained using a DNA staining dye and imaged using a Typhoon imager.
(B) Fluorescence anisotropy measurements (Δr) of equilibrium binding of ISWI to Alexa488-labeled 10N18 nucleosomes
in the presence of 2 mM nucleotides. To more readily determine the
effect of ADP on ISWI binding, two different concentrations [2.5 nM
(●, ▲, and ◆) and 10 nM (■ and ▼)]
of the 10N18 substrates were used in the associated binding experiments.
The solid line in this panel represents the fit of the equilibrium
nucleosome binding data collected in the absence of nucleotides. (C)
Electrophoretic mobility shift assay performed by titrating a nonlabeled
5N71 nucleosome substrate (50 nM) with increasing concentrations of
ISWI ranging from 12 to 300 nM. Samples were analyzed using a 5% TBE–acrylamide
native gel. Gels were stained using a DNA staining dye and imaged
using a Typhoon imager.

Discussion
The ability of ISWI to translocate along
DNA in an ATP-dependent
manner is necessary for its nucleosome repositioning activity., During these processes, the enzyme undergoes continual rounds of
ATP binding, hydrolysis, and product release. For further delineation
of the role of DNA translocation in the mechanism of nucleosome repositioning
by ISWI, we quantitatively characterized the DNA and nucleosome binding
properties of ISWI. Furthermore, to understand the role of the ATP
binding and hydrolysis cycle in regulating translocation, we quantified
binding of ISWI to DNA and nucleosome substrates in the presence of
nucleotide analogues.

ISWI Binding to DNA Substrates
The
simplest model consistent
with our studies of the equilibrium binding of ISWI with a 20 bp double-stranded
DNA substrate is a 1:1 interaction with an equilibrium constant 1/β1 of 18 ± 2 nM (Scheme ). This
result agrees with previous studies showing that while Drosophila ISWI is unable to bind a 15 or 18 bp double-stranded DNA with detectable
affinity,, binding to a 23 bp DNA substrate was observed.Drosophila ISWI has also been
shown to bind a 35 bp DNA in a cooperative manner, indicating that
more than one ISWI molecule binds to this substrate, with a reported K1/2 of 15 nM. Consistent
with our model, these data suggest that the contact and occluded site
sizes for DNA binding are between 18 and 23 bp. Interestingly, an
apparent weaker DNA binding affinity (K1/2) for SNF2h was determined from analysis of its DNA-stimulated ATPase
activity. While these results suggest
that ISWI and SNF2h have different intrinsic affinities for DNA binding,
the weaker affinity for DNA binding by SNF2h might also result in
part from it being determined indirectly through DNA-stimulated ATPase
assays. Furthermore, this affinity was
found to vary with DNA length from &gt;1400 nM for 10 bp DNA to 4
nM
for 100 bp DNA. It is not surprising
that the apparent affinity determined from these experiments would
increase with an increasing DNA length because the rate of DNA binding
will scale with the number of DNA binding sites, and hence with the
length of the DNA., It is worth noting that although
ISWI binds double-stranded DNA more tightly than the SWI/SNF chromatin
remodeler RSC (Kd ∼ 140 nM), the kcat for ISWI
is much lower than for RSC and may suggest
a constraint related to the catalytic domain common to both ISWI and
RSC.

ISWI Binding to Nucleosomal Substrates
Our EMSA studies
of the equilibrium binding of ISWI to nucleosomal substrates with
very short flanking DNA, 10N5, demonstrated that ISWI binds to this
substrate with a 2:1 stoichiometry. Through subsequent global analysis
of anisotropy-based equilibrium binding studies of ISWI binding to
fluorophore-labeled nucleosomal substrates, we determined the following
associated overall equilibrium constants: 1/β1 =
1.3 ± 0.6 nM, and 1/β2 = 13 ± 7 nM2. Increasing the length of the flanking DNA to 18 bp from
one side did not affect the affinity or the stoichiometry of ISWI
binding, while further increasing the length to 71 bp provides an
additional binding site leading to the binding of an additional ISWI.

Previous studies of equilibrium nucleosome binding by ISWI have
presented conflicting results regarding the ability of ISWI to bind
nucleosome core particles that lack flanking DNA.,, One possibility for these differences is
in the sequence used to reconstitute the nucleosomes; indeed, it is
known that different positioning sequences give rise to different
dynamic nucleosome states. Similarly,
measurements of affinity for nucleosome binding determined indirectly
through ATPase assays showed that SNF2h binds to nucleosomes with
short (&lt;20 bp) flanking DNA with affinities ranging from 25 to
&gt;250 nM., These results form the basis
of a model
in which the affinity of SNF2h for nucleosomes is a function of the
length of the flanking DNA and that the presence of additional noncatalytic
subunits is required for efficient binding to nucleosomes with very
short flanking DNA. In comparison to
our observed stoichiometry, a negative stain electron microscopy study
showed that two SNF2h molecules are bound to a nucleosome substrate
with 60 bp of flanking DNA. It is worth noting that, unfortunately,
in these images the flanking DNA was not visible. Although it was
suggested that this might be a result of flanking DNA flexibility
or the fact that DNA is occupied by one of the bound SNF2h molecules, other native gel studies have shown that multiple
ISWI molecules can bind to a nucleosome substrate with 36–64
bp of flanking DNA.,

Studies conducted with
other ISWI-containing complexes, such as
the yeast ISW2, have shown that the affinity of nucleosome binding
is dependent upon the length of the flanking DNA with a minimum of
20 bp required for stable binding. Affinities
of ISW2 for nucleosome binding similar to what we report here for
ISWI required more than 70 bp of flanking DNA, suggesting that interactions mediated by the noncatalytic
protein subunits in the ISW2 complex to the flanking DNA might be
contributing to the observed affinity. Unfortunately, more quantitative
comparisons between these results are complicated by the fact that
conflicting estimates of the stoichiometries for binding of ISW2 to
various nucleosome substrates (0N20, 0N67, 0N70, and 0N109) have been
reported.,, Naturally,
any ambiguity in the stoichiometry of the interaction of ISW2 with
these substrates complicates estimates of the associated affinity.

Nucleotide Regulation of Binding of ISWI to DNA
We
investigated the effect of the ATP hydrolysis cycle on DNA binding
and found that while ADP has no effect on the binding affinity of
ISWI for DNA, ATP analogues weakened the interaction between ISWI
and DNA. The binding of other members of the SF-II superfamily to
single- and double-stranded DNA was shown to be modulated by the ATP
hydrolysis cycle, and this allosteric effect is central to the processive
DNA translocation activity of these enzymes.− Our observation that binding
of ADP by ISWI has no regulatory effects on binding of DNA by ISWI
is also consistent with a previous study of Drosophila ISWI. However, studies that characterized
how nucleotides allosterically regulate the DNA binding affinity of
ISW2 have yielded conflicting results: while one study showed that
ADP reduced the DNA binding affinity of ISW2, another study showed that ADP had no effect on DNA binding affinity. It was suggested that this discrepancy results
from differences between recombinant and native preparations of ISW2. Furthermore, our observations are different
from the regulation that was reported for the SWI/SNF subfamily chromatin
remodeler RSC. This suggests a difference
in the mechanisms of DNA translocation by ISWI and RSC that might
contribute to the differences in the proposed models of their nucleosome
repositioning activities.,,

Nucleotide Regulation of Binding of ISWI to Nucleosomes
We also characterized the effect of nucleotide binding on nucleosome
binding by ISWI and found that the binding of ISWI to nucleosomes
with flanking DNA ranging from 5 to 18 bp in length was unaltered
by ADP or ATP analogues. In agreement with our observations for ISWI,
neither ATP-γ-S nor ADP affects the nucleosome binding affinity
of ISW2;, however, the results of restriction mapping
experiments suggest that slight changes in contacts with the nucleosomes
occur in the presence of ATP analogues. Interestingly, a recent study has demonstrated that only a small
percent (1–3%) of the nucleosome-bound SNF2h in vivo was affected by ATP levels. More striking
are differences between the nucleotide-mediated regulation of nucleosome
binding by ISWI and SNF2h. The affinity of SNF2h for a 0N40 nucleosome
has been shown to increase in the presence of an ATP analogue and
decrease in the presence of ADP. It is
worth mentioning that the length of the flanking DNA used in these
experiments is beyond both the contact and occluded site sizes of
DNA binding by ISWI,, and that additional ISWI complexes have been observed for nucleosomes
with comparable lengths (36–64 bp) of flanking DNA. Thus, the presence of an additional SNF2h binding
site on the flanking DNA was possible in these experiments. Because
SNF2h is known to bind DNA with affinities comparable to those for
core nucleosome binding and if the binding
of SNF2h to DNA is regulated by nucleotides similar to ISWI, the presence
of an additional SNF2h binding site on flanking DNA would lead to
the overall observation of nucleotide-mediated regulation of nucleosome
binding by ISWI or SNF2h. Consistent with this hypothesis was our
observation that the affinity of ISWI for a 5N71 nucleosome substrate
was reduced in the presence of ATP-γ-S. This substrate can accommodate
an additional ISWI bound on the flanking DNA that is not in contact
with the nucleosome core.

Naturally, it is also possible that,
although highly conserved, ISWI and SNF2h proteins from different
species display distinct behaviors. Indeed, the allosteric effect
of nucleotides on DNA binding was found to vary when comparing helicases
from different superfamilies with very similar structures.− Nevertheless, without an independent determination of the stoichiometry
of binding of SNF2h or ISWI to these nucleosome substrates, a determination
of the mechanism through which nucleotide binding allosterically regulates
nucleosome binding is problematic. Indeed, as demonstrated in the
following paper (),
such information is critical for correct modeling of the nucleosome
repositioning activity of ISWI.

Implications for Nucleosome
Repositioning
Our findings
show that ISWI binds nucleosomes with 5 or 10 bp of flanking DNA with
very high affinity, and that additional lengths of flanking DNA are
not required for further enhancement of the stability of the binding.
The fact that free DNA but not nucleosome binding is allosterically
regulated by nucleotides might suggest a model in which ISWI stably
contacts structures that are present on the nucleosome but not on
free DNA. This agrees with the nucleosome repositioning model for
ISWI put forward by Längst and Becker, with previously published data showing that the ATPase activity
of ISWI is maximally stimulated in the presence of nucleosomes but
not free DNA,,, and with previously published data demonstrating that interactions
between ISWI and the H4 tail regulate ISWI’s ATPase activity.,− On the other hand, it is possible that ISWI bound to the nucleosome
core still interacts weakly with the flanking DNA and those interactions
are regulated by nucleotides. However, even if those weaker contacts
with the flanking DNA are present and regulated by nucleotides in
a manner similar to the regulation of binding to free DNA, the weak
nature of those contacts in comparison to the nature of the interactions
made with the nucleosome core would still result in no observed nucleotide-mediated
regulation of nucleosome binding. This possibility is in agreement
with our observations that increasing the length of the DNA to 24
bp has no effect on the affinity of ISWI for the nucleosome core,
and that the binding to this longer substrate is also not regulated
by nucleotides.

Because ISWI has two domains that are known
to interact with both DNA and nucleosomes [the ATPase domain and the
C-terminal HAND-SANT-SLIDE (HSS) domain], determining the origin of the differences in how ISWI binds to
nucleosomes and DNA requires resolution of how these two domains interact
with these substrates. It was recently demonstrated that the N-terminal
ATPase domain of ISWI formed the same ATPase stimulating contacts
with nucleosomes as the full length ISWI and is sufficient for nucleosome
sliding activity. While the deletion
of the entire C-terminal HSS domain decreased the affinity of ISWI
for DNA and nucleosomes, compromising mutations of DNA-interacting
residues of the SLIDE domain had no effect on the affinity for nucleosome
binding but did alter contacts with the flanking DNA., These results are consistent with a regulatory role for the C-terminal
DNA binding domain of ISWI in the repositioning activity, such as
determining directionality of translocation or remodeling efficiency
and/or processivity. Furthermore, these findings suggest that regulatory
mechanisms, such as nucleotide binding or flanking DNA binding, but
not the stable contacts made with the nucleosome core, might play
a supporting role in the regulation of nucleosome repositioning. Future
mutagenesis and deletion studies aiming to dissect the details of
the binding to DNA and nucleosomes, nucleotide-mediated allosteric
regulation, and potential cross-talk between the different domains
will be of great interest and will contribute further to the understanding
of the role of each domain in regulating the nucleosome binding and
repositioning activity of ISWI.

It is also possible that other
noncatalytic subunits associated
with ISWI in ISWI-containing complexes play a role in the allosteric
regulation of nucleosome binding by those complexes. Conformational
changes in ISWI upon ATP binding and hydrolysis can be also translated
into these protein subunits causing pronounced changes in the interaction
with flanking DNA, or changes occurring in the ISWI conformation when
in complex with these subunits alter the interactions of ISWI with
DNA and nucleosomes. Indeed, it has been demonstrated that noncatalytic
proteins within the ISW2 complex contact the flanking DNA and that
those contacts can extend as far as 53 bp, and that additional subunits within the ACF complex and the CHRAC
complex appear to modulate its nucleosome binding and repositioning
activities., Future studies that directly
compare the nucleosome binding and its associated allosteric regulation
for ISWI-containing complexes are required to further resolve these
issues.

Finally, our observation that a single nucleosome can
accommodate
up to two bound ISWI enzymes raises several questions regarding the
nucleosome repositioning activity of such a complex: if two ISWI enzymes
were bound simultaneously to the same nucleosome, would only one or
both be active during repositioning? Does any cross-talk occur between
the two ISWI during repositioning? In other words, do the two enzymes
work independently or concertedly? In light of the difficulty in interpreting
nucleosome repositioning data in the absence of information about
the stoichiometry with which the remodeler binds the nucleosome substrate,
we argue that resolution of these questions would require measuring
the nucleosome repositioning activity of ISWI under conditions of
known bound stoichiometry and information regarding nucleotide regulation. Nevertheless, it is worth noting that both
SNF2h and human ACF are believed to function as dimers, and that the dependency of ATP hydrolysis on the length of the flanking
DNA along with the allosteric regulation
by nucleotides controls which subunit of the dimer is active. In contrast, recent estimates of the total concentration
of SNF2h and nucleosomes in human cells would argue that the predominant
bound species in vivo is monomeric SNF2h. The fact that some remodeling complexes, such
as WCRF and human CHRAC, contain multiple ISWI subunits, only further emphasizes the need to determine how multiple ISWIs
bound to the same nucleosome coordinate their nucleosome repositioning
activity.

Supporting Information Available
Analysis of equilibrium DNA
binding isotherms in the absence of nucleotides using different models
(Table 1), comparison of different stoichiometries of binding of ISWI
to nucleosomes (Table 2), nucleotide analogue screening (Figure 1),
nucleosome-stimulated ATPase–nucleotide competition assay (Figure
2), non-normalized change in fluorescence anisotropy measurements
of ISWI–DNA and ISWI–nucleosome binding (Figure 3),
fluorescence anisotropy measurements (Δr) of
binding of ISWI to F10N24, F18N18F, and F24N24F nucleosomes (Figure
4), effect of the CBP tag on ISWI–DNA interactions (Figure
5), effect of the fluorophore on ISWI–DNA interactions (Figure
6), and ISWI binding to 5N71 nucleosomes in the presence of ATP-γ-S
(Figure 7). This material is available free of charge via the Internet
at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bi500224t_si_001.pdf

The authors declare
no
competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
We thank Dr. Mark Richter,
Dr. John Karanicolas, Dr. Philip
Gao, and Dr. Alexander Moise (University of Kansas) for the generous
donation of equipment and reagents. We are grateful to Dr. Bradley
Cairns (University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT) for the histone expression
plasmids. We also thank Dr. Timothy J. Richmond (ETH, Zurich, Switzerland)
for the kind gift of the nucleosome positioning sequence. We are thankful
to Dr. Paul Wade (National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD) for
xISWI cDNA. Thanks to all members of the Fischer lab for suggestions
and critical reading of the manuscript.

Abbreviations
ISWIimitation switch

AMP-PNPadenylyl-imidodiphosphate

ATP-γ-Sadenosine
5′-(3-trithiophosphate).

