Motile bacterial and archaeal
cells possess a conserved chemosensory pathway that senses external
chemical gradients and controls cell movement, allowing migration
toward an optimal living environment (reviewed in refs (−)). This chemotactic behavior plays a crucial role in cell survival
under nutrient limiting conditions, as well as in pathogenic wound
or tissue seeking during infection.−

The protein components
of the chemosensory pathway include receptors,
kinases, phosphatases, adaptor proteins, and adaptation proteins,
all of which assemble to form a membrane-bound, hexagonal-lattice
array.,,− The core structural proteins of this chemosensory array are the
transmembrane receptor, histidine kinase CheA, and adaptor protein
CheW. Together, these three proteins form a core unit composed of
(i) two receptor oligomers, each a trimer of homodimers, (ii) one
kinase homodimer, and (iii) two adaptor molecules.,,,,− Three of these core units join to form a hexagonal unit, and the
assembled array may contain dozens or hundreds of hexagons (Figure ). Each hexagonal unit is stabilized by a six-membered
ring, composed of three kinase regulatory domains alternating with
three CheW molecules, that contacts each of the six receptor oligomers
within the hexagonal unit. This six-membered ring possesses pseudo-6-fold
symmetry because of the homologous, dual-SH3 domain structural folds
of the kinase regulatory domain and CheW., The structural framework of the array does not change substantially
during ligand-triggered on–off switching; instead, signals
are transmitted through the array by subtle structural and/or dynamical
changes.−

Core
unit architecture, assembly of core units into higher-order
complexes, and locations of the present modifications at specific
core unit interfaces. (A) Current working model for the architecture
of the core unit formed by two receptor oligomers (each a trimer of
dimers, tan), one histidine kinase protein (CheA, a homodimer, green),
and two adaptor proteins (CheW, monomeric, blue).−,−, Shown also is the hypothesized mechanism for the assembly of core
units into the hexagonal chemosensory array. (B and C) Locations of the kinase regulatory domain bulky kpL545W
and kpV634W Trp substitutions (brown) at the contacts with the receptor
and adaptor protein, respectively.− (D) Location of the
engineered kpD586C/apN50C Cys pair (yellow) at kinase–adaptor
interface 1 in the kinase–adaptor ring.

The best studied chemosensory
array is that of Escherichia
coli and Salmonella typhimurium, two closely
related species whose core array components are nearly identical and
are functionally interchangeable.,,,, Quantitative analysis of this array has revealed it is ultrasensitive,
such that the binding of only one or two ligand molecules to the receptor
lattice can generate a detectable signal output. Moreover, ex vivo arrays assembled from
the three core components in cells and isolated in bacterial membranes
are kinetically ultrastable, such that upon incubation at room temperature
the isolated arrays continue to exhibit receptor-regulated kinase
activity for days or weeks. The remarkable
ultrasensitivity and ultrastability of the chemosensory array are
believed to arise from an extensive network of contacts among the
three core components.,, These
exceptional features, together with the availability of more than
20000 receptors specific for a wide array of ligands in bacterial
genomes, and the ability of receptors
of different specificities to assemble into the same core units and
arrays,,, make the array
a highly promising platform for the development of homogeneous and
heterogeneous biosensors.

The receptor–kinase–adaptor
core units, as well as
larger assemblies of core units ranging in size up to small hexagonal
arrays, can be reconstituted in vitro by combining
isolated, receptor-containing bacterial membranes with purified kinase
and adaptor protein.,,,,,− Cryo-electron microscopy studies
of reconstitutions in which the assembly process is halted before
full array cooperativity is achieved, and presumably before the array
is fully assembled, suggest the assembly reaction begins with the
formation of individual core units, which then associate to form larger
complexes, including dimers of core units (partial hexagons), trimers
(full hexagons), and nascent arrays (multiple hexagons) (Figure A). Like arrays isolated
from cells, these reconstituted core complex preparations are kinetically
ultrastable at room temperature over a time scale of days to weeks., When observed for several weeks, the kinase activity of the reconstituted
core complexes decays as the bound kinase molecules are clipped by
proteolysis, leading to the loss of the N-terminal substrate domain
and kinase function.

Careful analysis
of the protein–protein interfaces that
underlie the ultrastability is central to a basic understanding of
the conserved chemosensory array. Moreover, identification of the
most crucial interfaces could lead to the development of new antibiotics
that block pathogenic infection by disrupting the array and eliminating
chemotaxis, rather than by destroying all pathogenic and nonpathogenic
bacteria. Because the loss of chemosensing is detrimental only under
nutrient-starved conditions,,,,, antibiotics that disrupt the array would fight infection while preserving
the microbiome important to human health., Finally, interfacial modifications that enhance array stability
could facilitate biosensor development.

Altogether, the chemosensory
array is stabilized by four specific
protein–protein contacts, two involving receptor contacts (with
kinase and CheW) and two involving kinase–adaptor contacts
within the six-membered ring (kinase–adaptor contacts 1 and
2, respectively).,,,− This study investigated the contributions
of two of the four interfaces: (i) the contact between the receptor
protein interaction subdomain and the kinase regulatory domain that
is formed within the core unit, and (ii) contact 1 between the kinase
regulatory domain and the adaptor protein, which is also formed within
the core unit. To destabilize or stabilize a given interface, the
study employed a bulky Trp substitution to weaken the contact or an
engineered disulfide bond to covalently bridge the interface, respectively.
Subsequently, the effects of the modification on the kinetic stability
and proteolytic susceptibility of the array proteins and their receptor-regulated
kinase activity were quantified over long time courses extending for
days or weeks. The findings show that both core unit interfaces examined
play central roles in ultrastability. Trp substitutions that weaken
an interface reduce stability substantially, whereas a disulfide bond
that covalently cross-links an interface dramatically enhances stability
far beyond the already remarkable native ultrastability.

Materials and
Methods
Materials
All chemicals were highly pure reagent-grade.
Chemicals were obtained from Sigma-Aldrich with the following exceptions:
[γ-32P]ATP from PerkinElmer, dithiothreitol (DTT)
from Research Products International, Ni-nitrilotriacetic acid (Ni-NTA)
agarose resin from Qiagen, bicinchoninic acid assay (BCA) reagents
from Bio-Rad, and polyvinylidene fluoride from Millipore.

Protein Expression
and Purification
S. typhimurium Cysless
CheA kinase and Cysless CheW adaptor protein possessing
six-His tags on their N-termini were expressed from plasmids pET6H-CheA
and pET6H-CheW, respectively, in E. coli strain BL21(DE3)
(Stratagene). The indicated CheA kinase
and CheW adaptor protein point mutations were introduced into these
Cysless backgrounds using the polymerase chain reaction-based QuickChange
XLII mutagenesis kit (Agilent). Mutations were confirmed by DNA sequencing
the coding region. E. coli CheY with a C-terminal
six-His tag was expressed by plasmid pVSCheY-6H in E. coli strain plasmid M15-pREP4 (Qiagen). All
soluble proteins were isolated as previously described by standard
Ni-NTA agarose affinity chromatography., Protein concentrations
were estimated by UV absorption using extinction coefficients at 276
nm calculated from protein sequences as previously described.

E. coli serine receptor
(Tsr) was overexpressed in gutted E. coli strain
UU1581, which lacks all chemotaxis proteins, including receptors and
adaptation enzymes, using plasmid pJC3. Inside out, inner bacterial membrane vesicles containing Tsr were
isolated as previously described., The total
protein concentration in the membranes was determined by a BCA assay,
and the fraction of total protein represented by receptors was determined
by ImageJ densitometry of sodium dodecyl sulfate–polyacrylamide
gel electrophoresis (SDS–PAGE) gels. The receptor concentration
was determined by combining these two values.

Reconstitution of Functional
Core Complexes
Functional,
membrane-bound core complexes were reconstituted by combining 6.7
μM Tsr receptor, 5 μM CheA kinase, and 10 μM CheW
adaptor protein in kinase assay buffer [160 mM NaCl, 5 mM MgCl2, 50 mM Tris, 0.5 mM ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA),
pH 7.5] for 45 min at 22 °C in the presence of 0.5 mg/mL BSA,
2 mM TCEP, and 2 mM PMSF unless otherwise specified. Samples were
centrifuged at 21000g for 7 min, and pellets were
washed twice to remove free CheA kinase and CheW adaptor protein by
being resuspended in a 10-fold excess of modified kinase assay buffer
(without BSA, TCEP, and PMSF) and repelleted. After the final wash,
pellets were resuspended in the original volume of modified kinase
assay buffer, resulting in functional, washed core complexes.,

Aging of Core Complexes
Reconstituted, washed core
complexes were aged as described with minor modifications., Briefly, all Eppendorf tubes and pipet tips were autoclaved prior
to being used, and an aseptic technique was utilized to minimize possible
contamination. For each aging time course, reconstituted core complexes
were incubated at room temperature (∼22 °C) and protected
from light for up to 432 h as specified. At each time point, the Eppendorf
tubes containing the complexes were gently flicked to mix the membrane
suspension, and then aliquots of the aged complexes were removed and
prepared for quantification of the receptor-regulated CheA kinase
activity and the amount of full-length CheA retained in the membrane
complexes (see below).

Where specified, 3 nM trypsin (final
concentration) was added immediately after core complex reconstitution
as described previously to ascertain whether
the core components were susceptible to exogenous protease during
the aging time course. Trypsin stocks were prepared fresh for each
experiment from lyophilized powder and dissolved in 1 mM HCl at pH
3.

Quantifying the Decay Kinetics of Receptor-Regulated CheA Kinase
Activity within the Core Complexes
To monitor the decay kinetics
of CheA kinase activity, the relative kinase activities of core complexes
were measured at time points during the aging time course, as previously
described with minor modifications. A
5 μL aliquot of core complexes removed at a given time point
was mixed with 5 μL of CheY, yielding final concentrations of
3.3 μM receptor and 40 μM CheY. These concentrations were
suitable to ensure that CheA kinase autophosphorylation was the rate-determining
step and not phosphotransfer from CheA-P to CheY.− Receptor-mediated
attractant regulation was quantified by addition of 2 mM serine. Kinase
reactions were initiated by addition of 1 mM [γ-32P]ATP (4000–8000 cpm/pmol), followed by reaction at 21 °C
for 10 s, and then quenched by addition of 30 μL of 2×
Laemmli sample buffer containing 50 mM EDTA. The samples were then
snap-frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at −20 °C until
the time course was completed. All samples were then simultaneously
analyzed on denaturing SDS–PAGE gels and extensively dried,
and the γ-32P-labeled CheY band was quantified using
phosphorimaging. The same stock of [γ-32P]ATP was
utilized throughout the time course, ensuring that 32P
decay was equivalent for all samples and thus not a factor in time
course analysis. Moreover, each gel included multiple aliquots of
a large-volume, standard Cysless reaction conducted at the beginning
of the time course and used to normalize the relative magnitudes of
all γ-32P-labeled CheY bands on that gel, thereby
correcting for minor variability between gels.

Quantifying the Degradation
Kinetics of Intact, Full-length
CheA Kinase within the Core Complexes
The time course of
proteolytic degredation of intact, full-length CheA kinase within
the reconstituted core complexes was quantified as described with
minor modifications., Briefly, 5 μL of core complexes
removed at a given time point was centrifuged at 21000g for 10 min to pellet the membranes, thereby separating them from
any free CheA or fragments in solution. The supernatant was carefully
removed by aspiration and the pellet resuspended in 10 μL of
sample loading buffer with or without DTT as indicated. The samples
were then heated to 95 °C for 1 min, snap-frozen in liquid nitrogen,
and finally stored at −80 °C until the time course was
completed. Samples were then run on a 10% SDS gel to resolve the CheA
kinase bands via Coomassie staining, and the full-length CheA band
was quantified by densitometry. Each gel included multiple aliquots
of a large-volume, standard Cysless core complex reconstitution conducted
at the beginning of the time course and used to normalize the relative
amounts of full-length CheA in all samples on the same gel, thereby
correcting for minor variability between gels.

Generating and Analyzing
Disulfide-Linked, Reconstituted Core
Complexes
Reconstituted core complexes containing disulfide-linked
CheA kinase and CheW adaptor protein were generated using a modified
reconstitution procedure as described previously. Briefly, core components were mixed together as described
above, except that no reducing agents were utilized. After the 45
min incubation, Cu(II) was added to a final concentration of 5 mM.
After 20 s, 2 volumes of kinase assay buffer was added, and the membrane-bound
core complexes were immediately washed to remove any unbound CheA
kinase and CheW adaptor protein as well as Cu(II). The decay of kinase
activity and the decay of full-length CheA kinase were quantified
during aging of the core complexes as described above.

Data and Error
Analysis
All data points shown are averages
of a minimum of three replicates. Error bars and ranges indicate the
standard error unless otherwise specified. Asterisks indicate statistically
significant changes (P &lt; 0.05).

Results
Modified Core
Proteins Employed in This Study
To test
the effects of perturbing two key protein–protein interfaces
within the core unit on the ultrastability of reconstituted core complexes,
four previously described, mutations were introduced
into the standard set of Cysless core proteins. These core proteins
were the natively Cysless serine receptor (Tsr) and engineered Cysless
versions of CheA His-kinase and CheW adaptor protein, which together
are known to yield functional, ultrastable core complexes., Figure  illustrates the locations of the
four interface-perturbing modifications within the core complex.

Effects of the Modified Proteins on the Assembly and Kinase
Activity of Reconstituted Core Complexes
At the receptor–kinase
interface, the kinase protein L545W mutation (kpL545W) was designed to weaken the primary receptor–kinase
contact by introducing a surface Trp substitution onto the receptor-binding
face of the kinase P5 regulatory domain (Figure B). The bulky Trp side chain at this position had little or no effect
on the level of kinase incorporated into core complexes during reconstitution
but significantly reduced the specific activity of the incorporated
kinase (ref () and
Table ). The latter inhibition of specific
kinase activity indicates a loss of receptor-mediated kinase activation
within the assembled core complexes. The minor effect on kinase incorporation
suggests that the assembly reaction is directed largely by one or
more of the other three contacts, rather than by the receptor–kinase
contact.

Functional Parameters of Reconstituted
Core Complexes
 	 	kinase
specific activity	
kinase and
adaptor proteins	kinase incorporation	without Ser	with Ser	
kp and ap Cysless	1.0 ± 0.1	1.0 ± 0.1	0.05 ± 0.01	
kpL545W, apCysless	0.9 ± 0.2	0.20 ± 0.02	0.01 ± 0.01	
kpV634W, apCysless	0.6 ± 0.1	0.5 ± 0.1	0.08 ± 0.1	
kpD586C, apN50C (reduced)	1.0 ± 0.2	1.0 ± 0.2	0.2 ± 0.1	
kpD586C–apN50C (oxidized)	1.0 ± 0.2	1.1 ± 0.1	0.2 ± 0.1	
kp, kinase protein
(CheA); ap, adaptor
protein (CheW).

Relative
to Cysless.

Relative to
Cysless without Ser.

Also
see ref ().

Also see ref ().

At the kinase–adaptor interface within the
core unit (kinase–adaptor
contact 1), the kinase protein V634W mutation (kpV634W) was designed to introduce a bulky surface Trp
onto the surface of the kinase P5 regulatory domain that contacts
the adaptor protein (Figure C). The mutation
was observed to significantly reduce both the level of incorporation
of kinase into the reconstituted complexes and the specific kinase
activity of the molecules that are incorporated (ref () and Table ), indicating that kinase–adaptor contact 1 is important
in both complex assembly and kinase function.

At this same kinase–adaptor
contact 1, the kinase protein
mutation D586C (kpD586C) and the adaptor protein mutation N50C (apN50C)
together introduced a pair of surface Cys residues separated by only
7 Å that were easily oxidized to form an interface-bridging disulfide
bond within the core unit (Figure D). The reduced Cys pair was relatively nonperturbing,
yielding near-native kinase incorporation and specific activity in
reconstituted core complexes. Furthermore, disulfide formation within
the assembled complexes retained full kinase activity, indicating
the disulfide bond covalently stabilized the native interface (ref () and Table ). [Note that analogous engineered disulfide studies of the
receptor–kinase interface were not possible, because only two
of the six receptor homodimers in the core unit are bound to the kinase
(Figure A). As previously observed, oxidation
of complexes possessing Cys pairs on the receptor and kinase yielded
extensive receptor–receptor disulfide cross-linking that destroyed
the native structure and kinase activity of the reconstituted core
complexes.]

Effects of Bulky Trp Substitutions
on the Stability of Reconstituted
Core Complexes
To test the prediction that ultrastability
requires the native receptor–kinase and kinase–adaptor
contacts within the core unit, the stabilities of core complexes reconstituted
from Cysless and Trp mutant components were compared in 72 h time
courses. The decay of both (i) intact, core complex-associated, full-length
kinase protein and (ii) total, core complex-associated kinase activity
was quantified. For the control Cysless reconstituted complexes, as
previously observed, the decays of kinase
intactness and activity each displayed two-component decay time courses
in which (i) the quasi-stable component (approximately half of the
observed population) was lost over the 72 h experiment with an exponential
decay time of 17–34 h whereas (ii) the ultrastable component
(the remaining half) remained intact after 72 h (Figure A and Table ). Longer time courses
have previously shown that the ultrastable component exhibits an exponential
decay time of weeks rather than days (ref () and Figure C).

Effect of bulky
kpL545W and kpV634W Trp substitutions on the ultrastability
of reconstituted core complexes. Shown are 72 h decay time courses
for reconstituted, washed core complexes formed on isolated E. coli membranes. Serine receptor (Tsr), histidine kinase
(CheA), and adaptor protein (CheW) were mixed and incubated to reconstitute
core complexes, and then the resulting membrane-bound complexes were
washed to remove unbound components. Each plot summarizes the decay
of intact, full-length kinase (Kinase Intactness, dashed line and
empty symbols) and of kinase enzymatic function (Kinase Activity,
solid line and filled symbols). In each case, the addition of attractant
(Ser) fully inhibited kinase activity via native, receptor-mediated
kinase regulation. Table  summarizes the kinetic
parameters for each time course. (A) Decay of control Cysless reconstituted
complexes, exhibiting both a quasi-stable component (τ = 17–34
h for 60–70% of the population) and an ultrastable component
(τ ≫ 72 h for the remaining 30–40% of the population).
(B) Decay of reconstituted complexes containing the kinase protein
kpL545W mutation to perturb the receptor–kinase interface within
the core unit, exhibiting a quasi-stable (τ = 24–41 h
for 100% of the population) but no ultrastable component. (C) Decay
of reconstituted complexes containing the kinase protein kpV634W mutation
to perturb kinase–adaptor protein interface 1, located within
the core unit. The decay exhibits a quasi-stable (τ = 25–35
h for 100% of the population) but no ultrastable component.

Effects on ultrastability of a disulfide bond
bridging a core unit
interface. Decay time courses for reconstituted and washed core complexes
are shown (see the legend of Figure ). These
decays demonstrate the effects of the reduced or oxidized kpD586C/apN50C
Cys pair at kinase–adaptor interface 1 within the core unit;
the kpD586C–apN50C disulfide covalently cross-links this interface. Each plot summarizes the decay of intact, full-length
kinase (Kinase Intactness, dashed line and empty symbols) and of kinase
enzymatic function (Kinase Activity, solid line and filled symbols).
Addition of attractant (Ser) is observed to fully inhibit kinase activity
via native receptor-mediated kinase regulation. Table  summarizes the kinetic parameters. (A) A 72 h decay time
course of control reconstituted Cysless complexes, showing that the
redox treatments yield minimal perturbation of the decay kinetics
(compare with Figure A and Table ). Both the reduced and oxidized complexes exhibit
a quasi-stable component (τ = 17–34 and 19–32
h, respectively, for 60–70% of the population) and an ultrastable
component (τ ≫ 72 h for 30–40% of the population).
(B) A 72 h time course of the decay of reconstituted di-Cys complexes
containing the reduced Cys pair or the oxidized disulfide linkage.
The reduced di-Cys complexes exhibit both a quasi-stable component
(τ = 21–36 h for 60–80% of the population) and
an ultrastable component (τ ≫ 72 h for 20–40%
of the population) as observed in panel A for native Cysless complexes.
In contrast, the oxidized di-Cys complexes exhibit only the ultrastable
component (τ &gt; 300 h for 100% of the population). (C) A 432
h time course comparing the decay of Cysless complexes to that of
oxidized di-Cys complexes containing the disulfide linkage. As usual,
the Cysless complexes exhibit both a quasi-stable component (τ
= 35–42 h for 50% of the population) and an ultrastable component
(τ = 440–750 h for 50% of the population). In contrast,
the oxidized di-Cys complexes exhibit only the ultrastable component
(τ ≫ 1000 h for 100% of the population).

Decay Kinetics of Native and Modified
Reconstituted Core Complexes
 	For 72 h Time Courses      
[f(x) = Ae–t/τ + C]	
kinase and
adaptor proteins	activity
A	activity
 τ (h)	activity
C	 	intactness
A	intactness
 τ (h)	intactness
C	
kp and ap Cysless, reduced	0.7 ± 0.1	34 ± 10	0.3 ± 0.1	 	0.6 ± 0.1	17 ± 1	0.4 ± 0.1	
kp and ap Cysless, oxidized	0.7 ± 0.1	32 ± 9	0.3 ± 0.1	 	0.7 ± 0.1	19 ± 1	0.3 ± 0.1	
kpL545W, apCysless	1.0 ± 0.1	41 ± 1	0.0 ± 0.1	 	1.0 ± 0.1	24 ± 3	0.0 ± 0.1	
kpV634W, apCysless	1.0 ± 0.1	35 ± 9	0.0 ± 0.1	 	1.0 ± 0.1	25 ± 7	0.0 ± 0.1	
kpD586C, apN50C, reduced	0.8 ± 0.1	36 ± 6	0.2 ± 0.1	 	0.6 ± 0.1	21 ± 8	0.4 ± 0.1	
kpD586C, apN50C, oxidized	1.0	&gt;300	0.0	 	1.0	&gt;300	0.0	
 	For 432 h Time Courses      [f(x) = Afaste–t/τfast + Aslowe–t/τslow]	
kinase and
adaptor proteins	activity
Afast	activity
 τfast (h)	activity
Aslow	activity
 τslow (h)	 	intactness
Afast	intactness
 τfast (h)	intactness
Aslow	intactness
 τslow (h)	
kp and ap Cysless, reduced	0.50 ± 0.01	35 ± 5	0.50 ± 0.02	440 ± 40	 	0.50 ± 0.01	42 ± 5	0.50 ± 0.01	750 ± 40	
kpD586C, apN50C, oxidized	0.0	not applicable	1.0	≫1000	 	0.0	not applicable	1.0	≫1000	
Decay time course of kinase activity
or intactness.

kp, kinase
protein (CheA); ap, adaptor
protein (CheW).

In contrast
to the two-component decays of the control core complexes,
the decay time courses of core complexes containing either one of
the two interfacial Trp substitutions possessed only one component
because the ultrastable subpopulation was converted to the quasi-stable
state. Incorporation of either bulky Trp yielded a single population
of reconstituted complexes exhibiting an exponential decay time of
24–41 h that was the same, within error, as that observed for
the quasi-stable component of control Cysless complexes (Figure B,C and Table ).

The
lack of an ultrastable component in these mutant complexes
strongly supports the hypothesis that the native receptor–kinase
and kinase–adaptor core unit interfaces both play essential
roles in ultrastability. These findings are consistent with the previous
observation that coupling a bulky fluor to the receptor protein interaction
region eliminates ultrastability, by disrupting the receptor–kinase
interface as described above, by disrupting the receptor–adaptor
protein interface, or both because the homologous kinase P5 regulatory
domain and the adaptor protein bind to the same site on different
receptor molecules.

Effects of
an Interfacial Disulfide Bond on the Stability of
Reconstituted Core Complexes
To ascertain whether additional
stabilization of a specific protein–protein contact can further
enhance the stability of reconstituted core complexes, the stabilities
of reconstituted core complexes lacking and possessing the engineered
kpD586C–apN50C disulfide bond bridging kinase–adaptor
contact 1 were quantified. The control experiment depicted in Figure A shows that the reduction and oxidation conditions
used in these studies to generate the fully reduced Cys pair and the
disulfide bond, respectively, had little or no effect on the stability
of reconstituted Cysless complexes.

Strikingly, oxidative formation
of the interfacial, kpD586C–apN50C disulfide bond converted
the quasi-stable population to the ultrastable state and dramatically
enhanced the stability of the reconstituted core complex. The oxidized
disulfide-containing core complexes exhibited little loss of intact,
full-length kinase, and minimal loss of specific kinase activity,
relative to those of Cysless or reduced di-Cys complexes lacking the
disulfide bond over the 72 h time course (Figure B and Table ).

The enhanced
stability conferred by the disulfide bond necessitated
a longer time scale measurement to quantify the decay lifetime. Thus,
a 432 h time course was conducted, which revealed that the disulfide-containing
core complexes behaved like a single population in which the exponential
decay constant for the loss of intact, full-length kinase, or its
activity, greatly exceeded 1000 h (or 5.9 weeks) (Figure C and Table ). In contrast,
Cysless complexes lacking the disulfide displayed both quasi-stable
and ultrastable components of equal proportions with decay times (35–42
and 440–750 h, respectively) similar to those previously measured
on long time scales (ref (), Figure C, and Table ).

Previous studies have shown that the more rapid decay
of the quasi-stable
state in reconstituted core complexes arises from proteolysis of the
bound kinase at its P1−P2 or P2−P3 linker. Both of these
long linkers couple the P1 substrate domain to the P3−P4−P5
kinase core region, and both are susceptible to proteolysis in the
free kinase. Proteolysis of either linker releases the substrate domain
while the P2−P3−P4−P5 or P3−P4−P5
fragment remains bound in the core complex, leading to loss of both
intact, full-length kinase and kinase activity. Thus, the simplest hypothesis for the stabilizing mechanism
of the disulfide linkage is protection of the bound kinase against
proteolysis.

Testing the Hypothesis That the Stability-Enhancing
Disulfide
Protects Reconstituted Core Complexes from Proteolysis
To
test the ability of the stabilizing kpD586C–apN50C disulfide
bond to protect reconstituted complexes against proteolysis, the stabilities
of complexes lacking and possessing the disulfide were quantified
in the presence of added trypsin. As previously observed, a low level of exogenous trypsin (3 nM) sped
the decay of intact, full-length kinase and kinase activity for the
quasi-stable component of Cysless complexes over a 24 h time course
but had little or no effect on the ultrastable component (Figure A and Table ). Similarly,
trypsin accelerated the decay of the quasi-stable component, but not
the ultrastable component, of reduced di-Cys complexes (Figure B and Table ). The same
level of trypsin had little or no effect on reconstituted, disulfide-containing
complexes, indicating virtually complete protection from proteolysis
over the 24 h time course (Figure B and Table ). This full protection provides further evidence
that the disulfide drives the entire core complex population into
the ultrastable state.

Effect of a disulfide bond bridging a core unit interface
on susceptibility
to proteolysis. A 24 h time course illustrating the effects of added
trypsin on Cysless and di-Cys complexes possessing the kpD586C/apN50C
Cys pair (see the legends of Figures  and ). Each plot summarizes the decay of intact, full-length
kinase (Kinase Intactness, dashed line and empty symbols) and of kinase
enzyme activity (Kinase Activity, solid line and filled symbols).
Addition of attractant (Ser) is observed to fully inhibit, within
error, receptor-mediated stimulation of kinase activity. Table  summarizes the kinetic parameters. (A) Decay time
courses of control, reconstituted Cysless complexes showing that in
the absence of trypsin the decay exhibits the usual quasi-stable (τ
= 35–42 h for 50% of the population) and ultrastable (τ
≫ 42 h for 50% of the population) components. Trypsin speeds
the decay of most of the quasi-stable component (τ = 1.8–6.3
h for 30–40% of the population, and τ = 35–42
h for 10–20% of the population), whereas trypsin has no detectable
effect on the ultrastable component (τ ≫ 48 h for 50%
of the population). (B) Decay time course of reconstituted di-Cys
complexes containing the reduced Cys pair or the oxidized disulfide
linkage, both in the presence of trypsin. For reduced di-Cys complexes,
as for Cysless complexes (see panel A), trypsin speeds the decay of
most of the quasi-stable component (τ = 1.4–1.5 h for
20–40% of the population, and τ = 35–42 h for
10–30% of the population), whereas trypsin has no detectable
effect on the ultrastable component (τ ≫ 48 h for 50%
of the population). In striking contrast, the oxidized di-Cys complexes
possess no detectable quasi-stable component, and the ultrastable
component is fully resistant to trypsin on the examined time scale
(τ ≫ 48 h for 100% of the population).

Decay Kinetics of Native and Modified
Reconstituted Core Complexes and Effects of Exogenous Protease
 	For 24 h Time Courses    
[f(x) = Atrypsine–t/τtrypsin + Afaste–t/τfast + C (where τfast is the Cysless value and C = 0.5)]	
kinase (and
adaptor)
 proteins	activity
Atrypsin	activity
 τtrypsin (h)	activity
Afast	activity
 τfast (h)	activity
C	intactness
Atrypsin	intactness
 τtrypsin (h)	intactness
Afast	intactness
 τfast (h)	intactness
C	
kp and
ap Cysless,
 reduced (−) trypsin	not
 available	not
 available	0.50 ± 0.01	35 ± 5	0.50 ± 0.02	no data	no data	0.50 ± 0.01	42 ± 5	0.50 ± 0.03	
kp and ap Cysless,
 reduced (+) trypsin	0.4 ± 0.1	1.8 ± 0.7	0.1 ± 0.1	(35)	(0.5)	0.3 ± 0.1	6.3 ± 0.9	0.2 ± 0.1	(42)	(0.5)	
kpD586C, apN50C,
 reduced (+) trypsin	0.4 ± 0.1	1.4 ± 0.9	0.1 ± 0.1	(35)	(0.5)	0.2 ± 0.1	1.5 ± 0.4	0.3 ± 0.1	(42)	(0.5)	
kpD586C–apN50C,
 oxidized (+) trypsin	0.0	not
 applicable	0.0	not
 applicable	1.0	0.0	not
 applicable	0.0	not
 applicable	1.0	
Decay time course
of kinase activity
or intactness.

kp, kinase
protein (CheA); ap, adaptor
protein (CheW).

Discussion
The findings reveal that a bulky surface Trp substitution at either
of two key core unit interfaces, the receptor–kinase interface
or kinase–adaptor interface 1, eliminates the ultrastability
of reconstituted core complexes (Figure  and
Table ). It follows that both native interfaces
play essential roles in ultrastability and that a single modification
at either site can disrupt this unique property, yet these same Trp
substitutions allow near normal core complex assembly and have little
or no effect on the decay kinetics of the quasi-stable state, indicating
those features are less sensitive to perturbations and do not require
a full set of native core unit contacts. More generally, the quasi-stable
and ultrastable states of native reconstituted complexes exhibit indistinguishable
specific kinase activities and attractant regulation. Thus, the key
features of the quasi-stable state that distinguish it from the ultrastable
state are its shorter functional lifetime and its lack of sensitivity
to interfacial mutations (Table ). A simple
hypothesis consistent with these observations is that the fully functional,
quasi-stable state is formed early in the assembly reaction, whereas
the ultrastable state is formed later by the establishment of additional,
or more well-ordered, protein–protein contacts.

Strong
evidence supporting the role of well-formed interfaces in
the ultrastable state is provided by the discovery that an engineered
disulfide bond greatly enhances ultrastability. This disulfide bridges
core unit kinase–adaptor interface 1 and generates virtually
complete conversion of the quasi-stable state into the ultrastable
state, while also doubling the already remarkable persistence of the
ultrastable state (Figure  and Table ). The resulting enhancement of stability increases
the functional, exponential lifetime of the ultrastable state from
460 ± 50 h (19 days) to well over 1000 h (a lower limit, approximately
6 weeks).

The findings also reveal that the interfacial disulfide
enhances
ultrastability by protecting the bound kinase from proteolysis. Previous
studies have shown that, in the quasi-stable state, the decay of intact,
full-length kinase and its activity arises from an endogenous protease
activity that clips the bound kinase at the long linkers connecting
the P1 substrate domain and the P2 response regulator-binding domain
to the core of the kinase molecule. Moreover,
the addition of trypsin was found to speed proteolysis of the kinase
in the quasi-stable state while having little or no effect on the
ultrastable state. The present findings show that when the interfacial
disulfide converts the entire population to the ultrastable state,
it protects the entire population from both endogenous protease and
exogenous trypsin (Figure  and Table ).

The simplest model for explaining these
properties is that in which
proteolysis occurs when structural fluctuations within the reconstituted
complex expose the long linkers of the kinase substrate domain to
the endogenous or exogenous protease, whereas protection against proteolysis
either decreases the dynamics or increases the level of steric protection
of these linkers. Further studies are needed to ascertain whether
the disulfide-driven protection is provided simply by local stabilization
within individual core units via covalent cross-linking of its kinase–adaptor
interface, or rather by driving the assembly of core units into larger
complexes in which the local lattice architecture shields the kinase
from protease. Either mechanism is possible, because the disulfide-stabilized
interface is located within, rather than between, core units, but
stabilization of the native core unit structure could increase the
density of assembled core units on the membrane and thereby shift
the equilibrium toward assembly of larger core unit oligomers and
arrays.

Finally, the observation that different interfacial
modifications
can either eliminate or enhance ultrastability suggests that native
ultrastability is an evolved trait that provides an optimal, rather
than the maximal, level of kinetic durability. In this picture, new
selective pressures could either increase or decrease this durability.
Because the ultrastability and long-range cooperativity of the chemosensory
array are linked by their codependence on connectivity between components,
and because both are needed for optimal chemotaxis and survival under
nutrient-limited conditions, these two properties may well exhibit
co-evolution. Our findings raise the possibility that some as yet
uncharacterized bacterial chemotaxis pathways may utilize disulfide
bonds to generate very long-lived, highly cooperative chemosensory
arrays. These findings also provide a new impetus for using the bacterial
chemosensory array as a platform for the development of ultrasensitive,
ultrastable biosensors.

The authors declare no
competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
We gratefully
acknowledge Marc-Andre LeBlanc for expert technical
assistance on preliminary studies of trypsin sensitivity.

