Iron is a
critical component
of biological systems, often serving at the active sites of metalloenzymes
to promote catalysis. In eukaryotic cells, this redox-active d-block
transition metal is found in hemes and other mononuclear centers,
iron–sulfur clusters (ISCs), diiron centers, and FeIII oxyhydroxide nanoparticles., Mitochondria are a major
site of Fe metabolism in eukaryotic cells. Both ISCs and heme biosynthesis
occur in this organelle which houses Fe-rich respiratory complexes.

In yeast, vacuoles are another major site
of Fe metabolism, but
their role is not well understood. These acidic organelles store and
sequester cellular metabolites, including Fe. They import Fe under
Fe-replete growth conditions and export it under Fe-deficient ones.− Under Fe-replete growth conditions (defined here as &gt;10 μM
FeIII citrate in minimal medium, MM), vacuoles contain ca. 3/4th of the Fe contained in fermenting WT cells. The predominant form of Fe in these organelles
is a mononuclear NHHS FeIII species with polyphosphate-related
ligands. Depending on growth and isolation
conditions, vacuoles can also contain aggregates of FeIII phosphate- or polyphosphate-associated oxyhydroxide nanoparticles.

Iron enters vacuoles primarily through
Ccc1p, a protein that localizes
on the vacuolar membrane., Some Fe also enters
through endocytosis. CCC1 is tightly regulated through
two mechanisms, one of which involves Yap5p. Under Fe-replete cellular conditions, this Fe-sensing transcription
factor is constitutively bound to the CCC1 promoter
which induces transcription of the CCC1 gene, promoting
Fe import into vacuoles. Under low-Fe conditions, CCC1 expression is down-regulated by Cth2p.CTH2 is a member of the Fe regulon, a collection
of ca. 25 Fe-associated genes that are controlled
by Aft1p, an Fe-sensitive transcription factor. Under low-Fe conditions,
Aft1p localizes to the nucleus where it promotes expression of the
Fe regulon and stimulates Fe import. Also under Fe-deficient conditions,
Cth2p binds and destabilizes CCC1 mRNA, preventing
Ccc1p biosynthesis and thus Ccc1p-dependent Fe import into vacuoles. Under high-Fe conditions, Aft1p localizes to
the cytosol where it is inactive, and Yap5p dissociates from the CCC1 promoter., These mechanisms collectively
regulate Ccc1p-dependent entry of Fe into the vacuole in a manner
that appears sensitive to cytosolic Fe.

Vacuoles export Fe to
the cytosol during periods of Fe starvation.
The proteins involved are homologues of Fe-import proteins on the
plasma membrane. Prior to export, vacuolar NHHS FeIII ions
are reduced by Fre6p, a ferric reductase. Reduced FeII can be exported from the vacuole by the
Fet5p/Fth1p complex and by Smf3p, both of which are vacuolar membrane-bound
proteins., Fet5p, a multicopper oxidase, and Fth1p,
a ferric permease, comprise the high-affinity export system. The low-affinity system is composed of Smf3p,
a divalent metal transport protein which is not specific for Fe. High-affinity Fe transporters allow cells to
grow on medium containing low concentrations of Fe ([Femed] &lt; 1 μM).− Fre6p, Fet5p, and Fth1p are regulated by Aft1p,, whereas Smf3p is regulated by Aft2p, a homologue to Aft1p., When intracellular Fe levels decrease, these vacuolar Fe-export
proteins are up-regulated.,, This causes Fe to efflux from the vacuoles and move into the cytosol,
probably in the FeII state.

Vacuoles isolated from
cells in which CCC1 is
deleted (Δccc1) contain ∼20% of the
Fe typically found in WT vacuoles. The
residual Fe in Δccc1 vacuoles is due to Fe
uptake via END4-associated endocytosis. The vacuolar
Fe concentration in Δend4 vacuoles (containing
functional CCC1) is ∼60% of WT levels. Thus, Ccc1p imports 60–80% of vacuolar Fe under Fe-replete WT conditions.

Δccc1 cells have difficulty growing
in medium
containing &gt;3 mM ferrous ammonium sulfate. Kaplan has proposed that the cytosolic Fe concentration in such
cells must be high, arguing that Fe is inhibited from transiting into
vacuoles such that it accumulates in the cytosol where it promotes
ROS formation. The Fe concentration in Δccc1 cells is low, again consistent with increased
cytosolic Fe levels.

Conversely,
when CCC1 is constitutively overexpressed,
vacuolar and cellular Fe levels are 3–4 times higher than in
WT cells., Kaplan has proposed that in this strain,
additional cytosolic Fe is transported to vacuoles, leaving the cytosol
Fe-deficient. This activates the Fe regulon which up-regulates Fe-import
proteins on the plasma membrane thereby increasing cellular Fe import.
Fe import would continue until the sensed Fe species in the cytosol
exceeds some threshold concentration. Kaplan hypothesized further
that mitochondria and vacuoles share a common cytosolic Fe pool. Evidence
for this is that blocking mitochondrial Fe import (by deleting the MRS3 and MRS4 genes which encode the mitochondrial
Fe import proteins) increases vacuolar Fe import., We will refer collectively to these as Kaplan’s hypotheses.

Mössbauer (MB), EPR, and UV–vis spectroscopies,
as
well as ICP-MS, were used here to study the Fe content of Δccc1 and CCC1-up cells grown under
various conditions. Our results qualitatively support Kaplan’s
hypotheses. Based on these hypotheses, we developed a mathematical
model to better quantify these effects. Our results suggest (but do
not prove) that the cytosolic Fe complex that is imported into both
vacuoles and mitochondria is a mononuclear nonheme high-spin (NHHS)
FeII complex coordinated predominately by O and N donor
ligands. They also provide insights regarding the importance of pH
and oxidation status in determining the form of Fe in vacuoles.

Experimental
Procedures
Strains and Growth Conditions
Δccc1 and CCC1-up S. cerevisiae cells were a generous
gift of Jerry Kaplan (University of Utah). Both strains were derived
from DY150 (isogenic to W303) as described. WT and Δccc1 cells were grown in minimal
medium supplemented with 10 μM copper sulfate; the resulting
medium will be abbreviated MM. It contained 20% w/v glucose (Fisher
Scientific), 5% w/v ammonium sulfate (Fisher Scientific), 1.7 g/L
YNB (MP Biomedicals, LLC #4027-112, which lacked ammonium sulfate,
ferric citrate, and copper sulfate), 100 mg/L l-leucine (MP
Biomedicals, LLC #0219469480), 50 mg/L adenine hemisulfate dehydrate
(MP Biomedicals, LLC #0219460790), and 20 mg/L l-histidine
(MP Biomedicals, LLC #0210195480). A 40 mM (pH ∼ 5) stock of 57Ferric citrate (57FC) was prepared as described and added to MM to achieve final concentrations
of 1, 10, 20, and 40 μM. The absence of the CCC1 gene in the Δccc1 strain was verified by
PCR, using primers 5′ TTTCGGTCTGGACCAATCGC 3′ and 5′
GCGACCAAATGACGAATTAG 3′ (Figure ).

The CCC1 gene was overexpressed in CCC1-up cells using a LEU2-marked multicopy
plasmid that contained CCC1 under its native promoter., For this reason, leucine was omitted from the medium used to grow CCC1-up cells. Ccc1p overexpression was verified by Western
blot analysis of vacuoles isolated from WT and CCC1-up cells. A Ccc1p antibody was also provided
by Dr. Kaplan.

Sample Preparation for Biophysical Analyses
Cells were
grown and prepared as described. Strains
were stored at −80 °C in YAPD medium containing 15% glycerol.
Frozen cells were removed with a wooden stick and streaked onto YPAD
plates (CCC1-up cells were maintained on YPAD-Leu
plates). Single colonies were inoculated into 50 mL of MM and grown
for 24 h at 30 °C with shaking. These cells were used to inoculate
1 L of MM. Cultures were grown to an OD600 = 1.0 (±0.1)
and harvested. Cells were pelleted (4,000 × g, 10 min, Sorvall
Evolution RC centrifuge, SLC-6000 rotor) and washed 1× with 1
mM EGTA and 3× with ddH2O. Cells were packed into
MB cups or EPR tubes and frozen in liquid N2. Alternatively,
cells were resuspended in ddH2O for subsequent UV–vis
analysis. Whole cell samples were prepared aerobically. Mitochondria
and vacuoles were isolated anaerobically and prepared for spectroscopic
analysis as described.,

Biophysical Studies
MB, EPR, and UV–vis spectra
were collected and analyzed as described. MB spectra were collected using a MS4 WRC spectrometer (SEE Co.,
Edina MN), calibrated using α-Fe foil at room temperature. Spectra
were analyzed and simulated using WMOSS software. EPR spectra were
collected at the University of Texas at Arlington on an X-band EMX
spectrometer (Bruker Biospin Corp., Billerica, MA) equipped with a
bimodal resonator (4116DM) and an Oxford Instruments ESR900 cryostat.
Signals were integrated using a custom Matlab (Mathworks.com) program.
Spin concentrations were calculated as described using 1.00 mM CuSO4-EDTA as the standard.

UV–vis spectra of whole cells were collected on a Hitachi
U3310 spectrometer with a Head-on photomultiplier tube. Spectra were
simulated using OriginPro software as described. Packed-cell samples were diluted 3-fold with ddH2O and analyzed in a 10 mm path length quartz UV–vis cuvette
(Precision cells). After collecting MB spectra, isolated mitochondria
were thawed anaerobically in a glovebox (≤5 ppm of O2, MBraun, Labmaster), diluted 3-fold with SH buffer (0.6 M Sorbitol,
0.02 M HEPES, Fisher Scientific, pH 7.4), and transferred to a 2 mm
path length quartz UV–vis cuvette (Precision cells). The cuvette
was sealed with a rubber septum and brought out of the glovebox and
immediately analyzed by UV–vis.

Metal Concentration Determination
Pellets of whole
cells or isolated organelles were prepared for ICP-MS analysis as
described. Briefly, samples (50–100
μL) were digested by adding 100 μL of concentrated trace-metal-grade
nitric acid and then heating at 90 °C for ca. 17 h. Samples were
diluted to a final volume of 8 mL with high-purity double-distilled-and-deionized
(DDDI) water generated using a Teflon sub-boiling still (Savillex).
Metal concentrations were determined by ICP-MS (Agilent 7700x) utilizing
the H2 reaction mode and detecting 57Fe and 56Fe.

Results
We used Mössbauer
(MB), EPR, and UV–visible spectroscopies
to characterize the Fe content of two genetic strains of S.
cerevisiae, namely Δccc1 and CCC1-up. Δccc1 cells lack the Cccp1
transporter on the vacuolar membrane, whereas CCC1-up cells contain an abundance of this transporter relative to the level
found in WT cells. As a result, Δccc1 cells
should contain unusually high concentrations of cytosolic Fe and low
concentrations of vacuolar Fe, since cytosolic Fe should be largely
unable to move into vacuoles. Thus, in
the MB spectrum of Δccc1 cells we expected
to observe a diminished percentage of the sextet due to vacuolar HS
FeIII along with an increased percentage of the feature
due to cytosolic Fe. Conversely, we expected that CCC1-up cells would contain more vacuolar HS FeIII and less cytosolic
Fe. In previous studies, we have been unable to assign features of
whole-yeast-cell MB spectra to cytosolic Fe, perhaps due to a low
concentration of such species in WT cells. Our initial objective was
to evaluate these expectations and be the first to spectroscopically
characterize cytosolic Fe in a yeast cell.

WT Cells
The WT
strain from which Δccc1 and CCC1-up strains were derived, namely DY150,
differed from that used previously by our lab (W303-1B)., Thus, we briefly summarize the Fe content of DY150 to provide a
baseline against which Δccc1 and CCC1-up strains can be compared.

Fe concentrations of both WT strains,
when grown on MM supplemented with 40 μM FC, were similar (compare
Table  to Table  of
ref ()), but the distribution
and speciation of Fe were somewhat different. The low-temperature
(6 ± 1 K), low-field (0.05 T) MB spectrum of DY150 cells (Figure A) was dominated by a sextet due to mononuclear
NHHS FeIII species in vacuoles. The orange line above the spectrum simulates this feature. The concentration
of Fe associated with it (∼270 μM) was lower than it
was in W303-1B cells (∼380 μM). Other components of the DY150 spectrum, including a broad quadrupole
doublet arising from superparamagnetic FeIII oxyhydroxide
nanoparticles and a doublet arising from one or more NHHS FeII species, were more intense. The nanoparticle doublet, simulated
by the green line in Figure , was 4.5×
more intense than the corresponding doublet in the W303-1B spectrum.
The NHHS FeII doublet, simulated by the blue line in Figure , was 1.4× more intense. The intensity of the
so-called “central doublet” (CD) was similar to that
obtained with other strains. The CD originates
from S = 0 [Fe4S4]2+ clusters and LS FeII heme centers; the two types of centers
cannot be distinguished by MB spectroscopy. The purple line above
the spectrum, which simulates the CD, was generated at 8% spectral
intensity. The simplest interpretation of these differences is that ca. 100 μM of the vacuolar NHHS FeIII species
in W303-1B cells was converted into 60 μM of nanoparticles and
40 μM of NHHS FeII in DY150 cells. This is consistent
with vacuoles in DY150 cells being slightly more basic and/or more
reducing than vacuoles in W303-1B cells.

Six K, 0.05 T Mössbauer
spectra of DY150 cell grown with
[Femed] = 40 (A) and 1 (B) μM 57FC. The
orange line simulates NHHS FeIII using D = 0.5 cm–1, E/D = 0.33, Ao/γNβN = −228 KG, δ = 0.54 mm/sec, ΔEQ = 0.39 mm/sec, and η = 2. The blue line simulates
NHHS FeII using δ = 1.3 mm/s and ΔEQ = 3.0 mm/s. The purple line simulates the CD, using
δ = 0.45 mm/s and ΔEQ = 1.14
mm/s. The green line simulates FeIII nanoparticles using
δ = 0.53 mm/s and ΔEQ = 0.45
mm/s. The red lines that overlay the data are composite simulations
using percentages in Table .

Summary of Fe Percentages and Concentrations
Determined by Biophysical Methods
sample	total [Fe] (ICP-MS)	NHHS FeII (MB)	HS FeII hemes (MB)	CD (MB)	nanoparticles (MB)	NHHS FeIII (MB)	FeII hemes
 (UV–vis)	g = 4.3 (EPR)	
WT1	170 ± 45 μM (6)	25% (43 μM)	5% (9 μM)	60% (103 μM)	&lt;5% (&lt;9 μM)	0%	44 ± 1 μM	0 μM	
WT40	490 ± 140 μM (8)	13% (64 μM)	3% (15 μM)	8% (39 μM)	18% (88 μM)	55% (269 μM)	55 ± 3 μM	152 μM	
Δ1	148 ± 64 μM (8)	15% (22 μM)	10% (15 μM)	57% (85 μM)	&lt;5% (&lt;7 μM)	0%	46 ± 2 μM	&lt;1 μM	
Δ10	209 ± 8 μM (2)	26% (54 μM)	7% (15 μM)	39% (82 μM)	5% (11 μM)	23% (48 μM)	ND	ND 	
Δ20	285 ± 5 μM (2)	35% (100 μM)	5% (14 μM)	27% (77 μM)	8% (23 μM)	28% (80 μM)	ND	ND	
Δ40	360 ± 100 μM (7)	30% (107 μM)	5% (18 μM)	19% (69 μM)	17% (61 μM)	30% (108 μM)	43 ± 4 μM	73 μM	
Δ40, Mitos	854 ± 102 μM (2)	37% (316 μM)	5% (43 μM)	32% (273 μM)	23% (197 μM)	0%	364 ± 9 μM	ND	
UP1	250 ± 60 μM (3)	51% (130 μM)	3% (10 μM)	10% (30 μM)	19% (50 μM)	18% (50 μM)	32 ± 3 μM	30 μM	
UP10	565 ± 10 μM (2)	53% (300 μM)	2% (11 μM)	5% (28 μM)	25% (141 μM)	18% (102 μM)	ND	ND	
UP20	979 ± 24 μM (2)	39% (382 μM)	≤1% (≤10 μM)	3% (29 μM)	39% (382 μM)	17% (167 μM)	ND	ND	
UP40	1839 ± 750 μM (5)	38% (700 μM)	≤1% (≤18 μM)	2% (37 μM)	24% (441 μM)	17% (313 μM)	31 ± 6 μM	372 μM	
UP1+A	385 ± 68 μM (3)	70% (270 μM)	2% (8 μM)	7% (27 μM)	11% (42 μM)	10% (39 μM)	29 ± 3 μM	39 μM	
UP40+A	1040 ± 108 μM (4)	18% (187 μM)	2% (21 μM)	4% (42 μM)	29% (301 μM)	45% (468 μM)	40 ± 4 μM	415 μM	
In the column “total [Fe]”,
the number of replicates are indicated in parentheses. Uncertainties
in Mössbauer percentages and corresponding concentrations (in
parentheses) are ±3%. Concentrations of FeII hemes,
as determined by UV-vis, are the sum of individual components (hemes a, b, and c), simulated
as described. The g =
4.3 EPR signals were quantified from individual samples () as described. Sample concentrations were corrected for packing efficiencies: 0.73
for whole cells, 0.75 for isolated vacuoles, and 0.78 for isolated
mitochondria.,, ND = not determined.

The
EPR spectrum of DY150 cells grown on MM with 40 μM 57FC (to be called WT40 cells) was dominated by a g = 4.3 signal (Figure E). This signal arose
from a mononuclear, NHHS FeIIIS = 5/2
center with rhombic symmetry (E/D ∼ 1/3), the same species that
afforded the sextet in Figure A. The associated
EPR concentration was ∼150 μM (Table ). This concentration was divided by the cellular Fe concentration
(∼350 μM for this sample) and by the fraction of the
NHHS FeIII sextet in the MB spectrum (0.55) to yield a
ratio of 0.8. Given the uncertainties associated with these determinations,
we regard this as acceptably near to 1. The g = 2
region included a MnII-based hyperfine-split signal, a
low-intensity signal at g = 2.00 due to a radical,
and a gave = 1.94 signal due to reduced
ISCs. The combined concentration of the last two signals was 2–5
μM.

EPR of WT, Δccc1, and CCC1-up whole cells. A, WT1; B, Δ1; C, UP1; D, UP1+A; E, WT40; F,
Δ40; G, UP40; H, UP40+A cells. Spectra were collected at 4 K
with a microwave frequency of 9.63 GHz and microwave power 0.2 mW.

DY150 cells grown on MM supplemented
with 1 μM 57FC (called WT1 cells) contained less
Fe than cells grown with 40
μM 57FC (WT40) (Table ).
The low-temperature low-field MB spectrum of WT1 cells (Figure B) was dominated by the CD. HS heme and nonheme
FeII doublets were also evident, as was a minor contribution
of nanoparticles. There was no evidence of a NHHS FeIII sextet (though a very low-intensity sextet could be hiding in the
noise). WT1 cells did not exhibit a g = 4.3 EPR signal
(Figure A), indicating the absence of NHHS
FeIII in the vacuoles of these cells. These results verify
a previous study showing that WT1 cells do not accumulate significant
Fe in their vacuoles.

Concentrations
of FeII hemes in WT1 and WT40 cells,
as determined by UV–vis spectroscopy (Figure , A and B; ), did not change
significantly as the medium FC concentration ([Femed])
increased. Likewise, the CD and HS FeII heme concentrations,
as determined by MB and ICP-MS, also did not show significant changes.
These features are primarily associated with mitochondrial respiratory
complexes. Thus, our results indicate similar concentrations of mitochondrial
Fe in WT1 and WT40 cells. Since the total Fe content of yeast cells
can be roughly decomposed into vacuolar Fe and mitochondrial Fe,,, differences in intracellular
Fe concentrations (170 vs. 490 μM) are largely
due to differences in vacuolar Fe levels (empty in WT1 cells; ca.
300 μM Fe in WT40 cells).

Electronic absorption spectroscopy of
WT, Δccc1, and CCC1-up whole
cells. A, WT1; B, WT40; C, Δ1;
D, Δ40; E, UP1; F, UP40; G, UP1+A; H, UP40+A. Quantifications
of individual heme centers are listed in .

Δccc1 Cells
When grown on MM supplemented with
1, 10, 20, and 40 μM 57FC, these cells will be referred
to as Δ1, Δ10, Δ20, and Δ40, respectively.
The Fe concentrations in these cells were ∼20% less than in
the corresponding WT cells (Table ).

The low-temperature low-field MB spectrum of Δ1 cells (Figure A) was dominated by the CD. Although the spectrum
was noisy, doublets due to HS nonheme and heme FeII could
be discerned; the red line is a composite simulation using percentages
given in Table . EPR of Δ1 cells (Figure B) did not exhibit a g = 4.3 signal,
consistent with the MB spectrum which lacked the corresponding sextet.
UV–vis spectra of Δ1 cells (Figure C) showed that the concentrations of reduced hemes in Δ1 cells
were similar to those in WT1 cells. These results indicated that under low-Fe conditions, the absence of CCC1 had no significant effect
on cellular Fe content, relative to WT cells grown under similar conditions. This makes sense because vacuoles do not store Fe under low-Fe
conditions, and so the absence of the vacuolar Fe importer should
be largely irrelevant under these conditions.

Five K, 0.05 T Mössbauer
spectra of Δccc1 cells and isolated mitochondria.
A, Δ1 cells; B, Δ10
cells; C, Δ20 cells; D, Δ40 cells; E, mitochondria isolated
from Δ40 cells. Red lines are simulations of the entire spectrum
using the percentages given in Table . The
blue line is a simulation of the NHHS FeII feature generated
with parameters specified in Figure .

The MB spectra of Δ10, Δ20,
and Δ40 cells (Figure , B, C and D)
exhibited less CD on a percentage
basis than was evident in the Δ1 spectrum, but the absolute
concentrations of CD-associated Fe were all similar (Table ). The concentration of HS FeII hemes
also remained relatively constant as [Femed] increased.
The total concentrations of reduced hemes in Δ1 and Δ40
cells, as monitored by UV–vis (Figure , C and D), were similar to each other (40–50 μM) and
to those in analogous WT cells (Figure , A
and B). These results indicate that the concentrations of
Fe-containing centers in the mitochondria of Δccc1 and WT cells
were similar and were largely unaffected by changes in [Femed].

The major
changes occurring in the MB spectra of Δccc1 cells prepared with increasing [Femed] were lower-than-normal
increases in the sextet associated with vacuolar NHHS FeIII and greater-than-normal increases in the NHHS FeII doublet
(Figure , B – D, and Table ). The concentration of vacuolar FeIII increased to only ∼110 μM in Δ40 cells. This
was less than half of that in WT40 cells. Confirming this, Δ40
cells exhibited a g = 4.3 EPR signal (Figure F) that was also about half as intense as exhibited
by WT40 cells (Figure E). This implies that
∼60% of vacuolar Fe in WT40 cells is imported via Ccc1p; the
remaining vacuolar Fe (evident in Δ40 vacuoles) must enter through
other pathways (e.g., END4-associated). Interestingly, the resulting
vacuolar Fe in Δ40 cells exhibited the same spectroscopic signature
as in WT cells, implying the same structure (i.e., a mononuclear NHHS
FeIII complex with polyphosphate-related ligands) regardless
of whether the Fe is imported via Ccc1p or another pathway.

What happened to the other half of the Fe in Δ40 cells that,
in WT40 cells, is imported into vacuoles via Ccc1p? We hypothesize
that this Fe gives rise to some of the intensity associated with the
NHHS FeII doublet simulated by the blue line in Figure D. The concentration associated with this feature
in Δ40 cells increased from 20 → 110 μM as [Femed] increased. This represents about twice the concentration
observed in corresponding WT cells (compare the blue doublet line
of Figure D to that of 1A). Moreover, this
species accumulated in the range of [Femed] normally associated
with the import of Fe into the vacuoles (10–40 μM).

We initially conjectured that the NHHS FeII doublet
in MB spectra of Δccc1 cells represented a
single cytosolic Fe complex that in WT cells enters vacuoles via the
Ccc1p-dependent import pathway. Since the Fe concentration in Δccc1 cells was ∼20% less than in equivalent
WT cells, we further conjectured that this putative cytosolic FeII complex was sensed by the system that regulates Fe import
into the cell. Accordingly, its higher concentration in Δccc1 cells would down-regulate Fe import, as observed. We also found
that Δ40 cells suffered ∼4 times more oxidative damage
than comparable WT cells (). This
is consistent with the idea that the putative cytosolic NHHS FeII complex, in higher-than-WT levels, promoted Fenton chemistry
which caused the increased oxidative damage. As described below, our
modeling studies suggest that only a modest portion of the ions giving
rise to the NHHS FeII doublet is actually due to the sought-after
cytosolic Fe species. The remainder appears to be a different NHHS
FeII species - different either structurally or in its
location (perhaps it is located in vacuoles rather than in cytosol).

The Fe concentration in mitochondria isolated from Δ40 cells
(∼860 μM) was slightly higher than that in W303-1B mitochondria
(∼710 μM).,, Heme signals in the UV–visible spectra of mitochondria from
Δ40 cells were also more intense (). The same primary MB features were observed in WT cells,
including the CD, a NHHS FeII doublet, a nanoparticle doublet,
and a doublet due to HS FeII hemes (Figure E). Spectral intensities were also similar to those of WT
mitochondria except that the NHHS FeII doublet was more
intense. The increased Fe levels in Δ40 mitochondria probably
arose from a higher rate of mitochondrial Fe import due in turn to
a higher concentration of cytosolic Fe. The modest increase in mitochondrial
NHHS FeII is insufficient to account for the high concentration
of NHHS FeII observed in whole Δ40 cells–most
of these ions are nonmitochondrial.

CCC1-up Cells
Western blot analysis of vacuoles isolated
from CCC1-up cells grown with 40 μM FC (abbreviated
UP40 cells) showed that these organelles contained approximately twice
the concentration of Ccc1p as found in WT40 vacuoles (). A similar relative level of Ccc1p
abundance was assumed for all CCC1-up cells, regardless
of medium Fe concentration.

The concentration of Fe in CCC1-up cells grown with 1 μM FC in the medium (called
“UP1” cells) was substantially higher than that in WT1
cells (Table ). The low-temperature low-field
MB spectrum of UP1 cells was dominated by a NHHS FeII doublet
(Figure A). This feature was more intense
than it was in spectra of WT1 or Δ1 cells, corresponding to
130 μM FeII in UP1 vs 43 μM in WT1 vs 22 μM
in Δ1. The sextet and doublet due to NHHS FeIII and
nanoparticles, respectively, were also somewhat more noticeable (compare
Figure A to Figures B and A). The intensity of the g = 4.3 EPR signal exhibited by UP1 cells was slightly higher (compare
Figure C to A and B; also see Table ).

Five K, 0.05 T Mössbauer spectra of CCC1-up cells grown at various FC concentrations. A, UP1; B, UP10; C, UP20;
D, UP40; E, UP1+A; F, UP40+A. The red lines are simulations of the
entire spectrum using the percentages in Table . The green line is a simulation of the nanoparticle feature generated
using parameters specified in Figure .

The dominance of the NHHS FeII doublet in the MB spectrum
of UP1 cells diminished our ability to quantify the intensity of the
CD. However, after removing the contributions of the NHHS FeII doublet, the NHHS FeIII sextet, and the nanoparticle
doublet, little intensity remained that could be fitted to the CD.
Consistent with this, the UV–vis spectrum of UP1 cells (Figure E) indicated a lower concentration of FeII hemes (mostly mitochondrially asscociated) in UP1 cells, relative
to in WT1 (Figure A) or Δ1 cells (Figure C). Collectively, these results indicated that the
concentration of mitochondrial Fe was lower in UP1 cells than in WT1
or Δ1 cells, while the concentrations of vacuolar HS FeIII and the NHHS FeII species were higher.

The concentration of Fe in UP10 cells was about twice that in UP1
cells. The low-temperature low-field MB spectrum of UP10 cells (Figure B) was similar to that of UP1 cells, with the NHHS
FeII doublet again dominating. The NHHS FeIII sextet was evident, as was a shoulder on the low-energy doublet
line due to nanoparticles. The intensity of the CD was again low,
corresponding an Fe concentration of ∼30 μM. Low concentrations
of CD-associated Fe were also present in UP20 and UP40 cells.

The Fe concentration in UP20 cells was nearly twice that in UP10
cells, and the associated MB spectrum (Figure C) was correspondingly more intense. The NHHS FeII doublet
remained intense but was slightly diminished on a percentagewise basis
than in UP1 or UP10 spectra. The intensity of the nanoparticle doublet
(Figure C, highlighted by the green line simulation)
was more than twice that in UP10 cells. The concentration of the NHHS
FeIII species was also increased (Table ).

The Fe concentration of UP40 cells was nearly twice
that of UP20
cells (Table ). Such a proportional increase
in the cellular Fe concentration of UP cells with increasing [Fe]med (doubling from [Femed] = 10 μM →
20 μM, and doubling again from [Femed] = 20 μM
→ 40 μM) is unusual. It indicates that import
of Fe into CCC1-up cells is effectively unregulated. A component
of the regulatory machinery could be defective in UP cells, but we
find it more likely that the concentration of the sensed cytosolic
Fe species used in regulating Fe import was significantly below the
threshold concentration in CCC1-up cells, even when
grown on [Femed] as high as 40 μM Fe. Given that
these cells contained a high concentration of NHHS FeII, these considerations again suggested that only a portion of the
observed NHHS FeII species was sensed by the cytosolic
regulatory system.

The low-temperature low-field MB spectrum
of UP40 cells was again
dominated by the NHHS FeII doublet (Figure D). In fact, the NHHS FeII concentration in UP40
cells was the highest observed in this study. Curiously, Oxyblot analysis
revealed that these cells exhibited less ROS damage
than did Δccc1 cells (). This raised the possibility that the majority of NHHS
FeII in UP cells might, for some reason, be unable to promote
Fenton chemistry. A substantial proportion of the NHHS FeII observed in UP cells may be located in vacuoles where they might
not generate ROS as readily as NHHS FeII in other cellular
compartments (e.g., the cytosol). Inconsistent with this, vacuoles
isolated from UP40 cells did not exhibit an intense NHHS FeII doublet; most Fe was present as nanoparticles (). However, NHHS FeII may have leached
out of the organelle during isolation.

The UP40 spectrum exhibited
a strong nanoparticle doublet, similar
to that exhibited by UP20 cells, and a more intense NHHS FeIII sextet relative to that in the UP20 spectrum. Consistent with this,
EPR of UP40 cells showed an intense g = 4.3 signal
representing ∼370 μM HS FeIII (Figure G and ). The
ratio of the EPR-based concentration to the Mössbauer-based
HS FeIII concentration was 0.9 which was within error of
unity.

After contributions from the 3 dominant features in the
MB spectrum
of UP40 cells had been simulated and subtracted, a portion of the
remaining MB spectral intensity could be fitted to the CD and the
HS FeII heme doublet. However, the associated concentrations
were low (Table ). UV–vis analysis
revealed that the levels of FeII hemes were similarly low
in UP1 and UP40 cells (Figure , E and F; Table ). Viewed collectively, our analysis indicates that
mitochondrial Fe levels were low in UP cells, despite the elevated
intracellular Fe concentrations. This makes sense: when Ccc1p is overexpressed,
less than the normal amount of Fe is trafficked into mitochondria
because of lower cytosolic Fe concentrations. Consistent with this,
the Fe concentration in mitochondria isolated from UP40 cells (460
μM) was lower than in mitochondria from WT40 cells (700–800
μM). MB spectra of UP40 mitochondria indicated normal (WT40)
percentages of NHHS FeII, the CD, and nanoparticles ().

The 5 K MB spectrum of UP40
cells also exhibited a broad, magnetic
feature that accounted for ∼15% of spectral intensity, corresponding
to ∼280 μM Fe. At 100 K this feature collapsed and the
intensity in the central region of the MB spectrum increased. Variable-temperature
EPR of UP40 cells showed a broad signal in the g =
2 region which displayed anti-Curie Law behavior. The product of signal-intensity
× temperature (Figure ) was 5-times more
intense at 78 K (black line) than it was at 10 K (red line). In these
spectra, the g = 4.3 signal intensity, which followed
the Curie Law, served as a control and was of equal intensity in both
plots. Similar features have been observed in spectra of other Fe-overloaded
yeast cells. The origin of these features
remain unestablished, but we suspect a distinct form of nanoparticles
relative to those that exhibit a broad doublet at 5 K.,

Variable
temperature EPR spectra of UP40 cells. The red spectrum
was collected at 10 K; the black spectrum at 79 K. Spectra were collected
using microwave frequency 9.63 GHz and microwave power 0.2 mW. Spectra
were normalized and plotted using SpinCount software (http://www.chem.cmu.edu/groups/hendrich).

Adenine Deficiency of CCC1-up
Cells
When UP cells reached
an OD600 ∼1.0, a pink color was observed which indicates
an adenine deficiency. Standard MM, containing
50 mg L–1 of adenine, is sufficient to suppress
this phenotype in WT cells, but lowering the adenine concentration
in the growth medium 8-fold causes an adenine deficiency (Park and
Lindahl, unpublished). Park and Lindahl (unpublished) discovered that
Fe in adenine-deficient WT cells is dominated by NHHS FeII and argued that the vacuoles in such cells are more reducing than
those in adenine-replete WT cells. This difference causes NHHS FeIII ions in the organelle to become reduced. The pink color
and high concentration of NHHS FeII in UP40 cells indicated
that these cells are adenine-deficient in medium that is sufficient
to prevent adenine deficiency in WT cells.

We wondered whether
some (or all) of the Fe-associated phenotype that we had presumed
to be linked directly with the overexpression of Ccc1p might actually
be more closely associated with adenine deficiency. To deconvolute
these factors, we sought to relieve the adenine deficiency of CCC1-up cells by growing them on MM containing twice the
normal adenine concentration. Indeed the resulting UP1+A cells did
not turn pink. The concentration of Fe in UP1+A cells was slightly
higher than in UP1 cells, but the corresponding MB spectra (Figure , E vs. A) were similar in that
both were dominated by the NHHS FeII doublet. EPR spectra
were also similar (Figures , D vs. C). Corresponding UV–vis spectra were fairly similar (Figure , G vs. E), but the heme intensities
in the UP1 spectrum were lower than in UP1+A spectrum. Viewed collectively,
these results indicate that under low-Fe growth conditions, the observed
buildup of NHHS FeII is due primarily to CCC1 overexpression rather than to adenine deficiency.

The situation
was different under high-Fe conditions. Again, UP40+A
cells did not develop a pink color, but their Fe-related phenotype
differed relative to that of UP40 cells. UP40+A cells contained about
half as much Fe as UP40 cells (Table ), with
less NHHS FeII and more NHHS FeIII and nanoparticles.
These differences afforded a MB spectrum (Figure F) that was reminiscent of the WT40 spectrum (Figure A). The concentrations of Fe species associated
with mitochondria, including the CD (Figure F) and heme centers (Figure H) were not noticeably
affected by relieving the adenine deficiency. Like UP40 cells, UP40+A
cells exhibited a broad g = 2 feature by EPR which
displayed anti-Curie law behavior ().

Despite the lower cellular Fe concentration, UP40+A cells
exhibited
a g = 4.3 EPR signal (Figure H) that had a slightly higher spin concentration
than that of UP40 cells. This confirmed a shift from mononuclear NHHS
FeII → FeIII as UP40 cells were relieved
of their adenine deficiency. Although not evident from the EPR, some
NHHS FeII also shifted to FeIII nanoparticles.
These differences imply that ∼75% of the NHHS FeII species that accumulated in UP40 cells are more closely associated
with adenine deficiency then CCC1 overexpression.

That the loss of this NHHS FeII resulted in a decline in the concentration of cellular Fe sparked an insight.
If the lost NHHS FeII were the sensed form of Fe in the
cytosol, its decline should have been associated with an increase in cellular Fe. Since the opposite happened, we realized that most
of the NHHS FeII species present in CCC1-up cells must not be sensed by the Fe-import regulatory system.

Manganese
Homeostasis
Although not the focus of this
paper, some effects involving Mn are relevant to understanding the
effects of Δccc1 and CCC1-up on Fe metabolism. The g = 2 regions of the WT1
and WT40 EPR spectra (Figure , A and E) were
dominated by a MnII-based hyperfine-split signal, quantifying
in both spectra to a spin concentration of ∼35 μM (). This concentration was normalized
to the cellular Mn concentration, yielding a [spin]/[Mn] ratio of
0.9. This confirms a previous report that the vast majority of the
Mn in yeast cells is EPR-active, and it
demonstrates that the cellular Mn concentration is not affected by
different concentrations of Fe in the growth medium.

Δccc1 cells exhibited similar MnII-based
signals (Figure , B and F), but spin concentrations
were lower (&lt;10 μM). This correlated to a lower Mn concentration
in these cells (∼16 μM, ). In contrast, the concentration of Mn in CCC1-up cells was ∼80 μM (averaging values for UP1, UP40, UP1+A,
and UP40+A cells), which was double the concentration of Mn in WT
cells and about 5 times the concentration in Δccc1 cells. These results are consistent with reports that cellular Mn
is elevated when CCC1 is overexpressed. The intensity of the MnII signal in
the EPR spectrum of UP1 cells (Figure C) was
also greater than in WT1 (Figure A) or Δ1
(Figure B) cells, affording a [spin]/[Mn]
ratio of ∼0.9. Again, this indicates that the vast majority
of Mn in UP1 cells is mononuclear MnII and EPR-active.
The MnII EPR signal intensities exhibited by UP1, UP40,
and UP40+A cells were similar (). This indicates that the MnII levels are not affected
by adenine supplementation or by variations in [Femed].

Besides transporting Fe into vacuoles, Ccc1p also transports MnII ions. Therefore, the same argument
that was used to explain the variations in Fe concentrations in Δccc1 and CCC1-up cells can also
explain the variation in Mn concentrations. Accordingly, when Ccc1p
is absent, cytosolic MnII ions cannot enter vacuoles as
rapidly, so they accumulate in the cytosol. The cytosolic Mn-regulatory
system senses this and shuts-down further Mn import into the cell.
This is why the Mn concentration in Δccc1 cells
was low. When CCC1 is overexpressed, cytosolic MnII enters vacuoles at a faster-than-normal rate, leaving the
cytosol Mn-deficient. The regulatory machinery senses this low cytosolic
Mn concentration and increases the import flux of Mn, leading to the
observed higher Mn concentration in CCC1-up cells.

Mathematical Model
Kaplan’s hypotheses provide
a conceptual framework to understand our results, but we wanted to
explore these hypotheses more quantitatively. To do this, we developed
a simple deterministic mathematical model involving ordinary differential
equations (ODEs). The model represents an explicit hypothesis regarding
the mechanism of Fe trafficking and homeostasis in WT, Δccc1 and CCC1-up cells, as illustrated in Figure . It posits that cellular Fe is composed of 5 componentsComponent F3 was assigned
to the NHHS FeIII species located in vacuoles. P was assigned to FeIII oxyhydroxide nanoparticles. M was “mitochondrial Fe”, taken for simplicity
to be the sum of the MB central doublet, due mainly to [Fe4S4]2+ clusters, and the FeII heme
centers, as observed by UV–vis. Most of these centers in the
cell are present in mitochondrial respiratory complexes. In the model,
[M] was influenced by the import of Fe from the cytosol and the dilution
of M by cell growth.

Models of Fe trafficking in WT, Δccc1, and CCC1-up cells. In WT cells,
Fe import is regulated by the
concentration of cytosolic Fe C. Mitochondria and
vacuoles compete to import C. The majority of C enters the vacuoles via Ccc1p. Once in the vacuole, vacuolar
iron F2 is oxidized to HS FeIII (F3);
at high pH, a portion of this Fe is converted into nanoparticles P. In Δccc1 cells, there is no Ccc1p-dependent
Fe influx into vacuoles, so cytosolic Fe increases in concentration.
This concentration exceeds a threshold value such that further import
into the cell is inhibited. In CCC1-up cells, overexpression
of CCC1 increases the flux of Fe into the vacuole,
thereby decreasing the concentration of cytosolic Fe below a threshold
value, such that Fe import into the cell is upregulated.

A tenet of Kaplan’s hypotheses is that yeast
cells contain
a single cytosolic Fe species that is imported through
the plasma membrane and exported into both mitochondria and vacuoles.
In our model, C was assigned to this species. Accordingly,
[C] was determined by the balance of these processes. For a growing
cell, increasing volume would also diminish the concentration of C by dilution. These four processes are included in the
ODE d[C])/(dt = kin · nut – km ·
[C] – kccc1 · [C] – α · [C]. Here kin is the apparent first-order rate-constant associated with the import
of Fe through the plasma membrane, and nut is the
concentration of nutrient Fe in the medium, presumed to have a first-order
dependence on the Fe import rate. The second term of the ODE describes
the rate of Fe import into the mitochondria, which is presumed to
be proportional to rate-constant km and the concentration of C. The third ODE
term describes the rate by which C is imported into
vacuoles, assumed to be proportional to the product of kccc1 and [C]. The apparent
first-order rate-constant kccc1 should be viewed as the product of an intrinsic rate-constant
multiplied by the concentration of Ccc1p on the vacuolar membrane.
Thus, kccc1 will be different
for each genetic strain. The last term of the ODE reflects the dilution
of C due to cell growth. Here α is the apparent
first-order rate-constant associated with the growth rate of the cell.
This parameter was assumed to equal the inverse of the doubling-time
(α = 1/DT = 0.5 h–1).

We initially assumed
that C referred to the species
corresponding to the entire NHHS FeII doublet observed
by MB spectroscopy but were unable to construct a viable model based
on this assumption. We then assumed that the NHHS FeII doublet
arose from two cellular species, namely C and F2. That two NHHS FeII species might
yield indistinguishable quadrupole doublets is neither unreasonable
nor remarkable. Numerous mononuclear NHHS FeII complexes
afford a doublet with the observed parameters, which merely indicate
that the Fe is 5- or 6-coordinate with primarily O/N donors.

The locations of F2 and nanoparticles (referred
to as P in our model) are uncertain. Neither appears
to be located in mitochondria, but they might be located in vacuoles
or cytosol. In our model, F2 is presumed to be located
in vacuoles, which implies the relationship C → F2 → F3. This is chemically simpler
than C → F3 → F2. These considerations are reflected in the ODE d[F2]/dt = kccc1 · [C] – k23 · [F2] – α
· [F2]. The first term describes the increase
in [F2] as C is imported from the
cytosol. The second reflects the conversion of F2 → F3. k23 is
the apparent first-order rate-constant for this process, with F2 assumed to have a first-order dependence. The third term
describes the dilution of F2 due to cell growth.
For nanoparticles P, we assumed the connectivity F3 → P and that this reaction occurred
in vacuoles. The rate-constant knp is associated with the F3 → P reaction and is sensitive to the pH of the vacuoles, with
greater values corresponding to higher pH. The ODE that describes
the change in the concentration of F3 is d[F3]/dt = k23 · [F2] – knp[F3] – α
· [F3].

In its current form, the trafficking
processes included in the
model could not mimic the observed changes in cellular Fe as [Femed] changed. To correct this, regulation had to be included.
Since the molecular-level details of the Fe regulatory system are
not well understood, we used the Reg– and Reg+ functions as surrogates.can be viewed as a “valve” that
homeostatically regulates the flow of Fe. The valve is half-opened
when the concentration of the sensed form of Fe, called Fes, equals some threshold concentration KS. When [Fes] &gt; KS, flow decreases; when [Fes] &lt; KS, flow
increases. The sensitivity of this effect is dictated by the exponent ns which is typically ≥1. The Reg+ function
(Reg+ = 1 – Reg–) behaves oppositely.

A Reg– valve was used to regulate cellular Fe
import. We presumed that cytosolic Fe C was sensed
by the system. [C] should be higher than threshold value Kc in Δccc1 cells,
lower than Kc in CCC1-up cells, and roughly equal to Kc in WT cells grown under standard conditions
(ca. 1–10 μM).

Cth2p and Yap5p
regulate vacuolar Fe import (see Introduction) such
that Fe is imported into vacuoles only as [C] increases. To
mimic this, we augmented the rate of Fe import into the vacuole with
the Reg+(C, Kv1, nv1) function. This arrangement
worked well for cells grown at low [Femed] but not for
cells grown at high [Femed], in that too much Fe was imported
into vacuoles relative to what was observed. Thus, we augmented the
same term with a Reg– function in which F3 was the sensed form of Fe. The product {Reg+(C, Kv1, nv1)·Reg–(F3, Kv2, nv2)} allowed Fe into the vacuole as [Femed] increased but
limited the extent of Fe import for cells grown on high [Femed].

The regulation of Fe import into mitochondria is not well-defined.
The prevailing view is that this process is regulated by the ISC biosynthesis
activity in mitochondria, with the inner-membrane-bound Atm1p exporting
a S-containing species which integrates into the Grx/Fra/Aft1 pathway.,− Despite excellent progress in establishing the roles
of Aft1/2p,,, Yap5p,,, Cth1/2p,, Mrs3/4p,, Grx3/4p,,− and Fra1/2p,, the details of the
pathway are insufficiently understood to be modeled mathematically.
Models that included the product {Reg–(C, Km1, nm1)·Reg–(M, Km2, nm2)} fit the data
best. One Reg– function was sensitive to cytosolic
Fe C and the other to mitochondrial Fe M. Relating this to the prevailing perspective, the rate of Atm1-dependent
export of the S-species may be sensitive to ISC biosynthesis (modeled
by the Reg– function sensing M);
while the rate by which that species is used to assemble the [Fe2S2] cluster associated with the Grx/Fra/Aft1 pathway
may be sensitive to cytosolic Fe (modeled by the Reg– function sensing C). Limiting mitochondrial Fe
import throughout the standard Fe concentration range also required
this product Reg– function.

Cells grown on
low [Femed] exhibited more F2 than could
be simulated without also generating too much F2 (and
too little F3) for cells grown
on high [Femed]. This suggested that k23, the apparent rate-constant associated with the F2 → F3 reaction, might increase
at high [Fe]med, perhaps reflecting more oxidized vacuoles
under these conditions. To recreate this behavior, we augmented k23 with a Reg+(C, K32, n32) function.
This completes the development of the model, defined by ODEs [1] –
[5].

The
Fe concentration in the medium, including both added and endogenous
sources, was designated by the nut parameter. The
endogenous Fe concentration was considered to be 6 μM. Thus,
batches of cells grown with, for example, 1 and 10 μM Fe added
were simulated using nut = 7 and 16 μM, respectively.
For BPS-treated medium, nut was assumed to equal
4 μM.

Each batch of cells used in fitting was harvested
toward the end
of exponential growth (doubling time ∼2 h). Park et al. found
that the concentration of Fe in exponentially growing cells is approximately
invariant (i.e., d[Fecell]/dt ≈ 0), which implies that the sum of ODEs [1] –
[5] should equal zero under these conditions. Assuming this afforded
the relationshipThe Reg– valve should be
largely opened (i.e., equal to ∼1) for cells grown in Fe-deficient
medium (e.g., BPS-treated). Under these conditions, [Fecell] ∼ 125 μM. This suggests kin ≈ 16 h–1. This equation implies that in the absence of regulation, WT cells grown on e.g. 1 mM
Fe would contain ∼30 mM Fe! Actual cells grown under such conditions
contain ∼0.5 mM Fe which illustrates the critical need for
regulation in the model.

Each data set consisted of [Fecell], [M], [F3], [P], and {[C]+[F2]} (the two components
could not be separated), as determined for harvested batches of WT,
ΔCCC1, and CCC1-up cells.
Data for WT W303-1B cells grown in MM containing 0 → 10,000
μM added Fe (the “0” refers to BPS-treated), were included in fitting. WT1 and WT40 cells were prepared using
the DY150 strain. Data for ΔCCC1 cells included
batches grown on 1, 10, 20, and 40 μM Fe. Data for CCC1-up cells (in normal MM) included those grown on 1, 10, 20, and 40 μM
Fe. Data for CCC1-up cells in MM supplemented with
twice the normal concentration of adenine were also included.

The next step was to numerically integrate ODEs [1] – [5],
determine [C], [M], [F2], [F3], and [P] at long times
when these concentrations ceased changing, and compare these simulated
concentrations to those observed in actual cells. The final model
included 18 free parameters, namely kin, Kc, nc, km, Km1, nm1, Km2, mn2, kccc1, Kv1, nmv, Kv2, nv2, k23, K32, n32, knp, and α.
Each had to be specified before the ODEs could be integrated. To do
this, we estimated values, numerically integrated the equations using
Maple 17 (www.Maplesoft.com) and compared the resulting
simulations to the 19 data sets just described. Parameter values were
then iteratively changed to diminish differences between simulations
and data.

Parameters were divided into one group that should
be common to
all genetic strains examined and another group that should be (or
were found to be) different for each genetic strain. Common parameters
included Kc, nc, Km1, nm1, Km2, mn2, Kv1, nv1, Kv2, nv2, kin, km, and α (minor differences
in growth rates were ignored). Strain-dependent parameters included kccc1, k23, knp, K32, and n32.

An RMSD
error function was developedin which residuals between
data [Dji] and simulations [Sji] were normalized
by the observed [Fecell] for the particular batch j considered. These values were summed for each of the 4
experimentally distinguishable components of Fe in the cell (i = F3, M, C+F2, P) and for each of the 19 batches examined
(76 comparisons overall). Once RMSD was approximately minimized (by
manually adjusting each parameter), each parameter was increased and
decreased one-at-a-time while all others were fixed. The resulting
optimized values are given in Figure  legend.
The parameter-space for such an underdetermined system was too large
to be explored systematically. Our final parameter set is not unique
in a mathematical sense, and objectively defined uncertainties for
each parameter could not be obtained. Nevertheless, we were unable
to identify another parameter set that generated comparable fits despite
examining &gt;100 combinations.

Simulation of iron-containing species
in WT(W303) (black), WT(DY150)
(blue), Δccc1 (red), CCC1-up (green), and CCC1-up plus adenine (pink) cells
at different concentration of FC in minimal medium. Solid lines are
simulations for a particular strain/condition. Circles are data with
the same color-coding. The dashed lines indicate the threshold concentration
for cytosolic Fe. Parameters used in all simulations: kin = 16 h–1; km = 4 h–1; α = 0.5 h–1; Kc = 21 μM; nc =5; Km1 =
24 μM; nm1 = 3; Km2 = 90 μM; mn2 = 3; Kv1 = 17 μM; nv1= 6; Kv2 = 200 μM; nv2 = 4. Parameters specific for
the following strains, including kccc1 (h–1), k23 (h–1), K32 (μM), n32,
and knp (h–1): WT(W303), 38, 16, 18, 9, and 0.04; WT(DY150), 38, 13, 18, 9, and
0.2; Δccc1, 4, 1, 16, 9, and 0.15; CCC1-up, 400, 1, 12, 3, and 2; CCC1-up +
adenine, 400, 9, 16, 9, and 0.3. Specific simulation and data values,
along with residuals, are given in .

Modeling Results
The model captured the essential behavior
of Fe trafficking in yeast cells. The simulated total Fe concentration
of each strain/condition ([Fecell], top panel lines in
Figure  and selected entries in ) semiquantitatively mimicked that of
real cells grown under equivalent conditions. At [Femed] = 40 μM, RMSDs in [Fecell] were 4% for the two
WT strains, 19% for Δccc1, and 26% for CCC1-up. Simulated [Fecell] in Δccc1 cells was ca. 30%-less than that in WT cells, comparable
to what is observed. At high [Femed], the simulated [Fecell] of CCC1-up cells was 2–8 times
higher than of WT cells, also similar to that observed in real cells.

As [Femed] increased, the simulated [Fecell] in WT cells increased only slightly, as observed. This attenuated
increase was due to the Reg–(C, Kc = 21, nc = 5) function responding to changes in [C]. As [Femed] increased, [C] increased which caused Reg– to
restrict Fe import. The same regulatory system was operational in
all strains, including CCC1-up where
[Fecell] increased strongly with increases in [Femed]. Here, [C] was sufficiently low such that Reg– did not restrict Fe import as severely as it did in other strains
in which [C] was higher. The decline in [Fecell] of Δccc1 cells relative to in WT cells largely arose because
[C] in Δccc1 cells was just slightly elevated relative to in WT cells; nevertheless, this shift was enough
to slow Fe import. The absolute strain-to-strain differences in [C]
were amazingly small, with [C] = 28 μM in Δccc1, 24 μM in WT, and 17 μM in CCC1-up cells
(values quoted at [Femed] = 40 μM). However, these
small differences had a major impact on cellular Fe levels because
they hovered around the threshold concentration of the Reg– system (Figure , bottom panel, dashed line).

In simulations, vacuoles did not import much Fe at low [Femed] (BPS-treated and 1 μM FC conditions) but then strongly
increased vacuolar flow as [Femed] increased from 5 →
30 μM, as observed. At even higher [Femed], F3 levels plateaued, also as observed. This complex behavior
was due to the response of the {Reg+(C, Kv1 =17, nv1 = 6)·Reg–(F3, Kv2 = 200, nv2 = 4)}
product function to changes in both [C] and [F3].

Simulated
mitochondrial Fe concentrations [M] mimicked the data
adequately (Figure  and ), but the model could not capture all strain-dependent
differences. In real WT and Δccc1 cells, [M]
maximized when [Femed] ∼ 1 μM; then it plateaued
and declined modestly as [Femed] increased. In real CCC1-up cells, [M] maximized later, at [Femed] ∼ 40 μM. These subtle effects were not replicated
by the model. Rather, simulated [M] showed a general increase, followed
by a plateau and slight decline as [Femed] increased. Observed
levels of nanoparticle Fe [P] were roughly reproduced by the model.

Unexpectedly, the high concentration of Fe in CCC1-up cells was not primarily due to the greater rate
of vacuolar Fe import. One important factor was the more rapid rate
of nanoparticle formation (knp was 10–50 times faster in CCC1-up cells
than in WT cells and 13 times faster than in Δccc1 cells). Nanoparticles probably formed more rapidly in CCC1-up cells because the vacuoles are more basic than they are in WT or Δccc1 cells. This may be due to the extra Ccc1p that
pumps protons out of the vacuole as it imports Fe and other metal
ions. This effect was diminished in the
UP+A cells (knp was 7
times slower in UP+A cells than in UP cells), explaining the 4 →
9 fold decline in overall Fe concentration.

According to simulations,
another factor causing CCC1-up cells to load with
Fe is that they contained almost 7-times more F2 than Δccc1 cells and 50-times
more than WT cells (at [Fe]med = 40 μM). In our model,
vacuolar Fe import was sensitive to [F3] rather than
to [F2] such that high [F2] did not trigger shutdown
of vacuolar Fe import. Given the high concentrations of F2, CCC1-up vacuoles (like Δccc1 vacuoles) may be more reducing than WT vacuoles. Relieving the adenine
deficiency of these cells involved making the vacuoles more oxidizing.

Discussion
Understanding the trafficking and regulation
of iron in eukaryotic
cells is complicated by the large numbers and incompletely defined
components and reactions involved. The reductionist approach of isolating,
identifying, and characterizing individual components is clearly required
to understand these high-level processes. However, perceiving how
these components function together to give rise to cellular Fe trafficking
and regulation is also required; this involves a systems-level approach.

Systems-level studies of Fe trafficking and regulation in cells
generally involve characterizing the phenotype associated with various
genotypes. This is essentially the approach used here, except that
our characterization involved biophysical methods that are not usually
employed in genetic studies. Two genetic strains of yeast were studied
in which the gene encoding the only known Fe import protein into vacuoles
(CCC1) was either deleted or overexpressed. We applied
Mössbauer, EPR, and UV–visible spectroscopies to explore
the phenotype of these strains from an iron-centric perspective. We
measured the absolute Fe concentration in these cells and decomposed
that Fe into various groups. These groups included a mononuclear HS
FeIII species located in vacuoles, ISC’s and hemes
the majority of which are located in mitochondria, and NHHS FeII species and nanoparticles the locations of which are less
certain, but probably cytosolic or vacuolar. We also developed a simple
mathematical model that described Fe trafficking and regulation in
yeast. For each genetic strain, the model simulated how the concentrations
of these groups of Fe changed with changes in [Femed].
Combining experimental and computational approaches allowed a synergistic
interplay that would not have been possible had only one approach
been taken. Due to unknowns in regulation, we employed the surrogate
Reg∓ functions in our model to regulate the import
of cellular Fe at the plasma membrane, the import of cytosolic Fe
into vacuoles and mitochondria, and the conversion of FeII to FeIII. With these Reg functions included, our model
captured essential features of Fe regulation in yeast cells. As the
molecular-level details of Fe regulation become known, these Reg functions
can be replaced by molecular-level mechanisms.

According to
our model, the import of nutrient Fe through the plasma
membrane is regulated by sensing the concentration of the cytosolic
species C that results from the importation. This
is the same species that is imported into vacuoles and mitochondria
in subsequent steps. The threshold concentration was 21 μM,
and [C] remained near to this value for all genetic strains, and for
all “normal” nutrient Fe concentrations (1–100
μM). As predicted by Kaplan, [C] was higher in Δccc1 cells and lower in CCC1-up cells, relative to the
analogous concentration in WT cells.

Unexpectedly, our model
suggests that the strain-dependent differences
in [C] are quite small. The entire system responds to the blockage/enhancement
of entry into vacuoles by moderating these perturbations. We initially
thought that the entire NHHS FeII species observed in Δccc1 cells was C. But if this were
the case, Fe import would have been virtually shut-down (because the
concentration of the species was so high relative to threshold). In
reality, additional Fe enters Δccc1 cells grown
at higher [Fe]med. This implies that a portion of the NHHS
FeII in Δccc1 cells originates from
another species (F2) that is not sensed by the Fe
import regulatory system. Indeed, simulations strongly suggest that
the bulk of the observed NHHS FeII species in Δccc1 cells arose from F2, not C. This situation highlights the critical importance of quantitative
modeling in evaluating Fe trafficking hypotheses.

Our
results suggest (but do not prove) that C is
a mononuclear NHHS FeII species–either protein-associated
or part of a low-molecular-mass complex. We find this possibility
appealing because the coordination environment of such Fe complexes
tend to be labile, as might be important for a trafficking complex
that is also sensed for regulation. Also, these same types of NHHS
FeII complexes would also be expected to participate in
Fenton chemistry and to be associated with increased ROS damage. Our
conclusion is not definitive because most of the NHHS FeII species in Δccc1 and CCC1-up cells appears to arise from species other than C. Thus, we cannot exclude the possibility that C is
a completely different species that has not been detected or identified.
For example, C could be an [Fe2S2] cluster, perhaps associated with Grx3/4, Fra2p, and/or Aft1p. In cells containing 200–500 μM
Fe, such minor species (with a concentration of ca. 20 μM or less) would be difficult to detect by our biophysical
methods.

The dominating portion of NHHS FeII that
we observe
in these strains probably arises from the reduction of vacuolar FeIII. The concentration of such species (labeled F2 in our model) probably reflects the redox status of vacuoles, with
vacuoles of Δccc1 and CCC1-up cells more reducing than those in WT cells. We suspect that the
nanoparticles present in the mutant strains are derived from vacuolar
FeIII in which the pH of the organelle is higher than normal.
Many of the effects observed in this study probably arise from alterations
of Fe in the vacuoles, due ultimately to the absence or abundance
of Ccc1p. The magnitude of k23 is related
to the oxidation state of the vacuoles, with faster rates indicating
more oxidizing conditions. The magnitude of knp is related to the pH of the vacuole, with
faster rates associated with more basic conditions.

We hypothesize
that the vacuolar pH is higher in UP40 cells than
in WT cells. The vacuolar pH could have increased as a result of exporting
H+ during Ccc1p-mediated FeII import., Our finding that DY150 cells showed higher ratios of nanoparticles/NHHS
FeIII than W303-1B cells suggests that the pH of vacuoles
in DY150 cells is slightly higher than in W303-1B vacuoles. The similar
overall Fe concentration in both strains indicates that nanoparticle
formation was not due to increased Fe uptake but to a shift in the
distribution of Fe.

Adding excess adenine to UP40 cells resulted
in less NHHS FeII and more nanoparticles. Nanoparticle
formation is favored
under oxidizing and high pH conditions. This would suggest that adenine
deficiency leads to a more reducing vacuolar environment, supporting
the recent results of Park and Lindahl (unpublished).

Overall,
our results provide new insights into the Fe metabolism
of vacuoles, the organelles that store and sequester Fe. The Fe in
vacuoles is not “fixed” in the commonly observed HS
FeIII state but rather is sensitive to the oxidation status
and pH of the organelle. Under reducing conditions, vacuolar FeIII is reduced to FeII. Under basic conditions,
vacuolar FeIII is converted into nanoparticles. Whether
reduction involves ligand-exchange and/or movement out of the vacuole
is unknown. Nanoparticle formation does not involve redox changes
of the FeIII ion but it must involve changes in its coordination
environment (development of bridging ligands) such that mononuclear
FeIII complexes aggregate and magnetically interact.

Limitations
of the Model
Highlighting the deficiencies
of the model is as important as highlighting its strengths. The model
is simplistic and ignores many aspects of cellular Fe metabolism and
regulation; we plan to develop more sophisticated models in the future,
especially with regard to processes occurring in mitochondria. The
model did not simulate a decline in mitochondrial Fe with increasing
medium Fe. Kaplan and others have reported “cross-talk”
between vacuoles and mitochondria,,, and these effects need to be included. The volumes
of cytosol and various organelles should also be included, and more
sophisticated methods for optimization and sensitivity analysis should
be developed.

Manganese
Although not the focus
of this paper, we
discovered new aspects of Mn metabolism that relate indirectly to
the effects of Ccc1p on Fe metabolism. Ccc1p also imports cytosolic
Mn to the vacuole. We found that the
concentration of Mn in the cell varied with genetic strain. Δccc1 cells contained half the Mn concentration of
WT cells, and WT cells contained half the Mn concentration of CCC1-up cells. Arguing as we have done for Fe, deleting CCC1 probably increases cytosolic Mn which lowers the rate
of cellular Mn import. Overexpressing CCC1 increases
Mn import into the vacuole, creating a deficiency in the cytosol which
increases cellular Mn import. This suggests a regulatory mechanism
for Mn import functionally similar to that described here for Fe,
sensing cytosolic (not vacuolar) Mn. We have quantified these ideas
via a mathematical model similar to that used here to study Fe trafficking
(see ). Optimized
simulated concentrations for [Mncell] in Δccc1, WT, and CCC1-up strains were
16, 34, and 76 μM, respectively, which are very similar to experimental
values (). According to the model,
83%, 33%, and 5% of the Mn in these 3 strains were cytosolic, respectively,
with the remainder present in vacuoles. The threshold concentration
of cytosolic Mn was 11 μM. About 90% of Mn in the cell was EPR-active,
indicating a dominance of mononuclear MnII complexes. McNaughton
et al. have probed the speciation of Mn in yeast cells using ENDOR
spectroscopy. They found that in WT cells,
∼75% of cellular Mn was EPR-active, similar to that determined
here. Their WT cells contained 26 μM Mn, with about half of
that present as a low-molecular-mass MnII complex with
aqua and phosphate ligands. Another quarter was present as a similar
complex but with polyphosphate ligands. Given the dominance of polyphosphate
ligands in the vacuole,, we hypothesize that the polyphosphate
MnII complex is located in vacuoles while the phosphate-coordinated
complex is cytosolic. Our previous conclusion that little Mn was present
in vacuoles was based on studies using isolated vacuoles, which contained low concentrations of
Mn (1.7 ± 0.6 μM) and the low spin concentrations of the
Mn-based EPR signal. The Fe concentration in isolated vacuoles was
also low (220 ± 100 μM) relative to that present in vacuoles
contained in whole cells (estimated at 1.2 mM). This situation probably
arises from the rapid import:export dynamics expected for an organelle
that stores and delivers metal ions to the cytosol as needed. We suspect
that the concentration of Mn in vacuoles present in WT cells (grown
on MM) is proportionately higher – e.g. 6–10 μM
– similar to the concentration calculated for the polyphosphate-coordinated
complex in the ENDOR study. Our model predicts that Ccc1p imports
FeIIca. 40× faster than it does
MnII.

Supporting Information Available
Strain verification of CCC1-up (Western blot) and Δccc1 (Figure
S1), Oxyblot of whole cell extracts (Figure S2), electronic absorption
spectrum of mitochondria from Δ40 cells (Figure S3), MB spectrum
of vacuoles isolated from UP40 cells (Figure S4), MB spectrum of vacuoles
isolated from UP40 cells (Figure S5), EPR of UP40 + A cells (Figure
S6), quantifications of heme centers found by UV–vis (Table
S1), Fe and Mn concentrations and EPR intensities (Table S2), simulations,
data and residuals for Fe models (Table S3), and the mathematical
model of Mn trafficking in yeast. This material is available free
of charge via the Internet at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bi500002n_si_001.pdf

Author Contributions
A.C. designed,
performed and analyzed most of the experiments and wrote major portions
of the paper. S.P.M. performed the ICP-MS experiments, M.M. isolated
mitochondria, M.C. maintained the MB spectrometers and helped collect
and analyze the MB and EPR data. P.A.L. helped design and analyze
the experiments, wrote the mathematical model, and wrote and edited
the paper. All authors approved the final version of the manuscript.

This
study was
funded by the National Institutes of Health (GM084266), the Robert
A. Welch Foundation (A1170), and the National Science Foundation (DMS-0714896).

The authors
declare no
competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
We thank Dr. Jerry Kaplan (University of Utah) for
generously
providing the yeast strains and Ccc1p antibody used in this study
and for helpful discussions. We also thank Roland Lill, Philipps Universität,
Marburg Germany for providing the W303-1B strain, and Brad Pierce,
University of Texas at Arlington, for allowing us to use his EPR spectrometer.

BPSbathophenanthroline
sulfonate

Cmodel component symbolizing cytosolic Fe

CCC1gene encoding the Ccc1 protein

Δccc1yeast strain with CCC1 deleted

CCC1-upyeast strain with CCC1 overexpressed

CDcentral quadrupole
doublet

δisomer shift

DDDIdouble-distilled and deionized

Δ1, Δ10, Δ20, and Δ40Δccc1 cells grown on MM containing 1, 10, 20, and 40 μM FC, respectively

EPRelectron
paramagnetic resonance

F2model component symbolizing
NHHS FeII

F3model component symbolizing NHHS
FeIII

[Fecell]concentration of Fe in the cell

[Femed]concentration of FC added to MM

FCferric citrate

ICP-MSinductively coupled
plasma mass spectrometry

Mmodel component symbolizing
mitochondrial Fe

MBMössbauer

MMminimal medium

NHHSnonheme high-spin

ODEordinary
differential equation

Pmodel component symbolizing
FeIII phosphate/polyphosphate associated nanoparticles

ΔEQquadrupole splitting

RMSDroot-mean-square
deviation

ROSreactive oxygen species

UP1, UP10, UP20, and UP40CCC1-up cells grown on
MM containing 1, 10, 20, and 40 μM FC, respectively

UP1+A and UP40+ACCC1-up cells grown on MM containing
twice the normal concentration of adenine, along with 1 and 40 μM
FC, respectively

WT1, WT40wild-type cells grown in MM containing
1 and 40 μM FC, respectively

