Enzyme inhibitors
remain important as drug leads. Boronic
acids, 1, have for quite some time now been designed
and used as sources of active site-specific, anionic, tetrahedral
transition state analogue complexes, 2, of serine amidohydrolases
(Scheme ). They are thus very effective inhibitors
of these enzymes and potential drug candidates.− Among the enzymes
that are inhibited by these compounds are the β-lactam-recognizing
enzymes, the serine β-lactamases and DD-peptidases. Boronic
acid inhibition of serine β-lactamases has been recognized for
many years,, but only more recently have such inhibitors
of DD-peptidases been identified., The time gap
between these developments may reflect the increasing awareness of
the evolutionary relationship between DD-peptidases and β-lactamases
and thus their close structural and functional similarity.−

β-Lactamases catalyze the hydrolysis of β-lactam
antibiotics and are thus an important source of bacterial resistance
to these molecules. The reaction (Scheme ; shown with a penicillin) proceeds by way of a
covalent acyl enzyme intermediate 4 and, therefore, through
tetrahedral intermediates 3 and 5. Acyl-enzymes,
analogous to 4, are formed on reaction of DD-peptidases
with β-lactams but in this case hydrolyze very slowly leading
to effective inhibition of these enzymes and thus interruption of
bacterial cell wall synthesis. One would expect that the closest boronate
analogue to a β-lactamase deacylation tetrahedral intermediate/transition
state 5 would be 6, arising from reaction
between the enzyme and boronic acid 7. A number of approximations
to the structure 7 have been described, for example,
initially, amidoalkyl boronic acids such as 8., Subsequently, closer analogues, such as 9 and 10, were found to be very powerful β-lactamase inhibitors., Crystal structures showed them to form the anticipated tetrahedral
adducts 2 at the β-lactamase active site. To complement
these developments, we describe here the syntheses of the boronic
acids 11 and 12. We follow this with a description
and analysis of their inhibitory activity against representative serine
β-lactamases and DD-peptidases.

Materials and Methods
The boronic acids 11 and 12 were synthesized as described in detail in . The Actinomadura R39 and Streptomyces R61 DD-peptidases, and Bacillus subtilis PBP4a, were generous gifts from Dr. J.-M.
Frère and Dr. P. Charlier of the University of Liège,
Liège, Belgium. The Escherichia coli PBP5
DD-peptidase was a generous gift from Dr. R. A. Nicholas of the University
of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, NC. The AmpC β-lactamase was
provided by Dr. B. K. Shoichet of the University of California at
San Francisco, San Francisco, CA. The class C P99 β-lactamase
from Enterobacter cloacae, the class A TEM-2 β-lactamase
from E. coli W3310, and the class A Staphylococcus
aureus PC1 β-lactamase were purchased from the Centre
for Applied Microbiology and Research (Porton Down, Wiltshire, UK).
The class A SHV-1 enzyme was a gift from Dr. Michiyoshi Nukaga of
Jyosai International University, Japan.

Enzyme Kinetics Studies
DD-Peptidase
Inhibition
In Solution
Experiments
designed to obtain equilibrium constants of inhibition of the Actinomadura R39 DD-peptidase, B. subtilis PBP4a, and E. coli PBP5 in solution by compounds 11 and 12 were performed as described previously from steady-state competition experiments where N-(phenylacetyl)glycyl-d-thiolactic acid
was employed as a spectrophotometric (245 nm, Δε = 2500
cm–1 M–1) substrate (0.5 mM).
Enzyme concentrations were between 0.1 and 0.2 μM. Initial rates
of substrate hydrolysis in the presence of a range of concentrations
of 11 and 12 (0–1.0 mM) were obtained.

Membrane-Bound Enzymes
Equilibrium constants
for inhibition of E. coli DD-peptidases (PBPs) in
membranes were obtained as described previously, employing Bocillin
Fl as a fluorescent competitive β-lactam. Compounds 11 (0–1.0 mM) and 12 (0–100 μM) were incubated with E. coli membrane preparations for 1 h prior to addition of Bocillin Fl (20
μM).

β-Lactamase Inhibition
Equilibrium
constants of inhibition of the P99 and AmpC β-lactamases by
compounds 11 and 12 (0–100 μM)
were obtained from steady-state competition experiments where cephalothin
was employed as a spectrophotometric (262 nm, Δε = 7660
cm–1 M–1) substrate (0.2 mM).
The reaction conditions were 20 mM MOPS buffer, pH 7.50, 25 °C,
and enzyme concentrations of 2 nM, stabilized by 0.1% bovine serum
albumin in solution. Under these conditions, the Km value of the substrate was 9.0 μM for the P99
enzyme and 13.8 μM for AmpC. No
time-dependence of inhibition was observed in the manual mixing time
frame in these experiments. Measurements of the initial rates, v, of cephalothin hydrolysis catalyzed by the β-lactamase
in the absence and presence of 11 or 12 were
fitted to Scheme  by means of eq 1 (least-squares),
where v0 is the initial rate in the absence
of inhibitor, to obtain the Ki values.
Attempts to obtain Ki values of 11 and 12 for the class A TEM-2, SHV-1, and PC1
β-lactamases were conducted similarly.

Molecular Modeling
Simulations were performed on a SGI workstation running the program
Insight II, essentially as previously described., The crystal structure of the ampC β-lactamase, inhibited by 15 [PDB entry 1MXO()], including the crystallographic
water molecules, was modified to construct the adduct of 12 with the active site Ser 64. The pH was set to 7.0, and the total
charge on the complex was zero. At this pH, the side chain of Tyr
150 was neutral, and those of Lys 67 and 315 were cationic. The partial
charges of the enzyme were assigned by Insight II. Partial charges
(MNDO) of the inhibitor in the complex were calculated from a model
adduct with serine. Boron is not parametrized in Insight II so fixed
standard crystallographic B–C and B–O bond distances
and a rigid tetrahedral geometry at boron were assumed. The active
site was hydrated with a 15 Å sphere of water centered on Oγ
of the nucleophilic serine 64. The models were then subjected to 100
steps of steepest descent energy minimization followed by short
molecular dynamics runs (40 ps) to relax the active site side chains
and inhibitor. A typical snapshot from the molecular dynamics runs
was selected and subjected to 1000 steps of steepest descent energy
minimization, followed by 2000 steps of conjugate gradients.

A similar procedure was followed to obtain a model of the deacylation
analogue adduct of 12 with the TEM-1 β-lactamase.
This was derived from the crystal structure of the complex of 15 with this enzyme [PDP entry 1NXY()]. Note,
however, that the thiophene ring of 15 has been retained
in this model rather than changed to phenyl. In the TEM active site,
Glu166 was neutral and Lys73 and Lys234 cationic. A generic model
of a tetrahedral acylation adduct of 12 with the TEM-1
enzyme was derived directly from the crystal structure of its complex
with 27 [PDB entry 1NY0()]. Models
of benzylpenicillin at the CTX-M-9 and E. coli PBP4
active sites were built directly from the published crystal structures
[PDB entries 3HUO() and 2EX8, respectively].
In each case, the acyl forms were converted to tetrahedral intermediates
by Insight modeling.

Results and Discussion
The syntheses of the boronic acids 11 and 12 are outlined in Schemes  and , respectively. In these syntheses, we made use of the recent
discovery that stable α-boryl aldehydes can be prepared when N-methyl or pinene iminodiacetic acid (MIDA or PIDA) boronic
acid protecting groups are employed., Our use of
MIDA thus allowed synthesis of aldehydes 13 and 14 from which the thiazolidine rings of 11 and 12 could readily be constructed. We also found that the MIDA
protecting group was conveniently removed when treated with penicillamine
in methanol during the last step of each synthesis, yielding 11 and 12 in unprotected form. High resolution
mass spectral characterization of 11 and 12 presented difficulties since free boronic acids are generally not
volatile or stable enough under the conditions required. The mass spectrum of 11 as the
pinacol ester, however, displayed a small peak at the appropriate
mass (m/z = 406.3), but even this
represented a metastable ion and was thus not suitable for accurate
mass measurement. For both 11 and 12 we
were able to obtain accurate mass measurements for M-BO2 cations from these pinacol esters (see ). The presence of the boronic acid moiety in the
parent boronic acids was indicated in their 1H NMR spectra
by the absence of a methylene hydrogen resonance in the spectrum and
the characteristic upfield shift of the hydrogen α to the boryl
group.

Synthesis of 11
Stereochemistry is discussed in
the text. Reagents and conditions: (a) Grubb’s II catalyst,
CH2Cl2, reflux; (b) mCPBA, CH2Cl2, 0 °C; (c) BF3.Et2O, CH2Cl2, −30 to 0 °C; (d) d-penicillamine,
MeOH-H2O, rt.

Synthesis of 12
Stereochemistry is discussed in
the text. Reagents and conditions: (a) nBuLi, THF, −78 °C;
(b) BnOH, nBuLi, THF, −78 °C; (c) CH2Cl2, nBuLi, THF, −100 °C; (d) LHMDS, THF, −100
°C; (e) PhCH2COCl, CH2Cl2, −78
°C; (f) 1-methylpropylboronic acid, MeOH – H2O/hexane, 6 h; (g) MIDA, DMF, 80 °C, 12 h; (h) H2, Pd on carbon, MeOH, 40 psi, 12 h; (i) DMP, AcOH – CH3CN; (j) d-penicillamine, MeOH.

These syntheses yielded, as expected, mixtures of diasteroisomers
that we did not attempt to separate since we could get a good estimate
of the activity of the likely most active diastereoisomer from the
activity of the mixture. The preparation of 12 yielded
a mixture of two diasteroisomers in an essentially 1:1 ratio as indicated
by the 1H NMR spectrum. Presumably these would have structures 12a and 12b (Scheme ),
formed in the last step (j) of the synthesis. All precedent with β-lactam-recognizing
enzymes would suggest that 12a, which has the stereochemistry
of bicyclic β-lactams, would be the active inhibitor. The situation
with 11 was more complicated. Epoxidation and rearrangement
of the intermediate alkenes (Scheme ) led
to a mixture of two enantiomers with a chiral carbon α to the
boronic acid group (Scheme , a/c and b/d)
in a 4:1 ratio, where the stereochemistry of (a), α to the boryl
group, is likely to be present in the major component. Subsequent formation of the thiazolidine ring
(step d) would presumably, as with 12, subdivide these
equally into a final 4:4:1:1 mixture, as observed by 1H
NMR (), where the
likely most active 11a would represent 40% of the total.
A minor component 11c might also have some activity since
this stereochemistry is found in carbapenem antibiotics.

Boronic Acid Stereochemistry
The first important result was that neither 11 nor 12 inhibited representative DD-peptidases.
In solution, no inhibition of the low molecular mass DD-peptidases
of Streptomyces R61 and Actinomadura R39, or of B. subtilis PBP4a was observed. Gel
experiments also demonstrated that these compounds did not inhibit E. coli PBP1a/1b, 2, 3, 4, and 5. These results concretely
support a current general proposal for the mechanism of inhibition
of DD-peptidases by β-lactams. Figure  shows the structure of a model of the putative tetrahedral intermediate
for deacylation of the covalent acyl-enzyme formed on reaction of
benzylpenicillin with E. coli PBP4. This structure
was generated directly from the acyl-enzyme structure. This structure is not stable (and, consequently,
deacylation is very slow) because of unfavorable steric interactions
between the hydroxyl group of the water nucleophile and the adjacent
carbon and nitrogen atoms of the thiazolidine ring. These interactions
are nicely seen in a space-filling model (, Figure S1). If this rationale for the slow deacylation
of β-lactams from DD-peptidases were true, the tetrahedral boronate
adduct 6 would also be unstable, and thus 11 and 12 would not be DD-peptidase inhibitors. Therefore,
our results with these inhibitors support the mechanism of action
of β-lactams described above. It is also reported that 15 does not inhibit Streptococcus pneumoniae PBP1b. As would be anticipated from
the above discussion, analogues of 16, unsubstituted
α to the boronic acid, are more likely to be DD-peptidase inhibitors.−

Active
site of the E. coli PBP4 DD-peptidase with benzylpenicillin
bound as a deacylation tetrahedral intermediate. Modeled from the
crystal structure of the acyl-enzyme.

The results of Table  show that the new boronic acids 11 and 12 at micromolar concentrations do inhibit class
C β-lactamases, the P99 and AmpC enzymes. Notably, 11 is comparably effective to 12, despite the absence
in the former of the amido side chain which is present in good substrates
and generally thought to be important for active site recognition
through hydrogen bonding. Apparently
the hydrophobic side chain of 11 is just as effective
for inhibition as the amido side chain of 12, which we
can assume binds in the usual site between the backbone carbonyl oxygen
of residue 318 and the amide side chain of the conserved Asn152.

Enzyme Inhibition by Boronic Acids 11 and 12
 	Ki (μM)	
enzyme	11	12	
P99 β-lactamase	0.62 ± 0.15	0.95 ± 0.11	
AmpC β-lactamase	0.38 ± 0.12	1.3 ± 0.4	
TEM-2 β-lactamase	NI	NI	
PCI β-lactamase	NI	NI	
R39 DD-peptidase	NI	NI	
The Ki values above are not
corrected for the presence of stereoisomers of 11 and 12 (see text). If it were assumed that the most likely stereoisomer
in each case was the only one with activity, the values for 11 reported above would be multiplied by 0.4 and those for 12 by 0.5 (see text) to obtain the Ki values of the active isomers.

NI, no inhibition observed at the concentration 1.0 mM.

NI, no inhibition observed
at the concentration 0.10 mM.

Boronic acid 12 is similar in structure to 15, an inhibitor described
by Morandi et al. The latter compound
is a 1 nM inhibitor of the AmpC β-lactamase. A crystal structure
of the inhibitory complex has been published, from which the active site diagram of Figure A has been taken. This shows the amide side chain of 15 firmly hydrogen-bonded to the protein as described above, and the
boronate present as a tetrahedral anion covalently bound to the nucleophilic
serine of the active site. One boronate oxygen is in the oxyanion
hole (hydrogen-bonded to backbone NH groups of Ser64 and Ala318),
and the other takes up the position of a leaving group or of the deacylating
water molecule, depending on whether the complex is seen as an analogue
of an acylation or deacylation tetrahedral intermediate (see below).

(A) Active
site of the AmpC β-lactamase with the boronic acid 15 bound, from the crystal structure. (B)
An energy-minimized model of 12 bound to the AmpC active
site, derived directly from the structure in A.

Finally, the carboxyphenyl group is oriented with its plane
perpendicular to the chain formed by the amido side group, the alkyl
boronate, and the side chain of Ser64. In this position, the carboxylate
is directed above the β2-strand where it forms a
hydrogen bond with the amido side chain of Asn 289. This is apparently
an effective arrangement since the boronic acid 16, lacking
the carboxyphenyl group, has a Ki value
of 0.57 μM.

A model of the
complex between 12 and the AmpC β-lactamase was
constructed based on the crystal structure with 15 as
described in . The initial
structure was subjected to a short molecular dynamics simulation to
relax active site interactions and a typical snapshot energy-minimized
(see ). This procedure
led to the structure of Figure B. This resembles
the structure of the complex of 15 described above but
differs in the positioning of the thiazolidine carboxylate vs the
phenyl carboxylate of 15, due to the nonplanar nature
of the five- (vs six-) membered thiazolidine ring and thus to the
positioning of its substituents. The short MD run suggested that the
thiazolidine carboxylate may prefer interaction with Arg349 over that
with Asn 289. A similar dynamics run on the complex with 15 suggested that it too may be mobile in solution, with carboxylate
access even to the Arg204 side chain. At any event, it appeared that
the carboxylates of 12 and 15 may prefer
somewhat different environments with some complementary adjustment
of the active site structure. These effects presumably lead to the
weaker binding of 12 than 15 to the enzyme.
It is possible that a cephalosporin analog of 12, e.g., 17, which more closely resembles 15, may be a
better inhibitor of class C β-lactamases: kcat values (deacylation rate constants) of cephalothin
and cephalexin are larger than that of benzylpenicillin for the P99
enzyme,, suggesting that deacylation transition states
of the former may be better stabilized by the enzyme.

It might be noticed in passing that the interactions of the
inhibitor carboxylate group with the enzyme described above hold the
thiazolidine ring of 12 from sterically impeding nucleophilic
attack by water on the acyl-enzyme intermediate; the thiazolidine
nitrogen is held well away from both boronate hydroxyl groups. This
situation is in clear contrast to that seen in DD-peptidases (see above) and presumably allows facile hydrolysis
of the acyl-enzyme by β-lactamases.

It might also be noted
that Gln289 is not strictly conserved in class C β-lactamases
but is replaced by serine in Enterobacter homologues
such as the P99 β-lactamase. The hydroxyl of serine in this
position may also be able to form a hydrogen bond with the carboxylate
of a penicillin substrate and of an inhibitor such as 15. Certainly 12 inhibits the P99 and AmpC β-lactamases
to very similar extents (Table ).

Perhaps
more striking than the results with class C enzymes are those with
class A. Neither the TEM-1, SHV-1, nor PCI β-lactamases were
inhibited by 11 or 12, even at 1 mM concentrations.
Given the fact that 12 should be the source of a precise
transition state analogue structure by reaction with these enzymes
(Schemes  and ), much
as with the class C β-lactamases, the result is quite astonishing.
In stark contrast, 15 is a powerful inhibitor of the
TEM-2 β-lactamase; Ki = 64 nM. This profound and unexpected difference between 12 and 15 is discussed below.

First, it
is necessary to recall that the geometry of the acylation and deacylation
transition states (and tetrahedral intermediates, Scheme ) is different in class A β-lactamases, unlike
the situation with the class C enzymes where the acylation and deacylation
tetrahedral intermediates have similar structure (see above). This
situation arises because, although the hydrolytic water molecule is
believed to attack the acyl-enzyme intermediate from the solution
side (Re face) in class C β-lactamases, this attack comes from
the protein side (Si face), catalyzed by Glu 166, in class A β-lactamases., During acylation, the leaving group is thought to depart from the
Re face of the acyl-enzyme in each case. These details are shown diagrammatically
in Scheme .

Mechanism of Formation
of Tetrahedral Intermediates and Their Boronate Analogues
In this diagram, 18 and 20 represent the acylation and deacylation tetrahedral
intermediates in class C β-lactamase catalysis, and 22 and 23, respectively, represent these species for a
class A enzyme. The boronate analogues 21, 24, and 26 are shown below their respective intermediates,
and 19 is the central acyl-enzyme. The arc adjacent to
one oxygen ligand in each case represents the oxyanion hole, the presence
of which serves to distinguish the two boronate hydroxyl groups.

Thus, although one would expect all boronic acid
complexes of class C enzymes to resemble 18 and 20 (i.e., have structure 21, the two forms of
which are interconvertible by a small single bond rotation), two possibilities, 24 and 26, exist for class A β-lactamases.
Indeed, examples of each kind have been observed with class A β-lactamases
in crystal structures of boronate complexes. Note that 22 and 23 (or 24 and 26) are not interconvertible by single bond rotations.

The crystal structure of the strongly inhibitory (64 nM) complex
between 15 and the TEM-1 β-lactamase represents
a mimic of a deacylation tetrahedral intermediate (Figure A), where one boronate hydroxyl group is in hydrogen
bond contact with the deacylation catalyst Glu166. In this structure, the carboxylate group of the inhibitor
forms a strong hydrogen bond with the Thr235 hydroxyl group and, probably,
with the Arg244 side chain via a water molecule. An energy-minimized
model of a complex of 12 with this enzyme is shown in
Figure B. In this structure, the interactions
with the active site are the same as that of the complex with 15. Both structures seemed stable during short MD runs. The
experimental result, that 12 (or 11) is
not an inhibitor, therefore remains a puzzle.

(A) Active site of the
TEM-1 β-lactamase with the boronic acid 15 bound,
from the crystal structure. (B) An energy-minimized
model of 12 bound to the TEM-1 active site, derived directly
from the structure in A. Note, however, that the thiophene ring of 15 has been retained in this model rather than changed to
phenyl.

A possible way out of this dilemma
may be found when the mechanism of formation of deacylation analogue
boronate complexes is considered. Direct formation of these complexes
from the free boronic acids and enzyme might be difficult since it
would require prior or concerted displacement of the deacylating water
molecule from Glu166. An alternative, perhaps more facile, mechanism
would proceed by way of initial direct formation of an acylation tetrahedral
intermediate analogue, 24. In an analogous fashion to
the acylation/deacylation sequence of a substrate (Scheme ), consecutively a neutral trigonal boronic acid
intermediate 25 may be formed from 24, followed
by its attack by the hydrolytic water molecule, presumably catalyzed
by Glu166, to form the deacylation tetrahedral intermediate analogue 26.

The crystal structure of the complex between the
class A TEM-1 β-lactamase with the boronic acid 27 resembles the acylation tetrahedral intermediate 22 (i.e., it has the structure 24) while, as noted above,
that with 15 resembles the deacylation intermediate 23 (i.e., it has the structure 26). Wang et al.
have suggested that the preference for the deacylation analogue structure 26 by 15 derives from the presence of the pendant
carboxylate group which interacts with Arg244 in the complex, as seen
in the crystal structure (Figure A). One might expect that the boronic acids, 11 and 12, bearing the thiazolidine carboxylate,
would also form stable complexes analogous to 26. Ke
et al. have also discussed the relative merits of acylation vs deacylation
complexes in various specific instances.

We approached a structural model of acylation tetrahedral
intermediate complexes by way of the crystal structure of the complex
of 27 with the TEM-1 enzyme. An immediate problem was that a bulky substituent α to the
boronic acid, as present in 11, 12, and 15, sterically interacts unfavorably with Tyr105 (Figure ), raising the likelihood of significant conformational
adjustment (Figure ). Models of both 12 and 15 were unstable, both to energy minimization
and to MD simulation. In both cases, particularly that of 12, expansion of the lower part of the active site, comprising Tyr105,
Asn132, and Glu166, occurred. In particular, Tyr 105 was “pushed
away” with motion of the Asp101 – Leu108 loop. This
distortion was more extreme with the bulkier (nonplanar) thiazolidine
of 12. Acylation tetrahedral intermediates thus appeared
likely to be less stable than the deacylation species described above.
This is certainly a reasonable explanation for the two types of boronate
structures obtained, the nature of the complex depending on whether
a bulky substituent α to the boronic acid is present.

Active site
of the TEM-1 β-lactamase with the boronic acid 27 bound, from the crystal structure. Also
shown, in the form of an added methyl group, is the general orientation
of an l-α substituent, as present in 11 and 12.

This problem of the instability of the intermediate 22 (and thus the analogue 24) might also be sufficient
to explain the lack of inhibition by 11 and 12. The ability of 15 to act as inhibitor but not 11 and 12 can be supposed to arise from the greater
bulk of the thiazolidine substituent of the latter than the phenyl
of the former (Figure S2, ) and thus the greater difficulty of the latter to achieve the acylation
analogue structure 24 required (Scheme ) as a precursor of the likely stable deacylation analogue
structure 26. This is an explanation in terms of unfavorable
kinetics, but it should be noted that no inhibition of the TEM-2 enzyme
was observed in 24 h.

In support of the rationalization above,
it should be pointed out here that acylation tetrahedral intermediate
analogues generated from acyclic boronic acids such as 11, 12, and 15 are not likely to closely
resemble the structure of a “real” acylation tetrahedral
intermediate 3 (Figure ). This
structure was generated from the crystal structure of a noncovalent
complex between benzylpenicillin and a Ser70Ala mutant of the class
A CTX-M-9 β-lactamase. In this
structure, the azetidine ring is still intact, with the scissile C–N
bond eclipsed by the C–C bond on the opposite side of the ring.
Such eclipsing will be lost for steric reasons when the four-membered
ring is opened, as seen in the structures of Figure . In Figure , the carboxylate substituent
of the thiazolidine ring forms hydrogen bonds with the side chains
of Lys234 and Thr235. After rotation away of the thiazolidine ring
with opening of the four-membered ring, this hydrogen-bond pattern
is lost and replaced by the interactions seen in Figure . Thus, acyclic boronates cannot generate close acylation
transition state analogue structures, at least of bicyclic β-lactam
substrates, hence the instability of the boronate acylation complexes 24 of class A β-lactamases. On the other hand, acyclic
boronic acids can form direct analogues of deacylation tetrahedral
species, 23 (Scheme ). It is
possible that recently discovered cyclic borinates, may better approximate acylation complexes.

Active site of the class
A CTX-M-9 β-lactamase with benzylpenicillin bound as an acylation
tetrahedral intermediate. Modeled from the crystal structure of the
noncovalent complex of penicillin with the Ser70Gly mutant.

These considerations lead to another point and one that provides
direct evidence for the instability of acyclic boronate adducts 24. Methyl penicilloate, 28, is known to be a
substrate of a Pseudomonas class C β-lactamase, and we have extended this result to the P99
β-lactamase (see ). This compound is, however, neither a substrate nor a covalent
inhibitor of the class A BCI β-lactamase, and we have extended this point by observations with the
TEM-2 enzyme ().
These observations prove that while the class C β-lactamase
active site can significantly stabilize the acylation tetrahedral
intermediate 29 (a direct analogue of 18), the class A active site cannot (stabilize the analogue of 22), presumably for the reasons discussed above.

Summary and Conclusions
Neither 11 nor 12 [or, most likely, 15()] inhibit DD-peptidases, even
at 0.1 mM concentrations, probably because of unfavorable steric interactions
at the active site of these enzymes (Figure ). Deacylation tetrahedral intermediates of DD-peptidase catalysis
are thought to be destabilized in the same way., The
results with 11 and 12 from experiments
in solution therefore strongly support the steric mechanism of inhibition
of DD-peptidases by β-lactams and thus the mechanism of antibiotic
action by these compounds. Previous evidence for this mechanism largely
rested on inspection of crystal structures of inert complexes.

The boronic acids 11 and 12 inhibit class
C β-lactamases, at micromolar concentrations, presumably by
formation of covalent tetrahedral adducts (Figure B) that resemble the high energy tetrahedral intermediates
of penicillin turnover. Compounds 11 and 12 are not, however, as effective as inhibitors as the phenyl analogue 15. It is possible that 17, a cephalosporin analogue, closer in structure to 15, may be more effective than 12. The new compounds
do not inhibit class A β-lactamases even at millimolar concentrations,
in strong contrast to 15, which, at nanomolar concentrations,
forms 26, a structural analogue of the deacylation tetrahedral
intermediate 23() (Scheme ). A rationale for this surprising result is offered
in terms of a mechanism of formation of 26 (Scheme ), which requires the initial formation of an acylation
tetrahedral analogue 24, followed by that of a neutral
trigonal boronic acid intermediate 25, analogous to an
acyl-enzyme, and finally formation of 26 by intramolecular
water attack on 25, presumably catalyzed by Glu166. A
model of the acylation tetrahedral intermediate analogue from 12 suggests that this species may be unstable on steric grounds,
precluding progress of 11 and 12 toward
the deacylation analogue 26. An effective transition
state analogue inhibitor requires an energetically accessible path
to the inhibitory complex as well as transition state mimicry in that
complex.

Supporting Information Available
Synthetic details for the preparation
of compounds 11 and 12. Figures S1and S2
illustrate steric effects of the thiazolidine ring. This material
is available free of charge via the Internet at http://pubs.acs.org

Supplementary Material
bi500970f_si_001.pdf

The authors declare no competing financial interest.

Abbreviations
DMPDess–Martin
periodinane

ESMSelectrospray ionization mass spectroscopy

LHMDSlithium hexamethyldisilazane

mCPBAm-chloroperbenzoic acid

MIDAmethyl iminodiacetic acid

MOPS3-morpholinopropanesulfonic acid

NMRnuclear magnetic resonance

PBPpenicillin-binding
protein

THFtetrahydofuran

DMFdimethylformamide

DMSOdimethyl sulfoxide

