The spliceosome
catalyzes eukaryotic
pre-mRNA splicing and is one of the most complex and dynamic macromolecular
machines in the nucleus. At the core of
this machinery are five major snRNPs [small nuclear ribonucleoproteins
(U1, U2, and U4–U6 snRNPs)], which each contain a single unique
snRNA and multiple associated proteins, some of which are unique to
a given snRNP and others of which are shared among snRNPs. In particular,
the U1 and U2 snRNPs of many metazoans have a common protein, first
identified in Drosophila. This Drosophila SNF, protein (for sans fille) binds to U1 snRNA Stemloop II (SLII) and U2 snRNA Stemloop IV (SLIV). To date, there are no data regarding the in vivo function of SNF in the snRNPs, although protein
mutations result in defects to Drosophila sex determination,
and genetic data show that a SNF deletion is embryonic lethal in the
fly.

SNF contains two RNA recognition
motifs (RRMs), the first of which
is responsible for specific binding to both RNAs. RRMs are the most abundant RNA binding domains in eukaryotes
and are characterized by an α/β sandwich topology. A nuclear
magnetic resonance (NMR) solution structure of SNF RRM1 shows its classic RRM fold (Figure A), but there are no structures of SNF in bimolecular complexes
with either SLII or SLIV. However, SNF is a member of the U1A/U2B″/SNF
family of RNA binding proteins, all of which contain an N-terminal
RNA binding RRM. The homology between the three RRMs (∼74%
identical) allows us to use existing cocrystals of human U1A RRM1
bound to SLII and human U2B″ RRM1
bound to SLIV as models for possibly analogous
SNF interactions. In cocrystals of U1A RRM1 bound to SLII, and U2B″
bound to SLIV, the RNA is spread out over the surface of the four-stranded
antiparallel β-sheet. In these complexes, two aromatic amino
acids stack with nucleobases (Figure B); we
anticipate that this orientation also describes SNF/RNA complexes.

RNA and
proteins. (A) Overlay of structures of the U1A RRM solution
NMR structure, the SNF solution NMR structure (purple), and U2B″ from the ternary complex(blue). (B) Cartoon representation of U2B″/SLIV/U2A′
ternary complex formation (Protein Data Bank entry 1A9N), the model of ternary
complex formation for Drosophila SNF. RNA is colored
yellow, RRM purple, and U2A′ green. Structures represented
with VMD. (C) Drosophila U1 snRNA SLII and U2 snRNA SLIV sequences.

The sequences of SLII and SLIV are remarkably similar, and
SNF
binds to each with affinities that are uniquely dependent on salt
and temperature, reflecting differences in binding mechanisms for
the two RNAs. The RNA sequences are shown
in Figure C; the conserved nucleobases in
the loops (5′AUUGCAC/G) are primary contacts for U1A and are
likely to be maintained for SNF. Binding of SNF to SLIV is complicated
by the association of SNF with U2A′ protein, which is also
phylogenetically conserved in metazoans.

In Drosophila, U2A′ is a 265-residue protein
that contains an N-terminal leucine-rich repeat (LRR) and a C-terminal
domain of ∼100 residues, predicted to be mostly disordered
(using IUPRED). In a ternary SLIV/U2B″/U2A′
crystal structure, the LRR domain of human
U2A′ interacts with the α-helical side of human U2B″
RRM1. As the ternary complex shows, the U2B″ RRM is sandwiched
between SLIV and the U2A′ LRR (Figure B). By analogy to the complex formed by the homologous U2B″
RRM1, SNF is thought to form a ternary complex with both SLIV and
U2A′. As with the U1A/SLII cocrystal, an important caveat is
that the RNA binding properties of U1A, U2B″, and SNF are quite
different,,, so inferences
from structural comparisons must be cautious.

Early in vitro pull-down experiments with [35S]SNF
showed that it bound to Xenopus U1
snRNA. However, the ability of Xenopus U2 snRNA to pull down [35S]SNF was enhanced
when SNF was co-incubated with in vitro-translated
human U2A′ or with Drosophila nuclear extract, which presumably contained Drosophila U2A′. These results led to the conclusion that protein/protein
interactions between U2A′ and SNF enhanced the affinity of
SNF for SLIV, promoting the formation of the SLIV/SNF/U2A′
ternary complex. However, those experiments neither explained the
apparent absence of a SLII/SNF/U2A′ ternary complex nor provided
a mechanism that explained the formation of a SLIV/SNF/U2A′
ternary complex.

We used purified recombinant proteins and RNAs
to perform in vitro experiments that compare binding
in the ternary
complex system (RNA/SNF/U2A′) with bimolecular binding of SNF/U2A′
and SNF/RNA complexes. Our system allows us to analyze SNF binding
in terms of binding cooperativity, which we define as the degree to
which binding by one ligand (RNA) affects binding of the second ligand
(U2A′). Intriguingly, while the cooperativity for the SLIV/SNF/U2A′
complex is large, the cooperativity of SLII/SNF/U2A′ binding
is marginal. Of most significance is the fact that the RNA-dependent
thermodynamic cooperativity between protein/RNA and protein/protein
interactions is sufficient to explain the characteristic partitioning
behavior of U2A′ to the U2 snRNP and exclusion from the U1
snRNP. We finally describe protein/protein and protein/RNA binding
in terms of allosteric models that include contributions of RNA and
protein internal conformational equilibria.

Materials and Methods
Protein
Constructs and Purification
Full-length SNF
was purified as previously described.

A pGEX-2T plasmid containing the gene for Drosophila U2A′ was obtained from H. Salz. The U2A′ gene was
subcloned into our Ptac expression vector under an isopropyl β-d-1-thiogalactopyranoside (IPTG) inducible promoter, and the
three cysteines in the protein were Quick-changed to their human sequence
counterparts (C19V, C38T, and C119S) for the sake of biochemical convenience.
[EMSA experiments using both constructs showed no difference in binding
properties (data not shown).] The protein construct was truncated
at position 180, so what we call U2A′ is the protein LRR domain.
Protein expression was induced in Escherichia coli BL 21 cells at an OD of 0.8 in LB medium with 0.1 mM IPTG at 17
°C overnight to reduce the level of inclusion body formation.
Cells were spun down and resuspended on ice in 30 mM sodium acetate
(pH 5.3), 200 mM NaCl, 2 mM EDTA, and 8.5% sucrose. A protease inhibitor
cocktail (Sigma), phenylmethanesulfonyl fluoride, and DNase II were
added prior to lysis. Cells were French pressed, spun down in an ultracentrifuge,
and filtered through a 0.22 μm filter, and the supernatant was
loaded onto a prepacked GE Hi-Trap SP-HP cation exchange column at
4 °C. The column was washed with 50 mM NaCl and 50 mM Tris (pH
7.5). A salt gradient from 50 to 375 mM NaCl was run at a rate of
1.5 mL/min over 2.5 h. Fractions with U2A′ were collected and
concentrated into 100 mM arginine, 50 mM KCl, and 10 mM cacodylate
(pH 7). The arginine was necessary to maintain protein solubility
at high concentrations. The concentrated protein was then run on a
Superdex 75 10/300 GL (GE) gel filtration column in the same buffer,
with a flow rate of 0.3 mL/min to remove impurities. The protein was
eluted as a single, symmetric peak. Clean fractions were collected
and concentrated to ∼100 μM for further use.

Fluorescence
Titrations
For fluorescence binding experiments,
we used 6-carboxyfluorescein (6-FAM) 5′-end-labeled RNAs (IDT)
with sequences of 5′-6-FAM-GGGCCCGGCAUUGCACCUCGCCGGGUCC (SLII)
and 5′-6-FAM-GGGCCCGGUAUUGCAGUACCGCCGGGUCC (SLIV).
Loop nucleotides are underlined. These RNAs were also 3′-end-labeled
(using T4 RNA ligase) with [α-32P]pCp
(cytidine 3′,5′-bis-phosphate) to assess whether the
5′-fluorescein label affects RNA binding as measured by nitrocellulose
filter binding experiments. Filter binding assays with FAM-RNAs and in vitro T7 RNA polymerase SLII and SLIV showed no difference
in dissociation constants (data not shown).

Fluorescence experiments
were performed using an SLM 8000 fluorimeter. Cuvettes and stir bars
were soaked in HCl for 15 min to eliminate RNase contamination, thoroughly
rinsed with RNase-free water, and then blocked for 1 h with 250 mM
KCl, 10 mM potassium phosphate (pH 8), 1 mM MgCl2, and
40 μg/mL BSA. RNA stocks were diluted in water, heated to 65
°C for 5 min, and quenched on ice. A 1/10 volume of 10× buffer was added to complete RNA folding.

Fluorescence emission spectra were recorded on samples containing
10 nM RNA and variable protein concentrations (as indicated in the
figures). The buffer was the same as that used for blocking. The temperature
was held constant with a circulating water bath at 23 °C. Protein
stocks were sufficiently concentrated that the RNA dilution was &lt;1%.
The excitation wavelength was 490 nm, and the slit widths were 8 and
2 nm for the excitation and emission monochromators, respectively.
The emission wavelength was varied between 495 and 600 nm. Buffer
reference spectra were subtracted from the sample spectra, and the
emission intensities were normalized to the maximal intensity of the
free RNA.

SNF/U2A′ titrations were performed in 250 mM
KCl, 10 mM
potassium phosphate (pH 8), 1 mM MgCl2, 40 μg/mL
BSA, 5 mM DTT, and RNasin. Titrations were performed at 23 °C
while the mixtures were being constantly stirred. For a single titration
of SNF or the SNF/U2A′ complex into FAM-RNA, the cuvette and
titrant concentration of FAM-RNA was held constant at 0.1 or 0.5 nM
(the lower concentration was used for the highest-affinity interactions).
The cuvette and titrant also contained identical concentrations of
U2A′. The sample was excited at 490 nm, and the emission intensity
was recorded at 520 nm (excitation and emission slit openings of 8
and 16 nm, respectively). SNF or the SNF/U2A′ complex was titrated
into the RNA, and the fluorescence emission intensity was recorded
for each addition of SNF. The intensity data were converted to fraction
fluorescence enhancement and normalized to the maximal fluorescence
enhancement. Titrations were collected at multiple concentrations
of U2A′, and the data were globally fit in Scientist (Micromath)
to eqs –; fractional
fluorescence enhancement corresponds to the fraction of RNA bound
either by SNF or by the SNF/U2A′ complex. Titration series
were repeated at least twice for each RNA. The parameter values listed
in Table  represent the average of the series
fits, with uncertainties that are the larger of either the propagated
error or the standard deviation between measurements.

Thermodynamic Binding Parameters for
SNF, RNA, and U2A′
 	SNF and FAM-SLII	SNF and FAM-SLIV	
KD,R,app (M) (1/KR)	(1.1 ± 0.5) × 10–9	(8.3 ± 0.4) × 10–8	
ΔG°(R,binding) (kcal/mol)	–12.1 ± 0.3	–9.6 ± 0.1	
KD,Uapp (M) (1/KU)	na	(1.4 ± 0.2) × 10–6	
ΔG°(U,binding) (kcal/mol)	na	–7.9 ± 0.1	
α	2.2 ± 0.4	361 ± 51	
Δg = −RT ln(α) (kcal/mol)	–0.47 ± 0.1	–3.5 ± 0.1	
R is RNA.
U is U2A′. SLII
and SLIV are labeled with fluorescein (FAM). Binding buffer for all
experiments consisted of 250 mM KCl, 10 mM potassium phosphate (pH
8.0), 1 mM MgCl2, 40 μg/mL BSA, 5 mM DTT, and RNasin
at 22 °C. Parameter values reflect the average values from at
least two separate data series. Uncertainties represent the larger
of either the standard deviation of parameter values from different
fits or the propagated error.

Data not available from this
experiment.

Partitioning
surfaces were simulated in Scientist based on binding
parameters determined in the fluorescence experiments. For these surfaces,
SLII and SLIV were considered competitive ligands for SNF. The partitioning
surfaces were plotted in MatLab.

2-Aminopurine Fluorescence Experiments
2-Aminopurine
(2AP) SLIV (Dharmacon) had the sequence 5′-GGCCGUAUUGCAGU-2AP-CCGCGGCC.
The RNA stock was diluted to 300 nM in water, heated to 95 °C
for 3 min, and quenched on ice. A concentrated buffer stock was added
to bring the salt concentration to 50 mM KCl, with 10 mM cacodylate
(pH 7) (the lower salt concentration prevented RNA dimerization).

Cuvettes and stir bars were washed with acid and blocked with BSA
as described. The temperature was held constant with a circulating
water bath at 23 °C. Protein stocks were sufficiently concentrated
such that the RNA dilution was &lt;1% upon addition. The excitation
wavelength was 310 nm, and the slit widths were 8 and 2 nm for the
excitation and emission monochromators, respectively. A polarizer
in the emission path parallel to the monochromator gratings eliminated
monochromator artifacts from Wood’s anomaly. The emission wavelength
was varied between 340 and 460 nm. Buffer reference spectra were subtracted
from the sample spectra, and the emission intensities were normalized
to the maximal intensity of the free RNA.

Circular Dichroism (CD)
Spectroscopy
CD spectra were
buffer-subtracted and recorded at room temperature on a Jasco J715
instrument. RNA experiments were performed with an RNA concentration
of 2 μM in 50 mM KCl and 10 mM cacodylate. Spectra were collected
from 375 to 210 nm. For experiments with protein, protein was added
to a concentration of 2 μM (SNF or SNF and U2A′). The
hairpin RNA sequences were 5′-GGCCGCAUUGCACUCCGCGGCC
(SLII) and 5′-GGCCGUAUUGCAGUACCGCGGCC
(SLIV).

ITC Experiments
Protein samples were diluted from stock
solutions into 100 mM arginine, 50 mM KCl, and 10 mM cacodylate (pH
7) and dialyzed in mini dialyzers (ThermoScientific, 2000 molecular
weight cutoff) against that buffer. Final samples were prepared by
diluting the protein solutions (SNF and U2A′) with equal volumes
of the final buffer, including 5 mM BME. Samples were degassed prior
to being loaded into the ITC injection syringe or cell. Titrations
were performed on a NanoITC instrument (TAinstruments) and analyzed
using NanoAnalyze.

Results
SNF/RNA/U2A′ Ternary
Complexes
We have previously
determined dissociation constants for binding of SNF to SLII and SLIV. In those experiments, we compared the binding
of FL SNF, RRM1, and RRM2. We found that RRM2 does not bind to either
SLIV or SLII or to a single-stranded random sequence RNA. We also
determined that FL SNF and SNF RRM1 bind with a 1:1 stoichiometry
to either hairpin. We now consider three-component systems (RNA, SNF,
and U2A′) to explore possible mechanisms of U2A′ localization.

To determine the properties of formation of the RNA/SNF/U2A′
complex, the SNF/RNA binding affinity was measured at different U2A′
concentrations. Binding was monitored by fluorescence intensity changes
of FAM-RNA upon addition of protein [FAM does not alter RNA binding
affinity (see )]. Addition
of a saturating amount of SNF results in a 20% enhancement of the
FAM-SLII or FAM-SLIV fluorescence intensity at 520 nm. No further
change in fluorescence was observed when a large excess of U2A′
was added to the RNA alone or to the RNA bound to SNF (Figure a). For binding titrations, the fluorescence intensity
can therefore be monitored to detect protein binding, and the enhancement
is a result of binding of RNA to SNF alone or to the SNF/U2A′
complex. Representative binding curves for these experiments are shown
in panels b and c of Figure . We observed
that the presence of U2A′ imparts a marginal increase in the
affinity of SNF for SLII but a very large increase in the affinity
of SNF for SLIV.

Binding isotherms for SLII and SLIV. (a) Fluorescence
spectra of
FAM-SLII (left, red) and FAM-SLIV (right, blue) increase ∼20%
at 520 nm when the RNA is bound to either SNF (solid line) or SNF
and U2A′ (×) under saturating conditions. Addition of
1 μM U2A′ alone did not change the FAM-RNA fluorescence
(indicated by × on the RNA only spectrum). (b) Titration of SNF
with or without U2A′ into fluorescein-labeled SLII. (c) Titration
of SNF with or without U2A′ into fluorescein-labeled SLIV.
The concentration of SLIV varied with the U2A′ concentration
but was &lt;1 nM. The SLII concentration was 0.1 nM. Conditions: 250
mM KCl, 10 mM potassium phosphate (pH 8), and 1 mM MgCl2 at 22 °C.

A schematic of the thermodynamic
cycle for ternary complex formation
is shown in Figure , with the right panel
depicting the macromolecules. On the left, S represents the SNF protein,
U represents U2A′, and R represents the RNA, either SLII or
SLIV. The individual bimolecular binding events have characteristic
binding parameters; KR and KU represent the bimolecular association constants for
the SNF/RNA and SNF/U2A′ interactions, respectively. These
binding events are also characterized by free energies of binding,
ΔGRNA and ΔGU2A′, respectively. The ternary complexes can be
formed by binding of U2A′ to the preformed SNF/RNA complex
or by binding of RNA to the preformed SNF/U2A′ complex. These
are defined by association constants KU,R and KR,U, respectively.

Schematics of the binding
model and thermodynamic cycles for ternary
complex formation. S is SNF. R is RNA. U is U2A′. The right
panel gives a pictorial representation of the thermodynamic cycle.
Cooperativity factor α is shown.

Consider that SNF (S) is the
macromolecule that can bind two ligands, each of which binds at a
single site, in the thermodynamic cycle shown in Figure . Conservation of energy requires that KR,U = αKR and KU,R = αKU, where α
is the cooperativity parameter and describes the extent to which binding
by one ligand affects binding of the second ligand. If α &gt;
1,
there is positive cooperativity between the binding events (binding
by either ligand improves binding of the second ligand). When α
= 1, there is no cooperativity; binding by either ligand is independent
of the other. If α &lt; 1, there is negative cooperativity in
binding of the ligands. In the case of competitive ligand binding,
where binding by one ligand completely precludes binding of the second
ligand, α = 0. The free energy associated with cooperativity
is given by Δg = −RT ln(α).

All binding data were globally fit to eqs – to obtain the two
bimolecular association
constants KR and KU, as well as α, the cooperativity parameter.where FS+US is
the fraction of the total RNA, bound either to SNF (S) or to the U2A′/SNF
complex (US); RT, UT, and ST are the total RNA, U2A′,
and SNF concentrations, respectively; R, U, and S are the concentrations of free
RNA, U2A′, and SNF, respectively; α is the cooperativity
parameter; and KR and KU are the bimolecular association constants for the SNF/RNA
and SNF/U2A′ interactions, respectively.

We find that
cooperativity of ternary complex formation depends
on the RNA species bound (Table ) [note that
binding dissociation constants KD are
given; KD(U,R) = 1/KU,R]. Cooperativity between U2A′ and SLII binding to
SNF is only marginal (α = 2; Δg°
= −0.5 kcal/mol), so it was not possible to reliably determine
the bimolecular binding constant for the SNF/U2A′ interaction
from these titrations. Instead, the protein/protein bimolecular binding
constant was fixed to the value determined in the SLIV binding assays.
For SNF binding to SLIV, the cooperativity between U2A′ and
SLIV binding is very large; binding by either molecule increases the
binding affinity for the other by a factor of 350 (α). Even
though the apparent affinity of U2A′ for SNF in the absence
of RNA is only ∼1.5 μM, the high degree of cooperativity
between U2A′ and SLIV binding to SNF means that the affinity
of the SLIV/SNF complex for U2A′ is 4 nM. Similarly, the apparent
affinity of SNF for SLIV is shifted from 80 to 0.25 nM. Given the
large cooperativity, the shift in the SLIV binding curve approaches
the U2A′ saturation limit. This result is striking, corresponding
to a free energy of cooperativity (Δg°)
of −3.5 kcal/mol. This is a dramatic example of both the degree
to which cooperativity can affect binding and of the RNA dependence
of this phenomenon.

In Vivo Partitioning of
Proteins in snRNPs
Using the experimentally determined thermodynamic
parameters, we
simulated the fraction of cellular U1 and U2 snRNA that would be bound
by the various proteins when both proteins and both RNAs are considered
simultaneously. Figure a shows a schematic
of the two-protein, two-RNA system and all relevant binding constants.
In this analysis, SLII and SLIV are considered to be competitive ligands
for SNF. Panels b and c of Figure  and Figure
1 of the  show the
fraction of SLII and SLIV bound by SNF and U2A′ over a wide
range of possible SNF and U2A′ concentrations. These simulations
use the approximate cellular concentrations of U1 and U2 snRNAs of
3 and 1.5 μM, respectively.

Modeling protein
distributions on snRNPs. (a) Thermodynamic model
including both SLII and SLIV RNAs with binding parameters obtained
from fluorescence titrations. (b) Fractions of SLII found in a bimolecular
complex with SNF (red) and SLIV in a ternary complex (purple). (c)
Partitioning surface showing the fraction of both SLII (red) and SLIV
(purple) in ternary complexes. SLII is found primarily in the bimolecular
complex and SLIV primarily in the ternary complex when [SNF] &gt;
[U2A′].

Several important observations
can be made from the models of protein
partitioning. First, there is a significant range of U2A′ and
SNF protein concentrations for which most of SLII is found in a bimolecular
complex with SNF and most of SLIV is in a ternary complex with both
SNF and U2A′ (Figure b). Second, U2A′
partitions to the U1 snRNP only when [U2A′] &gt; [SNF] (Figure c), which is generally not a condition found in
cells. Even though binding of U2A′ and SLII is not negatively
cooperative, the difference in the free energy of binding cooperativity
(ΔΔg = 3 kcal/mol) between U2A′
and the SLII/SLIV complex binding to SNF is sufficient to effectively
partition the U2A′ protein away from the U1 snRNP and into
the U2 snRNP, when the concentrations of the various components are
found at expected cellular levels.

Protein/Protein Interaction
Direct measurement of the
bimolecular association of U2A′ and RRMs has not been done
previously. We used ITC to measure the binding thermodynamics. The
titration of U2A′ with SNF shows a very large apparent enthalpy
of binding (Figure a) that is temperature-dependent
(Figure b), indicating a change in heat capacity
(ΔCp) associated
with binding. Given the nonlinearity of the temperature dependence,
the data were fit to a model that takes
into account a temperature dependence of ΔCp:where T is the temperature
in kelvin, TR is an arbitrary reference
temperature (we chose 295 K), and ΔHR and ΔCp,R are
the apparent enthalpy and heat capacity of binding at the reference
temperature, respectively. Fitting the data to this model yields the
following values: ΔCp,R = −3.1 ± 0.2 kcal mol–1 K–1, ΔHR = −144
± 4 kcal/mol, and ΔΔCp = −190 ± 40 cal mol–1 K–2. To understand the origin of the large ΔCp,R and ΔH, we considered several sources that might contribute.

Protein/protein
interaction thermodynamics. (a) Calorimetric titration
of SNF into U2A′ shows a large and negative apparent enthalpy
of binding. (b) Temperature dependence of the observed enthalpy of
interaction indicates a large apparent heat capacity of binding. Calorimetric
titrations were conducted in 100 mM arginine, 50 mM KCl, and 10 mM
cacodylate (pH 7). (c) CD spectra of SNF (gray), U2A′, and
an equimolar mixture (black) show some nonadditivity in the spectra;
the hashed line indicates the sum of the SNF and U2A′ spectra.

The protein/protein binding mechanism
includes burial of hydrophobic
surfaces. On the basis of the SLIV/U2B″/U2A′ cocrystal
structure, we calculate there is burial
of 629 Å2 of polar surface area and 1184 Å2 of apolar surface at the U2B″/U2A′ interface.
Applying estimates of binding enthalpy from surface burial yields a predicted binding enthalpy (ΔH) of −15 kcal/mol at 22 °C. The measured apparent
heat capacity and enthalpy of binding for SNF/U2A′ far exceed
this estimate, so unless the binding of SNF to U2A′ is very
different from the binding of U2B″ RRM1 to U2A′, there
must be other contributions.

Contributions to the observed enthalpy
could come from coupling
of protonation or ion binding and/or release to complex formation.
Cacodylate was used as the buffer in most of the calorimetric titrations
in part because the ionization enthalpy of cacodylate is very small
(−0.72 kcal/mol). To estimate
the effect of linked protonation equilibria, experiments were repeated
in ACES buffer, which has a much higher ionization enthalpy (7.17
kcal/mol) (both experiments conducted at pH 7.0). This analysis showed
a net release of approximately eight protons from the solvent on binding.
The source of the large linkage between binding and protonation needs
to be investigated to improve our understanding of the binding mechanism.

Conformational changes coupled to binding are a common source of
an apparent heat capacity., We used CD to assess
changes in the secondary structure of the proteins upon binding (Figure c). CD spectra of SNF, U2A′, and a 1:1 mixture
of the proteins show that the spectra are not entirely additive, suggesting
some degree of change to the secondary structure upon binding. However,
the difference spectrum is small compared to that of other protein–protein
interactions with large values of ΔCp. For the SNF/U2A′ interaction, while the
changes in overall secondary structure appear to be minor, it is possible
that there are significant changes in the tertiary structure of one
or both components that are coupled to binding and contribute to the
large apparent ΔH and ΔCp.

Protein/RNA Interactions
Cocrystals, first
suggested that RNA binding to RRMs results in significant distortion
of the loops of U1 SLII and U2 SLIV. Most significantly, the RNA loop
must open up upon protein binding, which allows formation of the specific
contacts between the protein and RNA. To probe conformational changes
to the RNA upon protein binding, we measured CD spectra of SLII and
SLIV in the presence and absence of SNF and U2A′ (Figure a,b). Between 240 and 300 nm, the contribution of
the protein to the CD signal is negligible compared to that of the
RNA. Changes in the CD spectrum can therefore be attributed to changes
in the RNA structure upon binding.

RNA conformations in binary and ternary
complexes. (a) CD spectra
of SLII as free RNA (black), RNA with SNF (purple), and RNA with SNF
and U2A′ (blue). Stacking of nucleobases increases the ellipticity
at 260 nm, so the RNA bases appear to be changing their relative orientations.
(b) CD spectra of SLIV as free RNA, RNA with SNF, and RNA with SNF
and U2A′. (c) Fluorescence emission spectra of SLIV with 2-aminopurine
in the loop show large changes upon protein binding. (d) Low-energy
CD spectra of 2-aminopurine in the SLIV loop, with (blue and purple)
and without (black) proteins [2 μM RNA or 2 μM SNF or
SNF/U2A′ in 50 mM KCl and 10 mM sodium cacodylate (pH 7)].

SNF binding results in an overall
increase in the magnitude of
the CD signal of the RNA band centered at ∼265 nm, consistent
with an increased level of base stacking. Further addition of U2A′
(and formation of the ternary complex), however, results in a significant
decrease in the intensity of the CD bands, suggesting unstacking of
the loop nucleobases.

The 3′-UCC of the SLII loop does
not make contact with U1A; neither does
the 3′-ACC of SLIV make
contact with U2B″ or U2A′ in the cocrystal. We previously replaced the 3′-loop adenine
of SLIV with 2-aminopurine (2AP) and showed that it does not affect
the RNA binding affinity of SLIV for SNF; this nucleotide is stacked with its neighboring bases in the free
RNA but becomes flipped out of the stack upon binding to SNF. Unexpectedly, when U2A′ is added to the
preformed SNF/SLIV complex, the 2AP fluorescence intensity is quenched
(Figure c). The signal can be recovered by
addition of a large excess of SNF (data not shown), which presumably
increases the relative population of the bimolecular SNF/RNA complex.

At wavelengths greater than 300 nm, 2-aminopurine can show an induced
CD band that is sensitive to the environment of the nucleobase. Comparing the low-energy CD spectra of free
RNA and bound RNA in either the bimolecular or ternary complex shows
a substantial increase in the magnitude of the induced CD signal at
315 nm, suggesting a change in the electronic environment of 2AP (Figure d). Fluorescence quenching upon U2A′ binding
may be due to the increased flexibility of neighboring bases that
transiently stack with the 2AP, while 2AP remains in an environment
that retains an induced CD. Currently, we do not have a molecular
explanation for the 2AP signal changes when proteins are bound, but
the data indicate that the RNA undergoes conformational changes in
both complexes.

Discussion
The biological implications
of the cooperativity that produces
the SLIV/SNF/U2A′ ternary complex are complex. The most obvious
is the localization of the U2A′ protein to the U2 snRNP and
its exclusion from the U1 snRNP. The function of the U2A′ protein
in the U2 snRNP is not clear, although there are some experimental
results that suggest it is a crucial element of U2 snRNP stability
and spliceosome assembly., Second, as noted in
earlier studies, U2A′ does enhance the affinity of SNF for
U2 snRNA SLIV. We conclude that the RNA sequence modulates the cooperativity
and so determines the localization of U2A′.

The molecular
origin of the cooperativity (α) is the predominant
unknown that arises from these results. Because the degree of cooperativity
determines the form of the SNF complex in vivo, the
physical basis of the thermodynamic signature is important to understand.
More specifically, we want to understand the origin of α = 350-fold
enhancement (positive heterotropic linkage) of binding of SNF to either
SLIV or U2A′ (upon binding by the other) with a corresponding
free energy (Δg°) of −3.5 kcal/mol.
The cooperativity is dependent on the RNA, because linkage effects
between binding of SNF to U2A′ and SLII are slightly positive
but weak (α = 2.2; Δg° = −0.5
kcal/mol). The RNA dependence of the linkage effects is sufficient
to explain why U2A′ is effectively partitioned to the U2 snRNP
and excluded from the U1 snRNP.

Conformational changes of proteins
and RNA coupled to binding are
known contributors to observed large and negative apparent binding
enthalpies as well as a large apparent ΔCp. Formation of the SLIV/SNF/U2A′ complex
certainly requires conformational changes of the RNA, as shown by
our spectroscopic data that monitor the SLIV hairpin loop. SNF likely
undergoes conformational changes upon RNA binding, as well, much as
U1A RRM1 undergoes a conformational change when bound to SLII (loop
3 protrudes through the RNA loop). SNF RRM1 itself is sampling conformational
space, as determined by its NMR spectra: the entire RRM1 undergoes
conformational averaging on the chemical shift time scale, suggesting
that it is best described as an ensemble of structures. In addition, the free and bound conformation
of the U2A′ LRR domain could be significantly different, or
its conformational sampling could be altered. Coupled conformational
changes are likely to be a major contributor to the observed cooperativity,
the heat capacity, and the large apparent enthalpy of binding.

Conformational changes coupled to binding might imply that a macromolecule
alters its conformation only when a ligand is bound, and such is the
premise of the concept of induced fit., However, the
free states of SNF and the RNAs are best described as ensembles of
structures. Their binding is best described by conformational selection, in which the structural ensemble is thought to include conformations
that are competent to bind ligand. A recent example of this process
for RNA/protein binding is seen at the single-molecule level, looking
at the conformational ensemble of an RNA five-way junction before
and after a protein binds (S4 protein binding to a rRNA five-way junction). Combining the mechanisms of induced fit and
conformational selection, with the thermodynamics
that couple conformational changes to binding will be a challenge
in the SLIV/SNF/U2A′ system.

What Is α? Implications
for Allostery in SNF Interactions
In 1961, Monod and Jacob
introduced the term “allosteric”, and the first model to explain the allosteric
effect was proposed in 1965. The model
postulated that the protein existed in an equilibrium between at least
two states. Since then, additional models for allostery have emerged
(most notably the KNF or sequential model). However, the term “allostery” has been used to encompass
a much broader range of phenomena; almost any “action at a
distance” has been described as allostery. The feature common
to most of what is described as allostery is the presence of an allosteric
binding site. This is a site that is distant from the functional (orthosteric)
site; the allosteric site can be a catalytic site or a binding site
for a second molecule. When the allosteric site is occupied, the activity
of the molecule at the orthosteric site is altered.

If the SLIV/U2B″/U2A′
cocrystal structure is representative of the SLIV/SNF/U2A′
ternary complex, then binding sites for the two ligands (the RNA and
U2A′) are distinct. Our data show that binding of RNA to the
SNF RRM affects binding of U2A′, and vice versa. Thus, the
system meets the two criteria for allostery.

The system is unusual
in terms of descriptions of allostery because
the ligands (and the ligand binding surfaces) are quite large. Using
U2B″ as a model, we calculated that 40% of the SNF RRM1 surface
is part of an intermolecular interface. More important than the size
of the ligands, however, is the fact that at least one ligand (the
RNA) clearly experiences its own conformational heterogeneity, which
is modulated by binding. Allostery in larger macromolecular complexes, will need to account for conformational heterogeneity of “ligands”
as well as conformational changes of the “macromolecule”.

If in a considerable simplification of the system, we consider
the RNA/SNF/U2A′ complex in terms of a two-state SNF equilibrium
ensemble, α is given by (see the )where KC is the
equilibrium constant between the two states of SNF and β and
γ are the ratios of the binding constants of each state of SNF
for each ligand. As a consequence, α is limited by KC, and regardless of β and γ, the maximal
value of α is ∼1/KC. For
unbound SNF, this means that the free energy difference between the
low- and high-affinity states must be at least 3.5 kcal/mol to account
for the experimental data [Δg = −RT ln(α) = −3.5 kcal/mol], but this difference
is equal to the SNF RRM1 folding free energy [ΔG°(folding) = −3.5 ± 0.3 kcal/mol]. The observed linkage (α) between U2A′
and RNA binding to SNF could occur if the major conformation of free
SNF has a weak affinity for the two ligands but a minor conformation
has a high affinity for the ligands. This scenario would require that
both the RNA and U2A′ binding surfaces of SNF are substantially
different in the two conformations.

Assuming two-state exchange
is the basis of the allosteric effect,
the difference in linkage between SLII and SLIV binding and U2A′
binding could be explained by substantially different affinities of
the RNAs for the two states (in eq , βSLIV ≫ βSLII). However, we know that
at the very least, the conformational landscape of the RNAs is best
described as an ensemble of states, so we must consider whether the
internal equilibria of the ligands can substantially alter the measured
linkage parameter and/or allosteric response. If we introduce two-state
exchange phenomena in one ligand, we obtain the following dependence
of α:where KL is the
equilibrium constant for the ligand exchange process and β and
μ are the ratios of the binding constants to the two states
of the macromolecule for the two states of the ligand (Figure 2 of
the ). This model
requires an allosteric response of the macromolecule (if KC = 0, then α = 1). Given identical ligand exchange-independent
parameters, α(exchange) can be greater than or less
than α(no ligand exchange). The analysis
can be extended to include internal equilibrium of both ligands, with
similar results.

The ensemble allosteric model (EAM) is a more
general model of
allostery that includes both MWC and
KNF models as special cases. In the EAM, the two ligand binding sites
can be treated formally as separate “domains” that can
interact. Each domain can sample distinct conformations. Assuming
two-state exchange, the equilibria between states of both domains
(in the absence of interactions between them) are given by K1 and K2. This is
modified by a factor when the two domains interact. If simple two-state
ligand internal equilibria are introduced into the EAM, modulation
of the linkage parameter α is also seen. Like the simpler model,
an allosteric response (α ≠ 1) requires that the macromolecule
undergo exchange. If K1 or K2 is zero or if there is no interaction between the domains,
then α = 1. While ligand internal equilibria can modify the
degree of the allosteric response, this model predicts that allostery
requires an energetic change in both domains. It also predicts that
the two domains thermodynamically interact when the two binding sites
are occupied.

While it is possible that the two RNAs have very
different ΔΔG values for the states of
SNF (which could account for
the difference in the linkage effect), it is also possible that differences
in the conformational landscapes of the RNAs (and how they bind protein)
are important in the difference between αSLII and
αSLIV. Ligand internal equilibria can have a dramatic
impact on the observed allostery of the system, but determining the
thermodynamic origins of allostery in this system and in other systems
will be challenging. Attention has recently focused on allosteric
effects that are mediated by changes in protein dynamics, as well
as changes in protein structure.− We suggest that such
effects are probably ubiquitous and important in the assembly and
function of larger macromolecular complexes. This is particularly
likely in RNA–protein complexes, where both macromolecules
are flexible.

RNA Recognition by Proteins
Protein
recognition of
RNAs is a complex process; while many structural studies have provided
insight into the binding of discrete protein domains to particular
tracts of RNA, most RNA binding domains are found in the context of
larger proteins, which often contribute to RNA binding. Careful studies
of multidomain protein recognition of RNA targets have been undertaken; these studies highlight the heterogeneity of
mechanisms used to achieve RNA binding specificity.

Large changes
in the free energy of binding have been reported for protein/RNA/protein
complexes, in which binding by one protein is coupled to a large conformational
change in the RNA, which results in a large apparent increase in the
affinity for the second protein. One example occurs in 16S rRNA where
S15 protein binding to the rRNA was found to increase the free energy
of binding of the S6/S18 heterodimer to the 16S rRNA by at least 6.5
kcal/mol. Substantial work has shown
that protein/protein interactions, coupled with protein/RNA interactions,
very significantly impact the catalytic activity of archaeal RNase
P,, although the thermodynamics and kinetics
have not been completely resolved.

Our results show that a protein/RNA
interaction can have a very
large (350-fold) impact on protein/protein binding; this is an RNA-specific
effect, as a highly similar RNA sequence elicits very little change
in the protein/protein interaction. The effect has biological consequences,
as it is sufficient to explain the protein partitioning behavior of
the system and localize U2A′ exclusively to the U2 snRNP. We
consider it likely that such phenomena of coupled binding are important
in localizing many proteins within RNPs.

Supporting Information Available
Simulations of protein distributions
on snRNAs and the dependence of α on systems where both components
undergo exchange, as well as the formalism for the description of
α. This material is available free of charge via the Internet
at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bi500192a_si_001.pdf

The authors declare
no
competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
We thank W. Tom Stump for lab management.

Abbreviations
RRMRNA recognition motif

LRRleucine-rich repeat

ITCisothermal titration
calorimetry

snRNPsmall nuclear ribonucleoprotein

EMSAelectrophoretic mobility shift assay.

