Heme-copper
oxidases play a
key role in mitochondrial and bacterial respiration, catalyzing the
reduction of dioxygen to water and redox-coupled proton translocation.− The resulting electrochemical gradient is used by ATP synthase to
make ATP. The heme-copper oxidases are
classified into the A, B, and C subfamilies., Ligand
channels have been proposed for oxidases from the different subfamilies,
including for the bovine enzyme,Rhodobacter sphaeroides (Rs) aa3,Paracoccus denitrificans (Pd) aa3, and Escherichia coli bo3() from the A family, Thermus
thermophilus (Tt) ba3 from the B family, and Pseudomonas stutzeri cbb3 from the C family. A hydrophobic channel originating at a V-shaped
cleft formed by subunit III was identified in the crystal structure
of Pd aa3. A channel starting in subunit I and converging with the channel
starting in subunit III was observed in Rs aa3 by trapping Xe atoms in the crystal structure.

More recently, additional details of the
ligand channel in Tt ba3 have been obtained., The location of Xe atoms in the Tt ba3 crystal structure shows a bifurcated Y-shaped ligand channel 18–20
Å in length, starting from two points, the first between helices
II and III of subunit I and the second between helices IV and V of
subunit I on the protein exterior., On the basis
of these observations, cavities in the bovine, Rs, and Pd aa3 oxidases were assessed and
putative O2 pathways suggested. In the bovine, Rs, and Pd aa3 oxidases, there is a narrowing of the ligand channel ∼9
Å from the catalytic site, caused by conserved tryptophan and
phenylalanine residues;,, this narrowing is not present in Tt ba3 in which smaller residues, tyrosine (Y133) and threonine (T231),
occupy the positions of the tryptophan and phenylalanine, respectively., Recent experiments in our laboratory have shown that binding of
O2 and NO to the active site in the Y133W and Y133W/T231F
mutants of Tt ba3 is ∼5 times slower
than in the wild-type enzyme. This suggests
that the significantly slower ligand binding in the bovine enzyme
(1 × 108 M–1 s–1) compared to that in Tt ba3 (1 ×
109 M–1 s–1), is in part due to the tryptophan constriction residue in the ligand
channel of the bovine aa3 enzyme (W126)
impeding the access of O2 and NO to the active site. A hydrophobic pocket in the ligand channel of
the bovine enzyme may further impede the access of O2 and
NO to the active site.

A comparison
of amino acid sequences and crystal structures of
the heme-copper oxidases has also identified strictly conserved residues
in the ligand channels of these enzymes, including that of Tt ba3, which may play important roles in modulating
access of ligands to the binuclear active site. One of the highly
conserved amino acid residues in the ligand channel is a glycine residue,
G232 in Tt ba3.,,,, The crystal structure of Tt ba3 shows that G232 is located between two large residues, tryptophan
(W229) and phenylalanine (F228) (Figure ),
which have been suggested to form a hydrophobic and hydrophilic boundary
around the binuclear center., The G232 residue is
located behind the Xe1 site, identified in Xe-pressurized crystallographic
studies of Tt ba3,, providing a small opening proposed to be the site of entry of ligands
into the active site. Mutation of the homologous glycine residue in Rs aa3 oxidase (G283) to a larger valine residue
was reported to give rise to significantly faster CO recombination
[major phase (50%), 40 μs, compared to 10 ms in the wild-type
enzyme], suggesting that the photodissociated CO did not leave the
catalytic site cavity of the mutant enzyme. The oxidation of the fully reduced G283V mutant upon exposure to
dioxygen was found to be significantly slower (minutes) compared to
that of the wild-type enzyme (1 ms), which was interpreted as the
valine side chain completely blocking access of O2 to the
catalytic site in this enzyme. Because
of the critical involvement of this conserved residue in ligand access
in Rs aa3, it is important to know if
G232 plays a similar role in Tt ba3, particularly
considering that the G232 residue is adjacent to T231 Tt ba3, which in the aa3 oxidases
is replaced by the phenylalanine “constriction point”
residue.

Residues lining the ligand channel of the wild-type ba3 cytochrome oxidase (colored yellow, PDB entry 3S8F) and the G232V mutant
(blue). The purple spheres are water 618 and the green spheres water
604 as described in the text.

In this study, the CO photolysis and recombination dynamics
and
the reactions of O2 and NO with the G232V Tt ba3 mutant were investigated using photolabile NO and O2 carriers. The replacement of glycine with the larger valine
does not impede ligand access because the resulting structural change
appears to open other O2 cavities in the ligand channel.

Methods
Protein
Expression, Purification, and Steady-State Activity
Measurements
Recombinant wild-type Tt ba3 and the G232V mutant were expressed in Tt HB8 and isolated and purified as previously described. The proteins were concentrated to 20 mg/mL in
a buffer containing 20 mM Tris (pH 7.6) and 0.05% dodecyl β-d-maltopyranoside (DM) (Affimetrix Inc.). All the samples were
stored at 4 °C for future use. The steady-state activities were
measured as previously described.

Crystallization,
X-ray Data Collection, and Structure Determination
Crystallization
was performed at room temperature in 24-well hanging
drop plates. The crystals were harvested
and immediately flash-frozen in liquid nitrogen. All diffraction data
were collected at the Stanford Synchrotron Radiation Lightsource.
iMosflm and SCALA were used to integrate, scale, and merge the data
sets., The G232V structure was determined by molecular
replacement with Phaser, using the wild-type Tt ba3 structure (PDB entry 3S8F) as the initial search model. The output
model was manually adjusted in Coot and refined with Refmac5.−

Sample Preparation
The Tt ba3 recombinant wild-type enzyme and G232 mutant were dissolved in 0.1
M HEPES buffer (pH 7.5) containing 0.1% DM. The potassium pentachloronitrosyl-ruthenate(II)
photolabile NO complex was obtained from Alfa Aesar, and the (μ-peroxo)(μ-hydroxo)bis[bis(bipyridyl)cobalt(III)]
nitrate photolabile O2 complex was synthesized as previously
described.

The fully reduced Tt ba3 was prepared by first taking the oxidized
enzyme solution through several alternating cycles of vacuum and nitrogen.
For the O2 experiments, glucose, glucose oxidase, and catalase
(final concentrations of 3.5, 0.25, and 0.01 mg/mL, respectively)
were added to the deoxygenated enzyme solution to remove any residual
O2 in the solution. The enzyme was reduced using ascorbic
acid and a ruthenium hexamine mediator (final concentrations of 2
mM and 15–25 μM, respectively). For the NO binding studies,
a final concentration of phenazine methosulfate (PMS) of 1 μM
was used in place of the ruthenium hexamine to prevent a possible
reaction with the photolabile NO complex. The enzyme concentration
was determined from the spectrum of the fully reduced enzyme using
a Δε560–590 of 26 mM–1 cm–1. The fully reduced
CO-bound enzyme for the CO flash-photolysis experiments was prepared
by exposing the fully reduced enzyme to CO for ∼30 min with
occasional agitation.

Time-Resolved Optical Absorption (TROA) Measurements
The O2 reaction and NO binding of the fully reduced Tt ba3 G232V mutant were investigated by mixing
the mutant with the O2 or NO carrier and photolyzing the
respective complex with a 355 nm laser pulse. The concentrations of the photoproduced O2 and NO were
determined as previously described.,

The
TROA difference spectra were recorded using a CCD camera and analyzed
using singular-value decomposition (SVD) and global exponential fitting,
which provided the apparent lifetimes and the associated b-spectra., The spectra of the intermediates
in the O2 reaction of the Tt ba3 G232V mutant were determined on the basis of a proposed kinetic
scheme. The plausibility of the scheme was tested by comparing the
experimental and model spectra of the proposed intermediates.

Classical
Molecular Dynamics Simulations
Classical
molecular dynamics simulations of diffusion of O2 to the
active site of the fully reduced wild-type ba3 and the G232V mutant were performed using the CHARMM27 force
field as implemented in GROMACS version
4.5.5. The system comprises the enzyme’s
catalytic subunit I, two leaflets of 64 dimyristoylphosphatidylcholine
(DMPC) lipids each, TIP3P water, and chloride ions to achieve charge
neutrality. Initial coordinates for the wild-type system were taken
from production simulations of Xe diffusion in fully reduced ba3 oxidase as reported in our recent study, where the Xe atom was located near the Xe1 crystallographic
binding site. The Xe atom was replaced
with a dioxygen molecule, and the system was energy minimized using
a combination of the conjugate gradient and low-memory BFGS algorithms.
Harmonic position restraints were subsequently placed on the dioxygen
ligand, and the system was heated to 300 K and then equilibrated at
300 K for 700 ps. The position restraints were then removed from the
dioxygen ligand, and twenty 1 ns production simulations were performed. Coordinates for the fully reduced G232V mutant
were obtained from the production simulations of the wild-type enzyme
after replacing the G232 side chain with that of valine in the conformation
observed in the crystal structure presented here. The mutant system
was then energy minimized, heated, and equilibrated as described above,
and fourteen 2 ns production simulations were performed. Additional
simulation parameters, including the integration time step, neighbor
list update, and nonbonded interactions, can be found in the .

Results
Structure and
Activity of the G232V Mutant
Overall,
the crystal structures of wild-type ba3 and the G232V mutant are similar, with an rmsd of ∼0.25 Å
(Figure ). The major difference at residue
232 is that the N–Cα–C plane rotates ∼26°
toward residue I235, resulting in a 0.96 Å upward (i.e., toward
the P-side of the membrane) displacement of the Cα atom in the
G232V mutant compared to that in the wild-type enzyme. The increase
in the rise of helix VI as a result of the glycine-to-valine mutation
also leads to changes at the CuB site, which will be addressed
in more detail in the . Furthermore,
the side chain of V232 in the mutant protrudes ∼2.5 Å
toward the oxygen channel such that the CG1 and CG2 atoms enter the
channel. This expansion of the side chain into the channel also affects
the two water molecules that are bridged to the active site in the
native structure (waters 604 and 618 in PDB entry 3S8F), forcing one of
them (water 604 in PDB entry 3S8F) to move 1.25 Å away (Figure , green spheres). The crystallographic statistics for the
refined structure of the G232V mutant are listed in Table S1 of the . The steady-state activity
of G232V was the same as that of the wild-type enzyme.

CO Flash-Photolysis
and Recombination of the Fully Reduced G232V Tt ba3 Mutant
Time-resolved optical
absorption difference spectra (postphotolysis minus prephotolysis)
were recorded upon photolysis of CO from heme a3 of the fully reduced CO-bound G232V mutant with a 532 nm
laser pulse (Figure S1A of the ). The spectra were analyzed by SVD and global exponential fitting,
which resolved four apparent lifetimes, 94 μs, 630 μs,
13 ms, and 274 ms. The corresponding b-spectra, which
represent the spectral change associated with the individual apparent
lifetimes, are presented in the  (Figure S1B). The apparent lifetime of 274 ms associated with the
major process (∼90% of the overall spectral change) is attributed
to CO rebinding to heme a32+ based on the respective b-spectrum (Figure S1B
of the , cyan). This
lifetime is comparable to the CO rebinding rate of ∼260 ms
in the wild-type enzyme.

Reaction of Fully Reduced G232V Tt
ba3 with NO and O2
Previous
studies in our laboratory
have shown that the rate of binding of NO to the a32+ reaction center in wild-type Tt
ba3 in the absence of CO is comparable to that
of binding of O2 (∼1 × 109 M–1 s–1), supporting the general assumption
that the NO ligand entry pathway from the protein exterior to the
binuclear center is the same as that of O2., To determine whether the mutation of the small glycine to a larger
valine residue affects the access of ligands to the binuclear active
site, we investigated binding of NO to fully reduced G232V ba3 using a photolabile NO complex. TROA difference
spectra (postphotolysis minus prephotolysis) (Figure A) were subjected to SVD and global exponential fitting, and
a single apparent lifetime of 9.5 μs (100 μM NO) was observed
for the G232V mutant. The corresponding b-spectrum
(Figure B, blue) confirms that this process
is caused by the binding of NO to heme a32+. The 9.5 μs lifetime yields a second-order rate
constant of 1.1 × 109 M–1 s–1 (100 μM NO), which is the same as that observed
for wild-type recombinant ba3 (∼1
× 109 M–1 s–1). Thus, the glycine-to-valine mutation does not
impede the access of NO to the active site.

(A) SVD-filtered TROA
difference spectra (postphotolysis minus
prephotolysis) recorded during the reaction of the fully reduced G232V Tt ba3 mutant with the photoproduced NO. The
spectra were recorded at 10 delay times, equally spaced on a logarithmic
time scale between 500 ns and 500 μs. The spectra are those
obtained following the subtraction of the spectral contribution from
the photolabile NO complex, determined in a separate experiment. The
arrows represent the direction of the absorption change with time.
Conditions: 0.1 M HEPES (pH 7.5) with 0.1% DM; optical path length
of 0.5 cm. The effective enzyme concentration was 1.0 μM. The
NO concentration was 100 μM. (B) b-spectra
resulting from a single-exponential fit of the TROA difference spectra
recorded during the reaction of the photoproduced NO with the fully
reduced G232V Tt ba3 mutant. The b1 spectrum (blue, apparent lifetime of 9.5 μs)
and the non-zero time-dependent b0 spectrum
(green), which represents the difference spectrum extrapolated to
infinite time.

To investigate whether
O2 binding and subsequent electron
transfer steps are affected by the G232V mutation, we monitored the
reaction of the fully reduced G232V Tt ba3 mutant with photoproduced O2. The TROA difference spectra
are shown in Figure . SVD-based global exponential
fitting resolved four apparent lifetimes of 8 μs, 12 μs,
114 μs, and 4 ms with the corresponding b-spectra
(Figure S2 of the ).

SVD-filtered TROA difference spectra (postphotolysis minus prephotolysis)
recorded during the reaction of the fully reduced G232V Tt
ba3 mutant with photoproduced O2. The
spectra were recorded at 17 delay times, equally spaced on a logarithmic
time scale between 200 ns and 50 ms. The spectra are those obtained
following the subtraction of the spectral contribution of the photolabile
O2 complex, determined in a separate experiment. The arrows
represent the direction of the absorption change with time. Conditions:
0.1 M HEPES (pH 7.5) with 0.1% DM; optical path length of 0.5 cm.
The effective enzyme concentration was 2.6 μM. The O2 concentration was 74 μM.

The spectra of the intermediates generated
in the reaction of O2 with the fully reduced G232V mutant
were determined on the basis of the slow–fast sequential mechanism
that we recently applied to analyze analogous data for the wild-type Tt ba3 enzyme. Our
previous TROA studies of the reaction of O2 with fully
reduced wild-type Tt ba3 showed that the
traditional fast–slow mechanism, in which decreasing values
of the experimental apparent rate constants were assigned to microscopic
rate constants of consecutive steps, did not provide a good correspondence
between the experimental spectrum of compound A (AR) and the model spectrum of compound A of the bovine enzyme. However,
a good correspondence was obtained between the experimental and model
spectra using a slow–fast mechanism in which O2 binding
was followed by a faster step generating PI. Similarly, a good agreement
was observed between the experimental intermediate spectra of the
G232V mutant (Figure A) and those of the recombinant
wild-type enzyme (Figure B) based on the slow–fast
mechanism; minor changes are observed in the spectra between the G232V
mutant and the wild-type enzyme. In this mechanism (Scheme ), the binding of O2 to heme a3 in G232V (12 μs) is followed by a faster
cleavage of the O–O bond (8 μs), which generates the PI intermediate, with the concomitant
oxidation of heme b.

Experimental intermediate spectra for
the reaction of the photoproduced
O2 with the fully reduced G232V mutant (A) and wild-type ba3 (B). The intermediate spectra are referenced
against the reduced enzyme and were extracted on the basis of the
slow–fast mechanism in Scheme . The
intermediate spectra determined are represented with the following
colors: blue for R, green for A, red for PI, cyan for PII, and magenta for O.

Slow–Fast Sequential Scheme for O2 Reduction
in
the Fully Reduced G232V Tt ba3 Mutant
The 12 μs (74 μM O2) lifetime assigned to
the O2 binding step in the G232V mutant corresponds to
a second-order rate constant of ∼1 × 109 M–1 s–1. This rate constant is the
same as that observed for the reaction of reduced recombinant wild-type ba3 with O2 (17 μs at 48 μM
O2; 1.2 × 109 M–1 s–1) (this study) and that previously observed for the
nonrecombinant wild-type enzyme. It is
also consistent with the observed rate of NO binding reported above.
Furthermore, the rates of the other steps in the reaction mechanism
are similar between the ba3 G232V mutant
and the recombinant wild-type enzyme (5 μs, 71 μs, and
2.2 ms) or the nonrecombinant wild-type enzyme.

Classical Simulations of Diffusion of O2 to the Active
Site in Wild-Type Tt ba3 and the G232V
Mutant
Our TROA measurements show that the rate of O2 or NO binding to the a3 reaction
center in Tt ba3 is unaffected upon replacement
of the conserved glycine (G232) in ba3 with valine. In contrast, a previous study concluded that the mutation
of the conserved glycine to valine in Rs aa3 significantly decreased the level of access of O2 to
the catalytic site; this conclusion was based on the much slower oxidation
(from ∼1 ms to minutes) of the reduced mutant upon its exposure
to air. To explore in more detail why
NO and O2 ligand access in Tt ba3 is not affected upon replacement of glycine with the bulkier valine
residue, we performed a total of 20 and 28 ns classical molecular
dynamics simulations of O2 diffusing through subunit I
of the wild-type enzyme and the G232V mutant, respectively.

The diffusion of O2 through the ligand channel was monitored
on the basis of the distances of O2 from CuB, Y133, and I78 as previously described. Figure  shows a comparison of the wild-type
and G232V mutant time series for these three distances when O2 was initially placed at the Xe1 (A and B), Xe5 (C and D),
and Xe2 (E and F) sites identified in the X-ray xenon-pressurized
crystallographic study. The time series
demonstrate that the ligand channel of the G232V mutant is “less
sticky” than that of the wild-type enzyme as evidenced by the
noisier traces of the mutant enzyme, and the increased frequency of
transitions between different regions of the G232V ligand channel
when compared to that of the wild-type enzyme (Figure ). Furthermore, there is a well-defined O2 docking
site within the wild-type ligand channel that is characterized by
O2–CuB distances of 13—15 Å
(e.g., Figure E, 200—400 ps); this
site is not observed in the time series of the G232V mutant. Moreover,
the O2 ligand comes within van der Waals contact of the
CuB atom (&lt;5 Å) for tens of picoseconds in the
mutant (Figure F, 340–360 and 400–445
ps) but not in the wild-type enzyme, suggesting conformational differences
in the environment close to the CuB site between the wild-type
enzyme and the G232V mutant. This will be discussed in more detail
below.

Representative time series of the O2–CuB distance (red trace), O2–Y133 distance (blue),
and O2–I78 distance (green trace) from classical
molecular dynamics simulations of O2 diffusion in the wild
type (A, C, and E) and the ba3 G232V mutant
(B, D, and F). Simulations were initiated with O2 placed
at the Xe1 crystallographic site (A and B), the Xe5 binding site (C
and D), or the Xe2 crystallographic site (E and F).

Discussion
A conserved
glycine (G232 in Tt ba3) is highly conserved
in the O2 channel of the heme-copper
oxidases and has been suggested to play a significant role in facilitating
access of ligands to the binuclear active site. The glycine-to-valine mutation in Rs aa3 (G283V) was previously reported to have O2 access to the catalytic site significantly slower than in the wild-type
enzyme. Reduced O2 access
was concluded from the slow oxidation rate of the reduced enzyme after
its exposure to air; however, the O2 binding and reduction
reaction was not investigated directly by fast detection techniques,
such as the flow-flash method. In the “flow-flash” study
presented here, NO binding and O2 binding and reduction
in the G232V Tt ba3 mutant appear to be
unaffected by the replacement of the small glycine residue with the
significantly larger valine residue. One possible explanation is that
the valine side chain exhibits conformational freedom, with the side
chain rotating out of the ligand pathway, thus not interfering with
ligand access. However, this appears to be unlikely because the G232
residue is “sandwiched” between two large amino acids,
W229 and F228, and therefore may not have room to rotate. The lack
of conformational freedom of the G232V side chain is confirmed by
the classical molecular dynamics simulations, in which the G232V side
chain adopts a conformation different from that of the crystal structure
for only 13 ps of 27.5 ns of total simulation time. Furthermore, the
root-mean-square fluctuations (rmsfs) in atomic positions of the valine
side chain CG1 and CG2 atoms (0.72 and 0.73 Å, respectively)
are smaller than the average fluctuations for the whole protein (0.97
Å).

In agreement with previous investigations into the
protein flexibility
of subunit I in Rs aa3, our classical simulations find that helices I–VI,
X, and XI form a stable, relatively rigid structure in wild-type Tt ba3, as indicated by Cα rmsfs that are
∼1 standard deviation smaller than the average. Helices VII–IX
and XII in the wild-type enzyme are slightly more mobile (less rigid)
as indicated by rmsfs in atomic positions that are 0–0.5 standard
deviation smaller than the average Cα fluctuations. The G232V
mutation increases the flexibility of helices VIII–X in the
mutant. The rmsfs are presented in Figure  where they have been converted to b-factors for
the G232V mutant (left) and wild-type ba3 (right). The increase in warm colors (orange and red) in G232V reflects
the increased flexibility of this mutant, particularly of helix VIII
(circled by an ellipsoid), compared to that of the less flexible wild
type, which is depicted in predominately cool colors (green and blue).
Furthermore, the classical molecular dynamics simulations of the G232V
mutant show that the glycine-to-valine mutation distorts helix VI,
causing the cross-linked H233–Y237 CuB ligand to
move relative to the atom positions of the wild-type enzyme. This
movement severs the H-bond between the phenolic OH of Y237 and the
hydroxyethyl moiety of heme a3 and slightly
increases the separation between CuB and the heme a3 in the G232V mutant (by 0.2 Å) compared
to the separation in the wild type (Figure ). These changes may explain the small differences in the observed
electron transfer rates between the wild-type enzyme and the mutant
during O2 reduction. Furthermore, they allow the O2 ligand to approach the binuclear center significantly more
closely (∼4 Å from CuB) in the G232V mutant
than in the wild-type enzyme (∼5.5 Å from CuB). This could be one reason why the larger residue has no effect
on ligand binding in the G232V mutant compared to that in the wild-type
enzyme. The simulations also demonstrate that O2 moves
much more frequently between different sites within the ligand channel
in the G232V mutant than in the wild-type enzyme (Figure ).

Main chain flexibility of the G232V mutant (left) and
wild-type ba3 (right) presented as b-factors
obtained by converting rmsfs in atomic positions from the classical
molecular dynamics simulations. Helix VIII is circled by the ellipsoid.
CuB is shown as the black sphere, heme a3 is cyan, and heme a is pink. The cyan
sphere is Fea3.

Structural changes to helix VI and CuB due to the G232V
mutation. The wild-type enzyme is colored cyan (PDB entry 3S8F), and the G232V
mutant enzyme is colored magenta. Mutation G232V is colored yellow.

The ligand channels within subunit
I of the wild-type ba3 and the G232V mutant
were obtained from the simulation
data using O2 occupation counts on a grid of spatial points
surrounding the ligand using UCSF Chimera. The ligand channels so obtained are presented in Figure A for wild-type ba3 and
in Figure B for the G232V mutant. For comparison,
the seven crystallographic Xe binding sites of ref () are shown in Figure  after rmsd fitting the Cα atoms of the Xe-pressurized
wild-type crystal structure to the simulated wild-type structure.
The ligand channels derived from the simulations have good overlap
with all seven crystallographic Xe sites, which validates the use
of occupation data to locate ligand cavities within proteins. While
the overall size and shape of the ligand channels in the wild type
and G232V mutant are similar (the cavity volumes are 1061 and 1005
Å3 for the wild type and mutant, respectively), the
mutation does alter the ligand channel in important ways. Figure B clearly shows that in the G232V mutant, the valine
side chain protrudes into the ligand channel at the location of the
Xe6 binding site (behind the magenta F228), narrowing the mutant ligand
channel slightly at this location to 4.2 Å from 6.6 Å in
the wild-type enzyme; these distances are obtained by measuring the
diameter of the cavity generated from the O2 occupation
data. Furthermore, in the G232V mutant, the O2 ligand channel
shifts “up” (i.e., toward the P-side of the membrane)
near the point mutation compared to the cavity position in the wild-type
enzyme. Additional structural changes observed in the ligand channel
of the G232V mutant are the ligand exit pathways between helices IV
and V (Figure B, bottom right “protein
exterior”) and helices V and VI (top right “protein
exterior”). These ligand exit (and presumably entrance) sites
are not used by the O2 ligand in simulations of the wild-type
enzyme. Hence, the theoretical calculations show that the insertion
of the larger valine residue in place of the glycine opens other “cavities”
that allow O2 and NO unhindered access to the active site,
thus compensating for the larger valine residue.

Ligand cavities in subunit
I of wild-type ba3 (A) and the G232V mutant
(B). In panels A and B, the seven
crystallographic Xe binding sites are shown as green spheres (PDB
entry 3BVD). The cavities were obtained from the classical
molecular dynamics simulations using O2 occupation counts
on a grid of points surrounding the ligand using UCSF Chimera.

A model of the putative ligand channel
in the
G283V mutant of Rs aa3 cytochrome oxidase
is presented in Figure . This model was constructed
by replacing the side chain of the conserved glycine (G283) in the
fully reduced wild-type Rs crystal structure (PDB
entry 3FYE) with that of valine in the conformation found
in the crystal structure of the G232V ba3 enzyme presented here. The fully reduced Rs aa3 structure was used to be consistent with the simulations,
which are based on the fully reduced ba3 structure. The wild-type fully reduced Rs aa3 enzyme has some structural similarities with the ba3 G232V mutant, including the lack of a direct
H-bond between the phenolic OH of the cross-linked histidine-tyrosine
and the hydroxyethyl moiety of heme a3 as discussed above. However, in the crystal structure of fully reduced Rs aa3, there is a bridging water molecule that
forms H-bonds with both the phenolic OH and the hydroxyethyl moiety
of the high-spin heme; this bridging water is not present in the G232V
mutant. Furthermore, the CuB–Fea3 separation is larger in the fully reduced Rs
aa3 structure than in the fully reduced G232V ba3 mutant. The distance between the CG1 carbon
atom of the valine side chain and the CH2 carbon atom of the tryptophan
172 side chain in the Rs model G283V mutant is 3.38
Å. This is considerably shorter than the distance of 5.5 Å
between the CG1 atom of the valine 232 side chain and the CE2 carbon
atom of the homologous Y133 side chain in the G232V ba3 enzyme (cf. Figure ).

Model of the R. sphaeroides cytochrome oxidase
G283V mutant showing residues that line the postulated ligand channel.
The model was constructed by replacing the native G283 residue in
the fully reduced wild-type Rs aa3 (PDB
entry 3FYE)
with valine in the conformation observed in the G232V ba3 crystal structure presented here.

As noted previously, the major structural difference between
the
O2 pathway in Tt ba3 and the
bovine, Rs, and Pd aa3 oxidases is the narrowing of the ligand channel in the aa3 oxidases caused by conserved tryptophan and phenylalanine
residues;,, in Tt ba3, these residues are replaced with tyrosine
(Y133) and threonine (T231), respectively., Specifically, the distances between the Cα atom of the glycine
and the CH2 carbon atom of the tryptophan 172 side chain in Rs aa3 is 5.27 Å, while the distance between
the Cα atom of the glycine and the CE2 carbon atom of the homologous
Y133 side chain in the ba3 enzyme is 8.31
Å. Therefore, the ligand channel is also narrower in the wild-type Rs aa3 enzyme than in wild-type ba3 at the location of the glycine. This is also true of
the bovine enzyme. The very narrow ligand channel of G283V Rs aa3 is consistent with previous experiments
that showed that the rate of O2 reduction was slowed from
∼1 ms in the wild-type enzyme to minutes in the G283V mutant, while the wider, more open ligand channel of
the G232V Tt ba3 mutant agrees with our
results indicating that this mutation has no effect on ligand access
to the binuclear center. Under microaerobic conditions, such as those
present in hypersaline microbial mats or at oxic–anoxic interfaces
inhabited by the T. thermophilus bacterium, O2 binding may indeed be rate-limiting.
Therefore, a more open O2 channel in Tt ba3 may reflect an evolutionary adaptation in Tt
ba3 that increases the rate of O2 diffusion
to the active site at low O2 concentrations to maintain
physiologically relevant reaction rates. This is consistent with phylogenetic analysis that has shown that
of the three heme-copper oxidase superfamilies, the A family is the
most ancient, with the B and C families evolving later.

Conclusions
The G232 residue in Tt ba3 has been
postulated to create a small passageway for ligands to pass through
en route to the active site, with the glycine residue being sandwiched
between two larger amino acid residues (W229 and F228 in Tt
ba3). Considering the high degree of conservation
of the glycine in the ligand channels of the heme-copper oxidases,
this residue would be predicted to play a crucial role in ligand access
to the binuclear active site and/or in O2 reduction. However,
the replacement of G232 in Tt ba3 with
valine does not appear to affect the rate of O2 or NO binding,
although the crystal structure shows that the two arms of the valine
side chain protrude ∼2.5 Å into the ligand channel. Importantly,
there is a distortion in helix VI, resulting in an increased separation
between CuB+ and heme a3. Furthermore, the histidine–tyrosine cross-link moves
significantly, resulting in an increase of 0.67 Å in the distance
between heme a3 and the OH group of the
cross-linked tyrosine, which has been proposed to act as an electron
and/or proton donor during the reaction of the mixed-valence enzyme
with O2.− The increased separation between the OH of Y237 and the hydroxyethyl
moiety of heme a3 results in a loss of
the hydrogen bonding interaction in the G232V mutant, which may affect
proton-coupled electron transfer involving the cross-linked tyrosine
in the mixed valence mutant and/or disrupt the K proton channel. Moreover,
the O2 ligand is able to diffuse much closer to the active
site in the G232V mutant than in the wild-type enzyme, and the glycine-to-valine
mutation appears to open other O2 exit and entrance pathways
to the active site, allowing O2 and NO unhindered access
to the active site.

Supporting Information Available
Additional details regarding
the simulation protocol and system preparation and equilibration for
the classical molecular dynamics simulations of wild-type Tt ba3 and the G232V mutant, a summary of data
collection parameter and refinement statistics for the G232V mutant
(Table S1), TROA difference spectra and b-spectra
resulting from the exponential fit of the CO recombination flash-photolysis
data of the fully reduced CO-bound G232V mutant (Figure S1), and the b-spectra resulting from the multiexponential fit to the
TROA difference spectra recorded during the reaction of the photoproduced
O2 with the fully reduced G232V mutant (Figure S2). This
material is available free of charge via the Internet at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bi500289h_si_001.pdf

Author Present Address
§ Y.L.:
Program in Cellular and Molecular Medicine, Boston Children’s
Hospital, Harvard Medical School, 3 Blackfan Circle, Boston, MA 02115.

Author Contributions
W.M. and
C.F. contributed equally to this work.

This work was
supported by National Science Foundation Grant CHE-1158548 to Ó.E.
and National Institutes of Health Grant GM035342 to C.D.S.

The authors declare no
competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
Portions of this
research were conducted at the Stanford Synchrotron
Radiation Lightsource (SSRL), a Directorate of SLAC National Accelerator
Laboratory and an Office of Science User Facility operated for the
U.S. Department of Energy (DOE) Office of Science by Stanford University.
The SSRL Structural Molecular Biology Program is supported by the
DOE Office of Biological and Environmental Research and by the National
Institutes of Health, National Institute of General Medical Sciences
(including Grant P41GM103393), and the National Center for Research
Resources (Grant P41RR001209).

Abbreviations
SVDsingular-value
decomposition

b-spectrumspectral changes associated with an apparent
rate (lifetime)

Tt ba3T. thermophilus ba3 cytochrome
oxidase

RsRhodobacter sphaeroides

PdParacoccus denitrificans

PDBProtein Data Bank.

