Replicative
DNA polymerases
(pols) are vital for transferring genetic information from parent
to progeny., They do so with extremely high fidelity,
exhibiting an error frequency in the range of 1 in 106–109 mistakes per incorporation event depending on the presence
or absence of an intrinsic exonuclease activity., As
might be expected, deregulation of normal modes of DNA replication
has a profound effect on the rates of cell division. This can lead
to uncontrolled cell proliferation and is the underlying cause of
a number of pathological states, especially those associated with
malignancy., When mutations affecting base discrimination
are in the replicative pol itself, misincorporation events are more
frequent and, if not corrected, can cause cell death because of error
catastrophe. Thus, it is important to
understand the basis of pol fidelity as it will contribute to our
knowledge of how malignancies arise and will provide a theoretical
underpinning for the development of drugs that can be used to treat
malignancies and a number of viral, microbial, and parasitic infections.,

DNA pols have been grouped into seven different families [A–D,
X, Y, and reverse transcriptase (RT)] on the basis of amino acid sequence
homology., Although the ability of pols to select a
correct dNTP varies dramatically among different families, they share
a number of properties. For example, (i) they have an overall architecture
that resembles a right hand, as discussed
below, and (ii) they require two divalent metal ions to catalyze the
nucleotidyl transfer reaction during which the hydroxyl group at the
3′ terminus of the primer strand attacks the α-phosphorus
atom of an incoming dNTP.

We have chosen to study the DNA pol
from bacteriophage RB69 for
several reasons. First, it is extensively similar in sequence and
structure to human and other B family eukaryotic replicative pols, and unlike eukaryotic replicative pols, RB69pol
can be expressed in high yield in Escherichia coli with full activity. Second, unlike
the closely related DNA pol from bacteriophage T4, it can be readily
crystallized either in an apo form or in ternary complexes with a
primer/template (P/T) and an incoming dNTP. There is also a wealth of kinetic and structural data that makes
this pol an excellent model for studying structure–function
relationships and fidelity mechanisms. In addition, RB69pol has been
recently used as a surrogate enzyme for the discovery and development
of antiherpetic drugs. This review will
focus on the studies of RB69pol, particularly those from our own lab,
and from others. For a broader and more comprehensive review of structure–function
relationships among replicative DNA polymerases, readers should consult
refs (), (), and (−) as well as refs (−).

Structure and Function
of RB69pol
RB69pol is primarily responsible for the replication
of the RB69
bacteriophage genome. The first crystal
structure of the apo form of this pol was reported in 1997. Subsequently, Franklin et al. published the
structure of a ternary complex of an exonuclease deficient variant
of RB69pol that contained a correct incoming dNTP and a dideoxy-terminated
primer/template with a resolution of 2.6 Å. In 2011, we determined the crystal structure of a wild-type
(wt) RB69pol ternary complex at a higher resolution (1.8 Å). This latter structure captured the pol in a
conformational state that may exist just prior to the transfer of
an incoming dNTP to the 3′ terminus of the primer strand and
allowed us to visualize important details that were not visible in
the 2.6 Å resolution structure. However, a possible caveat that
applies to all pol complexes is that the crystal structure of the
complex may not actually be on the reaction pathway between substrates
and products. Like many other DNA polymerases, the overall structure
of RB69pol resembles a right hand and consists of five conserved regions:
the N-terminus, exonuclease, palm, fingers, and thumb. As shown in Figure A,
these subdomains are arranged in a disklike structure with a central
cavity. The P/T duplex is bound in a groove formed between the palm
and thumb (Figure A,B).

Overall structure of
the dCTP/dG-containing ternary complex of
wt RB69pol. (A) The pol structure is colored by subdomain: blue for
the N-terminal subdomain (residues 1–108 and 340–382),
orange for the exonuclease subdomain (residues 109–339), yellow
for the palm subdomain (residues 383–468 and 573–729),
red for the fingers subdomain (residues 469–572), and green
for the thumb subdomain (residues 730–903). The primer/template
duplex is shown as sticks, with the template colored black and the
primer pink. (B) Orthogonal view of panel A. (C) Space-filling model
depicting the interaction of the S565 hydroxyl group with the purine
base of the templating dG. (D) Minor groove HB network that includes
five ordered water molecules. (E) Ca2+ coordination in
the dUpNpp-containing ternary complex. (F) The 3.45 Å distance
between the Cα hydrogen and the N3 hydrogen acceptor
is consistent with the presence of HBs.

The N-terminal subdomain is composed of two nonadjacent segments
in the amino acid sequence (residues 1–108 and 340–382).
Although the function of this subdomain has not been clearly defined,
the classic βαββαβ topology of
the N-terminal subdomain has also often been found in RNA binding
proteins., Interestingly, both RB69pol and T4pol bind
to their own mRNAs, specifically repressing translation, thus exerting
tight feedback control on the level of DNA polymerase that is produced
in the bacterial cell after phage infection.− The N-terminal
subdomain has a specific guanine binding pocket. We took advantage
of this feature by designing a P/T duplex with a single overhanging
dG at the 3′ end of the template strand that binds tightly
to a G specific pocket in RB69pol and facilitates crystallization
of the ternary complex. O6 and N2 of the guanine
form hydrogen bonds (HBs) with the amide nitrogen of I380 and the
carbonyl oxygen of K378 from a symmetrically related molecule in the
crystal lattice. However, the biological
relevance of this guanine binding pocket is still not known.

The exonuclease (exo) subdomain lies between the N-terminal and
thumb subdomains. When an incorrect dNTP is incorporated onto the
3′ terminus of the primer strand, the pol helps to switch the
primer terminus from the pol to the exo subdomain, facilitating cleavage
of the 3′-terminal nucleotide residue., The exo subdomain of RB69pol is strikingly similar to the exo subdomain
of the Klenow Fragment (KF), both consisting of five-stranded β-sheets
surrounded by a distribution of α-helices., However, the exo activity of RB69pol is almost 3 orders of magnitude
greater than that of KF.,− The active site of the exo subdomain is centered around a conserved
DEDD motif (D114, E116, D222, and D327). The carboxylate groups of
these residues are coordinated to a magnesium ion that is essential
for catalyzing excision of the misincorporated base. When one or more
of these acidic residues are replaced with Ala, the exo activity is
either completely lost or decreased by at least 4 orders of magnitude.

The palm subdomain harbors the catalytic
core responsible for pol
activity. Two highly conserved acidic residues (D411 and D623) serve
as ligands for metal ions A and B, which are crucial for catalyzing
the nucleotidyl transfer reaction. From
the 1.8 Å resolution structure, we were able to observe a rigid
HB network located at the minor groove of the P/T junction. As shown in Figure D,
this HB network, consisting of five ordered water molecules, was linked
to pol residues that interact with the O2 and N3 HB acceptors in the P/T duplex. It is worth noting that three of
the five water molecules (w1, w3, and w4 in Figure D) have classic tetrahedral geometry but the other two (w2
and w5) have an unusual trigonal geometry. This HB network provides
an excellent example of how ordered water molecules can serve as extensions
of protein side chains to mediate non-sequence specific pol–DNA
interactions.

Overall, the palm subdomain is structurally and
topologically similar
to palm subdomains found in all other pols for which structures exist,
except for pol β. In contrast,
the fingers subdomain of RB69pol bears little resemblance to the fingers
subdomain of pols in other families. It consists of two long antiparallel
α-helices that extend perpendicularly from the pol surface (Figure B). A fingertip region unique to RB69pol is composed
of a nine-residue helix and an 18-residue loop that joins the two
long helices. It has been suggested that this fingertip region might
be involved in pol–pol dimerization in the RB69 replisome. The fingers subdomain contains a conserved
dNTP binding motif (KX3NSXTG) analogous to the KX4NSXTG motif located in helix O of KF.− Each phosphate group of the incoming
dNTP is coordinated to a protein side chain in the following wa.:
(i) The ε-amino group of K560 is hydrogen bonded to the nonbridging
α- and γ-phosphate oxygens. (ii) The amide side chain
of N564 forms a HB to the nonbridging oxygen of the β-phosphate
via an ordered water molecule. (iii) The δ-guanidino group of
R482 and the ε-amino group of K486 are hydrogen bonded to the
oxygens of the γ-phosphate. The triphosphate tail of the incoming
dNTP is coordinated to metal ion B in the classic α,β,γ
tridendate state. As shown in Figure E, metal
ion B is coordinated to the three oxygen ligands from the triphosphate
tail of the nonhydrolyzable dNTP analogue, dUpNpp, the carboxylates
of D411 and D623, and the backbone carbonyl oxygen of L412. Metal ion A is coordinated to D411, D623, and
the 3′-hydroxyl group of dC at the 3′ end of the primer
strand, as well as to a nonbridging oxygen of the α-phosphate
of dUpNpp. Metal ion A is responsible for bringing the 3′-OH
group at the primer terminus close to the α-phosphorus atom
of the incoming dNTP, allowing phosphodiester bond formation. Metal ion B stabilizes the pentacoordinate transition
state and assists in the departure of the pyrophosphate group. A third metal ion with partial occupancy was
observed coordinated to E686 and E683. Substitution of these residues
with Ala caused a dramatic decrease in pol activity. However, full
pol activity could be recovered when Mn2+ was substituted
for Mg2+ . Similar
results were recently reported for ϕ29 DNApol. In addition, two unusual interactions were observed in
the fingers subdomain: one between the Cα hydrogen of G568 and
N3 of the templating dG (Figure F) and the
other between the aromatic face of the templating base and the hydroxyl
group of S565 (Figure C). These interactions
anchor the templating base tightly within the nascent base pair binding
pocket. The thumb subdomain of RB69pol also differs topologically
from the thumb subdomain of pols in other families. It consists of three long α-helices protruding from
the palm subdomain. There is a microsubdomain composed of three short
β-strands and two α-helices at the tip of the thumb that
bridge the thumb and exo subdomains. The 11 carboxyl-terminal residues
of RB69pol extend directly out from the structure and are bound within
a deep cleft in the ring-shaped sliding clamp (gp45). This sliding clamp increases the processivity of T4pol,
and very likely RB69pol, by tethering them at the P/T junction. Overall, RB69pol has proven to be a useful model
for understanding structure–function relationships in B family
pols.

Relationship between the
Kinetics and Structure of RB69pol Variants
With the availability
of a high-resolution structure of the RB69pol
ternary complex, the next challenge was to relate its structure to
function in ways that could account for the high efficiency of DNA
synthesis and its exquisite base selectivity. To this end, various
RB69pol mutants have been constructed on the basis of its ternary
structure and previously determined apo and binary structures of RB69pol.,, Kinetic studies have been conducted
with these mutants to determine the functional role of the many highly
conserved residues. The majority of the single-amino acid substitutions
were restricted to the palm, fingers, and thumb subdomains (Table ). In the palm subdomain, replacing D411 and D623,
which coordinate the catalytic magnesium ions, with Ala abolished
the pol activity. Seven residues near the metal ion binding sites
(D621, T622, S624, Y619, E686, and K706 in the palm subdomain and
Y708 in the fingers subdomain) were also replaced to determine their
roles in the wt enzyme as shown in Table .
Results from single-turnover experiments showed that the values of
the maximal turnover rate (kpol) for all
the mutants were greatly reduced. These
changes can be rationalized on the basis of various crystal structures
as follows. (i) The side chains of D621, T622, and K706 are part of
a rigid HB network in the minor groove of the P/T junction. (ii) The
hydroxyl group of S624 and the carboxyl group of E686 are hydrogen
bonded to metal ion A via an ordered water molecule. (iii) Residues
Y416 and Y708 form HBs with the nonbridging oxygens in the terminal
phosphodiester bond of the primer via a single water molecule. Thus,
these residues are all directly or indirectly involved in the correct
alignment of the 3′-hydroxyl group at the primer’s 3′
terminus with the α-phosphorus atom of the incoming dNTP. Replacement
of any of these residues with Ala or other amino acids disturbs the
optimal alignment of the reactive groups in the catalytic center and
can account for the dramatic reduction in the corresponding kpol values of these variants. In addition, Y416
acts as a “sugar gate” that sterically blocks the 2′-hydroxyl
group of an incoming rNTP. The level of discrimination against rNTPs
is decreased by ∼3000-fold when Y416 is replaced with Ala. It is worth pointing out that Y416 is highly
conserved in B family pols, while the
same function is performed by a conserved Glu residue in A family
pols.,

Summary of Pre-Steady-State
Kinetic
Parameters and Functional Consequences of Various RB69pol Variants
subdomain	residue	functional
interactions with RB69pol	amino acid
substitution	kpol (s–1) or kexo (s–1)	Kd (μM)	kpol/Kd (μM–1 s–1)	ref	
palm	Y391	HB to Y567, HB network at
minor groove	Y →
A	155	980	1.5 × 10–1	()	
 	 	 	Y → F	312	90	3.5	 	
 	D411	ligands to metal ion at
pol site	D →
A	inactive	 	 	()	
 	L415	HB to β-phosphate
of the incoming dNTP	L → A	11	3	3.7	()	
 	 	 	L → G	58	9	6.4	 	
 	 	 	L → M	375	12	31.3	 	
 	Y416	“sugar gate”,
sterically blocks the 2′-OH group of an incoming rNTP	Y → A	22	70	3.1 × 10–1	()	
 	 	 	Y → F	36	209	1.7 × 10–1	 	
 	T587	HB to Y567,
HB network at
minor groove	T →
A	0.8	0.7	1.1 × 10–1	()	
 	Y619	HB to a water molecule,
HB network at minor groove	Y → F	14	ND	ND	()	
 	D621	HB to K706, HB network at
the minor groove	D
→ A	1.3	166	7.8 × 10–3	()	
 	T622	HB to D621, anchors the
side chain of D623	T → A	0.2	ND	ND	()	
 	D623	ligands to metal ion at
pol site	D →
A	inactive	 	 	()	
 	S624	ligands to metal ion at
pol site via a water molecule	S → C	4.5	18	2.5 × 10–1	()	
 	E686	ligands to metal ion at
pol site via a water molecule	E → A	7	58	1.2 × 10–1	()	
 	K706	HB to D621 and base at position n – 2 of primer strand	K → R	0.1	ND	ND	()	
fingers	R482	HB to γ-phosphate
of the incoming dNTP	R → A	0.2	1100	1.8 × 10–4	()	
 	K486	HB to γ-phosphate
of dNTP via a water molecule	K → A	3.3	71	4.6 × 10–2	()	
 	K560	HB to α,γ-phosphate
of the incoming dNTP	K → A	0.8	790	1.0 × 10–3	()	
 	L561	anchoring the templating
base at the major groove	L → A	101	50	2.0	()	
 	N564	HB to β-phosphate
of dNTP	N →
A	23	250	9.2 × 10–2	()	
 	S565	anchoring the templating
base	S → G	157	48	3.3	()	
 	Y567	HB to Y391, HB network at
minor groove	Y →
A	213	68	3.1	()	
 	 	 	Y → F	7.5	2400	3.1 × 10–3	 	
thumb	Y708	HB to 3′-terminal
phosphodiester bond (primer strand)	Y → A	6	34	1.8 × 10–1	()	
 	E716	ligands to a third metal
ion at the pol site	E → A	200	ND	ND	()	
exonuclease	E116	ligands to metal ion at
the exo site	E →
A	2.8 × 10–4	 	 	()	
 	D222	ligands to metal ion at
the exo site	D →
A	inactive	 	 	()	
 	K302	anchors the
side chain of
D327	K → A	1.0 × 10–2	 	 	()	
 	Y323	HB to Q171, anchors the
backbone of D327	Y
→ F	5.8 × 10–3	 	 	()	
 	D327	ligands to metal ion at
the exo site	D →
A	inactive	 	 	()	
Indicates the excision
rate for
RB69pol variants.

Not
determined.

Residues in
the dNTP binding motif (KX3NSXTG)
of the fingers subdomain are highly conserved in pols of all families. Replacing the residues that coordinate the bridging
and nonbridging oxygens in the triphosphate tail of the incoming dNTP,
such as R482, K486, K560, and N564, with Ala causes the catalytic
efficiency of the altered RB69pol to decrease by 2–5 orders
of magnitude. The ε-amino group
of K560, in addition to its role in anchoring the dNTP triphosphate
tail, also serves as a proton donor during the nucleotidyl transfer
reaction. As a consequence, the Lys to
Ala substitution at this position causes a 200-fold decrease in kpol. Residues L561
and Y567 are located at the major and minor grooves adjacent to the
templating base, respectively (Figure A).
Together, these two residues rigidly anchor the templating base in
an optimal position for hydrogen bonding to the base of the incoming
dNTP. Replacing either residue with Ala reduces the base selectivity
by up to 2 orders of magnitude (Table )., When the L561A and Y567A substitutions were combined in the same
RB69pol variant, the resulting double mutant (dm) was 3–40-fold
more likely to incorporate an incorrect dNTP than either of the single
RB69pol mutants. This result suggested
that increasing the amount of space in the NBP caused a decrease in
base selectivity. To further investigate the apparent correlation
between an increased NBP volume and the loss of base selectivity,
the S565G substitution was added to the dm, creating the L561A/S565G/Y567A
triple mutant (tm). As shown in Table , the probability of accommodating a purine/pyrimidine
mispair, a pyrimidine/pyrimidine mispair, or a purine/purine mispair
by the tm is increased by (i) 3-fold, (ii) 2–5-fold, or (iii)
4–8-fold, respectively, compared to that exhibited by the dm. Because of the diminished base selectivity,
we were able to obtain crystal structures of RB69pol ternary complexes
with 8 of the 12 possible mispairs using this tm. To obtain the structures
of the four missing purine/purine mispairs, an additional substitution,
L415A, was introduced into the tm (Figure B). Residue L415 is located just below the triphosphate tail of the
incoming dNTP (Figure A). The resulting quadruple
mutant (qm) allowed us to obtain high-resolution crystal structures
with all of the 12 mismatches. Pre-steady-state
kinetic results with the qm showed that the catalytic efficiencies
for incorporation of purine dNTPs opposite a purine templating base
increased by 28–74-fold compared to efficiencies observed for
the tm (Table ). This reduction in selectivity against purine/purine mismatches allowed
us to capture the missing purine/purine mispairs in crystals of the
qm ternary complexes. A surprising feature of the qm is that the maximal
turnover rate for a purine dNTP opposite a purine templating base
was greater than 300 s–1, which is faster than the kpol for incorporation of a correct dNTP by the
wild-type (wt) RB69pol. In summary, we
found that incremental expansion of the space in the NBP of RB69pol
resulted in a progressive increase in the incorporation efficiency
of incorrect dNTPs. On the basis of this finding, we propose that
RB69pol exerts base discrimination via a “negative selection”
against mispairs by using residues in the NBP of the wt to allow rapid
and efficient incorporation of only correct dNTPs.

Summary of the Catalytic Efficiencies
for RB69pol wt and Its Single, Double, Triple, and Quadruple Mutants
 	 	kpol/Kd (μM–1 s–1)	
base pair	wt	L561A	Y567A	dm	tm	qm	
Pu-Py	dATP/dC	4.4 × 10–5	2.2 × 10–3	7.6 × 10–3	9.1 × 10–2	2.7 × 10–1	8.5 × 10–1	
 	dCTP/dA	1.7 × 10–4	4.8 × 10–4	1.4 × 10–3	3.5 × 10–3	9.0 × 10–3	1.7 × 10–1	
 	dGTP/dT	5.4 × 10–5	7.2 × 10–4	1.5 × 10–3	4.0 × 10–2	1.2 × 10–1	1.0 × 10–2	
 	dTTP/dG	7.0 × 10–5	3.4 × 10–4	3.1 × 10–4	4.3 × 10–2	4.2 × 10–2	2.4 × 10–1	
Py-Py	dCTP/dT	6.0 × 10–6	9.3 × 10–5	3.2 × 10–4	1.7 × 10–3	8.8 × 10–3	4.5 × 10–1	
 	dTTP/dC	5.2 × 10–5	1.6 × 10–3	3.7 × 10–3	5.6 × 10–2	9.0 × 10–2	5.0 × 10–1	
 	dCTP/dC	3.0 × 10–7	1.5 × 10–5	4.2 × 10–5	4.6 × 10–4	1.1 × 10–3	1.4 × 10–1	
 	dTTP/dT	1.0 × 10–5	6.2 × 10–4	5.0 × 10–4	7.2 × 10–3	2.2 × 10–2	3.2 × 10–1	
Pu-Pu	dATP/dG	4.4 × 10–4	9.7 × 10–5	1.1 × 10–4	3.0 × 10–3	2.3 × 10–2	1.1	
 	dGTP/dA	3.8 × 10–6	4.3 × 10–5	2.0 × 10–4	8.7 × 10–4	2.7 × 10–3	2.0 × 10–1	
 	dATP/dA	1.6 × 10–4	1.9 × 10–4	1.3 × 10–3	4.4 × 10–3	1.7 × 10–2	4.8 × 10–1	
 	dGTP/dG	1.0 × 10–5	6.9 × 10–4	4.0 × 10–5	2.2 × 10–3	1.4 × 10–2	5.5 × 10–1	
W-C	dATP/dT	4.4	3.7	7.2	3.7	5.0	1.0	
 	dTTP/dA	6.4	2.4	12.8	3.3	5.4	1.7	
 	dCTP/dG	2.9	2.6	3.1	4.5	6.0	0.8	
 	dGTP/dC	2.4	3.4	4.8	5.5	5.0	1.0	
Double mutant (L561A/Y567A).

Triple mutant (L561A/S565G/Y567A).

Quadruple mutant (L415A/L561A/S565G/Y567A).

Critical residues that comprise the NBP
in the dCTP/dG-containing
RB69pol ternary complex: (A) wt RB69pol and (B) RB69pol qm. dCTP/dG
is shown as yellow sticks, and protein side chains are shown in space-filling
mode. L415/A415 is colored green, L561/A561 blue, S565/G565 gray,
and Y567/A567 red.

Factors That Contribute
to the dNTP Insertion Efficiency and
Fidelity of Wild-Type RB69pol
Studies conducted with many
pols have led to various hypotheses
about how replicative pols achieve such an extraordinary degree of
base selectivity. Waston and Crick originally proposed that HBs between
complementary bases provided the specificity for accurate DNA replication. However, this explanation failed to account
for the huge difference in incorporation efficiencies between dNTPs
that form Watson–Crick base pairs and those that do not. Showalter
and Tsai attributed base discrimination to the differences in the
energy barriers of the transition state between correct and mismatched
base pairs. Johnson proposed that a rate-limiting
conformational change takes place before chemistry and acts as a fidelity
checkpoint. This was followed by a report
by Joyce and Benkovic that further expanded on this notion. However, it is now generally accepted, because
of the work of Arndt et al, Rothwell
et al, and Luo et al, that the open to closed conformational change is not rate-limiting
and that it is not possible to ascribe a given degree of selectivity
to a particular step in the nucleotidyl transfer reaction pathway. In fact, it was Tsai and Johnson who proposed
that base discrimination is determined by the relative magnitudes
of the forward and reverse rates of the prechemistry conformational
change (fingers closing) compared to the rate of the chemical step
that completely changed the concept prevailing at the time concerning
base selectivity. Our studies of RB69pol
have shown that nucleotide insertion efficiency and base selectivity
are determined by a number of factors, including interbase HBs, minor
groove HBs, base stacking, the geometry of the base pair as it fits
into the NBP, conformational changes, and the partitioning of the
primer terminus between the pol and exo subdomains.,,,,− Subsequently, we showed that the results obtained by Tsai and Johnson
also applied to RB69pol. In addition
to the results obtained from kinetic and structural studies, molecular
dynamics simulation approaches have further enhanced our understanding
of conformational dynamics of the polymerase-catalyzed nucleotidyl
transfer reaction that results in base selectivity., We discuss each of them in turn in the following sections.

Role of Interbase
HB in Insertion Efficiency and Base Selectivity
There is
an ongoing debate about which features of a nascent base
pair and the NBP are most important for pols to maintain high base
selectivity. Several groups have made
important contributions that have provided insights into this issue.− Kool’s group challenged Watson and Crick’s argument
about the basis for nucleotide discrimination by using an array of
nonpolar nucleoside analogues, such as 2′-deoxyribo-4-methylbenzimidazole
(dZ), 2′-deoxyribo-2,4-difluorotoluene (dF), and 2′-deoxyribo-9-methyl-1H-imidazole-[(4,5)-β]-pyridine (dQ), in primer extension
assays to show that base pairing was not as important as shape for
base selectivity.,− The analogue
that created the most controversy was dF, which was reported to be
a nonpolar, non-hydrogen bonding isostere of dT. As shown in Figure A, dF is isosteric
to dT but differs from it by having four-atom substitutions, F2 and F4 for O2 and O4, respectively,
and C1 and C3 for N1 and N3, respectively. The NMR structure of a dF/dA pair in a DNA duplex
showed that dF did not perturb the configurations of B-form DNA as
the overall shapes of dF/dA and dT/dA pairs are very similar. In addition, when dF is in the templating position,
KF preferentially incorporates dATP over dCTP, dGTP, and dTTP. Similarly,
when dA is the templating base, dFTP is preferred over dATP, dCTP,
and dGTP by KF., Because dF is considered to be
nonpolar according to classic polarity measurements, Kool proposed
that HBs between base pairs are not absolutely required for efficient
nucleotide insertion. Furthermore, they
advanced a steric hypothesis, namely that a snug fit between nascent
base pair and nearest pol residues would lead to the rapid insertion
of dNTPs.− The first quantitative study using dF was
conducted by Lee et al. in 2008 using human mitochondrial DNA polymerase
(pol γ). They showed that the
shape of the base analogue alone was not sufficient for base selectivity
but that H-bonding was essential for proper primer extension and proofreading.
To investigate the contribution of interbase HBs during DNA synthesis
by RB69pol, we determined the pre-steady-state kinetic parameters
for incorporation of all four dNTPs opposite dF by wt RB69pol. Similar
to what was observed with KF, our results showed that there is a strong
preference for dATP incorporation compared to the three other dNTPs. The catalytic efficiency for incorporation of
dATP opposite dF is 1450-, 1120-, and 360-fold greater than those
for incorporation of dCTP, dGTP, and dTTP respectively. In contrast,
when dT is the templating base, the catalytic efficiency for the insertion
of dATP opposite dT is 5057-fold greater than the catalytic efficiency
for the incorporation of dATP opposite dF. Therefore, the two direct
interbase HBs between the dATP/dT base pair make a big difference
with respect to efficient nucleotide insertion.

(A) Chemical structures of dT and dF. (B) Superposition of four
dNTP/dF-containing structures (dATP/dF, pink; dCTP/dF, green; dGTP/dF,
blue; dTTP/dF, yellow) shows a conserved hydration network of four
ordered water molecules. (C) dATP/dF pair. (D) dATP/dT pair. (E) dGTP/dF
pair. (F) dGTP/dT pair. (G) dCTP/dF pair. (H) dCTP/dT pair. (I) dTTP/dF
pair. (J) dTTP/dT pair. Hydrogen bonding atoms are linked with a dashed
red line; non-hydrogen bonding atoms are linked with a black line
to show the distance.

To obtain a more complete understanding of the properties
of the
dF isostere, we determined the pre-steady-state kinetic parameters
for incorporating all four dNTPs opposite dF in the presence of the
RB69pol tm because this variant has the same kinetic parameters for
inserting correct dNTPs as wt RB69pol. In addition, its enlarged NBP allowed us to obtain high-quality
crystals of RB69pol ternary complexes with all four dNTPs opposite
dF and dT. We found that the catalytic efficiency for incorporation
of dATP opposite dF, using the RB69pol tm, was 120-, 180-, and 60-fold
higher than that for the insertion of dCTP, dGTP, and dTTP, respectively. We then determined and compared the structures
of eight RB69pol ternary complexes, four with each of the dNTP/dF
pairs and another four with each of the dNTP/dT pairs. As shown in
panels C and D of Figure , the geometry of
the dATP/dF pair is very similar to that of the dATP/dT pair. The
distance between F4 of dF and the N6-H group
of dATP is 3.96 Å, which is too great for a HB. Surprisingly,
a direct HB was observed between F2 of dF and the N2-H group of dGTP, and between F4 of dF and the
N3-H group of dTTP (Figure E,I).
In addition, the F4 atoms of the four dNTP/dF pairs have
four ordered water molecules located within 3.2 Å of its radius
(Figure B). Superimposition of all four dNTP/dF-containing
structures reveals a conserved hydration network around the F4 atoms (Figure B). Compared to the
structures of dNTP/dT-containing ternary complexes, the shapes of
the nascent dNTP/dF pairs differ from those of the dNTP/dT pairs.
In particular, the dGTP/dF pair has a direct interbase HB, while the
dGTP/dT pair adopts wobble geometry. No ordered water molecules were
observed between the dCTP/dF pair, but three ordered water molecules
were located at the interface of the dCTP/dT pair mediating their
interbase HBs. On the basis of these structures, it seems that dF
does not behave as would be predicted for a nonpolar, non-hydrogen
bonding isostere of dT. It should be
noted that there is evidence from NMR studies of the existence of
a HF–C hydrogen bond, although
this bond is likely to be rather weak. Our observations challenge the view, which has been debated for
the past 15 years, namely that dF, because of its nonpolar nature,
is incapable of forming H-bonds.

One puzzling question concerns the reason for the preferential
incorporation of dATP opposite dF compared to the insertion of dGTP
and dTTP opposite dF because the latter two dNTPs have direct interbase
HBs between each of them and a templating dF whereas dATP does not.
In the case of the dGTP/dF pair, the distance between C3 of dF and N1 of dGTP is 3.32 Å (Figure E). To avoid a repulsive interaction that would
occur between the C3 hydrogen of dF and the N1 hydrogen of dGTP, the templating dF twists away from its normal
position, causing a distortion in substrate alignment. This is consistent
with the poor electron density around dF and the relatively large B factors for the templating dF. As for the dTTP/dF pair,
the base of the incoming dTTP did not stack nearly as well with the
penultimate base pair compared to the adenine base of the dATP/dF
pair. The pyrimidine base of dTTP is
not in the same plane as the base of the templating dF. Therefore,
base selectivity is not solely determined, in these cases, by the
number of HBs between the incoming dNTP and the templating base.

Role of Minor Groove HBs in Insertion Efficiency and Base Selectivity
The lone pair of electrons carried by N3 of purines
and O2 of pyrimidines are competent HB acceptors and can
form HBs with amino acid side chains of the pol.,,, To explore
the role of minor groove HBs in nucleotide insertion efficiency and
base selectivity, we used 3-deaza-2′-deoxyadenosine (3DA),
an analogue of adenine in which N3 of dA is replaced with
a carbon atom (Figure A). As shown in Figure B, 3DA has the
same hydrogen bonding pattern with dT as dA but lacks hydrogen bonding
capability at the C3 position, making it an ideal analogue for probing
the role of minor groove HBs. Our 1.8 Å resolution structure
of the wt RB69pol ternary complex has shown that (i) the hydroxyl
group of Y567 forms a HB with N3 of dG at position n – 1 of the template strand via a water molecule,
(ii) the side chain of T622 is hydrogen bonded to O2 of
dT at position n – 1 of the primer strand
via a water molecule, and (iii) the ε-amino nitrogen of K706
forms a HB with N3 of dA at position n – 2
of the primer strand. Substitution of dA with 3DA at position n – 1 of the template strand results in a 90-fold
decrease in catalytic efficiency. The
effect is more dramatic when the 3DA substitution is in the primer
strand. Replacing dA with 3DA at positions n –
1 and n – 2 in the primer strand causes the
catalytic efficiency to decrease by 144- and 900-fold, respectively.

(A) Chemical structures of dA and 3DA. (B) 3DA/dT base
pair. (C)
Minor groove HB network at the P/T junction of wt RB69pol. (D) Minor
groove HB network at the P/T junction of wt RB69pol with 3DA at position n – 1 of the template strand. (E) Minor groove HB
network at position n – 1 of the primer strand.
(F) Minor groove HB network at position n –
2 of the primer strand.

To provide a structural basis for these observations, we
determined
the structure of wt RB69pol with 3DA at position n – 1 of the template strand. It is of interest that water
molecule w1, which mediates the HB between the hydroxyl group of Y567
and N3 of dA, when dA is at position n – 1 of the template strand, is missing in this structure
(Figure C,D). In addition, water molecule
w2 shifted laterally by 1.2 Å away from the side chain of Y567.
The disruption of the rigid HB network at position n – 1 of the template strand could be the reason for the 90-fold
decrease in the efficiency of nucleotide incorporation. Although we
do not have structures of RB69pol ternary complexes with 3DA at position n – 1 or n – 2 of the primer
strand, the structure of the wt RB69pol ternary complex with a P/T
control that has dA at positions n – 1 and n – 2 of the primer strand provides insight into
the kinetic behavior of these complexes. As shown in Figure E, water molecule w4 mediates the HB between the
hydroxyl group of T622 and N3 of dA at position n – 1 of the primer strand. Replacing dA with 3DA at this position
creates a steric clash between the C3 hydrogen of 3DA and water molecule
w4, further disrupting the HB network at position n – 1 of the primer strand. Because 3DA is located at the primer
terminus where the 3′-OH attacks the α-phosphorus atom
of the incoming dNTP, perturbing the minor groove hydrogen bonding
would be expected to have a greater impact on catalysis than the situation
in which disruption of the minor groove HB network affects the templating
base. This is consistent with our kinetic results. It is worth noting
that the catalytic efficiency decreases by almost 3 orders of magnitude
when the 3DA substitution is at position n –
2 of the primer strand. The sp3-hybridized ε-amino nitrogen is in perfect tetrahedral geometry
as it is hydrogen bonded to N3 of dA, the carboxyl group
of D621, and an ordered water molecule, w5 (Figure F). The carbonyl oxygen of D621 is coordinated to metal ion
A via a water molecule. The adjacent D623 residue is essential for
catalysis. We speculate that the 3DA substitution at position n – 2 in the primer causes a reorientation of the
K706 side chain, which prevents a steric clash between the ε-amino
group of K706 and the C3 hydrogen of 3DA. Repositioning K706 would
directly affect the rotomer conformation of D621 and would further
interfere with the optimal coordination of catalytic metal ion A with
its ligands. This could explain why there is a 900-fold decrease in
catalytic efficiency when 3DA is at position n –
2 of the primer strand. For these reasons, we have proposed that minor
groove HB interactions at position n – 2 of
the primer strand in RB69pol complexes are critical for maintaining
the correct rotomer conformations of K706 and D621 as well as for
positioning of metal ion A so that they are all optimally aligned
for nucleotide insertion. In addition, our fluorescence lifetime analysis
shows that the minor groove HB interactions also help stabilize the
P/T in the pol subdomain. For mismatched base pairs at the P/T junction,
the primer terminus of the P/T duplex is more likely to shift to the
exo subdomain without the stabilizing influence of minor groove HB
interactions of the DNA duplex with amino acid side chains of the
pol subdomain. On the basis of our kinetic
and structural results, we believe that minor groove HB interactions
at positions n – 1 and n –
2 of the primer strand and position n – 1
of the template strand in RB69pol ternary complexes are essential
for efficient primer extension and base selectivity.

Interactions
between the Base at the Primer’s 3′
Terminus and the Base of the Incoming dNTP Affect Insertion Efficiency
and Base Selectivity Opposite an Abasic Site
Watson–Crick
hydrogen bonding between complementary bases and base stacking are
two important factors responsible for the stability of the DNA double
helix. To evaluate the contribution
of base stacking between the incoming dNTP and the base at the 3′
end of the primer to nucleotide insertion efficiency and base selectivity,
we determined pre-steady-state kinetic parameters for incorporation
of dNTPs opposite an abasic tetrahydrofuran (THF) site by both wt
RB69pol and the tm. As shown in Figure A, THF is an abasic site mimic and has been used
in studies of translesion synthesis by repair pols.− Because there is no templating base, the insertion efficiency and
fidelity of incorporation of a nucleotide opposite THF are not influenced
by the direct interbase HB interactions, but instead by base stacking
between the incoming dNTP and the penultimate base pair (pBP). Our
pre-steady-state kinetic experiments have shown that RB69pol preferentially
inserts dAMP opposite THF when dC/dG is in the pBP position. The order of catalytic efficiency for incorporation
of different dNTPs opposite THF exhibited by the tm follows the same
pattern that is observed with wt RB69pol, but the differences in incorporation
efficiencies among the incoming dNTPs are smaller. These results are
consistent with the generally accepted “A-rule”, namely
that most replicative pols preferentially incorporate dAMP opposite
an abasic site.,− In addition, we also determined the pre-steady-state kinetic parameters
for bypassing dN/THF lesions. We found that both wt RB69pol and the
tm can bypass a dA/THF lesion more efficiently than other dN/THF lesions.
Similar results have been obtained with other B family pols. On the
basis of these results, we propose that the A-rule can be extended
to state that replicative pols will preferentially incorporate dATP
opposite an abasic site but will also bypass a dA/abasic lesion more
efficiently than other dN/abasic lesions. To determine the effect
of nearest neighbor base stacking on insertion efficiency and fidelity,
we varied the pBP adjacent to the templating THF using all 16 possible
base pair combinations and then determined the corresponding pre-steady-state
kinetic parameters. Unexpectedly, we found that there was a 210-fold
difference in catalytic efficiency depending on the identity of the
incoming dNTP and the pBP. For a given pBP, dATP was always incorporated
more efficiently than the other three dNTPs, again supporting the
notion that RB69pol follows the A-rule. For any given incoming dNTP,
the incorporation efficiency when the pBP is a G·C pair (dG/dC
or dC/dG) is higher than when the pBP is an A·T pair (dA/dT or
dT/dA). This is consistent with the fact that more “breathing”
is observed for DNA duplexes with A/T rich sequences at the P/T junction.
For purine dNTPs, the incorporation efficiency is highest when dC/dG
is the pBP and lowest when dA/dT is the pBP. In general, although dATP is most often incorporated more efficiently
than other dNTPs, adherence to the A-rule is dependent both on the
particular DNApol and on the sequence context preceding the abasic
site.

(A) Chemical structure of THF. (B) Superposition
of the four dNTP/THF-containing
structures (dATP/THF, red; dCTP/THF, blue; dGTP/THF, orange; dTTP/THF,
gray). The PB’s ddC/dG is shown as a space-filling model. (C)
Base stacking of an incoming dCTP with ddG/dC. (D) Base stacking of
an incoming dCTP with ddA/dT. (E) Base stacking of an incoming dATP
with ddC/dG. (F) Base stacking of an incoming dATP with ddA/dT.

To provide a structural basis
for these nearest neighbor effects,
we determined high-resolution structures of tm RB69pol ternary complexes
that had the highest and lowest incorporation efficiencies for each
incoming dNTP. Superimposition of these four structures with different
incoming dNTPs but with the same pBP (dC/dG) showed that the triphosphate
tail and ribosyl moieties of the dNTPs could be overlaid and appeared
to be congruent with one another (Figure B).
As might be expected, incoming dNTPs containing purines stack better
against pBPs than dNTPs containing pyrimidines. It is of interest
that there was a positive correlation between the incorporation efficiency
and favorable partial charge interactions between the incoming dNTP
and the pBP. For example, when dCTP was the incoming dNTP, the catalytic
efficiency was greatest when the pBP was dG/dC and poorest when the
pBP was dA/dT. As shown in Figure C, the partial
negatively charged O2 of dCTP lies on top of the partial
positively charged N2 of dG, and the partial positively
charged N4 of dCTP that is situated right over the partial
negatively charged O6 of dG. These favorable positive and
negative partial charge interactions help to stabilize the ternary
complex. In contrast, the partial negatively charged O2 of dCTP is positioned just adjacent to the partial negatively charged
O2 of dT, and the partial positively charged N4 of dCTP is positioned right above the partial positively charged
N6 of dA (Figure D). The resulting
repulsive interactions would be expected to destabilize the ternary
complex.

When the incoming dNTP contains purine, the hydration
network around
the purine base could be an important determinant for insertion efficiency.
As shown in Figure E, when dATP is the incoming
dNTP and dC/dG is the pBP, the ordered water molecules are located
just above the N3 atoms of the pBP and would be expected
to help stabilize the ternary complex. In contrast, when dA/dT is
the pBP, the ordered water molecules are located just above the C
atoms of the pBP and should destabilize the ternary complex (Figure F). This supposition is consistent with kinetic
results that showed that when dATP was the incoming dNTP, the catalytic
efficiency was greatest when the pBP was dC/dG and greatly diminished
when the pBP was dA/dT. Overall, this was the first example in which
partial charge interactions among the incoming dNTP, the pBP, and
the hydration shell surrounding the incoming dNTP appear to modulate
nucleotide insertion efficiency and base selectivity.

How Does
the Shape of the Nascent Base Pair and the Shape of
the NBP Affect RB69pol Fidelity?
Current hypotheses that
attempt to rationalize the fidelity of replicative pols concur that
closed ternary complexes with mismatched base pairs are destabilized.
Therefore, being able to account for this destabilization in structural
and dynamics terms is critical for a mechanistic understanding of
base selectivity. Clearly, structures of the 12 mismatches in closed
ternary complexes are essential for this purpose. For this reason, we used the RB69pol qm variant, mentioned
previously, to capture all 16 combinations of base pairs in the NBP
of RB69pol. As shown in Figure A–D, the geometries of the four Watson–Crick
base pairs are quite similar, but the C1′–C1′
distances and the glycosidic dihedral bond angles vary slightly among
the Watson–Crick base pairs. For purine/pyrimidine mismatches,
the dTTP/dG, dGTP/dT, and dCTP/dA pairs all adopt wobble geometry,
with the purine bases receding into the minor groove (Figure E–G). In contrast, an inverted wobble base
pair was observed for the dATP/dC pair (Figure H). For pyrimidine/pyrimidine mismatches, two highly ordered water
molecules were located at the base pair interface mediating the HB
between dCTP and dT and also between dTTP and dC (Figure I,J). Only one ordered water molecule was observed
at the interface of the dCTP/dC pair (Figure K). No water molecules were found between dTTP and dT. Instead, the
dTTP/dT pair adopts wobble geometry with the templating dT displaced
toward the minor groove (Figure L). For purine/purine
mispairs, the templating dA bases were flipped 180° from their
normal position so that they are now located opposite an incoming
dATP or dGTP (Figure M,N). Similarly, the
templating dG has shifted 30° toward the DNA major groove in
the dATP/dG and dGTP/dA pairs (Figure O,P).

Sixteen
nascent base pairs in the NBP of the RB69pol qm: (A) dATP/dT
pair, (B) dTTP/dA pair, (C) dCTP/dG pair, (D) dGTP/dC pair, (E) dTTP/dG
pair, (F) dGTP/dT pair, (G) dCTP/dA pair, (H) dATP/dC pair, (I) dCTP/dT
pair, (J) dTTP/dC pair, (K) dCTP/dC pair, (L) dTTP/dT pair, (M) dATP/dA
pair, (N) dGTP/dA pair, (O) dATP/dG pair, and (P) dGTP/dG pair.

Next we superimposed all 12 mismatch-containing
structures with
the structure of a wt RB69pol ternary complex containing dCTP/dG to
see if the mismatches would fit into the NBP of wt RB69pol. To our
surprise, we found that only 3 of the 12 mismatches (dTTP/dG, dGTP/dT,
and dTTP/dT) clashed with side chains in the NBP while the rest of
the nascent base pairs could be modeled perfectly well into the NBP
of the wt RB69pol. The question then arises as to what prevented the
nine remaining mismatched dNTPs from being incorporated if their geometries
were compatible with the closed ternary complex of wt RB69pol.

We have proposed four reasons for this. First, there were steric
clashes between mismatches and protein side chains, e.g., the three
instances mentioned previously. Second, there were only very weak
interactions between the incoming dNTP and the templating base. The
four purine/purine mismatches fall into this category, as the templating
base was either flipped out of the NBP completely or projected 30°
toward the major groove. Third, large gaps were observed between some
of the incoming dNTPs and the templating bases. For example, the large
gap among the dCTP/dT, dTTP/dC, and dCTP/dC pairs would very likely
destabilize the closed ternary complex. Fourth, it appears that the
purine base of dA in the dCTP/dA pair and the pyrimidine base of dC
in the dATP/dC pair are protonated (Figure A,B), which would be expected to be disfavored in the highly structured
environment of the NBP, and should destabilize the ternary complex.

Protonation
states of (A) dCTP/dA and (B) dATP/dC in the NBP of
the RB69pol qm.

When we superimposed
all 16 structures of dNTP/dN-containing qm
RB69pols, the incoming dNTPs could be overlaid perfectly with one
another, particularly with respect to their triphosphate tails and
sugar moieties, but the conformation of the templating bases varied
dramatically. In the NBP of wt RB69pol, residues L561 and Y567 are
located right above and below the templating base. Replacing these
two residues with Ala generated large cavities directly above and
below the templating base, providing the phosphodiester backbone and
the glycosidic bond of the templating base with greater degrees of
freedom, allowing the templating base to shift its position so that
it can pair with different mismatched incoming dNTPs. Thus, repositioning
of the templating base is a critical feature that allows the NBP of
the RB69pol qm to accommodate all 12 mismatches. This movement is
consistent with structural observations from other pols. For example,
in the NBP of T7 DNA pol, a model family A replicative pol, two highly
conserved residues, K522 and Y530, are located right above and below
the templating base, whereas there are
no protein side chains located directly above or below the templating
base in the NBP of repair pols. Thus, shifting of the templating base
to accommodate incorrect dNTPs is a likely reason that the base selectivity
of repair pols is so low., It should be noted,
however, that the glycosidic bond can rotate freely and that the sugar
pucker can change. If these events occur, then various positions of
the base of an incorrect incoming dNTP could be accommodated. In the
NBP of wt RB69pol, the side chains of L561 and Y567 restrict the movement
of the templating base; consequently, the same mismatch now requires
that the incoming incorrect dNTP shift its position, resulting in
misalignment of the 3′-hydroxyl group at the primer terminus,
thus accounting for the observed low insertion efficiencies. An alternative
possibility is that when the bases of either the template or the dNTPs
are in the wrong position, as they would be in a mispair, the amino
acid side chains around the active site could move to try to maintain
interactions with misplaced bases, and it is these altered amino acid
positions that could cause polymerization to be inhibited.

Is the
Conformational Change upon dNTP Binding a Critical Fidelity
Checkpoint for RB69pol?
Structures of the binary and ternary
RB69pol complexes show that the fingers subdomain rotates 60°
toward the palm subdomain upon the formation of the closed ternary
complex (Figure A). On the basis of studies
with an MDCC-labeled T7 DNA pol, Tsai and Johnson proposed that base
selectivity is determined by not only the relative rate of chemistry
(k3) and the rate of the forward conformational
change (k2) but also by the relative rates
of k3 and the rates of reversal of the
forward conformational change (k–2) (Scheme ). For example, when T7 DNA pol encounters a correct dNTP, the value
of k3 is much greater than the value of k–2, which leads to rapid nucleotide insertion.
However, when T7 DNA pol encounters an incorrect dNTP, the value of k–2 is much greater than that of k3, leading to nucleotide release. To see whether
this hypothesis for rationalizing base selectivity can be applied
to RB69pol, we used 2-aminopurine (2AP), a fluorescent adenine analogue
(Figure B), as the templating base to estimate
the rate of the reverse conformational change., We have interpreted the fluorescence quenching of 2AP by an incoming
dTTP as a consequence of 2AP stacking with the penultimate base pair
as the fingers subdomain closes. In addition, we took advantage of
two observations reported by Bakhtina et al. (i) Rh3+ can be used as an exchange-inert metal ion to
form a complex with an incoming dNTP. It fills the B metal ion site
without compromising insertion efficiency. (ii) The occupancy of Rh·dNTP
at the B metal ion site is sufficient to ensure the formation of a
closed ternary complex. We found that
the rate of product formation was only 4 s–1 when
Mg2+ was added after the formation of the RB69pol/P/T/Rh·dTTP
ternary complex, when 2AP was the templating base. This rate of 4 s–1 was much lower than
the rate of 80 s–1 observed when Mg2+ was present in the mixture initially and was interpreted as reopening
of the fingers subdomain prior to chemistry. In addition, we measured the rate of 2AP quenching in the presence
of a catalytically inert Ca2+ with different dTTP concentrations.
We obtained an approximate value for k–2 of 4–30 s–1 by extrapolating the hyperbolic
curve of the 2AP quenching rate versus the dTTP concentration. Although
it was difficult to obtain an accurate estimate of the intercept at
the Y axis, the reverse conformational change rate
was clearly much slower than the rate of chemistry. A similar experiment
was performed with various dCTP concentrations, an incorrect dNTP
opposite a templating 2AP. The results were simulated using KinTekSim
to obtain an estimate of k–2, which
turned out to be greater than 1000 s–1. As an independent
check, another fluorescent analogue, tC°, which can form three
HBs with guanine (Figure C), was used in the
same type of experiment. The quenching
of the tC° fluorescence depends on both base stacking with the
penultimate base pair and hydrogen bonding with the templating base.
Similar values of k–2 were obtained
(S. Xia et al., unpublished results). Thus, our kinetic results with
2AP or tC° quenching were consistent with the proposal advanced
by Tsai and Johnson. However, it is important
to point out that the interpretation of the 2AP and tC° quenching
experiments was based on the assumption that the stacking of 2AP or
tC° with the penultimate base pair happens concurrently with
closing of the fingers subdomain. Our recent kinetic studies with
the L415A variant of RB69pol have shown that the rate of 2AP quenching
for this mutant was greater than 500 s–1 but that
the corresponding value of kpol from chemical
quenching was only 11 s–1. If our assumption about 2AP quenching is correct, these results
strongly suggest that a rate-limiting step exists after fingers subdomain
closing but before chemistry, which is likely to be a rearrangement
of the active site residues. Ideally, using a fluorescently labeled
RB69pol to determine the conformational change rates for correct and
incorrect dNTPs would be a more direct measurement of k–2. Unfortunately, RB69pol has eight Cys residues,
some of which are critical for pol activity because substitution of
all the Cys residues with Ala or Ser inactivated the enzyme (T. Christian
et al., unpublished results). However, even if we were able to label
RB69pol with a fluorescent probe, it still might not report on the
putative rearrangement of active site residues that could be the real
rate-limiting step for dNTP insertion. Other approaches will be required
to unambiguously address the relationship between conformational changes
and base selectivity exhibited by RB69pol.

(A) Superposition of the structure of the wt RB69pol closed
ternary
complex [Protein Data Bank (PDB) entry 3NCI] with the structure of the binary complex
in an editing mode (PDB entry 1CLQ). (B) Chemical structure of the dAP/dT
pair. (C) Chemical structure of the tC°/dG pair.

Partitioning of the Primer Terminus between
the Pol and Exo
Subdomains
When a pol incorporates an incorrect dNTP, it
favors switching of the primer terminus from the pol to the exo subdomain,
allowing for excision of the misincorporated base. The fidelity of
a pol is increased by additional 102–103-fold when it harbors an exo subdomain. Thus, the pol to exo partitioning is an important checkpoint that
enhances the extraordinarily high fidelity of replicative pols. To
further investigate this issue, we developed a novel tC°-tCnitro Förster resonance energy transfer (FRET) assay
to monitor pol to exo partitioning. As
shown in Figure A, both tC° (donor) and
tCnitro (acceptor) are cytosine analogues and can form
HBs with guanine. We designed two sets of duplex P/Ts with tCnitro as the templating base and tC° at position n – 7 of the primer strand (Figure B). One set was a fully matched P/T duplex that served as
a control; the other set had a mismatched base pair (dA/dA) at the
P/T junction (Figure B). The relative orientation
of the tC°-tCnitro FRET pair, when embedded in the
P/T, was revealed by the structure of the tC°-tCnitro FRET-containing RB69pol ternary complex (Figure C; S. Xia and M. Wood, unpublished results).

(A) Chemical structures
of tC° and the tCnitro/dG
pair. (B) P/T sequences used in the tC°-tCnitro FRET
assay. (C) Structure of the tC°-tCnitro FRET pair-containing
ternary complex of RB69pol. tC° is colored green and tCnitro red.

Our rationale is that FRET efficiency
decreases if the duplex at
the P/T junction unwinds because of the partitioning of the primer
terminus from the pol to the exo subdomain. The results were exactly
what we expected, namely, that FRET efficiencies for the control P/T
and mismatched P/T, alone, were 0.43 and 0.32, respectively. When
the P/T duplex binds to wt RB69pol, the FRET efficiency for the control
P/T decreased slightly to 0.37 but the FRET efficiency for mismatched
P/Ts decreased by almost 50% to 0.18. This strongly suggested that
RB69pol promoted switching of the mismatched primer terminus from
the pol to the exo subdomain; hence, the distance between the FRET
pair increased. This separation does not occur unless the mismatched
P/T is in a binary complex with the pol. Clearly, this tC°-tCnitro FRET method is sensitive enough to detect unwinding of
duplex DNA at the P/T junction and can be used to monitor partitioning
of the primer between the pol and exo subdomains.

Using this
method, we found that the RB69pol L415A or L415G variant
cannot fully distinguish complementary P/Ts from mismatched P/Ts,
as the corresponding FRET values for both P/Ts were not statistically
different from one another. This is consistent with our kinetic data
in that both L415A and L415G mutants are 100-fold more efficient for
incorporating a nucleotide residue beyond a mispair. Because residue
L415 is located right below the triphosphate tail of the incoming
dNTP and does not interact with the P/T, we were puzzled as to why
replacing L415 with Ala or Gly would interfere with pol to exo partitioning.
The structures of L415A and L415G ternary complexes show that replacing
L415 with Ala or Gly greatly enlarges the size of a cavity located
at the tip of the L415 side chain. As a consequence, nearby residues,
such as L412, D623, and M683, together with a water molecule move
in to partially occupy the vacated space. Trapping a water molecule
in a hydrophobic pocket is energetically unfavorable and restricts
its rotation.− In addition, D623 is located at the tip of a β-hairpin, which
has been shown to play a role in the alignment of the primer terminus
with an incoming dNTP. We believe that the HB interaction between
the trapped water molecule and D623 would likely restrict the movement
of this β-hairpin, further affecting the stabilization of the
primer terminus when it is located in the pol subdomain. Although
our interpretation is speculative, the fact that alteration of the
size of the cavity adjacent to the NBP of RB69pol changes its conformational
dynamics is clear. Our tC°-tCnitro FRET assay is simple
and easy and can be applied to pols from other families (S. Xia and
M. Wood, unpublished data), but the studies with the RB69pol L415
variant suggest that ensemble kinetic experiments and static crystal
structures alone are not sufficient to address pol–exo dynamics
in detail, which are highly relevant for understanding mechanisms
that determine base selectivity.

Future Research Will Require
a Transition from Studying Structure–Function
Relationships to Pol Dynamics
Several experimental results
have made us realize that pol dynamics
plays a major role in base discrimination.,,− For example, (i) conformational changes of the pol upon substrate
binding could be a key checkpoint for pol fidelity, (ii) rearrangement
of the protein side chains in the NBP could be rate-limiting for nucleotide
insertion, (iii) residues that do not interact with the P/T duplex
directly can affect pol–exo partitioning, and (iv) mutations
quite far from the NBP have dramatic effects on dNTP insertion kinetics.
Because of these results, we have shifted our emphasis from studying
structure–function relationships in RB69pol to investigating
pol dynamics. Accordingly, we attempted to explore the dynamics of
conformational changes that contribute to fidelity using time-lapse
X-ray crystallography and single-molecule Förster resonance
energy transfer (smFRET). Pioneering work using time-lapse X-ray crystallography
with human pol η, conducted by Yang’s group, enabled
them to observe sequential structural changes of pol η complexes
at various stages of primer extension. Several interesting results emerged, including the change of the
sugar pucker conformation and the presence of a third metal ion. Subsequently,
Wilson’s group used the same technique to explore the base
selectivity of pol β by capturing structures of the enzyme at
various stages along its reaction pathway when it incorporates either
a correct or an incorrect incoming dNTP. Both pol η and pol β are repair pols, where the insertion
rates are quite slow in contrast to that of RB69pol. To see if the
same approach could be applied to RB69pol, we produced an RB69pol
variant L415G with kpol and Kd,app values greatly reduced compared to those of wt RB69pol,
permitting high-quality crystals of a ternary complex to be obtained.
Attempts to perform time-lapse crystallography with this variant failed
because the crystals were gradually deformed during the primer extension
reaction. As an alternative, we have initiated a collaboration with
Paul Carey’s group, which has shown that Raman crystallography
is also an excellent method for probing pol structure and dynamics
during the nucleotidyl transfer reaction. Preliminary results from the Carey lab with the L415G variant at
low temperatures are encouraging in that they show well-defined changes
in the Raman spectra as the nucleotidyl transfer reaction proceeds.
Thus, it should be possible to determine the rates of appearance and
disappearance of reaction intermediates caused by rearrangements of
the side chains in the NBP of the L415G variant. However, neither
of these approaches will provide information about the rates of transition
between different conformational states in solution, which is crucial
for understanding mechanisms of base selectivity, so we are using
smFRET with RB69pol to obtain this information. Because we could not
remove all eight Cys residues and still retain activity, we had to
employ a biorthogonal labeling procedure, introducing a p-acetylphenylalanine (p-Ac-Phe) residue into RB69pol.
The p-Ac-Phe residue serves as a unique site for
modification by hydroxamate-functionalized fluorescent dyes (Alexa
647, etc.). We have also labeled several different P/T constructs
with Cy3B using standard methods. Our preliminary results show that
different FRET states are observed depending on (i) the base pairing
status at the P/T junction and (ii) the presence of a correct incoming
dNTP. The addition of a correct nucleotide to the pol-P/T binary complex
also resulted in an altered pattern of FRET efficiencies (M. Wood,
unpublished results).

In parallel with our smFRET studies of
RB69pol, we are also using
Pfu pol, a thermostable B family DNA pol that is fully active even
though its resident Cys residues have been replaced with Ser. With
the des-Cys Pfu pol variant, we have introduced pairs of Cys residues
at different locations. After labeling with donor and acceptor dyes,
we expect that the labeled pol will report on conformational changes
when dNTPs are added to the pol-P/T binary complex. Our preliminary
results suggest the presence of a partially closed (ajar) conformation
that could serve as a fidelity checkpoint for nucleotide insertion
(M. Wood, unpublished results). An “ajar” conformation
has been observed with Bst1pol, an A family DNApol. Results with the doubly dye labeled Pfu pol should provide
information that will complement results obtained with the RB69pol-P/T
ternary complexes in which the acceptor dye is on the pol and the
donor dye is on the DNA. We believe that, with the p-Ac-Phe labeling strategy and the dual-Cys Pfu labeling strategy,
we have a chance of answering questions about the conformational dynamics
of both dNTP discrimination (fidelity) and the pol–exo transition
in B family pols.

Summary
RB69pol has proven to be
an excellent model for B family replicative
DNA polymerases because of (i) sequence similarities in their highly
conserved regions, (ii) the ease of crystallization of wt RB69 and
many of its mutants, and (iii) extensive kinetic studies that have
been correlated with its structure and function. Insights have been
obtained about base discrimination that are likely to be applicable
to other B family DNA pols. The kinetics for primer extension and
editing are consistent with the scheme proposed by Tsai and Johnson
that could also hold for other replicative DNApols. While the structures
and kinetics of RB69pol have provided valuable information about base
selectivity and editing, there are still a number of issues that require
further investigation. (i) How does sequence context affect the rate
of dNTP incorporation? (ii) How do accessory proteins (sliding clamp,
gp45, single-strand binding protein, and gp32) affect the fidelity
and rates of nucleotide addition and excision? (iii) Are there intermediate
conformational states that can be identified by smFRET and/or Raman
spectroscopy on crystals of DNA pol ternary complexes? Clearly, dynamics
play a major role in fidelity, and the tools for investigating this
are now becoming available. It will be interesting to see how the
results obtained with these techniques will influence our current
views about the mechanisms that ensure faithful copying of genomic
information.

Author Present Address
† S.X.:
iRND3, Mountain View, CA 94043.

This work is
supported by National Institutes of Health Grant GM 063276−09.

The authors declare no
competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
This review is dedicated to the memory of Dr. Shuangluo
Xia.

Abbreviations
polpolymerase

P/Tprimer/template

HBhydrogen bond

exoexonuclease

RB69polRB69 DNA polymerase

KFKlenow Fragment

NBPnascent base pair binding
pocket

dmdouble
mutant

tmtriple
mutant

qmquadruple
mutant

wtwild type

dZ2′-deoxy-2′-deoxyribo-4-methylbenzimidazole

dF2′-deoxyribo-2,4-difluorotoluene

dQ2′-deoxyribo-9-methyl-1H-imidazole-[(4,5)-β]-pyridine

2AP2-aminopurine

3DA3-deaza-2′-deoxyadenosine

THFtetrahydrofuran

pBPpenultimate base
pair

FRETFörster
resonance energy transfer

smFRETsingle-molecule Förster resonance energy transfer

p-Ac-Phep-acetylphenylalanine.

