A central challenge in antibiotic
discovery is to follow the penetration of druglike molecules into
bacterial cells and monitor their interactions with the target enzymes.
The need to quantitate the penetration of antibiotic-like molecules
into bacterial cells remains a major barrier to this understanding. Previous studies on cell permeability of antibiotics
were indirect and limited because the measurements relied on reconstituted
proteoliposomes, radiolabeled compounds,
or a specific enzyme reaction inside intact cells compared with the
reaction of the compounds with cell lysate.− However, druglike
molecules have specific Raman signatures that can be used to follow
directly their penetration and reactions in bacteria cells.

β-Lactam compounds are one of three major classes of antibiotics
against bacterial infections. Unfortunately, β-lactamase production
is the most common and important mechanism of bacterial resistance
to β-lactam antibiotics among Gram-negative bacteria. β-Lactamase enzymes hydrolyze the lactam
ring of β-lactam antibiotics, rendering them ineffective before
they reach their intended target, the penicillin binding proteins
(PBPs) that play critical roles in peptidoglycan synthesis and maintaining
the integrity and shape of most bacterial cells.

The present
work uses Raman microspectroscopy combined with Raman
difference spectroscopy− to follow specific changes in a very complex system.
We monitor the penetration of clavulanic acid and tazobactam and their
reactions with different β-lactamases inside whole bacterial
cells. This report is built on a plethora of earlier studies characterizing
drug:β-lactamase complexes in single crystals, and more recent advances in which these complexes were trapped in
dilute aqueous solutions. Although Raman
microspectroscopy has been used for more than two decades for imaging
and characterization of various cells,− cell division, molecular composition of different part of cells, and studying metabolic states of bacterial cells
with and without antibiotic treatment, our protocol is singular in at least in two aspects. First, the
Raman spectra are from a group of freeze-dried bacteria that are located
in the focal volume of the laser beam rather than from a single bacterial
cell. Thus, we are not undertaking cell imaging per se. Second, flash
freezing allows us to follow the time evolution on the subminute time
scale, and using difference spectroscopy we can record specific changes
(e.g., drug penetration, drug–target reactions, and associated
changes in cell-wall metabolism) within cells. We present for the
first time a technique that can be used to follow drug reactions occurring
inside live bacterial cells.

Materials and Methods
Bacterial Strains and Cloning
The β-lactamase
genes blaSHV-1, and blaKPC-2 were cloned into the pBC SK (−) and pBC SK
(+) [cat] phagemid vectors (Stratagene, La Jolla,
CA), respectively. These vectors were transformed into E. coli DH10B [endA1 recA1 galE15 galK16 nupG rpsL ΔlacX74 Φ80lacZΔM15 araD139 Δ(ara,leu)7697 mcrA Δ(mrr-hsdRMS-mcrBC)] cells (Invitrogen, Carlsbad,
CA) as a host strain and exploited for site-directed mutagenesis using
Stratagene’s Quik Change mutagenesis kit to provide blaSHV-1 E166A and blaKPC-2 E166A, respectively, as previously described.−E. coli DH10B cells carrying the
empty pBCSK (−) vector (no bla) were used
as a control.

Purification of SHV-1 β-Lactamase
E. coli DH10B cells carrying the blaSHV-1 plasmid were grown overnight with agitation
at 37
°C in Lysogeny Broth (LB, no. 136) containing 20 μg/mL
chloramphenicol. Cells were harvested by centrifugation, and the pellet
was stored frozen at −80 °C. Cells were lysed by freezing
and thawing the pellet (at −70 and 0 °C, respectively,
for 20 min) three times followed by the addition of 40 mg/L lysozyme
from chicken egg white (Sigma) in Tris-EDTA (10 or 1 mM) buffer (pH
7.4) and stirring for half an hour at room temperature. After centrifugation,
the soluble fraction was concentrated using an ultrafiltration membrane
with a molecular weight cutoff of 10 kDa (Millipore) to remove the
low-molecular-weight proteins from the mixture and decrease the sample
volume for the FPLC step. The concentrated fraction was loaded on
a gel-filtration column (Superdex Hi Load 26/60) that had been pre-equilibrated
in sodium bicarbonate buffer (10 mM, pH 8.5), and proteins were eluted
in the same buffer. SHV-1-enriched fractions were next passed over
an anion-exchange column [Q Sepharose Hi Load 26/10 (Pharmacia, Uppsala,
Sweden)], which was developed with a 10–900 mM sodium bicarbonate
(pH 8.5) gradient. SHV-1 was eluted from the column using 450 mM sodium
bicarbonate. The purity of SHV-1 protein was assessed by SDS-PAGE,
and the concentration was determined using a Thermo Scientific NanoDrop
spectrometer.

SHV-1 Crystallization
SHV-1 was
concentrated to 10
mg/mL in 2 mM HEPES buffer (pH 7.4) for crystallization by the vapor
diffusion method. The 5 μL hanging drop containing 2 μL
of 10 mg/mL SHV-1, 0.5 μL of Cymal-6 detergent (Hampton Research,
Laguna Niguel, CA), and 2.5 μL of reservoir solution (2 M MgSO4 and 0.1 M HEPES, pH 6.5) was placed over 1 mL of reservoir
solution. The enzyme crystallized in approximately 1 week.

Raman
Crystallography
The Raman microscopy technique
has been described previously., A SHV-1 crystal was
transferred into a solution containing 20% poly(ethylene glycol) 6000
and 0.1 M Tris-HCl (pH 7) and washed several times. Then the crystal
was transferred to 4 μL of the same solution on a siliconized
glass coverslip and brought into a hanging drop setup. A 100 mW 647
nm Kr+ laser beam (Innova 70 C, Coherent, Palo Alto, CA)
was focused into the protein crystal using an 20× objective.
The Raman spectrum of an apo-crystal was acquired for 1 s and 100
accumulations. Then 1 μL of 100 mM clavulanic acid in water
was added to the 4 μL hanging drop around the SHV-1 crystal.
Raman spectra of the reaction of the SHV-1 crystal with clavulanic
acid were acquired for 1 s, and 100 accumulations were averaged for
each time point serially every 2–3 min. For each condition,
one spectrum from the buffer around the crystal was also recorded
and subtracted from the crystal spectrum. To acquire the Raman difference
spectrum for each time point, the Raman spectrum of the SHV-1 apo-crystal
was subtracted from the Raman spectrum of the crystal plus clavulanic
acid at each time point.

Rapid Mix–Rapid Freeze
To
trap the intermediates
of the reaction between SHV-1 enzyme and clavulanic acid in solution,
we used a rapid mix–rapid freeze technique combined with a
freeze-drying process developed by our lab. Briefly, 200 μL of 5 mg/mL SHV-1 enzyme was mixed with 200
μL of 0.34 mg/mL clavulanic acid (this concentration represents
about 10 molar equiv with respect to SHV-1 enzyme) in a commercial
rapid mixing apparatus (KinTek RQF-3). Intermediates at different
time points were trapped by freezing the reaction mixture in isopentane
at −110 °C using different delay times. After freeze-drying
of the frozen material, Raman spectra were taken from the freeze-dried
powder on aluminum foil on the microscope stage.

Raman Spectroscopy
of Bacterial Cells
E. coli DH10B cells producing one of the different
β-lactamases (SHV-1, SHV-1 E166A, KPC-2, or KPC-2 E166A) were
grown at 37 °C with agitation in Mueller Hinton broth (Difco)
containing 20 μg/mL chloramphenicol. A clinical inhibitor [clavulanic
acid (Sigma), with a final concentration of 10 μg/mL, or tazobactam
(Chem-Impex International) with a final concentration of 200 μg/mL]
was added to the medium when the optical density at 600 nm (OD600) was 0.1. The cells were pelleted when the OD600 was 0.8. The pellet was washed two times with buffer (dibasic potassium
phosphate 0.067 M and magnesium chloride 0.01 M, pH 7) and then freeze-dried. A Raman microscope was
used to record the spectra of freeze-dried cells grown in the presence
or absence of inhibitor. Data collection and processing were performed
using HoloGRAMS and GRAMS/AI7 software (ThermoGalactic, Salem, NH).
To obtain Raman difference spectra, the spectrum of the freeze-dried
bacterial cells grown in the absence of inhibitor was subtracted from
that of the cells grown in the presence of the drug.

Measurement
of the Number of Clavulanic Acid Molecules Penetrating
into E. coli DH10B Cells
In
the first step, a reference curve was made to correlate the Raman
intensity of the 1695 cm–1 peak from intact clavulanic
acid to the known concentration of clavulanic acid mixed with a known
amount of cells. To generate the reference curve, 10 mL aliquots of
0.8 OD600 (3.4 × 109 cfu/mL) culture of E. coli cells were distributed in nine different
tubes. The cells were pelleted and washed with buffer, and 5, 10,
25, 50, 100, 250, 500, or 1000 μg of clavulanic acid dissolved
in 1 mL water was used to resuspend the pellet in different tubes.
For the control sample, 1 mL of water was added. The mixtures were
frozen immediately by immersing the tubes in liquid nitrogen (the
lag time between addition of clavulanic acid and resuspension before
freezing was less than 30 s). Frozen mixtures were freeze-dried, and
Raman spectra were taken from each sample. After Raman difference
spectra [(cells with drug) minus (cells without drug)] were obtained,
the intensity of the 1695 cm–1 peak was measured
and ratioed to that of the 1450 cm–1 peak (CH2 vibrations, an internal standard, from all molecules in the
cells containing −CH2 groups) from each mother spectrum.
The ratio was plotted against the initial amount of clavulanic acid
in each sample (see Figure ).

To measure
the amount of clavulanic acid penetrating E. coli DH10B cells, cells were grown to 0.1 OD600, and then
10 μg/mL clavulanic acid was added to the medium. Growth was
continued to 0.8 OD600, and cells from 10 mL of culture
were harvested by centrifugation. This normally took 6–8 h
under our conditions. The cell pellet was washed with buffer and then
freeze-dried. The Raman spectrum was taken from freeze-dried cells,
and after the Raman difference spectrum was obtained, the intensity
at 1695 cm–1 was ratioed to that at 1450 cm–1 from the original spectrum. By plotting this ratio
on the reference curve, the amount of clavulanic acid present in the
cell pellet was calculated. To estimate the number of clavulanic acid
molecules present inside each cell, the number of cells present in
the 0.8 OD600 culture was estimated by serial dilution
of the culture and counting the number of colonies formed on agar
plates (cfu/mL). From the amount of clavulanic acid and the number
of cells present in the sample, the amount of clavulanic acid inside
each cell was calculated (see the  for details).

Immunoblotting
Quantitative immunoblotting
was developed
to determine the total amount of SHV-1 and KPC-2 β-lactamase
present per bacterial cell using conditions comparable to those employed
in the Raman spectroscopy experiments. In order to determine the total
number of cells, the cultures were serially diluted and plated on
agar plates containing 20 μg/mL chloramphenicol. The plates
were incubated at 37 °C for 16 h, and the colonies were counted.
For immunoblot analysis, 10–100 μL aliquots of culture
were pelleted and frozen at −20 °C for 16 h. Pellets were
resuspended in 20 μL of SDS-PAGE loading dye, separated by SDS-PAGE,
and transferred to poly(vinylidene difluoride) membranes (Novex Life
Technologies, Carlsbad, CA) by electroblotting. To determine the absolute
amount of protein per sample, purified SHV-1 (50–200 ng) or
KPC-2 (50–150 ng) β-lactamase was included on the blot.
After blocking for 1 h with 5% nonfat dry milk in Tris-buffered saline
(TBS) (20 or 150 mM, respectively, pH 7.4), blots were incubated overnight
in TBS with 5% nonfat dry milk containing 1 μg/mL anti-SHV-1
or anti-KPC-2 polyclonal antibody, respectively. In addition, a 1:10000
dilution of anti-DnaK monoclonal antibody (Enzo Life Sciences) was
used as a loading control. The membranes were washed four times for
15 min in TBS containing 0.1% Tween 20 (TBST) and subsequently incubated
with a 1:10000 dilution of horseradish peroxidase (HRP)–Protein
G conjugate (Bio-Rad) and HRP–goat anti-mouse antibody conjugate
(Santa Cruz Biotechnology) in TBS with 5% nonfat dry milk. After four
additional 15 min washes with TBST, the membranes were processed for
exposure using the ECL kit (GE Healthcare) and FOTO/Analyst FX (Fotodyne,
Inc.). EZQuant gel analysis software was used to measure the density
of the bands from the gel images; the background density was subtracted.
A standard curve was generated using the densities from the purified
SHV-1 and KPC-2 bands. From the standard curve and total cell count,
the amount of protein per cell was calculated. Western blotting was
performed in triplicate for the SHV-1 and KPC-2 β-lactamase
quantification.

Morphological Study
Live cells were
observed by differential
interference contrast microscopy to study
their morphology upon growth in the presence or absence of clavulanic
acid, tazobactam, or mecillinam in the culture medium. Cells were
grown under the same conditions as used in the Raman spectroscopy
experiments on bacterial cells and then placed on an agar pad of 1.0
or 1.2% agarose with 0.5% NaCl immediately before observation.

Results
Characterizing β-Lactamase and Clavulanic
Acid Intermediates in a Single Crystal and in Solution
Clinically
utilized β-lactamase inhibitors (clavulanic acid, sulbactam,
and tazobactam) undergo complex reactions with β-lactamase enzymes. Figure a shows a partial
reaction scheme of clavulanic acid with class-A β-lactamases. Clavulanic acid forms approximately equal amounts
of imine and enamine in a reaction within a SHV-1 single crystal. Figure S1 in the  shows the Raman difference spectrum of intermediates
formed in the reaction between clavulanic acid and the SHV-1 β-lactamase
in a single crystal. The Raman feature near 1613 cm–1 represents the O=C–C=C–NH– stretching
mode of trans-enamine (Figure a), and the peak at 1654 cm–1 is assigned to imine
intermediates.

(a) Partial reaction
mechanism of clavulanic acid and class-A β-lactamase
enzyme and the structure of mecillinam as an example of a specific
penicillin-binding protein 2 inhibitor. (b) Partial Raman difference
spectra of freeze-dried powders from the reaction of clavulanic acid
with SHV-1 enzyme in solution after 25 ms, 1 s, and 5 s.

To detect the intermediates of this reaction in
solution, the reaction
between SHV-1 and clavulanic acid in aqueous solution was quenched
by freezing the reaction mixture in liquid nitrogen. Subsequently, by freeze-drying the frozen mixture we obtained
high-quality Raman spectra of the freeze-dried material in the presence
or absence of clavulanic acid. Figure b shows
the partial Raman difference spectra of this reaction, from freeze-dried
powder derived from the rapid mix–rapid freeze approach, after 25 ms, 1 s, and 5 s. After 25 ms of reaction,
the Raman features at 1599 and 1660 cm–1 are assigned
to the enamine and imine intermediates, respectively. The peak at
1695 cm–1 corresponds to intact clavulanic acid
present in the reaction mixture. After 1 s of reaction, the imine
population decreases since the equilibrium in Figure a has shifted toward the enamine species. At 1 s, some unreacted
clavulanic acid remains present in the mixture. After 5 s of reaction,
there is only a trace of imine (1653 and 1647 cm–1) in the mixture. In the 5 s Raman difference spectrum, the broad
peak around 1605 cm–1 is assigned to enamine intermediates
and the small peak at 1692 cm–1 corresponds to a
trace amount of unreacted clavulanic acid in the reaction mixture.
The success of these studies depends on the fact that the reactions
in crystals are up to 104 times slower than in solution. The agreement between the data for the crystal
and solution (rapid mix–rapid freeze) reactions demonstrates
that the basic mechanisms in the two phases are very similar.

Raman Spectroscopy of Freeze-Dried Bacterial
Cells
Following the Penetration of Clavulanic Acid
and Tazobactam into E. coli DH10B Cells
To follow the penetration of clavulanic acid and tazobactam into E. coli DH10B cells that were not expressing β-lactamases,
cells were grown in the presence and absence of clavulanic acid and
tazobactam. Following freeze-drying of a washed pellet from the culture,
a Raman microscope was used to record the spectra of the freeze-dried
cells. Using Raman difference spectroscopy [(cells with drug) minus
(cells without drug)], we could detect Raman features related to intact
clavulanic acid or tazobactam inside cells. To quantify the amount
of drug penetrating into each cell, we developed an assay based on
the Raman intensity of characteristic features from clavulanic acid
(the 1695 cm–1 band related to the −C=C–
stretching mode; Figure S2 in the ) and tazobactam (the 626 cm–1 band assigned to
the C–S stretch in the sulfone ring; Figure S3 in the ) in their Raman difference
spectra and using the 1450 cm–1 peak due to CH2 vibrations in each original spectrum as an internal standard.

Figure  shows
a reference curve for clavulanic acid in the presence of E. coli cells. Using this assay (see the  for details), we determined
that when cells were grown in the presence of 10 μg/mL clavulanic
acid, ∼ 2.2 × 106 intact molecules of clavulanic
acid were associated with each cell. We calculated a similar number
for tazobactam, provided that it was added at 100 μg/mL to the
cell-growing medium. These data suggest that clavulanic acid penetrates
cells about 10 times more readily than tazobactam.

(a) Partial Raman spectra
of (A) freeze-dried E.
coli DH10B and (B) freeze-dried E.
coli DH10B mixed with 500 μg of clavulanic acid
and (C) the Raman difference spectrum (B minus A). (b) Reference curve
for freeze-dried mixtures of clavulanic acid with E.
coli DH10B cells (plotted as means with n = 3, error bars show ±SD).

Detection of Enamine Intermediates and Metabolic
Changes in Bacterial Cells Grown in the Presence of Clavulanic Acid
To capture the reaction intermediates formed in vivo, we used a
similar protocol. E. coli DH10B cells
containing one of the different β-lactamase enzymes [SHV-1,
SHV-1 E166A (a deacylation-deficient laboratory-constructed variant),
KPC-2, or KPC-2 E166A (a deacylation-deficient laboratory-constructed
variant)] encoded on a pBC SK phagemid were used (see  for details). The cells were grown in
the presence or absence of clavulanic acid (10 μg/mL) or tazobactam
(200 μg/mL), spun down, washed, and freeze-dried. A Raman microscope
was used to record their spectra, and difference spectra were obtained
by subtraction [(cells with drug) minus (cells without drug)].

Figure  shows Raman spectra of freeze-dried
cells containing the β-lactamase gene blaSHV-1 on a pBC SK (−) phagemid grown in the absence
or presence of clavulanic acid as an inhibitor of the SHV-1 β-lactamase
enzyme. Before the application of difference spectroscopy, the traces
in Figure  appear exactly identical. The signal-to-noise
ratio is approximately 55. Nearly all of the spectral features can
be assigned to modes from proteins, nucleic acids, and lipids. Assignments
of some of the main features are given in Figure .−

Raman spectra of freeze-dried E. coli DH10B cells producing SHV-1 enzyme in the absence (top)
or presence (bottom) of 10 μg/mL clavulanic acid. A, C, G, and
T stand for adenine, cytosine, guanine, and thymine, respectively.

Figure  shows a partial Raman difference
spectra of cells producing SHV-1 or KPC-2 enzyme after growing in
the presence of 10 μg/mL clavulanic acid, where the parent spectra
closely resemble those seen in Figure . In
Figure  (upper spectrum), the peak near 1613
cm–1 is assigned to a trans-enamine
mode resulting from formation of the SHV-1:clavulanic acid complex.
The reaction pathway inside bacterial cells is very similar to the
reaction between SHV-1 enzyme and clavulanic acid in solution after
several seconds since no imine feature (∼1660 cm–1) is present in the Raman difference spectrum. The precise enamine
vibrational frequency in the cell differs slightly from the aqueous
solution value. This could reflect the difference in environments,
as the solution spectra result from freeze-drying of dilute aqueous
solution whereas the whole-cell spectra result from freeze-drying
of the acyl–enzyme complex from a viscous solution in the periplasm.
Crucially, in cells producing the KPC-2 enzyme, we did not observe
any major feature near 1600 cm–1 in the Raman difference
spectrum (Figure , lower spectrum). This is
consistent with the notion that KPC-2 rapidly hydrolyzes the acyl–enzyme
complex formed from clavulanic acid and does not form a stable enamine.

Partial Raman difference spectra of E.
coli DH10B cells producing SHV-1 (top) or
KPC-2 (bottom) enzyme
after growing in the presence of 10 μg/mL clavulanic acid. *
indicates the trans-enamine peak.

In addition to the enamine signature region near
1600 cm–1 in Figure , there
are many other features
in the Raman difference spectra. They are not Raman features of the
enamine formed in the reaction or from unreacted clavulanic acid.
In Figure , Raman difference spectra of SHV-1
and KPC-2 cell samples show similar features in the region between
1200 and 1500 cm–1. These features are assigned
to fragments of cell wall, probably glycan, following partial cell
lysis in these samples. During centrifugation and washing of the cells,
insoluble components of the cell wall that are rich in glycan strands
remain in the pellet and produce these features in the Raman difference
spectra.

To estimate the enamine concentration inside bacterial
cells, we
measured the amount of SHV-1 or KPC-2 enzyme per cell by immunoblotting
(see ). Our data (see
Figure ) indicate that 17 ± 10 fg of
SHV-1 or 3 ± 0.7 fg of KPC-2 enzyme is present in each E. coli DH10B cell carrying the blaSHV-1 or blaKPC-2 plasmid,
respectively.

Quantification of the total amount of SHV-1 or KPC-2 per
bacterial
cell. (a) Western blot with anti-SHV-1 antibody and anti-DnaK antibody
(as a loading control) using lysed E. coli DH10B SHV-1 pBC SK (−) cells and known amounts of pure SHV-1.
(b) Western blot with anti-KPC-2 antibody and anti-DnaK antibody (as
a loading control) using lysed E. coli DH10B KPC-2 pBC SK (+) cells and known amounts of pure KPC-2.

In the next set of experiments,
cells producing SHV-1 E166A or
KPC-2 E166A enzyme were used. The glutamic acid to alanine mutation
renders both enzymes deacylation-deficient and should lead to the
formation of a long-lived acyl–enzyme intermediate in the reaction
with clavulanic acid. In addition, we
used cells lacking a β-lactamase gene as a control. Figure a,b shows that the Raman difference spectra of cells
producing the deacylation-deficient enzymes both display a peak near
1600 cm–1 that is assigned to the enamine intermediate.
The exact position (∼1599 cm–1) is 14 cm–1 lower than the corresponding band with wild-type
SHV-1 in the cell (Figure ). This difference
is similar to that for the trans-enamine formed in
the single crystal of SHV-1 (the 1613 cm–1 peak
in Figure S1 in the ) and SHV-1 E166A (1602 cm–1). The KPC-2 E166A variant enzyme also formed enamine intermediates
as predicted (Figure b). The very similar
features in the Raman difference spectra of SHV-1 E166A and KPC-2
E166A provide evidence for similar reactions between these enzymes
and clavulanic acid. In cells lacking β-lactamase (Figure c) there is only a weak feature at 1597 cm–1, which may be due to the reaction of clavulanic acid with PBPs., The peaks near 1690–1700 cm–1 in Figure a–c are assigned to unreacted clavulanic
acid inside cells. The band near 1638 cm–1 is not
definitively assigned but may result from changes in cell-wall synthesis
induced by clavulanic acid.

Raman difference spectra of E.
coli DH10B cells producing (a) SHV-1 E166A, (b) KPC-2
E166A, or (c) no
β-lactamase grown in the presence of 10 μg/mL clavulanic
acid and (d) cells without β-lactamase grown in the presence
of 10 μg/mL mecillinam. * in (a) and (b) denotes the trans-enamine peak. ▼ in (a), (b), and (c) denotes
the peak due to intact clavulanic acid.

In addition to the enamine and unreacted clavulanic acid
signatures
in the Raman difference spectra, it is proposed that the other features
are due primarily to the reaction of clavulanic acid in the cell-wall
synthesis pathways in a similar manner in all three cases. Many of
the negative features in the Raman difference spectra between 1200
and 1500 cm–1 (Figure )
can be assigned to peptidoglycans, suggesting that clavulanic acid
interferes with cell-wall synthesis. It has been reported that PBP2
is a major target of clavulanic acid, leading to a reduction of peptidoglycan
synthesis and a change in cell morphology where cells become spherical.− For comparison, cells without a β-lactamase gene were grown
in the presence of 10 μg/mL mecillinam, which is known to bind
PBP2 with a high affinity. The Raman
difference spectrum from this experiment is presented in Figure d. It is strikingly similar to those in Figure a–c, supporting the interference of clavulanic
acid with PBP2 activity.

In general, the Raman difference spectra
from different batches
of the same cell/compound, recorded on different dates, were highly
reproducible.

Detection of Enamine Intermediates
and Metabolic
Changes in Bacterial Cells Grown in the Presence of Tazobactam
Clavulanic acid was chosen for this study because this compound is
known to more readily enter the periplasmic space than other β-lactamase
inhibitors such as tazobactam. Still,
we found that useful results could be obtained by growing cells in
the presence of the latter at concentrations of 100–200 μg/mL.
The Raman difference spectrum from E. coli DH10B cells producing SHV-1 is shown in Figure . The presence of unreacted tazobactam is indicated by the
characteristic tazobactam peaks near 1785 cm–1 (C=O
mode of the lactam ring) and 627 cm–1 (C–S
mode). The peak for the enamine acyl–enzyme
complex at 1597 cm–1 is the same value as that for
the enamine in solution and single crystals., SHV-1 can be inhibited by tazobactam with much lower turnover number
(∼5) compared with clavulanic acid (∼40). Turnover number, put simply, is the number of
inhibitor molecules needed to block the enzyme. This predicts that
there will be a significant amount of intact inhibitor (tazobactam)
present in the periplasmic area of cells producing SHV-1 enzyme, which
is confirmed by the presence of the lactam C=O mode near 1785
cm–1 and the C–S mode at 627 cm–1.

Partial Raman difference spectrum of E. coli DH10B cells producing SHV-1 grown in the presence of 200 μg/mL
tazobactam. The peaks at 1789 and 627 cm–1 represent
unreacted tazobactam, and the peak at 1597 cm–1 is
assigned to enamine intermediates.

The overall Raman difference spectrum of cells containing
SHV-1
enzyme grown in the presence of tazobactam (Figure ) is remarkably similar to those seen in Figure a–c, which strongly indicates that tazobactam can inhibit
PBPs in a similar manner as clavulanic acid. In addition, a morphological study of cells grown in the presence
of tazobactam showed a loss of rod shape similar to the effects of
clavulanic acid (data not shown).

The strong parallel between
the results for clavulanic acid and
tazobactam provides additional evidence for the formation of enamine
species inside the cells and for the action of different inhibitors
on the same PBPs in the cell-wall synthesis pathway.

Discussion
We have shown that Raman microspectroscopy can be used to detect
both unreacted druglike molecules and the Raman signature of the corresponding
drug–target (acyl–enzyme) complex within whole bacterial
cells. In the case of bacterial cells, we selected strains that express
one of two β-lactamases (SHV-1 or KPC-2) or one of their variants,
each of which has different reaction profiles toward clavulanic acid
and tazobactam. Interestingly, enamine-like intermediates were detected
in the cells producing deacylation-deficient β-lactamases but
not in cells producing KPC-2 enzyme, which readily hydrolyzes clavulanic
acid. The results are summarized in Table . Expectations based on other parameters measured in vitro were also
met. To illustrate, cells producing SHV-1, an enzyme with a low turnover
number for clavulanate, also appeared to contain a population of enamine-like
acyl–enzyme complex. Overall, the in vitro properties of the
β-lactamases were predictive of their in vivo states, at least
in an E. coli experimental background.
More generally, our results provide a “proof of principle”
that Raman microspectroscopy is a viable and unique approach to characterize
specific enzyme properties in their highly complex and physiologically
relevant cellular habitat. Increasing sensitivity will result from
higher laser exposure time.

Summary of Corresponding
Raman Features
of Intermediates Formed by Reaction with Clavulanic Acid under Different
Reaction Conditions
 	wavenumber
(cm–1)	
substrate	trans-enamine O=C–C=C–NH– 	protonated
imine –C=NH+– 	
SHV-1 single crystal	1613	1654	
SHV-1 in solution	1605	small trace at 1654	
SHV-1 in E. coli DH10B	1613	no peak	
KPC-2 in E. coli DH10B	no peak	no peak	
SHV-1E166A single crystal	1602	no peak	
SHV-1E166A
in E. coli DH10B	1599	no peak	
KPC-2E166A in E. coli DH10B	1598	no
peak	
E. coli DH10B without β-lactamase gene	small trace at
1597	no peak	
The assignment of the enamine species inside the cells
is bolstered
by an in-depth Raman analysis of the reaction in single crystals and in solution. However, we are only beginning to assign features in the difference
spectra due to changes in cell component populations. It will be of
interest to expand the analyses by testing the effects of defined
mutations in metabolic pathways on the cellular Raman spectra. This,
and when possible the insertion of stable isotopes at key locations
in the cell, should enable the interpretation of whole-cell Raman
data with increasing certainty. Indeed, the protocol described here
should be readily adaptable to the study of metabolic changes at the
molecular level in other areas of cell biology.

An immediate
application stems from the demonstration that the
intensity of Raman peaks can be used to measure, at least at the semiquantitative
level, the concentration of inhibitor/antibiotic compounds entering
bacterial cells. We measured about 2.2 × 106 unreacted
clavulanic acid molecules per cell (see the ) compared with 3 × 105 molecules
of SHV-1 enzyme per cell as revealed by immunoblotting. We note that
this makes it the second-most-abundant protein in the cell next to
Braun’s lipoprotein. The slight excess of compound over enzyme
is confirmed by the results with tazobactam. In Figure  it appears that an enamine complex has been formed between
tazobactam and SHV-1. This is moderately stable since the turnover
number is about 5. Thus, in Figure  we see an excess of unreacted tazobactam coexisting
with the stable enamine. The similarity in the numbers of enzymes
and inhibitors explains why we can detect intermediates. It must be
emphasized that since we are not employing imaging as such, we are
measuring the total population of cell-associated species. We cannot
identify their location inside the cells. Obtaining a population estimate
of a compound inside cells by the Raman protocol is highly reproducible
and relatively facile. It does not require labeling or any cell treatment
apart from freeze-drying.

As new β-lactamase inhibitors
are being developed, we will
have an opportunity to study the in-cell reactions as inhibitors are
partnered with β-lactams. The reader must keep in mind that
we have intentionally chosen to initiate a study using two common
class-A β-lactamases (SHV and KPC) with compounds that inhibit
these enzymes but also mimic β-lactam substrates. Our choice
here was based upon our ability to interpret the reaction chemistry
in vivo. As we extend our studies to β-lactamases that defy
inhibition (class-D oxacarbapenemases, class-C cephalosporinases,
and even metallo-β-lactamase enzymes), we will enjoy the opportunity
to correlate the whole-cell inhibition chemistry with in vitro results.
These insights will add significantly to the knowledge available to
the medicinal chemist as both β-lactam-based and non-β-lactam-based
inhibitors or fragments are designed. Moreover, the reactions observed
at the cell-wall interface also have implications for host response.
Our approach opens up a “new window” in β-lactam
and β-lactamase inhibitor medicinal chemistry.

Supporting Information Available
Raman difference spectra
of
intermediates from clavulanic acid with an SHV-1 single crystal, Raman
spectra of unreacted clavulanic acid and tazobactam, details of sample
requirements, and calculation of clavulanic acid and tazobactam penetration
inside the bacterial cell. This material is available free of charge
via the Internet at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bi500529c_si_001.pdf

This work was
supported by NIH GM54072 to P.R.C. and NIH GM57059 to P.A.J.d.B. R.A.B.
acknowledges support from NIH under Awards R01AI072219, R01AI063517,
and R01AI100560 and by funds and/or facilities provided by the Louis
Stokes Cleveland Department of Veterans Affairs Medical Center and
the VISN 10 Geriatric Research, Education and Clinical Care Center
of the Department of Veterans Affairs.

The authors declare no
competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
We thank Dr. Brian
A. Cobb for the gift of polysaccharide
A from Bacteroides fragilis and Logan
Persons for technical assistance in bacterial microscopy.

