Nonenzymatic
protein glycation
results in the formation of advanced glycation end products (AGEs),
which comprise a structurally diverse class of post-translational
protein modifications., AGEs have been linked to complications
of diabetes, chronic inflammation, Alzheimer’s disease, and
cancer.− AGEs mediate their effects primarily through a receptor-dependent
pathway by binding to a specific cell surface receptor, the receptor
for AGEs (RAGE)., RAGE is a member of the immunoglobulin
(Ig) superfamily of cell surface receptors and consists of three extracellular
domains, V, C1, and C2, a transmembrane helix, and a short cytoplasmic
tail. RAGE is located in the major histocompatibility
complex class III (MHC III) region, suggesting its involvement in
immune responses.,

Methylglyoxal (2-oxoaldehyde)
is a reactive α-oxaldehyde
metabolite and precursor of AGEs. Glycation
by methylglyoxal affects mainly arginine and results in a loss of
positive charge via the formation of hydroimidazolones. Methylglyoxal-derived
hydroimidazolones (MG-H) form three structural isomers that are physiological
ligands of RAGE:− MG-H1 [Nδ-(5-hydro-5-methyl-4-imidazolon-2-yl)ornithine],
MG-H2 [5-(2-amino-5-hydro-5-methyl-4-imidazolon-1-yl)norvaline], and
MG-H3 [5-(2-amino-4-hydro-4-methyl-5-imidazolon-1-yl)norvaline]. The
concentration of methylglyoxal in human tissues and blood plasma can
reach relatively high levels, approximately 1–5 μM. Among reported arginine-derived AGEs, MG-Hs
are believed to be the most prevalent in humans, and at least one MG-H adduct is present on 3–13%
of the proteins found in the human body; furthermore, MG-H modifications comprise 1.3% by weight of the total
protein in heat-treated foods.

AGEs bind only to the V domain of RAGE., This
binding does not accelerate clearance or degradation but rather begins
a sustained period of cellular activation mediated by receptor-dependent
signaling that leads to inflammation. It is proposed that RAGE activation
is largely responsible for the pathogenicity associated with AGEs., Despite the fact that AGE–RAGE biology has been studied for
more than 20 years, very little is known about the structural biology
of AGE–RAGE complexes. This is mostly due to the extensive
heterogeneity of AGEs created by glycation reactions: Glycation reactions
are not largely dependent on sequence specificity, and lysine and
arginine residues, which are particularly susceptible to glycation,
are very common in proteins.

Recently, we and others have shown
that major free AGE adducts
of lysine, Nε-carboxymethyl-lysine
(CML) and Nε-carboxyethyl-lysine
(CEL), do not bind to RAGE, and the binding of
CML (CEL)-containing peptides to the V domain of RAGE is weak, in
the micromolar range. The solution structure
of the V domain–CEL peptide complex revealed a positively charged
pocket on the surface of the V domain that recognizes not only the
CEL side chain but also the peptide backbone, thus explaining the
puzzling lack of sequence specificity for CML (CEL) ligands of RAGE.

Here, we determined a solution structure
of an MG-H1–V domain
complex and structurally characterized an MG-H1-containing peptide–V
domain complex. MG-H1 binds to a molecular surface on the V domain
that is similar to that recognized by CML (CEL) peptides. In addition
to specific electrostatic contacts, the MG-H1 imidazolone ring tightly
fits into the V domain binding site. The structure suggests that MG-Hs,
as the most prevalent AGEs in humans, may contribute to ligand-induced
RAGE signaling.

Experimental Procedures
Reagents and Chemicals
Restriction enzymes and Taq polymerase were from
NEB. MG-H isomers, MG-H1, MG-H2,
MG-H3, and G-H1 were from PolyPeptide. Dulbecco’s modified
Eagle’s medium (DMEM), penicillin/streptomycin, and fetal bovine
serum (FBS) were purchased from Gibco-Life Technologies. The 4 to
12% bis-tris gels were from Novex-Life Technologies. Lipofectamine
was from Invitrogen-Life Technologies, RAGE si-RNA from Ambion, and
scramble si-RNA from Thermo Scientific. Phosphorylated and nonphosphorylated
Janus N-terminal kinase (p-JNK and JNK, respectively), glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate
dehydrogenase (GAPDH), and anti-mouse IgG (HRP) antibodies were purchased
from Cell Signaling. The RAGE antibody was from Millipore. The anti-RAGE
(A-9) antibody was from Santa Cruz Biotechnology, and HRP-conjugated
anti-rabbit IgG was from Promega. All other chemicals used were reagent
grade or better.

Solid Phase MG-H1 Peptide Synthesis
Peptides were synthesized
on a SYRO2000 multiple synthesizer (MultiSynTech GmbH, Witten, Germany)
employing 9-fluorenylmethoxycarbonyl/tert-butyl (Fmoc/tBu) chemistry on Wang resin., MG-H1 was
introduced as an Nα-allyloxycarbonyl
(Alloc)-protected ornithine derivative [Fmoc-Orn(Alloc)-OH]. After
the peptide synthesis had been completed, the Alloc group was cleaved
with tetrakis(triphenylphosphine)palladium(0) in the presence of N-methylmorpholine and MG-H1
was synthesized as described previously. Peptides were cleaved with TFA containing a 12.5% (v/v) scavenger
mixture (1:2:2:2 ethanedithiol/m-cresol/thioanisole/water
mixture) at room temperature for 2 h. The peptides were precipitated
with cold diethyl ether and purified by reverse phase high-performance
liquid chromatography (RP-HPLC) using a Jupiter C18 column
(21.2 mm internal diameter, 250 mm length, 15 μm particle size,
30 nm pore size) (Phenomenex Inc., Torrance, CA). The purities of
the peptides were confirmed by RP-HPLC and the molecular weights by
matrix-assisted laser desorption ionization time-of-flight mass spectrometry
(MALDI-TOF MS; 4700 proteomic analyzer from Applied Biosystems GmbH,
Darmstadt, Germany) using an α-cyano-4-hydroxycinnamic acid
matrix.

Plasmid Construction
Human RAGE cDNA library clone
BC020669 was obtained from Open Biosystems and used as a template
for polymerase chain reaction (PCR) amplifications. DNA encoding the
V domain (amino acids 24–125) was amplified via PCR using Taq
polymerase and oligonucleotides 5′-TTTCATATGGCTCAAAACATCACAGCCCGGATTGG-3′
and 5′-GTCTAAGGACCCTTCGGTCTTACTCAGCTGTTT-3′
containing flanking 5′-NdeI and 3′-SalI restriction sites. The restriction-digested PCR products
were ligated into expression vector pET28a (Novagen), which confers
kanamycin resistance. The resulting plasmid, pET28-V, expresses a
C-terminal His-tagged V domain of RAGE.

Site-Directed Mutagenesis
of the V Domain
To singly
mutate the V domain of RAGE, the QuikChange II XL Site-Directed Mutagenesis
Kit (Strategene) was used. Following mutagenic PCR, pET28-V was restriction
digested with DpnI for 1 h and transformed into Escherichia coli strain DH10B. Mutated plasmids were isolated
and purified using a Mini-Prep Kit (Qiagen). DNA sequencing identified
plasmids pET28-R98A-V and pET28-Q100A-V, which encode the appropriate
mutant V domain.

Labeling, Expression, and Purification of
Wild-Type and Mutant
V Domains
To uniformly label the V domain, pET28-V, pET28-R98A-V,
or pET28-Q100A-V was transformed into E. coli strain
BL21(DE3) Codon+ (Novagen). For uniformN labeling or uniform 13C and 15N labeling,
cells were grown at 37 °C in minimal medium (M9) containing 35
mg/L kanamycin, 4 g/L unlabeled dextrose or [U-13C]dextrose as the sole carbon source, and 1 g/L [U-15N]ammonium chloride as the sole nitrogen source. Cells were grown
to an A600 of 0.7 at 37 °C, induced
with 0.5 mM isopropyl 1-thio-β-d-galactopyranoside
(IPTG), and grown overnight. Cells were harvested and resuspended
in 20 mM Hepes-Na buffer (pH 7.0) containing 8 M urea and heat lysed
at 100 °C for 10 min. The lysate was centrifuged, and the supernatant
was loaded onto a nickel-nitrilo-triacetic acid-agarose (Ni-NTA) column
(Qiagen). The column was washed with 20 mM Hepes-Na buffer (pH 7.0),
and the protein was allowed to renature on the column before being
eluted with 20 mM Hepes-Na (pH 7.0) containing 500 mM imidazole. Fractions
containing the eluted protein were pooled and dialyzed into nuclear
magnetic resonance (NMR) buffer [10 mM sodium phosphate (pH 6.5),
100 mM NaCl, and 0.02% (w/v) NaN3]. The C-terminal His
tag of the V domain was cleaved by thrombin (Novagen) at room temperature
for 1 h before gel filtration chromatography on an SE-75 column (Amersham
Biosciences). The fractions containing the eluted protein were concentrated
by using Ultra-Centricones (Millipore). The purity was estimated to
be &gt;95% by Coomassie-stained sodium dodecyl sulfate–polyacrylamide
gel electrophoresis.

NMR Experiments
MG-H1-containing
peptide residues were
assigned by using two-dimensional 1H{1H} TOCSY
and 1H{1H} ROESY experiments, which provide through-bond and through-space proton connectivities.
Protein samples of [U-15N]V domain, with concentrations
ranging from 60 to 300 μM, were dissolved in NMR buffer, 10
μM potassium phosphate (pH 6.5), 100 mM NaCl, and 0.02% (w/v)
NaN3, in a 90% H2O/10% D2O mixture,
and unlabeled MG-H1 or an MG-H1-containing peptide, MG-H1-PEP, was
added to a 2-fold molar excess. To obtain backbone resonance assignments
of the [U-15N,13C]V domain–MG-H1
complex, standard triple-resonance HN(CA)CO, HNCO, HN(CO)CA, HNCA,
CBCA(CO)NH, and HNCACB spectra were recorded
at 298 K using an Avance Bruker spectrometer operating at a 1H frequency of 700 MHz equipped with a single Z-axis
gradient cryoprobe. To obtain the side chain resonance assignments
of the V domain bound to MG-H1, 1H{15N} HSQC
and CC(CO)NH, HCC(CO)NH, and three-dimensional (3D) 1H{15N} NOESY-HSQC experiments were
performed. To assign intra- and intermolecular nuclear Overhauser
effects (nOes), 3D 1H{15N} and 1H{13C} NOESY-HSQC experiments and 3D 15N-edited 13C-filtered
NOESY-HSQC experiments were performed
on samples containing 500 μM free [U-13C,15N]V domain and 500 μM [U-13C,15N]V domain with 1 mM unlabeled MG-H1. All spectra were processed
using TOPSPIN version 2.1 (Bruker), and assignments were made using
CARA.

Structure Calculation
Structural calculations were
conducted with Cyana 2.1 using 986 intramolecular
and five intermolecular distance restraints derived from 13C-edited NOESY and 15N-edited and 15N-edited 13C-filtered NOESY spectra, 150 pairs of backbone torsion angle
restraints derived from TALOS, 38 restraints
for hydrogen bonds, and the restraints from one disulfide bond between
Cys38 and Cys99. nOes were converted to upper limit distances using
the CALIBA module in CYANA. The reference
volume determined by CALIBA was increased 2 times before conversion
to loosen the distance restraints. All upper limit distances for intermolecular
nOes were set to 6 Å. The geometry of the unnatural amino acid
(R)-epimer of MG-H1 was added to the CYANA library.
These experimental restraints are summarized in Table S1 of the . To perform CYANA calculations,
a single polypeptide chain was constructed for the V domain and MG-H1
molecules.

For refinement, the CYANA-generated distance and
angle restraints were converted into CNS format in CCPN. The structure for the nonstandard amino acid
MG-H1 was generated and energy-minimized in PRODRG2. A total of 1000 structures were calculated, and the 200
lowest-energy structures were subjected to water refinement and further
analysis by PROCHECK_NMR; 80.5% of the
V domain residues were in the most favorable regions of the Ramachandran
plot, 18.2% in additional allowed regions, and 1.3% in generously
allowed regions. There were no residues in the disallowed regions.
The structural statistics of the 20 best structures are listed in
Table S1 of the .

Fluorescence Titration
Measurements were performed
on a Fluorolog-3 fluorescence spectrophotometer (HORIBA Jobin Yvon)
at 25 °C in a 1 mL stirred cuvette. For fluorescence titration
experiments, the V domain was dissolved in 10 mM phosphate buffer
(pH 6.5) and 100 mM NaCl at a concentration of 100 nM, and the concentration
of MG-Hs or MG-H1-containing peptides was increased from 5 nM to 10
μM in 11 steps using 1 mM stock solutions. Titrations in the
absence of the V domain and in the absence of MG-H ligands were performed
as references. The tryptophan fluorescence was measured using an excitation
wavelength of 295 nm. The fluorescence emission signal was subtracted
from the signal of the reference titrations, and the differences adjusted
by the dilution factor were plotted against the final concentration
of added MG-H molecules or MG-H1-containing peptides. Curve fitting
(OriginLab) was performed to find the best values for Kd using a single-site binding isotherm approximation.

Enzyme-Linked Immunosorbent Assay (ELISA)
The binding
affinity of the V domain for methylglyoxal-modified bovine serum albumin
(MGO-BSA) was determined using an ELISA. MGO-BSA was prepared according
to the method of Ahmed et al. Ninety-six-well
plates (Falcon ProBind, Becton Dickinson) were first coated with MGO-BSA
at a level of 500 ng/well in 0.1 M sodium carbonate buffer (pH 9.6)
and incubated overnight at 4 °C. The wells were blocked with
1% BSA (Fraction V, Calbiochem) in wash buffer, 10 mM potassium phosphate
(pH 6.5), and 100 mM NaCl and incubated at room temperature for 2
h. The purified V domain, at concentrations ranging up to 10 μM
in wash buffer, was added to the wells and incubated at room temperature
for 2 h. Anti-RAGE (A-9), a mouse monoclonal antibody that recognizes
residues 23–43 at the N-terminus of RAGE, was diluted 1:100
in wash buffer containing 1% BSA, added to each well, and incubated
overnight at 4 °C. The secondary antibody, anti-mouse IgG (HRP),
was diluted 1:1000 in wash buffer containing 1% BSA, added to each
well, and incubated at room temperature for 2 h. After the addition
of a chromogenic 3,3′,5,5′-tetramethylbenzidine, TMB,
substrate solution (Thermo Scientific), plates were read on a scanner.
All washes were performed three to five times. Data were analyzed
by using GraphPad Prism version 5.

MGO-BSA, the purified V domain,
and MG-Hs (PolyPeptide) were used in ELISA-based competition experiments.
Ninety-six-well plates were first coated with MGO-BSA at a level of
500 ng/well in 0.1 M sodium carbonate buffer (pH 9.6) and incubated
overnight at 4 °C. The wells were blocked with wash buffer containing
1% BSA and incubated at room temperature for 2 h. MG-Hs, at concentrations
of up to 1 mM, mixed with 1 μM V domain dissolved in wash buffer,
were added to the wells and incubated at room temperature for 2 h.
Anti-RAGE (A-9) was diluted 1:100 in wash buffer containing 1% BSA,
added to each well, and incubated overnight at 4 °C. A secondary
antibody, anti-mouse IgG (HRP) (Cell Signaling), was diluted 1:1000
in wash buffer containing 1% BSA, added to each well, and incubated
for 2 h at room temperature. After the addition of a chromogenic TMB
substrate solution, plates were read on a scanner. All washes were
performed three to five times. Data were analyzed by using GraphPad
Prism version 5.

Cell Lines and Materials
Human alveolar
epithelial
cells, A549, were maintained in DMEM supplemented with 10% fetal bovine
serum (FBS) and 1% penicillin/streptomycin in a 5% CO2 incubator
at 37 °C. For experiments, cells were plated at a density of
1 × 105 cells/mL in 60 mm dishes. Cells were serum-starved
overnight after they had reached 70–80% confluence, treated
the next day with 12 μg/mL BSA and MGO-BSA for 7 min, and used
in Western blot analyses.

Western Blot Analyses
Cells were
lysed, and total cellular
lysates were immunoblotted and probed with p-JNK (Thr183/Tyr185)/JNK,
RAGE, and GAPDH antibodies. Briefly, ∼40 μg of proteins
from cell lysates were denatured and resolved on 4 to 12% bis-tris
gels and transferred onto nitrocellulose membranes. Membranes were
blocked by using 5% nonfat dry milk and incubated with primary antibodies,
p-JNK/JNK, RAGE, and GAPDH. HRP-conjugated anti-rabbit IgG was used
to identify sites of primary antibody binding. Membranes were stripped
of bound primary antibodies and reprobed with the GAPDH antibody as
a loading control.

Si-RNA Transfection
Si-RNA transfection
was performed
according to the manufacturer’s protocol. A549 cells were transfected
with 150 pM RAGE si-RNA using lipofectamine. After incubation for
6 h, transfection medium was replaced with fresh DMEM containing 10%
FBS. Transfected cells were serum-starved, incubated with 12 μg/mL
BSA or MGO-BSA for 7 min, and used in Western blot analyses.

Results
To prove that methylglyoxal-modified proteins, which contain hydroimidozolones,
are RAGE ligands, we monitored the phosphorylation of JNK, an effector
of RAGE signaling, in response to RAGE activation by MGO-BSA in human
alveolar epithelial cells, A549 (Figure ).
Incubating A549 cells with 200 nM MGO-BSA results in an increase in
the level of phosphorylation of JNK as compared to that of A549 treated
with unmodified BSA (Figure A). To verify
that this effect is specific to RAGE signaling, we decreased the level
of RAGE expression in A549 cells by using RAGE si-RNA. Phosphorylation
of JNK in response to MGO-BSA was decreased in A549 cells transfected
with RAGE si-RNA compared to that of A549 cells transfected with scrambled
si-RNA (Figure B,C). MGO-BSA binds to the
V domain (Figure D), and methylglyoxal-derived
hydroimidazolones, MG-H1, MG-H2, and MG-H3, can successfully block
binding of MGO-BSA to the V domain (Figure E). We concluded that methylglyoxal-modified proteins are indeed
RAGE ligands.

Methylglyoxal-modified proteins are RAGE ligands. (A)
In the top
panel, MGO-BSA-stimulated activation of RAGE increases JNK phosphorylation
(p-JNK) relative to that with BSA alone in human alveolar epithelial
cells, A549. The bottom panel shows the JNK loading control. (B) In
the top panel, decreasing the level of RAGE expression by adding RAGE
si-RNA reduces MGO-BSA-stimulated activation of pJNK relative to nonspecific
scramble si-RNA in A549 cells. The bottom panel is the JNK loading
control. (C) RAGE si-RNA specifically reduces RAGE overexpression
in A549 cells relative to scramble si-RNA. The bottom panel is the
GAPDH loading control. (D) MGO-BSA binds to the V domain. MG-H1, MG-H2,
and MG-H3 (left to right, respectively) compete with MGO-BSA for the
V domain in ELISAs. Kd, R2, and IC50 are the dissociation constant,
Pearson’s correlation coefficient, and the half-maximal inhibitory
concentration, respectively. (E) Before MG-H1.

The MG-Hs used in this work are a series of methylglyoxal-modified
arginines, composed of a racemic mixture of (R)-
and (S)-epimers of three isomers, MG-H1, MG-H2, and
MG-H3, each of which contains an imidazolone ring with a methyl group
at a different site (Figure ). To investigate the interaction between MG-Hs
and the V domain of RAGE, we synthesized short peptides containing
MG-H1 (Figure S1 of the ). The amino acid sequences of the peptides represent the primary
glycation sites found in human serum albumin, a major plasma protein.

Synthesis
and structure of arginine-derived AGEs MG-H1 [Nδ-(5-hydro-5-methyl-4-imidazolon-2-yl)ornithine],
MG-H2 [5-(2-amino-5-hydro-5-methyl-4-imidazolon-1-yl)norvaline], and
MG-H3 [5-(2-amino-4-hydro-4-methyl-5-imidazolon-1-yl)norvaline]. Only
(R)-epimers of hydroimidazolones are shown.

Free MG-Hs bind to the V domain
of RAGE, unlike ε-amino group-modified
lysines, CML and CEL. The binding affinities
were estimated by monitoring changes in the native tryptophan fluorescence
of the V domain upon titration with MG-Hs (Table  and Figure S2 of the ). The three MG-H isomers bind to the V domain with similar affinities,
indicating that RAGE does not discriminate between MG-Hs or specifically
recognize MG-Hs based on the location of the methyl group. This was
confirmed by examining the binding of G-H1 [Nδ-(5- hydro-4-imidazolon-2-yl)ornithine], which lacks
a methyl group on the imidazolone ring; the affinity of G-H1 for the
V domain is comparable to that of the MG-Hs (Table ). MG-H1 peptides also bind to the V domain with an affinity
similar to that of isolated MG-Hs, implying that the MG-H moiety is
the key recognition element and defines the major molecular binding
surface on the V domain.

Binding Affinities
of Hydroimidazolones
and Hydroimidazolone-Containing Peptides for Wild-Type and Mutant
V Domains
molecule	V domain Kd (nM)	Q100A V domain Kd (nM)	R98A V domain Kd (nM)	
MG-H1	40 ± 5	&gt;10000	&gt;10000	
MG-H2	44 ± 5	–	–	
MG-H3	31 ± 5	–	–	
G-H1	43 ± 7	–	–	
LSQ(MG-H1)FPKAE	35 ± 4	–	–	
ALT(MG-H1)EYTG	44 ± 6	–	–	
The dissociation constant was obtained
by fitting fluoresceence titration data with a single-site binding
isotherm.

Chemical shift
perturbation and changes in the intensities of NMR
resonances upon ligand binding can be used to identify amino acid
residues of the V domain that are affected by the binding of MG-H1 (Figure  and Figure
S3 of the ). Titrating
the 15N-labeled V domain with free MG-H1 results in changes
in the chemical shifts of residues I26, V35, E50, L53, N81, V89, Q100,
and G106, and the most significant changes in intensity for residues
S22, V35, K52, S74, R98, and V117 (Figure S3B of the ). We also titrated the 15N-labeled V domain with a peptide in which MG-H1 is inserted between
amino acids glutamine and phenylalanine, LSQ(MG-H1)FPKAE. Because
of the extra amino acids, the peptide structure contributes an interaction
surface area larger than that of free MG-H1. The changes in the chemical
shifts of residues G31, C38, K52, T55, F85, D93, F97, R98, C99, M102,
and K110 and changes in intensity for residues A41, G56, L64, K110,
and Y113 delineate the interaction surface between the peptide and
the V domain (Figure S3C of the ). Two key residues, K52 and R98, as well as the surrounding area
of the V domain, composed of residues E50, L53, C99, Q100, M102, and
K110, are affected by both free MG-H1 and the MG-H1-containing peptide
(Figure A,B).

RAGE V domain does not discriminate between
MG-H1 and MG-H1 embedded
within the peptide sequence LSQ(MG-H1)FPKAE. (A) Overlay of 15N HSQC spectra of the free (black) and MG-H1 bound (red) V domain.
(B) Overlay of 15N HSQC spectra of the free (black) and
LSQ(MG-H1)FPKAE peptide-bound (red) V domain.

To elucidate the chemical nature of the interaction between
the
V domain and MG-Hs, we determined the solution structure of the V
domain (residues 23–123 of the 356-residue RAGE) in complex
with MG-H1. Only the (R)-epimer of MG-H1 can be fit
into the MG-H1–V domain binding site, implying stereospecific
recognition of MG-H1. The structured regions comprised residues 23–92
of the V domain and the MG-H1 ligand. On the basis of the constraints
obtained from NMR experiments, 20 structures with the lowest target
function values were superimposed (Figure  and Table S1 of the ). The solution structure of the V domain–MG-H1 complex is
similar to that of the free V domain and
of the V domain within VC1. The root-mean-square
(rms) deviations between the solution structure of the MG-H1-bound
V domain and the free V domain (PDB entry 2E5E) or the V domain within VC1 (PDB entry 3CJJ) are 2.0 and 2.1
Å for the backbone and 2.0 and 2.9 Å for all heavy atoms
(carbon atoms) in the ordered regions. At the binding site, the rms deviation between the solution structure
of the MG-H1-bound V domain and the free V domain is 0.98 Å for
the backbone and 2.39 Å for all heavy atoms (carbon atoms).

Stereo
overlay of the 20 lowest-energy MG-H1–V domain complex
backbone traces. The Ramachandran plot shows 84.4% of the residues
in the most favored regions, 14% of the residues in additional allowed
regions, and only 1.6% of the residues in generously allowed regions.
The rms deviations of the solution structure of the V domain (PDB
entry 3CJJ)
and MG-H1 are 0.84 and 0.72 Å for the backbone and 1.7 and 0.7
Å for all heavy atoms. The N- and C-termini of the V domain and
MG-H1 are indicated. The figure was prepared by using SwissPDB.

The solution structure of the
MG-H1–V domain complex is
shown in Figure . The MG-H1 binding site is
small, spanning 80 Å2, and fits well into a groove
formed by strands C, F, and G; side chain interactions provide additional
stability for MG-H1 binding. Importantly, the methyl group of MG-H1
imidazolone is oriented away from the binding site, suggesting that
this group does not contribute to the binding free energy. As a result,
any (R)-epimer of MG-H can bind to the RAGE V domain
with high affinity at the same binding site despite the different
locations of the methyl group on the imidazolone ring.

Solution structure of
the MG-H1–V domain complex. (A) Structure
of MG-H1 (balls and sticks) bound to the V domain (ribbon representation).
Secondary structural elements are labeled following the immunoglobulin
convention., (B) Residues surrounding the
interaction surface between MG-H1 and the V domain. (C and D) Electrostatic
potential surface of the V domain (C) and a close-up showing dipole–dipole
forces (D). MG-H1 fits well into a groove composed of K52, R98, Q100,
and K110 on the V domain. Positively and negatively charged surfaces
are colored blue and red, respectively. The red arrow represents a
dipole of the MG-H1 molecule, and yellow arrows represent environmental
dipoles on the V domain surface. Both shape complementarity and dipole–dipole
forces contribute to the stabilization of the MG-H1–V domain
complex.,

We detected an extended network of nOes confidently placing
the
small MG-H1 into the groove by this cluster (Table S2 of the ). The electrostatic potential
surface of the V domain is shown in Figure C. Three positively charged amino acids, K52, R98, and K110, are
localized on the surface of the V domain, with two nearby negatively
charged residues, E50 and E108, suggesting strong charge–dipole
and dipole–dipole interactions (Figure D). The amine hydrogen and the carbonyl group of MG-H also create
a molecular dipole that aligns well with the surface charges in the
MG-H binding site on the V domain (Figure D).

To further examine the role of residues
that are involved in MG-H1
binding, we made single R98A and Q100A mutants of the V domain to
perturb the protein–ligand electrostatic interaction. Indeed,
the affinities of MG-H1 for the mutant V domains are greater than
10 μM, much weaker than for the wild-type V domain (Table  and Figure S2 of the ). The results are consistent with R98 and Q100
being critical for MG-H1 binding.

AGEs recognize the V domain
through a specific binding pattern,
as do a large number of RAGE activation ligands. Despite the difference in conformation between MG-H1 and
CML (CEL)-PEP, the two ligands share a similar binding surface. Because
it is the MG-H1 moiety specifically that binds to the V domain, MG-H1-containing
peptides or proteins, which have different secondary and tertiary
structures, exhibit similar binding affinities and binding surfaces.
As a result, MG-H1 is an essential structure for AGE-induced RAGE
signal transduction.

Discussion
Many functionally and
structurally different AGEs are observed
under various physiological and pathological conditions, but the interactions
with RAGE of only a few have been quantitatively studied. Methylglyoxal-derived
hydroimidazolones, such as CML, CEL, and MGHs, are the predominant
AGE modifications found in vivo. A previous study of the CEL-PEP–V domain complex
revealed that CML (CEL)-modified proteins bind to RAGE even when the
ligand modification site possesses very different primary, secondary,
and tertiary structures. In these cases,
the V domain makes molecular contacts with both the CEL (CML) moiety
and the peptide backbone in the immediate vicinity of CEL (CML). Here
we establish a model of a RAGE ligand–V domain complex in which
the V domain specifically recognizes the MG-H1 moiety instead of the
residues surrounding the modified site.

The positively charged
cavity on the V domain, consisting of residues
K52, R98, and K110, together with E50 and E108, presents a favorable
polar environment for MG-H1 to bind (Figure D). The binding energy results from the tight fit between the imidazolone
ring and the V domain binding site and also from charge–dipole
and dipole–dipole interactions between the ligand and the protein., Because the peptide backbone of MG-H1-containing peptides is not
involved in binding to the V domain, the binding does not depend on
the primary, secondary, or tertiary structure of the MG-H1-modified
protein. This explains why various MG-H-modified proteins found in
tissue and plasma can bind to RAGE and is consistent with RAGE acting
as a pattern recognition receptor., The geometry
of MG-H1 is critical for molecular recognition, as only the (R)-epimer of MG-H1 can fit into the V domain binding site.
The short bent conformation allows the MG-H1 structure to fit well
inside a small area, and the methyl group does not interfere with
the interaction between the MG-H isomer and the V domain.

An
important question is whether the precursor of MG-H1, arginine,
can fit into the MG-H1 binding groove and therefore possibly compete
with MG-H1-containing ligands for the V domain, thus activating RAGE
signaling. MG-H1 binds to the V domain in a compact and bent conformation
that allows for a fit better than that afforded by the arginine side
chain and facilitates van der Waals interactions that stabilize the
MG-H1–V domain complex. Importantly, the affinity of arginine
for the MG-H1 binding site on the V domain is expected to be very
low because of its positive charge. Indeed, we did not detect any
binding of arginine to the V domain.

MG-Hs contribute to various
disease states such as diabetes,, cancer, cardiovascular disease, and renal failure by interacting with
RAGE. In contrast to CML (CEL)-modified proteins, which are present at submicromolar concentrations
in human plasma and bind with micromolar affinity, MG-Hs and MG-H-modified
proteins are present at micromolar concentrations and bind to the
V domain with nanomolar affinity. Because RAGE forms dimers and higher-order
oligomers,, polyvalent engagement of MG-H
proteins by RAGE results in tight binding and triggers RAGE-dependent
signaling., Overall, these observations suggest
an important role for MG-H modifications in the physiology and pathology
of disease states.

Supporting Information Available
Synthetic MG-H1 peptide, LSQ(MG-H1)FPKAE,
that contains the correct chemical structure of methylglyoxal-derived
hydroimidazolone isomer (Figure S1), binding of MG-H-containing peptides
to the V domain (Figure S2), interaction surface between MG-H1 and
MG-H1-containing peptides and the V domain (Figure S3), intermolecular
nOEs establishing the MG-H1–V domain binding mode (Figure S4),
NMR and refinement statistics for the MG-H1–V domain complex
(Table S1), and intermolecular NOE distance constraints used to model
the MG-H1–V domain complex (Table S2). This material is available
free of charge via the Internet at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bi500046t_si_001.pdf

The authors declare no
competing financial interest.

