All cells depend upon ion channels
to conduct ions across the cell membrane under specific conditions
to shape their electrical behavior. Voltage-gated potassium (Kv) channels
play crucial roles in physiological processes such as neuronal excitation
and muscle contraction. Kv channels open in response to changes in
the membrane potential by coupling four voltage-sensing domains (VSDs)
to a central pore domain. In canonical, depolarization-activated Kv
channels, the movement of the S4 helix of the VSD toward the extracellular
side of the membrane during depolarization causes the pore domain
to open and allows ion permeation.− Current structural and
biochemical evidence from depolarization-activated channels supports
the view that the S4–S5 linker couples the VSD and pore domains
by acting as a rigid helical lever to hold the pore closed or open
at hyperpolarizing potentials., However, this mechanism
fails to explain coupling in hyperpolarization-activated channels:
despite conserving the molecular architecture of the Kv superfamily,
they open when canonical family members are closed and close when
canonical family members are open (Figure A,B). The mechanism of this inverse coupling has remained elusive
in the absence of structural data. To open up new opportunities for
structural and biophysical studies of this family, we have developed
a biochemical preparation of an archaeal hyperpolarization-activated
potassium channel from Methanococcus jannaschii,
MVP.,

MVP poses an interesting case study
for coupling between the VSD
and the pore domain. MVP opens in response to hyperpolarization with
half-maximal activation at −175 ± 33 mV and an apparent
gating charge of 1.1 e() (Figure C). The VSD of MVP has the same
orientation and senses changes in the polarity of the membrane potential
in the same manner as canonical Kv channels, an important difference
being that the MVP opens when the S4 helix moves downward (toward
the intracellular side) and closes when the S4 helix moves upward
(toward the extracellular side). The same observations have been made
for the VSDs of the hyperpolarization-activated cyclic nucleotide-binding
(HCN) channels and hyperpolarization-activated channels from plants,,− suggesting that the key explanation for their reversed
voltage sensitivity resides in an inverted coupling between the VSD
and pore domains. Great strides toward understanding gating in HCNs
have been made by expressing and characterizing HCN channels in oocytes
or mammalian expression systems for electrophysiological studies.
However, constraints on expression systems have limited structural
studies to the isolatable and soluble cyclic nucleotide-binding domain
(CNBD) located at the HCN C-terminus.

Canonical
Kv and HCN channels share a common VSD and pore domain
but are coupled inversely. (A) Schematic showing the shared domains
of the voltage-gated ion channel family. (B) Hyperpolarization-activated
channels exhibit inverse gating with respect to depolarization-activated
channels: they are activated and open at hyperpolarizing potentials,
when the conserved voltage sensor is in the down state. (C) GV curves
displaying the voltage dependence of a hyperpolarization-activated
channel (MVP) and a depolarization-activated channel (Shaker). The curves represent Boltzman fits to experimental data for MVP
and Shaker.

Because of its relative structural simplicity and its prokaryotic
origin, MVP exemplifies a minimalistic model for hyperpolarization-activated
channels and is likely to be more amenable to spectroscopic and crystallographic
studies than eukaryotic HCN channels. Like HCN channels, MVP is activated
at hyperpolarizing voltages of less than −100 mV on a slower
(0.2–2 s) time scale., The moderate voltage
dependence of MVP more closely resembles the equivalent of 4–6 e in HCNs than the 13 e for the highly
voltage-dependent Shaker K+ channel. There
are a few critical differences between HCN channels and MVP. Unlike
the HCN channels, MVP does not have a CNBD, and cyclic nucleotides
do not modify its gating behavior or conductance. This is an important difference because both voltage and
cyclic nucleotides activate HCNs and
the C-linker between the pore domain and the CNBD appears to make
important functional contacts to the linker between the VSD and pore
domain., Moreover, MVP appears to exhibit a higher
degree of sequence similarity to members of the Kv2 family, rather
than the Kv10–12/HCN cluster. These observations suggest that
MVP is a closer relative of the more thoroughly characterized Kv channels,
such as Shaker, than the HCN channels and may serve
as an important model system for improving our understanding of the
mechanistic basis for electromechanical coupling between the VSD and
pore domain.

In the interest of pursuing MVP as target for structural
and biophysical
studies, we have conducted an initial structural investigation of
the activation gate in MVP using site-directed spin labeling and electron
paramagnetic resonance (EPR) spectroscopy. A codon-optimized WT MVP
construct is purified as a monodisperse peak via gel filtration chromatography
and is stable in maltosides (DDM and DM) for weeks. Patch recordings
of reconstituted MVP demonstrate kinetics and voltage dependence similar
to those described in previous reports of exogenously expressed protein
in yeast. EPR measurements of the S6 helix
demonstrate that reconstituted MVP is spectroscopically well behaved
and that the pore domain is in the closed conformation at 0 mV, as
expected for a hyperpolarization-activated channel. The availability
of this stable, strongly expressing target will finally allow biochemical
inroads into the molecular mechanism of inverse coupling and an understanding
of electromechanical coupling in general.

Experimental Procedures
Molecular
Biology and Expression Test
The DNA encoding
the codon-optimized synthetic gene sequence of MVP (MVP-s) was generously
donated by S. Goldstein. In this synthetic construct, the native amino
acid sequence is maintained while 62 of 209 archaeal codons are altered. The gene was amplified by polymerase chain reaction
(PCR) and cloned into pQE-32 (Qiagen), pQE-60, pGEX-6p-1 (GE Healthcare),
pET15b (Novagen), and pET28. For expression tests, MVP-s constructs
were transformed into fresh Escherichia coli competent
cells and grown overnight in LB medium supplemented with 200 μg/mL
AMP and 1% glucose at 37 °C for 12–16 h. Tested E. coli strains included XL1-Blue, XL10-Gold, M15, BL21(DE3)pLysS,
Rosetta(DE3)pLysS, and Bowie strains 1 and 5 generously provided by
R. Nakamoto. The saturated overnight cultures were diluted 100-fold
into LB medium with 1% glucose and grown at 37 °C to an OD600 of 0.8. The cells were then induced with 1 mM IPTG (Anatrace),
and samples of the cultures were taken as they expressed MVP over
time. Cell samples were normalized to the amount of cells in the preinduction
sample and spun down. Pellets were resuspended in SDS loading dye
and broken up by shear force using a syringe fitted with a 30 gauge
needle. SDS-solubilized cell samples were loaded for sodium dodecyl
sulfate–polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS–PAGE)
and developed for Western blotting. The penta-His antibody (Qiagen)
was used as the primary antibody for pET28 and pQE-60, the RGS-His
antibody (Qiagen) for pQE-32, and a GST antibody (GE Healthcare) for
pGEX-6p-1. In all cases, the secondary antibody was anti-mouse Alexa
Fluor 647, followed by detection on an Odyssey Infrared Imaging System
(LI-COR). Expression levels were compared roughly by intensities from
Western blots. Initial expression conditions were further optimized
for E. coli strain temperature, IPTG amount, and
expression time, following the procedures described above.

The
two native cysteine residues at positions 136 and 141 were mutated
to serine by site-directed mutagenesis methods using standard procedures
to produce cysteine-less MVP-s. This construct was then used as a
template to generate single-cysteine mutants for fluorescence and
EPR studies.

Detergent Screen
Fresh XL10 competent
cells were transformed
with MVP-s/pQE-60 and grown in XL10-Gold cells following the methods
described for expression tests. The membrane fraction from a large-scale
expression was resuspended in buffer A [150 mM KCl and 50 mM Tris
(pH 8)] with protease inhibitor phenylmethanesulfonyl fluoride (PMSF,
1 mM) and homogenized. The membranes were pelleted at 100000g for 35 min, and the pellet was resuspended in buffer A
and divided into eight aliquots. The eight detergents were individually
added at 10 times their critical micellar concentration and incubated
at room temperature, rotating, for 2 h. The samples were then spun
down at 100000g for 35 min, and the supernatant was
subjected to SDS–PAGE and Western blot analysis as described
for expression tests.

Purification
Fresh BL21(DE3)pLysS
competent cells were
transformed with MVP-s/pET15b and grown overnight in LB with 1% glucose
and 200 μg/mL ampicillin. Overnight cultures were diluted 100-fold
in TB medium with 1% glucose and 200 μg/mL ampicillin. Cells
were grown for 2.5–3 h to an OD600 of 0.5–0.6
and shifted to 30 °C. When the OD600 reached 0.8–0.9,
the cells were induced with 0.5 mM IPTG. After growing for 5 h at
30 °C, cells were harvested and lysed in buffer A [150 mM KCl
and 50 mM Tris (pH 8)] with protease inhibitors phenylmethanesulfonyl
fluoride (1 mM), leupeptin (1 μg/mL), pepstatin (0.1 μg/mL),
and aprotinin (1 μg/mL). DNase (0.1 mg/mL) and MgCl2 (5 mM) were added to aid homogenization. The mixture was homogenized
and spun down at 100000g for 35–60 min. MVP
was extracted from the membrane pellet with DDM [6–9 mM, n-dodecyl β-d-maltopyranoside (Anatrace)]
at room temperature for 1–2 h in buffer A with 1 mM PMSF. The
extraction mixture was incubated with Talon Co2+ affinity
resin for 30 min. The resin was collected in a plastic column and
washed (buffer A with 15 mM imidazole), and the protein was eluted
from the resin (buffer A with 400 mM imidazole and 1 mM DDM). The
protein was further purified over a Sephadex-200 HR 10/30 size-exclusion
column (GE Healthcare) in an AKTA FPLC system in buffer A with 0.5
mM DDM.

Protein Characterization
The stability of MVP in various
detergents was analyzed by exchanging purified MVP with detergents
DM, OG, Anzergent 3-14, LDAO, and Foscholine-14. The Superdex 200
HR 10/30 column was individually pre-equilibrated with various detergents,
and roughly 100 μg of purified MVP-s was loaded. The elution
profile was then evaluated for maintenance of the tetramer peak. Detergents
in which MVP-s continued to appear as a monodisperse peak were reinjected,
and the elution profile was reevaluated.

The molecular mass
and homogeneity of MVP-s–detergent complexes were determined
by multiple-angle light scattering (MALS) methods. An AKTA FPLC system
equipped with a Superdex 200 HR 10/30 size-exclusion column was coupled
to a MALS system with a flow cell. Light scattering was detected with
a HELEOS system (Wyatt Technology Corp.) equipped with a 60 mW GaAs
laser at 658 nm and 18 detectors at angles from 22.5° to 147.0°.
The refractive index was determined from an Opilab rEX unit (Wyatt
Technology Corp.). The UV absorbance was measured at 280 nm by the
detector from the AKTA system (GE Healthcare) and converted to analog
between 0 and 1 V in the HELEOS system. Data were acquired and analyzed
using the ASTRA software package (Wyatt Technology Corp.). Both the
molecular mass of the protein–detergent complex and the protein
content of the complex were analyzed for the peak of interest by the
system template Protein Conjugate of ASTRA.

Mutagenesis and Labeling
Cysteine mutants of MVP were
grown and purified as described for the wild type (WT) with the addition
of 5 mM BME to the lysis and extraction mixtures, and the addition
of 0.5 mM TCEP [tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine hydrochloride] to the
washing buffer and 0.1 mM TCEP to the elution buffer for cobalt column
purification. After cobalt affinity purification, they were labeled
with either fluorescein 5-maleimide methyl and tetramethylrhodamine
5-maleimide for fluorescence experiments or methanethiosulfonate spin
probe [1-oxyl-2,2,5,5-tetramethylpyrrolidin-3-yl (Toronto Research)]
for EPR spectroscopy. We labeled the MVP by adding a label to the
sample at a 10:1 (label:channel) molar ratio, incubating the reaction
mixture on ice for 30 min, adding an additional equal amount to the
reaction mixture, and incubating the reaction mixture on ice for at
least 30 min again. For fluorescent labels, the sample was incubated
instead at room temperature, rotating, for 1 h. The reaction was then
quenched with cysteine (10-fold molar excess) and labeled MVP separated
from free spin-label or fluorescent label by purification over a PD-10
desalting column (GE Healthcare). Less stable mutants were purified
over a Sephadex-200 size-exclusion column in buffer A with 0.5 mM
DDM to isolate the tetrameric form.

Fluorescence Spectroscopy
MVP K4C (C136S/C141S) was
purified and individually labeled with either fluorescein 5-maleimide
(excitationmax = 494 nm; emissionmax = 518 nm)
or tetramethylrhodamine 5-maleimide (excitationmax = 544
nm; emissionmax = 572 nm) fluorescent dye. The individually
labeled MVP K4C was mixed at a 1:1 donor:acceptor ratio and reconstituted
into liposomes of asolectin, E. coli extract, or
POPC and POPG (3:1). Liposomes were prepared from stock lipids in
chloroform following standard protocols: lipids in chloroform were
dried on rotovap for 30–60 min, dried under N2 for
30 min, and diluted to 10 mg/mL with buffer A before being sonicated
in a water bath. Concentrated MVP samples were diluted in buffer A
with 0.36 mM DDM (2 times the CMC) and added to an equal volume of
10 mg/mL liposomes. The mixture was allowed to incubate at room temperature
for 1 h, rotating, before being diluted to 10 mL with buffer A. Detergent
was removed by adding Bio-Beads SM-2 Adsorbants (Bio-Rad) and allowing
the mixture to incubate overnight. Liposomes were collected by spinning
down the mixture at 60000 rpm. The degree of aggregation of MVP was
determined by an established fluorescence energy transfer method.− The fluorescence emission was recorded from 500 to 700 nm upon excitation
at 494 nm in a PTI fluorimeter (PTI Technology). The relative FRET
intensity in the 570–580 nm range was used as an indicator
of the proximity of the donor and acceptor and, by extension, the
relative aggregation level of MVP tetramers. Lipid compositions, protein:lipid
ratios, and the stability versus time were tested and optimized for
minimal FRET values.

Patch-Clamp and Single-Channel Recordings
Electrophysiological
measurements of proteoliposomes were made using the patch-clamp method
as previously described. MVP-n and MVP-s
were reconstituted into asolectin vesicles at channel:lipid molar
ratios of 1:100000 to 1:10000 to obtain recordings suitable for single-channel
analysis using the procedure described for fluorescence spectroscopy.
The proteoliposomes were spun down at 60000 rpm for 1 h and resuspended
in 120 μL of 5 mM MOPS (pH 7) and 150 mM KCl. The resuspended
proteoliposomes were dried overnight at 4 °C under vacuum and
then rehydrated with 5 mM MOPS (pH 7) and 150 mM KCl for 1 h at room
temperature. Single-channel recordings were made in inside-out configurations
under steady-state conditions. Patch pipettes were pulled from thin-walled
borosilicate capillaries, coated with Sylgard (Dow Corning Corp.),
and fire-polished to a final resistance of 2–3 MΩ. Currents
were recorded under symmetrical conditions of 5 mM MOPS (pH 7.0) and
150 mM KCl buffer. Single-channel currents were recorded using an
Axon 200-B patch-clamp amplifier (Axon Instruments, Inc.). The data
were digitized at a sampling rate of 40 kHz and low-pass-filtered
to 5 kHz through an eight-pole Bessel filter.

EPR Spectroscopy and Analysis
For EPR experiments,
labeled MVP was reconstituted at a 1:1500 (protein:lipid) molar ratio
in POPC/POPG (3:1) liposomes. Liposomes were prepared from stock lipids
in chloroform following standard protocols in 10 mg/mL stock solutions.
Samples were reconstituted by adding MVP diluted in buffer A with
0.35 mM DDM (2 times the CMC) to an equal volume of 10 mg/mL POPC/POPG
liposomes {3:1 1-palmitoyl-2-oleoyl-sn-glycero-3-phosphocholine/1-palmitoyl-2-oleoyl-sn-glycero-3-[phospho-rac-(1-glycerol)]
(Avanti)}. The mixture was allowed to incubate at room temperature
for 1 h, rotating, before being diluted to 10 mL with buffer A. Detergent
was removed by adding Bio-Beads SM-2 Adsorbants (Bio-Rad) and allowing
the mixture to incubate overnight. Liposomes were collected by spinning
down the mixture at 60000 rpm. Continuous-wave EPR (CW-EPR) spectroscopic
measurements were performed at room temperature on a Bruker EMX X-band
spectrometer equipped with a dielectric resonator and a gas-permeable
TPX plastic capillary following standard protocols.,,,, Spectra were recorded at an incident power of 2.0
mW, a modulation frequency of 100 kHz, and a modulation amplitude
of 1.0 G.

Results
Expression and Purification
of MVP
An optimal expression
system for MVP was established after combinatorially screening expression
vectors and cell lines. Initially, native MVP (MVP-n) cloned from
the genome of M. jannaschii was tested for expression
in multiple expression vectors with disappointing results (Table ). However, a synthetic version of MVP (MVP-s),
in which 62 of the archaeal codons were altered to bacterial codons
(see ), was successfully
expressed in several expression vectors and cell lines (Table ). Expression levels were qualitatively evaluated
by comparing relative intensities of the MVP bands in Western blots
of crude cell lysates from small-scale expression trials. The highest
yields were obtained using pQE-60/XL10-Gold and pET15b/BL21(DE3)pLysS
expression systems.

Expression of Native
and Codon-Optimized
MVP Sequences in Various Constructs and Cell Lines
sequence	affinity
tag	vector	promoter	E.
coli strain	relative
intensity	yield (mg/L)	
MVP-n	 	pQE-32	T5	XL10-Gold	+	0.125	
MVP-s	N-terminal His	pQE-32	T5	XL1-Blue	+++*	 	
 	N-terminal His	pQE-32	T5	XL10-Gold	+++*	 	
 	N-terminal His	pQE-32	T5	M15	+	 	
 	C-terminal His	pQE-60	T5	XL1-Blue	+	 	
 	C-terminal His	pQE-60	T5	XL10-Gold	++++	0.7–1	
 	C-terminal His	pQE-60	T5	M15	+	 	
 	N-terminal GST	pGEX-6p-1	T5	XL1-Blue	+	 	
 	N-terminal
GST	pGEX-6p-1	T5	XL10-Gold	–	 	
 	N-terminal GST	pGEX-6p-1	T5	M15	+	 	
 	N-terminal His	pET15b	T7	BL21(DE3)pLysS	++++	1.5–2	
 	N-terminal His	pET15b	T7	Rosetta(DE3)pLysS	+	 	
 	N-terminal His	pET15b	T7	Exp1-Bowie	+	 	
 	N-terminal His	pET15b	T7	Exp5-Bowie	+	 	
 	C-terminal His	pET28	T7	Exp1-Bowie	–	 	
 	C-terminal His	pET28	T7	Exp5-Bowie	–	 	
Native and synthetic sequences of
MVP were cloned into various expression vectors and assayed for expression
in various cell lines by Western blot. Positive (+) and negative (−)
signs indicate the relative appearance of MVP bands. Multiple signs
indicate relatively higher intensities. Asterisks denote a high level
of expression with proteolysis. Some conditions were grown full scale
and purified as described in ; the average yields of these conditions are listed here. Shown in
bold is the expression system ultimately chosen for optimization.

Various detergents were assessed
for their ability to extract MVP-s
from crude membrane fractions by qualitatively comparing intensities
of MVP-s bands in clarified extracts (Figure A). Western blots of the solubilized crude membrane indicate that
all tested detergents extract MVP-s and that MVP-s appears primarily
as two major bands around 50 and 20 kDa (Figure A). A similar SDS resistance and banding pattern is seen in KcsA,
where the higher weight is attributed to the tetrameric form of the
channel and the lower weight to monomers. From the relative intensities of these bands, SDS, Anzergent 3-14,
and LDAO appear to favor the monomer, while Triton X-100 and DDM stabilize
the tetramer. Because of its relatively higher efficiency of extraction
and tetramer bias, DDM was chosen for subsequent solubilization during
large-scale expression and purification trials.

Extraction, purification,
and characterization of MVP. (A) Western
blot showing a detergent screen of MVP-s in pQE60 expressed in XL10
cells. The control is the MVP membrane fraction with no added detergent.
MVP appears as two bands differing in oligomeric state (arrows). Although
all tested detergents extracted MVP to a certain extent, DDM was chosen
for subsequent purification trials, as it appeared to favor the higher
oligomeric state. (B) Coomassie brilliant blue-stained SDS–PAGE
gel illustrating the two-step purification process of MVP. The last
well was overloaded to highlight impurities. (C) Size-exclusion chromatograph
of purified MVP in DDM. The elution volume was ∼12 mL on the
Superdex 200 HR 10/30 column. (D) MVP’s molecular mass determined
by multiangle light scattering methods in DDM.

MVP-s was purified by cobalt affinity and SEC (Figure B, pET15b/BL21(DE3)pLysS shown), where fractions
containing the tetramer peak exhibited the same major bands via SDS–PAGE
as those seen in the Western blots of the detergent screen (Figure A). The Rf values for the major two bands are 57.4 ± 0.9 and 21
± 1 kDa. MVP-s expressed in pET15b/BL21(DE3)pLysS at 30 °C
results in 1.5–2 mg/L yields of the channel tetramer, and these
channels are stable to reinjection over the course of weeks (Figure C). A cysteine-less construct (C136S/C141S) is expressed
at WT levels and retains the biochemical properties of the WT construct.

Characterization, Reconstitution, and Function of MVP
Both
pQE-60/XL10-Gold and pET15b/BL21(DE3)pLysS expression systems
produced monodisperse peaks eluting around 12 mL (Figure C, pET15b/BL21(DE3)pLysS shown). Multiangle light
scattering after reinjection via SEC showed that the determined molecular
mass of the MVP-s tetramer was 120 ± 10 kDa (Figure D), in good agreement with the theoretical molecular
mass of the His-tagged MVP-s construct (107.5 kDa). The MVP-s–DDM
complex contains approximately 354 DDM molecules per channel at the
analyzed concentration of ∼0.8 mg/mL. MVPs appears to be stable
only in maltosides, as detergent exchange tests with FC-12, OG, Anzergent
3-14, or LDAO led to either precipitation before a second reinjection
(LDAO) or extreme changes in stability upon reinjection (Anzergent
3-14, FC-12, and OG). Only DM appeared to be able to mimic the stabilizing
characteristics of DDM.

Because MVP is an archaeal protein,
it is difficult to establish which lipids would create a physiologically
relevant membrane environment that best stabilizes the channel and
is less likely to promote two-dimensional aggregation. To this end,
a simple FRET-based assay,,, was used to estimate relative
levels of aggregation of MVP-s tetramers reconstituted in various
synthetic, nonarchaeal lipids. In this assay, single-cysteine mutants
labeled alternatively with donor or acceptor fluorophores are combined
just before reconstitution and assayed for a FRET signal (Figure A, inset). For the fluorescein-tetramethylrhodamine
(TMR) pair, a strong FRET signal indicates that the FRET pairs are
closer than 50 Å, suggesting that the protein forms small aggregates.
The high-magnitude FRET signal from aggregated MVP-s in a detergent-free
solution and the low-magnitude FRET signal from solubilized MVP-s
exemplify the extremes of this phenomenon (Figure A). Cysteine-less MVP-s mutated at the intracellular, N-terminal
end of S1 (K4C) was expressed, individually labeled with either fluorescein
(donor) or TMR (acceptor), mixed at a 1:1 ratio, and reconstituted
in different liposomes. A robust signal from the individually labeled
channels in solution suggested that the labeling reaction was efficient.
After liposome reconstitution, MVP-s exhibits little or no aggregation
in asolectin and POPC/POPG (3:1) liposomes over those made from E. coli polar lipids (Figure A).
Although a lower-magnitude FRET signal was measured for the freshly
reconstituted channel in asolectin liposomes than in POPC/POPG liposomes,
further experimentation suggested that MVP-s was less likely to aggregate
upon freezing or over time in POPC/POPG liposomes, as the FRET signal
exhibited little change under these conditions (Figure B).

Reconstitution and stability of MVP in liposomes. (A) FRET analysis
of N-terminal, fluorescently labeled MVP indicates that MVP can be
reconstituted into many lipids and is most stable in asolectin. The
inset shows a cartoon of the FRET assay in which tetramers of MVP
are separately labeled with either a fluorescent donor or an acceptor
and then combined for reconstitution. The strength of the FRET signal
indicates the proximity of MVP tetramers and, by extension, the degree
of two-dimensional aggregation. (B) Comparison of changes in FRET
levels of MVP in different lipids over time. The change in the FRET
level was calculated from the difference in the FRET signal intensity
under the experimental condition from that of MVP tetramers in detergent
(shown in panel A).

To ascertain whether
isolated MVP was functional, we reconstituted
the channel into asolectin liposomes at various molar protein:lipid
ratios and assayed for single-channel activity using patch-clamp techniques.
At low reconstitution ratios (1:100000 to 1:1000000), we obtained
singles of MVP at extreme membrane potentials for both native and
synthetic constructs (Figure A). We were unable
to obtain macroscopic currents with either the native or synthetic
constructs at high reconstitution ratios, although ensemble activity
reconstructions from averaging single-channel conductances reproduced
the overall time course of an outward current in which current amplitude
and kinetics increase with extreme voltages (Figure A,B), confirming that purified MVP exhibits the basic properties
expected of a voltage-gated channel. Voltage ramp experiments illustrate
that the channels are likely reconstituted equally in both orientations,
with similar activity at extremely positive or negative potentials
(Figure C). The current–voltage (I–V) plot of MVP-s is hyperlinear
(Figure D).

Functional analysis of reconstituted MVP.
(A) Traces of MVP-n obtained
in symmetric 200 mM KCl (pH 8) at −170 and −200 mV.
MVP was reconstituted into asolectin liposomes at a 1:100000 protein:
lipid molar ratio. The data were digitized at a sampling rate of 40
kHz and low-pass-filtered to 5 kHz through an eight-pole Bessel filter.
Shown below the singles are reconstructions of ensemble measurements
from averages of single-channel activity. (B) On kinetics from exponential
fits to ensemble currents. (C) Voltage ramp from −200 to 200
mV. Activity at the extreme negative and positive voltages indicates
MVP reconstitutes equally in both orientations. (D) I–V curve constructed from single-channel
measurements of reconstituted MVP-s in asolectin liposomes.

Local Structure and Dynamics
of the Lower S6 Region
In contrast to standard depolarization-activated
channels, MVP should
overwhelmingly populate the closed conformation under biochemical
conditions at 0 mV because its V1/2 is
−175 mV (Figure C). We set out to spectroscopically
evaluate the conformational state of MVP’s inner bundle gate
by probing the mid to lower S6 region using continuous wave electron
paramagnetic resonance (CW-EPR) spectroscopy. The pore domain of potassium
channels is well-conserved among family members, and KcsA has been fully characterized by EPR in its open
and closed states., Therefore, a survey of the local
dynamics and degree of intersubunit spin–spin coupling at the
S6 helix of MVP-s would provide a direct indication of the overall
conformation of MVP’s activation gate.

Cysteine mutations
were introduced into the cysteine-less construct from position 188
to 209, the last residue of the channel (Figure A). This region is located approximately one-third down the length
of S6. Cysteine mutants were labeled, reconstituted in POPC/POPG liposomes,
and subjected to CW-EPR measurements at 0 mV. EPR spectral line shapes
of the S6 residues yielded unique line shapes characteristic of transmembrane
regions, confirming the protein is stable and properly folded (Figure B). Interestingly, the line shapes of positions
191 and 195 particularly display the particular broadening pattern
generated by spin–spin coupling, indicating that the spin-labels
on the four subunits are in the proximity of each other (Figure B,C, asterisks). This phenomenon is similar to that
seen for EPR measurements of closed channels KcsA, (see ), MscL,, and CorA. Such spin–spin coupling
patterns have been taken as a clear indication of oligomeric folding
in centrosymmetric channels and as evidence of the closed (nonactivated)
conformation of the activation gate of ion channels. As illustrated
in the far right panel of Figure A, when the
channel is underlabeled at a ratio of 1:8 (spin-label:tetramer), the
line shape loses this characteristic broadening pattern. This is expected
if the spectral broadening indeed originates from the interhelix proximity.

CW-EPR
scan of the S6 helix. (A) Schematic showing the membrane
topology of MVP, the region scanned for EPR analysis, and a schematic
showing how spin-labels on the S6 helix could lie within the proximity
of each other in a tetrameric channel. In the far right panel, the
amplitude-normalized spectra for fully labeled (FL) and underlabeled
(UL; 1:8 label:cysteine) 195C mutants are shown. (B) CW-EPR spectra
of residues 190–196 in POPC/POPG liposomes. This region is
located about midway through the S6 helix. Asterisks indicate spectra
that exhibit strong spin–spin coupling. (C) Plots of the environmental
parameters for the S6 region. Asterisks indicate residues whose spectra
showed spin–spin coupling; the arrow denotes the point at which
the periodicity in the mobility data ends. Environmental parameters
were not obtained for residue 195 because the strong spin–spin
coupling interfered with this analysis.

In addition, environmental parameters such as mobility (ΔH0–1) and accessibility to
contrast agents Ni-EDDA (ΠNiEDDA) and oxygen (ΠO2) were obtained from power saturation experiments of the spin-labeled
constructs.− ΔH0–1 is an empirical measure of the local dynamics of the labeled site
via the spectral anisotropy affected through tertiary contacts. Positions
within loop regions exhibit higher ΔH0–1 values because the spin-label has fewer steric
constraints. Positions in transmembrane regions exhibit lower but
oscillating ΔH0–1 values because the spin-label may be constrained by contacts with
other parts of the protein on different faces of the α-helix.
Ni(II)EDDA is a water-soluble chelated paramagnetic ion; therefore,
ΠNiEDDA is expected to be high for loop regions that fully exit
the membrane interface but extremely low or absent for transmembrane
regions. In contrast, given its high solubility in lipids, ΠO2 is used a reporter for lipidic/membrane-exposed environments.

In the lower region of the S6 helix of MVP-s, ΔH0–1 values oscillate in the expected
manner for a transmembrane α helix between positions 188 and
199 and then become increasingly dynamic toward its C-terminus (Figure C, arrow). The ΠO2 trace exhibits
similar behavior: it also loses periodicity around position 199 and
increases toward the C-terminus. The loss of periodicity likely indicates
that around position 199, the S6 helices are no longer packed into
a helical bundle with clear protein and lipid interactions. It is
at this point that they cross and splay away from each other into
the membrane. The S6 helix of MVP is relatively short compared to
other potassium channels, and the high ΠO2 values
at the C-terminus may suggest that the intracellular end of the S6
helix does not fully exit the membrane–water interface. In
agreement with this, ΠNiEDDA values are consistently low throughout
the scanned region (Figure C). The low ΠNiEDDA
values could be attributed to an underestimation of water accessibility
at the membrane–solvent interface, consistent with the fact
that the intracellular ends of the S6 segment may be held very close
to the membrane–solvent interface. Overall, these data suggest
that under these experimental conditions (in POPC/POPG liposomes,
in the nominal absence of a membrane potential) the activation gate
in MVP’s pore domain is in the closed conformation, showing
spin-label environmental parameters and spin–spin interaction
patterns that are reminiscent of, but distinct from, those of other
inner bundle gates in the closed state.

Discussion
Although
much progress has been made in determining how Kv channels
function at the molecular level, the mechanism underlying electromechanical
coupling and the structural basis of reverse polarity coupling in
hyperpolarization-activated channels remain poorly understood. It
is clear that the underlying nature of inverse gating in both eukaryotic
(HCN) and prokaryotic (MVP) systems is not a consequence of altered
voltage sensing;,− rather, it
appears to be directly related to changes in the process of electromechanical
coupling between voltage sensors and the gate. So far, structural
details for HCN channels are limited to the soluble C-terminal domain,
and much of the structural information for the critical transmembrane
regions has been obtained from cross-linking studies.− Here, we report on the biochemical, functional, and EPR conformational
characterization of the prokaryotic hyperpolarization-activated potassium
channel MVP, focusing on the local structure and dynamics of the lower
gate in the closed state at 0 mV.

Closed Conformation of MVP
Because
of the high degree
of sequence conservation among potassium channel pore domains, our
initial approach to characterizing MVP by EPR was to probe the S6
segment, which forms part of the inner helical bundle and defines
the activation gate in all Kv channels. This data could then be directly
compared to KcsA, a system that has been extensively studied and characterized
through a variety of structural and spectroscopic approaches. Overall,
we obtained strong signals and characteristically unique line shapes
from this region, indicating that the purified and reconstituted MVP
preparation represents a properly folded and structurally stable system.
Two residues halfway down the S6 segment exhibited distinctive spin–spin
coupling, an indication of intersubunit proximity.,,− Residues 191 and 195
are one turn away from each other and appear to line the inner face
of the S6 helix, likely participating in the constriction of the lower
gate in the closed conformation. Closed KcsA also shows a similar
pattern of spin coupling, and these residues were ideal reporters
of the pore conformation between open (low-pH) and closed (neutral-pH)
forms.,

Sequence alignment and comparison
of the EPR data for the two inner bundle helices of MVP and KcsA point
to several important observations. First, although it displays considerable
sequence similarity, the S6 helix of MVP is somewhat shorter than
that of KcsA (Figure A). Second, the region
that contains strong spin-coupled residues in MVP occurs before the
putative glycine hinge in MVP (G197), whereas it occurs after the
glycine hinge (G104) in KcsA. This suggests that while the constricted
portion of KcsA occurs closer to where TM2 (S6) exits the membrane,
in MVP it may occur closer to the middle of the membrane (Figure C). A comparison of the mobility profiles along
this region in the two channels (Figure B)
also indicates that the C-terminal end of the pore domain adopts different
closed conformations in these channels. KcsA’s lower gate probably
exhibits low mobility as its exits the membrane because of the extensive,
soluble C-terminal domain that constrains the movement of the C-terminal
ends of the TM2 region.,, In contrast, MVP’s lower gate is unconstrained by any C-terminal
domain, and the high oxygen and low NiEDDA accessibilities of this
region in MVP suggest that the C-terminal ends of the MVP’s
S6 helix may remain splayed into the bilayer.

Comparison of KcsA and
MVP closed conformations. (A) Alignment
of the MVP pore loop and S6 helix (residues 162–209) with the
KcsA pore loop and TM2 (residues 67–120). The alignment was
made by submitting only the pore TM2 and S6 regions to ClustalW. Asterisks denote residues with strong spin–spin
coupling in each channel. The arrow indicates the point at which MVP
appears to lose periodicity in its environmental parameters. (B) ΔH0–1 for KcsA in the open (pH
3.5) and closed (pH 7) conformations, and MVP. Arrows denote positions with strong spin–spin coupling.
(C) Schematic illustrating the differences observed between the closed
conformation of KcsA and MVP. Regions of strong spin–spin coupling
for each channel are marked with X’s. The channels differ in
the region where the strong spin–spin pattern appears, the
number of positions with strong spin–spin coupling, and the
mobility of the C-terminal ends of the TM2 or S6 segments. This may
indicate that MVP’s helical bundle crossing occurs closer to
the middle of the membrane.

Understanding Electromechanical Coupling in Hyperpolarization-Activated
Channels
In canonical Kv channels, the transition to the
resting potential results in a downward motion of the S4 helix (toward
the intracellular side). This downward motion is transmitted to the
S4–S5 linker, which is described by current models as exerting
a “pushing” force on the lower region of the S6 helix, leading to pore closure. However, in the hyperpolarization-activated
channel (i.e., MVP), the same downward S4 motion leads to channel
opening. This hypothesis naturally begs the question of whether in
channels with reverse polarity coupling, the function of the S4–S5
linker is to pull the lower gate closed when S4 moves upward (extracellular)
or to push it open when S4 moves downward (intracellular). Alignments
of various voltage-gated ion channel families have demonstrated divergence
among Kv, CNG, and HCN S4–S5 linker regions, suggesting that
these channels might couple their VSDs and pore domains in a manner
different from that of canonical Kv channels. Alanine-scanning mutagenesis of the S4–S5 linker in HCN2
demonstrated that mutations at residues Y331 and R339 disrupted channel
closing. Furthermore, the fact that the
S4–S5 linker can be cross-linked to the lower region of the
S6 helix, corroborates the idea that these channels
also use the S4–S5 linker to couple the VSD to the pore domain.
However, difficulties in mapping these interactions onto existing
Kv models suggest that HCN channels most likely gate through a unique
coupling mechanism.

By directly
probing the local dynamics and residue environmental parameters, we
were able to evaluate local structural differences in MVP in reference
to KcsA, a model system of known structure and conformation. These
differences suggest a distinct closed pore conformation that may have
altered interactions with the S4–S5 linker during gating, underlying
MVP’s reverse polarity coupling. Interestingly, the position
at which the S6 segments in MVP appear to cross and leave the helical
bundle (residue 199) occurs after the primary glycine hinge in KcsA
(G104) (a region that aligns to the PXP sequence in Kv channels). The PXP region has been shown to contact the
S4–S5 linker in the crystal structure of the Kv1.2 chimera, and mutating this region in Shaker decouples the VSD and pore domain. It
is possible that in MVP the S4–S5 linker still makes contact
with the pore domain to couple it to the VSD but that these interactions
have been altered to accommodate a modified activation gate. The constricted
region in MVP’s pore domain is located well before the region
in Shaker shown to contain the gating residues that
are expected to seal the pore in the closed state., For MVP, the narrowest constriction in the lower gate occurs in
the middle of the S6 helix, instead of at the intracellular side of
the membrane (as in KcsA). Furthermore, our accessibility data indicate
that the ends of the S6 helices appear to splay into the lower portion
of the bilayer. Therefore, the S4–S5 linker may be interacting
with the pore domain through a novel mechanism to open the channel
when the VSD is in the down state under hyperpolarizing conditions.

Because HCNs have highly structured C-terminal domains that could
constrain the conformational freedom of the lower S6 region, they
could potentially utilize a different mechanism for regulating the
activation gate. However, determining how the VSD is coupled to the
pore domain in MVP should nevertheless lay the groundwork for understanding
the mechanics of electromechanical coupling in hyperpolarization-activated
channels and inform future studies of HCN channels. Our proposed model
for the structure of MVP’s activation gate is not unprecedented:
the recent structure of TRPV1 exhibits an activation gate whose helical
bundle also crosses closer to the middle of the membrane. TRP channels are only distantly related to the
Kv channels yet display remarkable structural similarity. It is likely
that small modifications to the conserved 6TM voltage-gated ion channel
architecture underlie large changes in channel behavior and function.

Author Present Address
† L.G.C.:
Department of Cell Physiology and Molecular Biophysics,
Texas Tech University Health Sciences Center, Lubbock, TX 79430.

This
work was
supported in part by National Institutes of Health Grant R01-GM57846
(to E.P.).

The authors declare the
following competing financial interest(s): I receive funding for a
collaborative project with Bristol-Myers Squibb. That project is unrelated
to the research in this work.

Acknowledgments
We thank Steve Goldstein for kindly
providing the synthetic
MVP gene and Francisco Bezanilla for kindly allowing access to the
PTI fluorimeter. Many thanks to Ernesto Vargas for writing software
that greatly facilitated EPR data analysis. We thank the members of
the Perozo lab for helpful discussions and invaluable experimental
advice. In particular, Olivier Dalmas and Qufei Li were instrumental
in offering helpful advice with EPR data acquisition and troubleshooting.

Abbreviations
CMCcritical
micellar concentration

CNBDcyclic nucleotide-binding
domain

CNGcyclic
nucleotide-gated channel

CW-EPRcontinuous wave electron paramagnetic resonance

DDMdodecyl d-maltoside

DMdecyl d-maltoside

FC-12Foscholine-12

FPLCfast protein liquid chromatography

GSTglutathione S-transferase

HCNhyperpolarization-activated
cyclic nucleotide-gated channel

IPTGisopropyl β-d-thiogalactopyranoside

KcsApotassium crystallographically
sited activation channel

Kvvoltage-gated potassium channel

LDAOlauryldimethylamine oxide

MVPM. jannaschii voltage-gated
protein

NiEDDAnickel(II)ethylenediamine
di(o-hydroxyphenylacetic acid)

OGoctyl d-glycoside

PCRpolymerase chain reaction

PDpore domain

POPC/POPG3:1 mixture of
POPC and POPG

POPC1-palmitoyl-2-oleoyl-sn-glycero-3-phosphocholine

POPG1-palmitoyl-2-oleoyl-sn-glycero-3-[phospho-rac-(1-glycerol)]

SDS–PAGEsodium
dodecyl sulfate–polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis

SDSsodium dodecyl sulfate

SECsize-exclusion
chromatography

TCEPtris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine hydrochloride

VSDvoltage-sensing domain

ΔH0–1mobility as the inverse width of the
central resonance line width of CW-EPR spectra

ΠNiEDDANi-EDDA accessibility

ΠO2oxygen accessibility.

