Integrins are noncovalently
linked α–β heterodimeric transmembrane receptors
that mediate cell–cell and cell–matrix interactions.
They provide a mechanism of linking the extracellular matrix (ECM)
to the cytoskeletal/contractile apparatus within a cell and also transmit
signals that initiate cell cytoskeleton reorganization which enables
the cell to adhere, spread, move, proliferate and differentiate. Integrin αIIbβ3 is a platelet-specific family member and plays a vital role in homeostasis
and thrombosis. Its membrane-proximal domains of α- and β-subunit
interact in a default manner, constraining the integrin in a resting
low affinity conformation to its ligands. This association of integrin subunits can be interrupted by agonists,
such as adenosine diphosphate (ADP), thrombin, or collagen, triggering
conformational changes in integrin extracellular domain and driving
integrin to a high affinity state for its ligands (a process termed
integrin activation or inside-out signaling). Ligand binding to integrin,
in turn, initiates a process termed outside-in signaling which alters
the structure of the receptor triggering intracellular signals that
control cell polarity, cytoskeletal reorganization, gene expression,
and cell survival and proliferation.

Skelemin is a cytoskeletal protein first identified in the periphery
of the sarcomeric M-line of myosin thick filaments in striated muscles. In muscle cells, skelemin cross-linked myosin
filaments to maintain thick filament lattice and to serve as a linker between M-band and intermediate filaments
through a desmin binding domain. Skelemin
belongs to a member of a family of myosin associated proteins and
is highly homologous to myomesin as they are encoded by the same gene,
but alternative splicing gives rise to the insertion of serine/proline-rich
domain in the center of skelemin. Recent
studies have confirmed the presence of a skelemin in nonmuscle cells,
such as platelets and Chinese hamster ovary (CHO) cells.− In addition, after adhering to immobilized ligand fibrinogen, skelemin
can interact and colocalize with integrin αIIbβ3 at the initial stage of cell spreading, suggesting that skelemin
serves as a cross-linker between integrin and the myosin cytoskeleton
in nonmuscle cells.−

Skelemin is one of very few proteins reported
to bind to both the
α and β cytoplasmic tails of an integrin., It contains five repeats of fibronectin type III motifs and seven
repeats of immunoglobulin superfamily C2-like motifs. The primary interaction of skelemin with αIIbβ3 involves the skelemin immunoglobulin C2 motifs
5 and the membrane proximal regions of cytoplasmic tails of αIIbβ3, while there is an additional low affinity
contact between the skelemin immunoglobulin C2 motifs 4 and the C-terminus
of β3 tails., However, the function
significance of skelemin–integrin interactions has not been
fully explored. In this paper, integrin affinity state, outside-in
signaling, and related functions in CHO cells overexpressing mutant
integrins lacking the binding capacity to skelemin were investigated.
Our collaborators and we previously identified the critical residues
in the αIIb and β3 tails involved
in skelemin binding. Here, we introduced
alanine substitutions at Arg995, Arg997, and Leu1000 in αIIb tail, and Lys716 and His722 in β3 tail
(Figure ). We then established stably expressed
single, double, or triple mutations in CHO cells, namely, R995A, R997A,
R995A/R997A, L1000A, R995A/R997A/L1000A, K716A, H722A, and R995A/R997A/K716A.
Integrin-mediated cell adhesion, cell spreading, activation of focal
adhesion kinase (FAK), and Src were investigated, and the distribution
of αIIbβ3, skelemin, and talin was
measured in the protrusions of the cell leading edge.

αIIbβ3 mutant sequences and PAC-1
binding in the presence of metal ions or GFP-skeC2. (A) Amino acid
sequences of αIIb and β3 cytoplasmic
tails. Residues targeted for alanine substitutions are underlined
and sequence numbers are displayed. (B) Binding of PAC-1 to mutant
cell lines in the presence of Ca2+ or Mn2+.
Cell treated with 2 mM Ca2+, 200 μM Mn2+ or 2 mM EDTA were incubated with PAC-1 and washed. Then the cells
were incubated with a PE-conjugated secondary antibody and analyzed
by flow cytometry. PAC-1 binding was expressed as a percentage of
positive cells treated with Ca2+ or Mn2+ from
flow cytometric histogram minus that obtained in the presence of EDTA.
The data represent the mean ± s.d. of three separate experiments.
(C) Binding of PAC-1 to mutant cell lines following transfection with
GFP-skeC2. Cells were transiently transfected with GFP or GFP-skeC2
and tested PAC-1 binding in the presence of Ca2+ or EDTA
following the above method. PAC-1 binding was expressed as a percentage
of positive cells treated with Ca2+ from flow cytometric
histogram minus that seen in the presence of EDTA. The data represent
the mean ± s.d. of three
separate experiments. The difference of PAC-1 binding with GFP or
GFP-skeC2 expression for each cell line was not statistically significant
(P &lt; 0.05).

Experimental Procedures
Generation of Mutant Cell Lines
The cDNAs for αIIb and β3 were cloned into pcDNA3.1 vectors
with neomycin and hygromycin resistance genes respectively. Mutations
were carried out with the use of site-directed mutagenesis strategy.
All sequences were verified by DNA sequencing. CHO cells were transfected
using Lipofectamine (Invitrogen Corp.) with the respective plasmids
for both αIIb and β3 subunits, and
then followed by selection in 600 μg/mL G418 and 500 μg/mL
hygromycin B. Control CHO cells were transfected with empty vectors.
Stable CHO cell lines were maintained in the presence of 400 μg/mL
G418 and 300 μg/mL hygromycin B and cultured in DMEM containing
10% FBS and antibiotics (penicillin, streptomycin).

Flow Cytometry
CHO cells were harvested and suspended
in Tyrode’s buffer containing 1 mM CaCl2, 1 mM MgCl2, 0.1% glucose, and 0.1% BSA. For PAC-1 binding, 5 ×
105 cells were pretreated with Tyrodes buffer containing
2 mM Ca2+, 200 μM Mn2+, or 2 mM EDTA at
37 °C for 15 min. Cells were then incubated with PAC-1 (10 μg/mL,
Becton Dickinson) at room temperature for 1 h, washed, and then incubated
with PE-labeled goat antimouse Ig (BD Biosciences) for 1 h on ice.
Cells were analyzed on a flow cytometer. The mean fluorescence intensity
provided a measure of ligand binding affinity of integrins. To assess
the effect of skelemin fragment expression on integrin affinity state,
cells were transiently transfected with green fluorescence protein
(GFP) or GFP-skeC2 and tested PAC-1 binding in the presence of 2 mM
Ca2+ following the above method.

Cell Adhesion Assay
Tissue culture plates (96-well)
were coated overnight at 4 °C with 50 μL of 20 μg/mL
fibrinogen or heat-denatured 1% BSA, and blocked with 1% BSA at room
temperature for 2 h before use. Cells were harvested and labeled by
incubation with Calcein AM (10 μM, Invitrogen) at 37 °C
for 30 min in the dark. Labeled cells were washed twice and resuspended
in Tyrode’s buffer containing 1 mM CaCl2, 1 mM MgCl2. The cells were then added to each well (4 × 105 cells in 100 μL) and incubated at 37 °C for 30
min. Unbound cells were removed by washing two times. Bound cells
were counted on a microplate reader (SpectraMax M2e) using an excitation
wavelength of 494 nm and an emission wavelength of 517 nm. The specific
percentage of cells bound to ligand in each well was calculated as
(FU from ligand-coated wells) – (FU from BSA-coated wells)
× 100/total FU added to each well.

Immunohistochemistry
Falcon 4-well Culture Slides were
treated with 1% SDS, rinsed with PBS, and then precoated with 20 μg/mL
of fibrinogen overnight at 4 °C. Cells were seeded and adhered
to culture slides for different required times. Cells were fixed in
4% paraformaldehyde for 10 min, permeabilized by 0.2% (V/V) Triton
X-100 for 10 min, washed three times and blocked with 1% BSA. Filamentous
actin (F-actin) was stained using Alexa Fluor 594 phalloidin (Invitrogen)
for 30 min in 1:40 dilution. For visualization of integrin distribution,
cells were fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde, incubated with β3-specific mAb (AP3, GTI Diagnostics) overnight at 4 °C
and then a PE-conjugated secondary antibody for 2 h. For visualization
of integrin and skelemin/talin colocalization, β3 integrins were first stained as described above, and then talin
(goat IgG from Santa Cruz) or skelemin (rabbit IgG from Dr. T. Ugarova)
were stained with BD Cytofix/Cytoperm solution (BD Biosciences). This
sequential approach preserved the cell surface antigens during the
intracellular staining.

Immunoprecipitation and Western Blot
Cells were trypsinized
and plated on fibrinogen-coated culture dishes for 1 h at 37 °C.
Nonadherent cells were washed away and adherent cells were solubilized
with lysis buffer (20 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.4), 150 mM NaCl, 1% Triton
X-100, 1 mM CaCl2, 1 mM PMSF, 100 μg/mL leupeptin,
and 10 mM benzamidine) for 1 h at 4 °C. For immunoprecipitation,
lysates (600–1000 μg total proteins) were incubated with
2 μg of AP3 or 2 μL anti-GFP antibody (Invitrogen) for
2 h at 4 °C. The immunocomplexes were captured by incubation
with 40 μL of Protein G-agarose (Santa Cruz) overnight at 4
°C and washed three times. The immunocomplex samples or total
cell lysates were boiled in loading buffer and loaded onto 7.5% SDS-PAGE
gels. Proteins were then transferred to nitrocellulose membrane (Whatman).
The membrane was blocked with 5% milk-TBST or 5% BSA-TBST for detecting
phosphorylated proteins, and incubated with primary antibody overnight
at 4 °C. Anti-pY416-Src was obtained from cell signaling, and
anti-β3 antibody (N20), anti-pY397 FAK, and β-actin
were obtained from Santa Cruz. Anti-Src (mAb327) was obtained from
Calbiochem.

Results
Integrin Affinity for Ligand
The expression of wild-type
and mutant integrin was first assessed by flow cytometry using a β3-specific antibody (). The levels of integrin expression and percentage of cells expressing
receptors in the mutant cell lines were comparable to that of wild-type
αIIbβ3 cells, except for K716A which
had only 70% of cells expressing a comparable amount of integrins.
The membrane proximal regions in the integrin cytoplasmic domains
are important in integrin activation modulation, and point mutations
within this region could enhance the affinity for integrin ligands
and promote constitutive signaling., To assess
the activation state of αIIbβ3,
we tested these mutants for PAC-1 binding in the presence of 2 mM
Ca2+, 200 μM Mn2+, or 2 mM EDTA by flow
cytometry (Figure B). Nonspecific PAC-1 binding
in the presence of EDTA was low and negligible (data not shown). In
the presence of Ca2+, only R995A, K716A, and R995A/R997A/L1000A
cells bound significant levels of PAC-1, showing that the three mutants
are constitutively active. These data are consistent with previous
mutational studies,, suggesting that the residues
of K716 and R995 within β3 tails are involved in
the regulation of αIIbβ3 activation.
PAC-1 binding under the condition of Mn2+ treatment was
also tested, which is assumed to be the maximal activation of integrin.
Generally, Mn2+ was able to activate wild-type and mutant
αIIbβ3 leading to a much higher
level of PAC-1 binding. However, Mn2+ did not fully activate
integrin as Mn2+-induced PAC-1 binding in wild-type αIIbβ3 cells is still significantly lower than
that of K716A and R995A/R997A/L1000A cells treated with Ca2+. Even K716A and R995A/R997A/L1000A were in a constitutive activation
state, Mn2+ had an additional activating effect for these
mutants and enhanced PAC-1 binding with 3–4 fold than wild-type
αIIbβ3 in the presence of Mn2+. These results suggest that among all the mutants, R995A,
K716A, and R995A/R997A/L1000A exhibited partial activation, and in
the presence of Mn2+ K716A and R995A/R997A/L1000A had higher
maximal activation than that of wild-type αIIbβ3.

To assess if knocking-down skelemin binding contributes
to integrin activation, we investigated the effects of exogenous skelemin
overexpression on integrin activation. We assume if lack of skelemin
binding was responsible for constitutive activation of αIIbβ3, introduction of exogenous skelemin
would change the activation state of αIIbβ3. In this assay, wild-type and mutant cells were transiently
transfected with either GFP-tagged skelemin immunoglobulin C2 motifs
4–5 (SkeC2: the αIIbβ3 binding
domain of skelemin) or GFP alone, and their PAC-1 binding levels in
the presence of Ca2+ or EDTA were investigated (Figure C). Specific PAC-1 binding was measured by subtracting
the nonspecific binding (in the presence of EDTA) from PAC-1 binding
in the presence of Ca2+. For wild-type αIIbβ3 and inactive mutants, R995A/R997A and H722A,
GFP-SkeC2 expression did not enhance PAC-1 binding. Similar results
were also obtained in three active mutants, R995A, K716A, and R995A/R997A/L1000A.
No statistically significant difference was found between cells expressing
GFP-SkeC2 or GFP and their ability to bind PAC-1. Thus, skelemin expression
did not appear to alter the affinity state of αIIbβ3, suggesting that skelemin is not involved in
αIIbβ3 activation.

Adhesion to Immobilized Fibrinogen
The strength of
cell adhesion to ECM not only depends on integrin expression level
and integrin affinity, but also relies on integrin-mediated cytoskeleton
linkages. Previous studies demonstrated that skelemin and integrin
association was an early response to integrin occupancy and clustering,
being initiated between 30 min to 2 h after cell adherence. If their
association is essential for linking ECM to the cell cytoskeleton,
mutant cells may show decreased cell adhesion to ECM. Therefore we
compared the capacity of the mutant and wild-type cells to adhere
to fibrinogen over a 30 min time period (Figure ). Fluorescently labeled cells were allowed to adhere to fibrinogen-coated
microplates. After washing, adherent cells were counted as a percent
of the number of total cells added. Nonspecific cell adhesion was
low as less than 5% cells adhered to BSA-coated wells for all cell
lines tested. In addition, cell adhesion to fibrinogen was αIIbβ3-mediated as adhesion of wild-type cells
was 3-fold higher than that of mock-transfected cells. As shown in
Figure , cell attachment of R995A, R995A/R997A,
R995A/R997A/L1000A, K716A, H722A, and R995A/R997A/K716A to fibrinogen
was higher than that of wild-type cells, while R997A and L1000A cell
adhesion were comparable. The R995A, K716A, and R995A/R997A/L1000A
mutations showed the strongest cell adhesion, in agreement with their
constitutively active state as assessed by PAC-1 binding. In general
it appears that disruption of the skelemin binding sites in αIIbβ3 did not impair stable cell adhesion,
suggesting that skelemin-αIIbβ3 interaction
may not be essential for the linkage of integrin–cell cytoskeleton.

Adhesion
of mutant cells to immobilized fibrinogen. Calcein-AM
labeled cells were allowed to adhere to 20 μg/mL fibrinogen-coated
wells for 30 min in Tyrode’s buffer. After being washed, adherent
cells were counted on a fluorescence microplate reader. Following
subtraction of background adhesion to BSA-coated wells, cell adhesion
was expressed as the percent of adherent cells to total cells added.
The data represent the mean ± s.d. of three separate experiments.
**P &lt; 0.01 compared to wild-type cells.

Cell Spreading and Membrane Protrusions
Integrins and
their associated proteins form focal adhesions in cultured cells,
which link integrin clusters to the actin cytoskeleton and initiate
actin assembly into stress fibers. Here, stress fibers were stained
with fluorescence-labeled phalloidin after cell adhesion to fibrinogen-coated
coverslides for 1 h (Figure A). Normal CHO
cells lacking αIIbβ3 expression
were still round at this time point, whereas wild-type and mutant
αIIbβ3 transfected cells were spreading
and already displaying strong formation of stress fibers. There was
also obviously formation of lamellipodia and filopodia within the
mutant cell lines. Quantitative measurements of cell areas clearly
showed some mutant cells exhibited a greater extent of cell spreading,
that is, R995A/R997A/L1000A, K716A, H722A and R995A/R997A/K716A (Figure B). We also stained cells with anti-β3 antibody (AP3) and observed tremendous αIIbβ3-based focal adhesions, lamellipodia, and filopodia
at the leading edges of the mutant cell lines (data not shown). Taken
together, these results demonstrated that defective binding of skelemin
to αIIbβ3 does not disrupt actin
cytoskeleton organization, membrane protrusion formation, and cell
spreading, suggesting that other cytoskeletal proteins are capable
of performing some of the functions performed by skelemin. Thus, different
cytoskeletal proteins may act in unison to prevent impaired integrin-cytoskeleton
linkages.

Effect of αIIbβ3 mutations on
the actin cytoskeleton. (A) After being spread on fibrinogen-coated
wells for 1 h, cells were fixed, permeabilized, and stained with rhodamine
phalloidin to detect F-actin. a: CHO; b: wild-type; c: R995A; d: R997A;
e: R995A/R997A; f: R995A/R997A/L1000A; g: K716A; h: H722A; and i:
R995A/R997A/K716A. Scale bar: 100 μm. (B) Quantitative analysis
of cell spreading. The areas of cell spreading were measured using
ImageJ analysis software. The area of wild-type cells was normalized
to 1. Error bars are standard deviations. *P &lt;
0.05 compared to wild-type cells.

Src and FAK Activation Downstream of Integrin Signaling
The increased cell adhesion ability and higher spreading level observed
in some mutations suggested that there was an upregulation in integrin-downstream
signaling. Therefore, we examined the activation of FAK and Src, two
important tyrosine kinases in integrin signaling that are required
for efficient adhesion and spreading of cells on integrin ligands. Western blot analysis of total cell lysates
showed that adhesion to fibrinogen did not affect the levels of total
Src but increased the levels of activated, autophosphorylated Src
(pY416-Src) in R995A/R997A/L1000A, K716A, and H722A mutant cells compared
to wild-type cells (Figure A). Autophosphorylation
and subsequent activation of Src could be a result of its direct binding
to C-terminus of β3 tails via the Src SH3 domain
upon cell adhesion, or by interacting
with β3 through its distal p-FAK binding site., There were no differences in cellular levels of autophosphorylated
FAK (pY397-FAK, active FAK form) among mutant and wild-type integrin-expressed
cells (Figure A), in agreement with the previous
study showing the membrane distal NPLY motif of β3 tails was required for FAK phosphorylation. Thus, we speculate that the increase in p-Src levels in the mutant
cell lines was a result of increased Src binding directly to the C-terminus
of β3, rather than interacting with β3 through p-FAK. With most mutant cell lines displaying an increase
in total cellular pY416-Src, we determined if one could also detect
an increase in pY416-Src associated with the β3 tail.
Therefore, using the anti-β3 antibody AP3, we immunoprecipitated
β3 from wild-type and four mutant cell lines, and
probed for pY416-Src (Figure B). In all cell
lines tested, pY416-Src coimmunoprecipitated with β3 and in R995A/R997A/L1000A and K716A cell lines that contained high
levels of total cellular pY416-Src, there was a significant increase
in the levels of pY416-Src associated with the β3 tail compared to wild-type cells (Figure B,C). Here, the increased levels of pY416-Src in R995A/R997A/L1000A,
K716A, and H722A cells after 1 h spreading on fibrinogen were in good
agreement with their increased cell spreading.

Effect of αIIbβ3 mutations on
Src signaling. (A) Increased levels of pY416-Src in mutant cell lines
expressing similar levels of pY397-FAK. Cells were incubated with
fibrinogen-coated plates for 1 h, lyzed and total cell extracts subjected
to SDS-Page. Blots were probed using antibodies against pY416-Src,
Src, pY397-FAK, and β-actin. β-Actin staining demonstrated
equal sample loading. The band ratio of pY416-Src/Src for each mutant
cell line was shown in the lower panel. The band area was measured
by ImageJ software and the band ratio of pY416-Src/Src for wild-type
cells was normalized to 1. (B) Increased pY416-Src association with
R995A/R997A/L1000A and K716A αIIbβ3 mutants. Cells were plated on fibrinogen-coated culture dishes for
1 h and then lyzed. β3 integrin was immunoprecipitated
from the cell lysates using AP3 and Western blot analysis was performed
using pY416-Src and β3 antibodies. Western blot analysis
of total cell extracts using the β3 antibody demonstrated
equal sample loading. Lower panel: Densitometric quantization of pY416-Src
levels. Western blots of pY416-Src coimmunoprecipitated with β3 were quantitated by densitometric analysis. The data represent
the mean ± s.d. of three separate experiments. **P &lt; 0.01 compared to wild-type cells.

Association of Skelemin with Mutant Integrins
Experiments
were then performed to confirm that our mutations resulted in a decrease
association of skelemin with the expressed integrins. In cells, skelemin
is present as either a soluble cytoplasmic protein or as an insoluble
cytoskeletal-bound protein. The relative abundance of soluble endogenous
skelemin in our cell lines was very low, and therefore the interaction
between endogenous skelemin and αIIbβ3 was difficult to elucidate and reproduce by coimmunoprecipitation
and Western blot. Therefore, to overcome this problem, coimmunoprecipitation
experiments were performed using recombinant GFP-skeC2 fusion protein.
Wild-type, R995A/R997A/L1000A, H722A, and K716A cells transiently
transfected with GFP-skeC2 plasmids or GFP as a control were subjected
to immunoprecipitation with antibodies against GFP and Western blot
analysis (Figure A). These three mutant cell
lines were chosen as they all exhibited increased cell adhesion, spreading
and active pSrc levels. Immunoblotting with an anti-β3 antibody revealed that wild-type αIIbβ3 coimmunoprecipitated with GFP-skeC2 (Figure A), but not with GFP (data not shown), confirming the specifics
of interaction of αIIbβ3 with skeC2.
GFP-immunoreactive bands were consistent with the predicted size of
the GFP-skeC2 fusion protein (∼90 kDa) and that equal amounts
of fusion proteins were loaded in each lane. In comparison to wild-type
cells, there was a marked decrease in the amount of αIIbβ3 coimmunoprecipitated with R995A/R997A/L1000A,
H722A, and K716A mutated integrins. Thus, we confirmed that the mutations
did result in a decreased association of skelemin with αIIbβ3.

Reduced skelemin binding to αIIbβ3 mutants does not affect cell anchorage.
(A) Association of GFP-skeC2
with αIIbβ3. Wild-type, R995A/R997A/L1000A,
H722A, and K716A cells were transfected with GFP-skeC2 plasmids for
48 h, and then allowed to adhere to immobilized fibrinogen for 1 h.
Cell lysates were immunoprecipitated with anti-GFP. Western blot analysis
using anti-β3 antibody revealed a decreased association
between β3 mutants and GFP-skeC2 compared to wild-type
αIIbβ3. (B) Immunofluorescence images
reveal different effects of skelemin C2 transfection on wild-type
(WT), R995A/R997A/L1000A, H722A, and K716A cells. Cells were transiently
transfected with GFP-skeC2 and plated on fibrinogen for 2 h, fixed,
and detected by GFP fluorescence. Scale bar: 100 μm. (C) β3 integrin stained with AP3 (red) and GFP fluorescence were
visualized by confocal microscopy. Wild-type and R995A/R997A/L1000A
cells transfected with GFP or GFP-skeC2 were treated as described
in (B). The cell that weakly expresses GFP-skeC2 is indicated by an
arrowhead.

Previous studies have demonstrated that introduction
of skeC2 into
wild-type cells caused spread cells to round up., We
also investigated the spreading level of these cells transfected with
GFP-skeC2 or GFP (Figure B). Wild-type, R995A/R997A/L1000A,
H722A, and K716A cells transiently transfected with GFP-skeC2 or GFP
were replated on fibrinogen, and cell areas were measured by GFP immunofluorescence
on 2 h after spreading (Figure B). Compared
to control transfections with GFP, GFP-skeC2 expression inhibited
wild-type cells spreading, while it had little effect on the spreading
of R995A/R997A/L1000A, H722A, and K716A cells. Figure C shows a representative confocal microscopy image of transfected
wild-type and R995A/R997A/L1000A cells that were stained with AP3
(red) after 2 h spreading. Most wild-type cells expressing GFP-skeC2
were completely rounded up, whereas R995A/R997A/L1000A cells transfected
GFP-skeC2 were fully spreading. It was noted that wild-type cells
highly expressing GFP-skeC2 were rounded up but cells that were weakly
expressing GFP-skeC2 had normal spreading morphology (indicated by
arrowhead). A similar result was also observed in Hek293 cells. As
shown in , the transfection of Hek293 cells with GFP-skeC2 inhibited the αIIbβ3-mediated cell spreading only when the
stoichiometry of GFP-skeC2 to αIIbβ3 was high.

SkeC2 expression could abolish αIIbβ3-mediated cell spreading and had a more inhibitory
effect
for spreading in wild-type cells than mutant cells, at least in R995A/R997A/L1000A,
H722A, and K716A cells. We conclude from these results that transfection
of wild-type cells with GFP-skeC2 competes with endogenous skelemin
for integrin binding, thus disrupting the binding of integrin tails
to not only endogenous skelemin, but to other cytoskeletal proteins
that physically link αIIbβ3 to the
cell cytoskeleton. However, the reduced affinity of GFP-skeC2 for
mutant receptors allows for other cytoskeletal proteins to stabilize
cell anchorage by providing the physical linkage of αIIbβ3 to the cell cytoskeleton. Thus, αIIbβ3 and skelemin, or other cytoskeletal proteins
link the cell cytoskeleton to the ECM to stabilize cell anchorage
and promote cell spreading.

Co-Localization of Talin and Skelemin with Integrin αIIbβ3 in Wild-Type and K716A Mutant Cells
Among those integrin-cytoskeleton linkage candidates, talin is
of interest as, similar to skelemin, it has a membrane-proximal binding
region in the β3 tail, and it also has a distinct
NPLY membrane-distal binding site. In
addition, talin plays critical roles in linking integrin to actin
cytoskeleton and focal adhesion proteins during cell spreading, apart
from being a direct activator of αIIbβ3. Therefore, we used double labeling
of integrin αIIbβ3 (red) and talin
(green) or skelemin (green) to compare the distribution of talin and
skelemin in wild-type and mutant cells at the early time point of
cell spreading (40 min). Among all the mutant cell lines, K716A was
chosen to be shown here (Figure ), as it developed
enormous integrin-based membrane protrusions of filopodia and lamellipodia
at the early cell spreading. Staining with AP3 (red) showed cell attachment
to fibrinogen promoted translocation of integrin from the cytosol
to the cell periphery in wild-type cells as well as K716A mutant cells.
K716A mutant cells had a more profound spreading level, and filopodia
and lamellipodia structures were strikingly obvious. Co-staining with
skelemin showed that skelemin colocalized with αIIbβ3 at the cell periphery in wild-type cells, while
in K716A mutant cells it was not present in sheets of membrane protrusions
at cell periphery but localized diffusely in the main cell body, thus
losing the colocalization with αIIbβ3 (Figure A). Compared with skelemin, both
of the cell lines exhibited highly colocalization of αIIbβ3 and talin at the cell periphery (Figure B). Wild-type cells displayed very strong ring-shaped
staining for both αIIbβ3 and talin
at the cell periphery. This strong colocalization pattern is also
clearly visualized in the sheets of lamellipodia in K716A mutant cells.
It seems that colocalization of talin and integrin αIIbβ3 supports active formation of cell membrane protrusions
in K716A mutation, which could be a result of knocking down skelemin
binding to αIIbβ3 cytoplasmic tails.

Distribution
of skelemin and talin in wild-type and K716A cells.
After spreading on fibrinogen-coated wells for 40 min, (A) wild-type
(WT) or K716A cells were fixed and stained for β3 integrin and skelemin or (B) β3 integrin and talin.
Images were collected on a confocal fluorescent microscope.

Discussion
The association of integrins with cytoskeletal
proteins is crucial
for the transmission of biochemical signals and mechanical force across
these adhesion receptors and, thus, for integrin-mediated cell functions,
such as spreading, migration, and gene expression. The dynamic binding of skelemin to the cytoplasmic domains
of integrin αIIbβ3 during cell spreading
process has been reported: skelemin did not bind to resting αIIbβ3 in nonadhered platelets and CHO cells;
cell adhesion and spreading to immobilized fibrinogen promoted skelemin
binding with αIIbβ3; and, the two
proteins dissociate in later stages of cell spreading.− Since skelemin is a family member of myosin-associated myomesin,
it was previously speculated to exert a contractile force by linking
integrin to myosin. In the present study
we tested this hypothesis and tried to elucidate the role of skelemin
in integrin functions with the use of a series of stable CHO cell
lines expressing mutant αIIbβ3 integrins
in which key residues involved in the binding of skelemin to αIIbβ3 were mutated. We recognize that these
mutations might also exhibit impaired interactions with other integrin
binding proteins, and therefore we generated a number of mutants to
reveal a general picture of the functional role of skelemin–integrin
interactions. We found that most of the mutant cells defective in
skelemin binding had unimpaired cell adhesion and spreading capacity
at the early stages of cell spreading on immobilized fibrinogen. Some
of the mutant cells also had increased membrane protrusion formation,
a larger cell spreading area, and elevated levels of activated pY416-Src.
These data lead us to conclude that engagement of skelemin to the
cytoplasmic tail of αIIbβ3 is not
essential for the expansion of a cell protrusion during cell spreading.
Instead, we propose that the binding of skelemin, talin, and other
proteins to the tail of αIIbβ3 is
a mutually exclusive event and depending on what protein is bound,
a cell will either spread or contract. As discussed below, when skelemin
is bound to the cytoplasmic tail of αIIbβ3, a contractile force is generated which supports cell contraction.
To initiate cell spreading, a cell must prevent or disrupt skelemin
binding to allow for the recruitment of other proteins to integrin
clusters that facilitate cell spreading, such as talin and Src. Thus,
modulating skelemin binding to integrin tails is one mechanism a cell
can use to regulate the highly organized process of cell spreading.

We identified three constitutively active integrin mutants: R995A,
K716A, and R995A/R997A/L1000A. To address whether the activation of
the mutant is caused by knocking down skelemin binding, we characterized
PAC-1 binding of cells overexpressing GFP-SkeC2. Overexpression of
this fragment did not alter the integrin affinity state of either
wild-type or active mutant cells (Figure C).
Unlike talin which is able to unclasp the membrane–proximal
interface of αIIb/β3 cytoplasmic
tails and lead to integrin activation, skelemin cannot unclasp the
interface even though skelemin also binds the membrane proximal regions
of αIIbβ3 cytoplasmic tails as the
head domain of talin. It has been demonstrated that skelemin and αIIbβ3 association occurs after unclasping
of the αIIb/β3 interface due to
integrin–ligand ligation, which unmasked binding residues with
skelemin. Our data here support the view
that the association of skelemin with αIIbβ3 is a postligand event, but not involved in the process of
integrin–ligand affinity regulation.

The binding of skelemin
with integrin is dynamically regulated
during cell spreading, suggesting its regulatory role for cell spreading.
Our proposed model for skelemin in cell spreading and anchorage is
displayed in Figure . Focusing on cytoskeletal
proteins, activation of integrins involves talin binding (Figure A) that results in integrin clustering and activation
of FAK, resulting in the recruitment of skelemin and other cytoskeletal
proteins to integrin clusters (Figure B).
During these early phases of cell adhesion and spreading, skelemin
competes with other cytoskeletal proteins for binding to the β
tail and prevents the activation of Src from occurring at the C-terminus
of the β tail. In doing so, skelemin would counteract the activity
of other proteins involved in cell adhesion, spreading and signaling,
providing the cell with a mechanism to fine-tune its cell shape. During
later stages of cell spreading, soluble skelemin either converts into
insoluble skelemin, or dissociates from integrins, being replaced by talin or other actin-binding proteins
and firm adhesion occurs (Figure C).

Proposed model
of skelemin interacting with αIIbβ3 tails. (A) Activation. Integrin activation involves
the binding of talin (T) to the membrane proximal and NPLY regions
of β3 that results in unclasping of the integrin
tails, leading to αIIbβ3 binding
to fibrinogen (Fg). Src is also directly bound to C-terminus of the
β3 tail. (B) Early stages of cell anchorage and spreading.
Following integrin activation, integrin clustering is initiated together
with the activation of FAK (F). This results in the recruitment of
additional integrins, skelemin and other cytosolic and cytoskeletal
proteins to the integrin cluster and the formation of a focal adhesion.
(i) Skelemin binds to the membrane-proximal regions of αIIb and β3 tails and to the C terminus of
β3 tails, which displaces Src from the C-terminus
of β3, but still allows Src to bind to β3 via activated FAK bound to the NPLY region. (ii) In the presence
of skelemin, talin can still bind to the β3 NPLY
region but not to its β3 membrane-proximal binding
domain. (iii) The binding of other actin-binding proteins (ABP) to
integrin tails allows for maximal Src activation while providing a
linkage to the actin cytoskeleton. Skelemin can also provide transient
linkages to the actin cytoskeleton (i and ii). A combination of these
binding scenarios would be present within a focal adhesion. (C) Late
stages of cell anchorage and spreading. As cell adhesion and spreading
progresses, the majority of the soluble skelemin is replaced by other
actin-binding proteins, allowing for increased Src activation. The
remaining skelemin makes firm contacts with the actin cytoskeleton
bringing cell spreading and adhesion to completion.

Previous studies reported that microinjection or
overexpression
of skeC2 fragments into cultured cells abolished cell spreading., It was assumed that skelemin was essential for cell spreading based
on the interpretation that skeC2 competes with endogenous skelemin
binding to integrins but lack of a cytoskeletal binding site, and
thus resulting in breakage of the integrin–cytoskeleton linkage.
However, we found that mutant cells defective in skelemin binding
had unimpaired adhesion and spreading capacity on integrin ligands,
suggesting that skelemin binding to integrin was not essential for
cell spreading. These apparent contradictory results can be resolved
if one reinterprets the earlier study with the new data generated
herein. We propose that the binding of skeC2 with integrin tails results
in a loss of the control mechanisms governing the dynamics of cell
adhesion and spreading by blocking the binding of endogenous skelemin
and other cytoplasmic proteins to integrin tails that are important
in regulating the formation of cellular protrusions and cell spreading.
Whereas in our study, the use of cells expressing receptors containing
site-specific point mutations impeded the binding of endogenous skelemin
but not the interactions of other cellular proteins with the integrin
tails. Furthermore, the stoichiometry of skelemin and integrin needs
to be considered when using GFP-skeC2 since we found that GFP-skeC2
inhibited the αIIbβ3-mediated cell
spreading only when the stoichiometry of GFP-skeC2 to αIIbβ3 was high (Figure C and ). The interaction between integrin and skelemin is robust. A previous
NMR study showed that the association between skelemin C2 and integrin
β3 tail is increased by increasing the ratio of skelemin
C2 to β3. If the ratio
of skelemin C2 to integrin is much higher in plasmid-transfected CHO
cells than in wild type cells, such as platelets, one may overestimate
or incorrectly define the role of skelemin in integrin biology. One
problem with overexpressing skelemin C2 is that it would saturate
the skelemin binding sites on integrins and not only block endogenous
skelemin binding but also the association of other integrin binding
partners that compete for the skelemin binding site. This is likely
why we were able to obtain some novel insights into skelemin function
from experiments utilizing our wild-type and mutant integrin cell
lines but not from skelemin C2 overexpression experiments.

The
cytoplasmic tails of αIIbβ3 are
key structures for outside-in signaling in that they recruit
a substantial number of cell signaling and cytoskeletal proteins. Notable among these are Src and talin, which
are obligatory for cell spreading., The level
of pY416-Src in total cell lysates and that coimmunoprecipitating
with β3 increased in R995A/R997A/L1000A and K716A
cells (Figure B), suggesting that a reduction
in skelemin bound to integrins may allow more Src to be bound and
priming it for activation. NMR spectroscopy study revealed that immunoglobulin
C2-like repeats 4 (SkIgC4) interacts weakly with C terminus of β3 tails, which is also the binding site for Src involved in
binding with integrin αIIbβ3., Therefore, it is very likely that the binding of SkIgC4 with C terminus
of β3 tails occupies the Src binding site and thereby
reduces the capacity to maximally activate Src. However, it does not
completely block Src activation as Src can still bind to and become
activated at the membrane distal NPLY motif of β3 through activated FAK.

Recent
structural studies shed additional light on this topic in
identifying the critical roles of K716 of β3 integrin
in the αIIbβ3 interface and its
interactions with αIIb via hydrogen bonds and electrostatic
interactions.,, Our PAC-1 binding assay confirmed that K716A is an activated integrin
mutant. Highly developed filopodia and lamellipodia were visualized
at early cell spreading stage in K716A mutant cells (Figure ). Furthermore, the residue of K716 appeared to
be the most important for skelemin binding in in vitro studies. Given the overlapping binding
areas within the β3 membrane proximal region, we
predict that binding of skelemin and talin to the β3 membrane proximal region are mutually exclusive events. This was
supported in our study that talin is strongly colocalized with αIIbβ3 in the ruffle structure of the K716A
cell protrusions, but skelemin still remained in the main cell bodies
(Figure ). Disrupting skelemin binding in
K716A cell may facilitate talin recruitment that promotes actin polymerization
and membrane protrusion formation. Filopodia and lamellipodia are
the two integrin and actin-based membrane protrusions formed at the
leading edge of a moving cell or the periphery of a spreading cell
that are prerequisite cell motility and spreading. The elongation of these protrusions pushes the leading
edge forward while the tail edge undergoes retraction enabling the
cell to migrate. Dynamic cell spreading
requires that a cell balance its extending and contractile forces.
In platelets, contractile forces also play an important role in blood
clot retraction, where the fibrin meshwork is bound to αIIbβ3 and pulled together by the platelet
cytoskeleton. Contractile forces are provided by myosin II. Similar to myomesin, skelemin was thought to
regulate the organization of myosin filaments and mediate the interaction
of myosin with integrins. In our study,
skelemin was not present in the sheets of lamellipodia, and reducing
skelemin-integrin interactions promoted cell protrusion formation
in K716A cell and cell spreading in other mutant cells. These results
do not support a role for skelemin in generating an extending force
but are consistent with skelemin exerting a contractile force.

In summary, our results extend the current understanding of skelemin
function as an integrin–cytoskeleton linker. We propose a model
that the two components of skelemin, soluble and insoluble, might
differ in importance for particular integrin functions. During the
initial stages of cell spreading, soluble skelemin proteins bind to
αIIbβ3 integrin clusters at the
leading edges of cells. These skelemin–integrin interactions
function to coordinate the binding of different cytoskeletal proteins
to the membrane proximal region of integrin tails, such as talin and
Src (Figure B). However, the NPLY region remains
exposed during skelemin binding and thus talin and Src can still bind
to β3. During this time period, talin can therefore
function as a linker of integrin and actin filaments and maximal Src
activation can be modulated by skelemin. This might afford a mechanism
to dampen Src activation and consequently suppress integrin signaling.
As cell adhesion and spreading progresses and large amounts of cell
protrusion form, a majority of skelemin then dissociates from integrins
to allow for other actin-binding proteins to bind to integrins, bringing
cell spreading and adhesion to completion (Figure C). Concurrently, there is an increase in active Src levels
and talin at the cell leading edges, due to skelemin dissociation.
Some of soluble skelemin can remain bound to αIIbβ3 and function as a linker between integrins and
the myosin cytoskeleton, thereby transforming it into insoluble skelemin.

Supporting Information Available
Figures
showing the cell-surface
expression levels of αIIbβ3, and
Hek293 cells cotransfected with αIIbβ3 and GFP-Ske C2. This material is available free of charge via the
Internet at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bi301269a_si_001.pdf

bi301269a_si_002.pdf

The authors
declare no
competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
We would like to thank Dr. T. Ugarova (Arizona State University)
for her discussions and for donating plasmids for skelemin C2 motifs
4-5 and an antiskelemin antibody, and Xinfeng Ma for his technical
assistance.

Abbreviations:
ADPadenosine
diphosphate

AP3an activation-independent
anti-β3 antibody

CHOChinese hamster ovary

ECMextracellular matrix

FAKfocal adhesion kinase

GFPgreen fluorescence protein

PAC-1an antibody specific
for integrin αIIbβ3 activation conformation

skeC2immunoglobulin
C2 motifs 4–5 of skelemin that contains the αIIbβ3 binding domain

