Poly(ADP-ribose)
polymerase-1
(PARP-1) is an abundant nuclear protein that is implicated in many
essential cellular processes, such as DNA damage repair and the regulation
of chromatin structure and transcription.− PARP-1 is activated
upon binding to damaged DNA and catalyzes the cleavage of nicotinamide
adenine dinucleotide (NAD+) to nicotinamide and ADP-ribose;
the latter is covalently attached to nuclear acceptor proteins as
a linear or branched polymer [poly(ADP-ribose) (PAR) (Scheme )]. Several protein
substrates of PARP-1 have been identified, including histones, transcription
factors, and PARP-1 itself., Extensive poly(ADP-ribosyl)ation
of PARP-1 (automodification) results in the downregulation of its
enzymatic activity. Inactivation of PARP-1
by caspase-3 cleavage is a key event in apoptosis, while overactivation
of PARP-1 leads to the depletion of cellular ATP levels and necrosis., Given the central role of PARP-1 in the maintenance of genomic stability
and apoptosis, inhibitors of PARP-1 show much promise as novel therapeutics
for the treatment of cancer and inflammatory diseases.−

PARP-1 is a 113 kDa protein consisting of three main functional
domains: an N-terminal DNA binding domain, a central automodification
domain, and a C-terminal catalytic domain. These domains are further subdivided into smaller regions (domains
A–F) that share homology with previously identified functional
modules (Scheme ). Domain A contains two unusual
“PARP-like” zinc fingers (FI and FII). A bipartite nuclear localization sequence (NLS) is located
in domain B. Domain C, which contains
a novel zinc-ribbon motif, is required for the catalytic activation
of PARP-1 upon DNA binding, though it does not itself bind to DNA;
it does, however, have affinity for the PAR polymer., Together, domains A–C form the N-terminal DNA binding domain.
The automodification domain (domain D) contains a BRCT [breast cancer
type 1 susceptibility protein (BRCA1) C-terminal] motif, which is
known to be involved in the formation of protein–protein interactions. Domain E, the WGR domain, which is named after
the several conserved tryptophan, glycine, and arginine residues it
contains, was identified as a potential nucleic acid binding domain
and is known to have affinity for PAR polymers., Recently, a double-stranded DNA binding (DsDB) domain was identified
within the loop connecting the BRCT and WGR domains. Domain F contains the so-called PARP regulatory domain
(PRD) at its N-terminus and the PARP signature motif at its C-terminus;
the latter houses the active site of PARP-1., Domains E and F comprise the catalytic domain.

The high-resolution
structures of most of the individual domains
of human PARP-1 are known,,,− though it is still unclear how these domains are organized into
a functional whole. Recently, FI and domain C were cocrystallized
with the catalytic domain in the presence of DNA. However, the structure of full-length PARP-1 in the presence
or absence of DNA has thus far eluded analysis by NMR spectroscopy
or X-ray crystallography, in part because of the large size and high
degree of flexibility of the enzyme. Small-angle X-ray scattering
(SAXS) is a powerful technique that can be used to probe the low-resolution
solution structures of such systems. In
this paper, the structural changes of full-length PARP-1 (as well
as that of several domain deletion mutants) associated with binding
to an 8-mer DNA ligand known to induce poly(ADP-ribosyl)ation activity were analyzed using SAXS and molecular dynamics
simulations to gain insight into the catalytic activation mechanism
of PARP-1.

Materials and Methods
Cloning, Expression, and Purification of
PARP-1 Constructs
DNA encoding residues 1–232 [domains
A and B (AB)], 1–373
[domains A–C (ABC)], 369–1014 [domains D–F (DEF)],
or 1–1014 (full-length PARP-1) of the human PARP-1 enzyme was
cloned into the MalE-pET expression vector at the NdeI and XhoI restriction
sites. MalE-pET is a modified pET-24b(+) vector designed to express
the PARP-1 constructs with an N-terminal decahistidine-maltose binding
protein (MBP) tag and an intervening TEV protease cleavage site. The DEFΔ mutant, which lacks residues
626–645 at the C-terminal end of the WGR domain, was constructed
using the QuikChange Site-directed Mutagenesis Kit (Stratagene), with
5′-CAC TTC ATG AAA TTA TAT GAA GAA AAA ACC GGG AAC GCT GGC
CAG GAT GAA GAG-3′ and 5′-CTC TTC ATC CTG GCC AGC GTT
CCC GGT TTT TTC TTC ATA TAA TTT CAT GAA GTG-3′ as the primers
and the DEF/MalE-pET plasmid as the template. To construct the full-length
PARP-1Δ mutant (also lacking residues 626–645), the DEFΔ/MalE-pET
and PARP-1/MalE-pET plasmids were digested with the PstI and XhoI
restriction enzymes. The small DNA fragment from the former and the
large DNA fragment from the latter restriction digestion reactions
were gel purified and ligated together to generate the PARP-1Δ/MalE-pET
plasmid. The sequence of the resulting PARP-1Δ/MalE-pET plasmid
was verified by DNA sequencing at the DNA Sequencing Core Facility
at The University of Texas at Austin.

The MalE-pET vectors containing
the PARP-1 constructs were transformed into Escherichia coli Rosseta2 BL21(DE3) (Novagen) and grown at 37 °C in 6 L of Luria-Bertani
broth containing 50 μg/mL kanamycin. Expression of the MBP-tagged
PARP-1 constructs was induced by the addition of 0.2 mM IPTG when
the OD600 of the cultures reached 0.5. The cultures were
grown for an additional 20 h at 18 °C, and the cells were harvested
by centrifugation (7000g for 10 min) and stored at
−80 °C until they were further used.

The PARP-1
constructs were purified according to the procedure
previously described for domain C with a few modifications. Briefly, thawed cells were resuspended in lysis
buffer containing 20 mM HEPES, 300 mM NaCl, 10 mM imidazole, 1 mM
β-mercaptoethanol, and 10% glycerol (pH 7.5) and sonicated.
Cell debris was removed by centrifugation at 18000g for 30 min, and the resulting supernatant was incubated with 10
mL of Ni-NTA agarose resin (Qiagen) at 4 °C for 1 h. The mixture
was loaded onto a column, allowed to drain, and then washed with lysis
buffer. The column was then washed extensively with lysis buffer containing
1 M NaCl. The MBP fusion proteins were then eluted from the column
with lysis buffer containing 0.25 M imidazole. The desired protein
fractions were pooled and dialyzed against lysis buffer. During dialysis,
the fusion proteins were incubated with 2% (w/w) His6-TEV
protease to cleave the His10-MBP tag, leaving behind two
additional amino acid (Gly-His) residues at the N-terminus of the
corresponding PARP-1 construct. The constructs were then purified
from His10-MBP and His6-TEV protease by slowly
filtering the mixture through a column containing 10 mL of Ni-NTA
resin. The flow-through was concentrated with an Amicon concentrator
using a YM 10 membrane (Millipore) and further purified by size exclusion
chromatography using an AKTA FPLC system and a Superdex 200 column
(GE Healthcare). The elution buffer contained 20 mM HEPES, 300 mM
NaCl, and 10% glycerol (pH 7.5). Fractions containing the desired
PARP-1 constructs [as judged by sodium dodecyl sulfate–polyacrylamide
gel electrophoresis (SDS–PAGE)] were pooled and concentrated
as described above.

Preparation of DNA Ligands
Single-stranded
8-mer (5′-GGA
ATT CC-3′) and 44-mer (5′-CGG TCG ATC GTA AGA TCG ACC
GGC GCT GGA GCT TGC TCC AGC GC-3′) DNA were purchased from
IDT DNA Co. (Coralville, IA). To prepare the corresponding double-stranded
8-mer and 44-mer nicked dumbbell DNA ligands, the oligos were dissolved
in annealing buffer containing 100 mM NaCl and 10 mM Tris-HCl (pH
7.5). The samples were then heated to 95 °C for 4 min, cooled
slowly to 4 °C, and dialyzed into buffer containing 20 mM HEPES,
300 mM NaCl, and 10% glycerol (pH 7.5).

SAXS Data Collection and
Processing
Synchrotron X-ray
scattering data from solutions of PARP-1 constructs were obtained
with BioCAT beamline 18 ID (Advanced Photon Source, Argonne National
Laboratory), equipped with a high-sensitivity Aviex CCD detector.
Samples (∼120 μL) were housed in a water-jacket flow
cell maintained at 4 °C. For samples containing both protein
and DNA, the PARP-1 constructs were incubated with DNA at either a
1:1 (AB and ABC) or a 1:2 (full-length PARP-1) molar ratio. The sample
concentrations were as follows: 8-mer DNA, 0.15 mg/mL; AB, 0.80 mg/mL;
AB–8-mer, 0.77 mg/mL; ABC, 1.7 mg/mL; ABC–8-mer, 1.6
mg/mL; DEF, 1.5 mg/mL; PARP-1, 0.47 mg/mL; PARP-1–8-mer, 0.46
mg/mL. All samples were centrifuged continuously at 4 °C in a
microcentrifuge prior to data collection. The samples were passed
through the 12 keV X-ray beam using a Hamilton programmable dual-syringe
pump 3 m from the detector, which minimized radiation damage and allowed
a Q range of scattering vectors of 0.06–4
nm–1 to be covered. Fifteen 6 s frames of scattering
data were collected for each sample and the corresponding buffer control.
Frames showing evidence of radiation damage were discarded, and those
remaining were averaged. The average scattering curves were then normalized
to the intensity of the incident X-ray beam, and the background scattering
of the buffer was subtracted. The difference curves were then extrapolated
to infinite dilution using PRIMUS.

SAXS Data Analysis and Model Building
The forward scattering
[I(0)], pair distribution function [P(r)], radius of gyration (Rg), and maximal dimension (Dmax) of each PARP-1 construct were evaluated by indirect Fourier transformation
using the AUTOGNOM software package. DAMMIN
verion 53 was then used for ab initio shape determination
of each construct. This program utilizes
a simulated annealing algorithm to produce a single-phase dummy atom
model that best reproduces the experimental scattering curves, subjected
to looseness penalties for the calculated structure. For each PARP-1
construct, 100 DAMMIN reconstructions were performed and the 20 structures
with the smallest χ values with respect to the experimental
curves were averaged.

CORAL was used to obtain structural models
of the PARP-1 constructs and their complexes with 8-mer DNA using
the available high-resolution domain structures. In this program, the position and orientation of each domain
and/or subunit and the conformation of any intervening linkers (modeled
as a chain of dummy residues with a spacing of 3.8 Å) are varied
simultaneously to determine the structure that best reproduces the
SAXS data. A simulated annealing algorithm is employed for the minimization
protocol, which includes penalties for steric clashes and improper
loop conformations. The high-resolution structures utilized in the
calculations were as follows: 8-mer DNA (PDB entry 4DQY or 3ODC), zinc finger I
(FI, residues 6–91, PDB entry 4DQY), zinc finger II (FII, residues 113–198,
PDB entry 3ODC), zinc finger III (FIII, residues 224–359, PDB entry 4DQY), BRCT domain (residues
388–483, PDB entry 2COK), WGR domain (residues 531–644, PDB entry 4DQY), and catalytic
domain (residues 662–1009, PDB entry 4DQY).,, SABBAC (online Structural Alphabet-based
protein BackBone reconstruction from Alpha-Carbon trace) was then utilized to position the missing atoms
in the flexible linkers of the structural models of full-length PARP-1
and the PARP-1–8-mer complex generated by CORAL. This program
uses the coordinates of the α-carbons of a protein to select
candidate fragments from a Hidden Markov Model-derived structural
alphabet and assembles the fragments using a greedy algorithm to reconstruct
the peptide chain.

Molecular Dynamics Simulations
Molecular
dynamics simulations
were then used to energy minimize and equilibrate the structures of
full-length PARP-1 and the PARP-1–8-mer complex from CORAL
using NAMD version 2.9. NAMD was developed by the Theoretical and
Computational Biophysics Group in the Beckman Institute for Advanced
Science and Technology at the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign. The protonation states of histidine residues
and the cysteine residues coordinated to the zinc ions were selected
to reflect their local environments. The PARP-1 molecules were placed
in a box of solvent water modeled with the TIP3P parameters, with
a box padding of 15 Å. Sodium and chloride ions were added to
adjust the ionic strength of the solvent to 0.6 M and neutralize the
system. The CHARMM27 force field was used for protein and nucleic
acid parameters. A switching distance of 10 Å, a cutoff of 12 Å,
and a pair list distance of 14 Å were used for electrostatic
and van der Waals interactions. The simulations used a 2 fs time step
size, with rigid bonds enabled for all atoms. Nonbonded and full electrostatic
forces were evaluated at each step and every other step, respectively.
Periodic boundary conditions were employed, with the particle mesh
Ewald sum method being utilized for long-range electrostatic interactions.
The temperatures of the systems were held constant at 277.15 K using
Langevin dynamics for all non-hydrogen atoms and a damping coefficient
of 5 ps. The pressures were maintained at 1.01325 bar using a Nosé-Hoover
Langevin piston with oscillation and damping time constants of 200
and 100 fs, respectively. The systems were first minimized for 5000
steps (10 ps) and then equilibrated for 250000 steps (0.5 ns).

Electrophoretic
Mobility Shift Assay
The relative DNA
binding affinities of DEF and PARP-1, as well as the corresponding
deletion mutants lacking residues 626–645 in the WGR domain
(DEFΔ and PARP-1Δ), were measured using an electrophoretic
mobility shift assay (EMSA). The DNA ligand (150 pmol of 8-mer or
nicked dumbbell DNA) was incubated with the PARP-1 constructs at various
protein:DNA ratios (0:1, 1:1, 2:1, 3:1, 4:1, 5:1, and 6:1) in a total
volume of 8 μL. The samples were allowed to equilibrate on ice
for 30 min, after which they were run on a 1.5% agarose gel and visualized
using ethidium bromide staining and UV transillumination.

Automodification
Assay
The automodification activities
of full-length PARP-1 and the PARP-1Δ mutant were analyzed using
an SDS–PAGE assay. Reactions of 1 μM enzyme, 1 μM
8-mer DNA, 5 mM NAD+, 50 mM NaCl, 7.5 mM MgCl2, and 20 mM Tris buffer (pH 7.5) were quenched at various time points
using 2× SDS–PAGE loading buffer containing 50 mM EDTA.
Reactions were initiated by the addition of NAD+. As a
negative control, 8-mer DNA was omitted from the mixtures, and the
reaction was quenched after 5 min. After the reaction had been quenched,
the automodified PARP-1 constructs were separated from the unmodified
enzyme on an SDS–PAGE gel and visualized by being stained with
Coomassie Brilliant Blue.

Results and Discussion
The experimental SAXS data of the PARP-1 constructs (AB, ABC, DEF,
and full-length PARP-1) and the 8-mer DNA ligand are shown in Figure . GNOM analysis of the SAXS data yielded estimates
for the forward scattering [I(0)], radius of gyration
(Rg), maximal dimension (Dmax), and pair distribution function [P(r)] for each construct (Table  and Figure S1 of the ). The pair distribution functions for
the PARP-1 domain deletion mutants (AB, ABC, and DEF) contain several
distinct maxima, consistent with the presence of individual ordered
domains connected by flexible linkers. The P(r) for the AB construct (residues 1–232) was similar
to that obtained in a previous SAXS study of domain A (residues 1–209). Upon binding to 8-mer DNA, full-length PARP-1
undergoes a conformational change in which its structure become more
compact. This can be seen in the smaller Rg and Dmax value for the DNA complex (Table ) or by comparison of the corresponding pair distribution
functions (Figure S1 of the ).

In contrast to these observations, the AB and ABC constructs
become
more elongated upon DNA binding (Table  and
Figure S1 of the ). In addition, the previous SAXS study demonstrated that the binding
of 30-mer blunt DNA to domain A or the ABCD construct (residues 1–486)
resulted in more elongated structures. A more elongated structure can be expected when DNA binds to the
relatively small zinc finger containing constructs of PARP-1 (i.e.,
A or AB). However, it was surprising that full-length PARP-1 became
more compact upon DNA binding, while the ABC and ABCD constructs were
elongated. This result may be explained by the absence of the WGR
domain, and the majority of the loop connecting it to the BRCT domain,
in the ABC and ABCD constructs. The WGR domain has been suggested
to be a potential nucleic acid binding motif, and the loop connecting
the WGR and BRCT domains (residues 480–540) has recently been
shown to be a double-stranded DNA binding (DsDB) domain., Thus, these data suggest that the activation of PARP-1 by damaged
DNA may involve a conformational change in which both the zinc finger
and the WGR and DsDB domains form contacts with the DNA ligand.

The solution structures of the PARP-1 constructs were modeled using
DAMMIN and CORAL. DAMMIN generates an ab initio dummy
atom model of the low-resolution molecular shape of each construct. In contrast, CORAL utilizes the available high-resolution
structural data of the individual domains (and DNA ligands) and builds
in the missing linkers using a chain of dummy residues. Superpositions of these models for the PARP-1
constructs are shown in Figure , and the associated
χ values for fits to the experimental SAXS data are summarized
in Table . The molecular shape of the 8-mer
DNA ligand was also reconstructed using DAMMIN, and the resulting
low-resolution structure was aligned with an average B-form DNA duplex
generated using the Nucleic Acid Builder (NAB) programming language
(Figure ).

The structure of the PARP-1–8-mer complex was modeled in
two ways using CORAL (Figure ). In the first
model (χ = 1.93), the FI, C, and EF domains were fixed in the
same orientation observed in the cocrystal structure. This results in domain D (the automodification domain)
being placed adjacent to the catalytic domain, in a position conducive
for the poly(ADP-ribosyl)ation of several recently identified automodification
sites (D387, E488, and E491). These modification
sites reside in the loops connecting domain D to domains C and E,
which could bind to the active site housing the catalytic base E988
via a conformational change. The constraints
imposed on domains FI, C, and EF were relaxed in the second model,
which resulted in a significantly better fit to the experimental SAXS
data (χ = 0.58). Interestingly, the automodification domain
D is found in a dramatically different position in this model (Figure ). Domain D also contains a BRCT motif, which is
known to be involved in forming protein–protein interactions.
Upon binding to and being activated by damaged DNA, PARP-1 recruits
DNA repair factors to the lesion site, specifically X-ray cross complementing
group 1 protein (XRCC1), which is a DNA repair scaffolding protein.
Recently, it was shown that PARP-1 does not interact significantly
with XRCC1 unless it has been automodified. Moreover, the loop connecting domains D and E contains the double-stranded
DNA binding (DsDB) domain, which in this structural model would be
positioned such that it could bind to the double-stranded region of
DNA adjacent to a lesion site in genomic DNA. It is therefore tempting
to speculate that the best-fit structural model of the PARP-1–8-mer
complex is in a conformation that resembles the one that recruits
XRCC1 to the site of DNA damage after PARP-1 automodification.

SABBAC was then used to reconstruct the peptide backbone and position
the side chains of the amino acid residues within the flexible linkers
of the best-fit structural models of full-length PARP-1 and the PARP-1–8-mer
complex generated by CORAL., The resulting PARP-1–8-mer
structure and that of unliganded PARP-1 were then subjected to energy
minimization and equilibration in a box of water using molecular dynamics
simulations as implemented in the NAMD software package. A comparison of the structures of PARP-1 and
the PARP-1–8-mer complex obtained after a 10 ps energy minimization
and a 0.5 ns equilibration is shown in Figure .

When full-length PARP-1 binds to DNA, the most dramatic conformational
changes to its structure, not surprisingly, occur in the DNA binding
domain. Both FI and FIII (as well as the WGR domain) form interdomain
contacts with the catalytic domain via the PARP regulatory domain
(PRD)., FI is known to be critical for DNA-dependent
activation of PARP-1, while FII is dispensable for this purpose even
though it has a greater affinity for DNA.,− In particular, mutations to one of several residues in FI (Q40,
D45, L77, and K97) were shown to eliminate activation of the poly(ADP-ribosyl)ation
activity of PARP-1 in the presence of DNA, despite the fact that these
mutants could still bind DNA with an affinity similar to that of the
wild-type enzyme (Figure )., Similarly, mutational studies showed several residues in FIII to
be critical for DNA-dependent enzyme activation but not DNA binding
(K249, G313, T316, and W318) (Figure ). It is therefore likely that these interdomain
interactions with the PRD induce an allosteric change in the catalytic
domain that stimulates the poly(ADP-ribosyl)ation activity of PARP-1.
In support of this hypothesis, a gain-of-function mutant containing
an L713F substitution in the PRD was previously identified and found
to increase the kcat and kcat/KM ∼10-fold relative
to that of the wild-type enzyme (Figure ). In addition, this increase in catalytic activity
was observed in the basal activity of the catalytic domain, independent
of DNA binding. Thus, this amino acid
substitution may elicit a structural change in the active site that
mimics the allosteric activation observed upon DNA binding. In addition,
there are several phosphorylation sites in the DNA binding (S32, S41,
S177, S179, S257/T258, and T335) and catalytic (S542, T656, Y775,
S782, and S785/S786) domains that may modulate the interdomain interactions
that activate PARP-1.

Another striking
feature of the structure of the PARP-1–8-mer
complex is that FII extends away from the core domains required for
DNA-dependent poly(ADP-ribosyl)ation activity (FI, FIII, and EF) (Figure ). The two 8-mer ligands are bound to FI and FII
such that their helical axes are approximately orthogonal to one another.
As mentioned above, FII imparts PARP-1 with most of its DNA binding
affinity.,− FII is connected to
the core domains through two flexible linkers, which likely is important
for the ability of PARP-1 to recognize and be activated by a large
number of DNA structures, including nicked
DNA,, double-strand breaks, overhangs, cruciforms,, and promoter regions. The WGR domain
also forms contacts with DNA in the structural model of the PARP-1–8-mer
complex. To obtain experimental evidence of this predicted interaction,
a deletion mutant of the DEF construct lacking residues 626–645
at the C-terminal end of the WGR domain was constructed and tested
for its ability to bind DNA. As shown in the EMSA data in Figure S2
of the , the affinity
of the DEFΔ mutant for dumbbell DNA is clearly diminished compared
to that of wild-type DEF. Similar results were obtained using 8-mer
DNA (Figure S2 of the ). Within the context of the full-length enzyme, the effect of deletion
of residues 626–645 in the WGR domain on the DNA binding affinity
of PARP-1 is less dramatic (Figure S3 of the ). However, this deletion almost completely abolishes
the automodification activity of PARP-1 (Figure S4 of the ). Together, these data
show that the WGR domain plays a critical role in the DNA-dependent
activation of the poly(ADP-ribosyl)ation activity of PARP-1.

The DsDB domain is housed in the loop connecting domains D and
E. In the structure of the PARP-1–8-mer
complex, the DsDB domain is positioned such that it can bind to DNA
adjacent to a lesion site within genomic DNA, as is the loop connecting
domains C and D. The DsDB domain contains a SUMOylation site (K486)
and several lysine residues that have been identified as acetylation
(and possible automodification) sites (K498, K505, K508, K521, and
K524) (Figure ).− PARP-1 is acetylated
by the histone acetyltransferase p300 and its homologue, the cAMP-response
element binding protein (CREB) binding protein (CBP). Acetylation of PARP-1 is required for its function as a
transcriptional coactivator of certain transcription factors (e.g.,
nuclear factor κB, NF-κB). In addition, acetylation was shown to induce PARP-1 activation in
the absence of DNA. SUMOylation of PARP-1
by small ubiquitin-like modifier SUMO1 or SUMO3 abrogates p300/CBP-mediated
acetylation of PARP-1 but has no effect on its DNA-dependent activation. There are also several putative phosphorylation
sites in the DsDB domain (S504 and S519), the BRCT domain (T420/T422
and S455), FIII (S257/T258 and T335), and the loop connecting the
latter two domains (T368/S372/T373/S375) (Figure ). S372 and T373 were shown to
be phosphorylated by the extracellular signal-regulated kinases ERK1
and ERK2, and this post-translational modification was found to increase
the level of DNA-dependent PARP-1 activation. These post-translational modifications undoubtedly have a profound
influence on the specificity of PARP-1 for its substrate proteins
and interaction partners and may also influence the DNA binding affinity
and conformational dynamics of PARP-1 (e.g., interconversion of PARP-1
structures shown in Figures  and ).

In summary, insight into the catalytic
activation of PARP-1 by
damaged DNA has been obtained from analysis of the SAXS data of the
full-length enzyme and several truncation mutants. GNOM analysis of
the SAXS data indicates that full-length PARP-1 and the AB and ABC
constructs undergo conformational changes upon binding to DNA, wherein
the former becomes more compact and the later two truncation mutants
become elongated. The PARP-1 constructs and their associated DNA complexes
are dynamic structures in solution, containing individual ordered
domains connected by flexible linkers. Structural models of the PARP-1
constructs in the presence or absence of DNA were obtained from the
SAXS data using CORAL. The structural models obtained from this analysis
for full-length PARP-1 and the PARP-1–8-mer complex were further
refined using molecular dynamics simulations. The structure of the
PARP-1–8-mer complex is in a conformation that appears to be
poised to recruit DNA repair factors to the site of DNA damage. Comparison
of the resulting PARP-1–8-mer atomistic model with that of
free PARP-1 led to a working model of DNA-dependent PARP-1 activation.
Specifically, PARP-1 binds to the site of DNA damage, which facilitates
the formation of interdomain interactions between the DNA binding
and catalytic domains that induce an allosteric change in the active
site and stimulates poly(ADP-ribosyl)ation activity. This model is
consistent with the results of previous structural and functional
studies of the PARP-1 domains and with biochemical data for the residues
and post-translational modifications important for DNA-dependent enzyme
activation. In particular, the WGR domain plays a key role in the
activation of PARP-1 poly(ADP-ribosyl)ation activity by interacting
with both DNA (via its α-helix and central β-sheet) and
the catalytic domain. In this study,
the WGR domain in the structural model of full-length PARP-1 is rotated
out such that it is approximately perpendicular to its position in
the crystal structure of the FI–C–EF–DNA complex and is found to interact with 8-mer DNA via
a loop at the C-terminal end of this domain. Deletion of residues
626–645 from this loop diminishes the DNA binding affinity
of the catalytic domain and abolishes the automodification activity
of PARP-1. This study provides, for the first time, structural information
about the full-length enzyme and its complex with DNA and provides
a framework from which to interpret new data to better understand
the function and mechanism of this intriguing and centrally important
nuclear enzyme.

SAXS intensity as a function of momentum transfer for
all PARP-1
constructs and the DNA ligand used in this study. SAXS data of PARP-1
constructs bound to 8-mer DNA are indicated with a dotted line.

Comparison of DAMMIN reconstructions of the
PARP-1 constructs and
the 8-mer DNA ligand with the corresponding models obtained using
CORAL or NAB. Structural superpositions were achieved using SUPCOMB20. Individual PARP-1 domains are colored as in
Scheme , and the 8-mer DNA is colored cyan.
The chains of dummy residues connecting the PARP-1 domains in the
CORAL models are shown as black loops. Zinc ions are shown as gray
spheres. Constructs from top left to bottom right 8-mer DNA, AB, AB–8-mer,
ABC, ABC–8-mer, DEF, PARP-1, and PARP-1–8-mer, respectively.
All ribbon representations and dummy atoms are shown to scale.

Comparison of the CORAL structural models of
the PARP-1–8-mer
complex obtained by fixing the FI, C, and EF domains in the positions
observed in the cocrystal structure (top) or after relaxing these
constraints (bottom). The later model
results in significantly better fits (χ = 0.58) to the experimental
SAXS data (χ = 1.93) and a dramatically different position of
the BRCT domain (green) relative to the DNA binding and catalytic
domains. The PARP-1–8-mer models were aligned using SUPCOMB20. The structures are rendered and colored as described
in the legend of Figure .

Conformational changes in the PARP-1 structural model upon binding
to 8-mer DNA. Domain reorganization occurs as PARP-1 binds to 8-mer
DNA, such that FI, domain C, and the WGR domain form contacts with
the PARP regulatory domain (PRD). The PARP-1 (top) and PARP-1–8-mer
(bottom) models were aligned using SUPCOMB20. The structures are rendered and colored as described in the legend
of Figure .

Positions of post-translational modification sites and functionally
important residues identified via mutational analysis mapped on the
PARP-1–8-mer structural model. The phosphate backbone grips
and base stacking loops of FI and FII, the double-stranded DNA binding domain (DsDB), and the PARP regulatory domain (PRD) are highlighted. Residues discussed in the text are labeled.
Automodification sites: D387, E488, and E491 (green). Phosphorylation sites: S32, S41, S177, S179, S257/T258,
T335, T368/S372/T373/S375, T420/T422, S455, S504, S519, S542, T656,
Y775, S782, and S785/S786 (red). SUMOylation
site: K486 (purple). Acetylation/automodification
sites: K498, K505, K508, K521, and K524 (blue)., Residues critical for DNA-dependent PARP activation but not DNA
binding: Q40, D45, L77, K97, K249, G313, T316, and W318 (cyan),, Gain-of-function mutant residue: L713 (yellow). Catalytic base required for poly(ADP-ribosyl)ation activity:
E988 (orange).

Reaction Catalyzed by PARP-1
Domain Structure of PARP-1
Rg and Dmax Estimates from GNOM for Fits to the SAXS
Data
construct	I(0) (×105)	Rg (Å)	Dmax (Å)	
8-mer	5.736	11.56	39.00	
AB	75.59	27.99	86.09	
AB–/8-mer	93.52	29.20	89.96	
ABC	232.3	37.53	113.8	
ABC–8-mer	108.8	37.64	142.0	
DEF	231.9	40.64	126.8	
PARP-1	136.3	56.74	176.2	
PARP-1–8-mer	151.6	51.90	160.6	
χ
Values for Fits to Experimental
SAXS Data
construct	DAMMIN	CORAL	
8-mer	0.412–0.413	–	
AB	0.775–0.842	0.75	
AB–8-mer	0.619–0.667	0.59	
ABC	1.392–1.708	1.12	
ABC–8-mer	1.638–2.322	1.27	
DEF	1.140–1.384	0.94	
PARP-1	0.822–1.194	0.49	
PARP-1–8-mer	0.568–0.747	0.58	
Supporting Information Available
Supplementary Figures S1–S4.
This material is available free of charge via the Internet at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bi401439n_si_001.pdf

Author Present Address
∥ S.O.M.: Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, Auburn University,
Auburn, AL 36849.

This work was
supported by funding from the Texas Institute for Drug and Diagnostic
Development (TI-3D) of The University of Texas at Austin, the Welch
Foundation (F-1511), the National Institutes of Health (NIH) National
Center for Research Resources (NCRR), the Department of Energy (DOE)
Office of Basic Energy Science (BES), and NIH Fellowship GM082085
awarded to S.O.M.

The authors
declare no competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
We thank Dr. Pappannan Thiyagarajan for helpful
discussions
and assistance in collecting SAXS data on BioCAT beamline 18 ID at
the Advanced Photon Source.

Abbreviations
BRCTbreast cancer type 1 susceptibility
protein C-terminal

CBPcAMP-response element binding protein (CREB) binding protein

CCDcharge-coupled
device

DsDBdouble-stranded
DNA binding

ERKextracellular signal-regulated kinase

FIPARP-like zinc finger domain I

FIIPARP-like zinc finger
domain II

FPLCfast
protein liquid chromatography

HEPES4-(2-hydroxyethyl)-1-piperazineethanesulfonic
acid

IPTGisopropyl
β-d-1-thiogalactopyranoside

MBPmaltose binding protein

NADnicotinamide adenine
dinucleotide

NF-κBnuclear factor κB

NLSnuclear localization sequence

NMRnuclear magnetic resonance

NTAnitrilotriacetic acid

PARP-1poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase-1

PDBProtein Data Bank

PRDPARP regulatory
domain

SAXSsmall-angle
X-ray scattering

TEVtobacco etch virus

WGRtryptophan-glycine-arginine

XRCC1X-ray cross complementing group 1 protein.

