The genetic instability that
leads to the development of cancer is driven by the accumulation of
damaged DNA. Impairment of any of the DNA repair pathways represents
one mechanism leading to such an accumulation., Approximately
30% of human tumors that have been sequenced show variations in DNA
polymerase (pol) β, an enzyme that is centrally important in
the overlapping base excision repair (BER) and single-strand break
repair pathways.− A large number of tumor-associated mutations in pol
β have been identified, and the functional effects of many of
them have been characterized.− Many of these mutations confer mutator phenotypes on the enzyme,
and several of these cancer-associated mutations have catastrophic
effects on enzymatic activity., The pol β(E295K)
mutation alters a critical residue in the sensor–effector coupling
pathway that constitutes the functional connection between correct
base pair sensing and catalytic activation. Recent nuclear magnetic
resonance (NMR) studies of pol β(E295K) demonstrate the failure
of a correctly matched ternary complex to induce the conformationally
activated state, a result consistent
with the extremely low activity found for this mutant.

In addition to impairing activity, some
mutated forms of pol β
can have additional consequences resulting from nonproductive binding
of damaged DNA intermediates or the displacement of native, wild-type
pol β from DNA repair complexes. Pol β is known to form
a specific complex with the amino-terminal domain of the scaffold
X-ray cross complementing group 1 protein (XRCC1) involving the carboxyl-terminal
“N-subdomain” of the enzyme., Mutations that influence pol β structure or activity but leave
the interface with XRCC1 unperturbed can interfere with the normal
function of the repair complex. Thus, a binary complex formed between
a truncated pol β, polβΔ208–236, and XRCC1 acts as a dominant-negative mutant, and transgenic mice
expressing the truncated form of pol β exhibit a significantly
elevated incidence of tumor formation.

Pol β containing the L22P mutation in the lyase domain
(LD)
has been identified in cells derived from a gastric carcinoma., The mutation was found to significantly impair both enzymatic activities;
pol β(L22P) exhibits negligible 5′-deoxribose phosphate
(dRP) lyase activity, and very low or
no polymerase activity. Molecular dynamics
simulations indicated that the L22P mutant is characterized by altered
packing that results in considerable destabilization. In our study, we have utilized NMR spectroscopy to evaluate
the structural impact of the L22P mutation. We also have evaluated
the effects of the mutation on enzyme activity and substrate binding,
as well as the structural effects of substrate interactions on the
L22P-perturbed enzyme structure.

Experimental Procedures
Proteins
[methyl-13C]Methionine-labeled
pol β(L22P) and pol β(L22P)LD (residues 1–87) were
prepared as described previously by growth
of plasmid-containing Escherichia coli on a medium
containing [methyl-13C]methionine (CIL,
Cambridge, MA). The [U-2H], [Ile-δ-13CH3] samples were expressed in E. coli BL21(DE)3
transformants grown in M9 deuterated (99% D2O) medium containing
[U-2H,13C]glycerol and 15NH4Cl as the sole carbon and nitrogen sources, respectively; 50 mg per
liter of [3,3′-2H2,1,2,3,4-13C4]-α-ketobutyric acid was added to the deuterated
culture 30 min prior to protein induction by the addition of isopropyl
β-d-1-thiogalactopyranoside. The L22P variants were
generated using the QuikChange kit (Stratagene). The protein concentrations
were determined using 280 nm extinction coefficients of 20088 M–1 cm–1 for full-length polymerases
and 3591 M–1 cm–1 for the isolated
lyase domains.

Oligonucleotides
Oligonucleotides
for NMR (from Oligosetc
or IDT) were dissolved in D2O to make an ∼10 mM
stock solution. The single-stranded DNA used for the NMR experiments
has a 5′-CCG ACG GCG CAT CAG C-3′ sequence. The short
hairpin DNA used for the NMR experiments has a 5′-PCTG GCG AAG CCA G-3′ sequence. The double-hairpin, one-nucleotide
gap DNA substrate used for the NMR experiments has a 5′-PGGC GAA GCC TGG TGC GAA GCA CC-3′
sequence (the templating T in the gap is underlined). The DNA concentrations
were determined using their 260 nm extinction coefficients. The oligonucleotides
used to construct substrates for single-nucleotide gap-filling reactions
were the 5′-6-carboxyfluorescein labeled primer (5′-CTG
CAG CTG ATG CGC-3′), the downstream oligonucleotide (5′-GTA
CGG ATC CCC GGG TAC-3′), and the template (3′-GAC GTC
GAC TAC GCG GCA TGC CTA GGG GCC CAT G-5′,
where the templating G in the gap is underlined). The downstream oligonucleotide
was synthesized with a 5′-phosphate. The oligonucleotides used
to construct substrates to assay removal of a 5′-dRP group
were the primer (5′-CAT ATC CGT GTC GCC CTC-3′), the
downstream oligonucleotide (5′-U ATT CCG ATA GTG ACT ACA-6-
carboxyfluorescein-3′), and the template (3′-GTA TAG
GCA CAG CGG GAG TAA GGC TAT CAC TGA TGT-5′).

NMR Spectroscopy
NMR samples contained 0.1–0.6
mM protein in a buffer (10% D2O for 1H–15N HSQC experiments and 100% D2O for 1H–13C HSQC and HMQC experiments) consisting of
50 mM Tris-d11 (pH 7.6), 150 mM KCl, 1
mM CDTA, 1 mM dithiothreitol (DTT), 0.1 mM AEBSF, 0.04% NaN3, and 50 μM DSS as an internal chemical shift standard. NMR
experiments were performed at 25 °C on a Varian UNITY INOVA 600
or 800 MHz NMR spectrometer, using a 5 mm Varian 1H{13C,15N} triple-resonance room-temperature or cold
probe, equipped with actively shielded Z-gradients. The 1H–13C HSQC spectra were recorded using Varian’s
gChsqc sequence; the 13C HMQC
experiments were performed using Varian’s gChmqc sequence.
The spectra were processed using NMRPipe version 2.1 and analyzed using NMRView version 5.0.4. All spectra were processed using squared cosine bell apodization
functions in all dimensions and forward–backward linear prediction
in the indirect dimension.

The
isoleucine δ1-methyl chemical shift assignments were made on
an isoleucine-labeled sample in a 1:1 complex with the one-nucleotide
gapped double-hairpin DNA described above in a buffer solution consisting
of 100 mM phosphate (pH 6.7), 1 mM CDTA, 1 mM DTT, 0.1 mM AEBSF, 0.04%
NaN3, and 50 μM DSS as an internal chemical shift
standard. It was determined that the samples were stable for several
weeks at 35 °C in the lower-pH phosphate buffer. The higher temperature
greatly improved the signal-to-noise ratio of the three-dimensional
(3D) chemical shift assignment experiments described below. The backbone
chemical shift assignments of this complex were made from a combination
of 3D HNCA, HN(CO)CA, HN(CA)CB, HN(COCA)CB, and HNCO experiments and shown to agree for the most part with the
assignments of a similar pol β·DNA complex. The isoleucine methyl assignments were made
using a combination of 3D Ile,Leu-(HM)CM(CGCBCA)NH, Ile,Leu-HM(CMCGCBCA)NH,
HMCM[CG]CBCA, and Ile,Leu-HMCM(CGCBCA)CO experiments. The Ile,Leu-(HM)CM(CGCBCA)NH and Ile,Leu-HM(CMCGCBCA)NH
experiments were conducted on a Varian Inova 800 MHz spectrometer
equipped with a 1H{13C,15N} cold
probe. All the other 3D experiments were conducted on a Varian Inova
600 MHz spectrometer also equipped with at 1H{13C,15N} cold probe.

DNA Preparation
DNA substrates for single-nucleotide
gap-filling DNA synthesis or dRP lyase activity measurements were
prepared by annealing three purified oligonucleotides. Each oligonucleotide
was suspended in 10 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.4) and 1 mM EDTA, and the concentration
was determined from their UV absorbance at 260 nm. The annealing reactions
were conducted by incubating a solution of primer with downstream
and template oligonucleotides (1:1.2:1.2 molar ratio) at 95 °C
for 5 min and cooling the sample at a rate of 1 °C/min to 10
°C in a PCR thermocycler.

Single-Nucleotide Gap-Filling
DNA Synthesis
Steady-state
kinetic parameters for single-nucleotide gap-filling reactions at
37 °C were determined by initial velocity measurements as described
previously. Unless noted otherwise, enzyme
activities were determined using a standard reaction mixture containing
50 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.4, 37 °C), 100 mM KCl, 10 mM MgCl2, 1 mM DTT, 100 μg/mL bovine serum albumin, 10% glycerol, and
500 nM single-nucleotide gapped DNA. For reactions with TMAO, glycerol
was omitted. Enzyme concentrations and reaction time intervals were
chosen so that substrate depletion or product inhibition did not influence
initial velocity measurements. Reactions were stopped with EDTA and
samples mixed with an equal volume of formamide dye. The substrates
and products were separated on 16% denaturing (8 M urea) polyacrylamide
gels. Because a 6-carboxyfluorescein 5′-labeled primer was
used in these assays, the products were quantified using the GE Typhoon
phosphorimager in fluorescence mode. Steady-state kinetic parameters
were determined by fitting the rate data to the Michaelis equation.
When the observed rates could not be saturated because of poor substrate
binding, the data were fit to an alternate form of the Michaelis equation
to extract the apparent catalytic efficiency (kcat/KM, best-fit initial slope).

dRP Lyase
Activity
To generate a 5′-dRP group,
the annealed DNA substrate with a 5′-uracil on the downstream
oligonucleotide was treated with 50 nM uracil DNA glycosylase for
30 min at 37 °C. The DNA substrate was stored on ice until it
was used. Prior to being used, the DNA substrate was incubated at
37 °C for 5 min before initiation of the reaction with enzyme.
The reaction mixture included 50 mM HEPES-KOH (pH 7.5), 20 mM KCl,
0.5 mM EDTA, 1 mM DTT, 10% glycerol, and 100 nM DNA. For reactions
with TMAO, glycerol was omitted. Reactions were quenched with freshly
prepared cold 200 mM NaBH4 (final concentration) and mixtures
put on ice for at least 30 min. After the mixtures had been briefly
heated (5 min at 95 °C), the DNA was resolved on 15% denaturing
(8 M urea) polyacrylamide gels. Because a 6-carboxyfluorescein 3′-labeled
downstream oligonucleotide was used in these assays, the products
were visualized using the GE Typhoon phosphorimager in fluorescence
mode.

Results
It has been reported that pol β(L22P)
exhibits no lyase activity
and negligible polymerase activity,, so that it
was anticipated that the L22P substitution would significantly perturb
the NMR resonances of the pol β lyase domain. A comparison of
the 1H–15N HSQC spectra obtained for
pol β(L22P) with that of pol β reveals that the amide
resonances of the catalytic domain show negligible or small chemical
shift perturbations, while the amide resonances of the lyase domain
are largely absent (Figure A,B). The spectra
also contain additional intense resonances consistent with substantial,
domain-specific unfolding. In harmony with these observations, the 1H–15N HSQC spectrum obtained for the isolated
mutant pol β lyase domain, LD(L22P), is generally consistent
with expectations for a random coil (Figure C); the 1H shift range of the amide protons is mostly
localized to the region between ∼8 and 8.5 ppm. Some resonance broadening is observed, suggesting
a dynamic state that may include regions containing some degree of
secondary structure. In contrast with these results, the spectrum
of the wild-type LD exhibits dispersion typical of a folded domain
(Figure C).

Effects of the L22P mutation on amide
resonances of pol β.
(A) Overlay of the 1H–15N HSQC spectra
of 130 μM [U-2H,15N]pol β (blue)
and 116 μM [2H,15N]pol β(L22P) (red).
(B) Expansion of the boxed region showing the disappearance of lyase
domain resonances. (C) Overlay of the 1H–15N HSQC spectra of 100 μM [U-2H,15N]LD
(blue) and 100 μM [2H,15N]LD(L22P) (red).
All samples were in 50 mM Tris-d11 (pH
7.6), 150 mM KCl, 1 mM CDTA, 10 mM NaN3, and 10% D2O. Spectra were recorded at 25 °C.

Previous NMR studies of pol β containing 13C-labeled
methyl groups have proven to be particularly useful for the analysis
of substrate binding and conformational activation.,, The region of the 1H–13C HSQC spectrum containing the isoleucine δ-methyl
resonances of binary complexes of pol β or the L22P variant
with a double-hairpin gapped DNA substrate is shown in Figure A. The δ-13CH3-Ile resonances
in the LD annotated with blue numbers are essentially missing for
the L22P mutant, consistent with the conclusions regarding the loss
of structure described above. Alternatively, the δ-13CH3-Ile resonances in the polymerase domain are unaffected
(black annotations) or, in some cases, show small but significant
shift perturbations (magenta annotations). Importantly, the latter
resonances overlay quite well with resonances from uncomplexed wild-type
pol β, indicating that there is very little binding of the double-hairpin
substrate by the mutant enzyme (Figure B).
Thus, the apparent indirect chemical shift perturbations of the isoleucine
106, 119, 138, 257, 260, and 277 resonances resulting from the L22P
mutation can all be explained by the loss of DNA binding and the accompanying
loss of the DNA-induced conformational perturbations (Figure C). Interestingly, the δ-13CH3 resonance for Ile97, corresponding to a residue on α-helix
F, has also disappeared and is annotated in blue (Figure A). Although this helix is typically assigned to
the DNA-binding subdomain, it interacts closely with helices A and
E in the LD, so it is not surprising that the catastrophic loss of
structure of the LD should significantly affect a residue on α-helix
F. Examination of the well-resolved amide resonances of the variant
enzyme indicates disappearance for residues 99 and 100, but not residue
104, suggesting that from a structural standpoint, the integrity and
positioning of α-helix F are strongly dependent on the presence
of a folded LD.

Effect of the L22P mutation on pol β Ile methyl
resonances.
(A) 1H–13C HSQC spectral overlay corresponding
to binary complexes of [δ-13CH3-Ile]pol
β (black) and [δ-13CH3-Ile]pol β(L22P)
(red) with a one-nucleotide gapped double-hairpin DNA substrate. Resonances
experiencing large shifts (presumably to the random coil positions)
are annotated in blue, and resonances experiencing smaller shifts
are annotated in magenta. (B) Expansion of the HSQC spectrum shown
in panel A with an additional overlay of apoenzyme [δ-13CH3-Ile]pol β (teal), illustrating that most of
the Ile resonance shifts in the polymerase domain do not result directly
from the mutation but are indirect consequences of weakened DNA binding.
(C) Structure of the pol β·DNA ternary complex (Protein
Data Bank entry 3ISD) showing the residues whose resonances are affected by the L22P
(orange) mutation. Blue and magenta residues in panel C correspond
to blue and magenta annotations in panel A, respectively. All samples
were in 50 mM Tris-d11 (pH 7.6), 150 mM
KCl, 1 mM CDTA, 10 mM NaN3, and 100% D2O. Spectra
were recorded at 25 °C.

Interaction of DNA with the Pol β LD
The amino-terminal
LD of pol β has a pI of 10.4 and a high affinity for both single-
and double-stranded DNA. As shown previously,
the methionine methyl resonances in pol β provide useful indicators
of both ligand binding and conformational activation, with Met18 specifically
sensing interactions with the DNA located immediately downstream of
the single-nucleotide gap. As expected
from the behavior of amide resonances discussed above, the Met18 methyl
resonance of LD(L22P) is strongly shifted from its position in the
wild-type domain, exhibiting an intense peak at δ(1H,13C) = (2.07,16.97), close to the expected position
for a methionine methyl resonance in a random coil peptide (Figure A). In the presence
of excess ssDNA, a second, considerably less intense resonance is
observed at δ(1H,13C) = (1.66,16.08) close
to the position of the Met18 resonance in the wild-type LD (Figure B). Further addition of ssDNA leads to only minimal
changes, indicating that the stabilization resulting from ssDNA binding
is insufficient to fully compensate for the destabilization produced
by the L22P mutation. Analogous results were obtained using hairpin
DNA, similar in structure to those used in our previous studies (Figure C)., Although the intensity of the
shifted Met18 resonance in the DNA–LD(L22P) complex is considerably
lower than that of the resonance in the uncomplexed domain, the fraction
of folded LD(L22P) is higher than a direct comparison of the intensities
would indicate, because of the relaxation differences between the
folded and unfolded conformations.

Effects of DNA and TMAO on the Met18 resonance
of the isolated
pol β lyase domain. (A) Overlaid 1H–13C HSQC spectra of [13CH3-Met]LD (black) and
[13CH3-Met]LD(L22P) (red). (B) Overlaid 1H–13C HSQC spectra of [13CH3-Met]LD(L22P) in the absence (red) or presence (blue) of 187
μM ssDNA. (C) Overlaid 1H–13C HSQC
spectra of [13CH3-Met]LD (orange) and [13CH3-Met]LD(L22P) in the presence of 411 μM
hairpin DNA (green). (D) Overlaid 1H–13C HMQC spectra of [13CH3-Met]LD(L22P) in the
presence of 1, 2, or 3 M TMAO (black, blue, or red, respectively).
All spectra correspond to 100 ± 12 μM LD in 50 mM Tris-d11 (pH 7.6), 150 mM KCl, 1 mM CDTA, 10 mM NaN3, and 100% D2O. Spectra were recorded at 25 °C.

Effects of TMAO on the
Conformation of the LD
TMAO
is a naturally occurring organic osmolyte that has been shown to promote
protein folding by destabilizing the unfolded state. Titration of a sample of [13CH3-Met]LD
with TMAO results in a loss of intensity of the random coil Met18
resonance, and a parallel increase in the intensity of a broad resonance
near the folded position (Figure D). Interestingly,
the TMAO titration does not produce a concentration-dependent shift
perturbation, but rather a shift in the ratio of intensities of the
two observed methionine methyl resonances. These results are consistent
with a two-state conformational equilibrium of the LD(L22P), in which
the primary effect of the TMAO is to alter the relative stability
of the two component states. In comparison with the effects of the
DNA ligands shown in panels B and C of Figure , the TMAO-induced Met18 resonance is broader and further shifted
from its position in the wild-type LD, and the Met18 peak at the random
coil position is much more effectively eliminated. Despite these changes
suggesting that TMAO promotes folding of the LD(L22P) to a conformation
similar to that of the wild-type domain, the 1H–15N HSQC spectrum of the [U-15N]LD(L22P) shows considerably
less dispersion and uniformity than the spectrum of the domain lacking
the mutation (Figure S1 of the ). In general, the effects observed are consistent with studies indicating
that the primary effect of TMAO is destabilization of the random coil
form of the domain as a result of unfavorable interactions between
the TMAO and the peptide backbone.,,

Substrate-Induced Folding and Conformational
Activation of Pol
β(L22P)
In response to the addition of its substrates,
pol β undergoes a series of conformational changes that are
conveniently monitored with the methionine methyl resonances. The 1H–13C spectrum
of [13CH3-Met]pol β(L22P) is very similar
to that of the wild-type enzyme, except that the Met18 resonance typically
observed at δ(1H,13C) = (1.66,16.10) is
replaced by an intense resonance at δ(1H,13C) = (2.08,16.97), as seen for the isolated LD (Figure , black spectrum). Addition of a single-nucleotide gapped
double-hairpin DNA substrate to [13CH3-Met]pol
β(L22P) produces a typical, small shift of the Met236 resonance.
For Met18, two resonances are observed: a sharp and intense resonance
near the random coil position and a broader resonance near the position
expected for Met18 in the wild-type DNA complex (Figure , red spectrum). On the basis of comparisons of the methionine
resonance intensities, we estimate that in the presence of the double-hairpin
DNA, ∼20% of the pol β(L22P) has adopted a folded state
approximating that of the wild-type enzyme. Because the DNA-stabilized
pol β(L22P) contains the mutation, the substrate-rescued conformation
is expected to approximate rather than duplicate that of the wild-type
enzyme.

Effects of substrates on methionine resonances of pol β(L22P).
Overlaid 1H–13C HSQC spectra correspond
to 100 μM [13CH3-Met]pol β(L22P)
alone (black) and after addition of 119 μM one-nucleotide gapped
double-hairpin DNA (red) and further addition of 500 μM dATP
in the presence of 10 mM CaCl2 (blue). Samples were in
50 mM Tris-d11, 150 mM KCl, 1 mM CDTA,
10 mM NaN3 (pH 7.6), and 100% D2O and run at
25 °C.

Next, an abortive ternary
complex was formed by addition of complementary
dATP and CaCl2 to the binary pol β(L22P)·DNA
complex (Figure , blue spectrum). This strategy
represents an alternative to that used previously, in which gap-filling
synthesis was blocked using either a dideoxy-terminated primer or
a nonhydrolyzable dNTP analogue., The use of
Ca2+ represents an attractive alternative because it promotes
a ternary complex with the true enzyme substrates but fails to support
catalysis. Although in the binary complex
only the Met18 resonance exhibits two peaks, formation of the ternary
complex results in two sets of resonances for each methionine methyl
group, except for Met191. The methionine resonance shifts indicate
that in the presence of these substrates, the fraction of the pol
β·DNA·dATP ternary complex in which the LD has been
conformationally rescued by the DNA substrate undergoes further conformational
activation similar to that of the wild-type ternary complex. In particular,
the abortive ternary complex is characterized by a downfield shift
of the Met158 resonance in the 13C dimension, and an upfield
shift of the Met282 resonance in the 1H dimension. As discussed
previously, this 1H shift is consistent with the transition
to a closed enzyme conformation and the increased proximity of the
Met282 methyl group to Phe320. Although
in previous studies of the wild-type enzyme, the Met18 resonance was
observed to respond to the DNA substrate but not to the formation
of the ternary complex, the Met18 resonance of pol β(L22P) undergoes
an additional shift change upon ternary complex formation (Figure ). Apparently, the reduced stability of the LD in
the mutant enzyme makes the domain conformation more susceptible to
the perturbation produced by ternary complex formation.

One
other characteristic worth noting is the observation of a shifted
Met155 resonance in the ternary complex. Previous studies of Mg-containing
ternary complexes did not result in an observable Met155 peak, which
was too severely broadened to permit unequivocal observation. In contrast,
the Ca2+-containing ternary complex appears to provide
greater stabilization of the closed enzyme conformation, so that the
shifted resonance for Met155 can be observed. This observation is
independent of the presence of the L22P mutation, and we have made
similar observations in other studies of Ca2+-containing
pol β ternary complexes (unpublished results). For the Ca2+ ternary complex, Met191 is also subject to a small resonance
shift. Overall, these studies demonstrate that the DNA substrate is
able to induce a folded conformation of the mutated LD that approximates
that of the wild-type enzyme. Formation of an abortive ternary complex
is then able to induce the conformationally activated state in a fraction
of the substrate-rescued enzyme. A larger fraction of the enzyme contains
an apparently unfolded LD, binds DNA poorly, and fails to undergo
conformational activation (Figure ).

A comparison of the 1H–13C HSQC spectra
obtained for ternary complexes of the wild-type and L22P [13CH3-Met]pol β mutant is shown in Figure . In both cases, the abortive ternary complex is
produced by addition of double-hairpin DNA forming a single-nucleotide
gap with a templating thymine base, dATP, and CaCl2. Under
the conditions used in this study, the entire ternary pol β
complex exhibits the resonance characteristics of the conformationally
activated state. In contrast, the methionine methyl resonances in
the pol β(L22P)·DNA·Ca2+dATP complex are
split into two components that we assign to species containing either
the disordered or the folded LD. In the complex formed with wild-type
pol β, the resonances arising from Met155, Met158, and Met282
are all shifted to positions that correspond to the closed enzyme
structure, while in the complex formed with the L22P mutant, each
of these residues gives rise to both a shifted resonance and an unshifted
resonance. For these three pairs of resonances, the intensity ratio
of the shifted to unshifted peaks provides an estimate of the fraction
of active to inactive enzyme complex. Evaluation of peak intensities
is consistent with ∼20–40% folded enzyme complex.

Spectral comparison
of abortive ternary complexes of wild-type
and L22P pol β. Overlaid 1H–13C
HSQC spectra of 100 μM [methyl-13C]methionine-labeled pol β with a one-nucleotide gap DNA substrate
and dATP in the presence of CaCl2 (magenta) and 100 μM
[methyl-13C]methionine-labeled polβ
L22P variant with a one-nucleotide gap DNA substrate and dATP in the
presence of CaCl2 (blue). Samples were in 50 mM Tris-d11 (pH 7.6), 150 mM KCl, 1 mM CDTA, 10 mM NaN3 (pH 7.6), and 100% D2O and run at 25 °C.

Effect of the L22P Mutation
on DNA Synthesis and dRP Lyase Activities
Not unexpectedly,
the L22P mutant exhibits very low activity when
it is assayed at substrate concentrations that would saturate the
wild-type enzyme. However, attempts to measure steady-state kinetic
constants showed that the activity of the mutant enzyme increases
approximately linearly with increasing DNA and dNTP concentrations,
reaching a level similar to that of the saturated wild-type enzyme
(Figure ). This behavior is consistent with
a DNA binding defect in pol β(L22P) rather than a nucleotide
insertion deficiency. The loss of catalytic efficiency can be completely
ascribed to the higher apparent KM,dNTP characterizing the mutant enzyme (Table ). An increase in KM,dNTP is expected
for a DNA polymerase that binds DNA more weakly (i.e., lower processivity
because of an increase in its dissociation rate constant). Although it is difficult to saturate the L22P
mutant with substrates, an apparent catalytic efficiency (kcat/KM,dCTP) can
be easily quantified. In the presence of 1 μM DNA, the apparent
efficiency is 0.69 × 10–3 μM–1 s–1, more than 1000-fold lower than that of wild-type
pol β [dG-dCTP (Table )].

Steady-state
kinetic characterization of pol β(L22P). The
left panel shows the DNA concentration dependence of the observed
rate of insertion of dCMP opposite guanine in a single-nucleotide
gapped DNA substrate. The concentration of dCTP was 1 mM. The right
panel shows the dCTP concentration dependence of the observed rate
of insertion of dCMP opposite guanine. The concentration of the single-nucleotide
gapped DNA substrate was 1 μM. Because the observed rate increased
in an approximately linear fashion with substrate concentration, the
data were fit to a hyperbolic equation to extract the best-fit initial
slope (i.e., apparent catalytic efficiency, gray line; see ).

Steady-State Kinetic Parameters for
Single-Nucleotide Gap-Filling DNA Synthesis


enzyme	incoming
nucleotide	TMAO (1 M)	KM,dNTP (μM)	kcat (s–1)	kcat/KM,dNTP (×10–3 μM–1 s–1)	fidelity	
WT	dCTP	–	1.18 (0.08)	0.96 (0.07)	814 (80)	–	
WT	dCTP	+	0.26 (0.07)	0.26 (0.06)	1000 (355)	–	
WT	TTP	–	ND	ND	0.08 (0.02)	10175	
WT	TTP	+	125 (25)	0.088 (0.002)	0.7 (0.1)	1430	
L22P	dCTP	–	ND	ND	0.69	–	
L22P	dCTP	+	38 (2)	0.51 (0.03)	13 (1)	–	
L22P	TTP	–	NA	NA	NA	NA	
L22P	TTP	+	ND	ND	0.0042	3100	
The
templating base in the gap
is guanine. When standard errors are given, the results represent
the mean of at least two independent determinations.

Fidelity = [(kcat/KM,dCTP)/(kcat/KM,dTTP)].

Wild-type enzyme.

Not determined because of weak substrate
binding. In this situation, the concentration dependence of the observed
activities was fit to eq .

No activity was observed.

The amino-terminal LD is responsible for targeting
pol β
to gapped DNA substrates bearing a 5′-phosphate or dRP group. During base excision repair, the LD removes
the 5′-dRP group generating a 5′-phosphate required
for DNA ligation after DNA gap-filling synthesis. The destabilizing
effect of the L22P mutation on the structure of the LD would also
be expected to strongly reduce the dRP lyase activity of pol β.
A qualitative dRP activity assay indicates that while activity is
reduced, it is not eliminated (Figure ). This
residual activity is consistent with DNA-induced folding of the mutated
domain.

Influence of TMAO on the dRP lyase activity of the wild-type and
L22P LD. A 5′-uracil-containing downstream oligonucleotide
labeled at its 3′-end with 6-FAM (U, lane D) was treated with
uracil DNA glycosylase as described in  to create a substrate (S) for the dRP lyase reaction.
The 5′-terminal dRP-containing oligonucleotide migrates farther
than the U-containing strand. Removal of the dRP group results in
a shorter product (P). The dRP lyase reaction was monitored for 5
and 10 min in the absence (−) or presence (+) of 2 M TMAO with
50 nM enzyme. The last lane included 500 nM wild-type (WT) enzyme,
demonstrating complete conversion of substrate to product.

Because TMAO appears to stabilize the folded form
of the lyase
domain of the mutant enzyme, activity was measured in the presence
of TMAO. In the presence of 1 M TMAO, steady-state kinetic parameters
for gap-filling DNA synthesis were easily quantified (Table ). The apparent binding affinities for substrates
are increased significantly, resulting in ∼20-fold increases
in catalytic efficiencies. Higher concentrations of TMAO do not increase
activity. The fidelity [i.e., (kcat/KM,dCTP)/(kcat/KM,dTTP)] of the mutant enzyme is similar to
that of the wild-type enzyme in the presence of TMAO, suggesting that
the L22P substitution does not influence nucleotide discrimination.
Interestingly, the fidelity of the wild-type enzyme is significantly
reduced in the presence of TMAO (Table ; −TMAO,
10175 ; +TMAO, 1430). With respect to dRP lyase activity, the activity
of the isolated L22P LD is increased significantly in the presence
of TMAO (Figure ), whereas the activity of
the wild-type LD is moderately decreased.

Discussion
DNA
pol β is composed of two domains that complement its
biological function in base excision repair. The amino-terminal 8
kDa LD removes the 5′-deoxyribose phosphate generated after
incision by apurinic/apyrimidinic endonuclease during the repair of
simple base lesions. The LD recognizes
the 5′-phosphate in DNA gaps, thereby targeting the polymerase
for gap-filling DNA synthesis. The nucleotidyl transferase activity
of pol β resides in the 31 kDa carboxyl-terminal polymerase
domain. A helix–hairpin–helix structural motif is found
in each domain and interacts with the DNA backbone in a non-sequence-dependent
manner on opposite sides of gapped DNA. Genomic mutations that alter
DNA repair systems are a common feature of cancer cells, and changes
in the DNA repair enzyme pol β have been identified in several
cancers.−,, A leucine to proline change at residue 22 of pol β was isolated
from a gastric carcinoma. The change is
situated in the middle of α-helix A in the amino-terminal LD
and forms part of a hydrophobic core. The catastrophic structural
effect resulting from the L22P mutation was not totally unexpected.
It is well-known that proline residues disfavor interior positions
in α-helices; in the referenced
study, the authors were not able to identify any examples of α-helices
containing proline at an interior position. An analogous unfolding
effect has been reported to result from the introduction of a T62P
substitution in α-helix A of the model enzyme, staphylococcal
nuclease. These profound perturbations
highlight the delicate balance that exists between the folded and
unfolded states of proteins. The ability of single- or double-stranded
DNA to partially rescue the conformation of the unfolded lyase domain
was, however, unexpected. Apparently, the binding energy is able to
provide some but not all of the energy required to compensate for
the destabilizing effect of the mutation. Crystallographic structures
of pol β·DNA binary complexes indicate that the short downstream
fragment of gapped DNA interacts with residues on α-helices
B–D, but not directly with helix A. An even stronger effect
might have been observed if the DNA interacted directly with residues
on this helix.

In this series of solution NMR studies, the Met18
methyl resonance
was found to provide a particularly useful readout for the structural
status of the LD, both in isolation and in the full-length protein.
From the perspective of Met18, both pol β(L22P) and the LD(L22P)
behave as bistable systems, with folded and unfolded fractions that
are dependent on the presence of single- or double-stranded DNA. Additionally,
the folded/unfolded ratio can also be influenced by other environmental
factors such as TMAO. In both cases, the exchange between the folded
and unfolded states is apparently slow on the NMR time scale, consistent
with an interconversion rate below ∼106 s–1. The NMR data presented here indicate that the conformational rescue
by DNA is based more on its effective stabilization of the folded
LD, while the effect of the TMAO results more from its destabilization
of the unfolded LD, as has been observed for other proteins.,, Thus, the DNA complex with LD(L22P)
appears to provide a closer approximation of the wild-type structure.
The ability of the TMAO to enhance the activity of pol β(L22P)
indicates that there is some cooperativity between the effects of
the cosolvent and the substrate. A reasonable interpretation of this
result is that the TMAO stabilizes a conformational ensemble that
more closely approximates that of the wild-type enzyme, providing
a more substrate-accommodating binding site than the structure with
an unfolded LD.

In contrast with the analysis based on the methionine
resonances,
a 1H–15N HSQC spectrum of the [U-15N]LD(L22P) indicates that even 3 M TMAO is unable to compensate
for the effects of the L22P mutation (Figure S1 of the ). The more dynamic structure
of the LD(L22P) indicated by the 1H–15N HSQC spectrum is consistent with the broader Met18 methyl resonance
of the folded structure observed in the presence of TMAO (Figure D). For this system, the observation of two resolved
Met18 resonances provides a useful basis for determining the ratio
of folded to unfolded states, while the amide HSQC spectrum does not
lend itself to such a direct evaluation.

Two models are generally
considered for ligand-assisted protein
folding: (1) an induced-fit model in which binding of a ligand to
a catalytically inactive conformation results in a catalytically active
conformation and (2) a conformational
selection model in which binding of a ligand to a minor population
exhibiting a relatively high ligand affinity shifts the equilibrium
to a folded state. The substrate-induced
rescue of full-length pol β(L22P) is consistent with the induced-fit
model. However, because the ligand-binding competent population is
expected to be small and difficult to detect, some degree of conformational
selection cannot be fully discounted. More recently, an extension
of the conformational selection model that also incorporates an induced-fit
component has been proposed. Although
for DNA polymerases, induced fit generally has been discussed in terms
of substrate specificity (i.e., right and wrong nucleotide selection), binding of a ligand to unfolded or partially
unfolded proteins (e.g., intrinsically disordered proteins) alters
their conformational distribution, and this type of ligand-induced
folding is significant for many cellular interactions. Initial DNA
gap binding by pol β is expected to occur through the LD that
recognizes the 5′-phosphate in gapped DNA. In the absence of a folded LD, the level of binding of
DNA to pol β(L22P) is reduced, thereby reducing the catalytic
activities even in the presence of DNA. In addition, nucleotide binding
is also affected. Generally, the binary DNA complex exists in an open
conformation where the nucleotide binding pocket is exposed. Binding
of a nucleotide results in a conformational change (repositioning
of the N-subdomain of the polymerase domain) that provides the enzyme
the opportunity to probe proper base pair geometry. Normally, the
LD forms intimate contacts with the N-subdomain that are necessary
for a stable ternary complex. In the absence of a properly folded
LD, the catalytic efficiencies for nucleotide insertion and nucleotide
binding are strongly compromised (Table ).

It previously has been suggested that the L22P pol β variant
can produce a mutator phenotype, and this
could be a direct consequence of the expression of a variant that
exhibits low fidelity. It is already known that many of the cancer-associated
variants of pol β that produce structural perturbations much
less profound than those produced by the L22P mutation can significantly
reduce polymerase fidelity. The very low activity of the variant and
its limited ability to insert incorrect nucleotides suggest that poor
fidelity is not the direct cause of a mutator phenotype in this case,
as the fidelity of the variant in the presence of TMAO was similar
to that of the wild-type enzyme. Alternatively, a reduced level of
DNA repair, expected because of the loss of activity, and/or the possibility
that the variant interferes with DNA repair (trans-dominant inhibition),
e.g., by forming inactive complexes with XRCC1, may be expected to
indirectly increase the level of mutations.

Supporting Information Available
Effects
of 2 and 3 M TMAO on
the 1H–15N HSQC spectra of the LD(L22P)
(Figure S1). This material is available free of charge via the Internet
at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bi5001855_si_001.pdf

The authors declare
no
competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
We are grateful to Virginia Bass and Cassandra Smith for technical
assistance in the preparations of the pol β variants used in
these studies.

Abbreviations
5′-dRP5-deoxyribose phosphate

BERbase excision repair

DTTdithiothreitol

LDlyase domain

pol βDNA polymerase
β

TMAOtrimethylamine N-oxide

XRCC1X-ray cross complementing group 1 protein.

