In an era
of rising drug resistance
and a diminishing pipeline for new antibiotics, understanding the
mechanisms that drive acquired drug resistance in bacteria has become
critical. Bacterial adaptation and evolution are closely tied to the
stress response (SOS) pathway, a widely conserved, inducible network
of genes involved in DNA repair and recombination that allows bacteria
to respond to DNA damage. The SOS response is governed by a bifunctional
repressor-protease, LexA. In its basal state, LexA represses the transcription
of 15–40 genes involved in the SOS response (Figure A). Interactions with RecA, a sensor of DNA damage,
cause LexA to self-cleave (autoproteolyze), resulting in the derepression
of the downstream SOS genes.− These induced SOS genes include Y-family DNA polymerases,
which catalyze error-prone translesional replication over damaged
DNA and can promote acquired drug resistance., Further,
LexA autoproteolysis increases the level of expression of integrons
involved in the transfer of mobile genetic elements and has been associated
with the formation of biofilms., Thus, LexA and the SOS
pathway regulate several of the major mechanisms by which pathogens
can tolerate antimicrobials and acquire drug resistance.

LexA repressor-protease
regulates the bacterial stress response
(SOS pathway). (A) Autoproteolysis of the LexA repressor-protease
activates the mutagenic SOS response in bacteria. In the absence of
stress, LexA binds to SOS-controlled promoters, limiting their action.
When DNA is damaged, RecA filaments form at the site of damage and
stimulate LexA self-cleavage. Autoproteolysis prompts dissociation
of LexA from DNA, permitting expression of downstream SOS genes. Activation
of the SOS response and its associated DNA damage tolerance pathways
increases bacterial survival and mutation rates. (B) Structure of
LexA from E. coli. LexA binds to DNA as a dimer.
The C-terminal domain (CTD) contains the major dimerization interface
and a serine protease active site. The N-terminal domain displays
a winged helix–turn–helix motif and binds to the palindromic
DNA of the SOS box. The CTD and NTD are connected by a flexible linker
peptide (dashed line), which was not resolved in the crystal structure
(PDB entry 3JSO). The close-up of the LexA CTD active site shows an overlay of the
cleavage-competent and cleavage-incompetent forms of LexA (PDB entries 1JHE and 1JHC, respectively).
The internal cleavage loop of LexA undergoes a large conformational
change between the cleavage-incompetent state (red) and the cleavage-competent
state (purple), placing a scissile bond in the proximity of the active
site serine-lysine catalytic dyad (red and blue surfaces, respectively).
The active site is boxed for the sake of clarity. (C) The LexA cleavage
regions across species from different families of pathogenic bacteria
(Gram-negative, Gram-positive, and mycobacteria) are shown. The scissile
Ala-Gly bond is noted (green arrow), and numbering is shown relative
to Pseudomonas aeruginosa LexA (LexAPa). The percent identity is represented by the degree
of shading with red and plotted below the alignment.

The LexA repressor was the notable first of a family
of enzymes
shown to undergo self-cleavage as part of their physiological function.− Members of this family possess a conserved serine-lysine catalytic
dyad that cleaves between an Ala-Gly or Cys-Gly sequence within the
protease domain. In its repressor role,
LexA functions as a dimer, with each monomer containing an N-terminal
DNA binding domain (NTD) that is connected by a flexible linker to
the C-terminal serine protease domain (CTD) (Figure B). Structural studies of Escherichia coli LexA have shown that the CTD can exist
in two distinct conformations, and that self-cleavage is associated
with a shift from a basal cleavage-incompetent conformation of the
CTD to a cleavage-proficient conformation., Self-cleavage is initiated when LexA is exposed to either activated
RecA (RecA*) in vivo and in vitro or high pH in vitro, features shared by several
other members of the LexA superfamily.−,,

The cleavage-proficient
conformation of LexA has several unique
features. The protein loop containing the scissile Ala-Gly bond appears
to form specific contacts near the active site, suggesting that like
classical serine proteases, there is a binding pocket involved in
cleavage sequence recognition. Indeed,
genetic mutagenesis and selection studies of LexA and the related
λ CI repressor have indicated that point mutations at several
of the residues surrounding the cleavage loop can interfere with self-cleavage.− However, in conventional serine proteases, the scissile bond of
the substrate peptide is almost uniformly bound in the middle of an
extended β-sheet. In LexA, by contrast, the bond is positioned
at the end of a β-turn.,− Furthermore, because LexA acts upon a tethered substrate (the cleavage
region within the same molecule), the effective local concentration
of the substrate is high. This feature may explain why common serine
protease inhibitors, such as diisopropyl fluorophosphate, inhibit
LexA only at extremely high concentrations, and why wild-type LexA
only weakly cleaves peptides or other proteins in trans., This distinctive binding mode and requirement
for a conformational change for catalysis make LexA a potentially
distinctive therapeutic target among proteases.

Genetic and
synthetic biology studies have shown that preventing
LexA autoproteolysis decreases the rate of development of resistance
and can sensitize bacteria to antibiotics. Most notably, when an E. coli strain harboring a noncleavable mutant of LexA was
evaluated in a murine infection model, the development of antibiotic
resistance was abrogated by the loss of normal LexA function. Specifically, while the wild-type bacteria thrived
and became entirely resistant to rifampin after drug exposure in the
mouse model, the mutant strain failed to acquire any rifampin resistance.
In an alternative study, phage-mediated transduction of E.
coli with an inactivated LexA protease was shown to greatly
hypersensitize the bacteria to traditional antibiotics. In addition to participating in the transfer
of mobile genetic elements, LexA has been suggested to mediate persister
formation and play a role in stress-induced mutagenesis.,, Targeting LexA pharmacologically,
therefore, has been suggested as a means to delay the acquisition
of resistance, increase the efficacy of known antimicrobials, and
offer insight into bacterial adaptation and evolution.,,

Despite the availability
of crystal structures of the LexA, a detailed
structure–function relationship of the LexA active site and
the cleavage sequence has yet to be established. Here, we study the
LexA protein from Pseudomonas aeruginosa (LexAPa), a Gram-negative pathogen that is an archetype
for the problem of acquired drug resistance and a major cause of mortality
in cystic fibrosis patients., We developed a methodology
for high-efficiency mutagenesis and enzymatic characterization to
profile the substrate preferences of LexA autoproteolysis comprehensively
for the first time. Combined with available structural data, this
study provides insight into the mechanism of LexA substrate recognition
and lays the groundwork for efforts to develop inhibitors and probes
of LexA, the SOS pathway, and bacterial evolution.

Experimental
Procedures
LexAPa Cloning and Expression
All oligonucleotide sequences used in LexAPa amplification, cloning, and cassette mutagenesis were purchased
from Integrated DNA Technologies (IDT) and are available upon request.
The lexA gene was amplified via polymerase chain
reaction with LexAPa genomic primers from
the P. aeruginosa PA01 strain and cloned into the
pET41 expression vector engineered with an N-terminal His tag and
C-terminal Streptavidin tag. The S125A
active site mutant was generated by QuikChange site-directed mutagenesis.
The enzyme was heterologously expressed in E. coli, followed by one-step purification using the N-terminal tag. The
purified product was predominantly full-length (∼26 kDa), with
trace amounts of self-cleavage that occurs during the course of purification.

Saturation Mutagenesis
For the efficient generation
of saturation and positional scanning mutagenesis variants, mutations
introducing the unique restriction sites AgeI and Eagl were engineered
at nucleotide positions 255 and 282, respectively, in the lexA coding sequence using QuikChange site-directed mutagenesis.
An additional mutation (BamHI) at nucleotide 267
and a TAG stop were included within the cassette region, as mechanisms
for selection against wild-type sequences from the parent vector.
This construct served as the parent cloning vector for cassette-based
mutagenesis. Briefly, the LexAPa cloning
vector was digested with AgeI, BamHI, and EagI for 2 h at 37 °C
and treated with calf intestinal phosphatase. Individual oligonucleotides
containing a degenerate codon (NNS) at each position from position
85 to 94 were ordered from IDT and annealed to their complement with
a standard annealing protocol. Annealed oligonucleotides containing
sticky ends complementary to AgeI and EagI cleavage sites were phosphorylated
with T4 polynucleotide kinase for 1 h at 37 °C. The oligonucleotide
cassettes were ligated into the digested cloning vector using T4 DNA
ligase. The ligation product was then transformed into New England
Biolabs (NEB) 10-β competent cells using standard transformation
procedures. One-tenth of the transformation mixture was plated to
estimate the library size, and the remaining portion was grown overnight
in Luria-Bertani broth. The isolated plasmids from this culture constituted
the saturation mutagenesis library at each position (I85X, G86X, etc.).
Successful incorporation of the degenerate NNS codon was verified
by Sanger sequencing of the library.

Point Mutations of Selected
Residues in the LexAPa Cleavage Loop
The same cassette-based
mutagenesis strategy was adopted to generate the individual point
mutations in residues spanning positions P5 to P2′ of the LexAPa cleavage region (residues 86–92).
For each of the seven positions, 20 forward and reverse oligonucleotides
encoding each amino acid mutation were constructed and ordered from
IDT. Oligonucleotides containing two mutant codons were used for the
LexAPa A89C/I94C double mutant. Oligonucleotide
pairs were annealed, phosphorylated, and ligated into the digested
parent vector, as described above. After transformation, individual
colonies were selected and mutant plasmids were sequenced to confirm
the proper insertion of the mutation cassettes.

Expression
and Purification of LexAPa, Saturation
Mutant Cohorts, or Individual Positional Scanning Mutants
Expression plasmids were transformed into BL21(DE3)-pLysS E. coli cells for heterologous expression. For the saturation
mutant library, the liquid culture after transformation was used as
the starter overnight culture. For point mutants, the transformation
was plated and an individual colony selected for the starter overnight
culture. The following day, 35 mL Luria-Bertani broth cultures were
inoculated with 1 mL of overnight culture and grown at 37 °C
until the OD600 reached ∼0.6. The cultures were
subsequently induced with 1 mM isopropyl β-d-1-thiogalactopyranoside,
shifted to 30 °C, and grown for 4 h. The culture was centrifuged
at 4000 rpm for 20 min at 4 °C and the pellet stored at −80
°C until it was purified. Thawed cell pellets were lysed per
protocol with Bugbuster Mastermix (Novagen). The soluble supernatant
was incubated with 100 μL of reconstituted HisPur resin (Pierce)
for batch binding at 4 °C for 1 h in 10 mL polyprep columns (Bio-Rad).
The flow-through was discarded and the resin subsequently washed three
times with 10 resin volumes of wash buffer [25 mM sodium phosphate
(pH 7.0), 150 mM NaCl, and 30 mM imidazole]. Following the wash, bound
protein was eluted from the resin with 3 resin volumes of elution
buffer [25 mM sodium phosphate (pH 7.0), 150 mM NaCl, and 200 mM imidazole].
The eluted proteins were then dialyzed into 25 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.0),
150 mM NaCl, and 10% glycerol. The same protocol was used for the
wild-type enzyme, saturation mutant libraries, and individual positional
scanning mutants. For the 140 positional scanning mutants (20 amino
acids × 7 positions), the cohorts of 20 mutants at each position
were processed in parallel to provide an internal (wild-type) control.

Alkali-Mediated Qualitative Cleavage Assays of LexAPa
To qualitatively screen the cleavage ability
of LexAPa variants, purified protein was
mixed in a 1:1 ratio with 2× cleavage buffer (100 mM Tris-Glycine-CAPS
and 300 mM NaCl) at pH 7.2 or 10.6. Reaction mixtures were incubated
at room temperature for 16 h. Cleavage was quenched by adding 2×
Laemmli sample buffer to the reaction mixture and by denaturation
at 95 °C for 10 min. The extent of LexAPa cleavage was visualized by running reaction samples on 15%
sodium dodecyl sulfate–polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS–PAGE)
gels and Coomassie staining. Mutants that displayed cleavage were
selected for further quantitative analysis. Coomassie-stained gels
were imaged on a Typhoon Imager using red laser excitation at 633
nm and no filters. The fraction of cleaved protein was calculated
by dividing the density of the LexAPa cleavage
products by the sum of the density of all LexAPa full-length and cleaved components, using Quantity One (Bio-Rad).
Linear detection of Coomassie-stained products was verified by analysis
of standards.

RecA*-Mediated Cleavage of LexAPa Proteins
RecA of E. coli was purchased
from NEB. Purified LexAPa was incubated
with an excess of activated RecA*, generated by premixing ∼100
μg/mL RecA, 900 μM ATPγS, and 10 μM ssDNA. Reactions without RecA were run parallel as
a negative control. Reaction mixtures were incubated at room temperature
for 16 h. The cleavage products were analyzed and quantified as described
for alkali-mediated cleavage.

Alkali-Mediated Quantitative
Assays of LexAPa
For quantitative
kinetic analysis, 25 μL of
purified protein was mixed with 25 μL of 2× cleavage buffer
(pH 10.6) and the mixture incubated at 37 °C for 2 h. At the
given time points, 5 μL of the reaction mixture was removed
and the reaction rapidly quenched in 2× Laemmli sample buffer.
The extent of cleavage over time was visualized on Coomassie-stained
15% SDS–PAGE gels. For restrictive positions, time points were
collected in triplicate, while reactions were run in duplicate for
the permissive positions. Coomassie-stained gels were imaged and quantified
as detailed above.

Calculation of LexAPa Cleavage Rates
and Generation of the LexAPa Cleavage
Profile
The density of the protein bands was quantified using
Quantity One (Bio-Rad). For each time point, the fraction of uncleaved
LexAPa was calculated as described above
and plotted versus time. Rate plots were then fit to the first-order
exponential decay equation A = A0e–kt using Prism to
obtain k, the observed rate of cleavage. To calculate
the specificity profile, we used the enoLOGOS web tool to generate
a normalized sequence LOGO of the P5–P2′ sequence preferences. The cleavage rate constants, k, at each position were used as the relative scaling factors, with
an unknown weight type and the frequency method for calculating the
height of the symbol stacks.

Structural Modeling of LexAPa
To assist with the analysis of our biochemical data,
we generated
a structural model of the LexAPa CTD.
We entered the amino acid sequence of the LexAPa CTD (residues 81–204) into Modeler 2.0, with the crystal structure of activated LexA
from E. coli as the homology template (PDB entry 1JHE).

Liquid Chromatography and Tandem Mass Spectrometry
(LC–MS/MS)
LC–MS/MS was performed at the Proteomics
&amp; Systems Biology
Core Facility at the University of Pennsylvania Perelman School of
Medicine. Purified LexAPa A89C/I94C samples
were either reduced or not reduced with 1 M dithiothreitol and treated
with 300 mM iodoacetamide (molecular mass of 57 Da). Samples were
subsequently digested with trypsin and subjected to LC–MS/MS.
Peptide fragments were identified and analyzed with PEAKS.

Results
The Sequence of LexAPa Is Strongly
Identical to That of LexA of E. coli
The
LexA protein is strongly conserved across all families of bacteria
and shares a high level of sequence similarity.− Given the importance of drug resistance in the opportunistic pathogen P. aeruginosa, we focused our efforts on studying the LexA
of P. aeruginosa (LexAPa). A sequence alignment of LexAPa with
LexA of E. coli (LexAEc) reveals a 64% sequence identity, with notable features such as
the serine-lysine catalytic dyad and the internal cleavage loop conserved
(Figure S1A of the ). This strong sequence identity provided the basis for structural
modeling of the LexAPa CTD to help interpret
our biochemical assays (Figure S2 of the ). We modeled LexAPa based on the structure of the CTD of LexAEc in the active conformation (PDB entry 1JHE), with the high
degree of sequence homology resulting in a root-mean-square deviation
of 1.2 Å between the known and modeled structures.

Saturation
Mutagenesis of LexAPa Reveals the Tolerance
of Residues in the LexA Cleavage Region to
Mutation
We next cloned, expressed, and purified LexA from
reference strain PA01. In accordance with prior biochemical assays
on LexA from other species, we demonstrated that our tagged LexAPa is proficient in both alkali- and RecA*-mediated
autoproteolysis (Figure S3 of the ). Recombinant LexAPa displayed cleavage
kinetics similar to that of tagged or untagged LexA from other species
(see below).,−

Prior biochemical studies
have revealed that the LexA protease has poor cleavage activity in trans.(,) In its wild-type catalytic form,
both the full-length LexA protein and the isolated LexA protease domain
are unable to efficiently cleave the target substrate of a second
LexA enzyme. Extensive mutagenesis of
the enzyme’s active site and the target sequence can allow
for trace detectable activity in trans; however,
it is clear that the native substrate of LexA is itself. We explored the possibility that full-length
LexA or the CTD alone may cleave short peptides that mimic the internal
cleavage loop; however, we did not observe cleavage in fluorescence-
or LC–MS-based cleavage assays (data not shown). For these
reasons, conventional peptide array-, genetic library-, and mass spectrometry-based
methods for assessing protease specificity could not be readily translated
to characterizing LexAPa specificity.− We therefore decided to directly assess LexA’s specificity
by exhaustive mutagenesis of the cleavage loop within the enzyme and
assessing (in cis) autoproteolysis activity. Given
that this approach would require extensive mutagenesis, we implemented
an efficient cassette mutagenesis strategy for introducing variations
into the internal substrate of LexA (Figure S4 of the ).− The specificity
determinants of LexAPa could be delineated
broadly at first by saturation mutagenesis (the introduction of a
degenerate codon) and then in detail by positional scanning mutagenesis
(the generation of individual point mutants to each of the 20 amino
acids).

For saturation mutagenesis, 10 duplexed oligonucleotide
cassettes
that contain a degenerate NNS codon at each position from Ile85 to
Ile94 (e.g., I85X) were produced. The degenerate NNS codon encodes
all 20 potential amino acid variants and one potential stop codon
(TAG). The calculated depth of the library at each position was &gt;1000-fold,
and the presence of a degenerate NNS codon at each position was verified
by sequencing. Although this library is not proportionally represented
for the various amino acid substitutions, we reasoned that the general
patterns of restrictive and permissive positions could be gleaned
from analysis of a positionally diversified cohort of variants.

For each position, we expressed and purified the mutant protein
library in cohort, which showed expression characteristics and solubility
similar to those of wild-type LexAPa.
Each cohort was then incubated overnight at pH 7.2 or 10.6, and the
fraction of cleavage was assessed under these conditions (Figure ). The positions clustered into two general groups
based upon comparison to wild-type LexAPa: positions P5 (G86), P3 (V88), P2 (A89), P1 (A90), and P1′
(G91) appear to be restrictive to mutation, displaying small changes
in the fraction of cleaved protein (&lt;30%), while the remaining
positions were more permissive to the introduction of a degenerate
codon, exhibiting changes in cleavage levels closer to that of the
wild-type enzyme despite being highly diversified (Figure ). We repeated the analysis in the presence or absence
of RecA* and found the same overall patterns of tolerant and restrictive
positions with this alternative stimulus for autoproteolysis (Figure
S5 of the ). Notably,
as RecA*-mediated cleavage analysis was used as a purely qualitative
measure, we used RecA from E. coli in our assays
(74% identical and 87% similar to that of P. aeruginosa) because of its availability and the observation that LexAPa cleaves as efficiently as LexAEc under RecA* stimulation.

Saturation mutagenesis of the LexAPa cleavage region. For each position from
I85 to I94, the wild-type
codon was substituted with a degenerate NNS codon. To determine the
tolerance for mutation at each position qualitatively, the saturation
mutant library at each position was purified as a cohort and subjected
to overnight self-cleavage at pH 7.2 (L) or pH 10.6 (H). Self-cleavage
of the full-length (FL) enzyme results in the generation of the isolated
C-terminal and N-terminal domains (CTD and NTD, respectively). The
multiple banding in the lower-molecular weight fragments is caused
by the migration patterns of mutants with an altered charge state.
The fraction of cleavage product detected under each condition is
shown (pH 7.2, gray columns; pH 10.6, black columns). Error bars represent
the standard error of duplicate trials.

Positional Scanning Mutagenesis and a Cleavage Screen of Residues
P5–P2′ Identify Specific Residues That Are Important
for LexAPa Autoproteolysis
The
qualitative overview from saturation mutagenesis set the stage for
detailed quantitative analysis. Here, we focused on the residues of
positions P5–P2′, spanning the most restrictive sites
we identified by saturation mutagenesis. Furthermore, the LexAPa homology model suggests that these residues
form the most extensive interactions with the surrounding active site
pocket (Figure S2 of the ).

In our positional scanning mutagenesis approach, for each
position of interest, we individually mutated the residues to each
of the 20 potential amino acids (G86A, G86S, G86T, etc.) using cassette
mutagenesis. For each position, all 20 variants were expressed, purified
in parallel and subjected to both alkali- and RecA*-mediated cleavage
overnight to identify specific variants that permitted autoproteolysis
(Figure S6 of the ). Together, the individual point mutants in this assay validated
the patterns observed with saturation mutagenesis. The full cleavage
profiles for each position are provided in Figure S6 of the , with select examples
of a restrictive and tolerant position shown in Figure . Restrictive positions, such as P1 (A90), tolerate only a
few mutations, while permissive positions, such as P4 (R87), tolerated
all amino acids, although to varying degrees (Figure ). Both alkali- and RecA*-mediated cleavage screens yielded
similar cleavage results, with the exception of position P5, where
RecA*-mediated cleavage was more restrictive than alkali-mediated
cleavage (Figure S6A of the ). Overall, the cleavage behavior of select restrictive mutations
in LexAPa (G86V, G86D, V88M, V88E, A89V,
A90D, and A90T) agrees qualitatively with the results of a prior study
of LexA from E. coli that identified slow-cleaving
variants via limited mutagenesis and genetic screening. One notable exception is the aspartate mutation
at the P1′ glycine, which completely abrogates alkali-mediated
and RecA*-mediated cleavage in LexAPa (Figure
S6F of the ) but
allows limited levels of cleavage in LexA from E. coli.

Positional scanning mutagenesis and kinetic
analysis of the LexAPa cleavage region.
Each residue from G85
to A92 was mutated to each of the 20 amino acids. Each point mutant
was expressed and purified separately. Shown are the results from
overnight cleavage at pH 7.2 (L) or pH 10.6 (H) for each mutant of
(A) A90 (position P1), a relatively restrictive position, or (B) R87
(position P4), a relatively tolerant position. The wild-type enzyme
is denoted by WT. Cleavable mutants of (C) A90 (position P1) or (D)
R87 (position P4) from the initial cleavage screen were then evaluated
for their alkali-stimulated cleavage kinetics. The data represent
three replicates for restrictive (P1) positions and two replicates
for tolerant (P4) positions. For the sake of clarity, the kinetic
data for five of the 20 R87 variants representing varying cleavage
rates are shown. The points are fit as a first-order exponential decay,
and the standard error is shown. Mutants are grouped by the properties
of their side chains at physiological pH (orange for hydrophobic,
purple for aromatic, yellow for hydrophilic, green for positive charge,
and blue for negative charge). The wild-type (WT) residue is indicated
with a thicker dotted line. Corresponding results for all positions
from P5 to P2′ are displayed in Figures S6 and S7 of the , with quantitative results
for rates listed in Table .

Kinetic Evaluation of Cleavable Mutants
Individual
mutants deemed cleavage-proficient under overnight cleavage conditions
were next subjected to detailed kinetic analysis. We performed the
cleavage reaction under alkali-induced conditions to allow for direct
comparison of the various mutants. Alkali-mediated cleavage, while
nonphysiological, has the distinctive advantage of being a unimolecular
first-order reaction, allowing us to probe the intrinsic substrate
preferences of LexAPa without confounders
such as potential alterations in RecA* interactions (Table ). Employing our method, we determined the rate
of autoproteolysis of all cleavable mutants. Representative data from
one highly restrictive (P1) position and one tolerant position (P4)
are presented in panels C and D of Figure , with kinetic plots for all cleavable variants shown in Figure S7
of the . Notably,
the rate of cleavage of the wild-type enzyme at each position differed
slightly (range of 53–144 × 10–5 s–1) as a result of batch-to-batch variability in expression
and purification. Given that each cohort of 20 mutants at a position
was prepared in parallel, the rate of each mutant was scaled to that
of the wild type to obtain the relative amino acid preferences, with
the comprehensive analysis summarized (Figure A).

Substrate preference for alkali-mediated self-cleavage of LexAPa. (A) Heat map representing the cleavage
rates of the LexAPa point mutants. The
wild-type residues from position P5 to P2′ are listed along
the top. The rows represent each point mutation, listed in order of
the increasing size of the amino acid. Crosses denote analogues that
show no cleavage in the overnight self-cleavage assay at pH 10.6.
For each cleavable analogue, the first-order rate constant for self-cleavage
was determined at pH 10.6 [two or three replicates per condition (Table )]. The rate for each mutant was scaled relative
to the wild-type residue and shown in the heat map as shades from
white to blue. Residues that cleave at rates greater than that of
the wild type are colored deep blue. (B) Normalized sequence LOGO
diagram summarizing the autoproteolysis profile of LexAPa. The diagram was generated using the enoLOGOS program
with the rates of cleavage at each position as the relative scaling
factors. The color scheme groups amino acids as in Figure .

First-Order
Rate Constants for Alkali-Induced
Self-Cleavage of LexAPa Mutants
 	rate, k (×10–5 s–1)	
 	P5	P4	P3	P2	P1	P1′	P2′	
amino acid mutation	G86	R87	V88	A89	A90	G91	A92	
G	76 ± 13	23 ± 2	3.2 ± 0.2	113 ± 8	38 ± 2	144 ± 3	26 ± 2	
A	25 ± 2	143 ± 10	10.5 ± 0.8	98 ± 3	157 ± 10	-	95 ± 13	
S	11 ± 1	85 ± 10	0.5 ± 0.1	121 ± 8	2.0 ± 0.3	2.8 ± 0.3	50 ± 3	
C	3.8 ± 0.3	63 ± 10	5.5 ± 0.5	4.0 ± 0.5	2.3 ± 0.2	–	105 ± 10	
T	2.8 ± 0.3	130 ± 17	8.7 ± 0.5	3.0 ± 0.5	1.0 ± 0.2	–	53 ± 7	
D	7.8 ± 0.2	63 ± 7	–	2.2 ± 0.3	–	–	27 ± 2	
P	–	103 ± 12	–	3.2 ± 0.5	–	–	433 ± 150	
N	15.8 ± 0.3	45 ± 8	–	6.5 ± 0.5	–	–	137 ± 12	
V	0.5 ± 0.2	113 ± 20	76 ± 7	1.0 ± 0.1	–	–	62 ± 5	
E	3.8 ± 0.1	183 ± 33	–	2.2 ± 0.3	–	–	85 ± 8	
Q	2.5 ± 0.2	100 ± 17	–	5.5 ± 0.8	–	–	167 ± 20	
H	7.3 ± 0.2	25 ± 5	–	5.2 ± 1.2	–	–	85 ± 7	
L	0.5 ± 0.2	45 ± 7	0.16 ± 0.01	4.8 ± 0.3	–	–	73 ± 5	
I	7.8 ± 0.2	50 ± 8	15.2 ± 0.7	2.2 ± 0.2	–	–	125 ± 12	
M	11 ± 2	60 ± 7	0.3 ± 0.1	2.2 ± 1.2	–	–	65 ± 5	
K	6.0 ± 0.2	78 ± 10	–	1.3 ± 0.3	–	–	103 ± 10	
F	5.8 ± 0.3	68 ± 10	–	6.8 ± 1.0	–	–	75 ± 12	
Y	6.5 ± 0.3	210 ± 45	–	9.0 ± 1.3	–	–	65 ± 5	
R	3.2 ± 0.2	53 ± 3	–	4.7 ± 0.2	–	–	77 ± 13	
W	5.5 ± 0.2	216 ± 12	–	25 ± 3	–	–	113 ± 15	
The positions
upstream of the cleavage site show an alternating
pattern of being restrictive or permissive to variation, with restrictive
positions favoring the wild-type residue over all other amino acids.
At position P5 (G86), we see a modest tolerance for amino acids with
either a small or flexible side chain, such as A or S, while larger
side chains reduce the level of LexAPa self-cleavage (Figure B). Position P4 (R87),
which appears solvent-exposed in the LexAPa model, shows tolerance to all variants, despite being conserved
as a basic residue across species (Figure C). Indeed, certain acidic or large hydrophobic variants such as
R87E and R87W appear to cleave at rates higher than that of the wild-type
enzyme. Position P3 (V88) is restrictive, with the wild-type residue
preferred 5-fold over the next best variant, V88I. Three of the four
best variants are the β-branched amino acids, suggesting the
possibility of active site engagement with the branched side chains.
Other tolerated variants are hydrophobic and predominantly small amino
acids. Position P2 (A89), exposed in the active conformation of LexAPa, tolerates all amino acids, although to
different extents. Variants with the smallest side chains (A89G, wild
type with A89, and A89S) are most readily cleaved, while the level
of cleavage generally decreases as a function of increasing size.

The positions immediately flanking the cleavage site show highly
restrictive patterns, while preferences are again relaxed in the downstream
positions. At position P1 (A90), only the five smallest amino acids
are tolerated: the wild-type A90 is preferred over the next best variant
A90G by 4-fold, while cleavage is detectable with A90C, A90S, and
A90T, suggesting significant active site constraints at this position.
Position P1′ (G91) is situated at the β-turn of the LexA
cleavage region in its active conformation. It is the most restrictive
position among those examined, with only a serine mutation retaining
any detectable self-cleavage activity (∼50-fold slower than
the WT). Position P2′ (A92) is a solvent-exposed residue and
situated at the end of the β-turn. The tolerance of this position
to mutation is in line with its poor conservation across species isoforms
of LexA (Figure C).

The kinetic data
determined at each position allow for the construction
of the overall sequence preference heat map for LexAPa (Figure A). The calculated cleavage
rates were used to build the position-specific scoring matrix, which
was then graphically converted into a sequence LOGO depiction that
encapsulates the substrate specificity profile for LexAPa (Figure B). As evidenced
in the sequence LOGO, positions tolerant to mutation have high entropy
or variability, while restrictive positions show low variability.

Kinetic Analysis Reveals LexAPa Mutants
That Cleave Faster than the Wild-Type Enzyme
In our kinetic
assays of the LexAPa mutants, we observed
that certain mutants interestingly exhibited a cleavage rate higher
than that of the wild-type enzyme (“hyperactive” mutants).
While some hyperactive mutants of LexA have previously been discovered
through genetic screens,, the molecular basis
for hyperactive self-cleavage has not been well-investigated. In our
mutagenesis, A92P shows a notable cleavage rate ∼4-fold higher
than that of the wild-type enzyme and undergoes autoproteolysis even
under nonstimulatory conditions (neutral pH, no RecA*) (Table  and Figure S6G of the ). The transition between the cleavage-incompetent
and cleavage-competent forms of LexA is associated with a β-turn
at the cleavage site (A90-G91). Because
position A92 is located at the end of the β-turn in the LexA
cleavage loop, we hypothesized that a mutation to proline stabilizes
the β-turn and could thereby promote the active conformation
of the protein., To test this hypothesis, we introduced
cysteine mutations at positions A89 and I94, two residues that are
within disulfide bonding distance in the active conformation (Figure
S2 of the ). We then
confirmed by mass spectrometry that the variant formed an intramolecular
disulfide bond across the β-turn (Figure S8 of the ). While the individual
point mutants have rates of cleavage slower than (A89C) or comparable
to (I94C) that of the wild type, the A89C/I94C double mutant is enhanced,
in line with the A92P cleavage rate (Figure ). While the mechanism cannot be definitively assessed, the A92P
and A89C/I94C LexA variants point to the importance of secondary structure
formation in the cleavage region, with potential implications for
inhibitor design.

Stabilizing the β-turn around the LexAPa scissile bond enhances autoproteolysis. (A) Time-dependent
cleavage profiles of LexAPa wild type
(WT), A92P, and A89C/I94C. Proteins were incubated at pH 10.6, quenched
at the given time points, and visualized using SDS–PAGE. (B)
Cleavage kinetics of hyperactive variants and controls with individual
mutants to cysteine. In triplicate, the fraction of uncleaved protein
was determined using densitometry and fit as a function of time according
to first-order decay kinetics.

Discussion
The emergence of drug resistance in bacterial
pathogens is one
of the most pressing issues in infectious diseases today, particularly
given the limited pipeline of new antimicrobials to combat this threat., Given the need for a better mechanistic understanding of bacterial
adaptation and novel approaches to combating drug resistance, the
idea of targeting the pathways that allow bacterial pathogens to adapt
and evolve resistance to antibiotics has been proposed., In support of this approach, stimulating genetic and synthetic biologic
studies have suggested that targeting LexA autoproteolysis can prevent
activation of the SOS pathway and thereby hypersensitize bacteria
to traditional antibiotics, slow acquired drug resistance, and offer
insights into the mechanisms driving bacterial evolution. To inform
our understanding of LexA, we performed exhaustive mutagenesis studies
on &gt;140 variants of LexA that help to delineate the key determinants
of proteolysis. These studies have led us to conclude that the LexA
repressor-protease possesses a unique substrate preference, with both
side-chain and conformational requirements that govern autoproteolysis.
Dissecting each of these stringent, intermediate, and tolerant determinants
for self-cleavage offers insights into LexA’s mechanism (Figure ) and can fuel future efforts to probe the SOS pathway.

Postulated
structure–function relationship of the key residues
in the LexAPa cleavage region. (A) Structural
model demonstrating intermediate, stringent, and tolerant positions
in the active LexAPa cleavage region.
This active site model is taken from the full homology model of the
LexAPa CTD described in Figure S2 of the . Positions evaluated in
this study are shown as sticks and color-coded according to their
selectivity (red, stringent; orange, intermediate; green, tolerant).
Other residues in the LexA cleavage region are shown as pink lines.
The LexAPa catalytic serine S125 and basic
lysine K162 are shaded red and blue, respectively, highlighting the
active site. (B) Interactions between the LexAPa cleavage loop and LexAPa active
site pocket. For each position from position P5 to P2′, the
active site residues (S5–S2′) within van der Waals contact
range of the side chain are noted in the box. Positions P3 (V88) and
P1 (A90) form specific hydrophobic contacts with the surrounding active
site, which are conserved in both LexAPa and LexAEc. Position P2 (A89) interacts
with position P4′ (I94) on the opposite side of the loop turn.
At each of these positions, the wild-type residues and smaller side
chains are more conducive to proteolysis. The two flanking glycines,
G86 and G91 (P5 and P1′, respectively), show a preference for
the wild-type glycine, which may confer rotational flexibility on
the LexA cleavage region, allowing the internal loop to undergo the
transition from the inactive form to the active form. Positions P4
(R87) and P2′ (A92), which are notably solvent-exposed, are
tolerant to all amino acid substitutions, including several that can
enhance cleavage.

Stringent Determinants:
Positions P3, P1, and P1′
We have identified three
positions in the LexA cleavage region that
are restrictive to extensive mutation. Interestingly, although exhaustive
mutagenesis was not performed, point mutations at these positions
were also identified to be important for the self-cleavage of the
related λ CI repressor, and the positions are well conserved
in LexA isoforms across species (Figure C). For LexAPa, positions
P3 and P1 favor the wild-type residues and show tolerance toward β-branched
or small amino acids, respectively. For both positions, analysis of
the crystal structure shows extensive van der Waals contacts between
the side chains and hydrophobic pockets in the LexA active site (Figure B). Because increasing or decreasing the size of
the amino acid at these positions reduces cleavage efficiency (Table ), we conclude that positions P3 and P1 determine
specificity through active site contacts.

Position P1′
is the most restrictive position, tolerating only the wild-type glycine
and a serine mutation. Position P1′ is located at the end
of the β-hairpin turn and undergoes a dramatic bond rotation
during the transition between active and inactive conformations. Only glycine can readily adopt and interconvert
between these unusual Ramachandran angles, thus explaining the strong
preference for the wild-type residue at that position. Larger amino
acids likely cause steric clash with the surrounding protein or are
hindered in making the necessary bond rotations. Interestingly, trace
cleavage was also detectable in the G91S mutant (Figure S6F of the ). We speculate that mutation
to a serine likely allows for the formation of hydrogen bonds between
the side-chain hydroxyl group and peptide backbone that can stabilize
the turn, compensating for the decreased level of rotational freedom.

Intermediate Determinants: Positions P5 and P2
Unlike
the stringent determinants, positions P5 and P2 tolerate a wide range
of mutations yet display a preference for a particular subset of amino
acids. At position P5, the wild-type residue, glycine, is preferred
over a larger amino acid, such as alanine or serine. Similar to position
P1′, in the determined structures of LexA, the glycine at position
P5 undergoes a significant rotation during the transition from the
inactive state to the active state, thus explaining the presence of
a flexible residue that can serve as a molecular hinge.

Position P2 displays an intermediate phenotype,
as well: although all variants are tolerated, amino acids that exceed
the size of serine decrease the rate of self-cleavage. Structurally,
the side chain of position P2 forms contacts with the side chain of
position P4′ (I94) located on the opposite side of the loop
(Figure S2 of the ). Increasing the size of the amino acid likely reduces the rate
of cleavage due to steric clash.

Permissive Positions and
Enhanced Autoproteolysis: Positions
P4 and P2′
In addition to deciphering specificity
determinants, our study has also identified two highly permissive
positions that flank the LexA scissile bond. Positions P4 and P2′
can be mutated to the whole amino acid spectrum without abrogating
LexA cleavage, although changes in the rate of cleavage are observed.
The LexAPa model structure shows both
positions to be relatively solvent-exposed, forming few specific contacts
with the surrounding active site. Interestingly, both positions also
harbor mutations that enhance the level of self-cleavage compared
to that of the wild-type enzyme. At position P4 (R87), mutations removing
a basic residue appear to enhance self-cleavage (Table ), despite the conservation of the basic residue in LexA across
species (Figure C). We speculate that these
rate-enhancing mutations may result from the removal of a potential
repulsive interaction with an adjacent (and well-conserved) positively
charged residue (R120) in the active conformation. Position P2′,
in contrast to position P4, is highly variable across species (Figure C), which correlates well with its tolerance to
mutagenesis in our biochemical study. At position P2′, introduction
of a proline mutation enhances self-cleavage, likely by stabilizing
the β-turn around the scissile bond and thereby promoting the
cleavage-competent state of LexA. This model is supported by our analysis
of the disulfide cross-linked A89C/I94C mutant, which shows cleavage
kinetics similar to those of the A92P mutant (Figure B).

Our results expand the list of previously identified
mutations that enhance LexA cleavage. In a prior study, mutations located at positions P5′ and
P8′ in E. coli LexA, distant from the catalytic
site, were shown to stabilize the active conformation of the entire
LexA cleavage loop., Our results for A92P and A89C/I94C
mutants suggest that stabilizing the β-turn around the scissile
bond with rigid cyclic structures similarly enhances cleavage and
could offer novel avenues for inhibitor design.

Conformational
Constraints and Side-Chain Recognition in LexA
The nature
of our experimental design, which focused on mutations
in the cleavage loop and kinetic analysis of autoproteolysis, requires
that the enzyme and its substrate change simultaneously. Additionally,
given that we evaluated single-point mutants, the impact of combinatorial
modifications in the substrate could not be readily assessed from
our approach. Despite these limitations, the relative independence
of the cleavage loop and the active site residues make it possible
to integrate across our biochemical analysis and structural modeling
to provide a detailed picture of LexA’s specificity. From our
analysis, we postulate that the nature of the specificity determinants
of LexA can be classified under two broad categories: those permissive
for substrate recognition and those permissive for the conformational
change in self-cleavage (Figure B). Much like
conventional proteases, LexA has substrate recognition pockets that
determine its selectivity, most evident at positions P3 (V88) and
P1 (A90) (Figure B). As a key difference from
conventional proteases, however, the LexA cleavage region must internally
rearrange to adopt a proper cleavage-competent conformation for proteolysis
to occur. Positions P5 (G85) and P1′ (G91) are highly dynamic
positions, implying that conformational flexibility at either end
of the cleavage region appears to be important for autoproteolysis.
In support of the importance of dynamic rearrangements in LexA, stabilizing
the β-turn across the scissile bond promotes self-cleavage at
a level above that of the wild type. We postulate that these requirements
for both proper sequence and conformation serve as a mechanism of
self-recognition and limit off-target proteolytic activity. Our findings
help rationalize the low cleavage activity of the LexA protease in trans and offer insights into rational probe design.

Comparison of LexAPa to Similar
Proteases
Our biochemical results are particularly informative
when we compare LexAPa to members of the
larger LexA/signal peptidase superfamily, many of which mediate bacterial
stress responses (Figure S1B of the ). This superfamily includes LexA homologues such
as Bacillus subtilis DinR and Vibrio cholerae SetR, the phage λ CI repressor, and UmuD and MucA, self-cleaving
enzymes that function in the SOS-linked translesion DNA synthesis.,,,,,,, In these enzymes, position
P1′ is universally conserved as a glycine (Figure S1 of the ), suggesting that the
flexibility of position P1′ is likely critical to the mechanism.
The stringent residues involved in side-chain contacts are also strongly
conserved, with a β-branched residue at position P3 and a small
residue at position P1 conserved across comparators (Figure S1B of
the ). Notably, the
position S3 and S1 recognition pockets are entirely conserved between
LexAPa and LexAEc (Figure S1A of the ), suggesting a common mechanism of side-chain recognition in forms
of LexA from different species. For the intermediate determinants,
the position P5 glycine offers the most revealing comparison to other
self-cleaving enzymes. We speculate that this residue is a critical
“hinge” for the conformational change that allows self-cleavage
within a LexA monomer. Interestingly, position P5 is not conserved
in UmuD where cleavage of one monomer can occur in the other monomer’s
active site. Overall, comparing the superfamily
to other common serine proteases, we note that LexA favors small amino
acids in the positions flanking the scissile bond, most similar to
the elastase family of serine proteases., However, the unique self-cleaving mechanism and its conformational
requirements are distinguishing features that appear to be well conserved
across the LexA/signal peptidase superfamily.

Implications for the Design
of Inhibitors and Molecular Probes
of LexA
In addition to revealing insights into the mechanism
of self-cleavage, several aspects of our substrate specificity studies
can potentially help direct future efforts to develop small molecule
probes of the SOS pathway. First, while LexA does not have proficient
activity with peptides in trans, it does have detectable
activity. Peptides or peptidomimetics that incorporate preferred features,
such as the side chains of positions P3 and P1 or β-turn-stabilizing
structures, may be exploited to enhance binding. Even weak binding
peptides or peptidomimetics could be converted into more potent probes
by the incorporation of mechanism-based covalent inhibitor warheads
into such molecules. Second, our discovery of tolerance at positions
P4 and P2′ could be exploited in inhibitor discovery. The introduction
of fluorescent reporters at these positions could aid in screening
for inhibitors of self-cleavage or, given the highly dynamic nature
of position P2′, potential allosteric modulators of the conformational
change. Finally, our discovery of a range of hypocleavable LexA variants
can potentially help further validate LexA’s viability as a
therapeutic target. Given that LexA inhibitors would be unlikely to
fully recapitulate the LexA catalytic mutant, these variants can be
used to reveal the amount of inhibition that will be necessary to
synergize with current antibiotics or to slow acquired antibiotic
resistance.

Implications for Bacterial Mutation and Evolution
We
hypothesize that the identification of rate-enhancing mutations by
prior genetic studies and our biochemical studies has wider implications
for bacterial mutagenesis and evolution., The fact that mutations can enhance cleavage suggests the possibility
that the rate of LexA autoproteolysis may be finely tuned to be fast
enough to facilitate robust SOS responses but slow enough to prevent
aberrant SOS pathway activation. This characteristic has been thought
to be functionally important in different members of the LexA superfamily.
As an example, temperate phage repressors such as the phage λ
CI repressor self-cleave more slowly than LexA during SOS-inducing
treatments, thereby inducing prophage formation only with extensive
DNA damage. Similarly, mutagenesis proteins,
such as UmuD, self-cleave at rates slower than that of LexA, which
could promote translesion DNA synthesis later in the SOS response,
only after higher-fidelity repair mechanisms have failed. Given that self-cleavage can be either slowed
or enhanced by mutations, we hypothesize that the LexA cleavage rate
has been selected for to allow for proper activation of the SOS pathway
and that LexA may serve as a rheostat for evolution under stress.
Our study offers the possibility of modulating the cleavage rates
of LexA across a large range to assess the impact on bacterial mutation
and survival directly under varying degrees of stress.

Supporting Information Available
Alignment of LexAPa with other superfamily members, structural homology
model of LexAPa, functional validation
of LexAPa self-cleavage, overall scheme
of the cassette-based mutagenesis, additional screening and kinetic
data from all scanning and saturation mutagenesis, and LC–MS/MS
data for the LexAPa A89C/I94C mutant.
This material is available free of charge via the Internet at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bi500026e_si_001.pdf

The authors declare no
competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
We thank E. James Petersson and all members of
the Kohli laboratory
for useful comments. We are grateful to Chao-Xing Yuan of the Penn
Proteomics Core for assistance with LC–MS/MS.

Abbreviations
SOSstress response

LexAPaP. aeruginosa LexA

LexAEcE. coli LexA

NTDN-terminal DNA
binding domain

CTDC-terminal serine protease domain

RecA*activated RecA

NEBNew England Biolabs

IDTIntegrated DNA Technologies

LC–MS/MSliquid chromatography
and tandem mass spectrometry

PDBProtein Data Bank.

