Indocyanine green (ICG) is the
only near-infrared (NIR) fluorescent dye approved by the U.S. Food
and Drug Administration (FDA) and European Medicines Agency (EMA)
for human use. With its 820 nm NIR emission
wavelength, ICG is considered a good in vivo contrast
agent with minimal interference from blood and tissue autofluorescence
(∼500–600 nm). It is indicated for determining cardiac
output, hepatic function, and liver blood flow, and for ophthalmic
angiography. ICG is used off-label or in research to visualize anatomical
structures filled with fluid (for example, blood, cerebrospinal fluid,
lymph, or urine) or as a contrast agent for vascular, renal, or excretory
pathways. In aqueous environments, ICG
molecules aggregate and ICG fluorescence readily degrades.− In blood, ICG binds to plasma proteins, enhancing its fluorescence
intensity. In vivo ICG fluorescence intensity and
duration may vary with fluctuating plasma protein and lipoprotein
concentrations and interindividual variation.

To overcome the
protein binding dependency, scientists have attempted
to add ICG to hydrophobic polymers, serum albumin, and nanoparticles,
including liposomes. Recent reports on ICG and liposomes with diverse
physiochemical characteristics prepared by various procedures have
demonstrated the potential of ICG–lipid particles for optical
imaging of lymphatic function,, sentinel lymph nodes
(SLNs), vascular permeability, and angiogenesis. However, most of these liposomes with varying compositions containing
ICG were prepared without a full understanding of the interactions
between ICG and lipids. Under certain conditions, ICG can physically
interact with phospholipids in the liposome membrane and modify the
stability and quantum yield of ICG as well as the structure and stability
of the lipid membrane. ICG may also be encapsulated in the aqueous
compartment of liposomes. These properties and variations could profoundly
impact optical NIR imaging quality and the ability to provide medical
diagnostic value.

Not all liposomes are alike; some may consist
of phospholipids
with different headgroups and fatty acyl chains, while others may
include cholesterol or other additives, all of which can alter a liposome’s
physiochemical properties. Because of
a high degree of overlap between the absorption and emission spectra
of ICG, ICG exhibits concentration-dependent fluorescence quenching
(self-quenching). It is therefore important to define not only the
lipid–ICG interactions but also the optimal density of ICG
molecules within a lipid bilayer that exhibits both maximal fluorescence
intensity per ICG molecule and minimal self-quenching. On the basis
of the biochemical characteristics of ICG and lipid–ICG interactions,
a stoichiometric range of the lipid:ICG molar ratio that prevents
self-quenching and maximizes the fluorescence yield can be achieved
through systematic studies. Binding of ICG to the lipid has been assumed
through indirect evidence to stabilize ICG fluorescence and protect
the ICG molecule from oxidation, resulting in an enhanced fluorescence
intensity.,,− However, the interactions between ICG and lipid have yet to be studied.

Therefore, the goals of this study are to elucidate the lipid–ICG
interactions that influence ICG fluorescence intensity and ICG–lipid
complex stability and to evaluate liposomal ICG as an in vivo imaging agent. We found that ICG binds to lipid and in the process
stabilizes and enhances its fluorescence properties, overcoming the
dependency on protein binding. Compared to free ICG, ICG embedded
in a lipid membrane enhanced the visualization of the popliteal lymph
node and downstream lymph nodes in mice and allowed light to be transmitted
through 1.5 cm of muscle tissue. In addition, these liposomal ICG
nanoparticles, produced by an efficient and scalable preparation procedure
that incorporates nearly 100% of ICG, had excellent light exposure
and storage stability.

Experimental Procedures
Chemicals
Indocyanine green (ICG, C43H47N2NaO6S2, sodium 2-{7-[3,3-dimethyl-1-(4-sulfonatobutyl)benz[e]indolin-2-ylidene]hepta-1,3,5-trien-1-yl}-3,3-dimethyl-1-(4-sulfonatobutyl)benz)
was purchased from Sigma-Aldrich (St. Louis, MO). 1,2-Distearoyl-sn-glycero-3-phosphocholine (DSPC), 1,2-distearoyl-sn-glycero-3-phosphoethanolamine-N-methoxy-polyethylene
glycol-2000 (DSPEmPEG2000), and l-α-phosphatidylcholine
(Egg PC) were purchased from Avanti Polar Lipids (Alabaster, AL).
Other reagents were analytical grade or higher.

Methods
Liposome
Preparation
Control or empty liposomes and
liposomal ICG were prepared by thin film hydration and sonication.
Briefly, DSPC dissolved in CHCl3 and DSPEmPEG2000 dissolved in a CHCl3/CH3OH mixture [3:1 (v/v)]
were mixed (9:1 molar ratio) in a sterile test tube. The mixture was
then dried under N2 gas and reduced pressure into a thin
film, which was vacuum desiccated overnight at room temperature. The
thin film was rehydrated with 0.9% NaCl, 20 mM NaHCO3 buffer
at pH 7 (final lipid concentration of 20 mM) at 60 °C for 3 h.
The liposome diameter was reduced to approximately 50–80 nm
via a 15 min bath sonication at 55 °C. For liposomal ICG, ICG
dissolved in 100% CH3OH was added to the lipid mixture
prior to it being dried into a thin film. ICG self-quenching was reduced, and the density of ICG in the lipid
membrane was optimized. The mean diameters of liposomes and liposomal
ICG were obtained by particle size analysis with photon correlation
spectroscopy (PCS) on a PSS-NICOMP 380 ZLS instrument (Particle Sizing
Systems, Port Richey, FL). The ζ potential was measured on the
same instrument. The ICG incorporation efficiency was evaluated by
separation of lipid-bound and free ICG by equilibrium dialysis. All
experiments were performed under dark conditions, and light exposure
was avoided.

90° Light Scattering of ICG Adsorbed
to Liposomes
ICG dissolved in 100% CH3OH was incubated
with liposomes
in plastic micronic tubes at lipid:ICG molar ratios of 25:1 to 500:1
for 20 min before being diluted 25-fold with 0.9% NaCl and 20 mM NaHCO3 buffered at pH 7 to minimize ICG–lipid interactions.
The 90° light scattering was then measured on a Hitachi (Troy,
MI) F-4500 fluorescence spectrophotometer. The set parameters were
as follows: λex and λem values of
660 nm and excitation and emission slit widths of 2.5 and 5 nm, respectively.
Samples were stored away from light at room temperature during observation.

Fluorescence
Fluorescence measurements were performed
on a Victor3 V 1420-040 Multilabel Plate Reader (Perkin-Elmer,
Waltham, MA) with a tungsten–halogen continuous wave lamp (75
W, spectral range of 320–800 nm) and excitation (769 ±
41 nm) and emission (832 ± 37 nm) filters (Semrock, Rochester,
NY) using 100 μL of sample in flat bottom, untreated 96-well
plates (Grenier Bio-one, Monroe, NC).

Light Exposure and Storage
Stability
For light exposure
stability, samples of free ICG and liposomal ICG at 2.0 μM ICG
were exposed to overhead fluorescent tube lighting for 12 h. Fluorescence
measurements were recorded at 0, 6, and 12 h. For storage stability,
samples were placed in the dark at 4 °C for up to 313 days. Fluorescence
measurements were recorded at five different time points for free
ICG and at 10 different time points for liposomal ICG. The time-dependent
decay of ICG fluorescence was analyzed on the basis of an exponential
decay model with GraphPad Prism version 6.0 (GraphPad Software, San
Diego, CA). The data were expressed as t1/2 (half-life) and k (rate constant).

Tissue Depth
Penetration
Cuboid chicken breast tissue
phantoms of three different depths (0.5, 1.0, and 1.5 cm) were used
to assess ICG fluorescence detection through tissue. Tissue cuboids
were placed over capillary tubes [70 μL capacity, 75 mm length,
1.2 mm inner diameter (Fisher Scientific, Hampton, NH)] filled with
50 μL of 30 μM free ICG or liposomal ICG. White light
and NIR images were captured within 15 min of the preparation of capillary
tubes and tissue cuboids using a custom NIR charge-coupled device
(CCD) camera built by Hamamatsu Photonics K.K. (Hamamatsu, Japan).
Fluorescence intensity mean values of select areas, on a scale of
0 to 255 with 255 being the maximal brightness, were obtained with
the analysis function in Adobe Photoshop CS4 (Adobe Systems Inc.,
San Jose, CA).

In Vivo NIR Lymphatic Imaging
in Mice
Mice were kept under pathogen-free conditions, exposed
to a 12 h
light–dark cycle, and received food ad libitum prior to imaging. All procedures were approved by the University
of Washington Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee.

Three
mice were anesthetized with 1.5% isoflurane, shaved to remove fur,
and placed in a supine position on a 37 °C heat pad underneath
a custom NIR CCD camera. Precontrast images were taken to confirm
the absence of autofluorescence. Forty microliters of lipid-bound
ICG in liposomes (250:1 lipid:ICG molar ratio) or free ICG was injected
subcutaneously into the top of both rear feet (12.5 μM ICG in
0.9% buffered saline in each foot, totaling 1.0 nmol of ICG/mouse).
Immediately following injections, both feet were placed under gentle
even pressure. Images were acquired for up to 120 min prior to euthanasia
by cervical dislocation under anesthesia, upon which the skin was
surgically opened.

Results
Liposomal Lipid–ICG
Interactions
To evaluate
the interactions between ICG and lipid, we incubated empty (no ICG)
liposomes with varying concentrations of ICG. If ICG molecules in
solution bind to lipids in the membrane, it will cause liposomes to
cross-link and aggregate, resulting in an increase in the apparent
size of the membrane that can be detected by a change in 90°
light scattering and an increase in particle size. In a preliminary
experiment, we first tested liposomes composed of egg-derived phosphatidylcholine
(Egg PC) (containing mixed-length fatty acyl chains) and observed
an increase in light scattering intensity as the ICG concentration
was increased, indicating that ICG induced liposome aggregation. We
next used liposomes with a well-defined phospholipid composition,
DSPC containing two symmetrical C18 fatty acyl chains and DSPEmPEG2000 (9:1 molar ratio), to perform systematic studies. A fixed
lipid concentration in liposomes of 10 μM was allowed to interact
with varying ICG concentrations for 20 min at 25 °C; the reaction
was stopped by 25-fold dilution with a buffered solution. The mixture
was subjected to 90° light scattering analysis and photon correlation
spectroscopy (PCS) to estimate particle size.

The 90° light
scattering intensity is expected to be low when particles are in the
single, nonaggregated form and to increase with aggregation. However,
when lipid aggregates become too large, they may fall off the light
path or electrons in a particle may not oscillate together in phase
and cause intraparticle destructive interference, resulting in an
apparent decline in scattering intensity. As shown in Figure A, empty liposomes (lipid only) have a low scattering
intensity, and free ICG (ICG only) has a consistent scattering intensity
near zero regardless of the ICG concentration. When liposomes and
ICG (L-ICG) were mixed together, at low ICG concentrations (20–30
nM) a minimal light scattering intensity similar to that of the empty
liposome control (lipid only) was detected. The scattering intensity
of L-ICG increases approximately 1.5-fold when the ICG concentration
increases from 30 to 70 nM (Figure A). There
is a minor decline in scattering intensity at 40 nM ICG; however,
it is still significantly higher than at 20–30 nM ICG. At high
concentrations (100–400 nM ICG), the scattering intensity declines
as aggregates become larger. Figure B depicts
a schematic drawing of the proposed aggregate formation that leads
to an initial increase in light scattering intensity followed by a
decrease in intensity as the particle becomes exceedingly large. These
data were confirmed by aggregate size analysis with PCS. As shown
in Figure C, at an initial ICG concentration
of 20 nM, the particle diameter is similar to that of empty liposomes
(∼100 nm). The apparent liposomal ICG size increases greater
than 3-fold at ICG concentrations of 20–100 nM. The apparent
size fluctuates around a 300 nm diameter at ICG concentrations between
30 and 100 nM and then increases to ∼400 nm at 400 nM ICG.
In the region of 30–400 nM ICG, we detected a small population
of smaller but distinct liposomal–ICG particles with consistent
diameters of 60–90 nm (data not shown).

ICG concentration-dependent
liposome aggregation and apparent size
increase. (A) Effect of ICG concentration on the 90° light scattering
intensity of liposomes. A fixed concentration of liposomes was incubated
with varying ICG concentrations in a fixed volume. At 20 min, mixtures
were diluted to stop the reaction and the 90° light scattering
intensity was measured with a fluorometer as described in : (○) empty lipid
only liposomes, (●) lipid-bound ICG (L-ICG), and (△)
free ICG only. Each data point is the mean ± SD of 10 replicates.
(B) Schematic drawing of light scattering efficiency detected by the
photomultiplier tube (PMT; bold horizontal bar) 90° to the incident
light (hv) path as liposomes aggregate and increase
the diameter of the particle. (C) Effect of ICG concentration on particle
size analysis by photon correlation spectroscopy of liposomes. Following
collection of the data depicted in panel A, particle size analysis
was performed as described in : (○) empty lipid only liposomes and (●) lipid-bound
ICG (L-ICG). Each data point is the mean ± SD from digital autocorrelation
calculations following data collection for 8 min.

Collectively, these data indicate that ICG binds to lipid
presented
in empty preformed liposomes and leads to liposome aggregates, detected
as an apparent increase in particle size, and a discontinuous increase
in light scattering intensity. On the basis of the lipid concentration
of 10 μM and ICG concentrations of 20–50 nM, these data
give rise to a lipid:ICG molar ratio estimated to be between 200:1
and 500:1 that produces maximal lipid aggregation and an apparent
increase in particle size.

Impact of Liposomal Lipid–ICG Interactions
on ICG Fluorescence
We next determined the impact on the
fluorescence intensity caused
by binding of ICG to lipid. We used the lipid:ICG molar ratio range
from 125:1 to 25000:1. Because of the self-quenching of ICG, the reaction
mixture was diluted 20-fold with a buffered solution to the linear
ICG concentration range of 0.01–2.0 μM. As shown in Figure , the presence of lipid in the mixture increases
the fluorescence intensity of ICG at equivalent ICG concentrations.
As the ICG concentration increases from 0.01 to 1.0 μM, the
fluorescence intensity progressively widens for the mixture containing
lipid versus the control. At 0.1, 0.5, and 1.0 μM ICG, the fluorescence
intensity increased by 10.0-fold (65720 vs 6600), 4.3-fold (261640
vs 61360), and 2.8-fold (346610 vs 122530), respectively. At 2.0 μM
ICG, the lipid-mediated enhancement of the ICG fluorescence intensity
was smaller, and an only 1.4-fold increase (275820 vs 199420) was
observed. At a fixed lipid concentration of 250 μM and 0.5,
1.0, and 2.0 μM ICG, the equivalent lipid:ICG molar ratios for
these values are 500:1, 250:1, and 125:1, respectively (Figure ). Therefore, the optimal lipid:ICG molar ratio
that exhibits the highest fluorescence intensity is estimated to range
from 125:1 to 500:1. This estimate is consistent with data collected
from 90° light scattering and PCS size analysis. These values,
derived from ICG and preformed liposome interactions, were used as
the target range for subsequent ICG liposome preparation and characterization
studies.

Increased fluorescence intensity of lipid-associated ICG. A fixed
concentration of liposomes was incubated with varying ICG concentrations
in a fixed volume. At 20 min, mixtures were diluted 20-fold with a
buffered solution to stop the reaction, and the fluorescence intensity
was measured with a fluorometer as described in : (△) free ICG only and (●) lipid-bound
ICG (L-ICG). Each data point is the mean ± SD of eight replicates.

Incorporation of ICG into
Lipid Membranes To Stabilize and Maximize
ICG Fluorescence
Instead of adding ICG in solution to lipid
as admixtures in a buffered solution, we mixed ICG and lipid together
in an organic solution, first, then removed the solvent, and rehydrated
the sample in buffer to form liposomes in which ICG had been inserted
or embedded. ICG has a significant overlap in absorption and emission
spectra (Figure A) and consequently exhibits
self-quenching potential at high concentrations. Thus, we made liposomes
embedded or incorporated with different concentrations (densities)
of ICG incorporated into the lipid membrane. If the ICG density is
too high, the proximity between ICG molecules may induce self-quenching
because of concentration-dependent molecular interactions. Moreover, ICG incorporated into lipid without
exposure to water would provide a higher fluorescence than ICG molecules
exposed to water, which quenches ICG fluorescence. Eight lipid:ICG
molar ratios ranging from 100:1 to 500:1 were evaluated. Figure B represents the fluorescence intensity per unit
of ICG slope at typical ICG concentrations for three lipid-bound ICG
samples (equivalent to molar ratios of 100:1, 250:1, and 350:1) and
a soluble ICG control. At 0.01–2.0 μM ICG, the fluorescence
intensity appears to increase linearly. Note that the slope of the
250:1 line is the steepest, followed by the slopes of the 350:1, 100:1,
and ICG only samples. To determine the optimal lipid:ICG molar ratio,
we evaluated the slope of the line for each formulation (for the sake
of clarity, only three of eight total lines are presented in Figure B).

Optimization of the lipid:ICG molar ratio to maximize
ICG fluorescence
yield. (A) Excitation (—) and emission (−–−)
spectra of ICG in aqueous buffer. The dotted line extending the excitation
spectra is an estimate based on ref (). (B) Effects of the lipid:ICG molar ratio on
the ICG fluorescence yield (fluorescence intensity per micromolar
ICG). Lipid-bound ICG with varying lipid:ICG molar ratios was prepared,
and their fluorescence intensity per unit ICG was measured at the
indicated concentrations. Only three of eight liposomal ICG formulations
are presented for the sake of clarity; their data points are labeled
according to their lipid:ICG molar ratios: (●) 250:1, (○)
350:1, and (■) 100:1 lipid:ICG molar ratios and (△)
ICG only. Each fluorescence intensity data point is the mean ±
SD of eight replicates. (C) Effects of lipid:ICG molar ratio on fluorescence
yield. The data from panel B were used to calculate the slope (fluorescence
intensity per micromolar ICG) and plotted vs the lipid:ICG molar ratio:
(○) free ICG only and (●) lipid-bound ICG (L-ICG) in
liposomes at varying molar ratios. Each data point is the mean ±
SD of six replicates.

The slope equals the fluorescence intensity per micromolar
ICG.
As shown in Figure C, because of a decrease
in ICG density and self-quenching, the fluorescence intensity per
ICG (slope) increases as the lipid:ICG molar ratio increases from
100:1 to 250:1, at which point the maximum is reached. The fluorescence
intensity per ICG then decreases at 300:1 and 350:1, followed by a
significant decrease at 500:1. Thus, we observed the peak fluorescence
intensity per ICG at a lipid:ICG molar ratio of 250:1.

As the
250:1 lipid:ICG molar ratio exhibits the highest fluorescence
intensity per ICG, we characterized the 250:1 formulation using particle
size analysis by photon correlation spectroscopy (PCS) and particle
surface charge (ζ potential) analysis by electrophoretic light
scattering (ELS). The 250:1 formulation consisted of a monodisperse
population of particles with a 56.8 ± 4.4 nm diameter and a −33.1
± 3.1 mV ζ potential. Equilibrium dialysis indicated the
ICG incorporation efficiency was 97.8 ± 0.6%. Because of reproducible
and almost complete incorporation of ICG, this formulation was selected
without further purification for subsequent in vitro and in vivo studies.

Effects of Lipid Incorporation
on Enhancing ICG Stability for
Light Exposure and Storage
We next evaluated the stability
of liposomal ICG in 4 °C storage and under light exposure to
simulate the environment in clinical settings. As shown in Figure , the fluorescence intensity of liposomal ICG decreases
to 87.6 ± 0.5% of the initial value after a 6 h light exposure
and experiences no further decrease after 12 h (t1/2 = 67.5 ± 11.8 h; k = 0.011 ±
0.002 h–1). In contrast, the fluorescence intensity
of free ICG in solution decreases to 2.5 ± 0.5% of its initial
value after a 6 h light exposure (t1/2 = 0.036 ± 0.005 h; k = 19.2 ± 2.7 h–1), indicating the light instability of ICG in aqueous
solutions.

Lipid-bound ICG in liposomes reduces ICG fluorescence quenching
due to light exposure. Liposomal ICG and free ICG were exposed to
overhead fluorescent light for 12 h. ICG fluorescence was recorded
at 6 and 12 h as described in . Black bars represent data for liposomal ICG and gray bars data
for ICG only. Each data point is the mean ± SD of eight replicates.

To evaluate longer-term storage
stability, we kept liposomal ICG
in the dark at 4 °C and measured the fluorescence intensity multiple
times over 313 days. As shown in Figure  and
Table , ∼78.2 ± 2.8% of the initial
fluorescence intensity was recorded after liposomal ICG had been stored
for 8 months [t1/2 = 394 days (95% CI,
360–434 days); k = 1.76 × 10–3 day–1 (95% CI, 1.60 × 10–3 to 1.93 × 10–3 day–1)].
However, for free ICG in buffer, only 0.3 ± 0.2% of the initial
ICG fluorescence was observed after storage for 8 months [t1/2 = 1.19 days (95% CI, 1.14–1.25 days); k = 582 × 10–3 day–1 (95% CI, 554 × 10–3 to 609 × 10–3 day–1)].

Storage
Stability Kinetics
 	% ICG fluorescence (8 months)	t1/2
 (days)	k
 (×10–3 day–1)	
liposomal ICG	78.2 ± 2.8	394 (360, 434)	1.76 (1.60, 1.93)	
free ICG	0.3 ± 0.2	1.19 (1.14, 1.25)	582 (554, 609)	
Stored in the dark
at 4 °C.

Mean ±
SD of samples (N = 2 each) stored for 8 months.

t1/2 (95% CI) and k (95% CI) calculated from multiple
time points (N = 10) over 313 days.

t1/2 (95%
CI) and k (95% CI) calculated from multiple
time points (N = 5) over 239 days.

Stability of lipid-bound ICG in storage. Lipid-bound
ICG in liposomes
and free ICG were stored in the dark at 4 °C for up to 313 days,
and ICG fluorescence was analyzed at indicated time points: (△)
free ICG and and (●) lipid-bound ICG (L-ICG). The time course
data were analyzed on the basis of an exponential decay model, and
the half-life, t1/2 (days), and rate constant, k (inverse days), values are listed. The dashed line indicates
the limit of detection. Each data point is the mean ± SD of three
to eight replicates.

Enhanced NIR Imaging of Liposomal ICG in Vitro
To compare the fluorescence signal intensity between liposomal
ICG (250:1 lipid:ICG molar ratio formulation) and free ICG, we prepared
chicken breast cuboids with increasing muscle tissue thicknesses of
0.5, 1.0, and 1.5 cm (Figure F). We filled
all capillary tubes (75 mm in length, 1.2 mm in inner diameter) with
50 μL of 30 μM ICG (1.5 nmol of ICG) (Figure B). As shown in Figure A,
the intensity of the capillary tube filled with liposomal ICG is 3.2-fold
higher than that of free ICG (intensity means of 111.7 and 34.5, respectively).
When the sample was placed under three tissue cuboids, with an increasing
depth from left to right, free ICG fluorescence (top three cuboids)
was detectable only across a 0.5 cm depth (top left cuboid; intensity
mean of 9.0), not through greater depths; liposomal ICG fluorescence
(bottom three cuboids) was detectable across 0.5, 1.0, and 1.5 cm
depths (intensity means of 112.1, 77.3, and 10.0, respectively) (Figure C). Further analysis indicates that only liposomal
ICG in capillary tubes can be detected across 1.5 cm of muscle tissue
(intensity means for 0.5, 1.0, and 1.5 cm depths of 100.9, 68.0, and
15.2, respectively) (Figure E,F).

Fluorescence
intensity of lipid-bound vs free ICG detected through
muscle tissue. (A) NIR fluorescence image intensity of capillary tubes
filled with 30 μM free ICG (top) and lipid-bound ICG (bottom).
(B) White light image of the two identical capillary tubes filled
with different formulations of ICG in panel A. (C) NIR fluorescence
image overlaid on a visual light photograph of capillaries filled
with free (top) or lipid-bound (bottom) ICG and placed underneath
0.5, 1.0, and 1.5 cm (from left to right, respectively) chicken breast
tissue cuboids. (D) Visible light image of chicken breast tissue cuboids
in panel C. (E) NIR fluorescence image overlaid on a visual light
background of a lipid-bound ICG capillary placed underneath 0.5, 1.0,
and 1.5 cm chicken breast tissue cuboids. (F) Side view of tissue
cuboid thickness.

Effects of Liposome-Bound
ICG on NIR Lymphatic Image Resolution
in Mice
With the stable and optimized liposomal ICG formulation,
we performed in vivo proof-of-principle optical imaging
experiments in mice. To compare free and liposomal ICG, we subcutaneously
administered ICG in 40 μL (0.5 nmol of ICG), in either free
or lipid-bound form, to the mouse’s left or right foot (Figure A). After 6 min, only the foot that received liposomal
ICG (but not free ICG) exhibited a detectable popliteal node through
the skin (Figure A). Only when the image was
recorded below the skin were both popliteal lymph nodes detectable.
The ICG intensity mean of the popliteal lymph node that received free
ICG was 37.0 compared to a value of 208.1 for that treated with liposomal
ICG (data not shown). To further compare the lymphatic image resolution
of free ICG and liposomal ICG, in another set of mice, we administered
ICG to both feet either in free or liposomal form at the same dose.
As shown in Figure B, 6 min postadministration
and after removal of the skin, the animal receiving free ICG showed
diffusion of ICG into the blood (saphenous vein). In this case, ICG
was clearly detectable in the local popliteal node (Figure B). In contrast, in the mouse treated with liposomal
ICG, the popliteal lymph node intensity is much higher and a lymphatic
track leading to ventral pelvic and genital/regional nodes is readily
visible (Figure C). The distribution of free
ICG to this lymphatic track was not observed.

Comparison of lipid-bound
ICG and free ICG NIR image behavior in
mice after subcutaneous injection. (A) Lipid-bound ICG in liposomes
(Lipo-ICG; left foot) or free ICG (right foot) was subcutaneously
injected, and the NIR fluorescence image was recorded after 6 min.
The fluorescence image is overlaid on a visual light photograph for
anatomical representation. The dashed circle indicates the local popliteal
node. The mouse is viewed in the supine position. In another set of
mice treated with free (B) or lipid-bound (C) ICG for 6 min, the skin
was removed and analyzed further. (B) Visible light photograph of
the right leg of a mouse treated with free ICG in its right foot.
The corresponding fluorescence image is overlaid. The double arrow
(≫) denotes the saphenous vein where free ICG appears to diffuse
throughout the muscle tissue and the popliteal lymph node (dashed
circle). The mouse is viewed in the supine position. (C) Visible light
photograph of the right leg of a mouse treated with lipid-bound ICG
in its right foot. The corresponding fluorescence image is overlaid.
The dashed circle indicates the popliteal lymph node, and bold arrowheads
denote ventral pelvic and genital/regional lymph nodes. The mouse
is viewed in the supine position.

Discussion
On the basis of the ability of ICG to bind
to and insert into a
lipid membrane, we have systematically characterized these interactions
that confer ICG molecular and fluorescence stability. Our results
show that ICG binds to and is incorporated completely and stably into
the lipid membrane at lipid:ICG molar ratios as high as a 3:1. At
the optimal lipid:ICG ratio of 250:1, we detected a 4.5-fold enhancement
of lipid-bound ICG fluorescence intensity versus that of aqueous ICG.
At this optimal ratio, liposomal ICG exhibited nearly complete (98%)
incorporation efficiency of ICG, and the fluorescence intensity was
independent of plasma protein binding. In 4 °C storage away from
light, ICG in liposomes was stable [t1/2 = 394 days (95% CI, 360–434); k = 1.76 ×
10–3 day–1 (95% CI, 1.60 ×
10–3 to 1.93 × 10–3 day–1)] (Figure  and Table ). Liposomal ICG is also stable when exposed to
room light for several hours at 25 °C (t1/2 = 67.5 ± 11.8 h; k = 0.011 ±
0.002 h–1) (Figure ). When
ICG was administered subcutaneously in mice, preliminary data suggest
that lipid-bound ICG exhibited a higher intensity, NIR image resolution,
and enhanced lymph node and lymphatic vessel visualization. In contrast,
free ICG in mice is readily distributed into the blood with a lower
image resolution.

Although ICG in solution can induce liposome
aggregation, the exact
mechanism is not clear. It is possible that ICG with its high LogP
value (6.05 at pH 7.4; low water solubility) may bind to lipid and cause the liposome membrane to become sticky,
thus forming liposome aggregations, detected by 90° light scattering
and photon correlation spectroscopy as ICG induced an increase in
the light scattering and apparent diameter (Figure ). Others have mixed ICG with preformed liposomes composed
of various lipids and observed aggregation or fluorescence enhancement., However, these studies
did not probe concentration-dependent effects. In our studies, we
evaluated and found nonlinear concentration effects and used the information
for ICG–liposome admixtures related to ICG–lipid binding
and fluorescence enhancement to fine-tune an optimal composition to
construct ICG incorporated completely into liposome membranes. We
used a well-characterized lipid membrane composed of 90 mol % DSPC
and 10 mol % DSPEmPEG2000, which is based on a validated
and scalable formulation for in vivo lymphatic drug
delivery. With this lipid composition,
we achieved complete incorporation of ICG by mixing ICG and lipids
together in the organic phase, producing stable liposomal ICG particles.
This is in contrast to other preparations using various lipids where
ICG was added in an aqueous solution to encapsulate 50–88.2%
of ICG within liposomes.−,− In such situations, some ICG may be trapped within
the aqueous compartment while a small fraction may be bound to the
lipid membrane.

The observed ICG fluorescence yield enhancement
may be related
to insertion of ICG within the hydrophobic domains of the lipid bilayer.
In hydrophobic organic microenvironments such as methanol, the ICG
fluorescence spectrum is reported to have photo- and thermostability. However, the precise ICG–lipid binding
configuration that leads to this stabilization is not clear, nor is
it known how deep ICG inserts into the lipid membrane. The ICG vertical
depth in the lipid membrane could be elucidated by quenching ICG fluorescence
with extramembranal iodide ions (KI) or
by the parallax method in which quenching of ICG is compared between
two strategically placed quenchers at different known carbon positions
of the lipid fatty acyl chains. Given
the fluorescence enhancement that results from lipid-bound ICG, it
is likely ICG inserts at a depth where its interaction with water,
which quenches fluorescence and degrades ICG, is minimized. While
it is possible that some regions of ICG may be accessible to water
and aligned with the phosphate headgroup, it is clear that such interactions
did not have a significant impact on the fluorescence yield of ICG.
Regardless, ICG embedded in a lipid membrane assumes a conformation
that minimizes negative effects on fluorescence properties and the
chemical degradation caused by aqueous microenvironments, light, and heat.

While it is clear that insertion into the lipid membrane enhances
fluorescence, this enhancement is not unlimited. The nonlinear relationship
of fluorescence intensity per ICG versus lipid:ICG molar ratio (Figure C) is parabolic with the optimal lipid:ICG molar
ratio of 250:1 exhibiting a peak fluorescence yield. The decrease
in fluorescence yield to the right side of the vertex correlates with
the decreasing ICG density and the amount of ICG available to emit
fluorescence. As the density of ICG in the lipid membrane increases,
concentration-dependent quenching of ICG may become significant, leading
to the observed decline at higher ICG:lipid ratios (or lower lipid:ICG
ratios). Because of the significant overlap of the ICG excitation
and emission spectra between ∼780 and ∼820 nm (Figure A), ICG can undergo self-quenching at high concentrations.
However, self-quenching through molecular collision-dependent quenching
is unlikely for two reasons. First, ICG is immobilized in a lipid
membrane and does not easily collide with other ICG molecules, and
second, the experimental concentrations of ICG (40–200 μM
ICG in methanol and 0.1–2.0 μM ICG in an aqueous solution)
were well below those reported to induce ICG aggregates (dimers).
In water, ICG forms dimers at concentrations of ∼5 μM,,− and in methanol, ICG forms dimers above 4.2 mM. There may be other molecular interactions that
need to be explored further to address the discrepancies. Such studies,
however, are beyond the scope of this report.

In addition to
optimizing the formulation of liposomal ICG to achieve
the maximal fluorescence yield, stability against environmental effects
is also necessary. Light causes ICG to produce singlet oxygen that
chemically decomposes ICG through a dioxetane reaction (the polymethine
chain of ICG cleaves into two carbonyl products, which may be cytotoxic)., With clinical settings and surgical fields normally well lit, such
light decomposition is challenging to avoid. In its currently supplied
form, free ICG in aqueous solution decomposes from light in a matter
of seconds. Our results show that incorporation of ICG into the lipid
membrane shields against light degradation. Liposomal ICG can be exposed
to light for several hours at room temperature and retain nearly all
of its original fluorescence intensity (Figure ). To the best of our knowledge, this is the first report of light
stability for lipid-bound ICG, and the mechanism for such stability
remains to be explored. When stored in the dark at 4 °C in an
aqueous suspension, liposomal ICG maintains its fluorescence integrity
for at least 8 months (Table ). This period
exceeds those from other reports such as 42 days at room temperature and 70 days at 4 °C. Further stabilization of liposomal ICG could be achieved
by lyophilization with a cryoprotectant such as trehalose or sucrose
that retains the particle characteristics upon hydration with water.
Lipid-bound ICG appeared to be stable in serum as liposomal ICG exposed
to 10% heat-inactivated rat serum for 6 h retained 94 ± 0.6%
of its initial fluorescence. Taken together, the observed light, storage,
and serum stability indicate liposomal ICG has robust stability for
clinical use, especially for imaging the lymphatic system where lymph
contains a lower serum protein content than blood.

The advantage
of NIR fluorescence for biological imaging arises
from the minimal autofluorescence of deoxy- and oxyhemoglobin, lipid,
and water in the 700–900 nm range. This range is known as the
NIR or therapeutic window, and ICG, with its 820 nm emission, is the
only FDA- and EMA-approved fluorophore for human use to leverage this
property. At present, at least 10 other groups have developed liposomes
with ICG incorporated,,,, encapsulated,,,− or adsorbed with lipid membranes of various compositions and physiochemical
properties for in vivo NIR optical imaging. The polar
headgroup of a lipid affects the particle surface charge and degree
of hydration, which impacts the level of in vivo opsonization
and complement binding that induces clearance, and the amount of saturation
and chain length of the lipid fatty acyl tails affect the lipid phase
transition temperature (Tc) by altering
the rigidity, thickness, and uniformity of the lipid bilayer. Therefore, each variable may impact not only
the stability and interactions between ICG and lipid but also the in vivo behavior of the particles.

In summary, taking
advantage of the ability of ICG to incorporate
completely and stably into lipid membranes and understanding ICG–lipid
interactions, we developed liposomal ICG that maximizes ICG fluorescence
intensity and stability. These scalable particles are designed to
exhibit physiochemical characteristics suitable for in vivo imaging as demonstrated with NIR visualization of lymph nodes. Unlike
that of free ICG, because of the physiochemical characteristics of
subcutaneously given lipid-bound ICG, liposomal ICG is predominantly
localized and distributed within the lymphatics without an initial
distribution through the blood. Liposomal ICG could be further developed
with surface ligands or antibodies to target diseased cells and tissues
in the lymphatic system to visualize these cells, and this liposomal
platform may be used to deliver therapeutics. With high storage and
light stability, fluorescence intensity, and lymph node imaging resolution
compared to those of free ICG, lipid-bound ICG could provide additional
medical diagnostic value with NIR optical imaging for early intervention
in cases of lymphatic abnormalities.

The authors
declare no competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
We acknowledge the preliminary work of Jennifer P. Freeling,
Cameron Ng, and Danielle Taylor that helped inform the experiments
described in this paper. We thank Dr. Satoshi Minoshima for advice
on NIR imaging and sharing the CCD NIR imaging device supplied by
Hamamatsu.

Abbreviations
CCDcharge-coupled device

CIconfidence interval

DSPC1,2-distearoyl-sn-glycero-3-phosphocholine

DSPEmPEG20001,2-distearoyl-sn-glycero-3-phosphoethanolamine-N-methoxy-polyethylene
glycol-2000

Egg PCl-α-phosphatidylcholine

ELSelectrophoretic light scattering

EMAEuropean Medicines Agency

FDAFood and Drug Administration

ICGindocyanine green

NIRnear-infrared

L-ICGlipid-bound ICG

PCSphoton correlation
spectroscopy

SDstandard deviation

SLNssentinel lymph nodes.

