KCNE1 is
a 129 amino acid transmembrane protein that modulates the function
of the voltage-gated potassium ion channel (Kv) KCNQ1. Kv channels are critical for the function
of cardiac, nervous, and auditory systems and represent promising
targets for various therapeutic agents.− In the human heart, KCNQ1
associates with KCNE1 to generate the slow delayed rectifier current
(IKs), characterized by its slow activation
and deactivation kinetics, which is essential
for the repolarization phase of the cardiac action potential. In the
absence of KCNE1, the KCNQ1 channel activates rapidly but with limited
conductance. Coexpression and association
of KCNE1 with KCNQ1 delays the opening of the channel, shifts V1/2 to more positive potentials, removes channel
inactivation, and results in a roughly 5-fold increase in open-state
conductance.− The structure of the transmembrane domain (TMD) of
KCNE1 is important because its interaction with the KCNQ1 channel
regulates activity.− Mutations in both KCNE1 and KCNQ1 are known to result
in increased susceptibility to diseases such as congenital deafness,
congenital long QT syndrome, ventricular tachyarrhythmia, syncope,
and sudden cardiac death.−

The structure of KCNE1
has been determined using solution NMR spectroscopy under conditions
in which the protein was solubilized in LMPG micelles. In conjunction with restraints derived from mutagenesis-based
biochemical and structure–function studies, competing working
models for key aspects of how KCNE1 modulates channel function have
been developed.,− A point of
controversy between these models is whether the channel-associated
KCNE1 TMD is curved (NMR micelle structure), whether the curvature
is absent in channel-associated KCNE1, or whether the TMD is flexible
and adopts multiple conformational states while bound to KCNQ1. Here,
we examine whether the curvature seen for the KCNE1 TMD under micellar
conditions is an intrinsic property of this domain or whether the
TMD adapts its structure to the varying properties of its local environment
(micelle vs lipid bilayer). A POPC/POPG (3:1) lipid bilayer was used
to mimic phospholipids typically found in mammalian membranes.− Functional studies of KCNE1 with KCNQ1 in POPC/POPG lipid bilayers
under similar sample conditions have shown channel activity. More specifically, we report extensive site-directed
spin labeling (SDSL) double electron electron resonance (DEER) distance
data for KCNE1 in POPC/POPG lipid vesicles to probe the structure
of the TMD under native-like conditions when compared to a micelle.

Determining the structure of membrane proteins is very challenging.
Traditional biophysical techniques such as X-ray crystallography and
solution NMR are difficult or impossible to use when studying the
structural or dynamic properties of hydrophobic membrane proteins
directly in a lipid bilayer. DEER spectroscopy is one of the few biophysical
techniques that can be used to probe the structural properties of
membrane proteins in both micelles and lipid bilayers.

Materials and Methods
Site-Directed Mutagenesis
His-tag expression vectors (pET-16b) containing the wild-type and
a cysteine-less mutant of KCNE1 were
transformed into XL1-Blue Escherichia coli cells (Stratagene). Plasmid extracts from these cells were obtained
using the QIAprep spin miniprep kit (Qiagen). Site-directed cysteine
mutants were introduced into the cysteine-less KCNE1 gene using the
QuikChange Lightning site-directed mutagenesis kit (Stratagene). The
KCNE1 mutations were confirmed by DNA sequencing from XL10-Gold E. coli (Stratagene) transformants using the T7 primer
(Integrated DNA Technologies). Successfully mutated vectors were transformed
into BL21-(DE3) CodonPlus-RP E. coli cells (Stratagene) for protein overexpression. Quadruple Cys mutants
L45C–M49C/R67C–L71C, L45C–M49C/I66C–K70C,
Y46C–V50C/R67C–L71C, Y46C–V50C/I66C–K70C,
and V47C–L51C/S64C–S68C were chosen for bifunctional
double spin labeling, and double Cys mutants L45C/L71C, L45C/K70C,
V47C/I66C, V47C/K69C, M49C/R67C, V50C/S68C, L51C/Y65C, G52C/S64C,
and G55C/I66C were chosen for MTSL double spin labeling. The mutants
were selected to span most of the transmembrane domain of KCNE1.

Overexpression and Purification
Overexpression and purification
of KCNE1 mutants from E. coli BL21
cells were carried out using a previously described protocol. Cells were cultured in M9 minimal medium with
50 μg/mL ampicillin. The cell culture was incubated at 37 °C
and 240 rpm until the OD600 reached 0.8, at which point
protein expression was induced using 1 mM IPTG (isopropyl β-d-1-thiogalactopyranoside), followed by continued rotary shaking
at 37 °C for 16 h. KCNE1 was then purified from inclusion bodies
according to a previous method, with
final elution of pure protein into 0.05% LMPG or 0.2% SDS detergent
(buffer: 250 mM IMD, 200 mM NaCl, 20 mM Tris, pH 7.8). Protein samples
were concentrated by using a Microcon YM-3 (molecular weight cutoff,
3000) centrifugal cartridge (Amicon). Protein concentration was determined
from the OD280 using an extinction coefficient of 1.2 mg/mL
protein per OD280 on a NanoDrop 200c (Thermo Scientific).
The protein purity was confirmed by sodium dodecyl sulfate polyacrylamide
gel electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE).

Spin Labeling and Reconstitution
into Proteoliposomes
The bifunctional spin label (BSL) (3,4-bis(methanethiosulfonylmethyl)-2,2,5,5-tetramethyl-2,5-dihydro-1H-pyrrol-1-yloxy radical) (HO-1944) and 1-oxyl-2,2,5,5-tetramethylpyrroline-3-methylmethanethiosulfonate
(MTSL) spin label were obtained from Toronto Research Chemicals Inc.
(Toronto, Canada). The spin labels were dissolved in methanol to a
concentration of 250 mM and added directly to the concentrated protein
in elution buffer at a 10:1 spin label/protein molar ratio and allowed
to react for 24 h with gentle shaking at room temperature in the dark
to complete labeling. Excess/unreacted free spin labels were removed
by extensive dialysis or rebinding of the protein to Ni-NTA resin., Dialysis was carried out at room temperature in regenerated cellulose
dialysis tubing (Fisherbrand MW cutoff 3.5 kDa) against 1 L of elution
buffer (100 mM NaH2Po4, pH 7.8) without reducing agent.
The spin labeling efficiency was determined by comparing the protein
concentration (determined from A280) with
the spin concentration obtained from CW EPR spectroscopy. The protein
concentration for all KCNE1 samples was ∼75 μM, and the
spin labeling efficiency for all samples was ∼75%.

The
reconstitution of spin-labeled protein into POPC/POPG (3:1) vesicles
was carried out via dialysis methods following a similar protocol
in the literature., The concentrated spin-labeled
KCNE1 protein was mixed with a stock lipid mixture (400 mM SDS, 75
mM POPC, 25 mM POPG, 0.1 mM EDTA, 100 mM IMD, pH 6.5). The lipid mixture
had pre-equilibrated to clear mixed micelles via extensive freeze
thaw cycles. The final protein/lipid molar ratio was set to 1:400.
The KCNE1–lipid mixture was then subjected to extensive dialysis
to remove all SDS present, during which KCNE1/POPC/POPG vesicles spontaneously
formed. The 4 L of dialysis buffer (10 mM imidazole, 0.1 mM EDTA at
pH 6.5) was changed twice daily. The completion of SDS removal was
determined when the KCNE1–lipid solution became cloudy and
the surface tension of the dialysate indicated complete removal of
detergent. The KCNE1–lipid vesicles solution was then extruded
using a 100 nm filter to generate unilamellar vesicles.

Reconstitution
into Lipodisq Nanoparticles
Lipodisq nanoparticles (prehydrolyzed
styrene-maleic anhydride copolymer 3:1 ratio) were obtained from Malvern
Cosmeceutics Ltd. (Worcester, United Kingdom). The protein–lipid
complex was incorporated into SMA-lipodisq nanoparticles following
published protocols.,, A 500 μL aliquot of proteoliposome-reconstituted protein sample
(∼30 mM POPC/POPG lipid) was added with the same amount (500
μL) of 2.5% of lipodisq solution prepared in the same dialysis
buffer (10 mM imidazole, 0.1 mM EDTA at pH 6.5) dropwise over 3–4
min. The protein–lipodisq solution was allowed to equilibrate
overnight at 4 °C. The resulting solution was centrifuged at
40 000g for 30 min to remove nonsolubilized
protein. The size and homogeneity of the final complex was confirmed
by dynamic light scattering (DLS) spectroscopy.

EPR Spectroscopic
Measurements
EPR experiments were conducted at the Ohio Advanced
EPR Laboratory. CW-EPR spectra were collected at X-band on a Bruker
EMX CW-EPR spectrometer using an ER041xG microwave bridge and ER4119-HS
cavity coupled with a BVT 3000 nitrogen gas temperature controller.
Each spin-labeled CW-EPR spectrum was acquired with 42 s field scans
with a central field of 3315 G and sweep width of 100 G, modulation
frequency of 100 kHz, modulation amplitude of 1 G, and microwave power
of 10 mW at 295 K.

Four-pulse DEER experiments were performed
using a Bruker ELEXSYS E580 spectrometer equipped with a SuperQ-FT
pulse Q-band system with a 10 W amplifier and EN5107D2 resonator.
All DEER samples were prepared at a spin concentration of 100–120
μM. Deuterated glycerol (30%; w/w) was used as a cryoprotectant.
The sample was loaded into a 1.1 mm inner diameter quartz capillary
(Wilmad LabGlass, Buena, NJ) and mounted into the sample holder (plastic
rod) inserted into the resonator. DEER data were collected using the
standard four-pulse sequence [(π/2)ν1 – τ1 – (π)ν1 – t – (π)ν2 – (τ1 + τ2 – t) – (π)ν1 – τ2 – echo] at Q-band with a probe
pulse width of 10/20 ns, pump pulse width of 24 ns, 80 MHz of frequency
difference between probe and pump pulse, shot repetition time determined
by spin–lattice relaxation rate (T1), 100 echoes/point,
and 2-step phase cycling at 80 K collected out to ∼2.0 μs
for overnight data acquisition time (12 h). DEER data were analyzed using DEER Analysis 2011. The distance distributions, P(r), were
obtained by Tikhonov regularization in
the distance domain, incorporating the constraint P(r) &gt; 0. A homogeneous three-dimensional model for micelle samples
and a homogeneous two-dimensional model for proteoliposomes and lipodisq
nanoparticles samples were used for background correction. The regularization
parameter in the L curve was optimized by examining the fit of the
time domain.

Structure Refinement of the KCNE1 TMD Using
DEER Distance Restraints
The structure refinement of the
TMD of KCNE1 was carried out using an Xplor-NIH (version 2.33) simulated
annealing protocol, in a similar manner to that described
previously.− Positions 45, 47, 49, 50, 51, 52, 55, 64, 65, 66,
67, 68, 69, 70, and 71 along the KCNE1 TMD sequence were mutated to
Cys, and MTSL side chains were attached with the Xplor-NIH addAtoms.py
script. A simulated annealing routine was performed starting with
standard α-helical dihedral angles (Φ = −57.0°,
ψ = −47.0°, and ω = 180.0°) for the backbone
of the protein and standard MTSL dihedral angles (γ1 = −60°, γ2 = −60°) without
any experimental distance restraints to allow other side chain atoms
to find energetically reasonable conformations. The result of this
procedure was the starting structure for the simulation that fixed
the spin label side chain and generated an ideal straight α-helix.
Experimental DEER data for nine interlabel distances (45/71, 45/70,
47/66, 47/69, 49/67, 50/68, 51/65, 52/64, and 55/66) were used to
define restraints for an Xplor-NIH simulated annealing protocol. The
allowable ranges used for interlabel distances were established through
a series of preliminary simulated annealing molecular dynamics calculations
in which these ranges were varied. One
hundred structures were generated using the Xplor-NIH simulated annealing
routine with the Xplor-NIH anneal_nordc.py script. The simulated annealing
procedure used 3500 K as the high temperature and 25 K as the cooling
temperature, with temperature steps of 12.5 K. The first 10 structures
were kept with energies &lt;47.02 kcal/mol. Further analysis and visualization
were done using VMD-Xplor software. The
final structures were generated by replacing MTSL spin-labeled side
chains with native side chains using Visual Molecular Dynamics (VMD)
software similar to a previously reported
method. Further details of the simulated
annealing procedure and outputs are given in the  (Figures S3 and S4 and Table S1). The
newly determined lowest energy structure of KCNE1 TMD was further
used to validate the back-calculated dual-BSL distances with the dual-BSL-based
experimental DEER distances. The dual-BSLs were attached to the newly
determined structure with the Charmm force field− using the Quick
MD Simulator protocol under CHARMM-GUI. The resulting structure was solvated in a water box and neutralized
with KCl and further equilibrated and minimized following the instructions
provided in the Quick MD Simulator protocol in CHARMM-GUI. The dual-BSL
distances were calculated using VMD software and compared with experimental
DEER BSL distances (see , Table S2).

Results
The full-length
KCNE1 protein was investigated using nitroxide-based SDSL, EPR, DEER
spectroscopy, and simulated annealing molecular dynamics simulations.
Figure  shows the locations of the spin labels
introduced into the TMD of KCNE1 mapped onto the solution NMR structure
of the TMD in LMPG micelles (lowest energy model). DEER measurements were performed using two kinds of spin
labels: bifunctional spin labels (BSLs) and the more conventional
(monofunctional) MTSL spin labels. Bifunctional spin labels are rigid
and thus very useful for obtaining tighter DEER distance distributions
when compared to that for traditional MTSL., BSLs can also monitor protein backbone motion with minimal complications
from the internal flexibility of the side chain.

Schematic representation of spin-labeling probes and sites. (A)
MTSL, (B) BSL, and (C) ribbon model of transmembrane domain of KCNE1
(PDB ID: 2k21) highlighting representative sites used in this study with spheres
at their α-carbons. All spin-labeling sites are located inside
the membrane. The dashed lines represent the lipid bilayer interfaces.
Spin-labeling sites 45 and 71 are at the termini of the transmembrane
domain that spans the membrane bilayers.

Four-Pulse DEER Distance Measurements Using Bifunctional Spin Labels
(BSLs)
DEER spectroscopy coupled with SDSL is a very powerful
approach for measuring long-range distances of 18–80 Å.,,− KCNE1 was labeled
with BSLs attached near the termini of the KCNE1 TMD. BSLs can be
introduced by a facile cross-linking reaction of a bifunctional methanethiosulfonate
reagent with pairs of cysteine residues at i and i + 3 or i and i + 4 in
an α-helix and at i and i +
1 or i + 2 in a β-strand.,

The pairs of bifunctional spin-labeling sites include 45–49/67–71,
45–49/66–70, 46–50/67–71, 46–50/66–70,
and 47–51/64–68. These sites were chosen to include
the full transmembrane domain of KCNE1 in distance ranges reasonable
for conducting DEER measurements. Each double spin-labeled form of
KCNE1 was reconstituted into three different environments: LMPG micelles,
POPC/POPG proteoliposomes, and POPC/POPG lipodisq nanoparticles. KCNE1
does not exhibit any tendency to form oligomers.

Figure  shows representative four-pulse DEER data from
dual BSL-labeled KCNE1 (involving sites 46–50/67–71)
in all three model membrane media. Additional DEER spectra and the
corresponding data analysis for other double BSL-labeled samples are
given in the  (Figure
S1). All distances were derived from the maximum peak intensity in
the distance distribution plots. The derived distances for all double-labeled
samples are summarized in Table . Interestingly,
the distance distribution and signal-to-noise ratio (S/N) were improved
for KCNE1 incorporated into lipodisq nanoparticle samples when compared
to that with proteoliposomes.

Four-pulse Q-band DEER data of KCNE1 mutants
(Tyr46–Val50/Arg67–Leu71) bearing two BSLs. Background-subtracted
dipolar evolutions of the indicated mutants (left) and their corresponding
distance probability distributions from Tikhonov regularization are
shown (right) for conditions of (A) 1% LMPG micelles, (B) proteoliposomes
(POPC/POPG = 3:1), and (C) lipodisq nanoparticles.

Most Probable Intramolecular Distances
for KCNE1 Dual-Labeled Derivatives from Four-Pulse Q-Band DEER Experiments
in Three Different Membrane Environments (Micelles, Liposomes, and
Lipodisqs)
 	distance (Å)	
KCNE1 double mutants	micelles	liposomes	lipodisqs	
45–49/67–71	32	31	32	
45–49/66–70	32	31	32	
46–50/67–71	32	32	32	
46–50/66–70	32	32	33	
47–51/64–68	30	29	30	
45/71	35	36	35	
45/70	34	36	36	
47/69	31	32	31	
47/66	33	31	33	
49/67	28	27	27	
50/68	30	30	29	
51/65	23	22	23	
52/64	25	24	25	
55/66	22	21	21	
The uncertainty in these distances
is ±2 Å for BSL and ±2–4 Å for MTSL spin-labeled
samples.

Figure  shows the overlay of the DEER distance distribution
data for each BSL sample in micelles, proteoliposomes, and lipodisq
nanoparticles. Figure  and Table  clearly indicate that the most probable distances
calculated for each sample matrix (micelles, proteoliposomes, and
lipodisq nanoparticles) are comparable and that the structure of the
TMD of KCNE1 is comparable in all three different types of model membranes.

Overlay
of distance probability data obtained from Tikhonov regularization
in DEER data analysis for BSL-labeled KCNE1 samples in micelles, proteoliposomes,
and lipodisq nanoparticles. The black traces represent micelles, blue
represents proteoliposomes, and red represents lipodisq nanoparticles.
The label in each box indicates the dual-labeling sites. The Y-axis scale represents the probability of distance distribution
in each plot.

Four-Pulse DEER Distance
Measurements Using MTSL Spin Labels
Similarly, DEER spectra
were collected for nine pairs of conventional MTSL spin labels attached
at different positions on the transmembrane domain of KCNE1. The MTSL
labeling sites include 45/71, 45/70, 47/66, 47/69, 49/67, 50/68, 51/65,
52/64, and 55/66. Figure  illustrates the
DEER data for dual-MTSL-labeled sites (50/68) in 1% LMPG micelles,
POPC/POPG proteoliposomes, and POPC/POPG lipodisq nanoparticles. DEER
data and analysis for the remaining MTSL samples are given in the  (Figure S2). The distances
for all MTSL samples are summarized in Table . All distances were derived from the maximum peak intensity in each
DEER distance distribution plot. Figure  shows
an overlay of distance distribution data plotted for each MTSL sample
in micelles, proteoliposomes, and lipodisq nanoparticles. Figure  clearly indicates the major peaks of each sample
are comparable for micelles, proteoliposomes, and lipodisq nanoparticles.
This agrees with the BSL DEER data and indicates that the KCNE1 TMD
has similar structural conformations in all three membrane-mimicking
media.

Four-pulse Q-band DEER data of KCNE1 mutant (Val50/Ser68) bearing
two MTSL spin labels. Background-subtracted dipolar evolutions for
the indicated mutants (left) and their corresponding distance probability
distribution from Tikhonov regularization (right) are shown for (A)
1% LMPG micelles, (B) proteoliposomes (POPC/POPG = 3:1), and (C) lipodisq
nanoparticles.

Overlay of distance probability
distribution data obtained from Tikhonov regularization of DEER data
for MTSL-labeled KCNE1 in micelles, proteoliposomes, and lipodisq
nanoparticles. The black traces represent micelles, blue represents
proteoliposomes, and red represents lipodisq nanoparticles. The label
in each box indicates the dual-labeling sites. The Y-axis scale represents the probability of distance distribution in
each plot.

Structure Refinement of
the TMD of KCNE1 from MTSL DEER Distance Restraints
A model
for the most probable structure of the transmembrane domain of KCNE1
in POPC/POPG proteoliposomes was obtained using the experimental DEER
distances coupled with the simulated annealing software package Xplor-NIH
(version 2.33)., This approach has been used for
other DEER structural studies.− The DEER distance data obtained
for nine pairs of MTSL spin-labeled sites (see ) in proteoliposomes were converted into Xplor distance
restraints and employed in a simulated annealing protocol. The MTSL
DEER distance restraints were used to make the structure calculation
procedure simpler within Xplor-NIH. Since MTSL is a widely used spin
probe for EPR spectroscopic studies, the method of structure refinement
used in this study can be widely applied to many other membrane proteins.
A series of simulated annealing calculations were performed using
distance-restraint uncertainties of ±4 Å. A simulated annealing
calculation was also performed on a control system having amino acids
representing the KCNE1 TMD sequence without any experimental distance
restraints. The result of this control simulated annealing calculation
yielded a straight helix and did not satisfy the experimental DEER
distance restraints. Figure  displays the
10 lowest energy structures of the KCNE1 TMD in proteoliposomes obtained
from the simulated annealing calculation using MTSL-derived distance
restraints. To generate the final structures, the MTSL spin-labeled
side chains were replaced by the native side chains (Figure A). The output energies corresponding to 10 minimum
energy structures obtained from Xplor-NIH refinement are given in
the  (Table S1).

Results
of the structure refinement of the KCNE1 TMD in proteoliposomes incorporating
MTSL DEER distance-restraint data using an Xplor-NIH simulated annealing
molecular dynamics protocol. (A) Overlay of the 10 structures with
lowest energy obtained from restrained simulated annealing calculations
using amino acids 45–71 (transmembrane domain) of KCNE1. The
final structures were generated by replacing the MTSL-labeled side
chains by the native amino acid side chains with retention of the
Cβ position in the label. (B) Ribbon representation
of overlaid DEER structures. (C) Overlay of DEER structures and the
previously determined NMR structure (blue cartoon represents micellar
NMR structure, and purple cartoons represent DEER structures in lipid
bilayers).

The newly determined structures
were further validated with the BSL-based experimental DEER distances.
The back-calculated distances between dual-BSLs attached on the newly
determined lowest energy structure are consistent with the experimental
BSL distances within experimental error of ±2 Å (). The DEER determined structures and
the previously determined solution NMR structure in micelles are overlaid
in Figure C. The backbone RMSDs for all of
the superimposed new structures with respect to the previous NMR structure
vary between 1.5 to 3.0 Å (see ). The residue positions on the concave face of the KCNE1 TMD in
the new structure model are comparable to those of the previously
determined NMR structure. Additional details for the output structures
are given in the . These new structures indicate that the KCNE1 TMD adopts a similar,
slightly curved conformation when compared to the previously published
solution NMR structure in LMPG micelles. The predicted structural model of KCNE1 in a lipid bilayer is given
in Figure .

Schematic model of the overlay of the
10 lowest energy structures of KCNE1 TMD in a lipid bilayer.

Discussion
Methodological
Observations: Advantages of Bifunctional Spin Labels and Lipodisq
Model Membranes
DEER distance measurements allow researchers
to obtain valuable structural information from systems in which other
techniques like solution nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) or X-ray
crystallography prove to be difficult or impossible., Recent methodological and spectroscopic developments in DEER measurements
can provide higher quality structural data for the study of membrane
proteins.,,,,− Bifunctional spin labels (BSL) provide narrower distance distributions
when compared to that with standard MTSL spin labels., Bifunctional spin labels have been recently used to study conformational
states of the voltage sensing domain of KvAP. While the focus of this study was on the structure of KCNE1, this
work also included the exploration of the combination of relatively
new spin-labeling methods and a recently introduced model membrane
system. In this study, we utilized two kinds of spin labels, BSL (more
conformationally restricted) and MTSL (flexible), attached at several
position pairs within the DEER-detectable distance range on the KCNE1
TMD (see Figure ) in micelles and more native
membrane environments (proteoliposomes and lipodisq nanoparticles).
Here, we showed that the use of bifunctional spin labels yielded DEER
distance measurements with tighter distance distributions (Figure  and ) when compared
to those for the monofunctional MTSL spin-label samples (Figure  and ). This
illustrates the advantage of using a spin-labeled probe that is more
rigidly linked to the protein backbone by dual attachment to i, i+3/4 cysteine sites than the more classical
method of modifying a single cysteine site with MTSL.

This work
also provided a comparison between the use of lipodisq nanoparticles
and bilayered lipid vesicles as a medium for DEER EPR-based structural
studies of membrane proteins. SMA-lipodisq nanoparticles provide a
good membrane mimetic environment and boost the phase memory time
(Tm) by ∼2-fold and the corresponding
signal-to-noise ratio when compared to that for proteoliposomes,, (see Figures , , ). Also, the increase in Tm for lipodisq-based samples will enable DEER data to
be collected out further in time and lead to longer distance measurements
and potentially narrower distance distributions. Lipodisq nanoparticles
isolate protein macromolecules by minimizing the size of the complex
to ∼10–15 nm while still retaining a biologically relevant
membrane structure., Here, it was observed that all
DEER distance data collected in micelles and lipodisq nanoparticles
exhibit similar signal-to-noise ratios and distance distribution widths
for both BSL and MTSL samples. The lipodisq-based sample preparation
minimizes the clustering of intermolecular spins by decreasing the
size of individual protein–lipid complexes. Lipodisq nanoparticles
can be applied to a wide range of protein–lipid complexes.,, It should be added that several
laboratories have demonstrated that there are no significant structural
and/or functional perturbations of membrane proteins due to BSL and
lipodisq nanoparticles.,,,

Comparison of the KCNE1
TMD Structure in Micelles and Lipid Bilayers
Detergent micelles
are widely used as a membrane-mimetic for membrane proteins in part
due to their smaller size, facilitating high-resolution structure
analysis by solution NMR spectroscopy; however, it is often difficult
to test whether the structure of proteins in a micelle environment
is the same as that of the membrane-bound state.

A previous
solution NMR study indicated that the transmembrane domain of KCNE1
has a curved helix (Leu45–Leu71) in LMPG micelles. The BSL and MTSL DEER data presented in this
article indicate the TMD of KCNE1 is helical in proteoliposomes and
lipodisq nanoparticles. This agrees with our recent CD spectroscopic
study that indicated that KCNE1 has α-helical structural components
in POPC/POPG lipid bilayers; however,
the CD data was global for KCNE1 and not specific to the TMD. Also,
previously reported CW-EPR power saturation data suggested KCNE1 spans
the full width of the membrane, with the Leu59 residue located near
the center.

The most probable spin
label-to-spin label distances obtained for each combination of labeling
sites for KCNE1 in LMPG micelles, proteoliposomes, and lipodisq nanoparticles
were, in all cases, comparable (Table ). The
DEER-derived distances were used as restraints for conducting simulated
annealing molecular dynamics simulations to determine the three-dimensional
structural model of the KCNE1 TMD in lipid bilayers (Figures  and ). This approach converged
on a rather precise ensemble of structures that exhibit a slightly
curved helix with a helix apex close to Thr58. Figure C compares the new DEER structural model in lipid bilayers
with the solution NMR micelle structure. Although both structures
have a curved helix for the TMD, the solution NMR structure has greater
curvature.

In order to directly compare observed distances between
a straight helix and a curved helix for the TMD of KCNE1, modeling
studies were conducted. The MTSL-based nitroxide SL–SL distances
measured on the TMD of KCNE1 mutants in different structural forms
(Table ) indicate the distances obtained on
the newly determined lowest energy lipid-bilayer structure are consistent
with the experimental DEER distances and close to the solution NMR
micelle structure within experimental error. They are, however, quite
different than predicted by a linear helix. Inspection of all the
distances shown in Table  indicates that the
structure of the KCNE1 TMD is similar to the curved NMR structure
helix. The curvilinear conformation of the KCNE1 TMD is consistent
with the width of POPC lipid bilayers (∼37 Å) used in
this study., POPC/POPG lipids were used for
this study since they are typically found in mammalian membranes.− However, the degree of curvature and conformational flexibility
of the TMD of KCNE1 may vary depending upon the length and choice
of phospholipids used for the measurements. The slight curvature seen for the KCNE1 TMD may arise due to the
backbone conformational balance between glycine residues and a number
of flanking β-branched amino acids present in the KCNE1 TMD. This curvature may play a role in binding of
KCNE1 to KCNQ1 and for its subsequent modulation of channel function,
as previously proposed. One possibility
is that the curvature provides maximal exposure of the side chain
of Thr58, located at the apex of the convex face of the curved helix,
for interaction with KCNQ1. This site is known to be essential for
the delayed activation conferred on KCNQ1 by KCNE1.,, Another, not mutually exclusive, possibility
is that the curvature is required to optimize the binding interface
between KCNQ1 and KCNE1 and also to ensure the ends of the TMD are
correctly positioned to enable the extramembrane domains of KCNE1
to make optimal interactions with the channel.

Comparison of MTSL-Based Nitroxide Spin Label (SL)–Spin Label
(SL) Distances on the TMD of KCNE1 Mutants in Different Structural
Forms (Linear Helix, Previously Determined NMR Micelle Structure,
and Newly Determined Lowest Energy Lipid Bilayer Structure) with the
Experimental DEER Distances
 	distance (Å)	
KCNE1 double mutants	linear helix	NMR structure	DEER experimental	new model
structure	
45/71	44	37	36	38	
45/70	44	38	36	38	
47/69	40	34	32	34	
47/66	37	30	31	33	
49/67	26	27	27	28	
50/68	25	26	30	32	
51/65	24	28	22	24	
52/64	18	25	24	21	
55/66	19	23	21	17	
The modelling
of MTSL spin-labeled NMR micelle structure (see Figure  for structure) was carried out using addAtoms.py script under
Xplor-NIH. All of the modelling distances were measured using VMD-Xplor.

Conclusions
Detergent
micelles have come under considerable criticism as model membranes
on the basis that they may distort membrane protein structures from
their true native-like forms. It is notable
that the TMD of KCNE1 maintains the curved helical structure in both
lipid bilayers (proteoliposomes and lipodisq nanoparticles) and in
LMPG detergent micelles. This suggests that the curvature seen for
this domain is a robust feature of the KCNE1 structure not easily
perturbed by changes in the membrane local environment. It has previously
been argued that robust resilience of membrane protein structure in
the face of variations in membrane lipid composition may be an evolved
trait shared by many membrane proteins. Perhaps this is the case for the unusual KCNE1 TMD. If so, then
it seems probable that KCNE1 maintains a curved TMD even upon association
with KCNQ1. This hypothesis will require future experimental testing.

Supporting Information Available
Additional
experimental DEER data and corresponding analysis for the BSL and
MTSL spin-labeled KCNE1 samples (Figures S1 and S2), amino acid sequences
of wild-type and mutated KCNE1 TMD (Figure S3), additional structural
refinement data on KCNE1 TMD (Figure S4 and Table S1), back calculated
dual-BSL distances on the newly determined structure (Table S2), backbone
RMSDs of the newly determined structure with respect to micelle structure
of KCNE1 TMD (Table S3), and fwhm of DEER distance distributions (Table
S4). This material is available free of charge via the Internet at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bi500943p_si_001.pdf

This work was supported by National
Institutes of Health grant nos. R01 GM108026 (to G.A.L.) and R01 DC007416
(to C.R.S.). Funding was also provided by National Science Foundation
(NSF) grant no. CHE-1305664 (to G.A.L.). The pulsed EPR spectrometer
was purchased through NSF and the Ohio Board of Regents grants (MRI-0722403).

The authors declare
no competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
We would like to thank Dr. Charles Schwieters at the
National Institute of Health for assisting with the structural refinement
Xplor-NIH program and Dr. Shahidul Islam at the Department of Biochemistry
&amp; Molecular Biology, The University of Chicago, for assisting
with the use of BSLs under CHARMM-GUI.

Abbreviations
LQTSlong QT syndrome

TMDtransmembrane domain

DEERdouble electron–electron
resonance

NMRnuclear
magnetic resonance

SDSLsite-directed spin labeling

CW-EPRcontinuous wave electron paramagnetic resonance

IPTGisopropyl β-d-1-thiogalactopyranoside

SDS-PAGEsodium dodecyl sulfate polyacrylamide gel
electrophoresis

LMPG1-myristoyl-2-hydroxy-sn-glycero-3-phospho-(1′-rac-glycerol)
(sodium salt)

BSLbifunctional spin label, (3,4-Bis(methanethiosulfonylmethyl)-2,2,5,5-tetramethyl-2,5-dihydro-1H-pyrrol-1-yloxy Radical), (HO-1944)

MTSL1-oxyl-2,2,5,5-tetramethylpyrroline-3-methylmethanethiosulfonate
spin label

POPC1-palmitoyl-2-oleoyl-sn-glycero-3-phosphocholine

POPG1-palmitoyl-2-oleoyl-sn-glycero-3-phospho-(1′-rac-glycerol)
(sodium salt)

DLSdynamic light scattering

VMDvisual molecular dynamics

CDcircular dichroism

S/Nsignal-to-noise ratio

