The nuclear
factor κB
(NF-κB) essential modulator, NEMO (also known as IKKγ),
is a scaffolding protein that together with the catalytic subunits
IKKα (inhibitor of κ B kinase α) and IKKβ
forms the IKK complex, a central node in the canonical NF-κB
pathway. The NF-κB pathway regulates
the expression of a large number of genes responsible for immune response,
inflammation, cell proliferation and survival, and cancer and, as
such, is considered an attractive target for new therapies.− Upon activation by a variety of stimuli, the IKK complex phosphorylates
the inhibitor of κB molecules (IκB), responsible for keeping
NF-κB sequestered in the cytoplasm. IκB is then ubiquitinated
and degraded by the ubiquitin–proteasome system, freeing NF-κB
to enter the nucleus and activate target genes., Pharmacological
inhibition of the NF-κB pathway has been proposed and attempted
at many different levels (reviewed in ref ()), including targeting the IKK-binding domain
of NEMO. Some success was reported in the utilization of a six-amino
acid peptide encompassing the sequence found at the C-terminus of
both IKKα and IKKβ, the NEMO-binding domain [L737DWSWL742 (NBD)], which binds to NEMO and effectively interferes
with the formation of the IKK complex., A cell-permeable
NBD peptide was demonstrated to be an effective blocker of acute and
chronic inflammatory signaling in models of inflammation and to be
effective in models of cancer.−

We previously reported the structure of dimeric NEMO(44–111)
in complex with a longer fragment of IKKβ(701–745) (Figure A). As for most protein–protein
interaction interfaces, the NEMO–IKKβ interface is extended
and prevalently flat and possibly difficult to target with small molecule
inhibitors,, but rational inhibitor design
would greatly benefit from the knowledge of the structure of unliganded
NEMO or NEMO in the presence of small molecule ligands. NEMO constructs
of any length encompassing the IKKβ-binding domain have never
been crystallized in the apo form and produce nuclear magnetic resonance
(NMR) spectra of poor quality. NEMO(44–111)
in particular, the minimal IKK-binding domain, is characterized in
our hands by conformational heterogeneity and reduced thermal stability
and binding affinity, making unlikely a successful determination of
the structure. Structure prediction indicates a helical sequence (residues
49–94) followed by a coiled-coil region (103–130), although experimental confirmation of a dimeric
structure for unliganded NEMO(44–111) was not reported. While
unliganded NEMO(44–111) is characterized by structural instability,
upon binding IKKβ it undergoes a conformational change and locks
into a stable structure, but it remains unclear whether the conformational
heterogeneity of the short construct is an artifact of construct truncation
or an intrinsic characteristic of this portion of NEMO required for
IKKβ binding.

(A) Domain structure of full length NEMO and X-ray structure
of
NEMO(44–111) in complex with IKKβ(701–745) (Protein
Data Bank entry 3BRV). αH regions are the helical regions. CC1 and CC2 are the
first and second coiled-coil regions, respectively. LZ is the leucine
zipper region. ZF is the zinc finger domain. (B) Concept of using
a coiled-coil adaptor to stabilize the NEMO dimer. (C) Engineered
coiled-coil NEMO constructs.

Here we report the design and characterization of a series
of constructs
encompassing the IKK-binding domain of NEMO that we engineered to
achieve improved stability and structural homogeneity and to assess
the effect of this stabilization on binding affinity. The NEMO(44–111)
constructs incorporate an ideal coiled-coil sequence based on GCN4
at the N-terminus, C-terminus, or both termini (Figure B,C)., The coiled-coil extension was
chosen to stabilize the hypothesized dimeric structure of NEMO and
possibly nucleate coiled-coil zipping. Our study shows that the coiled-coil
adaptor indeed increases the stability of the short NEMO constructs
and restores their IKKβ binding affinity. Finally, we show that
the stabilized construct with a C-terminal coiled-coil adaptor is
able to recognize and bind endogenous IKKβ in mammalian cells.

Experimental
Procedures
Chemicals
Ampicillin (Sigma), isopropyl β-d-1-thiogalactopyranoside (IPTG) (Amresco), Tris base (Fisher
Scientific), glycerol (Invitrogen), magnesium chloride (Fisher Scientific),
imidazole (Sigma), benzonase (Sigma), NP40, urea (Fisher Scientific),
sodium chloride (Fisher Scientific), dithiothreitol (DTT) (Soltec
Venture), 5-carboxyfluorescein (5′FAM) (Nova Biochem), N-hydroxysuccinimide (NHS), and dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO)
(Acros) were acquired and used.

Protein Expression and
Purification
A list of primers
utilized in the cloning is reported in Table S1 of the . The NEMO(1–196)
construct was cloned into a pGEX-6P-1 vector with an N-terminal GST
tag.

The procedure used for protein production was as described
previously with the following exceptions:
induction with 0.2 mM IPTG, purification by affinity chromatography
with a GSTrap 4B column [GE Healthcare, washing with 50 mM Tris (pH
8), 150 mM NaCl, 5 mM DTT, and 1 mM EDTA; elution with 50 mM Tris
(pH 8), 150 mM NaCl, 5 mM DTT, 1 mM EDTA, and 10 mM reduced glutathione]
followed by size exclusion chromatography (SEC) [50 mM sodium phosphate
(pH 6.5), 150 mM NaCl, and 5 mM DTT] on a Superdex75 16/60 column
(GE Healthcare Life Sciences). All the denaturing steps utilized 8
M urea.

The NEMO(44–111) construct was cloned into a
pET-16b vector
with a TEV cleavage site inserted before the NEMO sequence. A tryptophan
was inserted at the N-terminus of the NEMO construct for UV detection.
The final construct has residues GSW before the NEMO sequence as a
result of the TEV cleavage and W insertion and is termed NEMOw. The
vector was transformed into BL21 Star (DE3) cells for protein production.
A 250 mL culture was induced with 0.2 mM IPTG at 20 °C overnight.
Cell pellets were collected after centrifugation at 4000 rpm for 30
min at 4 °C and resuspended in 25 mL of lysis buffer [50 mM Tris
(pH 8), 200 mM NaCl, 10 mM imidazole, 5 mM MgCl2, 0.02%
NP40, 5% glycerol, one tablet of Roche protease inhibitor, and 3 μL
of benzonase]. A French press was used to lyse cells, and the lysate
was denatured by adding 8 M urea. The urea lysate was centrifuged
at 40000 rpm for 30 min at 25 °C after being shaken overnight
at room temperature. The supernatant was applied to a HisTrap 5 mL
FF column (GE Healthcare Life Sciences) for purification and on-column
refolding. After elution with buffer [50 mM Tris (pH 8), 200 mM NaCl,
500 mM imidazole, and 2 mM DTT], Bradford reagent was used to determine
the protein concentration. Subsequently, His-tagged TEV protease was
added at a ratio of 1 mg of TEV to 10 mg of His-tagged protein for
TEV cleavage in dialysis buffer [25 mM Tris (pH 8), 100 mM NaCl, and
2 mM DTT] overnight at 4 °C. The cleavage mixture was applied
to the HisTrap column again to remove the His tag and TEV, while the
untagged protein in the flow-through was collected and concentrated
to 5 mL for SEC with a Superdex75 16/60 column in 20 mM Tris (pH 8),
100 mM NaCl, and 2 mM DTT.

All other NEMO constructs were derived
from the NEMOw construct
using site-directed mutagenesis (QuikChange XL II mutagenesis kit)
and expressed and purified in the same manner. The DNA for the coiled-coil
sequence was amplified by polymerase chain reaction from DNA received
as a kind gift from D. Bolon (University of Massachusetts Medical
School, Worcester, MA). [15N]NEMOw and [15N]NEMOwCcc8aa
were expressed and purified like the unlabeled version, utilizing
M9 minimal medium supplemented with 3 g/L 15NH4Cl (CIL) for cell growth.

The
IKKβ(701–745) construct was cloned into an engineered
pJCC04a vector as previously described, with a thioredoxin fusion
protein and a TEV cleavage site. It was
purified in the same fashion as NEMO(44–111) with denaturing
and on-column refolding followed by TEV cleavage and finally SEC.
The K703R, K704R double-lysine mutant (IKKβKK/RR)
was generated using site-directed mutagenesis (QuikChange Lightening
site-directed mutagenesis kit) and purified following the same procedure,
but using a different SEC buffer [100 mM sodium phosphate (pH 9.3),
100 mM NaCl, and 2 mM DTT].

The protein concentration was determined
by measuring the UV absorbance
at 280 nm, and the extinction coefficients were obtained using the
ProtParam tool from the ExPASy Server.

Sodium Dodecyl Sulfate–Polyacrylamide Gel Electrophoresis
(SDS–PAGE)
Each of the purified samples was prepared
for SDS–PAGE with 5× SDS sample loading buffer, and either
with or without 200 mM DTT. Samples were heated at different temperatures,
either 95 or 60 °C, for 10 min. Electrophoresis was conducted
in 12% polyacrylamide gels following standard protocols (Life Technologies).
Protein bands were visualized using Coomassie blue G-250 (Amresco)
stain.

Fluorescent Labeling of IKKβKK/RR
5′FAM fluorescein was activated by being mixed with NHS and
EDC at a 1:1:1 ratio in DMSO and then incubated at room temperature
for 20 min to activate 5′FAM. Purified IKKβKK/RR was concentrated to ∼2 mg/mL, and a 10-fold molar ratio of
the 5′FAM-NHS was added to 500 μL of IKKβKK/RR. The mixture was left slowly swirling in the dark for 30 h at 4
°C. Labeled IKKβKK/RR was loaded on a Superdex75
10/300GL column to separate excess fluorescein in 1× phosphate-buffered
saline (PBS). The concentration of 5′FAM-IKKβ was measured
as previously described.

Size Exclusion
Chromatography (SEC) Binding Assay
A
Superdex75 10/300GL column was used to confirm the binding of 5′FAM-IKKβKK/RR with NEMO. A sample of 5′FAM-IKKβKK/RR with NEMO(44–111) was prepared by mixing the two components
at a 1:1 molar ratio and incubating on ice for 3 h. A 500 μL
aliquot of the mixture was then injected onto the column and compared
with the chromatogram of 500 μL of purified 5′FAM-IKKβKK/RR alone. Detection utilized wavelengths of 280 and 495
nm (characteristic absorption wavelength of 5′FAM).

Circular
Dichroism (CD) Spectroscopy
Different NEMO
constructs were prepared in Tris buffer [20 mM Tris (pH 8), 100 mM
NaCl, and 2 mM DTT] with concentrations ranging from 10 to 20 μM.
CD spectra were acquired from 200 to 250 nm at 20 °C (Jasco J-185)
using a 0.1 cm cuvette. Melting curves were obtained by recording
the ellipticity at 222 nm from 10 to 90 °C with a temperature
gradient of 1 °C/min. The mean residue ellipticity was calculated
using the equationwhere [θ] is the mean residue ellipticity,
θ is the measured ellipticity in millidegrees, l is the path length of the sample cell in centimeters, C is the concentration of the protein in millimolar units, and n is the number of residues. The α-helical content
was calculated with the K2D3 method.,

Fluorescence
Anisotropy (FA) Assay
Direct binding measurements
were taken at a constant concentration of the reporter peptide 5′FAM-IKKβKK/RR (30 nM) and protein concentrations that ranged from micromolar
to nanomolar, as described previously. Fluorescence anisotropy was determined using a Tecan F500 Infinite
plate reader, an excitation wavelength of 485 nm, and an emission
wavelength of 525 nm as

Data were fit to a modified quadratic
binding equation by nonlinear regression analysis using KaleidaGraph:,where m1 is the
anisotropy of the reporter peptide in the absence of NEMO, m2 is the anisotropy value when all 5′FAM-IKKβKK/RR is bound to NEMO, and [L] and [R] are the total concentrations
of the ligand (5′FAM-IKKβ) and receptor (NEMO), respectively.

Competition binding experiments were performed as previously described. IC50 values were obtained by fitting
the data to the following sigmoidal dose–response curve equation
using KaleidaGraph.where m1 and m2 are the anisotropy values at highest and zero
inhibitor concentrations, respectively, m3 is the log(IC50) value, and m4 is the slope factor.

Ki was calculated
according to its
relationship with IC50 as follows:where IC50 and KD were obtained from the equations presented above and
[L] is the total concentration of the ligand.

NMR Spectroscopy
Samples for NMR contained 96 μM
[15N]NEMOw or 73 μM [15N]NEMOwCcc8aa and
145 or 107 μM unlabeled IKKβ(701–745), respectively
(1:1.5 NEMO:IKKβ ratio), in 25 mM phosphate buffer (pH 6.5),
100 mM NaCl, and 5% D2O. All NMR data were acquired on
a 700 MHz Bruker Avance III spectrometer equipped with a TCI cryogenic
probe, at 308 K. 1H–15N TROSY spectra
were acquired with 2048 × 128 points in 128 scans.− Data were multiplied by a squared cosine bell or Gaussian function
prior to Fourier transformation. Data analysis utilized Topspin 3.2
(Bruker Biospin). Molecular graphics images were produced using the
UCSF Chimera package from the Computer Graphics Laboratory, University
of California, San Francisco (supported by National Institutes of
Health Grant P41 RR-01081).

Co-Immunoprecipitation
We cloned
the NEMOwCcc construct
into the pCDNA3.1 vector, incorporating an N-terminal FLAG tag for
co-immunoprecipitation (co-IP) experiments. HEK293 cells were plated
at a density of 106 cells/well in six-well plates in 2
mL of Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s medium with 10% fetal
bovine serum and kept at 37 °C in 5% CO2. Transfection
was conducted on the second day with Lipofectamine 2000, when the
cells reached ∼70% confluence. A total of 2.5 μg of DNA
was prepared for each well, containing the NEMO plasmid of interest
together with an enhanced green fluorescent protein (EGFP) expression
plasmid and a tumor necrosis factor receptor
1 (TNFR1) plasmid, with the different amount of each vector listed
in Table .

Vectors Utilized
(μg) in the
Transfection of HEK293 Cells
vector	#1	#2	#3	#4	#5	#6	
EGFP	0.1	0.1	0.1	0.1	0.1	0.1	
TNFR1	0	0	0.1	0.1	0.1	0.1	
NEMOwCcc	0	0.8	0	0.2	0.8	2.0	
pcDNA3.1	2.4	1.4	2.3	2.1	1.5	0.3	
The DNA/Lipofectamine 2000 mixture was prepared according
to the
Lipofectamine 2000 protocol (Invitrogen, Protocol Publication MAN0007824,
revision 1.0), and a final volume of 250 μL of a mixture with
2.5 μg of DNA and 13.5 μL of Lipofectamine 2000 was added
to each well.

After 48 h, cells were washed three times with
1× PBS and
lysed in 250 μL of lysis buffer [50 mM HEPES (pH 7.3), 150 mM
NaCl, 0.5% NP40, 2 mM EDTA, 10% glycerol, 0.1 mM Na3VO4, 1 mM PMSF, and one tablet of Roche protease inhibitor per
50 mL of buffer]. The total protein concentration in cell lysate was
determined using the BCA assay (Pierce catalog no. 23225), so that
for each sample the same amount of protein was used for Co-IP; 200
μg of lysate from each sample was treated with 30 μL of
prewashed anti-FLAG M2 antibody conjugated to magnetic beads (Sigma),
for a total volume of 400 μL, by addition of TBST [20 mM Tris
(pH 7.5), 137 mM NaCl, and 0.5% Tween 20]. After incubation for 2
h at room temperature, the beads were washed three times with TBST
buffer and boiled in 30 μL of urea–SDS buffer with DTT.
The supernatant was separated from the beads by a magnetic rack and
utilized for Western Blot analysis (separation by SDS–PAGE).
NEMOwCcc was detected using the anti-FLAG M2 HRP-conjugated antibody
(Sigma), while IKKβ was detected using anti-IKKβ (Cell
Signaling) as a primary antibody and an anti-rabbit HRP-conjugated
secondary antibody (Promega W401B). β-Actin was used as a control
for the amount of lysate applied to the beads.

Results
A schematic representation of all protein constructs examined here
is given in Figure S1 of the . The sequences of the engineered NEMO constructs are listed in Table . For the sake of simplicity, we always refer to
residues 44–111, although construct length differs slightly
(see Table ). The ideal coiled-coil sequence
was chosen as designed by Havranek and Harbury and previously utilized
to enforce Hsp90 N-domain proximity., The heptad
repeats of the modified GCN4 coiled coil were matched to the heptads
in the sequence of NEMO(44–111) to select the insertion point.
The cloning results were confirmed by DNA sequencing (MCB Core, Dartmouth
College). All NEMO constructs express at high levels in Escherichia
coli and are soluble in Tris buffer at pH 8. As previously
reported, because of their elongated
structure, purified NEMO constructs have short retention times on
SEC, corresponding approximately to a 44 kDa molecular mass marker,
with the double coiled-coil construct being slightly larger than the
others. NEMOw serves as our reference protein for comparison to all
of the new constructs.

Sequences of the
NEMO Constructs Examined
The GS residues (gray) are appended
after cleavage of the six-His tag. The W (blue) was inserted for ease
of UV detection. The coiled-coil residues are colored orange. NEMO(44–111),
NEMOw, and NEMOwCcc include NEMO residues 44–112 and the other
constructs residues 51–112.

Enhanced Structure and Stability of Engineered NEMOs
SDS–PAGE, conducted under nonreducing conditions, shows that
the coiled-coil constructs, like wild-type NEMO, exist in solution
as covalently linked dimers (Figure ). The
introduction of the coiled-coil adaptor increases the dimer stability
to progressively harsher conditions, including the presence of a reducing
agent and sample heating to 95 °C. When compared to the NEMO(44–111)
construct, the coiled-coil NEMO proteins display an α-helical
content that increases from 54% for NEMOw to 70, 72, and 83% (Figure A,B), for NEMOwNcc, NEMOwCcc, and NEMOwDcc, respectively,
as evidenced by the two characteristic minima at 208 and 222 nm in
the CD spectra and predicted by the K2D3 method., α-Helices in a coiled-coil conformation are characterized
by greater ellipticity values at 222 nm than at 208 nm., The 222 nm/208 nm intensity ratio indicates an increase in the level
of coiled-coil structure in the designed constructs compared to that
in wild-type NEMOw (Figure B). Thermal denaturation
curves monitored by CD are displayed in panels C and D of Figure , and the melting temperatures are summarized in
Table . The results show that while NEMOw
melts at room temperature (well before 30 °C), NEMOwCcc and NEMOwDcc
are significantly more stable with melting temperatures around 65
°C, and melting curves typical of coiled-coil structures., The N-terminal coiled-coil construct shows a gradual loss of secondary
structure. The shortest engineered construct, NEMOwCcc8aa, is instead
very similar to NEMOw in its secondary structure with no increase
in coiled-coil content but shows improvement in its thermal stability
with a midpoint of approximately 50 °C. We examined each construct
in complex with IKKβ(701–745) (Figure D): most constructs show a more sigmoidal melting curve and
no major changes in melting temperature. By comparison, our reference,
NEMOw, shows improved stability with a melting temperature of 35 °C.
NEMOwDcc experiences only partial loss of secondary structure with
an increase in temperature. The total secondary structure in the complex
reflects the non-completely helical structure of IKKβ(701–745)
and the partial occupancy of NEMO at the concentration examined (unbound
IKKβ is disordered).

SDS–PAGE gel of the NEMO constructs as
labeled: NEMOw, lanes
2–4; NEMOwNcc, lanes 5–7; NEMOwCcc, lanes 8–10;
NEMOwDcc, lanes 11–13. MW markers in lane 1 are labeled. The
heating temperature used in the preparation of the sample for electrophoresis
is indicated as well as the presence or absence of the reducing agent
DTT. For each construct, the lower band represents the monomer (MW
= 8.8, 11.4, 12.1, and 14.8 kDa) and the upper band the dimer (NEMO
constructs run lower than the calculated MW respect to MW standards,
under these conditions).

(A) CD spectra of the NEMO constructs at 20 °C in Tris buffer
(pH 8). (B) Plot of the 222 nm/208 nm intensity ratio. Values of &gt;1
are indicative of coiled-coil structure, and the percent α-helix
values were calculated by the K2D3 method. (C) CD melting curve of
NEMO constructs, acquired between 10 and 90 °C, and monitored
at 222 nm. (D) CD melting curve of NEMO constructs in the presence
of IKKβ(701–745), at a 1:1 ratio.

Melting Temperatures (°C) of
NEMOw and Engineered NEMO Constructs with and without IKKβ
 	NEMOw	NEMOwNcc	NEMOwCcc	NEMOwDcc	NEMOwCcc8aa	
alone	25		65	65–70	50–55	
with
IKKβ	35	45–50	65	60	50	
NEMOwNcc experiences
a gradual
decrease in secondary structure content as the temperature increases
but does not display a sigmoidal melting curve with a defined midpoint.

Coiled-Coil Adaptors Rescue
IKKβ Binding Affinity
We initially tested the ability
of our reporter peptide (5′FAM-IKKβKK/RR)
to bind NEMO(44–111) using SEC. The unique UV
absorbance of the 5′FAM fluorescein at 495 nm allows detection
of the shift of the elution peak of 5′FAM-IKKβKK/RR to the molecular weight of the complex, upon co-injection with NEMOw
(Figure A). We measured the affinity of the
interaction by fluorescence anisotropy. The results are listed in
Table  and Figure B–D. In the absence of the coiled-coil adaptor, NEMOw has
a weak binding affinity (an approximate KD of 10 μM can be qualitatively estimated from the incomplete
binding curve). The addition of the N-terminal coiled coil in NEMOwNcc
improves the affinity to &lt;1 μM (980 ± 20 nM), and the
C terminal coiled coil in NEMOwCcc (150 ± 6 nM) restores binding
to the level of our control GST-NEMO(1–196) (168 ± 4 nM).
With both ends zipped up by coiled coils, NEMOwDcc has an affinity
of 114 ± 3 nM. In contrast, the short coiled-coil construct,
NEMOwCcc8aa, behaves like NEMOw, and the binding curve does not reach
a plateau at the maximal protein concentration tested, 52 μM.

KD Values
Determined by Fluorescence Anisotropy, as Direct Binding of Fluorescent
IKKβKK/RR
 	NEMOwNcc	NEMOwCcc	NEMOwDcc	GST-NEMO(1–196)	
KD (nM)	980 ± 20	150 ± 6	114 ± 3	168 ± 4	
 	IKKβ	IKKβKK/RR	
IC50 (nM)	266 ± 13	167 ± 3	
IC50 values were determined
by competition with fluorescent IKKβKK/RR. NEMOw
and NEMOwCcc8aa have KD values of &gt;1
μM.
At the protein concentration tested, no complete binding curve was
achieved, and the curves were therefore not fitted for KD determination.

(A) SEC elution profile
of 5′FAM-IKKβKK/RR with (···)
and without NEMO. Data from monitoring
at 280 nm are colored blue (total protein) and those at 495 nm red
(IKKβ). The IKKβ absorption shifts to the complex molecular
weight in the presence of NEMO. (B) IKKβ, IKKβKK/RR FA competition assay. (C) FA curves for direct binding of IKKβKK/RR to the engineered NEMO constructs and GST-NEMO(1–196).
(D) FA direct binding of NEMOw and NEMOwCcc8aa. In panels B–D,
the data represent the mean ± the standard deviation of three
repeats.

NEMOwCcc8aa Folds Like
Wild-Type NEMO upon Binding IKKβ
We further tested
the ability of the coiled-coil-containing NEMO
constructs to bind IKKβ(701–745) and produce a wild-type-like
complex by NMR. 15N-labeled NEMO(44–111) when binding
IKKβ(701–745) produces a characteristic 1H–15N correlation spectrum. When NEMOwCcc8aa binds IKKβ(701–745),
it reproduces the same dispersed pattern in a TROSY spectrum, with
a few additional peaks arising from the appended coiled coil, indicating
it assumes the same conformation when bound to IKKβ(701–745)
(Figure ).

1H–15N TROSY
spectra of NEMOw (orange)
and NEMOwCcc8aa (blue) in complex with IKKβ(701–745).
Cross-peaks distinctive of the NEMO-bound conformation (e.g., region
of 8.5–9.5 ppm) overlap in the two spectra, indicating the
two NEMO constructs adopt the same conformation when bound to IKKβ.
Additional peaks in the NEMOwCcc8aa spectrum are likely originating
from the coiled-coil adaptor.

NEMOwCcc Recognizes Endogenous IKKβ in Mammalian Cells
To complement the in vitro binding assays, we
tested a representative coiled-coil construct in mammalian cells and
monitored its ability to interact with endogenous IKKβ. As shown
in Figure  (compare lanes 1 and 2), only in
the HEK293 cells transfected with FLAG-NEMOwCcc, when NEMOwCcc is
captured using magnetic anti-FLAG antibody-conjugated beads, is IKKβ
detected in the immunoprecipitate. In the control experiment, in the
absence of transfected FLAG-NEMOwCcc, there is no detectable IKKβ.
In lanes 3–6, an increase in the amount of FLAG-NEMOwCcc transfected
in the cells causes a dose-dependent Co-IP of IKKβ, confirming
that our engineered NEMO construct retains the ability to bind endogenous
IKKβ in mammalian cells.

NEMOwCcc binds endogenous IKKβ in
HEK293 cells. (A) Amino
acid sequence of the FLAG-NEMOwCcc construct used in the co-immunoprecipitation
(Co-IP) experiments. The FLAG tag is colored purple and the coiled-coil
adaptor region orange. (B) HEK293 cells were transformed with (+)
and without (−) FLAG-NEMOwCcc (lines 1 and 2) or with an increasing
amount of input FLAG-NEMOwCcc (lines 3–6, amount indicated,
in micrograms). Whole cell lysates were immunoprecipitated with anti-FLAG
M2 beads, separated by SDS–PAGE, and immunoblotted for FLAG-NEMOwCcc
and IKKβ. β-Actin was used as a loading control.

Discussion
Our
early description of the structure of the minimal NEMO–IKKβ
complex coupled with structure prediction for the NEMO sequence suggests
that the N-terminus of NEMO may exist as a dimer with at least partial
coiled-coil character. Unfortunately,
the construct that we previously engineered, NEMO(44–111),
while crystallizing in the presence of IKKβ(701–745),
is not suitable for biophysical characterization or structural determination
in its unbound form. In this study, we
set out to test if the addition of an ideal coiled-coil sequence,
in one or four heptads, would be sufficient to nucleate structure
in the NEMO(44–111) sequence, improve thermal stability, and
restore binding affinity for IKKβ to the level of the longer
constructs [e.g., NEMO(1–196)]. The coiled-coil motif has been
extensively studied as a model system,, and the coiled-coil
domain of the yeast transcription factor GCN4 has been specifically
utilized to stabilize difficult proteins for structural studies (reviewed
in ref ()). The crystal
structures of 45 fusion proteins containing GCN4 adaptors, of which
14 are dimers, have been reported. We
chose a modified GCN4 sequence that was designed as a homodimeric
coiled coil and was tested to be effective in inducing N-terminal
proximity in Hsp90., We incorporated repeats of the
ideal coiled coil up to 29 residues long at either end or both ends
of our construct, truncating a few residues from either the N- or
C-terminal end to match the register of the predicted heptad repeats
for the NEMO sequence. It has been shown that a good match of the
fusion and insert portions maintaining a continuous heptad register
generates a continuous seamless coil.

Our results show that the engineered coiled-coil NEMO constructs
exist as dimers, they preserve Cys-54 responsible for dimerization, and dimer stability is enhanced by the presence
of the coiled coils as demonstrated by SDS–PAGE. Stability
to thermal denaturation is also improved, as monitored by CD and in
fulfillment of one of the goals of the construct design. The results
from CD additionally report on the secondary structure content of
the proteins. NEMOw is characterized by a low percentage of α-helix
(Figure B), indicative of a partially disordered
structure and in agreement with what has been reported previously. The insertion of a single heptad of the ideal
coiled-coil sequence in NEMOwCcc8aa maintains a very similar structure,
while insertion of a longer coiled-coil segment, corresponding to
approximately four heptads, causes an increase in helical content
in NEMOwNcc and NEMOwCcc, with &gt;80% helix in NEMOwDcc. These results
imply not only that the ideal coiled-coil portion maintains its helical
structure but also that the structure is propagated to the NEMO sequence
“insert”. On the basis of the 222 nm/208 nm ratio from
CD spectra, all three engineered constructs with long coiled-coil
attachments possess more coiled-coil structure than the parent NEMOw,
which fulfills our additional aim to minimize the structural heterogeneity
of apo NEMO. All coiled-coil constructs are also more stable to thermal
denaturation, with a melting temperature reaching 65 °C for NEMOwDcc,
and melting curves typical of coiled-coil structures (Figure C).

NEMOwNcc interestingly shows a progressive
loss of secondary structure
rather than a sigmoidal melting curve, which can be attributed to
helix unraveling at either end of the structure. It is possible that
the coiled coil at the N-terminus alters the original NEMO dimer packing
pattern. According to secondary structure prediction, the first 40
amino acids of NEMO are predominantly disordered followed by a strong
coiled-coil propensity up to residue 196 (Figure S2 of the ). Enforcing a tightly
zipped coiled coil at the N-terminus may induce a non-native fold
in NEMO, not as well tolerated as a C-terminal coiled coil. All constructs
maintain or improve thermal stability upon binding IKKβ (Figure
3D). In particular, the addition of coil zipping at both ends of NEMO(44–111)
creates such a stable construct that upon binding of IKKβ the
complex only slowly and partially unfolds at temperatures up to 90
°C (Figure 3D). NEMOwCcc8aa was designed after we observed the
improved stability of NEMOwCcc, to test if a single heptad, when coupled
with the native NEMO sequence, would create a sufficiently long segment
with coiled-coil forming propensity to fold independently. Although
it has been suggested that at least three heptad repeats are required
to form a stable coiled coil, the engineered heptad fused to NEMO’s
native sequence imparts improved thermal stability to the construct.
The coiled-coil character is indeed lower than those of the longer
constructs.

One of the metrics we established for a successful
engineered NEMO
construct is an improvement in binding affinity for IKKβ, as
an indication of nativelike behavior. In our hands, synthetically
produced IKKβ(701–745) never retained the complete ability
to bind NEMO [i.e., a population of unbound IKKβ was always
observed even in the presence of a large excess of NEMO, both by NMR
spectroscopy and by the SEC assay (data not shown)]. These observations
dictated our use of a recombinantly produced IKKβ(701–745)
in our FA assay. The only two lysines, close to the N-terminus of
the protein, were mutated to arginines to prevent multisite labeling.
On the basis of the direct binding and competition assays, the 5′-FAM-IKKβKK/RR binds to NEMO(1–196) like wild-type IKKβ(701–745)
and represents a suitable probe for FA assays: a KD of 168 ± 4 nM for binding of 5′-FAM-IKKβKK/RR to GST-NEMO(1–196) was obtained. In homologous,
IKKβKK/RR, and heterologous, IKKβ(701–745),
competition assays, IC50 values of 167 and 266 nM were
obtained, respectively. These results are in accord with literature
values, which range from low micromolar values to low nanomolar values,
depending on the method utilized.,,

Our FA results show improved affinity for all
three engineered
constructs. Unfortunately, NEMOw, used as a baseline, starts aggregating
at elevated concentrations, and therefore, an accurate KD cannot be obtained, with an estimated value in the low
micromolar range. NEMOwNcc has the weakest affinity of 980 ±
20 nM, in agreement with the discussed poor structural match of an
N-terminal coiled coil to wild-type NEMO. Meanwhile, NEMOwCcc and
NEMOwDcc show affinities of 150 ± 6 and 114 ± 3 nM, the
same level as observed for GST-NEMO(1–196). Together with the
thermal stability results, it is clear that via fusion of a coiled-coil
sequence at the C-terminus, the short NEMO construct can be stabilized
and its IKKβ binding ability can be restored to the level of
NEMO(1–196).

1H–15N HSQC
NMR spectroscopy is widely
employed to monitor protein folding characteristics and solution behavior,
and the spectra are often termed the “fingerprint” of
the protein for their sensitivity to any change in conformation, environment,
or interaction. Indeed, HSQC spectra are some of the most diffused
tools in NMR-based screening to monitor protein binding to even very
low affinity ligands. We have utilized
the 1H–15N TROSY spectrum (which provides 1H–15N correlations as the HSQC but gave
us better results for a complex of the size and shape of the NEMO–IKKβ
complex) to monitor the effect of binding of unlabeled IKKβ
to [15N]NEMOw and [15N]NEMOwCcc8aa. If NEMOw
and NEMOwCcc8aa bind IKKβ in the same manner, they will produce
a similar spectral pattern (same residues resonating at the same frequencies),
while if the coiled-coil extension produced a non-native binding for
NEMOwCcc8aa, the spectra would be different. The spectrum of NEMOwCcc8aa
bound to IKKβ(701–745) displays a pattern very similar
to the spectrum of our reference NEMOw under the same conditions,
indicating that upon binding to IKKβ(701–745), residues
from the wild-type and engineered NEMO constructs experience the same
interactions, and the coiled-coil adaptor does not alter the folding
of NEMO.

Our NEMOwCcc construct best fulfills the requirements
of stability,
size, structural content and homogeneity, and nativelike binding affinity
for the NEMO-binding domain of IKKβ. NEMOwCcc also retains the
ability to bind endogenous IKKβ in mammalian cells, and Co-IP
of IKKβ shows a dependence of the dose on the amount of FLAG-NEMOwCcc
transfected. The experiment further confirms that NEMOwCcc is a good
mimetic for the IKK-binding domain in NEMO and represents a nontrivial
improvement over our original construct of NEMO(44–111).

Conclusions
A C-terminal fusion
with approximately four heptads of an ideal
coiled-coil sequence based on GCN4 successfully stabilized the short
NEMO(44–111) construct. The original NEMO(44–111) is
characterized by structural heterogeneity and is marginally stable
at room temperature, while our best engineered construct is thermally
stable with an improvement of ∼40 °C in melting temperature.
The homodimeric coiled-coil design also rescues IKKβ binding
affinity to the level of GST-NEMO(1–196), suggesting that the
IKK-binding domain of NEMO may exist as a stable coiled-coil dimer
within the native protein and the conformational heterogeneity of
NEMO(44–111) is an artifact of protein truncation rather than
a requirement for IKKβ binding. The stabilization induced by
the coiled-coil fusion may additionally favor structural studies aimed
at the determination of the structure of unliganded NEMO, of NEMO
bound to small peptides and/or molecules (e.g., the NBD peptide),
and future screening efforts to identify small molecule inhibitors.

Supporting Information Available
All the primers and protein
constructs (Supplementary Table 1 and Figure 1) and coiled-coil prediction
of the NEMO(1–196) construct (Supplementary Figure 2). This
material is available free of charge via the Internet at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bi500861x_si_001.pdf

Research reported
in this publication was supported by the National Institute of Arthritis
and Musculoskeletal and Skin Diseases of the National Institutes of
Health via Grant R03AR066130.

The authors declare no
competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
M.P. thanks Prof. D. Bolon (University
of Massachusetts Medical
School) for the kind gift of the plasmid containing the optimized
GCN4 coiled coil and Dr. P. Schneider (University of Lausanne, Lausanne,
Switzerland) for his advice and the gift of plasmids for the mammalian
cell experiments. The work was executed in the Department of Chemistry
of Dartmouth College.

