Iron (Fe)
serves many essential
roles in cell biology. This redox-active transition metal functions
in enzyme catalysis, electron-transfer processes, and small-molecule
binding and activation. It is found as
Fe/S clusters (ISCs), heme centers, nonheme mono- and dinuclear complexes,
among others. Nonheme high-spin (NHHS) FeII complexes generally
promote Fenton chemistry, which can be detrimental to the cell; such
complexes help generate reactive oxygen species (ROS), which can damage
DNA, proteins, and membranes. Thus, Fe trafficking, regulation, and
sequestration are important aspects of cellular Fe metabolism.

The molecular-level details of Fe metabolism in eukaryotes are
best understood in the budding yeast Saccharomyces
cerevisiae., Numerous proteins on
the plasma membrane of this organism import Fe from the environment.
The membrane-bound Fet3p/Ftr1p (ferroxidase/permease) complex constitutes
the “high-affinity” Fe importer, whereas Fet4p and/or Smf1p constitute “low-affinity”
importers., The genes encoding the high-affinity importer
and about 20 other Fe-related proteins in the cell are regulated by
Aft1p. Under low-Fe conditions, this transcription
factor moves to the nucleus where it activates these genes. Under
Fe-replete conditions, Aft1p is deactivated and it moves into the
cytosol in an Fe-dependent process that involves binding to the [Fe2S2]-containing Grx3/4p-Fra2p heterodimer.,

Mitochondria are the primary sites in the cell for ISC assembly
and the only site of heme biosynthesis. Cytosolic Fe is imported into
this organelle via the inner-membrane proteins Mrs3p/4p; these proteins
constitute the primary mitochondrial Fe import pathway. Secondary
pathways also exist but are less well characterized., Many nascent ISCs and hemes are installed into respiratory complexes
and other respiration-associated mitochondrial proteins.

Vacuoles
sequester, store, and mobilize Fe as needed by the cell.
Under standard conditions, the vacuoles are acidic, with pH ∼
5. The dominant form of Fe in these organelles
is one or more NHHS magnetically isolated FeIII complex(es)
with polyphosphate-related ligands. Under
Fe-replete growth conditions (&gt;10 μM Fe), vacuolar Fe constitutes
the majority of cellular Fe, with mitochondrial Fe constituting much
of the remainder. Other forms of Fe,
for example, those found in the cytosol, appear to compose less than
∼10% of the total Fe in Fe-replete WT cells. The acidity of
the vacuoles plays an important role in Fe homeostasis. When vacuoles
become less acidic, the Fe regulon is activated, and additional vacuolar
Fe is imported., This may arise from the accumulation
of FeIII nanoparticles in these organelles, which form
under alkaline conditions.,

Many strains
of S. cerevisiae, including
that used in our studies (W303), contain a mutation in ADE2, a gene required for adenine biosynthesis. Minimal medium (MM) contains
sufficient adenine such that MM-grown cells are adenine-replete. However,
cells grown in medium containing insufficient adenine make a futile
attempt to synthesize the purine. Instead, they synthesize and accumulate
a toxic intermediate, 5-aminoimidazole ribotide (AIR), which is sequestered
into vacuoles. To do this, the cell attaches glutathione to an activated
form of AIR, affording a glutathione conjugate
(GS-X) that is pumped into vacuoles via ABC transporters on the vacuolar
membrane. Such pumps include Ycf1p, Ybt1p, and Bat1p, with Ycf1p playing
the dominant role.− Once in the vacuole, the conjugate is degraded and
an aggregated pink derivative of AIR accumulates. Freed glutathione
in the vacuole is hydrolyzed by γ-glutamyl transpeptidase and l-Cys-Gly dipeptidase, forming glutamate, glycine and cysteine,
which are returned to the cytosol.

The redox status of the cell is largely determined by the glutathione/glutaredoxin
(and thioredoxin-based) systems. A 10
mM glutathione (GSH) pool in the cytosol along with the low concentration
of oxidized glutathione disulfide (the molar GSH:GSSG ratio is estimated
at 50,000:1) establish the redox potential of this cellular region. Ycf1p, the main vacuolar transporter that pumps
glutathione conjugates into these organelles, functions to maintain
this ratio by pumping GSSG into vacuoles. Doing so raises the redox
potential of the vacuoles as it lowers that of the cytosol.

We report here that the FeIII polyphosphate-related
complex(es) in the vacuole become(s) reduced to the FeII state in adenine-deficient cells. This effect is undoubtedly associated
with the detoxification of AIR. The effect is transient, with FeII reverting back to FeIII when cells reach the
postexponential stage of growth. Loss of acidic conditions promotes
the formation of nanoparticles, whereas highly acidic conditions maintain
the Fe in a mononuclear FeIII state. Such redox- and pH-dependent
activities have not been described for vacuolar Fe. We demonstrate
that vacuolar FeIII is not “locked” into
the oxidized mononuclear state but rather can be reversibly reduced
and reoxidized and converted into nanoparticles. These transformations
depend on the redox and pH status of the vacuole. Changing the nutrient
composition in other ways (glucose, yeast-nitrogen-base, amino acids,
and nucleotide bases) also impacted the Fe content of yeast cells.
We also examined the effect of inhibiting the Target of Rapamycin
Complex 1 (TORC1). TORC1 is central to a partially defined metabolic
system, the inhibition of which is associated with the starvation
response, including increased lifespan. Although the molecular-level causes of such effects are unknown,
they illustrate the complex relationship between Fe and overall cellular
metabolism.

Experimental Procedures
Yeast Strain and Media
The main
strain used in this
study was W303-1B (MATα, ura3-1, ade2-1, trp1-1, his3-11,15,
leu2-3,112) purchased from American Type Culture Collection
(ATCC). Stocks were prepared by growing cells for 3–4 days
on agar plates consisting of standard rich medium with 2% (w/v) glucose
and 40 mg/L adenine hemisulfate dihydrate (YPAD). Cells were removed
from the plate, resuspended in 15% glycerol, and stored at −80
°C.

As needed, frozen cells were scraped with a sterile
wooden stick and spread onto an agar plate. Typically a single colony
was used to inoculate 50 mL of YPD medium. Cells were grown to OD600 ≈ 1 and then transferred to 200 mL of synthetic
medium. MM consisted of 1.7 g/L YNB (MP biomedical #4027-112, which
lacked (NH4)2SO4, FeCl3, and CuSO4), 38 mM (NH4)2SO4, 1 μM CuSO4, 2% (w/v) glucose, 0.76 mM leucine,
0.13 mM histidine, 0.24 mM tryptophan, 0.10 mM adenine hemisulfate
dihydrate, and 0.18 mM uracil. R+ medium was prepared by adding a
solution of rapamycin, dissolved in DMSO, to MM (20 nM final concentration). 56Fe- or 57Fe-citrate was added separately, to 40
μM final concentration. Adenine-deficient MM (A↓) was
the same as MM except that it contained 12 μM adenine unless
otherwise indicated. YAB↑ medium was the same as MM except
that it contained 3× more YNB, 3×
more of the three Amino acids Leu, His, and
Trp, and 3× more of the Bases adenine
and uracil. Cells were grown on 200 mL of MM and YAB↑ media
in 1 L baffled culture flasks starting at an OD600 ≈
0.01. Cells were also grown on 1 L of A↓ medium in 3.8 L baffled
culture flasks starting at the same OD600.

Cells
were grown for 5 days in a shaker at ∼150 rpm and
30 °C. Growth was monitored at OD600. Cells were typically
harvested at 1 and 5 days. Cells were processed for metal analysis,
stored at −80 °C for later Oxyblot analysis, or packed
into MB cups or EPR tubes as described.

For fluorescent studies, 5 day MM and YAB↑ cells were
washed
with 10 mM HEPES buffer, pH 7.4, containing 5% glucose. Washed cells
were pelleted at 5000g for 5 min and resuspended
in fresh buffer containing 10 μM MDY-64 fluorescent probe (Molecular
Probes, Oregon). After incubation for 5 min, cells were pelleted at
5000g for 5 min and resuspended in fresh buffer without
probe. Suspensions were placed on poly-l-lysine treated slides
and examined by a Zeiss 510 META NLO laser scanning microscope (Carl
Zeiss Microimaging, Thornwood, NY). Cells were irradiated at an excitation
wavelength of 451 nm; the emission intensity at 497 nm was measured.
The diameters of 100 cells and their vacuoles from each growth condition
were measured using ImageJ software.

Isolation of Mitochondria
and Vacuoles
To isolate mitochondria,
50 mL of MM cell culture (OD600 ∼ 1) was transferred
to 1 L MM. When the culture reached OD600 ∼ 1, it
was used to inoculate 24 L of A↓ medium at 30 °C in a
stirred glass fermenter. The same procedure was followed for isolating
vacuoles, except that 48 L of A↓ medium was used. Solutions
were purged with 99.6% O2 at 2 L/min to achieve aerobic
growth conditions. Cells were harvested after 24 h. Mitochondria and
vacuoles were isolated in a refrigerated Ar-atmosphere glovebox (MBraun,
&lt; 10 ppm of O2) as described.,

Preparation of Redox- and pH-Perturbed Cell Lysates
Cells
were grown to OD600 = 1 in MM. An aliquot (the first
aliquot) of the culture was used to prepare whole-cell MB samples
as described below. Three other aliquots were spun down at 2500g for 5 min and frozen at −80 °C. Frozen aliquots
were treated as follows. The second aliquot was thawed in the refrigerated
glovebox and mixed with 25 mM Tris–HCl buffer (pH 7.4) containing
1% Triton-X at a 3:1 (cell: buffer, v/v) ratio. The mixture was incubated
for 30 min and frozen in liquid N2 in a MB cup. The third
and fourth aliquots were thawed under O2-dominating atmosphere
and mixed with 0.5 M acetate, pH 4.5 plus 1% Triton-X buffer (final
pH 5.0) and 0.5 M Tris–HCl pH 8.0 plus 1% Triton-X buffer (final
pH 7.8), respectively. The buffers were oxygenated by bubbling with
99.6% O2 for 15 min before mixing and the mixtures were
also bubbled with O2 for 15 min. The resultant lysates
were frozen in MB cups using liquid N2.

Mössbauer
Spectroscopy
Isolated mitochondria,
vacuoles, and whole cells were packed into MB cups by centrifugation
at 18000g for 30 min, 10900g for
45 min, and 4000g for 5 min, respectively, using
an ultracentrifuge (Beckman Coulter Optima L-90K) with a swinging-bucket
rotor (SW 32 Ti). Samples were frozen in liquid N2. MB
spectra were recorded on a Model MS4 WRC spectrometer (SEE Co., Edina,
MN) that had been calibrated using α-Fe foil as described.

UV–Vis Spectroscopy
Whole
cells were packed
into quartz EPR tubes (5.0 mm OD; 3.4 mm ID; 80 mm long; Wilmad/Lab
Glass, Buena, NJ, U. S. A.) at 4000g for 5 min. They
were resuspended with an equal volume of deionized water and analyzed
as described. Each sample was scanned
six times and the results were averaged to improve the signal-to-noise
ratio. Resultant absorbances were multiplied by 5 to generate those
expected if a 10 mm, rather than 2 mm, path length cuvette had been
used.

Iron Concentrations
Packed mitochondria, vacuoles,
and whole cells were diluted 2–4 fold with deionized water.
The resulting ca. 400 μL suspensions were transferred to screw-top
plastic tubes and heated at 95 °C overnight in 200 μL of
30% trace-metal grade HNO3 (Fisher Scientific). Fe concentrations
were measured by ICP-MS (Agilent 7700x) as described. Reported Fe concentrations of mitochondria, vacuoles, and
whole cells were multiplied by dilution factors and adjusted using
previously reported packing efficiencies of 0.77 for mitochondria,
0.76 for vacuoles, and 0.70 for whole cells.,

Oxyblot Assay
Whole-cell lysates were analyzed using
the Oxyblot assay kit (Millipore) as described. Protein concentrations in lysates were measured using the
BCA protein assay kit (Pierce). Blot densities on membranes were quantified
by using ImageJ software (NIH).

Results
Adenine Deficiency
W303 cells in adenine-deficient
minimal medium (called A↓ cells) grew exponentially at the
same rate (doubling time ≈ 2.0 h) as cells grown on MM (Figure B, solid and open circles, respectively, from 0–10
h). Exponentially growing A↓ cells were not pink, indicating that they were not adenine deficient. An electronic
absorption spectrum of such cells exhibited peaks due to reduced heme
centers (Figure C, I). A↓ cells harvested
during this period (OD600 = 0.3) contained 390 ± 110
μM Fe.

Plots of W303 cell growth on MM and A↓ media. (A)
OD600 (circles) and Fe concentration (squares). Open symbols,
MM; solid symbols, A↓. Dashed and solid blue lines indicate
Fe accumulation during stationary growth mode of MM and A↓
cells, respectively. MM data were from a previous study. Plots are the averages of two independent experiments;
vertical bars indicate standard deviation. (B) Zoom of initial 30
h in (A). Dashed (MM) and solid (A↓) lines represent OD600 trend lines in log scale during exponential growth (in
red) and Fe accumulation trend lines during transitionary growth (in
blue). (C) UV–vis spectra of A↓ cells. I, OD600 = 0.2, 8 h; II, OD600 = 1.3, 1 day; III, OD600 = 2.1, 5 days (10-fold diluted). Inset, same as I but magnified
to show heme features better.

When growth was started at the same OD, the growth of A↓
cells slowed earlier than that of MM cells; they also transitioned
earlier into stationary state (Figure B, starting
at ∼12 h, OD600 = 0.5). As they transitioned, A↓
cells turned pink, indicating that the AIR-associated pigment in the
vacuole was accumulating. The electronic absorption spectrum of such
cells contained absorption maxima at 490 and 540 nm (Figure C, II), as published for adenine-deficient cells. A↓ cells probably transitioned earlier
from exponential growth mode because they experienced
a shortage of adenine. The intensity of the pink color increased during
the transitionary growth period. In the stationary state, cells were
dark magenta, implying that the pigment that accumulated during the
transitionary period did not decompose in the stationary state. After
5 days of growth, the electronic absorption spectrum of A↓
cells was dominated by a broad absorption/scattering feature that
was probably due to thickening of cell walls with aging (Figure C, III).

MM cells accumulate Fe as they transition
from exponential growth
to stationary state (Figure , A and B, open
squares); this occurs because the Fe import rate declines more slowly
than the growth rate declines. A↓
cells also accumulated Fe during the transitionary period (Figure , solid squares) but at a slower rate (70 vs. 100
μM/h, solid vs. dashed lines between 15–30 h in Figure B). A↓ cells harvested during late transitionary
growth (after 29 h of growth) contained 1.4 ± 0.1 mM Fe (n = 2), which was slightly lower than equivalent MM cells
(1.9 ± 0.1 mM). This suggests that the declining Fe import and
growth rates were better synchronized in A↓ cells than in MM
cells during this transition.

During the stationary state, both
MM and A↓ cells accumulated
Fe at similar rates, namely 30 vs 25 μM/h, respectively (Figure A, dashed vs solid lines at t &gt;
2 days). These rates were probably associated with the unregulated
import of Fe through the low-affinity import system. After 5 days of growth, A↓ cells contained 4.4 ±
0.1 mM Fe, whereas equivalently grown MM cells contained 5.2 ±
0.5 mM Fe ( Table
S1).

What type of Fe did A↓ cells contain? When harvested
during
early exponential phase (OD600 = 0.2), they exhibited a
low-temperature low-field Mössbauer (MB) spectrum similar to
that of MM cells (Figure , A vs. B). Dominating
both spectra was a sextet due to vacuolar HS FeIII; this
was simulated by the purple line above the spectrum in Figure A. The central doublet (CD) was simulated by the
green line. The CD is due to [Fe4S4]2+ clusters and low-spin (LS) FeII hemes; the two types
of centers cannot be resolved by MB spectroscopy.

Five K, 0.05 T Mössbauer
spectra of A↓ and MM cells,
harvested at different growth phases. A, A↓, exponential (OD600 = 0.2); B, MM, exponential (OD600 = 0.2); C,
A↓, transitionary (OD600 = 0.9); D, MM, transitionary
(OD600 = 1.8); E, C-minus-A difference spectrum; F, A↓,
5-day stationary (OD600 = 0.9); G, MM, 5-day stationary
(OD600 = 1.8). Red lines are composite simulations that
include NHHS FeIII, NHHS FeII, FeII heme, CD, and FeIII nanoparticle features. The purple,
green and blue lines are simulations of the NHHS FeIII,
CD and FeIII nanoparticles spectral features, respectively.
Maroon and orange lines in C and E are simulations of the FeIIONS and FeIION doublets, respectively.
Parameters used in simulations are given in  Table S2.

A↓ cells harvested during the transitionary period
(after
1 day of growth) exhibited a MB spectrum that was dominated, with
56% spectral intensity, by a broad NHHS FeII doublet (Figure C). In contrast, MM cells mostly accumulated FeIII oxyhydroxide nanoparticles (with a small amount of NHHS
FeII) as they transitioned to stationary state (Figure D). A sextet originating from vacuolar HS FeIII ions was also present in the spectrum of A↓ cells,
but at ca. half the normal intensity (31%). In 3 other independent
batches of A↓ cells (Figure , data
compiled in  Table
S2), the percentage of the NHHS FeII doublet in MB spectra
was as high as 84% and that of the NHHS FeIII sextet was
as low as 7%. The concentration of NHHS FeII in A↓
cells (total [Fecell] = 780 μM) harvested during
the transitionary period was about 430 μM. To put this into
perspective, the concentration of such species in adenine-sufficient
cells ranges from 20–70 μM.,,

Five K, 0.05 T Mössbauer spectra of different
A↓
cell batches at transitionary state. (A) A↓ cells harvested
at OD600 = 1.2. (B) A↓ cells (with 25 μM adenine)
harvested at OD600 = 1.3. (C) A↓ cells (with 25
μM adenine) harvested at OD600 = 2.1. Red lines are
overall simulations. Maroon and orange lines simulate FeIIONS and FeIION, respectively.

The difference-spectrum (Figure E) revealed
that the Fe that accumulated during the transitionary growth period
of A↓ cells was mainly NHHS FeII (85%, maroon and
yellow lines), along with a small contribution of FeIII nanoparticles (10%, blue line). The CD concentration slightly declined
as A↓ cells entered the transitionary phase (Figure E, green line). This suggests a decline in mitochondrial
Fe; however, the two samples that were used to generate this difference-spectrum
were from different batches and there might have been some batch-to-batch
variation in the level of mitochondria. The MB spectrum of mitochondria
isolated from A↓ cells exhibited a strong CD (Figure A, green line), providing no evidence that A↓
cells contain less CD-associated Fe than adenine-sufficient MM cells.
UV–vis spectroscopy could not be used to settle this issue,
as the pink color obscured heme features.

Five K, 0.05 T Mössbauer
spectra of mitochondria (A) and
vacuoles (B) isolated from 1 day-old A↓ cells (OD600 = 0.9). The red line simulates the major spectral features in (A),
including the NHHS FeII doublet, the HS FeII heme doublet and the CD. The green line simulates the CD, whereas
the orange and purple lines simulate the NHHS FeII and
NHHS FeIII species, respectively.

The broadness of the NHHS FeII doublet in Figure C suggested more than one component. In spectra
from three independent preparations (Figure , A–C), the resolution was slightly better—sufficient
to unambiguously demonstrate the presence of two major species called FeIION (δ = 1.2−1.3 mm/s and ΔEQ = 3.0−3.1 mm/s) and FeIIONS (δ ≈
1.1 mm/s and ΔEQ = 3.8−3.9
mm/s). Different batches contained different proportions of these
two species. The parameters associated with FeIION suggest a 5- or 6-coordinate complex with O/N donors. The parameters for FeIIONS suggest somewhat greater covalency, possibly associated with coordination
of a S-donor ligand. For example, the FeII ion in the active-site
of isopenicillin N synthase has an N2O4 coordination
sphere and exhibits a MB doublet with δ = 1.3 mm/s and ΔEQ = 2.7 mm/s,, arguably similar
to the FeIION doublet. With substrate bound,
the site becomes 5-coordinate with an N2O2S1 donor set including thiolate ligation from the substrate.
The associated MB doublet has δ = 1.1 mm/s and ΔEQ = 3.4 mm/s, rather similar to the FeIIONS doublet.

Because
the Fe concentrations of A↓ and adenine-sufficient
MM cells harvested at this OD were similar, adenine deficiency appeared
to cause the conversion of one form of cellular Fe
into another rather than the import of new Fe. The simplest interpretation
is that an adenine deficiency causes vacuoles to be more reduced such that vacuolar FeIII (and/or FeIII nanoparticles)
is/are reduced to form the FeIION/S species,
perhaps occurring in association with ligand exchange.

The location(s)
of FeIION and FeIIONS is(are)
unknown. The NHHS FeII doublet
in the MB spectrum of isolated mitochondria (Figure A, simulated by the yellow line) was more intense than usual,
but not enough to be responsible for the intense NHHS FeII doublets observed in the whole-cell spectrum (mitochondria represent
only 3%–10% of the volume of a fermenting cell). MB spectra of vacuoles isolated from A↓
cells did not include the FeIION/S doublets
(Figure B), suggesting (but not proving) that
these species are located elsewhere. Our hesitancy in concluding that
FeIION/S are not located in vacuoles is that
vacuoles are highly dynamic, such that FeIION/S could have exited the organelle during isolation. Although speculative,
we currently regard the cytosol as the most likely location of FeIION and the vacuoles the most likely location of
FeIIONS. This assignment helps explain some
data presented below.

Five-day-old A↓ cells harvested
in stationary state were
also pink (Figure C, III), but they contained
far more Fe (4.4 mM) than did 1-day-old A↓ cells. This is slightly
less than the Fe concentration of adenine-sufficient MM-grown cells
harvested at an equivalent age (5.2 mM). Note that Fe concentrations in  Table S1 were obtained from 200 mL cultures except A↓. For
the same culture size A↓ cells accumulated slightly less Fe
than MM cells.

The MB spectrum of 5-day-old A↓ cells
(Figure F) was dominated by a sextet due to
vacuolar HS FeIII and a doublet due to FeIII nanoparticles. The NHHS FeII doublets were dramatically
reduced in intensity such that
they could not be discerned in the spectrum. MM cells at the same
age exhibited a very similar spectrum (Figure G). This indicates that the vacuole-reducing effect of adenine-deficiency
was transient. When the cells reached stationary state, FeIION/S must have been reoxidized back to what appears to
be the same FeIII species that is found in MM cells. In
one of three batches of 5-day-old A↓ cells, the dominating
HS FeII doublet was still observed by MB ( Figure S1), indicating some batch-to-batch
variation in the extent of reoxidation. Reoxidation may reflect a
change in vacuolar/cytosolic redox state as the cells undergo the
diauxic shift.

The spectrum of 5-day-old A↓ cells also
contained a broad
unresolved magnetic feature representing ∼30% of the spectrum,
again similar to that observed in the MB spectrum of 5-day-old MM
cells. EPR of a corresponding A↓
sample exhibited a broad signal at g = 2.0 (Figure ) that was similar to that observed in equivalent
MM cells. The signal from MM cells originates
from nanoparticles with somewhat different properties than those found
in mitochondria of yeast strains with ISC defects.,,

EPR spectra of A↓ cells at stationary
phase. Black, 10 K;
blue, 30 K; red, 70 K. Spectra were recorded at 0.05 mW microwave
power, 9.64 GHz frequency, and 10 G modulation amplitude. Spectral
intensity was multiplied by temperature and then adjusted vertically
to align the g = 4.3 resonances.

A↓ cells harvested both at 1 and 5 days exhibited lower levels of oxidative stress relative to analogous MM
cells (Figure , lanes 3 and 4 vs lanes 1 and
2). The diminished degree of oxidative damage is consistent with a
more reducing environment in the 1-day-old A↓ cells but inconsistent
with our expectation that high concentrations of NHHS FeIION/S ions would promote oxidative damage. Such ions typically
have labile ligands and can participate in Fenton chemistry. This chemistry appears not to be occurring here.
Also, the type of Fe, namely NHHS FeII in 1-day-old cells vs NHHS FeIII and nanoparticles in
5-day-old cells, does not seem to make much difference. Perhaps the
level of oxidative stress is more closely correlated to the growth
rate or redox state of the cell. The compartment in
which the Fe accumulates might also matter; for example, Fe that accumulates
in mitochondria might be more dangerous than Fe that accumulates in
vacuoles. Further studies are required to investigate this.

Oxyblot assay
of MM and A↓ extracts from cells harvested
during different phases. Lane 1, MM, 1 day; lane 2, MM, 5 days; lane
3, A↓, 1 day; lane 4, A↓, 5 days. Percent band intensities
relative to the blot from MM/1 day cells for each lane are displayed
at the bottom of the image. Each lane contained 4 μg of whole
cell lysate protein.

Effect of Increasing Yeast-Nitrogen-Base, Amino Acids, and Nucleotide
Bases in Growth Medium
We discovered that the chemical state
of vacuolar Fe depends sensitively on the composition of the growth
medium. The origin of these effects is uncertain, but they illustrate
how Fe in the cell changes with metabolism. Cells grown on YAB↑
for 1 day exhibited a low-temperature low-field MB spectrum (Figure A) that was reminiscent of “young”
MM cells (Figure B); in both cases, the vacuolar
NHHS FeIII sextet dominated, followed by the CD. We suspect
that the vacuoles are acidic in “young” cells. When
grown for 5 days on YAB↑ medium, the cells exhibited MB spectra
in which ∼90% of the intensity was the vacuolar NHHS FeIII sextet, with little or no nanoparticles (Figure B). In equivalent MM-grown cells (Figure G), the vacuolar NHHS FeIII sextet represented
just 65% of spectral intensity, with the nanoparticle doublet representing
∼25%. Nanoparticles are generated from mononuclear FeIII under neutral and basic pH conditions. Thus, the dominance of NHHS FeIII and the absence of
a nanoparticle doublet in spectra of YAB↑ cells suggest that
the vacuoles in chronologically old YAB↑ cells remain acidic,
whereas the pH of vacuoles in old MM-grown cells increased thereby
causing nanoparticles to form.

Five K, 0.05 T Mössbauer spectra
of cells grown on YAB↑
media for 1 (A) and 5 (B) days. Green lines simulate the CD. Red lines
are composite simulations.

Most of the remaining 10% intensity in spectra of YAB↑
cells
originated from the CD (Figure B, green line).
This corresponds to a CD concentration of 110 μM Fe, nearly
40% higher than that in MM-grown cells. Likewise, UV–vis spectra indicated that the concentration
of FeII hemes in YAB↑ cells was 3-fold higher than
in MM cells ( Figure
S2). Both results indicate that YAB↑ cells have a higher-than-normal
level of mitochondrial Fe. This may reflect a greater reliance on
respiration in these cells.

We previously estimated a maximum
[Fe] in vacuoles of 1.2 mM and
concluded that these organelles occupy no more than ∼25% of
the cell’s volume. Accordingly,
filled vacuoles could contribute a maximum of ∼300 μM
to the total Fe concentration in MM cells. Contrasting this, YAB↑
cells at stationary state contained 1.8 ± 0.1 mM Fe (n = 2,  Table S1), 90% of which was vacuolar NHHS FeIII. If the
vacuoles occupied 100% of the cell’s volume, the concentration
of Fe in this component would be 1.6 mM; if vacuoles still occupied
∼25% of cell volume, the NHHS FeIII concentration
in YAB↑ vacuoles would be nearly 6 mM!

To distinguish
these possibilities, 5-day YAB↑ and MM cells
were stained with a vacuole-specific fluorescent probe and examined
by fluorescence microscopy. YAB↑ cells were slightly larger
than MM cells (diameters of 6.1 ± 0.8 μm and 5.2 ±
0.8 μm (n = 100, each), corresponding to respective
volumes of ∼120 and 74 fL. The vacuoles in YAB↑ and
MM cells represented 23% ± 6% and 20% ± 8% of cell volumes.
This indicates that 5-day-old YAB↑ vacuoles contain very high
concentrations of the NHHS FeIII species. Such highly acidic
vacuoles may be able to store NHHS FeIII ions at concentrations
approaching 6 mM.

Effect of Redox State and pH on Vacuolar
Fe
To illustrate
the effect of redox state and pH on the form of vacuolar Fe, these
properties of whole-cell lysates were perturbed. Unperturbed WT cells
grown on MM exhibited the standard MB spectrum (Figure A, similar to that in Figure A) composed
predominantly of the vacuolar NHHS FeIII sextet (simulated
by the purple line). A portion of these cells was disrupted by detergent
treatment that caused vacuolar Fe to be exposed to the reducing environment
of the cytosol. Approximately 70% of the Fe in the resulting lysate
was NHHS FeII (Figure B; yellow
line simulates the doublet), implying that vacuolar Fe was reduced
by endogenous cytosolic reducing agents. Simulation parameters were
the same as those used to simulate FeIION, not
those of FeIIONS. The formation of FeIION under these conditions would imply a direct reduction
of vacuolar iron (FeIIIvac + 1e– ⇄ FeIION). However, these simulation
parameters are not unique to FeIION, so another
(more complicated) scenario is also possible, namely that a different
NHHS FeII species with 5–6 O/N ligands formed. In
either case, our results suggest that FeIIONS is more closely associated with adenine-deficiency, whereas FeIION is more generally associated with reducing
adenine-replete cellular conditions.

Five K, 0.05 T Mössbauer spectra
of redox- and pH-perturbed
lysates of MM cells harvested at OD600 = 1.0. (A) Cells
before lysis. (B) Anaerobically lysed in 25 mM Tris–HCl and
1% Triton-X buffer (pH 7.4). (C) Lysed in a pure O2 atmosphere
using 0.5 M acetate and 1% Triton-X buffer (pH 4.5, final pH 5.0).
(D) Same as (C) but using 0.5 M Tris–HCl rather than acetate
(pH 7.8, final).

In cells that were lysed
at pH 5.0 (final) under a pure O2 atmosphere, half of the
vacuolar Fe remained oxidized (Figure C),
whereas in cells that were similarly lysed at
pH 7.8 (final pH), at least half of the Fe converted into nanoparticles
(Figure D). The remaining Fe exhibited an
unresolved and broad feature that could reflect a different type of
nanoparticle. The observed changes illustrate how redox and pH influence
the state of vacuolar Fe.

Effect of Glucose
We wondered whether
changing the
composition of the growth medium in other ways would also alter cellular
Fe content. Of all the nutrients in MM, glucose exerts perhaps the
greatest influence on cellular metabolism.Increasing the glucose concentration 3-fold (G↑
medium) did not affect the growth rate nor did it significantly affect
the Fe concentration in cells harvested in stationary state ( Table S1, G↑ vs
MM). In contrast, lowering the glucose concentration
10-fold (G↓ medium) lowered the steady-state culture density
by ∼40% and lowered the cellular Fe concentration 7-fold ( Table S1, G↓ vs
MM). We conclude that glucose limited the growth in G↓ medium,
whereas other nutrients limited the growth in G↑ medium.

The Fe concentrations of 1- and 5-day-old G↓ cells were nearly
the same (940 vs 1000 μM) implying that the stationary-state
Fe import rate through the low-affinity importer in G↓ cells
was lower than in MM-grown cells. Perhaps this rate is glucose-dependent.
In contrast, the rate of Fe import during exponential phase (through
the high-affinity importer) was not affected by the glucose concentration.
Under glucose-limited (G↓) stationary state conditions, Fe
is better regulated than in equivalent G↑ cells.

The
speciation of Fe in G↑ cells was virtually identical
to that of MM -cells (Figure , C vs B and  Table S2); both were dominated
by the vacuolar NHHS FeIII species (65% intensity) and
FeIII nanoparticles (15–25% intensity). The distribution
of Fe in G↓ cells (Figure A) was perhaps
more similar to that in cells treated with rapamycin (Figure E, see below).

Five K 0.05 T Mössbauer spectra
of cells grown for 5 days
on different media. (A) G↓, (B) MM, (C) G↑, (D) G↑Fe↑,
(E) R+. Red lines are composite simulations including the NHHS FeIII sextet, the NHHS FeII and HS FeII heme doublets, the CD, and the FeIII nanoparticle doublet.
Blue and green lines are simulations of spectral features from FeIII nanoparticle and NHHS FeII, respectively.

The proportion of Fe associated
with mitochondria in G↓
and G↑ cells was difficult to evaluate in these MB experiments
because the CD was obscured by the broad nanoparticle doublet and
the strong sextet in that region of the spectrum. However, UV–vis
spectra of these glucose-modulated cells (Figure , A–C) clearly indicated that heme concentrations (which
primarily reflect mitochondrial respiratory complexes and respiration-associated
heme proteins) were higher in G↓ cells (Figure A) than in G↑ (Figure C) or
MM (Figure B) cells. This makes sense because
G↓ cells must rely on respiration for growth whereas G↑
(and MM) cells rely more on fermentation.

Electronic absorption spectra of 5-day-old cells grown on different
media. (A) G↓, (B) MM, (C) G↑, (D) R+, (E) same as R+
medium but lacking rapamycin.

G↑ cells exhibited about 2-fold higher levels of oxidative
damage relative to comparable MM-grown cells ( Figure S3, compare lanes 2 vs 1 for
1-day growth and lanes 6 vs 5 for 5-day growth). Conversely, G↓
cells displayed only ca. 30% of the oxidative damage of comparable
MM cells ( Figure
S4). These results are consistent with previous reports concluding
that the level of oxidative stress in cells is proportional to the
level of glycolysis.−

We also grew G↑ cells in medium that
contained 10 times
the normal level of Fe (400 rather than 40 μM). Cells grown
on this G↑Fe↑ medium contained nearly 3 times more Fe
relative to cells grown on G↑ medium ( Table S1). The 5 K Mössbauer spectra of
G↑Fe↑ (Figure D) and Fe↑
cells (Figure 6A in ref ()) were dominated by nanoparticles (50–70% spectral
intensity) and NHHS FeIII (10–15% intensity). Thus,
adding extra Fe to G↑ medium caused a massive increase of nanoparticles
in the cell, again suggesting that the low-affinity Fe import rate
is sensitive to the Fe concentration in the medium. This increase
in nanoparticle buildup had no effect on the level of oxidative damage
( Figure S3, compare
lanes 3 vs 2 for 1-day growth and lanes 7 vs 6 for 5-day growth).
Amazingly, the extent of oxidative damage suffered by the nanoparticle-packed
G↑Fe↑ cells was about the same in G↑ cells despite
the 3-fold greater concentration of Fe in G↑Fe↑ cells.
Again, the extent of oxidative damage may depend on the cellular location
of the nanoparticles.

Effect of Rapamycin
MM cells treated
with rapamycin
(R+ medium) grew slowly for 2 days, probably due to G0 arrest, and then rapidly over the next 3 days such that
5-day-old R+ cells in stationary state had ca. 25% higher culture density than similarly aged MM cells ( Table S1). The Fe concentration of
5-day-old R+ cells was ca. 6-fold less than that
of MM-grown cells harvested at a similar age. This suggests that the
Fe import rate of R+ cells at stationary state was significantly lower,
relative to that of MM-grown cells, and better synchronized with the
decline of growth rate as cells reached steady-state. A similar effect
on Fe import rate was implicated in cells grown on G↓ medium.
R+ cells exhibited a stronger heme signal compared with control (Figure D vs 10E), similar to the effect observed in G↓
cells. In this respect, rapamycin treatment (inhibiting the TOR system)
and glucose deprivation exhibited similar cellular responses (less
Fe accumulation and better postexponential Fe regulation), with the
effect of rapamycin stronger than that of glucose.

The Mössbauer
spectrum of R+ cells exhibited a more intense NHHS FeII doublet relative to that of MM cells (Figure E vs Figure 4E of ref ()). The parameters associated with it were within ±0.1 mm/s of
those used to simulate the FeIION doublet associated
with A↓ cells and MM cell extracts. The percentage of magnetic
Fe in the sample (affording the NHHS FeIII sextet and FeIII nanoparticle doublet) was comparable to that of MM-grown
cells. However, because the overall Fe concentration was less, our
results predict a decline in the magnetization of these cells. Indeed,
inhibiting TORC1 lowers the magnetization in yeast cells.

Another interesting effect of inhibiting
TORC1 was a reduced level
of oxidative damage ( Figure S3, lanes 4 and 8). The level of oxidative damage in 1-day-old
R+ cells was 2–4 times less than in 1 day old cells grown on
any other medium studied here. The extent of oxidative damage in 5-day-old
R+ cells was also extremely low. In this respect, rapamycin treatment
(i.e., TORC1 inhibition) and glucose deprivation again exhibited similar
effects. In contrast, the extent of oxidative damage in G↑
cells was greatest of any condition studied.

Discussion
Our results regarding adenine deficiency suggest the model shown
in Figure . Here, the vacuoles of ADE2Δ
yeast cells grown on MM (Figure , top) are
oxidizing and acidic, such that the Fe in these organelles is predominately
mononuclear NHHS FeIII (but with some nanoparticles). The
redox status of the vacuoles is maintained by the import of GSSG via
Ycf1p into the vacuolar lumen. This process maintains a high ratio
of GSH/GSSG in the cytosol, resulting in a cytosolic redox potential
of ca. −320 mV. The redox state
of vacuolar Fe is controlled by the reaction 2FeII + GSSG
+ 2H+ ⇄ 2GSH + 2FeIII. Reduced GSH generated
in this way is pumped into the cytosol. The vacuoles are acidic, stimulating
FeII oxidation, but the pH is high enough that a small
proportion of mononuclear NHHS FeIII species is converted
into nanoparticles. The redox potential is such that a small proportion
of the Fe pool remains as FeII.

Model for the Fe status
in yeast vacuole according to the different
media conditions. Top, MM; middle, A↓; bottom, YAB↑.
See text for details.

The vacuoles of cells grown on A↓ medium are similarly
configured
during exponential growth. However, as the medium become depleted
of adenine, the cells express the enzymes of the adenine biosynthetic
pathway (Figure , middle). Due to the absence
of ADE2, this is a futile effort, and the adenine deficiency prompts
the cells to transition earlier into stationary state. The toxic intermediate
AIR accumulates and the cell sequesters it by forming a GS-AIR conjugate
that is pumped into vacuoles via Ycf1p, the same membrane-bound
protein that pumps GSSG into vacuoles under adenine-sufficient conditions. Due to this competition, GSSG import becomes partially blocked, causing these organelles to become more reducing
than they are under MM growth conditions. The majority of the vacuolar
FeIII becomes reduced to the FeII state, with
FeIION and FeIIONS species
dominating.

As cells stop growing, they stop producing AIR,
such that GSSG
can again be imported into vacuoles, thereby reestablishing normal
oxidized conditions. This explains the transient nature of the observed
adenine-deficiency effect. FeIION/S reoxidize
to the FeIII state, including both HS FeIII and
FeIII nanoparticles. Vacuolar pH might also increase in
stationary state cells, promoting nanoparticle
formation.

FeIION and FeIIONS may
coexist with NHHS FeIII in the vacuole, or one or both
may be exported into the cytosol. Our previous model posits that once vacuolar FeIII is reduced to
FeII, it immediately exits the vacuole and moves into the
cytosol. This model was based on the lack of HS FeII in
isolated vacuoles. FeII in vacuoles may be exported via
Smf3p, a divalent metal transporter located on the vacuolar membrane, as well as via Fth1p/Fet5p. Our current MB studies show that vacuoles isolated from
adenine-deficient cells also lacked NHHS FeII species,
again suggesting that FeIION and FeIIONS are located in the cytosol. However, we have also
found that Fe leaches from vacuoles during isolation,
consistent with our preferred speculation that FeIIONS is located in vacuoles within adenine-deficient cells and
that FeIION is in the cytosol. This possibility
needs to be investigated further.

Vacuoles in chronologically
older YAB↑ cells are more acidic
than in equivalent MM cells (Figure , bottom).
This prevents nanoparticles from forming and causes mononuclear NHHS
FeIII to accumulate instead. We view this loosely as YAB↑
medium keeping cells “younger”, with more acidic vacuoles.
An increase in vacuolar pH in aged cells is known to limit mitochondrial
function, which possibly implies lower levels of ISCs and hemes in
older cells. Consistent with this, YAB↑
cells, although grown for 5 days, afforded higher mitochondrial heme
levels than equivalent MM cells. Increased vacuolar pH also inhibits
synthesis of long-chain polyphosphates, which might be ligands of vacuolar FeIII. Thus, the shift toward nanoparticles at high
vacuolar pH may also be related to changes in polyphosphate concentrations.

Glucose
The effect of glucose on yeast Fe metabolism
suggests that the low-affinity Fe importer (probably involving Fet4p
or Smf1p), is regulated (directly or indirectly) by
the glucose concentration in the cell. Glucose levels may affect ATP
levels, which may affect Fe import processes at the plasma membrane.
High glucose concentrations increase the rate of
postexponential Fe import, whereas lower glucose concentrations decrease it. Because glucose concentrations do not affect
the rate of cell growth, this leads to an accumulation of Fe in the
cell under high glucose levels. Glucose also represses cellular respiration, which explains the decline of ISCs and heme
centers that are generally associated with mitochondria. The extent
of oxidative stress is also modulated by the initial level of glucose
in media. The more glucose, the more the cells are oxidatively stressed.

Similar effects of glucose on the Fe concentration and oxidative
stress of cells have been reported by Reverter-Branchat et al. They grew cells on rich media supplemented with
2% (w/v) and 0.5% (w/v) glucose and monitored for [Fe] and oxidative
stress for two months and 16–18 generations. They observed
stronger oxidative stress and higher [Fe] in cells fed more glucose.
They concluded that the pro-oxidant effects due to the increased Fe
caused the enhanced damage. We demonstrated here that oxidative stress
is not directly related to the level of cellular
Fe but more closely related to glucose metabolism. How glucose promotes
ROS generation in yeast is not known, but multiple biochemical pathways
in which glucose metabolism can generate ROS in mammalian cells have
been reported, including glyceraldehyde autoxidation, protein kinase
C activation and oxidative phosphorylation. Glucose suppresses a nutrient-dependent protein kinase (Rim15p)
that regulates expression of genes involved in antioxidant defense,
e.g., SOD1 and SOD2, thereby increasing
cellular ROS damage.

Rapamycin
The effect of rapamycin is roughly the opposite
of glucose. Lowering TORC1 activity by rapamycin treatment or knockout
of Tco89p, a component of TORC1, reduces the magnetization of yeast
grown on high Fe-containing media, arrests growth at G0 and increases
respiration.,, Consistent with those reports, we found that rapamycin inhibited
the rates of Fe import and cell growth (prompting a lag period prior
to exponential growth) and it promoted respiration. These effects
appear opposite of those caused by glucose. Unlike glucose, rapamycin
altered the distribution and speciation of cellular Fe. Rapamycin
shifted the vacuole to more reducing (and perhaps more basic) conditions.
Similar effects have been reported in the Tco89p knockout strain, allowing the presence of FeII together
with some FeIII nanoparticles.

The rapamycin effect
is consistent with previous reports that rapamycin increases life
span in many organisms including yeast. The increased final OD600 by rapamycin treatment relative
to that of MM cells implies an extended replicative life span as does
the decreased level of oxidative damage. Also, the reducing cellular
environment associated with rapamycin treatment supports a model in
which reduced TORC1 activity increases chronological life span by
increasing Rim15p-dependent and Rim15p-independent expression of environmental
stress-response genes.−

In summary, we have found that the concentration,
speciation and
distribution of Fe in yeast are altered dramatically by changing the
composition of nutrients in the growth medium. This illustrates the
complex connections between nutrient composition, cellular metabolism,
and Fe speciation in the cell. Our results demonstrate the importance
of vacuolar redox status and pH in controlling the form(s) of Fe contained
in these organelles. Vacuolar Fe is not “locked” into
a particular redox state or chemical form, but it exhibits substantial
redox chemistry and ligand-exchange reactions, and is influenced quite
sensitively by cellular metabolic processes. Along with the mitochondria,
vacuoles are a major “hub” for Fe trafficking. Thus,
deciphering the chemistry of Fe in vacuoles will be essential for
a more comprehensive molecular-level understanding of iron metabolism
in yeast cells, the predominant eukaryotic “workhorse”
that leads advances in this field.

Supporting Information Available
Figure S1, 5 K, 0.05 T Mössbauer
spectrum of another batch of yeast cells grown for 5 days on A↓;
Figure S2, UV–vis spectra of whole yeast cells grown for 5
days on MM and YAB↑; Figure S3, Oxyblot assay of whole cells
grown on different media and harvested during different phases; Figure
S4, Oxyblot assay of whole cells grown on MM and G↓; Table
S1, Final OD600 and [Fecell] after 5 days of
growth on various media; Table S2. Mössbauer parameters determined
from the spectra listed in the main text and Supporting Information.
This material is available free of charge via the Internet at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bi500148y_si_001.pdf

Author Present Address
⊥ Nuclear
Chemistry Research Division, Korea Atomic Energy Research
Institute, Daejeon, 305–353, Republic of Korea

This study was
funded by the National Institutes of Health (GM084266) and the Robert
A. Welch Foundation (A1170).

The authors
declare no competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
We thank
Brad Pierce (University of Texas, Arlington) for
allowing us to use his EPR spectrometer.

Abbreviations
AIRphosphoribosylaminoimidazole

CDcentral
doublet

DMSOdimethyl sulfoxide

EPRelectron paramagnetic resonance

G↑MM-based
medium in which the concentration of glucose was 3× higher than
in MM

G↑Fe↑same as G↑ but with 10-fold higher concentration
of ferric citrate in the medium

G↓MM-based medium in which the
concentration of glucose was 10× lower than in MM

GSSGoxidized
glutathione dissulfide

GSHreduced glutathione

HShigh spin

ICP-MSinductively coupled plasma
mass spectrometry

ISCiron sulfur cluster

MBMössbauer

MMminimal medium

NHHSnonheme
high spin

ODoptical density

R+MM medium plus rapamycin

ROSreactive oxygen species

SDSsodium
dodecyl sulfate

SOD2superoxide dismutase 2

TORtarget of rapamycin

TORC1TOR complex
1

WTwild type

YAB↑a MM-based medium in which the concentrations of YNB,
amino acids Leu, His, and Trp and nucleotide bases adenine and uracil
were increased 3-fold

YNByeast nitrogen base

