Transient receptor potential
(TRP) channels are cation channels involved in sensation of various
stimuli from internal and external environments. The TRP channel superfamily
is divided into six subfamilies in mammals: canonical or classical
TRPC, vanilloid TRPV, melastatin TRPM, ankyrin TRPA, mucolipin TRPML,
and polycystin TRPP.− Six TRPV proteins, TRPV1–6, belong to the
vanilloid subfamily. TRPV proteins function as tetramers, and each
protomer contains six transmembrane segments flanked by two intracellular
domains: a large N-terminal domain containing ankyrin repeats and
a short C-terminal domain.

TRPV channel activity is regulated
by post-translational modifications
such as phosphorylation or binding of regulatory molecules to intracellular
domains., In TRPV1, for example, ATP and calmodulin
(CaM) have been shown to bind to the N-terminal ankyrin repeat domain
(ARD) and sensitize and desensitize channel activity, respectively., The binding of ATP and CaM to the ARD is also conserved in TRPV4
and TRPV3. Phosphatidylinositol 4,5-bisphosphate
(PIP2) and CaM interact with the C-terminal domain of TRPV1
and regulate channel activity.− The molecular mechanisms by which
these intracellular signals regulate TRPV channel activity remain
unclear.

TRPV4 is a member of the TRPV subfamily expressed broadly
in neuronal
and non-neuronal cells. TRPV4 is activated by various stimuli, including
hypo-osmolarity, warm temperature, and chemical ligands such as 4-α-phorbol
esters and epoxyeicosatrienoic acids.− Consistent with these in vitro findings,
TRPV4 has been implicated in physiological functions such as osmoregulation
and thermoregulation., TRPV4 also plays a role in mechanosensation
in the vascular endothelium and unitary tract, and cell barrier formation in vascular and epidermal tissues. Recently, studies using TRPV4 knockout mice
suggested the functional importance of TRPV4 in the central nervous
system, nociception, and bone formation.−

Mutations in TRPV4
are associated with a wide spectrum of inherited
diseases, primarily autosomal dominant neuropathies and skeletal dysplasias., Several mutants studied in heterologous expression systems showed
constitutive basal activity and enhanced response to stimuli.− These findings are consistent with cell death caused by high calcium
influx such as the observed degeneration of motor neurons in neuropathies., However, it is difficult to explain how seemingly similar molecular
properties lead to such diverse disease phenotypes. It is therefore
essential to elucidate how TRPV4 is regulated at the molecular level
to understand the mechanisms behind these inherited diseases.

To obtain insight into regulatory mechanisms of TRPV4, we focused
on TRPV4-ARD, which can mediate channel regulation through binding
of ligands to its concave surface and is the target of many mutations
causing human diseases. We determined the structures of ATP-free and
-bound human TRPV4-ARD and compared them with the structures of the
other TRPV-ARDs. Despite a number of TRPV-ARD structures available
in the absence or presence of ATP, this represents the first cognate
pair of ATP-free and -bound structures. Structural analysis revealed
that a long loop forming Finger 3 is flexible and could switch conformation
to possibly regulate channel activity. Comparisons of TRPV-ARD structures
provide further insights into the evolution of ATP binding in TRPV
channels. Thermal stability analyses, a cysteine accessibility assay,
and molecular dynamics (MD) simulations indicate that ATP binding
can stabilize TRPV1- and TRPV4-ARD. Interestingly, most mutations
causing human genetic diseases in TRPV4-ARD are located away from
the ATP-binding site, suggesting that additional regulatory interactions
and mechanisms exist. A series of biochemical analyses of disease-associated
mutants showed that some impaired thermal stability and/or ATP binding
ability, providing biochemical insights into possible disease mechanisms.

Experimental Procedures
Expression Constructs
Human TRPV4 cDNA was obtained
from C. J. Sumner. The DNA fragment corresponding to the ARD (residues
149–396) was amplified by polymerase chain reaction and subcloned
into the NdeI and NotI sites of a pET vector with a C-terminal six-histidine
tag (pET21-C6H). Mutations were generated
with QuikChange (Stratagene) and confirmed by DNA sequencing.

Protein Production and Purification
Recombinant human
TRPV4-ARD protein was expressed in Escherichia coli BL21(DE3) by induction with 75 μM isopropyl β-d-thiogalactopyranoside for 13 h at room temperature after the cells
reached an OD600 of ∼0.6. Frozen cell pellets were
thawed, resuspended, and lysed by sonication in lysis buffer [20 mM
Tris-HCl, 300 mM NaCl, and 20 mM imidazole (pH 7.0)] with 1 mM benzamidine,
1 mM phenylmethanesulfonyl fluoride (PMSF), 0.1% Triton X-100, 0.2
mg/mL lysozyme, 50 μg/mL RNase A, and 25 μg/mL DNase I.
The lysate was cleared by centrifugation and the supernatant loaded
onto nickel-nitrilotriacetic acid (Ni-NTA) agarose (Qiagen) and eluted
with a step gradient containing 25, 50, 100, 150, 200, and 250 mM
imidazole (pH 7.0) in lysis buffer with 0.05% β-mercaptoethanol
and 0.5 mM PMSF. Fractions containing the protein at 150, 200, and
250 mM imidazole were combined, and EDTA (pH 8.0) was added to a final
concentration of 1 mM and then the mixture dialyzed against 20 mM
Tris-HCl (pH 7.0), 50 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, and 1 mM DTT. The dialyzed
protein was purified on SP Sepharose FF (GE Healthcare, Piscataway,
NJ) in 20 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.0), 1 mM EDTA, and 1 mM DTT using a linear
gradient from 0 to 0.4 M NaCl. Size exclusion chromatography on a
Superdex 75 column (GE Healthcare) in 10 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.0), 300
mM NaCl, 10% glycerol, and 1 mM DTT was used for final purification.
Protein was concentrated to ∼8 mg/mL in a Vivaspin centrifugal
filter (10000 molecular weight cutoff; Sartorius AG, Goettingen, Germany),
flash-frozen, and stored at −80 °C. In the purification
of mutant proteins for the thermal stability assay, dialysis and ion
exchange steps were omitted. After Ni-NTA purification, the proteins
were purified by size exclusion chromatography in phosphate-buffered
saline (pH 7.4) with 1 mM DTT. Rat TRPV1-ARD (rTRPV1-ARD) was purified
as described previously.

Crystallization of Human TRPV4-ARD
Crystals were grown
by hanging-drop vapor diffusion at 4 °C: the ATP-free form with
a 1:3 ratio of protein to reservoir solution [0.35 M NaH2PO4, 0.35 M KH2PO4, 10% glycerol,
and 0.1 M Na-HEPES (pH 7.8)] and the ATP-bound form with a 1:1 ratio
of protein to reservoir [3% PEG 4000, 10% glycerol, and 0.1 M Na-HEPES
(pH 7.9)] in the presence of 5 mM ATP. Crystals were soaked in reservoir
solution containing 15% glucose for 3 min, transferred into reservoir
solution containing 30% glucose, and flash-frozen in liquid nitrogen.

Data Collection, Structure Determination, and Analysis
X-ray data were collected at 100 K using an ADSC Q315 detector at
the Advanced Photon Source ID24 beamline, processed in HKL2000; data statistics are listed in Table . The hTRPV4-ARD structures were determined by molecular
replacement using the chicken TRPV4-ARD structure in MOLREP and Phaser. Model
building was performed in COOT and refinement
with TLS (Translation/Libration/Screw) in REFMAC5. Final refinement statistics are listed in Table . The coordinates have been deposited in the Protein
Data Bank (PDB) as entries 4DX1 (ATP-free) and 4DX2 (ATP-bound). Figures were generated with
PyMOL (Schrödinger, LLC).

Data Collection and Refinement Statistics
 	crystal form
I (ATP-free)	crystal form
II (with ATP)	
Data Collection	
space group	P3121	P3221	
wavelength (Å)	0.97917	0.97917	
cell dimensions a, b, c (Å)	53.30,
53.37, 440.71	147.89, 147.89, 93.90	
resolution (Å)	40.0–2.85(2.90–2.85)	40.0–2.95(3.00–2.95)	
Rsym	0.115 (0.614)	0.099 (0.714)	
I/σ(I)	12.3 (1.8)	17.6 (2.4)	
completeness
(%)	99.6 (99.3)	100.0 (100.0)	
redundancy	5.3. (5.4)	5.5 (5.6)	
Refinement	
resolution (Å)	39.2–2.85(2.92–2.85)	38.86–2.95(3.03–2.95)	
no. of
reflections	17306	23958	
Rwork/Rfree	0.215/0.278	0.177/0.220	
no. of molecules per asymmetric
unit	2	2	
no.
of residues in model	148–397(chain A)	148–394 (ATP-bound)	
 	148–396(chain B)	148–392 (ATP-unbound)	
no. of atoms	 	 	
protein	1995 (chain A)	1987 (ATP-bound)	
 	1986 (chain B)	1963 (ATP-unbound)	
ligand	25 (PO4)	31 (ATP)	
 	6 (glycerol)	6 (glycerol)	
 	 	12 (glucose)	
water	18	72	
B factor
(Å)	 	 	
protein	80.91	62.12 (ATP-bound)	
 	 	72.76 (ATP-unbound)	
ligand	113.98 (PO4)	91.00 (ATP)	
 	103.44 (glycerol)	72.51 (glycerol)	
 	 	90.86 (glucose)	
water	76.06	54.84	
rmsd	 	 	
bond lengths (Å)	0.013	0.013	
bond angles (deg)	1.51	1.80	
Values from the highest-resolution
shell are in parentheses.

Thermal Stability Assay by Circular Dichroism Spectroscopy
Circular dichroism (CD) spectra were measured at 10 °C with
3.4 μM protein in 150 mM NaCl, 5 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.5), and 1
mM DTT for experiments testing the influence of ATP on protein stability,
and in phosphate-buffered saline (pH 7.4) with 1 mM DTT for analyses
of the wild type and mutants. CD spectra were recorded in a 1 mm path
length cuvette on a Jasco J-815 spectropolarimeter. For thermal stability,
the molar ellipticity at λ = 222 nm was measured as the protein
solutions were heated at a rate of 1 °C/min and used to determine
the fraction of protein folded (assuming a completely folded protein
population at a starting temperature of 10 °C). Thermal denaturation
temperatures (Tm) were analyzed with Jasco
Spectra software (JASCO Inc., Easton, MD) and are given with their
standard deviation (SD).

Molecular Dynamics Simulation of rTRPV1-ARD
Two sets
of molecular dynamics simulations (apo and ATP) were conducted using
the structure of rTRPV1-ARD bound to ATP, with and without the ATP
ligand removed in silico, respectively (PDB entry 2PNN, residues 111–356).
Structures were solvated in explicit water (TIP3) and ions (100 mM
NaCl) using VMD. The systems contained
208501 (ATP) and 208482 (apo) atoms. Minimization, equilibration,
and steered molecular dynamics (SMD) simulations were performed in
multiple steps using NAMD2.7, the CHARMM27
force field for proteins with the CMAP correction,, full electrostatics, and 2 fs time steps with hydrogen bonds constrained.
SMD simulations stretched both ends of TRPV1-ARD at effective speeds
of 2 and 20 nm/ns.

ATP-Agarose Pull-Down Assays
The ATP-agarose assays
were performed as described previously. Briefly, 20 μg of protein was incubated with 70 or 75 μL
of a 50% ATP agarose slurry for 1 h at 4 °C in binding buffer
[10 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.0), 50 mM NaCl, 1 mM DTT, and 0.15% n-decyl d-maltopyranoside]. After the agarose had
been washed three times, proteins were extracted and loaded onto the
15% SDS gel. In each load lane, the volumes loaded corresponded to
1 μg of protein. Gels were quantified using ImageJ (National
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD), and shown are the averages ±
SD for three independent experiments.

TRPV1 Cysteine Modification Assay
Reaction mixtures
containing rTRPV1-ARD (8.5 μM) in 150 mM NaCl, 20 mM Tris (pH
7.0), 0.5 mM PEG-maleimide 5 kDa (Creative PEGWorks), and 10 mM nucleotide
as indicated were incubated at room temperature, reactions stopped
by addition of DTT to a final concentration of 110 mM, and mixtures
analyzed by Coomassie-stained 12% SDS–PAGE.

Statistical Analyses
Statistical significance was tested
by multiple comparisons using Tukey-Kramer or Dunnett’s method
with JMP software (SAS Institute Inc., Cary, NC).

Results
Structures of Human TRPV4-ARD
Recombinant human TRPV4-ARD
(hTRPV4-ARD, residues 149–396) produced in E. coli was purified for structure determination by X-ray crystallography
and biochemical analyses. We determined the structure of hTRPV4-ARD
in the absence (crystal form I, ATP-free) or presence (crystal form
II) of ATP (Table ). Both crystal forms contain
two molecules per asymmetric unit. In crystal form II, one molecule
is bound to ATP (ATP-bound) while the other is not (ATP-unbound).
As expected on the basis of previous structures of TRPV-ARDs, hTRPV4-ARD consists of six ankyrin repeats (ANK1–6)
each containing an inner and an outer helix followed by a connecting
finger loop (Fingers 1–5) (Figure A).
The inner helices and fingers form a concave surface to which ATP
is bound at the expected site previously identified in TRPV1. Importantly, these structures represent the first
cognate pair of ATP-bound and ATP-free TRPV-ARD structures.

Structural
comparison of human and chicken TRPV4-ARDs. (A) Superimposed
ribbon diagrams of ATP-bound (magenta) and ATP-free (blue) hTRPV4-ARD.
ATP is shown as sticks. (B) Superimposed Cα traces of human
and chicken TRPV4-ARD. Finger 3 is twisted and shrunken in the ATP-bound
(magenta) and ATP-unbound (green) hTRPV4-ARD structures, while the
finger is extended in ATP-free hTRPV4-ARD (blue) and cTRPV4-ARD (gray).
Several Finger 3 residues are disordered in three of six TRPV4-ARD
structures. The structure of Finger 2 in the ATP-bound and -unbound
forms differs from that in ATP-free forms.

The structures of hTRPV4-ARD were compared to each
other and to
those of chicken TRPV4-ARD (cTRPV4-ARD). The structures of ATP-free hTRPV4-ARD and cTRPV4-ARD (residues 133–382,
90% identical sequences) are very similar (rmsd ranges from 0.635
to 0.922 Å over 239–242 Cα atoms) except at the
tips of Fingers 2 and 3 (Figure B). The same
trend is apparent when extending this comparison to all 10 available
structures of TRPV4-ARD (four hTRPV4-ARD molecules in two crystal
forms and six cTRPV4-ARD molecules in two crystal forms as well),
with large structural differences observed in the very long Finger
3, as well as in the tip of Finger 2. Consistently, Finger 3 residues
had high B factors and were too disordered to trace
in several cTRPV4-ARD structures, indicating high flexibility.

Structural Consequences of ATP Binding
Direct comparisons
of the ATP-free and ATP-bound hTRPV4-ARD structures again show conformational
differences restricted to Fingers 2 and 3 (Figure A). Finger 3 was extended in ATP-free hTRPV4-ARD (and in ATP-free
cTRPV4-ARD), while the finger loop was twisted and shrunken in ATP-bound
hTRPV4-ARD. Finger 2 was also slightly twisted in ATP-bound hTRPV4-ARD.
Surprisingly, both conformational differences were also observed when
comparing the second, ATP-unbound, molecule in crystal form II to
the ATP-free crystal form I structures (Figure B). In crystal form II, an adjacent symmetry-related hTRPV4-ARD molecule
occupied the ATP-binding site of the ATP-unbound molecule, possibly
mimicking ATP binding. Alternatively, the shrunken Finger 3 structure
may result from crystal contacts and/or crystallization condition
differences.

One unusual feature of TRPV-ARDs is that many aromatic
residues are exposed on flexible Fingers 2 and 3. In hTRPV4-ARD, 9 of 20 aromatic residues are located on
the concave face of Fingers 2 and 3 [three and six residues, respectively
(Figure )]. Interestingly, F272 and F273 on
Finger 3 are exposed in the ATP-free form, while these phenylalanines
are buried in the shrunken Finger 3 of the ATP-bound form (Figure B). The observed conformational differences may
thus serve to regulate the exposure of the aromatic patch, and the
conservation of the patch suggests that it is important, perhaps in
interactions with regulatory ligands or with other regions of the
full TRPV4 homotetramer.

Aromatic residues on Fingers 2 and 3 have varied
positions in hTRPV4-ARD
structures. (A) The hTRPV4-ARD structures of ATP-bound (magenta),
ATP-unbound (green), and ATP-free (blue) forms are superimposed. Aromatic
residues are shown as sticks. (B) Detail of the Finger 2 and 3 loops.
F272 and F273 on Finger 3 (black rectangles) are embedded in the aromatic
cluster in the ATP-bound and -unbound forms but exposed in the ATP-free
form. Y235 and Y236 on Finger 2 and Y281 and F282 on Finger 3 are
located in similar positions but show variable orientations. F231,
F282, Y283, and F284 show less variation.

Structural Comparison of TRPV-ARDs
Multiple TRPV-ARD
structures are available: a structure of rat TRPV1-ARD (rTRPV1-ARD)
bound to ATP, structures of cTRPV4-ARD
in the absence of ATP, and structures of several ARDs that do not
bind ATP, namely, rat and human TRPV2-ARDs and mouse TRPV6-ARD,, (see Table S1 of the ). The overall structures
of all available TRPV-ARDs are similar, with rmsd values ranging from
0.637 to 1.865 Å over 139–155 core Cα atoms (Table
S2 of the ). A superposition
of all structures illustrates that the largest structural differences
are again found in Fingers 2 and 3 (Figure A). Structural comparisons of these TRPV-ARDs and the new human TRPV4-ARD
highlight three noteworthy features.

Structural comparison of TRPV-ARDs. (A)
Superimposed main chain
structure of TRPV-ARDs (rTRPV1-ARD, gray; rat and human TRPV2-ARD,
cyan; ATP-bound hTRPV4-ARD, magenta; ATP-unbound hTRPV4-ARD, green;
ATP-free hTRPV4-ARD, blue; and mouse TRPV6-ARD, black). Finger 3 and
a part of Finger 2 are highly flexible. Several residues on Finger
3 are missing in one of two TRPV1-ARD structures and four of seven
TRPV2-ARD structures. (B) ATP-binding site of hTRPV4-ARD and rTRPV1-ARD.
Residues (sticks) within 4 Å of the ATP molecule and a surface
map of the ATP-binding site in hTRPV4-ARD (left) and the corresponding
residues in the rTRPV1-ARD ATP-binding site (right). The bBound ATP
molecule is shown as sticks (orange and yellow). (C) Finger 2 (2)
and Finger 3 (3) structures of ATP-bound rat TRPV1-ARD (gray), rat
and human TRPV2-ARD (cyan), human ATP-bound TRPV4-ARD (magenta), and
mouse TRPV6-ARD (black). (D) Aromatic residue positioned behind the
adenine base of ATP in Finger 2 (F231 in human TRPV4-ARD). (E) This
aromatic residue is conserved in TRPV-ARDs that bind ATP (red rectangle).
(F and G) ATP-agarose pull-down assays for wild-type and mutant rTRPV1-ARD
(F) or hTRPV4-ARD (G). Coomassie-stained gels (top) of wild-type and
mutant proteins loaded (left) and bound to ATP-agarose in the absence
(middle) or presence (right) of competing free ATP. The normalized
intensity of protein recovered (mean ± SD; n = 3) is plotted below. The statistical significance of the change
in binding to ATP-agarose with respect to the wild type (WT) was determined
by a multiple-comparison test using Dunnett’s method, with p &lt; 0.01 indicated by an asterisk.

First, as expected from biochemical, mutational,
and sequence analyses, the interaction
of ATP with hTRPV4-ARD is very
similar to what was previously observed in rTRPV1-ARD (Figure B). The adenine base
fits in a conserved pocket, stacking against Tyr236 and hydrogen bonding
to Gln239. Furthermore, Lys192 and Lys197 on the surface of inner
helix 2 interact with the phosphate groups of ATP. These lysines are
homologous to lysines critical for ATP binding in rTRPV1-ARD (Lys155
and Lys160) and cTRPV4-ARD (Lys178 and
Lys183). The importance of Lys197 in ATP
binding is further discussed below. The γ-phosphate of the ATP
is further removed from the protein in TRPV4 compared to TRPV1, consistent
with the fact that TRPV4-ARD exhibited less selectivity for ATP over
ADP in ATP-agarose competition assays.

Second, the backbone structure of ATP-bound hTRPV4-ARD, with
a
collapsed Finger 3, is quite similar to those of TRPV2-ARD and TRPV6-ARD,
which lack the ability to bind ATP (Figure C). In contrast, the ATP-free structures of chicken and human TRPV4-ARD,
which both have the ability to bind ATP, have extended Finger 3 conformations
(Figures B and A).
This visual observation is supported by a comparison of rmsd values
for Fingers 2 and 3 of both ATP-free and -bound forms of hTRPV4-ARD
with TRPV2-ARDs and mTRPV6-ARD: the ATP-bound form generally showed
smaller rmsds than the ATP-free form (Table S2 of the ). This suggests that although the ARDs
of TRPV2 and TRPV6 do not bind ATP, they are closest to the ATP-bound
state of ARDs with ATP-binding sites, at least in structural terms.

Finally, the structure of ATP-bound hTRPV4-ARD and comparisons
to TRPV2 and TRPV6 suggest that a previously unrecognized residue,
Phe231 in hTRPV4-ARD, could be important for ATP binding. Phe231 is
located under the adenine-stacking Tyr236 on Finger 2 (Figure D), contributing to the adenine-binding pocket.
This aromatic residue is conserved in the ATP-binding site of rTRPV1-ARD
(Tyr194), while the aromatic residues are substituted with a smaller
aliphatic residue, cysteine or methionine, in TRPV2 or TRPV6, respectively
(Figure E). Sequence alignments of TRPV proteins
confirm this trend, as the equivalent residue is a tyrosine in TRPV3,
which binds ATP, and threonine in TRPV5, which does not. Substitution
of these aromatic residues with cysteine (the residue found in the
equivalent position in TRPV2) caused a significant reduction in the
level of ATP binding in both rTRPV1-ARD and hTRPV4-ARD. In rTRPV1-ARD,
the Y194C mutation reduced the level of ATP binding comparably to
the K155A mutation identified in a previous study (Figure F). A significant reduction
in the level of ATP binding was also observed in hTRPV4-ARD mutant
F231C (Figure G). These results indicate that
the buried aromatic residue in Finger 2 conserved in TRPV1, TRPV3,
and TRPV4 does indeed contribute to ATP binding in rTRPV1-ARD and
hTRPV4-ARD.

ATP Binding Stabilizes TRPV4-ARD and TRPV1-ARD
ATP
binding does not result in large conformational changes, but the ATP-bound
form showed a tightly packed Finger 3 in both rTRPV1-ARD and hTRPV4-ARD
structures, leading us to hypothesize that ATP may stabilize the proteins.
In other ankyrin repeat proteins, such as IκBα and Notch,
the ankyrin repeats are partially folded and complete their folding
as a ligand is bound.− We therefore sought to determine whether ATP binding
affected ARD stability. To this end, we analyzed the thermal stability
of hTRPV4-ARD by CD spectroscopy in the absence or presence of ATP,
AMP, or phosphate (Figure ). In buffer alone,
hTRPV4-ARD showed a melting temperature (Tm) of 37.1 ± 0.1 °C. Phosphate ions (1 mM) increased Tm slightly but not significantly (37.33 ±
0.07 °C). In the presence of nucleotide ligands (1 mM), however,
a small but significant increase in Tm was observed (Tm = 37.9 ± 0.2 °C
for ATP and 37.4 ± 0.2 for AMP). The greater stabilization observed
with ATP compared to AMP matches their differing binding affinity
observed with cTRPV4-ARD.

Effect of ATP on hTRPV4-ARD
thermal stability. (A)
Representative circular dichroism spectra of the purified TRPV4-ARD
protein (3.4 μM) in the presence of ATP, AMP, or phosphate (1
mM each) at 10 °C. The wavelength (λ) of 222 nm used for
thermostability assays is indicated by a vertical red line. (B) Representative
traces of the thermostability assay. The molar ellipticity at 222
nm was measured as the protein solutions were heated at a rate of
1 °C/min. (C) Tm of TRPV4-ARD in
the presence of 1 mM ATP, AMP, or phosphate. The statistical significance
of the change in Tm was determined by
a multiple-comparison test using the Tukey–Kramer method, with p &lt; 0.05 and p &lt; 0.01 indicated by
one asterisk and two asterisks, respectively.

Stabilization of the ARD fold by nucleotides may
also affect the
accessibility of buried cysteine residues. hTRPV4-ARD contains four
cysteines, two exposed (Cys194 and Cys250) and two buried (Cys294
and Cys353; Figure S1 of the ). We examined the effect
of ATP binding on ARD stability by measuring the kinetics of cysteine
modification with PEG-maleimide (mPEG) in the presence or absence
of 10 mM AMP or ATP. hTRPV4-ARD was modified at endogenous cysteines
by a 5 kDa PEG-maleimide, resulting in multiple shifted bands on SDS–PAGE.
Furthermore, the rate of protein modification with mPEG was significantly
reduced in the presence of nucleotides, especially ATP (Figure S1
of the ). This suggests
that the ARD fold is quite flexible, and that ATP binding stabilizes
the fold, consistent with the thermal stability results described
above.

To gain further insights into the effect of ATP binding
on ARD
stability, we used single-cysteine mutants, allowing us to specifically
address the accessibility of a buried cysteine. Interestingly, rTRPV1-ARD
possesses a cysteine residue accessible to chemical modification by
allicin, the active compound in garlic extract. This cysteine residue, Cys157 (corresponding to Cys194
in hTRPV4-ARD), is paradoxically buried within the hydrophobic core
of TRPV1-ARD (Figure A), suggesting that the
structure may have some flexibility in solution, similar to that hypothesized
for TRPV4-ARD above. Indeed, rTRPV1-ARD was modified at endogenous
cysteines, like hTRPV4-ARD, whereas no mobility shift was observed
in a cysteine-less rTRPV1-ARD variant (CL) (Figure B). More importantly, PEG-maleimide modification of a single-cysteine
variant (C157) of rTRPV1-ARD, in which all cysteines except Cys157
were substituted with serine (C126S/C257S/C362S), resulted in a single
shifted band (Figure B). This result demonstrates
that buried Cys157 is indeed accessible to modification (Figure B), indicating a flexible and/or unstable fold.
We hypothesized that ATP binding may stabilize the rTRPV1-ARD fold
as it did hTRPV4-ARD. To test this hypothesis biochemically, we took
advantage of the modifiable property of Cys157 to test the accessibility
of this residue in the presence or absence of ATP. The single-cysteine
variant rTRPV1-ARD CL-TRPV1-ARD C157 was chemically modified by PEG-maleimide
with a half-time of 4 min (t1/2 = 4 min)
at room temperature (Figure C,D). Incubation
with 10 mM ATP greatly inhibited the reaction, with a t1/2 of 52 min, consistent with ATP stabilizing rTRPV1-ARD
and limiting access to buried Cys157. In contrast, incubation with
10 mM ADP, a poor rTRPV1-ARD ligand, only
weakly inhibited Cys157 modification (t1/2 = 10 min). CL-TRPV1-ARD C362, containing a single surface-exposed
cysteine in the disordered C-terminal tail of the rTRPV1-ARD construct,
was rapidly modified (t1/2 &lt; 30 s)
even in the presence of nucleotides, confirming that ATP specifically
inhibits the reaction of buried Cys157 (Figure C,D). Therefore, as shown for hTRPV4-ARD above using CD spectroscopy,
cysteine modification of hTRPV4-ARD and rTRPV1-ARD indicates that
ATP binding can stabilize the TRPV-ARD fold.

Effect of ATP binding
on protein stability in rTRPV1-ARD. (A) Structure
of TRPV1-ARD (gray) bound to ATP (green, sticks), with buried Cys157
highlighted (spheres). (B) TRPV1-ARD is modified at cysteine residues
by PEG-maleimide (mPEG), causing an electrophoretic mobility shift
on a Coomassie-stained SDS gel. Abbreviations: WT, wild type; CL,
a cysteine-less variant; C157, CL-TRPV1-ARD C157 single-cysteine variant.
Shown is a representative Coomassie-stained gel from one of three
experiments. (C) Time course for modification of single-cysteine TRPV1-ARD
variants C157 and C362 with 0.5 mM mPEG at room temperature. (D) Data
from four experiments like that depicted in panel C were quantified,
and the mean ± standard deviation was plotted. (E and F) Molecular
dynamics simulation in which the termini of the ATP-bound TRPV1-ARD
(E) or TRPV1-ARD structure with ATP removed prior to equilibrating
the system (F) are pulled apart at a rate of 20 nm/ns. Superimposed
are the structures at the start (gold) and end (blue) of the simulations.
(G and H) Root-mean-square deviation of each Cα atom over the
course of the simulation mapped onto the starting models with (G)
or without (H) ATP. The change in color from blue to red indicates
changes in rmsd from 0 to 80 Å. Simulations in which the termini
were pulled apart at a rate of 2 nm/ns gave similar results. See Table
S3 of the  for experimental
details.

To further confirm our results, we used steered
molecular dynamics
(SMD) to pull the termini of TRPV1-ARD
and reveal stable regions during protein mechanical unfolding in silico.
The N- and C-termini were separated at a constant velocity of 2 or
20 nm/ns in the presence or absence of bound ATP. TRPV1-ARD simulated
in the absence of bound ATP unfolded at both ends, with repeats 6
and then 1 unraveling during the time periods of independent simulations
performed at either stretching speed (Figure E,F). In contrast, when ATP, bound to repeats 1–3, was included
in the simulations, repeat 6 and much of repeat 5 unravelled, while
repeat 1 remained essentially intact (Figure G,H). Unfolding forces were similar in the presence or absence of
bound ATP at fast stretching speeds, but slightly larger for the ATP-bound
ARD in the slower stretching simulations (Figure S2 of the ). These simulations therefore
support the idea that ATP stabilizes the surrounding local TRPV1-ARD
structure. Dynamic ligand-induced changes in TRPV-ARD stability may
therefore provide a regulatory mechanism for channel sensitivity and
activation.

Structural Analysis of TRPV4 Mutations Associated with Human
Diseases
Many mutations in the TRPV4 gene have been associated
with inherited diseases., Within the ARD, at
least 15 mutations at 12 residues have been reported to cause autosomal
dominant diseases classified as either neuropathies or skeletal dysplasias
(Figure A).− Mutations at arginine
residues located on the convex face of hTRPV4-ARD are associated with
neuropathies (Figure B). Arg232 and Arg269 are located on Fingers 2 and 3, respectively,
while Arg315 and Arg316 are located at the base of Finger 4. In contrast,
eight residues whose mutations are associated with skeletal dysplasias
(Glu183, Lys197, Leu199, Glu278, Thr295, Ile331, Asp333, and Val342)
are spread on both fingers and helices, primarily on the concave face
of hTRPV4-ARD (Figure B). Therefore, mapping
the available genetic data on the hTRPV4-ARD structure suggests that
the phenotypic differences of the diseases may be related to the differing
functional properties of the concave and convex ARD surfaces.

Mutations associated
with human diseases in hTRPV4-ARD. (A) Positions
of mutations associated with human inherited diseases that lie within
hTRPV4-ARD. Abbreviations: SEDM, spondyloepiphyseal dysplasia, type
Maroteaux; SMDK, spondylometaphyseal dysplasia, type Kozolowski; MD,
metatropic dysplasia; SMA, spinal muscular atrophy; SPMA, scapuloperoneal
spinal muscular atrophy; CMTC2, Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease type 2C;
HMSN2C, hereditary motor and sensory neuropathy 2C. This figure was
inspired by ref (). (B) Location of the disease-causing mutations within TRPV4-ARD.
Shown as spheres are 12 residue positions at which a total of 15 mutations
causing human inherited diseases have been identified. The ATP molecule
is shown as sticks. Skeletal dysplasia and neurophathy mutations are
depicted as green and blue spheres, respectively. (C) Leu199 is located
at the hydrophobic interface between ANK2 and ANK3. (D) Glu183 and
Arg232 form a salt bridge on the convex face of TRPV4-ARD.

To gain insights into possible biochemical mechanisms
connecting
the mutations with disease phenotypes, we generated mutant hTRPV4-ARD
corresponding to 13 of the 15 disease-causing mutations located within
the ARD. We were not able to produce recombinant T295A hTRPV4-ARD
because of its low level of protein expression and/or stability. The
inability of T295A to fold stably when expressed in E. coli and the influence of nucleotide ligands on the thermal stability
of hTRPV4-ARD suggest that several mutations could affect protein
folding and/or stability. We therefore tested the thermal stability
of wild-type hTRPV4-ARD and the 13 purified hTRPV4-ARD mutants by
CD spectroscopy. Wild-type hTRPV4-ARD had a melting temperature (Tm) of 37.93 ± 0.08 °C (note that a
phosphate-based buffer was used for these experiments). The Tm values of most mutants were significantly
different from that of the wild type, except for those of R232C and
I331T [38.1 ± 0.1 and 37.97 ± 0.07 °C, respectively
(Table S4 and Figure S3 of the )]. Most mutations resulted in a significantly lower Tm values, although R269C showed a significantly higher Tm (38.6 ± 0.2 °C) than the wild type
(Table S4 of the ). L199F and E183K showed the more severe reductions in Tm (32.9 ± 0.1 and 33.78 ± 0.06 °C, respectively).
Leu199 is buried and tightly packed between inner helices 2 and 3,
and therefore, its substitution with a larger phenylalanine side chain
likely affects the protein thermal stability by disrupting the hydrophobic
core packing arrangement (Figure C). Glu183
is on the surface of Finger 2 and forms a salt bridge to Arg232 in
some of the hTRPV4-ARD structures (Figure D). However, simple disruption of this salt bridge is unlikely to
cause this decrease in stability because the complementary R232C neutralizing
mutation did not significantly alter the Tm of hTRPV4-ARD. The E183K charge reversal may cause electrostatic
repulsion between the ANK fingers due to the proximity of Arg232,
while the R232C mutation, disrupting the salt bridge, would not actively
cause electrostatic repulsion. Overall, the averaged Tm of skeletal dysplasia mutants (35.6 ± 1.6 °C; n = 24) is significantly lower than those of the wild type
(37.93 ± 0.08 °C; n = 8; p = 0.0005) and neuropathy mutants (36.9 ± 1.5 °C; n = 15; p = 0.017), although not all mutants
obey this trend (Figure A).

Thermal stability and
ATP binding of hTRPV4-ARD mutants associated
with inherited diseases. (A) The Tm determined
by CD spectrometry in a phosphate-based buffer is plotted for wild-type
and mutant hTRPV4-ARDs. The statistical significance is shown in Table
S4 of the . (B) Coomassie-stained
gels show wild-type and mutant TRPV4-ARDs loaded (top) and bound to
ATP-agarose (bottom). (C) Normalized intensity of recovered protein
(mean ± SD; n = 3). The statistical significance
of the change in binding to ATP-agarose with respect to wild type
(WT) was determined by a multiple-comparison test using Dunnett’s
method, with p &lt; 0.05 and p &lt;
0.01 indicated by one asterisk and two asterisks, respectively.

ATP Binding by hTRPV4-ARD Mutants
Most disease-associated
mutations in TRPV4-ARD cause substitutions of surface-exposed side
chains. This suggests that interactions with other factors, such as
other regions of the TRPV4 protein and/or regulatory ligands, are
affected. Because ATP is a known ligand, we tested the ability of
the hTRPV4-ARDs with disease-causing mutations to bind ATP using an
ATP-agarose pull-down assay (Figure B,C).
Four mutants, K197R, R232C, R269H, and V342F, showed significantly
weakened ATP binding. Lys197, which directly interacts with ATP in
our ATP-bound hTRPV4-ARD structure (Figure B), showed one of the greatest reductions in the level of ATP binding.
This is also consistent with previously published experiments in which
corresponding residues Lys183 of cTRPV4-ARD and Lys160 of rTRPV1-ARD
were shown to be crucial for ATP binding., In contrast,
the reduction in the level of ATP binding observed for R232C and R269H
is surprising because both residues are on the surface opposite the
ATP-binding site (Figure B). Similarly, ATP
binding is significantly enhanced by the E183K and E278K mutations,
although these residues also have no direct interaction with ATP.
These results suggest that, although the interaction of ATP is specific
to the ATP-binding site observed in our structure, it is influenced by the general electrostatic properties
of hTRPV4-ARD. Because intracellular ATP sensitizes TRPV4 channel
activity, enhanced ATP binding may result
in higher channel activity, leading to constitutive basal activity.
However, although several mutations either impaired or enhanced ATP
binding, there was no correlation between the disease phenotypes and
the ATP-binding phenotype.

In summary, enhanced ATP binding
in E183K and E278K could contribute to the constitutive TRPV4 activity
that is thought to lead to the TRPV4-linked disease phenotypes. However,
it is difficult to explain the different disease phenotypes observed,
including neuropathy and skeletal dysplasia, on the basis of only
changes in thermal stability or ATP binding (Figure A,C), suggesting complex and unidentified mechanisms for regulating
TRPV4 channel activity in different tissues.

Discussion
In this study, we determined the structures
of ATP-free and -bound
hTRPV4-ARD and compared them with the structures of other TRPV-ARDs.
Structural analyses revealed the flexible Finger 3 as a possible switch
for regulating channel activity. Biochemical analyses and MD simulations
indicated that ATP contributed to protein stability in TRPV-ARDs possessing
ATP binding ability. Finally, a series of biochemical analyses of
the disease-associated mutants showed that several have impaired thermal
stability and/or ATP binding ability.

The new pair of crystal
structures of the ATP-free and -bound forms
of TRPV4-ARD revealed minimal conformational changes in the presence
of bound ligand. The long and flexible Finger 3 undergoes the largest
conformational change. In the process, a patch of aromatic residues
is affected, such that a number of these aromatic residues are buried
in the presence of ATP. This suggests that a regulatory signal could
be exposed or hidden by a Finger 3 conformational change, to affect
the sensitization of TRPV4 and the related TRPV1 channel by ATP., In other words, ATP binding may control the accessibility of a regulatory
surface, which could interact intramolecularly with other parts of
the TRPV4 channel or intermolecularly with additional regulatory factors.
One candidate for such a regulatory factor is calmodulin, which was
shown to require residues within the ATP-binding site for binding
to TRPV4-ARD.

It is interesting
that the ATP-bound ARD structures of both TRPV1
and TRPV4, with their packed forms of Finger 3, are similar to those
of TRPV2 and TRPV6, which lack the ability to bind ATP. Although it
does not bind ATP, in phylogenetic analyses TRPV2 clusters with TRPV1,
TRPV3, and TRPV4, which can bind ATP. This clustering and the fact
that most ATP-binding residues, including two critical lysines, are
conserved in TRPV2 suggest that TRPV2
may have lost its ATP binding ability in a relatively recent evolutionary
process. A previous study attempted to generate a TRPV2-ARD mutant
that could bind ATP and/or CaM by introducing two mutations: D78N,
which neutralizes a negatively charged side chain in the proximity
of the phosphate interaction site, and H165Q, which could restore
the adenine-binding pocket. Although neither
of the single mutants bound ATP, the D78N/H165Q double mutant bound
ATP weakly but significantly, suggesting that additional residues
are essential for ATP binding. Our structure of ATP-bound TRPV4-ARD
suggests a candidate, Phe231, which is conserved in the rTRPV1-ARD
ATP-binding site (Tyr194) but not in TRPV2 and TRPV6 (Figure D). Comparing the TRPV-ARD structures suggests that
this aromatic residue buttresses the adenine-binding pocket.

Several lines of evidence indicate that ATP binding increases the
protein stability of both TRPV1- and TRPV4-ARD (Figures  and  and Figure S1 of the ). Interestingly, TRPV4-ARD
showed a Tm near body temperature (37.1
± 0.1 °C), suggesting that the ARD could be quite sensitive
to changes in physiological temperature. In such a situation, a small
but significant increase in Tm induced
by binding of a ligand such as that observed here for ATP (37.9 ±
0.2 °C) may make a large contribution to protein stability at
body temperature. It has been reported that TRPV4 is activated by
warm temperatures (threshold for activation of ∼34 °C)
and shows basal constitutive activity around body temperature. Furthermore, it has been suggested that some
unfolding event may be responsible for the thermosensitivity of TRP
channels. Therefore, ARD stabilization
by ligand binding may fine-tune TRPV4 function and basal activity
levels, although the relationship between the stability of ARD and
channel activity remains speculative.

TRPV4 is unusual among
the TRPV ion channels because a large number
of dominant missense mutations that cause a whole spectrum of human
skeletal dysplasias and neurodegenerative diseases have been identified.
In particular, the neurodegenerative disease-causing mutations all
localize to one surface of the ARD. In
contrast, the skeletal dysplasia mutations spread throughout the protein, although a number of them are found in the ARD.
We studied a total of 15 mutations at 12 positions localized to the
ARD, five neurodegenerative disease mutations and 10 skeletal dysplasia
mutations. Recently, two new mutations, Q239H (associated with skeletal
dysplasia and located within the adenine pocket of the ATP-binding
site) and R316H (associated with CMT2C like the previously identified
R316C), have been reported in the ARD., Several hTRPV4
mutants, including both neurodegenerative mutations (R232C, R269C,
R269H, R315W, and R316C) and skeletal dysplasia mutations (I331F and
D333G), cause high basal activity and enhanced response to stimuli
when expressed heterologously in HEK293 cells and were inferred to
cause cell death because of high Ca2+ influx.−,,− The constitutive activity of hTRPV4 mutants is consistent
with their dominant disease phenotypes. However, how different tissue-specific
phenotypes are observed when both types of mutations result in a similar
cellular phenotype remains unexplained.

We therefore generated
13 of the ARD mutant proteins and compared
several of their biochemical properties. We did find several mutations
causing significant enhancement or reduction in ARD thermal stability
and/or ATP binding. These changes could play a part in the disease
mechanisms. Most hTRPV4-ARD mutants showed significantly reduced thermal
stability, suggesting that the ARD thermal stability may contribute
to the regulation of channel activity. For example, the ARD stability
could alter the functional channel population as the N-terminus of
TRPV4 has been reported to be important for tetramer assembly. However, a lower Tm does not provide a general correlation to TRPV4 function because
R269C, which showed a Tm higher than that
of the wild type, has been reported to cause the constitutive activity
of the channel., Of note, the enhanced ATP binding
by two skeletal dysplasia mutations, E183K and E278K, suggests a mechanism
for increased TRPV4 activity and Ca2+ influx because intracellular
ATP has been shown to sensitize TRPV4.

Biochemical analyses in this study suggested two possible
mechanisms
for how mutations in TRPV4-ARD affect channel activity: reduced ARD
thermal stability and enhanced ATP binding. However, it is difficult
to explain the disease-specific segregation on the basis of only these
two biochemical phenotypes, suggesting that additional mechanisms
are likely at play in the regulation of the TRPV4 channel. We also
did not see a correlation between thermal stability and ATP binding,
suggesting that there is no clear functional relationship between
these two phenotypes. Our results therefore leave us with two broad
hypotheses. (1) Disease-causing TRPV4 mutations affect diverse regulatory
mechanisms, converging to bone or neuron-related phenotypes in how
they ultimately affect TRPV4 activity. (2) The most important common
mechanisms remain to be identified. That is, there could be regulatory
factors or mechanisms specific to each tissue. Further understanding
of the mechanisms that cause the human inherited diseases will therefore
require the identification of tissue-specific biochemical phenotypes,
as well as additional cell biology and electrophysiology studies to
link biochemical findings to ion channel function.

Supporting Information Available
TRPV-ARD structures used
in
this study (Table S1), structural similarity between TRPV4-ARD and
other TRPV-ARDs (Table S2), molecular dynamics simulations of rat
TRPV1-ARD (Table S3), Tm values of wild-type
and mutant TRPV4-ARD proteins (Table S4), hTRPV4-ARD cysteine modification
assay (Figure S1), stabilities of TRPV1-ARD in equilibrium and SMD
simulations (Figure S2), and thermal stabilities of wild-type and
mutant TRPV4-ARD proteins (Figure S3). This material is available
free of charge via the Internet at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bi300279b_si_001.pdf

The authors declare no
competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
We thank David Neau for assistance with data collection, Dr.
Wilhelm A. Weihofen for help with data processing, Dr. Charlotte J.
Sumner for providing human TRPV4 cDNA, Dr. Ute Hellmich for comments,
and current and former lab members for technical help and discussions.

Abbreviations
ANKankyrin
repeat

ARDankyrin
repeat domain

CaMcalmodulin

CDcircular
dichroism

DTTdithiothreitol

EDTAethylenediaminetetraacetic
acid

HEPES4-(2-hydroxyethyl)-1-piperazineethanesulfonic
acid

IPTGisopropyl
β-d-thiogalactopyranoside

MDmolecular dynamics

PAGEpolyacrylamide gel electrophoresis

PDBProtein Data Bank

PEGpolyethylene glycol

rmsdroot-mean-square
deviation

SDSsodium
dodecyl sulfate

SMDsteered molecular dynamics

TRPtransient receptor potential

TRPVTRP vanilloid.

