Endothelial dysfunction (ED)
is an early indicator of numerous vascular diseases as well as a key
contributor to the pathophysiology of ischemia-reperfusion (I/R) injury.
ED is commonly associated with increased cellular oxidative stress
and with decreased nitric oxide (NO) bioavailability,− resulting in dysregulation of vascular tone and ultimately compromised
cardiovascular function. The oxidative stress seen in ED is generated
by a variety of reactive oxygen and nitrogen species (ROS and RNS,
respectively), predominantly superoxide (O2•–), which is responsible for the oxidation of a variety of redox-sensitive
molecules.− Several enzymes are thought to contribute to oxidative
stress in the heart and vascular tissue during I/R, including NADPH
oxidase, the mitochondrial electron transport chain, aldehyde oxidase
(AO), and xanthine oxidase (XO).− In endothelial cells, xanthine dehydrogenase (XDH), which catalyzes
the conversion of hypoxanthine/xanthine to uric acid using NAD+ as an electron acceptor, is widely reported to be a major
contributor to oxidative stress after I/R injury.,− This mechanism involves a reversible conversion of XDH to XO during
ischemia with a concomitant enhancement of ATP catabolism resulting
in accumulation of the XO substrates hypoxanthine (HX) and xanthine
(X). The steric modification to XDH impacts
the ability of NAD+ to access the FAD site of the protein,
leaving O2 to act as the electron acceptor, generating
O2•– and H2O2 during conversion of hypoxanthine to uric acid.

NO synthases (NOSs) make up a family of homodimeric
proteins that
convert l-arginine and O2 to l-citrulline
and NO using NADPH as a reducing substrate.− They also require a critical
redox-sensitive cofactor, tetrahydrobiopterin (BH4). While
there are three known NOS isoforms, endothelial NOS (eNOS or NOS3)
is the major NOS isoform expressed in endothelial cells, and eNOS-derived
NO mediates endothelium-dependent vasorelaxation.− No significant
expression of inducible or neuronal NOS has been observed in endothelial
cells under normal physiological conditions., While hypoxic stress has been reported to induce iNOS expression
in smooth muscle, there is a lack of iNOS induction in endothelial
cells with only eNOS expression detected.−

The increased
O2•– production
during ED impairs the catalytic activity of eNOS, severely compromising
cellular NO generation. Diminished NO production in endothelial cells
in various pathological conditions does not correlate with a decrease
in the level of eNOS protein.− The enzyme level remains the
same or even increases in ED, in preatherosclerotic states, heart
failure, and hypertension. Under such circumstances, with increased
oxidative stress, the oxidation of the essential eNOS cofactor, BH4, to dihydrobiopterin (BH2) is thought to cause
eNOS uncoupling,, an enzymatic state in which O2•– rather than NO is generated. Competition
between the oxidized and reduced forms of the pteridine cofactor for
the eNOS binding site is ultimately involved in eNOS uncoupling., While the impact of O2•– on
BH4 has been shown both in vitro and in vivo, the extent to which
a lack of this cofactor influences eNOS activity in endothelial cells
under intrinsic oxidative stress is not well-understood. Neither is
it known if other mechanisms, triggered by O2•–, play a crucial role in eNOS uncoupling and ED.

We have recently
discovered that eNOS can be uncoupled, regardless
of the presence or absence of BH4, by S-glutathionylation
of critical Cys residues, in particular Cys 689 and Cys 908 of the
reductase domain. Oxidized glutathione (GSSG) can induce dose-dependent
eNOS S-glutathionylation (eNOS-SG) through disulfide exchange. This process is regulated by the ratio of the
oxidized to reduced glutathione (GSSG/GSH) present in the intracellular
pool. Because GSH is present in the range of millimoles per liter
in a large variety of cell types, including endothelial cells, the
GSSG/GSH ratio is a critical determinant of the redox state., Interconversion between reduced and oxidized forms is critical for
cell redox homeostasis, and oxidative stress may shift the ratio toward
GSSG, thereby defining eNOS-SG as another possible pathway of eNOS
uncoupling in ED induced by the processes of hypoxia and reoxygenation
or related I/R injury.

In this study, the extent and mechanisms
of eNOS uncoupling in
endothelial cells subjected to hypoxia and reoxygenation (H/R) were
investigated. eNOS S-glutathionylation was demonstrated for the first
time as a consequence of intrinsic oxidative stress in endothelial
cells, as well as BH4-dependent eNOS uncoupling. Using
aortic endothelial cells in an adherent cell model of H/R, we observed
that these two mechanisms act together to cause eNOS uncoupling.

Materials
and Methods
Materials
Potassium phosphate monobasic (KH2PO4), dl-dithiothreitol (DTT), citric acid, diethylenetriaminepentaacetic
acid (DTPA), oxypurinol, menadione (vitamin K3), and N-acetyl-l-cysteine (NAC) were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich
(St. Louis, MO). Acetonitrile (ACN), ammonium acetate, methanol, an
iodine solution, and potassium iodide were purchased from Thermo-Fisher.
Octyl sulfate sodium salt (OSA) was purchased from Acros Organics
(Waltham, MA). 7,8-Dihydro-l-biopterin (BH2),
dihydroxanthopterin (XH2), pterin (P), isoxanthopterin
(IX), xanthopterin (XP), and l-biopterin (B) were purchased
from Schircks Laboratories (Jone, Switzerland). (6R)-l-Tetrahydrobiopterin (BH4), l-NG-nitroarginine methyl ester (l-NAME),
and Mn(III)TBAP were purchased from Cayman Chemical (Ann Arbor, MI).
Dihydroethidium (DHE) and 4′,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole dihydrochloride
(DAPI) were purchased from Invitrogen (Carlsbad, CA). Anti-NOS3 antibodies
were purchased from Santa Cruz Biotechnology (Santa Cruz, CA). The
anti-glutathione antibody was purchased from Virogen (Boston, MA).
The superoxide probe tetrathiatriarylmethyl (TAM) radical with a single
aromatic hydrogen (CT02-H) was synthesized in house as reported previously.,

Hypoxia and Reoxygenation (H/R) Model
BAECs were washed
with PBS and kept with serum-free DMEM in a hypoxic environment created
by placing the flasks containing cells at confluence into a Billups-Rothenberg
modular incubator chamber flushed with a 95% N2/5% CO2 gas mixture. The oxygen level was monitored with an oxygen
electrode placed inside the incubator chamber interfaced with an Apollo
4000 control unit. Cells were kept inside the chamber at 37 °C
for 24 h with an O2 concentration in the medium of ∼4
Torr followed by reoxygenation for 1 h by replacing the hypoxic medium
with normoxic PBS with calcium, magnesium, 1 g/L d-glucose,
and 36 mg/L sodium pyruvate. Cell viability was checked by trypan
blue exclusion. Cells were stained with 0.02% trypan blue in PBS,
and cell counts were performed with a Zeiss Laboratory light microscope.

Detection of Superoxide by Confocal Microscopy
Detection
of O2•– generated by BAECs was
performed using 10 μM DHE on cells grown on cover glass and
treated in six-well plates and then fixed prior to detection. DHE
fluoresces when it is oxidized. Blue fluorescent DAPI was used to
stain cell nuclei. The images were acquired using a 60× magnification
lens on an Olympus FV1000 confocal microscope.

Measurement of Superoxide
Using CT02-H Probe by High-Performance
Liquid Chromatography (HPLC)
Tetrathiatriarylmethyl (TAM)
radical with a single aromatic hydrogen (CT02-H) was synthesized and
purified as previously described. Upon
reaction with O2•–, the green
CT02-H is dehydrogenated to produce a purple diamagnetic quinone methide
detected on an ESA HPLC system via electrochemical oxidation by applying
an 800 mV potential to the ESA 6210 coulometric four-channel cell
and/or by following the UV absorbance at 540 nm (ε = 15900 M–1 cm–1). The HPLC conditions consisted
of a mobile phase (40/30/30 20 mM ammonium acetate/methanol/acetonitrile)
at pH 7.0, while the stationary phase was a C18 Tosoh Bioscience ODS-80Tm
column (250 mm × 4.6 mm, 5 μm). CT02-H was added to a final
concentration of 50 μM to ∼3 × 106 cells
cultured in a T25 flask with PBS containing calcium and magnesium,
1 g/L d-glucose, and 36 mg/L sodium pyruvate. The supernatant
was collected after reoxygenation for 1 h and injected into the HPLC
system, following isocratic elution at a flow rate of 1.2 mL/min.

HPLC Analysis of Pteridines
The HPLC analysis of pteridines
was conducted using an HPLC system from ESA equipped with a Waters
Atlantis T3 reversed phase column (5 μm, 4.6 mm × 150 mm).
The isocratic elution was performed at a flow rate of 1.2 mL/min using
a buffer consisting of 100 mM KH2PO4, 6 mM citric
acid, 2.5 mM OSA, 0.1 mM DTPA, 1 mM DTT, and 2% methanol (pH 2.5).
The detection of the pteridines was performed using the following
detector parameters: UV absorption at 254 nm, fluorescence with excitation
set at 348 nm and emission set at 444 nm, and electrochemical detection
(ESA coulometric four-channel array cell model 6210) with a potential
of 100 mV. The indirect detection of pteridines was conducted following
previously reported methodology. This
method was chosen for both robustness and sensitivity in determining
the levels of BH4 and BH2. In parallel, direct
electrochemical detection of pteridines was used to confirm the indirect
measurements of BH4 and to assess the presence of other
pteridines that are poorly detected or not detected with fluorescence,
such as XP and XH2. For BAEC pteridine analysis, approximately
20 × 106 cells were harvested and lysed using an extraction
buffer consisting of 0.1 N HCl and sonication. The supernatant was
then split into two aliquots: one for the indirect measurement of
BH4 and BH2 and one for the direct measurement
of pteridines. For the latter, final concentrations of 1 mM DTT, 1
mM ascorbate, and 100 μM DTPA were added to preserve the redox
status of the pteridines throughout sample handling.

Nitric Oxide Measurement by EPR
Spin trapping measurements
of NO from BAECs were performed with a Bruker EMX EPR spectrometer
with Fe2+-(N-methyl-d-glucamine
dithiocarbamate)2 [Fe2+-(MGD)2] as
a NO spin trap. The experiments were
performed on 3 × 106 cells grown in T-25 flasks. Cells
were washed with PBS; then 1.8 mL of PBS containing glucose (1 g/L),
pyruvate (36 mg/L), CaCl2, MgCl2, the NO spin
trap Fe2+-(MGD)2 (0.25 mM Fe2+ and
2.5 mM MGD), and calcium ionophore A23187 (1 μM) were added
to each flask, and the cells were incubated for 20 min at 37 °C
in a humidified environment containing 5% CO2. After the
incubation, the supernatant from each flask was collected and concentrated
by being dried under vacuum using a SpeedVac, and finally, the trapped
NO in the supernatants was quantified by EPR. For NOS inhibition, l-NAME was used at a concentration of 2 mM to ensure complete
inhibition. Spectra recorded from these cellular preparations were
obtained with the following parameters: microwave power of 20 mW,
modulation amplitude of 4.0 G, and modulation frequency of 100 kHz.

Immunoprecipitation, Sodium Dodecyl Sulfate–Polyacrylamide
Gel Electrophoresis (SDS–PAGE), and Immunoblotting
Approximately 20 × 106 cells were harvested and suspended
in RIPA buffer containing 10 mM NEM and protease inhibitors and then
lysed via sonication. The cell lysate was then incubated with the
bead-conjugated eNOS antibody overnight at 4 °C under constant
rotation. eNOS was then eluted from the bead–antibody–eNOS
complex using the loading buffer, and the supernatant containing the
eNOS was collected for SDS–PAGE. Standard procedures previously
described were followed. Briefly, protein
extracts were separated by a 4 to 20% polyacrylamide gel, and protein
bands were then transferred electrophoretically to a nitrocellulose
membrane. Membranes were blocked with 5% milk in TBS containing 0.05%
Tween 20 (TTBS) and then incubated overnight with the anti-glutathione
monoclonal antibody (1000/1). Membranes were then washed and incubated
with the HRP-labeled anti-mouse antibody. Subsequently, the signal
was detected with ECL Western blotting detection reagents (Bio-Rad),
and the signal intensity was digitized and quantified with ImageJ
(National Institutes of Health). Membranes were then reprobed for
eNOS as a loading control.

Statistical Analysis
Data are expressed
as means ±
the standard error of the mean (SEM). All experiments were repeated
at least three times. Microsoft Excel and Sigma Plot (SPSS, Inc.)
were used for data analysis. A Student’s t test was used for statistical analysis, with P &lt;
0.05 being considered significant.

Results
Xanthine Oxidase
Is a Major Source of Superoxide in BAECs under
H/R
We verified that the adherent BAEC H/R model generates
O2•– by two independent assays.
First, confocal microscopy was used to detect the fluorescence emitted
by oxidized DHE. As previously reported, cells undergoing H/R produce O2•–. As illustrated in panels A and B of Figure , the DHE-derived fluorescence signal from the cells
undergoing H/R was more than 15 times higher than the control (no
H/R). This fluorescence was quenched by incubating the cells during
H/R with 50 μM Mn(III)TBAP, a cell permeable SOD mimetic (SODm)
with an O2•– dismutation rate
of 107 M–1 s–1, confirming
that it was derived from O2•–.
The fluorescence signal was nearly totally abolished by the SODm.
To determine the role of XO in this process of O2•– generation, the cells were treated with the XO inhibitor oxypurinol
(2 mM) preceding H/R and the detected level of O2•– was 62% decreased compared to that from H/R.

Generation of superoxide
from BAECs. (A and B) Cells undergoing
H/R show strong DHE-derived fluorescence on confocal microscopy in
contrast to that in control cells (red fluorescence against staining
of nuclei with blue DAPI). Both SODm and oxypurinol decreased this
fluorescence when they were added to the cells prior to H/R. The relative
levels of O2•– (as DHE-derived
fluorescence intensity) are reported at the right. *H/R vs control,
H/R+SODm, and H/R+oxypurinol: p &lt; 2 × 10–5. #H/R+SODm vs H/R+oxyp: p &lt; 0.002.
(C and D) Amounts of superoxide released by the cells as detected
by HPLC using the CT02-H probe. The highest intensity is reported
from cells undergoing H/R, followed by the signal coming from cells
undergoing H/R and treated with oxypurinol and SODm prior to H/R.
The control is near the baseline. Panel D shows the level of the quinone
methide (proportional to O2•–).
*H/R vs control, H/R+SODm, and H/R+oxypurinol: p &lt;
0.002. #H/R+SODm vs H/R+oxyp: p &lt; 0.017.

To further confirm these results,
O2•– production was assayed by
HPLC using the O2•– probe CT02-H.
This compound, unlike other spin traps or fluorescence-based
O2•- assays, is well-suited for
an adherent cell study, and its impermeability to cell membranes allows
quantification of O2•– that reaches
the extracellular space. The amount of quinone methide generated after
the O2•– dehydrogenation of CT02-H
was determined. Panels C and D of Figure  show
the quinone methide production in cells undergoing H/R that closely
resembled the pattern seen with DHE confocal microscopy. In particular,
the concentration of quinone methide is increased from 22 ± 6
nM in the control to 437 ± 44 nM after H/R, which was then reduced
&gt;6-fold with SODm addition prior to H/R, while inhibiting XO with
oxypurinol prior to H/R resulted in a 3-fold decrease. For comparison,
as a positive control, administration of 50 μM menadione (vitamin
K3), which is reported to stimulate large amounts of O2•– production, resulted in a higher concentration of quinone methide,
reaching 2.04 ± 0.09 μM, ∼4.6 times higher than
in endothelial cells after H/R (data not shown).

The amount
of O2•– generated
by uncoupled eNOS was also assessed. As shown in panels A and B of
Figure , the amount of quinone methide detected
in BAECs after H/R was ∼33% lower when cells were treated with
the NOS inhibitor l-NAME (2 mM) prior to H/R compared to
identical experiments with untreated cells. Thus, uncoupling of eNOS
gives rise to prominent O2•– generation
in BAECs subjected to H/R.

Generation of superoxide from uncoupled eNOS
in BAECs undergoing
H/R. (A and B) Amounts of superoxide released by the cells as detected
by HPLC using the CT02-H probe. A 33% decrease in the concentration
of detected quinone methide from BAECs pretreated with eNOS inhibitor l-NAME (2 mM) prior to H/R is seen compared to levels from untreated
cells undergoing H/R, and this corresponds to uncoupled eNOS-mediated
O2•– generation. *H/R vs H/R+l-NAME: p &lt; 0.001.

The BH4/BH2 Ratio Is Decreased after H/R
and Preserved by Scavenging O2•– or Inhibiting XO
Panels A and B of Figure  show the molecular structures and chromatographic elution
profiles of BH4 and the corresponding products of BH4 oxidation. As a consequence of O2•– oxidation, analysis of the pteridines from cells undergoing H/R
showed that the decrease in the level of BH4 paralleled
the increase in the level of BH2, exhibiting a pattern
similar to that reported in vitro. As shown in Figure C, the level
of BH4 decreased from 19.3 ± 0.2 pmol/mg of protein
in the control (no H/R) to 6.1 ± 0.9 pmol/mg of protein after
H/R (∼70% less) while the level of BH2 increased
from 2.2 ± 0.3 to 8.9 ± 1.3 pmol/mg of protein (∼4
times higher than in the control). Therefore, the intracellular BH4/BH2 ratio dramatically decreased from ∼9.2
in the control to ∼0.7 after H/R treatment. Moreover, with
no other detectable pteridines, the total pteridine content was reduced
from 21.5 ± 0.8 pmol/mg of protein in the control to 15.0 ±
1.4 pmol/mg of protein after H/R (∼30% decrease). When 50 μM
SODm was added to the cells before H/R, the level of BH4 after the reoxygenation was significantly higher, 15.3 ± 0.7
pmol/mg of protein, ∼2.5 times higher than in H/R and ∼80%
of the level detected in the control, while the level of BH2 was 1.5 ± 0.8 pmol/mg, approximately the same level as in the
control cells. The total pteridine pool in SODm-treated cells after
H/R of 16.8 ± 0.5 pmol/mg of protein was not significantly different
compared to that of cells subjected to H/R, indicating that the change
observed in the BH4/BH2 ratio could only be
attributed to the scavenging properties of SODm and not to increased
biosynthetic activity. We also verified that the inhibition of XO,
using 2 mM oxypurinol, substantially reduced the level of BH4 oxidation; indeed, its level after H/R was 11.9 ± 0.8 pmol/mg
of protein, a value that was ∼2 times higher than in H/R and
62% of the control. In parallel, the BH2 level was reduced
(as in the SODm treatment) to the control level (2.2 ± 0.6 pmol/mg
of protein). No relevant differences in the total pteridine pool were
detected after this treatment either (14.2 ± 0.7 pmol/mg of protein).
To further determine the extent to which O2•– was able to oxidize BH4, cells were treated with 50 μM
vitamin K3. In this case, the amount of radical produced
was able to completely oxidize BH4 and almost completely
oxidize BH2, as well (1.5 ± 0.9 pmol/mg of protein),
leaving XH2 as a final product of oxidation (10.3 ±
0.8 pmol/mg of protein) that could be detected only under this extreme
condition of oxidative stress. No other detectable pteridines were
seen at significant levels.

Pteridines in BAECs undergoing H/R. (A) Molecular
structure of
BH4 and its main products of oxidation or rearrangement.
(B) Chromatographic elution profile of the pteridines in a given mix
of standards: (top) electrochemical oxidation of pteridines at 100
mV and (bottom) signal from fluorescence detection for the same pteridines.
(C) Pteridines detected by HPLC from the BAEC lysate. Cells under
H/R have 69% less BH4 (*p &lt; 8 ×
10–5) than the control, while the level of BH2 is 4 times higher (#p &lt; 0.004). SODm-
and oxypurinol-treated cells were able to preserve their BH4 pool at levels comparable to the control and significantly different
from the H/R level (∼2.5- and ∼2-fold, respectively):
*p &lt; 0.005; ** H/R+SODm vs H/R+oxyp, p &lt; 0.016. The BH2 level, on the other hand, was near
the control level in all treatments and significantly different from
that of H/R: #p &lt; 0.005. In stark contrast to
the H/R model, cells treated with vitamin K3 show no BH4 and a minimal level of BH2. The main detected
pteridine in this case was XH2.

eNOS-Mediated NO Production Decreases as a Consequence of BH4 Oxidation after H/R
The relative change in NO production
from cells undergoing H/R compared to control cells (no H/R) was analyzed
by EPR spectroscopy using Fe2+-(MGD)2. A decrease
in the NO production of cells following H/R was observed. Panels A
and B of Figure  show that NO production was
reduced to 34.2 ± 1.7% of the control (100%) after cells were
subjected to H/R, consistent with O2•– production and BH4 oxidation. Conversely, when the cells
were treated with 50 μM SODm prior to H/R, significant preservation
of NO levels was seen (72.3 ± 1.9%), and to a lesser extent,
the inhibition of XO by oxypurinol also partially preserved NO levels
after H/R (63.7 ± 3.0% of the control). To further test the relevance
of an O2•–-driven decrease in
the BH4/BH2 ratio to eNOS uncoupling and the
consequent reduction of the NO level, BAECs were incubated with 100
μM BH4 2 h after the onset of the hypoxic conditioning
to avoid depletion of the cofactor. The level of pteridines was then
checked at the end of the reoxygenation step by washing, harvesting,
and lysing the cells. The cells effectively internalized BH4 with its intracellular concentration reaching 455 ± 34 pmol/mg
of protein, ∼24-fold higher than that in the control sample.
While the intracellular concentration of BH2 also increased,
reaching 15.0 ± 1.2 pmol/mg of protein, the treatment provided
the highest BH4/BH2 ratio of ∼30 (more
then 3-fold higher than in the control). This translated to an increase
in NO production compared to that of untreated H/R cells, with levels
reaching 65.2 ± 2.4% of the untreated control. Thus, when compared
with that of cells under H/R, administration of BH4 significantly
preserved the NO level throughout the course of H/R. Interestingly,
while the decrease in the BH4/BH2 ratio was
reversed, restoration of NO production remained incomplete, suggesting
the presence of other mechanisms of eNOS dysfunction driven by the
oxidative stress occurring during H/R, but independent of BH4 levels or the BH4/BH2 ratio.

Production of NO in BAECs
undergoing H/R. NO levels from cells
undergoing H/R, as detected through EPR spin trapping (A), decreased
to 34.2% of the control: *p &lt; 6 × 10–5. (B) Cell treatments, with 50 μM SODm or 2
mM oxypurinol, significantly preserved NO levels as compared to H/R:
*p &lt; 0.002. Addition of 100 μM BH4 preserved NO at a level similar to that observed in the other two
treatments when compared to H/R: *p &lt; 0.002; #control
vs H/R+SODm, H/R+oxyp, and H/R+BH4, p &lt;
0.001.

eNOS Is S-Glutathionylated
in BAECs after H/R
We have
recently demonstrated that eNOS S-glutathionylation (eNOS-SG) can
also function as an important mechanism of eNOS uncoupling following
oxidative stress., eNOS-SG and a decrease in the
BH4/BH2 ratio may have additive detrimental
effects on NO biosynthesis., Therefore, measurements
of eNOS-SG were performed in endothelial cells undergoing H/R. Following
H/R, prominent levels of eNOS-SG were seen, more than 3 times higher
than in the control cells (no H/R) as shown in Figure A. A concomitant reduction in GSH and an increase in GSSG
were observed in the intracellular pool when measured via HPLC. As
illustrated in Figure B, after H/R, the level
of GSH was 0.32 ± 0.03 μmol/mg of protein compared to 1.64
± 0.03 μmol/mg of protein in the control. Conversely, GSSG
increased from 0.08 ± 0.02 μmol/mg of protein in the control
to 0.94 ± 0.1 μmol/mg of protein after H/R, an increase
in the GSSG/GSH ratio from ∼0.05 in the control to ∼2.9
in H/R. Notably, it was then verified that eNOS-SG in cells undergoing
H/R might be completely prevented by increasing the intracellular
GSH concentration. To increase the cellular concentration of GSH,
2 mM N-acetyl-l-cysteine (NAC) was given
to the cells overnight. NAC, which is required for the biosynthesis
of GSH, increased the level of GSH in control cells up to ∼2.6-fold
compared to the control (data not shown), while after H/R, the GSH
reached 2.4 ± 0.1 μmol/mg of protein, considerably higher
than the control and ∼7.5 times higher than in untreated cells
after H/R. Despite an increase in GSSG to 0.6 ± 0.1 μmol/mg
of protein, the GSSG/GSH ratio was dramatically reduced to ∼0.3.
The level of eNOS-SG under these circumstances was approximately half
that of the control and ∼7 times lower than in untreated cells
after H/R.

eNOS-SG in BAECs undergoing H/R. (A) eNOS-SG as determined by immunoprecipitation
followed by immunoblotting. The sample from H/R has a 3-fold higher
level of eNOS-SG than the control. The sample from the 2 mM NAC pretreatment
has the lowest detectable level of eNOS-SG, approximately 15% of that
of the untreated H/R sample. *H/R vs H/R+NAC, control, p &lt; 3 × 10–5. (B) GSH and GSSG cellular
content as observed by HPLC. The oxidized/reduced ratio notably increased
from 0.05 to 2.9 going from the control (untreated cells) to H/R cells,
respectively. Addition of 2 mM NAC kept the ratio at 0.3. For GSH:
*H/R vs H/R+NAC, control, p &lt; 2 × 10–5; **control vs H/R+NAC, p &lt; 0.001.
For GSSG: #H/R vs H/R+NAC, control, p &lt; 0.04;
##control vs H/R+NAC, p &lt; 0.001; ###H/R vs H/R+NAC, p &lt; 0.04.

eNOS Activity in BAECs Undergoing H/R Is Reduced Because of
the Concomitant Effects of eNOS S-Glutathionylation and the Reduced
BH4/BH2 Ratio
The effect of eNOS-SG
alone and eNOS-SG together with BH4 oxidation on uncoupling
eNOS was also investigated. As reported in panels A and B of Figure , the level of NO in cells undergoing H/R was significantly
preserved in cells incubated with 2 mM NAC, reaching 62.6 ± 2.2%
of the control (no H/R), a level very close to that seen in cells
treated with 100 μM BH4 prior to H/R. A substantial
increase in the level of NO was observed when cells were incubated
with 2 mM NAC along with 100 μM BH4. Under these
conditions, the detected level of NO after H/R increased to 83.4 ±
3.4% of the control and was ∼2.4-fold higher than that seen
after H/R in untreated cells, demonstrating a positive additive effect
that far exceeds the preservation of eNOS activity observed with individual
treatments alone.

Production of NO from BAECs treated with NAC, BH4, or
both after H/R. (A and B) Relative production of NO from eNOS. Treating
cells with 100 μM BH4 together with 2 mM NAC resulted
in &gt;85% NO preservation as compared to the control. NAC treatment
alone also significantly preserved NO but to a lesser extent. *H/R
vs control, H/R+NAC, H/R+NAC+BH4: p &lt;
0.002. #H/R+NAC vs H/R+NAC+BH4: p &lt;
0.003.

Discussion
Endothelial
dysfunction (ED), as a consequence of I/R injury, is
associated with an overall decrease in NO production due to eNOS uncoupling,
a process by which the enzyme switches from NO to O2•– production.− In prior studies, this
phenomenon was primarily linked to depletion of the eNOS cofactor,
BH4. It was shown that oxidative stress was a primary cause of BH4 depletion and that
the oxidized form, BH2, was able to compete for the same
binding site on the oxygenase domain of eNOS. Despite these advances in understanding the fundamental process
of eNOS uncoupling, the discordance between the function of BH4 in maintaining eNOS coupling in vitro and
the marginal results obtained by supplementation of BH4 in ex vivo and in vivo experiments
as well as in clinical trials,, prompted further investigation to consider if other processes may
be involved in triggering eNOS uncoupling and ED.

Building on
previous reports by our group and others,,, we found that XO plays a major
role in O2•– production in adherent
endothelial cells under H/R. Furthermore, we observed that XO-generated
O2•– triggers intracellular oxidative
stress leading to a critical shift from reduced to oxidized pteridines.
We quantified the decrease in the level of NO attributed to the decrease
in the BH4/BH2 ratio in endothelial cells undergoing
H/R, and consistent with previous observations, eNOS was significantly,
but not solely, affected by the decrease in this ratio. Moreover,
we observed only a partial recovery by saturating the enzyme with
BH4 through administration of the cofactor to endothelial
cells prior to and during H/R. Therefore, BH4 depletion
and the parallel increase in BH2 account for only a portion
of the eNOS uncoupling, and this possibly explains the lack of efficacy
in addressing eNOS-dependent ED with BH4 supplementation
alone.

Recently, S-glutathionylation of critical cysteines of
the eNOS
reductase domain was identified as yet another fundamental mechanism
of eNOS uncoupling, in this case triggered by increased levels of
GSSG., To elicit this post-translational modification,
endothelial cells were treated with BCNU or modified by molecular
genetic manipulation to inhibit glutathione reductase (GR), leading
to an increase in the intracellular GSSG concentration.,, However, the post-translational
modification of this thiol redox switch on eNOS function in the process
of ED following the pathophysiological stress of H/R remained unexplored.

Oxidative stress significantly increases the GSSG/GSH ratio in
the heart, and preventing this increase by scavenging the generated
ROS is associated with a decrease in GSSG concentration and higher
recovery of heart function.,, Therefore, we first investigated whether an increased GSSG/GSH ratio
occurred and was proportional to a decrease in NO production and an
increase in O2•– formation, and
secondarily if a consequent S-glutathionylation of eNOS represented
an additional mechanism of eNOS uncoupling. Consistent with this hypothesis,
the S-glutathionylation of eNOS was proportional to the increase in
the intracellular GSSG/GSH ratio detected in endothelial cells after
H/R. It was further shown that increasing the GSH pool through administration
of its precursor, N-acetyl-l-cysteine (NAC),
increased the eNOS activity after H/R with a decrease in the level
of eNOS S-glutathionylation.

While the interplay between these
two mechanisms of eNOS uncoupling
requires further investigation, we observed that the effects on eNOS
are additive and reversible by saturating the enzyme with BH4 together with enhancing the intracellular GSH pool, thus preventing
or reversing the S-glutathionylation. With supplementation of both
BH4 and NAC, the highest recovery of NO production was
observed.

The overall scenario that occurs in endothelial cells
under the
oxidative stress associated with H/R was found to be predominantly
XO-driven, triggering BH4 oxidation, with a concomitant
increase in the level of BH2. Thus, the pteridine ratio
dramatically shifts toward the oxidized pteridine. In parallel, the
O2•– and secondary ROS generated
oxidize the GSH pool and thus activate the process of S-glutathionylation
because of an increase in the intracellular GSSG concentration, resulting
in further uncoupling and enhanced production of O2•– from eNOS (Figure ).

Modulation of eNOS by H/R. BAECs under H/R show increased production
of O2•– mainly generated by XO.
As a consequence, the intracellular redox state is shifted toward
oxidation with an increase in GSSG over GSH in parallel with an increase
in the oxidized form of the eNOS cofactor, BH2 over BH4. The oxidative shift of these two ratios ultimately uncouples
eNOS via two mechanisms. An increased GSSG/GSH ratio generates S-glutathionylation
of critical cysteines in the reductase domains of eNOS, resulting
in O2•– production from the flavins,
while a decrease in the BH4/BH2 ratio uncouples
the oxidase domains either by BH2 outcompeting BH4 or by loss of a cofactor leading to the production of O2•– from the heme centers. Overall, uncoupled
eNOS contributes to O2•– production,
exacerbating the cellular oxidative state. Depletion of BH4 and NAC effectively recouples eNOS by replenishing cofactor and
by deglutathionylation, respectively. The eNOS schematic structure
is based on the work of Garcin et al.

Although other mechanisms besides
ROS formation are reported to
influence eNOS uncoupling, including l-arginine depletion
and methylarginine competition for the catalytic site of eNOS,, the significant recovery of NO production shown here in cells undergoing
H/R with co-administration of BH4 and NAC to address the
cofactor oxidation and to reverse S-glutathionylation, respectively,
emphasizes not only a primary role for these two phenomena over the
others but also the effectiveness of this cotreatment in recovering
nearly complete eNOS function. In addition, the impact of a larger
intracellular GSH pool may reduce the negative consequences of O2•– production, acting directly as
a physiological ROS scavenger.

Taken together, the two mechanisms of eNOS uncoupling are thus
having an additive detrimental effect on NO synthesis. Nonetheless,
it is worth noting that BH4 depletion will affect the increased
level of O2•– production from
the eNOS oxygenase domain, thereby exacerbating oxidative stress,
possibly leading to irreversible protein modification, while S-glutathionylation
of eNOS may not be as detrimental to cellular homeostasis because
of its reversibility. The reversible S-glutathionylation of eNOS allows
recoupling of the enzyme once the endothelial cells re-establish a
physiological redox state. In this sense, eNOS-SG works as a switch
regulated by the cellular oxidative state expressed by the GSSG/GSH
ratio. In this scenario, glutathione reductase (GR), which regulates
this ratio, would also play a critical role in actively controlling
the process of eNOS-SG, as can be inferred from prior reports.,

In conclusion, this work provides important insights into
the consequences
of redox stress on eNOS function and NO production in endothelial
cells. While most O2•– generation
in this adherent endothelial cell model undergoing H/R is shown to
be initially driven by xanthine oxidase, this in turn leads to eNOS
uncoupling through two distinct mechanisms. Both BH4 depletion
and GSSG/GSH-dependent S-glutathionylation serve as important mechanisms
by which eNOS is uncoupled in BAECs undergoing H/R. These findings
suggest that the combination of O2•–-mediated BH4 depletion and redox-regulated eNOS S-glutathionylation
trigger eNOS dysfunction and uncoupling in the endothelium under conditions
of hypoxia and reoxygenation that occurs in I/R injury in tissues.
As such, these results suggest that for optimal therapy to reduce
the extent of endothelial dysfunction a combined approach to replenish
BH4 and restore intracellular thiol redox balance will
be required.

The
authors declare no
competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
We thank Dr. Yangping Liu
who synthesized the superoxide probe
CT-02H used in these studies. We also thank Tina Nicole Burger for
preparation of the illustration presented in Figure .

Abbreviations
H/Rhypoxia and reoxygenation

BH4tetrahydrobiopterin

BH2dihydrobiopterin

GSSGglutathione disulfide

eNOS or NOS3endothelial
nitric oxide synthase

eNOS-SGeNOS S-glutathionylation

NACN-acetyl-l-cysteine

EDendothelial dysfunction

I/Rischemia-reperfusion

ROSreactive oxygen
species

RNSreactive
nitrogen species

O2•–superoxide

XOxanthine oxidase

XDHxanthine dehydrogenase

AOaldehyde oxidase

HXhypoxanthine

Xxanthine

SODmMn(III)TBAP.

