Na+/K+-ATPase is the energy-transducing enzyme that maintains the normal
physiological gradients of Na+ and K+ across
the plasma membrane of most higher eukaryotic cells., Two subunits of the enzyme (α and β) are essential for
catalytic and transport functions, and some of the preparations contain
other subunits (FXYD proteins; e.g., the γ-subunit of the kidney
enzyme) that regulate function.() Na+/K+-ATPase is also a signal transducer; i.e., in
response to some stimuli (drugs, hormones, and putative hormones),
it interacts with neighboring membrane proteins to activate multiple
growth-related signal transduction pathways, leading to a host of
cell-specific downstream effects.− More recently, we showed
that in several different cell types, a significant fraction of Na+/K+-ATPase resides in the caveolar microdomains
of the plasma membrane, and we suggested that this pool of the enzyme
may be responsible for its signal transducing function because of
its proximity to its signaling partners that are colocalized in caveolae.() Although our subsequent studies in cardiac myocytes
and smooth muscle cells confirmed the presence of Na+/K+-ATPase in caveolar microdomains, they also indicated diverse
and cell-specific signaling events linked to the enzyme and even suggested
that signaling by Na+/K+-ATPase may not be limited
to the caveolar pool., On the other hand, a number of
other studies of the signaling function of Na+/K+-ATPase of renal epithelial cells− have suggested that the enzyme-linked signaling
in these cells occurs through a pool of caveolar enzyme that does
not pump even in the absence of a stimulus, and that ouabain-induced
signaling is solely due to a specific interaction among the α-subunit
of Na+/K+-ATPase, Src, and caveolin-1. Attempting
to clarify these apparent discrepancies with respect to the role of
the caveolar enzyme in the signaling and the pumping functions of
Na+/K+-ATPase, we deemed it necessary to separate
the caveolar and the noncaveolar pools of the renal enzyme for comparative
structure–function studies.

The commonly used biochemical
procedures for the separation of
caveolar and noncaveolar membranes, that are applicable
to only small quantities of cultured cells or tissue samples yield
such limited samples of these membranes that are not suitable for
further purification or extensive studies. Therefore, we used the
ample prior experience in the field on the purification of the membrane-bound
Na+/K+-ATPase from kidney() to develop procedures for the separation and large-scale
preparations of the caveolar and noncaveolar pools of the kidney enzyme.
These procedures and the initial studies on the comparative properties
of the two pools are presented here. The findings not only resolve
some of the uncertainties mentioned above but also provide previously
unavailable information about (a) the characteristics of the enzymic
activities of the caveolar and noncaveolar pools of kidney Na+/K+-ATPase, (b) the nature and relative quantities
of the signaling proteins that accompany the subunits of Na+/K+-ATPase in the caveolar and noncaveolar pools, (c)
the established and potential sites of interaction among Na+/K+-ATPase oligomers, caveolin oligomers, and the other
two major caveolar proteins, E-cadherin and annexin-2 tetramer, and
(d) how the interactions between the caveolar Na+/K+-ATPases of two adjacent renal epithelial cells occur at adherens
junctions.

Experimental Procedures
Preparation of the Caveolar and Noncaveolar Pools of the Enzyme
Microsomes from pig kidney outer medulla were prepared as described
previously− and suspended (1.4 mg of protein/mL) in a solution
containing 3 mM ATP, 2 mM EDTA, and 50 mM imidazole (pH 7.5). A concentrated
solution of SDS was added to the suspension dropwise with constant
stirring over 30 min, at 24 °C, yielding a final SDS concentration
of 0.056%. Sucrose was then added to this microsomal suspension to
a final concentration of 12%. Discontinuous glycerol gradients, each
containing 25 mM imidazole and 1 mM EDTA (pH 7.5), were set up as
follows, from bottom to top, in a 100 mL centrifuge tube (Beckman
model 345778): 11 mL of 64% glycerol and 26 mL of 44% glycerol. On
top of these were overlaid 26 mL of the SDS-treated microsomes in
sucrose, and then 32 mL of 25 mM imidazole and 1 mM EDTA (pH 7.5).
The tubes were centrifuged in a Beckman Ti-45 rotor at 45000 rpm and
4 °C for 165 min. To obtain the two clearly separated opaque
bands, successive 5 mL fractions were collected from each tube. Each
fraction was diluted 7-fold in 25 mM imidazole and 1 mM EDTA (pH 7.5)
and centrifuged in a Beckman Ti-70 rotor at 55000 rpm and 4 °C
for 1 h. The resulting membrane pellets were suspended in 0.25 M sucrose,
30 mM histidine, and 1 mM EDTA (pH 7.4) and used. As indicated in  (Figure ), the pellets
from fractions 12 and 13 of each tube usually contained most of the
lighter caveolar enzyme, and that of fraction 16 contained most of
the heavier noncaveolar enzyme.

Na+/K+-ATPase and Other Assays
The steady-state ATPase activity was assayed at 37 °C by measuring
the initial rate of release of Pi from ATP in a medium
containing optimal concentrations of the required ligands: 100 mM
NaCl, 25 mM KCl, 2 mM ATP, 3 mM MgCl2, 1 mM EGTA, and 20
mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.4). Each assay was conducted in the presence and
absence of 1 mM ouabain, and the ouabain-sensitive component was considered
as the Na+/K+-ATPase activity. The K0.5 values and the Hill coefficient of the essential ligands
were determined as indicated previously.() Pi was assayed with Malachite Green as described previously.() The maximal level of the phosphoenzyme intermediate
of Na+/K+-ATPase was measured using [γ-32P]ATP as described previously,− and the molar activity
of the enzyme was calculated as indicated.() Cholesterol and protein assays were conducted as described previously.()

To assay for Src activity in the membrane
preparation or purified
Src, we incubated samples in a buffer containing 2 mM ATP, 125 mM
MgCl2, 25 mM MnCl2, 2 mM EGTA, 250 μM
sodium orthovanadate, 2 mM dithiothreitol, and 100 mM Tris-HCl (pH
7.2). After termination of the reaction by the addition of SDS and
boiling (see the section below), samples were subjected to SDS–PAGE
and immunoassayed for an increase in the level of Src pY418 or total
tyrosine-phosphorylated Src with the appropriate antibodies.

Immunoblot and Immunoprecipitation
Samples were solubilized
in a buffer containing 2% SDS and 5% β-mercaptoethanol,
boiled for 5 min, and then subjected to SDS–PAGE and probed
with appropriate antibodies for detection or for quantitative immunoblot
analyses as described previously., In some experiments,
boiling of samples prior to SDS–PAGE was avoided as specified.
For immunoprecipitation experiments, membrane samples were first treated
with a lysis buffer containing the detergents Triton X-100, octyl
glucoside, and other components.() The detergent-solubilized
proteins were then subjected to immunoprecipitation, SDS–PAGE,
and immunodetection using appropriate antibodies and procedures as
we described previously.()

Cross-Linking Experiments
Membrane samples were reacted
with BS3 and DDS as described
previously() and then subjected to SDS–PAGE
and immunodetection with the indicated antibodies.

Materials
Pig kidneys were purchased from the slaughterhouse.
ATP, ouabain,
and routine chemicals of the highest available purity were obtained
from Sigma (St. Louis, MO). [γ-32P]ATP was bought
from Perkin-Elmer Life Sciences (Boston, MA). Antibodies against the
indicated antigens were purchased from the following vendors: β1-subunit of Na+/K+-ATPase and EGFR from
Upstate Biotechnology (Lake Placid, NY); ERK 1/2, Src (sc-8056), phosphotyrosine,
PY99 (sc-7020), goat anti-rabbit IgG-bound horseradish peroxidase
(HRP), and goat anti-mouse IgG-bound HRP from Santa Cruz Biotechnology
(Santa Cruz, CA); caveolin-1 (610059), caveolin-2 (610684), annexin-2
p36 (610068), annexin-2 p11 (610070), and E-cadherin (610181) from
BD Transduction Laboratories (Lexington, KY); Na+/K+-ATPase α1 (α6F) from Developmental
Studies Hybridoma Bank, University of Iowa (Iowa City, IA); Akt and
PI3K p85 from Cell Signaling Technology (Danvers, MA); and phospho-Src
and occludin from Invitrogen (Carlsbad, CA).

The customer-designed
antibody against the 14 C-terminal residues
of the rat γ-subunit of Na+/K+-ATPase() was produced by Sigma-Genosys (The Woodlands,
TX). BS3 and DSS were purchased from Thermo Fisher Scientific
(Rockford, IL). Purified (&gt;90%) Src (p60c-src) (14–117)
was
purchased from Millipore (Billerica, MA). Purified (&gt;90%) human
EGFR
(BML-SE116) was purchased from Enzo Life Sciences International, Inc.
(formerly BIOMOL International, L.P., Plymouth Meeting, PA).

Analysis of Data
Unless stated otherwise, data are
means ± the standard error
(SE) of the results of a minimum of three experiments. A Student’s t test was used, and a p &lt; 0.05 significance
was accepted.

Results
Identification and Separation of the Caveolar and Noncaveolar
Pools of the Enzyme
Most of the Na+/K+-ATPase content of the
kidney outer medulla (∼70%) is found in the crude microsomal
membranes prepared from this tissue homogenate,() and such microsomes of various mammalian kidneys have been
standard starting materials for the well-established purification
procedures of this enzyme. We used one such procedure that we and
others had used before,, but in the final step
involving density gradient centrifugation of membrane fragments, we
looked not only for fractions enriched with Na+/K+-ATPase but also for those enriched with caveolin-1. The results
shown for a typical experiment (Figure A,B) indicated clear separation of light membrane
fragments containing most of caveolin-1 from heavy fragments containing
the major peak of Na+/K+-ATPase activity. The
results also showed a smaller shoulder of caveolin-1 in the heavy
fragments and a smaller shoulder of Na+/K+-ATPase
activity in the light membranes (Figure A,B).
The distribution of caveolin-2 in the various fractions was the same
as that of caveolin-1 (not shown). The patterns of numerous runs similar
to that described above were the same, but with minor shifts in the
positions of the caveolin-1 and Na+/K+-ATPase
activity peaks in different runs. For comparison of the properties
of the light and heavy membrane fragments presented below, we usually
used combinations of two fractions, 12 and 13, for the light caveolar
membranes, and one peak fraction, 16, for the heavy noncaveolar membranes.
As expected, the caveolar membranes contained significantly more cholesterol
than the noncaveolar membranes (Figure C).

Separation
of caveolar and noncaveolar pools of the kidney Na+/K+-ATPase. Microsomal membranes were purified and subjected
to density gradient fractionation as described in . (A) Distribution of caveolin-1, Na+/K+-ATPase activity, and protein in the fractions.
The specific Na+/K+-ATPase activity of fraction
16 was 980 μmol of Pi mg–1 h–1. (B) Distribution of the immunoreactive caveolin-1.
From each fraction, 1 μg of protein was subjected to SDS–PAGE
and immunostaining. (C) Cholesterol contents of the caveolar (fractions
12 and 13) and noncaveolar (fraction 16) pools. Means ± SE (n = 4). (D) Relative distributions of the subunits of Na+/K+-ATPase (α,β,γ) in the caveolar
and noncaveolar pools. The two pools and the microsomal preparation
used for the fractionation were subjected to quantitative immunoassays
for the subunits. No significant differences between the subunit contents
were noted in either pool (n = 4). (E) Equal amounts
of protein (5 μg) from each pool were subjected to SDS–PAGE,
and the gels were stained.

Na+/K+-ATPase Activities and Subunit Compositions
of the Caveolar and Noncaveolar Pools of the Enzyme
Because
in cardiac myocytes the different subunits of Na+/K+-ATPase are unevenly distributed among caveolar and
noncaveolar membranes,() it was important
to determine the relative distributions of the enzyme subunits in
the caveolar and noncaveolar kidney membranes prepared here. The immunoassays
of the α, β, and γ subunit contents of the fractionated
microsomes (Figure D) clearly showed that
the three subunits of the kidney enzyme are evenly distributed between
the purified caveolar and noncaveolar membranes. Because the three
subunits have already been shown to exist in 1:1:1 ratio in the purified
noncaveolar kidney enzyme,() the combined
data of panels A and D of Figure  indicate
that the kidney caveolar enzyme also contains the three subunits in
the same ratio.

The specific Na+/K+-ATPase
activity of the
purified noncaveolar enzyme was routinely 5–6 times higher
than that of the caveolar enzyme. In six runs similar to Figure A, the specific activities (micromoles of Pi per milligram of protein per hour) were 211 ± 40 for
the caveolar pool and 1118 ± 124 for the noncaveolar pool. Experiments
aimed at the enzyme activities of the two pools as functions of varying
ATP, Na+, and K+ concentrations showed no significant
differences between the kinetic parameters of the two pools (not shown).
The K0.5 values and Hill coefficients
of the three essential ligands were nearly the same for the caveolar
and noncaveolar pools and similar to the values presented previously
for the purified canine kidney enzyme.() The K0.5 values for the standard inhibitors
of Na+/K+-ATPase activity (ouabain, vanadate,
and oligomycin) were also the same for the two pools (not shown),
and as presented previously for the purified canine kidney enzyme.()

The molar activities of the caveolar and
noncaveolar pools, based
on the determination of the maximal phosphoenzyme intermediate capacity,
were found not to be significantly different [7124 ± 382 min–1 (n = 3); 7510 ± 500 min–1 (n = 3)], and in agreement with
the molar activities of all undamaged Na+/K+-ATPases.()

Taken together, our
findings indicate that the caveolar and noncaveolar
pools of the kidney Na+/K+-ATPase have similar
catalytic properties, but that the caveolar pool is simply less pure.
Comparison of the stained SDS gels of the two pools confirms the latter
conclusion (Figure E).

Other Proteins of the Caveolar and Noncaveolar Enzymes
In the highly purified preparations of the kidney enzyme studied
previously (similar to the noncaveolar membrane enzyme used here),
the subunits of Na+/K+-ATPase make up most of
the protein content of the preparation.− Because the caveolar
enzyme is less pure (Figure A,E), it was of
interest to identify the other major proteins of the caveolar preparation.
Of particular interest were E-cadherin and the annexin-2 heterotetramer
that are known to be major proteins of epithelial caveolae and rafts.− Immunoassays showed that E-cadherin and p36 and p11 of annexin-2
(two components of the annexin-2 heterotetramer) are indeed highly
enriched in kidney caveolar Na+/K+-ATPase relative
to the noncaveolar enzyme (Figure A,B). In
experiments depicted in Figure B, the detected
components of the annexin-2 tetramer were the p11 monomer and a complex
of p11 and p36 that was stable on the SDS gel. To explore further
the various known association states of annexin-2, in the caveolar enzyme, we immunoassayed samples that were boiled
or not boiled (Figure A). While in the boiled
sample the major detected species was the dimer of p11 and p36, in
the unboiled sample there seemed to be only one complex (&gt;100 kDa)
that could be detected by the antibody to either p11 or p36. These
results suggest that in the caveolar enzyme, the annexin-2 proteins
exist as oligomers with the minimum structure of the heterotetramer.
Because caveolin-1 oligomers are also known to be resistant to SDS,() we probed the caveolar enzyme with the anti-caveolin-1
antibody before and after boiling (Figure B). The results confirmed that caveolin-1 of this enzyme pool also
consists of large homo-oligomers of caveolin-1.

Relative
contents of E-cadherin and annexin-2 in caveolar and noncaveolar pools
of the enzyme. (A) Caveolar and noncaveolar enzymes were prepared
as described in the legend of Figure , and
equal amounts of protein from each pool were subjected to a quantitative
immunoassay for E-cadherin (n = 4). (B) Representative
blots of pairs of caveolar and noncaveolar pools were probed with
antibody to p11 of annexin-2.

Oligomeric
states of annexin-2 proteins and caveolin-1 in the caveolar Na+/K+-ATPase. (A) Samples of the caveolar enzyme
were either boiled in the standard sample buffer containing SDS and
β-mercaptoethanol () or not boiled and then subjected to SDS–PAGE and probed
with antibodies to p11 and p36 of annexin-2. (B) Boiled and unboiled
samples as described for panel A were probed with the caveolin-1 antibody.

We also compared the relative contents of a number
of proteins
that have been implicated in the signaling functions of Na+/K+-ATPase, in the caveolar and noncaveolar
enzymes. Somewhat surprisingly, Src, EGFR, p85 of PI3K, Akt, and ERK
1/2 were all enriched in the noncaveolar relative to the caveolar
pool (Figure ). Using highly purified preparations
of Src and EGFR as standards, and three different preparations of
caveolar and noncaveolar enzymes, we determined the molar ratios of
the α-subunit of Na+/K+-ATPase to these
signaling proteins to be as follows: α:Src ratio of 220 ±
12.5 (n = 3) and α:EGFR ratio of 324 ±
105 (n = 3) for the caveolar enzyme and α:Src
ratio of 1701 ± 133 (n = 3) and α:EGFR
ratio of 604 ± 36 (n = 3) for the noncaveolar
enzyme. Thus, in both caveolar and noncaveolar preparations of the
kidney enzyme, the signaling proteins exist as minor constituents
relative to Na+/K+-ATPase proteins. Nevertheless,
their presence has important functional implications (see ).

Relative
contents of some proteins related to the signaling functions of Na+/K+-ATPase in the caveolar and noncaveolar pools
of the kidney enzyme. Equal amounts of protein from each pool were
immunoassayed for the indicated proteins. The result for each protein
is expressed as a percentage of the total caveolar and noncaveolar
contents of that protein (n = 4–8).

Protein–Protein Interactions within the Caveolar Na+/K+-ATPase
For further exploration of
the previously suggested interactions
between the subunits of Na+/K+-ATPase and other
proteins, we first conducted co-immunoprecipitation studies. Using
detergent-solubilized caveolar Na+/K+-ATPase
and the indicated antibodies, experiments depicted in Figure  suggested interactions between the α,β,γ-protomers
of Na+/K+-ATPase and (a) caveolin-1 oligomers
and (b) the annexin-2 tetramer. The data do not show which subunit(s)
of Na+/K+-ATPase or the annexin-2 tetramer is
involved in such interactions. Similar experiments in which immmunoprecipitations
were conducted with antibodies against the p36 or the β-subunit
(not shown) led to the same conclusions.

Protein–protein
interactions of caveolar Na+/K+-ATPase detected
by co-immunoprecipitation. The membrane-bound caveolar enzyme as purified
in Figure  was solubilized by a mixture of
octyl glucoside and Triton X-100 () in which caveolin-1 retains its native oligomeric structure., Immunoprecipitation was conducted using a polyclonal anticaveolin-1
antibody, and immunoblots were created with a monoclonal anticaveolin-1
and the other indicated antibodies.

Because any interactions detected by co-immunoprecipitation
may
have been induced by the solubilizing detergent used, we also conducted
chemical cross-linking studies using the native purified caveolar
Na+/K+-ATPase and the cross-linking reagents
DSS and BS3, which have been used before to study the oligomeric
structures of caveolins and Na+/K+-ATPase.,, The results summarized in Figure  supported the suggestions of Figure , indicating that in native caveolar membranes there are large
oligomers of Na+/K+-ATPase, the annexin-2 tetramer,
and caveolin-1. No attempt was made to identify specific cross-linked
products.

Cross-linking
of caveolar Na+/K+-ATPase. Samples were incubated
with the amino-reactive cross-linking reagents for 15 min at 24 °C
as indicated in . BS3 and DSS concentrations were 0.5 mM, unless indicated otherwise.
After termination of the reactions, samples were subjected to SDS–PAGE
and probed with the indicated antibodies.

Activity of the Endogenous Src of the Caveolar and Noncaveolar
Pools
Because extensive studies of the functional consequences
of presumed
direct interaction of Src with Na+/K+-ATPase
have been reported,− it was important to explore the functional status of the endogenous
Src of the two kidney pools of the Na+/K+-ATPase.
Under conditions where purified Src exhibits kinase activity, the
endogenous Src forms of both caveolar and noncaveolar pools of Na+/K+-ATPase were also active, and sensitive to a
Src inhibitor, PP2 (Figure ). When the effects
of ouabain on PP2-sensitive phosphotyrosine formation were examined,
there was no ouabain-induced increase in either the caveolar or the
noncaveolar preparation (Figure ). In fact,
significant ouabain-induced inhibition was noted in the noncaveolar
pool (Figure ). In experiments similar to
those depicted in Figure , no immunoreactive
cross-linked products of Src were noted (not shown). These findings
indicate that interactions of endogenous Src with Na+/K+-ATPase, if any, are different from the previously reported
interactions of excess Src added to an isolated preparation of Na+/K+-ATPase.()

Endogenous
active Src in caveolar and noncaveolar pools of Na+/K+-ATPase. Five pairs of caveolar and noncaveolar enzymes prepared
as described in the legend of Figure  were
incubated at 30 °C for 10 min in the Src kinase buffer as indicated
in . ATP was absent
from controls. Reactions were terminated by the addition of SDS-containing
sample buffer, and samples were subjected to SDS–PAGE and immunoassayed
for p-Src also as described in . *p &lt; 0.05 compared to no ATP control. #p &lt; 0.05 compared to ATP alone.

Effects
of ouabain on the endogenous Src of the caveolar and noncaveolar Na+/K+-ATPase. Experiments were conducted as described
in the legend of Figure  on the same five
pairs of enzymes in the absence and presence of 10 μM ouabain.
*p &lt; 0.05 compared to no ouabain.

Discussion
Large-Scale Preparation of the Membrane-Bound Caveolar Enzyme
Since the discovery of Na+/K+-ATPase,() most of the classical studies on the biochemistry
of this enzyme (e.g., its reaction mechanism) have been conducted
with highly purified but still membrane-bound preparations to allow
the enzyme to retain its natural environment and minimize functional
perturbations induced by purification.,,, With the realization
of the existence of the caveolar microdomains of the plasma membrane,() the existing knowledge that both caveolae and
Na+/K+-ATPase are located at the basolateral
membranes of polarized renal epithelial cells,() and our unambiguous demonstration that some Na+/K+-ATPase is present in caveolae of the cell lines originating
from renal epithelium,() we expected the
existence of two distinct caveolar and noncaveolar pools of kidney
Na+/K+-ATPase. In this study, therefore, we
have used the same procedures that have been widely used before for
the large-scale preparation of the highly purified membrane-bound
enzyme to show that a caveolar pool of the enzyme, albeit less pure,
may easily be separated and also obtained in large quantities for
further structure–function studies. It is important to note
that in the purification procedures utilized here, SDS is used at
concentrations that do not denature the membrane-bound Na+/K+-ATPase but remove significant amounts of other proteins
from the microsomal membranes.,

Na+/K+-ATPase Activities of the Caveolar
and Noncaveolar Pools
The availability of sufficient quantities
of the two pools of the
kidney enzyme allowed us to compare their steady-state catalytic activities
and conclude () that there are no apparent
differences between the two pools for the K0.5 values of the essential ligands, and in their molar activities (turnover
numbers). These findings clearly suggest that the ion transport function
of the enzyme is retained within the kidney caveolae as it is within
the cardiac caveolae.() It is important
to note, however, that subtle but significant differences between
the catalytic and transport functions of the two pools are not ruled
out by these limited initial studies. There are major differences
between the lipid compositions of the caveolae–raft microdomains
and the remainder of the plasma membrane (Figure B and ref ()), and previous studies have clearly indicated effects of lipid on
the catalytic activities and quaternary structure of Na+/K+-ATPase.− It is also known that quaternary
structure has profound effects on the reaction mechanism of the enzyme.− Hence, we suggest the need for more rigorous investigations, e.g.,
those using transient kinetics, on the potential differences between
the turnover cycles of the caveolar and noncaveolar preparations,
and the possible physiological implications of such differences.,

Our findings that the turnover numbers of the caveolar and
noncaveolar
pools do not differ and are within the range of all previously reported
kidney enzyme preparations() are inconsistent
with the proposed existence of a nonpumping caveolar Na+/K+-ATPase.() This suggestion
was made on the basis of differing turnover numbers in stable cell
lines that were generated with various degrees of the α-subunit
knockdown. Because of the likely possibility of unidentified changes
in a multitude of gene products other than those of the α-subunit
or caveolins in these knockdown cells, it is difficult to identify
the causes of the damaged turnover numbers of the cell lines. In view
of the normal turnover numbers of the caveolar and noncaveolar pools
found here (), we suggest that the
hasty generalization, of the existence of a nonpumping
pool of Na+/K+-ATPase in normal renal epithelia
or other cell types needs to be re-examined.

Signaling Functions of Caveolar and Noncaveolar Na+/K+-ATPases
Because at least two parallel cell
signaling pathways (EGFR/Src-Ras-Raf-ERK
and PI3K-PDK-Akt) are known to be linked to Na+/K+-ATPase and activated by ouabain,() we
looked for and found several components of the two pathways in both
pools of the kidney enzyme. The fact that the levels of some are even
higher in the noncaveolar pool (Figure ) is
inconsistent with the previous suggestions that only the caveolar
enzyme may signal,, but
favors the later suggestion, that in any membrane
domain of an intact cell, Na+/K+-ATPase may
exhibit different signaling functions depending on the nature of the
existing neighboring proteins and those that are recruited upon stimulation
in a cell-specific, locus-specific, and stimulus-specific manner.

The demonstration of the presence of signaling proteins in both
pools of the kidney enzyme also has special relevance to previous
cell-free studies of the signaling function of the enzyme. The EGFR/Src-Ras-Raf-ERK
pathway was the first cell signaling sequence that was shown to be
linked to Na+/K+-ATPase.() Though early studies showed the diversity of the downstream events
of this ouabain-activated pathway in different cells, the postulated
proximal steps seemed amenable to cell-free studies using purified
Na+/K+-ATPase. Therefore, Tian et al.() added purified Src to the same purified kidney
enzyme used here (the noncaveolar pool), with and without ouabain,
and interpreted the resulting changes in the phosphorylation of Y418
of Src in the context of the direct interaction of Src with the α-subunit
of Na+/K+-ATPase. Our findings, however, suggest
that even in this cell-free system, ouabain is interacting with a
Na+/K+-ATPase that may be associating with EGFR,
Src, ERK, and a host of other signaling proteins, some of which are
yet to be identified. In such a complex, it would be difficult to
justify the choice of the specific pair of Src and Na+/K+-ATPase as the receptor for ouabain-induced signaling.,

The complexity of assessing the role of Src in ouabain-activated
signaling in cell-free experiments is compounded by our finding of
endogenous Src in both pools of the isolated kidney enzyme (Figure ), and the absence of ouabain activation of this
Src (Figure ), in apparent conflict with previous
findings for cases in which Src was added to isolated Na+/K+-ATPase.() It is important
to note that while Src is indeed activated when ouabain is added to
a variety of intact cell types,,, there is no compelling reason to assume that such Src activation
must be mediated through ouabain’s effect on a direct contact
between Src and Na+/K+-ATPase subunits. Perhaps
in some intact cells direct contact between the α-subunit and
Src, or other Src family kinases, does occur as postulated previously,,, but the existing in vitro experiments
do not provide unambiguous support for this postulate (Figures  and  and ref ()). In this regard, it is
also appropriate to note that the best previous evidence of direct
interaction between the Na+/K+-ATPase α-subunit
and Src is provided by co-immunoprecipitation experiments in which
Na+/K+-ATPase was denatured by the detergents
used to solubilize membranes prior to the addition of antibodies.,,, That denatured Na+/K+-ATPase subunits, but
not those of the native enzyme, directly interact with Src and related
kinases was also reported long ago() as
a conclusion to serious attempts by Racker’s laboratory to
clarify if Na+/K+-ATPase is regulated by tyrosine
phosphorylation of its subunits. We suggest that the possible direct
contact of Src with native Na+/K+-ATPase is
yet to be established.

Physiological Role of the Kidney Caveolar Na+/K+-ATPase
If the renal caveolar Na+/K+-ATPase has no
monopoly on the signaling function of the enzyme, what is its physiological
role? Our findings clearly indicate that it is in the regulation of
renal epithelial adherens junctions.

The fact that E-cadherin
and the annexin-2 tetramer are involved
in cell–cell adhesion in renal epithelial cells at adherens
junctions and tight junctions is well-established.− More importantly,
extensive previous studies in renal and other epithelial cells have
implicated the β-subunit of Na+/K+-ATPase
in the regulation of cell adhesion in partnership with E-cadherin
and annexin-2.− This evidence and prior studies showing that E-cadherin and annexin-2
are major proteins of the caveolae/rafts,− coupled with our findings about
the enrichment of both E-cadherin and the annexin-2 tetramer in the
caveolar pool (Figures  and ), lead us to conclude that the role of the kidney caveolar
Na+/K+-ATPase must be at the specialized junctional
domains of the renal epithelia. However, because we have not been
able to clearly identify immunoreactive occludin (a marker of tight
junctions) in the caveolar Na+/K+-ATPase (not
shown), we favor the hypothesis that the caveolar enzyme regulates
adherens junctions through the pumping and signaling functions of
the enzyme.,,,

Association States of the Major Proteins of the Caveolar Enzyme
The fact that in renal epithelial cells caveolin-1 exists primarily
as large caveolin-1 oligomers is well-established., The findings presented here (Figures , , and ) show that in the
kidney caveolar Na+/K+-ATPase caveolin-1 also
exists as homo-oligomers that interact with annexin-2 oligomers and
oligomers of the α,β,γ-protomer of Na+/K+-ATPase. Neither in co-immunoprecipitation nor in cross-linking
studies, however, do we find evidence of direct contact between caveolin-1
and any specific subunits of the other two oligomers. Our findings,
in conjunction with previous extensive evidence of the higher oligomeric
states of Na+/K+-ATPase promoters,,,,, and caveolin-1,, clearly indicate that interaction of caveolin-1 with kidney caveolar
Na+/K+-ATPase occurs within a large oligomeric
complex of caveolin-1, the annexin-2 tetramer, and Na+/K+-ATPase (Figure A).

Schematic
presentation of the arrangement of the components of the caveolar
Na+/K+-ATPase at renal epithelial adherens junctions.
(A) Large multiprotein complex of the caveolar enzyme, with identified
interactions among caveolin-1 oligomers, Na+/K+-ATPase oligomers, and the annexin-2 tetramer, but with unidentified
nearest-neighbor interactions. (B) Cell–cell contact at the
lateral side of the polarized cells maintained by E-cadherin and the
multiprotein complexes, with the essential role of the association
of the extracellular domains of the β-subunits of two adjacent
cells, possibly through some of several GXXXG dimerizing motifs of
the extracellular parts of the β-subunits. See .

Though the nearest-neighbor interactions in the
multiprotein complex
of Figure A need to be established in future
studies, the available structural information about the components
allows some suggested leads. The α-subunit of Na+/K+-ATPase has two caveolin binding motifs, and the possibility
of its interaction with caveolin-1 has been considered.() p36 of the annexin-2 tetramer also has a caveolin binding
motif and, hence, is a likely neighbor of caveolins within the multiprotein
complex. p11 of the annexin-2 tetramer has a well-defined TM helix,
and recent evidence() suggests the presence
of two highly ordered TM helices in caveolins. Therefore, considering
the abilities of several TM domains of the α-subunit to interact
with those of other integral membrane proteins,() both p11 and caveolins are potential partners of the α-subunit
through TM–TM interactions.

We have not included E-cadherin
in the multiprotein complex of
Figure A because we have no experimental data
that establish its contact with the complex. E-Cadherin’s enrichment
in the caveolar pool of the enzyme may be due to its preferential
binding to caveolar lipids.() On the other
hand, E-cadherins also contain highly ordered TM helices with dimerizing
motifs,() thus having the potential of
interacting with TM domains of the other components of the complex
depicted in Figure A.

Interactions of the Caveolar Na+/K+-ATPase
of Two Adjacent Cells
Though there is ample prior evidence
of a role of β,β-interactions
in cell adhesion, the major difference between the previously proposed
models is whether the relevant β,β-interactions are intracellular, or intercellular.,, The latter is favored by our findings and the available information
about the structure of the kidney enzyme as discussed below.

The existence of β,β-interactions was demonstrated
previously, in purified noncaveolar kidney enzyme preparations
by cross-linking experiments. The cross-linking experiments presented
here are also consistent with the existence of β,β-interactions
in the caveolar pool of the enzyme. These observations on purified
enzyme preparations raise an important question. If the β-subunits
of two adjacent junctional cells are in contact as has been suggested,, is it reasonable to expect that such noncovalent intercellular β,β-contacts
would survive the purification process? The detergents used in the
purification procedure are known not to disrupt the strong noncovalent
α,β,γ-associations;, hence, there
is no a priori reason for thinking that β,β-associations
(intracellular or intercellular) would be disrupted. We conclude,
therefore, that protein–protein interactions noted in both
caveolar and noncaveolar preparations include those that originate
from cell–cell contacts.

We may now ask if the information
surmised from the crystal structure
of the purified pig kidney enzyme() is
helpful in deciding whether the β,β-associations relevant
to cell adhesion are intercellular or intracellular in origin. We
suggest that the answer is yes in favor of the former. Morth et al.() noted that the only interactions between two
β-subunits occurred outside of the plane of the membrane, through
the extracellular segments of β (up to residue 73) that are
well-resolved in the electron density maps. We consider this clear
evidence of intercellular β,β-interactions indicating
the absence of intracellular β,β-interactions, at least
in the crystals of the kidney enzyme containing bound Rb+.()

In the caveolar kidney Na+/K+-ATPase, the
β,β-interactions of the enzymes of two adjacent cells
must cooperate with known and potential intercellular contacts provided
by E-cadherin and the annexin-2 tetramer, as discussed in the previous
section and depicted in Figure B. Because
caveolae were discovered as inpocketings of the plasma membrane() and are usually shown as such, it may be awkward
to envision contacts of adjacent cells as indicated in Figure B. There is ample evidence, however, to show that
caveolin-1 is located mostly at the caveolar necks and that caveolin-1
clusters also exist in the flat parts of the plasma membrane.,−

An important issue related to the β,β-interactions
of Na+/K+-ATPase is the matter of the GXXXG
amino acid sequence motifs of the β-subunit TM. With the realization
that this motif stabilizes TM helix interactions in many membrane
proteins,() a number of studies of the
structure of Na+/K+-ATPase have focused on the
existence of two such motifs in the β-subunit TM, and their
possible participation in α,β- and β,β-interactions
(refs (), (), (), and () and references cited therein).
With respect to the significance of these oligomerization motifs to
intercellular β,β-interactions, we emphasize the following.
First, GXXXG and related AXXXA motifs have also been noted to stabilize
helix–helix interactions and the folded states outside the
lipid bilayer and in soluble proteins., Second, the
pig kidney β-subunit contains eight GXXXG and AXXXA motifs,
with four of the former being extracellular. These facts, the extensive
previous studies of Creijido and colleagues,,, and the findings presented here provide
strong support for the contacts of the caveolar Na+/K+-ATPase of two adjacent cells at adherens junctions (Figure B).

Abbreviations
BS3bis(sulfosuccinimidyl)suberate

EGFRepidermal growth
factor receptor

ERKextracellular signal-regulated kinase

DSSdisuccinimidyl suberate

PI3Kphosphatidylinositol 3-kinase

PP24-amino-5-(4-chlorophenyl)-7-(dimethylethyl)pyrazola[3,4-d]pyridine

SDS–PAGEsodium dodecyl sulfate–polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis

TMtransmembrane domain.

