DNA interstrand cross-links
are produced by a variety of exogenous electrophiles that react directly
with two nucleotides in opposite strands.− Some ICLs, such
as those derived from acrolein, are in equilibrium with single-strand
modification products, and biochemical studies of them are typically
conducted with chemically stabilized cross-linked analogues., Recently, it was discovered that the AP, C4-AP, and DOB DNA lesions
also form ICLs.− C4-AP forms two types of ICLs; one of them in which the original
strand containing the oxidized abasic site is cleaved (1 and 2) has been detected in cellular DNA (1). The DOB-containing strand in ICL 4 is also cleaved. In another ICL derived from C4-AP (3), both strands are intact. However, 3 as well as that produced from DOB (4) forms
reversibly (Scheme ). In ICLs 1–4 the oxidized abasic site is typically bonded to the nucleotide on
the opposing strand that forms a base pair with the 3′-adjacent
nucleotide. This relative positioning of the cross-linked nucleotides
is consistent with the exclusive reactivity with dA and dC whose exocyclic
amines lie in the major groove of DNA. The stabilities of ICLs involving
AP lesions vary depending upon the native nucleotide to which it is
cross-linked., Cross-links formed with dA are
more stable than ICLs between AP and dG. ICLs are a dangerous form
of DNA damage because they are absolute blocks of DNA replication
and transcription. Although ICLs can be excised by other pathways,
nucleotide excision repair is a primary pathway for their removal
from DNA.− In recent years, nucleotide excision repair of ICLs has produced
unexpected and interesting observations. Investigations of 1 and two other ICLs revealed that NER actually misrepairs the lesions
by converting them into the most dangerous form of DNA damage, double-strand
breaks.− These reports provided the impetus to examine the
outcomes of interactions between the bacterial NER system, UvrABC
with 3 and 4.

UvrABC is present in prokaryotes and
is still used to study DNA
repair, despite its simplicity compared to the complexity of eukaryotic
NER.− UvrABC repair of psoralen cross-links occurs selectively on one
strand or another but avoids dsb formation.− Strand selection
depends upon the DNA sequence,
but how the NER system chooses one strand over another is not understood.
Strand selection was of paramount importance during incision of 1, which is a complex (clustered) lesion., Complex (clustered) lesions contain two or more damaged sites within
1.5–2.0 turns of duplex DNA and are often more difficult to
repair than isolated lesions.− ICL 1 is an example of a clustered lesion because it
also contains a strand break. NER incises the bottom strand of 1 approximately 15% of the time, producing a dsb. In addition, dsbs are produced ≥25% of
the time when UvrABC acts on an ICL between dA and T (5). Finally, ICLs resulting from reaction
of DNA with the antitumor agent mitomycin C are also transformed into
dsbs by UvrABC. These observations raise
the question of how general misrepair of ICLs is and led us to examine
the NER of stabilized analogues of 3 and 4.

Reversible Formation of ICLs from C4-AP and DOB
ICLs 3 and 4 form
rapidly but reversibly
from C4-AP and DOB, respectively.− Cross-linking occurs
preferentially with dA opposite a 3′-adjacent thymidine and
not at all with dG. The half-life for reversion to the oxidized abasic
sites is less than 4 and 12 h for ICLs 3 and 4, respectively. Although 3 and 4 were isolated
by denaturing polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (PAGE), they are
too unstable to be used reliably in subsequent NER experiments. Consequently,
a method for synthesizing oligonucleotides containing stabilized analogues
[6 and 7 (Scheme )] was developed. The analogues retain
the stereochemistry of the original lesions in natural DNA but lack
the hydroxyl groups that are necessary for reversible cross-link formation.

Stabilized Analogues of ICLs Derived from C4-AP (3)
and DOB (4)
Materials and Methods
Materials and General Methods
Oligonucleotides
were
prepared on an Applied Biosystems Inc. 394 DNA synthesizer. Commercially
available DNA synthesis reagents were obtained from Glen Research
Inc. DNA substrates used in this study are presented in Chart . T4 polynucleotide kinase, terminal deoxynucleotide
transferase, and T4 DNA ligase were obtained from New England Biolabs.
[α-32P]dCTP, [γ-32P]ATP, and [α-32P]cordycepin 5′-triphosphate were purchased from PerkinElmer.
Analysis of radiolabeled oligonucleotides was conducted using a Storm
840 phosphorimager and ImageQuant TL. UvrABC was obtained as previously
described., C18-Sep-Pak cartridges were obtained
from Waters. Experiments using radiolabeled oligonucleotides were
analyzed following PAGE using a Storm 840 phosphorimager and Imagequant
TL.

UvrABC Reaction
The purified cross-linked DNA was resuspended
in 100 mM NaCl and 10 mM potassium phosphate buffer (pH 7.2, 25 μL)
and rehybridized by heating to 90 °C (2 min), cooling to room
temperature over the course of 2 h, and storing at 4 °C overnight.
UvrA, UvrB, and UvrC were freshly prepared from stock solutions and
heated individually at 65 °C for 10 min before use. They were
added sequentially to the reaction mixtures. The reaction buffer contains
50 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.5), MgCl2 (10 mM), KCl (50 mM), dTT
(5 mM), and ATP (1.0 mM). The cross-linked DNA (2.0 nM) was incubated
with UvrA (20 nM), UvrB (100 nM), and UvrC (50 nM) in a total volume
of 20 μL at 55 °C. The concentration of cross-linked DNA
was based upon the specific activity of the initially labeled oligonucleotide,
which was determined by counting the radioactivity (using a liquid
scintillation counter) and measuring the concentration (A260). After 60 min, the reaction was quenched by precipitation
with 5 M NH4OAc (5 μL), 1 μg/μL calf
thymus DNA (5 μL), and cold ethanol (75 μL). The incision
products were separated by 20% denaturing PAGE and visualized using
the phosphorimager. For the time course reaction (total volume of
60 μL), aliquots (7 μL) were removed at the prescribed
times and immediately quenched by addition of 90% formamide loading
buffer (3 μL) and heating at 90 °C for 2 min.

Results
NER Substrate
Design and Preparation
ICLs containing
analogues 6 and 7 were designed on the basis
of local sequences in which C4-AP and DOB, respectively, are known
to produce cross-links. The lengths of the substrates (&gt;50 bp)
are
also sufficient for UvrABC to bind and incise DNA. The cross-linked
substrates were synthesized by a combination of solid-phase oligonucleotide
synthesis and enzymatic ligation, as previously described. The enzyme ligation procedure also provided
a convenient method for controlling which strand and which terminus
were 32P-labeled. Because the UvrABC experiments are conducted
at 55 °C, the stability of duplex 9 that contains
the DOB analogue (7) was carefully examined. The melting
temperature of the analogous un-cross-linked duplex was estimated
to be ∼75 °C using a standard TM calculator (www.idtdna.com/analyzer/Applications/OligoAnalyzer/). Nonetheless, hybridization persistence was tested using 5′-32P-t-9 [please note that the strand labeled in
each substrate is named “t” for the strand containing
the abasic site analogue (top strand in Chart ) or “b” for the strand containing the dA that is involved
in the cross-link (bottom strand in Chart )] and subjecting this to the reaction conditions (without UvrABC)
in the presence of 5 equiv of the unlabeled single-stranded 25mer
(10) (see the ). Aliquots were removed over the course of 60 min and analyzed by
nondenaturing PAGE. There was no evidence of either the loss of 5′-32P-t-9 or the appearance of 5′-32P-10, indicating that the hybridized complex was stable
to the UvrABC reaction conditions. UvrABC incision of 8 and 9 was calibrated using a duplex (12) containing a C5-fluoresceinylated thymidine derivative, which has
previously been used as a benchmark for comparing enzyme activity. In addition, a hairpin substrate (11) containing 6 was also prepared and labeled either
at the 5′-end of its top strand (5′-32P-t-11) or internally with 32P at the phosphate between
dC39 and dG40. The integrity of 5′-32P-t-11 was confirmed by treatment with the restriction
enzyme CviQI and comparing the migration of the product with that
from CviQI treatment of 5′-32P-t-8,
because both would generate the same radiolabeled product (see the ). On the other hand, the
integrity of internally labeled 11 was verified by treatment
with the restriction enzymes Fnu4HI (generating a 44mer product) and
HpyCH4V. These substrates facilitated determination of dsb formation
(see the ).

DNA Molecules
Used in This Study
Histogram describing UvrABC incision of C4-AP ICL analogue 6 in 8. Data taken from four individual experiments
in which each terminus of 8 was 32P-labeled.

UvrABC Incision of an Analogue
of the C4-AP ICL (6)
Unambiguous determination
of the site(s) at which UvrABC
incises an ICL comprised of 6 was conducted in four independent
experiments in which each of the termini of 8 was 32P-labeled. Nucleotides in both strands of 8 were
incised (Figure ). A single nucleotide (dG22 and dC83) was incised on the 5′-side of
the ICL in each strand. The 5′-incision site consisted of eight
nucleotides from the cross-link in the “top” strand
(that containing the abasic site analogue) and seven nucleotides in
the strand containing the dA portion (“bottom” strand).
The incision pattern on the 3′-side of 6 was more
diffuse in both strands and closer to the cross-linked nucleotides.
In the top strand of 8, the two nucleotides adjacent
to the cross-linked abasic site (T92 and A93) were the major sites of incision. T94 was also incised
but significantly less so than T92 and dA93 (Figure ). The incision pattern on the 3′-side of
the ICL of the bottom strand was also distributed over three nucleotides.
However, the relative cleavage intensity at dA32, T33, and dA34 was more evenly distributed than in
the top strand, and the incised nucleotides were further removed from
the cross-linked nucleotide. Although the positions of incised nucleotides
were shifted, the overall sizes of the unhooked oligonucleotides were
very similar in both strands. Incision sites in the top strand spanned
10–12 nucleotides, whereas sites in the bottom strand consisted
of 11–13 nucleotides.

Time dependence of UvrABC incision of C4-AP
ICL analogue 6 in 32P-labeled 8 compared to that
in 5′-32P-12. The total amount of incision
at all nucleotides in the region between the 32P label
and the cross-link is plotted: (A) 3′-32P-t-8, (B) 5′-32P-t-8, (C) 5′-32P-b-8, and (D) 3′-32P-b-8.

Although 6 was a
substrate for UvrABC, it was incised
significantly less efficiently by UvrABC than a duplex containing
fluoresceinylated dT (12), which is often used as a basis
for comparison (Figure ) (see the ). Greater than 90% of
5′-32P-12 was cleaved in 60 min. In
contrast, the maximal cleavage observed in any region of 8 was less than 30% in 8 h. Incision on the labeled strand in the
region between the ICL and the 32P label was quantified
even though other cleaved regions could be detected. The overall extent
of strand scission on the top strand was slightly greater than that
on the bottom strand of 8. In addition, although cleavage
on the 3′-side of the ICL was more diffuse in each strand than
on the 5′-side, overall it was greater. Consequently, the extent
of cleavage in the top strand on the 3′-side of the ICL (27–28%)
was higher than in any other region of the substrate. Most notable
is that the level of incision at T92–T94 was approximately twice that on the 5′-side of the ICL in
the same strand at C83. In comparison, incision on either
side of 6 in the bottom strand of 8 was
much closer to 1:1, although as previously stated the total level
of cleavage on the 3′-side of the ICL was consistently greater
than on the 5′-side.

UvrABC incision of hairpin DNA (11) containing C4-AP
ICL analogue 6. (A) Incision of 5′-32P-11: lane 1, nucleotide size markers; lane 2, unreacted
5′-32P-11; lane 3, incised 5′-32P-11; lane 4, A + G reaction; lane 5, T + C
reaction. (B) Incision of internally labeled 32P-11: lane 1, nucleotide size markers; lane 2, unreacted 11; lane 3, incised 11; lane 4, 5′-32P-16.

Because both strands of cross-linked 6 are incised
by UvrABC, we determined whether 8 undergoes double-strand
cleavage. Initial nondenaturing PAGE analysis of experiments with
5′-32P-t-8, 3′-32P-t-8, and 5′-32P-b-8 indicated ∼1–3% of the product migrated through the
gel at the same rate as the anticipated dsb (see the ). This would correspond to a ssb:dsb
ratio of ∼10, which is slightly greater than that previously
observed for 1. A control
experiment was designed to determine whether the observed dsb product
could be an artifact that results from the hybridization of products
released from two independent single-strand incisions. On the basis
of the incision sites determined for each strand in 8 (Figure ), the anticipated dsb product (13) was prepared and 32P-labeled at the 5′-terminus
of its shorter strand. This radiolabeled product was incubated under
the UvrABC incision conditions (55 °C, 3 h) separately with 1
and 5 equiv of 15, which contains the identical complementary
binding region as the unlabeled strand in 5′-32P-13 but is 13 nucleotides longer. The initial concentration
of 5′-32P-13 (0.26 nM) was carefully
chosen and based upon the amount of incision detected from the UvrABC
reaction with 8. More than 9.8% of the longer, slower
migrating exchange product (5′-32P-14) was observed following incubation with 1 equiv of 15 and 21.9% in the presence of 5 equiv (see the ). Given the ambiguity introduced by
this experiment, a hairpin substrate containing 6 (11) was prepared in which either the phosphate between dC39 and dG40 (Chart ) or
the 5′-terimus of the hairpin was 32P-labeled. Reaction
of UvrABC with 5′-32P-11 yielded cleavage
at a position and a yield that were the same as those of the analogously
labeled 8, indicating that the slight modification of
the substrate introduced in the form of the hairpin did not alter
the recognition of the cross-link (6) by proteins (Figure A). Internally labeled 32P-11 was then subjected to UvrABC incision. If both strands of the internally
labeled substrate were incised in the region between 6 and the hairpin loop at positions comparable to those in 8, the double-strand break would manifest itself in the form of a
54-nucleotide 32P-labeled product [16 (Figure B)]. UvrABC incision of 5′-32P-11 or internally labeled 32P-11 gave
rise to products that migrate slightly more slowly than the cross-linked
substrate. These products are believed to result from single-strand
cleavage of 11 in the region between the hairpin loop
and 6, as oligonucleotides that comigrated with these
were also observed when ligation was incomplete (data not shown).
Moreover, no product that migrated like the independently synthesized
anticipated dsb product (5′-32P-16)
was detected.

Histogram describing UvrABC incision of DOB ICL analogue 7 in 9. Data taken from four individual experiments
in which one of the four termini of 9 was 32P-labeled.

UvrABC Incision of an Analogue
of the DOB ICL (7)
The structure of 7 (4) is similar
to that of 1 in that the ICL is part of a complex lesion
that contains a strand break in addition to a cross-link. Consequently, the choice of strand incised is
important because cleavage of the strand containing the dA portion
of the ICL (“bottom” strand) would give rise to a double-strand
break. Indeed, treatment of 3′-32P-b-9 gives rise to double-strand breaks via strand scission at dA29–dG31 (Figure ).
Although the level of cleavage at dG30 was slightly greater
than at dG31, the amount of incision at either of these
purines was considerably higher than at dA29. After 1 h,
the total amount of incision over these nucleotides ranged from ∼16
to 22%, while incision of the fluoresceinylated dT (5′-32P-12) varied from ∼80 and 87% (Figure ). No other sites of strand scission were detected
by denaturing PAGE analysis of 3′-32P-b-9. Analysis of 5′-32P-b-9 or 3′-32P-t-9 also revealed a single region of incision
by UvrABC (see the ). In neither instance does the migration of the cleavage product
correlate with strand scission on the side of the cross-link between
it and the terminus where the substrate is 32P-labeled.
The migration of the cleavage product formed from both substrates
coincides with strand scission just beyond the cross-link position,
which is consistent with cleavage at dA29–dG31 detected using 3′-32P-b-9. The extent of strand scission measured was also similar in these
substrates. Extending the reaction time for 3′-32P-t-9 with UvrABC to 8 h yielded more than 60% strand
scission, but products corresponding to cleavage in the region of
dA29–dG31 were still the only ones observed
(Figure ) (see the ). Finally, cleavage in the noncovalently bound
strand would be detectable only in the substrate in which it is labeled
(5′-32P-t-9). Denaturing PAGE analysis
of this substrate does not show any cleavage, confirming that UvrABC
does not incise DNA containing 7 in this region (data
not shown).

Time dependence of UvrABC incision of C4-AP ICL analogue 7 in 3′-32P-b-9 compared to
that in 5′-32P-12.

Discussion
Nucleotide excision repair is a primary
pathway for protecting
the genome from interstrand cross-links. The mechanism(s) by which
even the relatively simple bacterial NER system (e.g., UvrABC) recognizes
its substrates is evolving but still not completely understood.,, Macroscopic distortion of the
DNA duplex is certainly believed to be one structural feature that
is recognized by the repair system. We characterized the UvrABC incision
of two chemically stabilized analogues (Scheme ) of interstrand cross-links produced by oxidatively damaged DNA
(Scheme ).

The C4-AP ICL analogue (6) is incised on both strands,
which distinguishes it from psoralen-cross-linked DNA., Although the choice of incised strand varies depending upon DNA
sequence, only one strand of psoralen-derived ICLs is cleaved by UvrABC.
The sizes of the DNA fragments incised by UvrABC in 8 (10–13 nucleotides) are within the usual range. However, cleavage on the strand containing the
cross-linked abasic site on the 3′-side of 6 occurs
predominantly at the two adjacent nucleotides. This is one to two
nucleotides closer to the damage site than one typically observes
and is one difference between incision patterns on the abasic site-containing
strand (“top”) and the “bottom” strand
containing the dA that is cross-linked. Another difference between
the interaction of the two strands in 8 with UvrABC is
that incision on the two sides of the cross-link on the top strand
are unequal. The level of cleavage on the 3′-side of the abasic
site is ∼2-fold greater than on the 5′-side. Previously,
it was shown that UvrABC incision of 1 was asymmetric. The inefficiency of incision is the most remarkable
difference between 6 and other ICLs subjected to UvrABC.
Although more than 90% of the standard UvrABC substrate, 12, is incised in 1 h, typically less than 10% of 8 is
cleaved in this time frame. Even after reaction for 8 h, levels of
cleavage of the strand in 8 that contains the abasic
site and the opposite strand were less than 30 and 20%, respectively.
Although it is not known at this time why 8 is cleaved
so inefficiently, it suggests that DNA containing 6 is
not significantly distorted. UvrABC incision of the C4-AP ICL analogue
(6) is also different than that of other recently characterized
cross-links, which have been observed to undergo double-strand scission.
Utilization of internally 32P-labeled hairpin substrate
containing 6 (11) unambiguously demonstrated
that UvrABC does not generate dsbs in this molecule. Importantly,
control experiments on ICL containing 6 revealed that
products corresponding to dsbs can be produced under the reaction
conditions from two independent cleavage events on complementary strands
in separate molecules. This possibility may also explain the observed
dsbs in other cross-linked substrates exposed to UvrABC.,

Incision of DOB cross-link analogue 7 in 9 was perhaps the most remarkable observation of any ICL reaction
with UvrABC yet reported. UvrABC incision of 9 is not
as efficient as the fluoresceinylated dT standard. However, DNA containing 7 is cleaved far more efficiently than cross-linked DNA containing
the C4-AP analogue. We hypothesize that the cross-linked sugarlike
components in 6 and 7 do not significantly
perturb the duplex structure. However, 7 is accompanied
by a strand break, which provides flexibility and gives rise to greater
distortion that is recognized by UvrABC. The cleavage pattern of 9 on the 3′-side of the cross-linked dA (“bottom”
strand) is similar to the corresponding location of the substrate
containing the C4-AP ICL analogue in that it is distributed over three
nucleotides adjacent to the cross-link. However, the region on the
3′-side of the cross-linked dA in 9 is the only
one in the DNA containing the DOB ICL analogue (7) that
is incised by UvrABC. Moreover, because DNA containing a cross-linked
DOB already contains a nick, cleavage of the ICL on the bottom strand
converts the substrate into a double-strand break. To the best of
our knowledge, DOB ICL analogue 7 is the only cross-linked
DNA that is exclusively transformed into a double-strand break, the
most deleterious form of DNA damage.

Conclusions
Molecules
that produce double-strand breaks and/or interstrand
cross-links directly are of great interest as potential DNA-damaging
therapeutic agents because these families of nucleic acid damage are
difficult to repair.− However, it is increasingly evident that DNA damage can be transformed
into forms that are potentially more deleterious. For instance, it was discovered that seemingly simple abasic
sites (AP, C4-AP, and DOB) spontaneously form interstrand cross-links.,,− One type of cross-link was identified
in cells (1), and its formation is catalyzed by the DNA
sequence flanking it., In addition, UvrABC transforms
cross-linked DNA containing 1 into a double-strand break
∼15% of the time.

This work
describes results for two chemically stabilized analogues
of ICLs that add to a small but growing list of lesions that affect
biochemical processes in unanticipated ways. The DOB lesion is produced
by some of the most cytotoxic DNA-damaging agents. Only a short time ago it was demonstrated that DOB forms
ICLs (4) in DNA. Exclusive
conversion of the stabilized analogue (7) of 4 into a double-strand break by UvrABC is the first example of such
selective misrepair. The interaction between UvrABC and the stabilized
analogue (6) of the C4-AP ICL (3) is different
but perhaps also significant. Unlike the other DNA ICLs whose interaction
with UvrABC has been reported, 6 is a very poor substrate
for this NER system. Given that ICLs are absolute blocks to replication
and transcription, failure to repair an ICL such as 3 (6) could be very detrimental to a cell. Consequently,
given the caveat that these studies were conducted with analogues
of the actual lesions, the experiments suggest additional possibilities
concerning the chemical bases for the cytotoxicity of DNA-damaging
agents that produce simple lesions.

Supporting Information Available
Procedures
for preparing, characterizing,
and radiolabeling UvrABC substrates; autoradiograms showing UvrABC
incision of 8 and 9 containing various 32P-labeled termini; time course analysis of UvrABC incision
of 32P-9; and an autoradiogram examining the
stability of 32P-9 and 32P-13. This material is available free of charge via the Internet
at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bi500914d_si_001.pdf

The authors declare
no
competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
We thank Professor Ben Van Houten (University
of Pittsburgh
Medical Center) for providing the plasmids for producing UvrA, UvrB,
and UvrC.

Abbreviations
APapurinic/apyrimidinic site

C4-APC4′-oxidized
abasic site

BERbase excision repair

DOB5′-(2-phosphoryl-1,4-dioxobutane)

dsbdouble-strand break

ICLinterstrand cross-link

NERnucleotide excision
repair.

