Alzheimer’s disease (AD)
is characterized pathologically by abundant neuritic plaques and neurofibrillary
tangles in several brain regions, especially those important for cognition. AD may become an even greater health and economic
burden. Currently, only palliative treatments
that provide temporary benefit with no effect on disease progression
exist. Potential disease-modifying therapeutic approaches for AD involving
both immunological and inhibitory strategies have focused on reducing
the levels of all Aβ peptide variants and have demonstrated
little if any efficacy or significant side effects.− However, in AD, neuritic plaques are composed primarily
of the Aβ42 peptide variant, and
the most consistent biochemical phenotype of the more than 200 different
familial AD or FAD-linked mutations is an increased Aβ42/Aβ40
ratio. This finding raises the possibility
that more selectively attenuating Aβ42 levels relative to the
shorter Aβ peptide variants (i.e., Aβ40, Aβ38, and
Aβ37) may prove to be safer and effective. All Aβ peptides, including the pathogenic Aβ42,
are ultimately generated by γ-secretase-mediated proteolysis
of APP-CTFs, the β-secretase cleavage product of the amyloid
protein precursor (APP).

γ-Secretase
is an enzyme complex composed of four critical
subunits: presenilin 1 (PS1) or presenilin 2 (PS2), anterior pharynx
defective 1 homologue A (APH-1a or APH-1b), presenilin enhancer 2
(PEN-2), and nicastrin. The γ-secretase
complex functions as a unique aspartyl protease that cleaves its substrates
within the membrane. It cleaves β-secretase-cleaved APP-CTFs
to produce each Aβ peptide variant. Once released from the membrane,
longer Aβ peptides (e.g., Aβ42) oligomerize, ultimately
forming insoluble deposits. One therapeutic
approach to AD was focused on lowering the total level of Aβ
peptide production by inhibiting the catalytic activity of γ-secretase.
Extensive efforts led to the discovery of many γ-secretase inhibitors
(GSIs) that until recently were being developed for clinical use.−

A potential liability of GSIs is adverse events resulting
from
the inhibition of Notch proteolysis,, which yields
the notch intracellular domain (NICD), a γ-secretase-generated
peptide necessary for proper cellular differentiation and the development
of key organs. In addition, γ-secretase is now known to hydrolyze
a rather large number of type I membrane proteins, including the Notch 1 receptor. Therefore, inhibiting this
enzymatic complex, which has been described as the “proteosome
of the membrane”, may in fact
be detrimental to an aged AD population. Side effects associated with
inhibition of γ-secretase-dependent Notch signaling, via inhibiting
NICD production, have frequently been observed (both preclinically
and clinically) upon repeated exposures to GSIs and were of great
concern with respect to the clinical development of GSIs., In all likelihood, as is the case for other age-related degenerative
disorders (e.g., cardiovascular disease), successful disease-modifying
therapeutic approaches will require long-term administration, beginning
early in the disease process, that are without side effects or engender
readily manageable ones.

More recently, a safer and more selective
approach for modulating
Aβ generation utilized NSAID-like substrate-targeted GSMs (e.g.,
tarenflurbil) that have been shown to selectively lower levels of
Aβ42; however, poor potency combined with limited ability to
cross the blood–brain barrier resulted in a lack of efficacy
in the clinic.− We recently discovered and characterized a series
of GSMs with potencies &gt;1000-fold improved compared to that of
tarenflurbil
and with good brain penetrance. These
first-generation aryl aminothiazole-containing GSMs (AGSMs) are bridged
aromates that appear to bind directly to specific subunits of the
γ-secretase complex, elicit a decrease in the level of Aβ42
and Aβ40 production, and concomitantly increase the level of
Aβ38 and Aβ37 production without measurably affecting
γ-secretase-mediated enzymatic processing of other known substrates,
such as E-cadherin and Notch. AGSMs were
shown to be potent and efficacious in vivo in decreasing
the levels of Aβ42 and Aβ40 in both the plasma and brain
of APP transgenic mice, and chronic efficacy studies revealed that
AGSMs dramatically attenuated AD-like pathology in the Tg2576 APP
transgenic mouse model. In addition, the AGSMs, by virtue of their
distinct noninhibitory mechanism of action unlike the GSIs, did not
show Notch-related side effects such as intestinal goblet cell hyperplasia. Unfortunately, the poor aqueous solubility of
AGSMs (&lt;0.1 μM at neutral pH) may hinder further preclinical
and clinical development.

Herein we describe a structurally
and mechanistically related,
yet novel, GSM chemotype (termed SGSMs for soluble γ-secretase
modulators) with significantly improved physicochemical properties
(e.g., aqueous solubility) that may be more suitable for comprehensive
preclinical evaluation. A GSM compound, capable of modulating enzyme
activity to selectively lower Aβ42 levels, without inhibiting
the enzymatic machinery or reducing the absolute levels of Aβ
peptides, would likely circumvent many if not all of the major obstacles
that attended the development of GSIs. An efficacious and well-tolerated
GSM could also reverse the increased Aβ42/Aβ40 ratio present
in FAD-linked mutations. The studies
described herein demonstrate that SGSMs behave like AGSMs with respect
to effects on Aβ peptide variant production. Both of these methylimidazole-containing
aminothiazole-bridged series of GSMs reduced the levels of Aβ42,
and to a limited degree that of Aβ40, while concomitantly increasing
the level of production of both Aβ38 and Aβ37. The SGSMs
described here show a dramatic separation between their ability to
inhibit the production of Aβ42 compared to that of Aβ40
and also demonstrate the ability to increase the level of production
of Aβ34 and Aβ33.

We thoroughly characterized these
SGSMs with respect to a number
of physicochemical properties and potency for lowering Aβ42,
potency for lowering Aβ40, and potency for potentiating production
of Aβ38. Importantly, none of the SGSMs tested inhibited proteolysis
of a truncated Notch protein harboring the γ-secretase ε-cleavage
sites, even at concentrations 200–1000-fold higher than their
IC50 values for decreasing the level of Aβ42. The
SGSMs tested also showed no effect on levels of APP-CTFs at similar
concentrations. Finally, it was also critical to test the ability
of the SGSMs to modulate γ-secretase under conditions where
the Aβ42/Aβ40 ratio was increased (i.e., cells overexpressing
a mutant PS1), as well as the ability to modulate a highly purified
γ-secretase enzyme complex in a fully reconstituted enzymatic
assay.

Materials and Methods
Reagents and Compounds
All SGSM
compounds were designed
at the University of California, San Diego, and Massachusetts General
Hospital and synthesized at Synchem (Elk Grove Village, IL) and determined
to be &gt;95% pure based on liquid chromatography–tandem mass
spectrometry and nuclear magnetic resonance analyses. Aβ peptides
were purchased from Bachem (Torrance, CA).

Physicochemical Property
Determinations
Kinetic solubility
measurements were conducted at Analiza (Cleveland, OH) using chemiluminescent
nitrogen detection (CLND) from DMSO stock solutions at pH 6.6 and
7.4 or using ultraviolet (UV) detection in phosphate-buffered saline
(PBS, pH 7.4) at Albany Molecular Research, Inc. (AMRI, Albany, NY).
ClogP values were calculated using Advanced Chemistry Development
Laboratories, Inc. (ACD/Laboratories), software (Toronto, ON).

Stable
Cell Lines and Cell-Based Assays for Measuring Extracellular
Aβ Levels
Human SHSY5Y neuroblastoma cells stably overexpressing
wild-type human APP751 (SHSY5Y-APP) have been described previously. Aβ peptide variants in conditioned medium
from SHSY5Y-APP cells following treatment for 24 h with either vehicle
or SGSM were quantitated using sandwich ELISAs for human Aβ42,
human Aβ40, and total human Aβ as described previously. Aβ42, Aβ40, and Aβ38 peptides
from stably transfected CHO-APP-PS1M146L cells treated for 24 h were
quantitated in conditioned medium by an ELISA utilizing Meso Scale
Sector 6000 multiplex technology (Gaithersburg, MD). Total Aβ
peptide levels were quantitated in conditioned medium by a sandwich
ELISA as described previously.

Cell-Based
Notch Proteolytic Processing Assays
Human
H4 neuroglioma cells stably overexpressing the human APP751 isoform,
or H4-APP751 cells, were transfected with the Myc-tagged Notch (NΔE)
construct and then treated with compounds or vehicle (DMSO) at a variety
of concentrations by serial dilution for an additional 24 h. Cells
were harvested 48 h post-transfection, and cell lysates were prepared
and analyzed for levels of NICD by Western blotting using an anti-Myc
antibody (1:1000) (Cell Signaling, Danvers, MA). APP and the C99 and
C83 APP carboxyl-terminal fragments (APP-CTFs) were probed with the
APP carboxyl-terminal antibody, A8717 (Sigma, St. Louis, MO), targeting
the 19 carboxyl-terminal amino acids of APP. β-Actin was probed
using an anti-β-actin antibody (1:10000) (Sigma). Compound activity
was verified by simultaneously analyzing aliquots of conditioned medium
for extracellular levels of Aβ42 that were quantitated by ELISA
kits (Wako, Richmond, VA). HRP-conjugated secondary antibodies (anti-mouse
and anti-rabbit) were used at a 1:10000 dilution (Pierce, Rockford,
IL).

Mass Spectrometric Analysis of Immunoprecipitated Aβ Peptides
Secreted from Human Neuroblastoma Cells following Treatment with SGSMs
Human SHSY5Y-APP neuroblastoma cells were treated for 24 h with
either vehicle (DMSO), compound, 49 or compound 46. Harvested medium was immunoprecipitated using the mAb4G8
antibody (Cell Sciences, Canton, MA), and the immune precipitates
were extracted with a trifluoroacetic acid/water/acetonitrile mixture
[1/20/20 (v/v/v)] and subjected to matrix-assisted UV laser desorption
ionization time-of-flight mass spectrometry (MALDI-TOF-MS) as described
previously.

Reconstituted γ-Secretase
Assays Using HeLa Cell Membranes
and a Tandem Affinity-Purified (TAP) Protein−γ-Secretase
Complex
In vitro γ-secretase assays
capable of detecting the generation of Aβ42 and Aβ40 from
a truncated, biotinylated APP artificial substrate (APP Sb4) were
conducted using either γ-secretase-enriched HeLa cell membrane
preparations or TAP protein−γ-secretase isolated complexes
exactly as described previously.,In
vitro γ-secretase assays capable of detecting NICD
from a truncated biotinylated Notch 1 artificial substrate (N1-Sb1)
were conducted using both the TAP protein−γ-secretase
subunit-containing complexes and γ-secretase-enriched HeLa cell
membranes as described previously.,

Results
Heterocycle
Substitutions of Phenyl Rings in AGSMs Provide Compounds
with a Broad Range of Physicochemical Properties and Potencies for
Inhibiting the Production of Aβ42 and Aβ40
The
key structural features of aryl aminothiazole γ-secretase modulators
(AGSMs) versus heterocycle-containing or soluble γ-secretase
modulators (SGSMs) are schematically illustrated below (Figure ). Kinetic solubility measurements for a number
of aryl aminothiazole AGSMs described previously were below the limits of detection (&lt;0.1 μM) regardless
of which method of detection was utilized (S. L. Wagner, data not
shown). These compounds were focused around diarylimidazoles with
an aminothiazole linker (C ring). SGSMs
were synthesized utilizing specific heterocycle substitutions replacing
the phenyl B rings and D rings of the AGSMs to improve aqueous solubilities
while retaining good potencies. Twenty structurally related SGSMs
were synthesized and characterized using the assays described and
depicted in Table  and Figure . ClogP values as low as 3.3 and as high as 5.7 were calculated
for the 20 SGSM compounds. Kinetic solubility measurements using the
chemiluminescent nitrogen detection (CLND) method from DMSO stock
solutions were very similar between those performed at pH 6.6 or 7.4.
In addition, kinetic solubility measurements for several SGSM compounds
were conducted using an ultraviolet (UV) detection method. In the
few circumstances where UV detection and CLND methods were compared
(compounds 31, 36, and 38),
UV detection gave slightly lower estimates of kinetic solubility than
did the CLND method (Table ). In summary,
the various B ring and D ring heterocycle substitutions resulted in
compounds containing a broad spectrum of kinetic solubilities ranging
from 18.4 to ≤1.6 μM (the lower limit of detection for
the UV method). The vast majority had kinetic solubilities (regardless
of the method of detection) significantly higher than those of the
AGSM series.

Schematic illustration of the key structural features
of AGSMs
vs SGSMs. Synthesis of SGSMs was achieved by replacing the phenyl
D ring and/or B ring of AGSMs with a variety of different heterocycles.

Representative concentration response curves
depicting effects
of two SGSMs (compounds 36 and 49) on steady
state levels of specific Aβ peptide variants and total Aβ
peptide levels secreted by SHSY5Y-APP cells treated for 24 h with
various concentrations of either SGSM 36, SGSM 49, or vehicle (DMSO). Individual Aβ peptide variants
(Aβ42, Aβ40, and Aβ38) and total Aβ peptide
levels were quantitated using MesoScale Sector 6000 multiplex technology
and sandwich ELISAs, respectively. IC50 values were derived
using four-parameter fit nonlinear regression analyses.

Chemical Structures, Physicochemical
Properties, and in Vitro Potencies for Novel Soluble
γ-Secretase Modulators
Structure–Activity
Relationships (SARs) within the B
Ring and D Ring of SGSMs
The various B ring and D ring substitutions
also led to a wide range of potencies for the inhibition of Aβ42
production. These IC50 values were determined with highly
reproducible cell-based assays utilizing a human SHSY5Y neuroblastoma
cell line stably overexpressing the wild-type human APP751 amino acid
isoform (SHSY5Y-APP) and were derived
from 10-point concentration response curves (in duplicate at each
concentration) using a four-parameter fit nonlinear regression analysis
following a 24 h treatment with either compound or vehicle. The assays
were required to demonstrate a Z′ score of
≥0.5 and to have a test–retest reliability with an r2 of ≥0.75 for the 20 SGSM compounds
representing a broad range of potencies (IC50 values for
inhibiting the production of Aβ42 ranging from ∼1.3 μM
to 30 nM).

The structure–activity relationships (SARs)
with respect to the heterocycle substitutions in the D ring, for compounds
containing a fluorophenyl B ring (compounds 28, 46, 48, and 36), showed that substitution
of either an ethyl (36), n-propyl (48), or isopropyl (46) group for the methyl group
(28) at position 1 of the pyrazole D ring led to a 3-fold
increase in potency (compare compound 28 to compounds 36, 46, and 48). These same pyrazole
D ring substitutions did not have any effects on potencies for compounds
containing the methoxyphenyl B ring (compare compounds 43, 29, 45, and 37).

Briefly,
in terms of the B ring SAR, for compounds containing the
3-tert-butyl-1-ethylpyrazole D ring (38, 35, 37, and 36), introduction
of a fluoro group at position 2 of the phenyl B ring (compare 36 to 35) led to a 2–3-fold increase in
potency; introduction of a methoxy group at position 2 of the phenyl
B ring led to a &lt;2-fold increase in potency (compare 37 to 35). Alternatively, substituting the phenyl B ring
with the 2-pyridyl ring (compare 38 to 35) caused a &gt;2-fold loss of potency. A similar B ring substitution
pattern in terms of effects on potency held for compounds containing
the 2-ethyl-tetrahydro-indazole D ring (compare compounds 42, 39, and 40; potency for the fluorophenyl 40 &gt; phenyl 39 &gt; pyridyl 42). However,
the most striking effect on potency in terms of B ring substitution
was achieved by replacing the phenyl B ring (39) with
a 2-methoxy 3-pyridyl B ring (49). This led to a &gt;10-fold
increase in potency.

SGSMs Do Not Affect the Levels of Total Aβ
Peptides, Reduce
Aβ42 Levels Much More Efficiently Than Aβ40 Levels, and
Increase Levels of Aβ38, Aβ37, Aβ34, and Aβ33
Regardless of compound potency, there was a consistent relationship
between the IC50 values for Aβ42 and Aβ40 in
the SHSY5Y-APP cell-based assay using ELISAs for Aβ42 and Aβ40 or the MesoScale multiplex ELISA used herein.
Interestingly, via comparison of the IC50 values for decreasing
the level of Aβ42 (in Table , compounds
are listed in order of increasing potency based on IC50 values for decreasing the level of Aβ42) and the IC50 values for decreasing the level of Aβ40, IC50 values
for decreasing the level of Aβ42 are significantly more potent
(∼3–5-fold). This is consistent across a range of IC50 values extending from the least potent compound 42 (Aβ42 IC50 = 1275 ± 92 nM) to the most potent
compound 49 (Aβ42 IC50 = 30 ± 6
nM). The IC50’ values for decreasing the level of
Aβ40 for this same series of SGSMs also defined a wide range
of potencies extending from the least potent compound 42 (Aβ40 IC50 = 4125 ± 1534 nM) to the most potent
compound 49 (Aβ40 IC50 = 104 ±
4 nM). This relationship is well-illustrated for the two most potent
SGSMs, compounds 49 and 36 (Figure ). These data suggest that this series of aminothiazole-bridged
heterocycle-containing methylimidazoles impact enzyme activity differently
with respect to cleavage events leading to Aβ42 and Aβ40.
Remarkably, the discrepancy between Aβ42 and Aβ40 potencies
was not seen with respect to the EC50 values for the potentiation
of Aβ38 and the relationship between the concentrations of these
SGSMs required for decreasing the level of Aβ42 and those required
for the potentiation of Aβ38. Importantly, all of the SGSMs
within this series maximally increased the levels of Aβ38 approximately
1.5–3-fold. In general, there was more variability with respect
to measuring levels of Aβ38 in this multiplex ELISA, especially
at the lower SGSM concentrations compared to those of Aβ42 (see
Figure ). For example, compound 49, the most potent SGSM based on Aβ42 inhibition, displayed
an EC50 for potentiating Aβ38 (305 ± 54 nM)
that was 10-fold higher than its IC50 for inhibiting Aβ42
(30 ± 6 nM). Alternatively, compound 46 potentiated
Aβ38 with an EC50 (131 ± 11 nM) that was very
similar to its IC50 for inhibiting Aβ42 (121 ±
9 nM).

We used MALDI-TOF to evaluate the effects of these two
molecules on Aβ peptide variant levels at each of their respective
IC50 values (for inhibiting Aβ42) using the conditioned
medium from SHSY5Y-APP cells treated for 24 h to comprehensively assess
their effects on Aβ peptide variants at these concentrations
(Figure ). MALDI-TOF analysis, though semiquantitative,
showed good agreement with the multiplex ELISAs. As expected, both
compounds 49 and 46 substantially lowered
Aβ42 levels at concentrations near their IC50 values
(30 and 150 nM for compounds 49 and 46,
respectively). Both compounds also increased the levels of Aβ34
and Aβ33, and neither had a comparable effect on the level of
Aβ40 or Aβ39 at these concentrations (although compound 49 did lower the levels of Aβ40 only slightly at a concentration
of 30 nM). Interestingly, at 30 nM, compound 49 significantly
increased the level of Aβ37 to a greater extent than it did
the level of Aβ38. This was not the case for compound 46, which when tested near its IC50 increased the
level of Aβ38 more so than it did that of Aβ37. Whether
differential effects on other Aβ peptide variants (e.g., Aβ37)
can explain differences between the IC50 for Aβ42
inhibition and the EC50 for Aβ38 potentiation for
compounds such as 49 is unknown at this time but does
offer an interesting possibility. For example, for compound 49, the EC50 for Aβ37 potentiation may be
closer to the IC50 for decreasing the level of Aβ42
than is the EC50 for the potentiation of Aβ38. However,
because of the lack of a robust Aβ37 ELISA, we could not make
this determination at this time. For the nine most potent compounds,
in terms of decreasing the level of Aβ42 (IC50 values
of ≤200 nM), all enhanced Aβ38 generation at EC50 values above their corresponding Aβ42 IC50 values
(see Table ); however, a few of these, including
compound 46, had EC50 values for Aβ38
that were very near their corresponding Aβ42 IC50 values. Interestingly, previous studies investigating the equilibrium
between Aβ42 inhibition and Aβ38 potentiation in cell-based
assays overexpressing a number of different FAD-linked PS1 mutations
and the effects of NSAID-like carboxylic acid-containing GSMs on decreasing
the level of Aβ42 versus Aβ38 potentiation clearly demonstrated
that these two activities are not coupled, yet those compounds described herein with IC50 values
for decreasing the level of Aβ42 that are the same as their
EC50 values for potentiating Aβ38 raise the possibility
that they could be.

(A) Immune precipitation–MALDI-TOF analysis of
Aβ
peptide variants in conditioned medium of SHSY5Y-APP cells following
a 24 h treatment with either the DMSO vehicle (top) or SGSM 49 at a concentration of 30 nM (bottom). (B) Immune precipitation–MALDI-TOF
analysis of Aβ peptide variants in conditioned medium of SHSY5Y-APP
cells following a 24 h treatment with either the DMSO vehicle (top)
or SGSM 46 at a concentration of 150 nM (bottom). The
Aβ12–28 internal standard (i.s.) was used as the immune
precipitation loading control.

We also assessed the effects of the two most potent SGSMs
(compounds 49 and 36) on total Aβ
peptide levels using
a sandwich ELISA that detects total Aβ peptides provided they
contain the first six amino acids of the Aβ peptide motif (Figure ). When SHSY5Y-APP cells were treated (for 24 h)
with increasing amounts of each compound over a broad range of concentrations
(100 pM to 10 μM), they failed to elicit a change in total Aβ
peptide levels. While levels of Aβ42 and Aβ40 were reduced
in a concentration-dependent manner, Aβ38 levels increased to
a maximum that was approximately 2.5–3-fold greater than that
of vehicle-treated cells in a concentration-dependent manner for these
two compounds.

SGSMs Do Not Inhibit γ-Secretase-Mediated
Proteolysis
of the Notch 1 Receptor or APP-CTFs at the ε-Cleavage Sites
It was also critical to assess whether these SGSMs had any effect
on γ-secretase-mediated proteolysis of the Notch 1 receptor.
We utilized three different assays to fully evaluate this. The first
was cell-based and utilized human H4 neuroglioma cells overexpressing
both the APP751 isoform and the NΔE Notch 1 receptor construct.
We used the dipeptidic carboxamide GSI, DAPT, as a positive control
and treated cells with increasing concentrations of either DAPT, SGSM 49, or vehicle for 24 h. For the DAPT-treated cells (Figure ), inhibition of the Notch intracellular domain
(NICD) occurred at concentrations as low as 300 nM (the lowest concentration
tested). Alternatively, in the SGSM 49-treated cells
(Figure ), there was no inhibition of NICD
generation, even at concentrations as high as 20 μM, which is
almost 1000-fold higher than its IC50 for inhibiting Aβ42
production in these very same cells (data not shown). In the SGSM 49-treated cells, we did observe a slight decrease in the
level of NICD generation at a concentration of 30 μM; however,
at this extremely high concentration, we also observed a decrease
in holo-APP and β-actin levels that was supported by toxicity
measurements at this very high concentration (data not shown). These
latter findings suggest a toxic effect rather than inhibition of γ-secretase-mediated
ε-site proteolysis. In addition, the lack of an effect of SGSM 49 on the accumulation of APP-CTFs (Figure ) is consistent with the lack of effect on NICD production
and further demonstrates the fact that SGSM 49 does not
affect the ability of γ-secretase to perform ε-site cleavages
of either of these substrates.

Stable H4 human neuroglioma cells overexpressing
human APP751,
or H4-APP751 cells, were transfected with the NΔED construct
(top panel, lanes 1–12) and then treated with either vehicle
(lanes 1 and 7), DAPT (lanes 2–6), or SGSM 49 (lanes
8–12) for an additional 24 h. Cells were harvested 48 h post-transfection,
processed, and subjected to Western blotting analysis. The Myc antibody
was utilized to assess the NΔED and NICD tagged with Myc at
their N-termini (top). APP (second panel from top) and C99 and C83
APP-CTFs (bottom two panels) were probed with the APP carboxyl-terminal
antibody (A8717). The bottom panel included a longer exposure to visualize
the C99 (APP β-CTFs). β-Actin (middle) was utilized as
the loading control.

We confirmed that SGSM 49 did not inhibit γ-secretase-mediated
ε-site proteolysis using both a cell-free HeLa cell membrane in vitro γ-secretase assay and a reconstituted γ-secretase
assay with highly purified tandem affinity-purified (TAP) γ-secretase
subunits (Figure ). In both systems (Figure ), SGSM 49 effectively inhibited cleavage
of a truncated, biotinylated APP artificial substrate (Sb4) at the Aβ42 cleavage site with IC50 values in the single-digit nanomolar range (IC50 values of 6 and 7 nM for the HeLa membrane and TAP γ-secretase
assays, respectively). SGSM 49 was slightly less efficacious
at inhibiting γ-secretase-mediated cleavage at the Aβ40
site (IC50 values of 37 and 132 nM for the HeLa membrane
and TAP γ-secretase assays, respectively) yet required concentrations
that were 200–400 times higher to inhibit cleavage of a truncated,
biotinylated Notch 1 receptor artificial substrate (N1-Sb1) at the NICD cleavage site by 50% [IC50 values of 2042 and 1423 nM for the cell-free HeLa membranes and
TAP γ-secretase assays, respectively (Figure )]. Collectively, these studies demonstrate that SGSM 49 is “notch sparing” and apparently unable
to affect γ-secretase-mediated proteolysis at the ε-sites
at concentrations required to affect γ-secretase-mediated proteolysis
at γ-sites.

Silver staining of TAP γ-secretase subunit purification:
bovine serum albumin (BSA), 500 ng (lane 1); molecular mass markers
(lane 2), with masses in kilodaltons given at the left; purified γ-secretase
components (lane 3), indicated at the right. Note that PS1 NTF has
a higher than expected mass because of the presence of the calmodulin
binding peptide tag (CBP). The faint band for Pen 2 is due to its
known low affinity for silver stain. Aph1a
and PS1-CTF comigrate. Nicastrin (NCT), calmodulin binding peptide-tagged
PS1 N-terminal fragment (CBP-PS1 NTF), anterior pharynx defective
1 homologue A (Aph1a), PS1 carboxyl-terminal fragment (PS1-CTF), and
presenilin enhancer 2 (Pen 2).

Concentration response curves of SGSM 49 for the inhibition
of Aβ42 (blue), Aβ40 (red), and NICD (green) in a HeLa
cell membrane (left) or in TAP reconstituted γ-secretase subunits
(right) during in vitro γ-secretase assays.
IC50 values were derived using four-parameter fit nonlinear
regression analyses.

SGSMs Modulate Aβ Peptide Variant Production in Cells
Overexpressing an FAD-Linked Mutant PS1
Finally, we conducted
experiments aimed at discerning whether SGSM 49 was capable
of modulating Aβ peptide variant production in a cell-based
assay harboring a missense mutation in PS1 (M146L). In these experiments,
two different cell lines (CHO-APP wt/PS1 and CHO-APP M146L/PS1) were
utilized. Ten-point concentration response curve experiments were
conducted exactly like those performed using the human SHSY5Y-APP
cell line. In the experiment involving the CHO-APPwt/PS1M146L cells,
SGSM 49 was essentially as effective at inhibiting Aβ42
(IC50 = 47 ± 5 nM) and Aβ40 (IC50 = 103 ± 4 nM) and at potentiating Aβ38 (EC50 = 499 ± 203 nM) as the wild-type CHO-APPwt/PS1wt cells (Aβ42
IC50 = 47 ± 17 nM; Aβ40 IC50 = 130
± 35 nM; Aβ38 EC50 = 646 ± 326 nM) and
the human SHSY5Y-APP751 cell line (Aβ42 IC50 = 30
± 6 nM; Aβ40 IC50 = 104 ± 4 nM; Aβ38
EC50 = 305 ± 54 nM) (Figure ).

Discussion
Since the recent demise of the GSIs, γ-secretase
modulation
via GSMs has attracted the majority of the attention in terms of exploiting
γ-secretase as a therapeutic target for AD. GSMs can be broken down into two basic classes of molecules:
(1) NSAID-derived GSMs and (2) non-NSAID-derived GSMs. The original series of non-NSAID-derived GSMs
were recently shown to be capable of effectively attenuating β-amyloid
deposition in a transgenic mouse model of AD following chronic administration. These small molecules are aryl aminothiazole
GSMs (AGSMs) and have the general structure schematically depicted
in Figure . The most potent of these are very
lipophilic in character with very poor aqueous solubilities. This
particular scaffold has been the basis of a large number of medicinal
chemistry investigations that have focused mostly on C ring substitutions. We attempted to identify permissive heterocycle
substitutions of the phenyl B and D rings in the hope of attaining
more aqueously soluble molecules while retaining the excellent potencies
of some of those from the original AGSM series. We were able to synthesize and characterize 20 SGSM compounds;
nine of these had IC50 values of &lt;200 nM (for inhibiting
Aβ42 production) with kinetic solubilities ranging from &lt;1.6
to 18.4 μM. All 20 of these SGSM molecules, regardless of their
potency for inhibiting Aβ42, had the same profile with respect
to their effects on Aβ peptide variant production. They consistently
inhibited Aβ42 with potencies much better than those for inhibition
of Aβ40, and they enhanced the production of Aβ38 with
potencies that were highly variable. This profile of inhibiting Aβ42
much more effectively than Aβ40 would seem to be ideal for a
disease-modifying AD drug. This is based
on a large number of observations involving both early onset familial
AD (EOFAD), and the more common sporadic late-onset
form of AD that denote the pathogenic
character of the Aβ42 peptide variant. In terms of EOFAD resulting
from missense mutations in one of three genes (APP, PSEN1, and PSEN2), the vast majority
of these genetic mutations cause an increase in the Aβ42/Aβ40
ratio. A pivotal study utilizing transgenic
mice expressing fusion proteins between the BRI protein and either
Aβ42 or Aβ40 demonstrated that Aβ42 was essential
for both parenchymal and vascular amyloid deposition. This latter study also showed that overexpression of Aβ40
in a well-characterized AD transgenic mouse model (Tg2576) caused
a reduction in the extent of amyloid pathology and that overexpression
of Aβ42 increased the extent of amyloid pathology in the same
model. The large disparity between the
ability of the SGSMs described here to inhibit Aβ42 versus Aβ40
would seem to be desirable, and one would be expected to be able achieve
dosing regimens that would allow selective inhibition of Aβ42
without affecting the levels of Aβ40 and therefore effectively
reversing the biochemical phenotype (increased Aβ42/Aβ40
ratio) elicited by the large number of EOFAD-linked mutations.

The most potent of these SGSM compounds, 49, contained
a methylimidazole A ring, a methoxypyridyl B ring, an aminothiazole
C ring, and a 2-ethyl-terahydro-indazole D ring. This compound inhibited
Aβ42 in the SHSY5Y-APP cell-based assay with an IC50 of 30 ± 6 nM, while the IC50 for inhibiting Aβ40
was &gt;3-fold higher (IC50 = 104 ± 4 nM). This compound
was also studied in a number of additional assays, including MALDI-TOF
mass spectrometry to assess its effects on total Aβ peptide
production, the ability to inhibit Notch 1 receptor proteolysis, APP
ε-site proteolysis, the ability to modulate γ-secretase
in cell-free and purified enzyme assays, and the ability to modulate
γ-secretase in cell-based assays harboring a missense mutation
in PS1.

As expected, compound 49, although able
to effectively
inhibit the production of Aβ42 and Aβ40 (much less effectively),
was able to potentiate the generation of Aβ38 yet was unable
to affect total Aβ levels over a broad range of concentrations
(100 pM to 10 μM). MALDI-TOF analysis demonstrated that when
SHSY5Y-APP cells were treated with 30 nM compound 49 (the
IC50 for inhibiting Aβ42 in this SHSY5Y-APP cell-based
assay) there was a decrease in the levels of Aβ42; a slight
decrease in the levels of Aβ40; an increase in the levels of
Aβ38, Aβ34, and Aβ33; and a considerable increase
in the levels of Aβ37. This particular Aβ variant profile
is distinct from that elicited by the NSAID-like carboxylic acid-containing
GSMs, such as GSM-1; however, it is very
similar to the profile generated through treatment of cells overexpressing
APP by the original AGSM series, although
that series of AGSMs did not demonstrate the ability to increase the
levels of the shorter Aβ variants Aβ34 and Aβ33.
Upon comparison of Aβ profiles elicited by a large number of
different GSMs from multiple chemotypes, it appears that there is
considerable diversity, even when examining molecules within the same
structural class (e.g., methylimidazole-containing GSMs or phenylacetic
acid-containing GSMs).

Upon rigorous
evaluation of the ability of compound 49 to inhibit γ-secretase-mediated
proteolysis of the Notch 1
receptor by implementing cell-based, cell-free, and purified γ-secretase
subunit-containing reconstituted enzymatic assays, it is clear that
this molecule has a very limited liability in this regard. This notch-sparing
feature appears to be a general property of GSMs of all structural
classes that is not shared by GSIs.,,, The cell-based assay
utilizing H4 glioma cells overexpressing both APP and the NΔE
truncated Notch 1 receptor construct also demonstrated that compound 49 had no effect on ε-site proteolysis of APP, even
at concentrations ∼1000-fold greater than its IC50 for inhibiting Aβ42 production in the H4 glioma cell-based
assay system. When compound 49 was tested for the ability
to inhibit γ-secretase-mediated proteolysis in both cell-free
and reconstituted TAP-purified γ-secretase subunit enzyme assays
using artificial substrates for both APP (Sb4) and Notch (N1-Sb1),
a similar disparity was observed between the ability of compound 49 to inhibit production of Aβ42 versus Aβ40 and
the ability to inhibit Aβ42 versus the ability to inhibit NICD
production. Although the IC50 values were lower in these
assays than the corresponding IC50 values in the cell-based
assay systems, the same general rank order of potencies held (i.e.,
compound 49 inhibited the production of Aβ42 ≫
Aβ40 ≫ NICD).

Compound 49 was also
tested for the ability to modulate
γ-secretase activity in cell-based assay systems harboring a
missense mutation in PS1 (M146L). Previous studies have determined
that although cell-based assays overexpressing APP mutations respond
to first-generation NSAID GSMs, cell-based assays overexpressing PS1
mutations for the most part do not., Alternatively,
second-generation NSAID-like phenylacetic acid-containing GSMs, such
as GSM-1, for the most part are able to modulate Aβ peptide
production in cell-based assays harboring PS1 mutants in a pattern
similar to how they affect cell-based assays harboring wild-type PS1
(selectively decreasing Aβ42 levels and selectively increasing
Aβ38 levels). However, when tested
against the G384A PS1 mutant, GSM-1 effectively lowered Aβ42,
Aβ40, and Aβ37 (thus removing the Aβ42 selectivity).
Other notable exceptions were the PS1 mutants L166P and N135S that
were resistant to inhibition of Aβ42 by GSM-1; however, GSM-1
was able to cause increases in Aβ38 levels in these same PS1
mutant-expressing cell lines.

Compound 49 was tested against a mutant-harboring
cell line (PS1M146L), and it behaved the same as it did in the corresponding
wild-type PS1-expressing cell lines with respect to the effects on
Aβ42 and Aβ40; Aβ38 levels were increased approximately
1.5-fold following treatment with compound 49. Previous
studies demonstrated that a compound termed “TorreyPines”,
a first-generation AGSM with a distinct scaffold similar to that of
compound 49, however, with a potency for inhibiting Aβ42
much lower in our hands than that of compound 49, when
tested against a large number of PS1 mutants, including both FAD-linked
and synthetic or artificial mutations (P117L, N135I, M146L, L166P,
M233V, Y256S, ΔE9, L383W, and G384A), was able to increase Aβ38
levels in all of the PS1 mutant-harboring cell lines (as was the case
with GSM-1) and inhibited Aβ42 production in all except the
N135I and L166P PS1 mutant-expressing cell lines. Another methylimidazole-containing GSM with a cinnamide
linker (as opposed to an aminothiazole C ring) termed “Eisai”
behaved like the “TorreyPines” compound in that study. However, those carefully performed experiments
utilized a cell-based assay system encompassing HEK cells overexpressing
the various PS1 mutants as well as human APP harboring a “Swedish”
mutation to provide optimal amounts of the βCTF (β-carboxyl-terminal
fragment of APP) substrate for γ-secretase, and it has been shown that increased levels of βCTF
can further augment the Aβ42/Aβ40 ratio. Perhaps cell-based assay systems utilizing human neurons
differentiated from iPSC cell lines derived from FAD patient fibroblasts
may provide a more accurate assay system for evaluating whether transgenic
animals and ultimately patients carrying certain PS1 mutations will
respond to a given GSM chemotype. Nonetheless, the previously published
studies make a strong case for evaluating these molecules against
FAD-linked mutations in vitro prior to embarking
on in vivo studies encompassing these various mutations.

The SGSMs described in these studies (aminothiazole-bridged heterocycles)
appear to work through a mechanism similar to that of the AGSM chemotype
(aminothiazole-bridged aromates) described previously. This is based on the similarity in Aβ
profiles generated by treatment of cells overexpressing wild-type
APP with either of these types of non-NSAID-like GSMs. The only difference
was the ability of the SGSMs to cause an increase in the shorter Aβ34
and Aβ33 variants. It is currently unknown precisely how these
types of GSMs (AGSMs and SGSMs) alter the Aβ peptide profiles.
A number of photoaffinity labeling studies, including “photophore walking” utilizing a variety photoprobes of different GSM chemotypes,
competition studies with various GSMs, and the use of clickable probes,, suggest that there are multiple allosteric sites within the catalytic
PS1-NTF subunit that can accommodate binding of various GSMs (for review).

A recent model describing
the sequential generation of shorter
Aβ peptide variants from longer Aβ peptides via successive
proteolysis or “processivity” has been used to describe one potential mechanism of action of GSMs., In this model, the GSMs induce a conformational change in the γ-secretase
catalytic center that inhibits Aβ42 release and allows for Aβ42
to be proteolytically processed to shorter Aβ peptide variants
such as Aβ38. The identification of specific tripeptide products
resulting from carboxy-terminal trimming of the longer Aβ peptides
clearly provides support for this model, yet another model has been proposed, the independent cleavage model, which postulates that GSMs induce a conformational
change in the active site of the enzyme (within the PS1-NTF) that
alters one of the preferred γ-secretase cleavages (preventing
cleavage at Aβ42 and augmenting cleavage at, e.g., Aβ38).
The SGSMs described here appear to be much more effective at inhibiting
cleavage at Aβ42 than inhibiting cleavage at Aβ40. At
much higher doses (3–5-fold), inhibition of Aβ40 production
eventually occurs, along with potentiation of Aβ38; however,
with several of the SGSMs described here, potentiation of Aβ38
occurred at concentrations much lower than those required for inhibition
of Aβ40.

MALDI-TOF analysis of SHSY5Y-APP cells treated
with two different
types of SGSMs [(1) compound 49, which inhibited Aβ42
production with an IC50 nearly 10-fold lower than its EC50 for potentiating Aβ38, and (2) compound 46, which inhibited Aβ42 production with an IC50 nearly
identical to its EC50 for potentiating Aβ38 production]
revealed that both of these compounds potentiated not only Aβ38
but also Aβ37, Aβ34, and Aβ33. Interestingly, compound 49 appeared to potentiate Aβ37 to a greater degree than
Aβ38 upon being tested near its Aβ42 IC50 (30
nM); however, this was not the case for compound 46,
which actually augmented Aβ38 to a greater degree than Aβ37
upon being tested at a concentration near its Aβ42 IC50 (150 nM). One possible interpretation of these data that could explain
the apparent disparity between two compounds like 49 and 46 is that for compounds such as 49 that display
large differences between their Aβ42 IC50 and their
Aβ38 EC50 one or more of the shorter peptides (e.g.,
Aβ37, Aβ34, and/or Aβ33) are actually potentiated
at concentrations of SGSMs similar to those required for inhibiting
Aβ42. Thus, if this proves to be correct, this would support
the alternative or independent cleavage model in which cleavage at
Aβ37, Aβ34, and/or Aβ33 takes the place of Aβ42
cleavage.

Under normal circumstances, Aβ40 is by far the
most abundant
product of γ-secretase (γ-site cleavage product), suggesting
it as the preferred γ-site cleavage. With this in mind, another
model to consider, especially for most of these SGSMs described here
(those that inhibit Aβ42 at concentrations much lower than that
required for either inhibiting Aβ40 or potentiating Aβ38,
e.g., compound 49), is one in which they bind initially
to a high-affinity site (at relatively low concentrations) that prevents
cleavage at the Aβ42 γ-site and then at another perhaps
lower-affinity site (at relatively higher concentrations) that eventually
reduces the amount of cleavage at Aβ40 and concomitantly promotes
cleavage at Aβ38, Aβ37, Aβ34, and Aβ33 instead.

Concentration
response curves displaying differential effects of
SGSM 49 on steady state levels of specific Aβ peptide
variants and total Aβ peptide levels secreted by CHO cells overexpressing
human APP751 and either wild-type human PS1 (left) or a mutant human
PS1 (M146L) (right) following treatment with either SGSM 49 or vehicle (DMSO). Individual Aβ peptide variants (Aβ42,
Aβ40, and Aβ38) and total Aβ peptide levels were
quantitated using MesoScale Sector 6000 multiplex technology and a
sandwich ELISA, respectively. IC50 values were derived
using four-parameter fit nonlinear regression analyses.

The authors declare no
competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
We thank AMRI for conducting
kinetic solubility measurements.

Abbreviations
Aβamyloid β-protein

ADAlzheimer’s disease

AGSMsaryl aminothiazole
γ-secretase modulators

SGSMssoluble γ-secretase modulators

APPamyloid precursor protein

APP-CTFamyloid precursor
protein carboxy-terminal fragment Aβ42, Aβ40, and Aβ38,
the 42-, 40-, and 38-amino acid Aβ peptide variants, respectively

ELISAenzyme-linked
immunosorbent assay

PBSphosphate-buffered saline

SDS–PAGEsodium dodecyl sulfate–polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis

CBPcalmodulin binding
peptide

TAPtandem
affinity-purified

PS1presenilin 1

PS1-NTFpresenilin 1 amino-terminal fragment

PS1-CTFpresenilin 1 carboxy-terminal fragment

C8383-amino acid APP
carboxy-terminal fragment

C9999-amino acid APP carboxy-terminal fragment

PS2presenilin 2

APH1Aanterior pharynx defective 1 homologue
A

PEN-2presenilin
enhancer 2

NCTnicastrin

GSIγ-secretase
inhibitor

DAPTN-[N-(3,5-difluorophenacetyl)-l-alanyl]-S-phenylglycine tert-butyl
ester

CLNDchemiluminescent
nitrogen detection

UVultraviolet

BSAbovine serum albumin

DMSOdimethyl sulfoxide.

