Caveolins are integral membrane
proteins that constitute the major scaffolding component of caveolae,
which are omega-shaped membrane invaginations enriched in cholesterol,
glycosphingolipids, and sphingomyelin., Mutations in
caveolins are known to cause a variety of disorders ranging from cancer
to muscular diseases,− and structural studies are needed to gain insight into the molecular
etiology of such diseases. There are three proteins in the caveolin
family.− The most extensively characterized caveolin is caveolin-1
(Cav1), which features a kinked reentrant integral membrane segment
that is flanked by cytoplasmic N- and C-terminal regions.− Significantly less is known about caveolin-3 (Cav3). However, Cav1
and Cav3 have 61% similar sequences and likely adopt a similar topology
(Figure A, top left). Furthermore, both proteins
feature multiple palmitoylation sites and form higher-order oligomers under certain conditions. In this work, we present the first structural
characterization of the monomeric form of full-length human Cav3 and
assess the impact of lipid modifications on its structural properties.

Cav3 was expressed in Escherichia coli and purified
as described in the , with consistent yields of 2–3 mg of &gt;90% pure protein/L
of culture. To identify optimal conditions for solution nuclear magnetic
resonance (NMR) studies of Cav3, we assessed the 1H–15N TROSY NMR spectrum of Cav3 in the presence of 10 different
detergents commonly used for structural studies of integral membrane
proteins. A visible precipitate formed during the preparation of Cav3
in β-n-decyl maltoside (DM) and lauryldimethylamine
oxide (data not shown), indicating these detergents are not suitable
for structural studies. The 1H–15N TROSY
spectra of Cav3 in the other eight detergents varied significantly
in quality (Figure S1 of the ), confirming that the structure, dynamics, and oligomeric state
of Cav3 are sensitive to the properties of the membrane environment.
The indole NH side chain peaks of the four tryptophan residues in
Cav3 could be resolved only in micelles of lyso-palmitoylphosphatidylcholine
(LPPC) or lyso-palmitoylphosphatidylglycerol (LPPG), suggesting that
the structural order of Cav3 is maximized and that the protein is
monomeric under these conditions. Furthermore, the largest number
of amide peaks could be observed in LPPG micelles (106 of the 153
expected peaks), a number slightly greater than the number in LPPC
(95 peaks). Therefore, of the conditions evaluated, LPPG micelles
provided the most favorable membrane mimetic for Cav3. The optimal
pH (6.5) and temperature (318 K) for solution NMR measurements were
also identified by 1H–15N TROSY screening.

Topology
and in vitro lipidation of Cav3. (A)
Cartoon depicting the predicted topology of monomeric Cav3 at the
membrane, with the positions of the natively palmitoylated cysteine
residues indicated (top). Cysteine thiols were first modified by the
addition of excess 5,5′-dithiobis(2-nitrobenzoic acid) (DTNB,
Ellman’s reagent) (middle). 3-Thio-6-nitrobenzoate groups were
then disulfide exchanged with thioalkyl chains in the presence of
excess octanethiol (bottom). (B) Representative sodium dodecyl sulfate–polyacrylamide
gel electrophoresis gel (Coomassie stain) of purified lipidated Cav3.

Effects of mutation and lipidation on the structural
properties
of Cav3. (A) 1H–15N TROSY spectra of
wild-type (WT) Cav3 (black) and 568C-Cav3 (red) in 100 mM imidazole
(pH 6.5), 1 mM EDTA, 1 mM TCEP, 1.5 mM DSS, and 66 mM (WT) or 112
mM (568C-Cav3) LPPG were recorded on a 900 MHz NMR spectrometer. (B)
The 1H–15N TROSY spectrum of lipidated
568C-Cav3 (red) in 100 mM imidazole (pH 6.5), 1 mM EDTA, 1 mM TCEP,
1.5 mM DSS, and 110 mM LPPG was recorded on a 900 MHz NMR spectrometer.
Residues influenced by lipidation are indicated. The 1H–15N TROSY spectrum of nonlipidated 568C-Cav3 from panel A is
plotted for reference (black). (C) The magnitude of the change in
the chemical shift for each assigned amide resonance in the 1H–15N TROSY spectrum of lipidated Cav3 relative
to 568C-Cav3 is indicated by the height of the bar. Negative bars
indicate the positions for which the change in chemical shift could
not be determined because of spectral overlap or missing assignments.
Red bars indicate peaks seen only in the spectrum of lipidated 568C-Cav3.
Black arrows indicate lipidation sites.

Cav3 is known to be natively palmitoylated at three positions
within
its C-terminal domain (C106, C116, and C129), modifications that likely
impact Cav3 lipid–membrane interactions, oligomerization, and
function (reviewed in ref ()). To mimic the effects of these modifications, we devised
a thiol-mediated approach to artificially lipidate the cysteine residues
in Cav3 in vitro. However, to restrict lipidation
to the three natively palmitoylated residues (the fifth, sixth, and
eighth Cys sites from the N-terminus), it was first necessary to mutate
the six natively unmodified cysteine residues in Cav3. We generated
a series of conservative mutations at the unmodified cysteine residues.
Those predicted to fall within the membrane domain were mutated to
alanine (C72A, C92A, and C98A), while cysteines predicted to fall
within the soluble domains were mutated to serine (C19S, C124S, and
C140S). This mutant is termed 568C-Cav3. To assess the impact of the
substitutions, we compared the 1H–15N
TROSY spectra of wild-type (WT) Cav3 and 568C-Cav3 in LPPG micelles.
Only modest differences in peak positions were apparent in the spectrum
of 568C-Cav3 (Figure A), which most likely
correspond to residues proximal to the mutation sites. Indeed, the
majority of the peaks in the two spectra overlap. Furthermore, the
far-UV CD spectra of these proteins are quite similar (Figure S2 of
the ). Together,
these data suggest that these substitutions do not perturb the overall
fold of the protein under these conditions.

We next introduced
alkyl chains into 568C-Cav3 at native palmitoylation
sites according to the scheme shown in Figure A (details in the ). The 1H–15N HSQC spectra of octylated
568C-Cav3 and tetradecylated 568C-Cav3 are nearly indistinguishable
(Figure S3 of the ), which suggests the length of the acyl chain modification is not
a critical factor governing the structural properties of the protein
under these conditions. Therefore, we chose to proceed with structural
characterization of octylated 568C-Cav3 (hereafter termed lipidated
Cav3) because of the relatively high yield of these modifications
[&gt;90, 88, and 76% for Cys 129, 106, and 116, respectively (Figure
S4 of the )]. While
lipidation did not reach 100%, the spectrum predominantly reflects
the fully lipidated species because the minor population of incompletely
modified protein is dispersed into subpopulations with minor signals
(Figure S4 of the ). Lipidated Cav3 migrates as a single sodium dodecyl sulfate–polyacrylamide
gel electrophoresis band (Figure B). Lipidation
of 568C-Cav3 resulted in the perturbation of several chemical shifts
as well as an improvement in the quality of the NMR spectra with regard
to the number of amide peaks (Figure B); 118
amide peaks were identified in the spectrum of lipidated protein versus
112 for unmodified 568C-Cav3. These differences were slowly reversed
upon reduction of the disulfide bonds using tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine
(TCEP) (Figure S4 of the ), which confirms that the spectral perturbations arise as a direct
result of lipidation.

To determine which domains of the protein
are perturbed by lipidation,
we utilized the amide resonance assignments of the Cav3 spectrum deposited
by our lab in the BioMagResBank (BMRB, entry 19903). Figure C reveals that the largest chemical shift perturbations
caused by lipidation occur near the modified cysteine sites, including
the proximal membrane domain. Additionally, the lipidated residue
C129 represents one of the six emergent peaks in the spectrum of lipidated
568C-Cav3 (but too broad to detect in nonlipidated samples), suggesting
that modification may suppress local conformational dynamics on the
microsecond-to-millisecond time scale. Furthermore, residues near
the modification sites also exhibited increased transverse 15N relaxation rates (R2) and hetero-NOE
values (Figure S5 of the ), consistent with locally dampened motions. Together, these findings
suggest these modifications likely alter the local conformation of
the chain by anchoring the segments of the protein near the modification
sites to the micelle environment.

It has previously been suggested
that palmitoylation may alter
the properties of nearby transmembrane segments, including their tilt
angle relative to the membrane.− However, lipidation does not
appear to significantly influence the secondary structure (Figure
S2 of the ) or overall
topology of Cav3. Indeed, the structure and dynamics of the entire
N-terminal domain, the scaffold domain, and the extreme C-terminus
appear to be insensitive to the effects of lipidation (Figure C and Figure S5 of the ). This suggests that biological functions performed
by these regions are unlikely to be conformationally modulated by
lipidation, at least not in the absence of other factors associated
with native membrane conditions. It is noteworthy that palmitoylation
of caveolins has been suggested to enhance oligomerization of Cav1
in native membranes. However, lipidation
of Cav3 does not induce its oligomerization under the micellar conditions
utilized in this work or impact the conformation of the N-terminal
segment (residues 34–74), which is known to mediate oligomerization
under native conditions. Questions for
future work include whether these results will be different in actual
lipid bilayers and/or in the presence of cholesterol. The possibility
that disulfide-linked alkyl chains are imperfect mimics for thioester-linked
chains also cannot be ruled out.

The structural impact of Cav3
lipidation appears to be only local
and modest. Thus, our results suggest that any effects of lipidation
on Cav3 function are unlikely to occur as a result of a large-scale
conformational change. This work represents the first structural characterization
of a monomeric full-length human caveolin. The expression, purification,
and NMR strategies detailed herein will allow a multitude of new structural
studies of Cav3, complementing previous work. Furthermore, these preliminary solution NMR measurements represent
an important first step toward determining the three-dimensional structure
of Cav3. Finally, considering that lipid modifications of proteins
are of general importance for cellular signaling,− the method reported herein for surrogate lipidation
in place of native cysteine palmitoylation should have broad applicability
to other lipidated proteins.

Supporting Information Available
Materials and methods, supporting
references, and Figures S1–S5. This material is available free
of charge via the Internet at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bi5005238_si_001.pdf

This work was
supported by National Institutes of Health (NIH) Grants U54 GM094608
and by RO1 GM106672. The NMR instrumentation used in this work was
supported by NIH Grant S10 RR025677-01 and National Science Foundation
Grant DBI-0922862.

The authors declare no
competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
We thank Prof.
Anne Kenworthy for her comments on a preliminary
version of the manuscript.

