The industrial
revolution has
led to a significant expansion of the chemical repertoire on earth.
The chemical industry has synthesized numerous compounds at commercial
scale for use as novel materials, pharmaceuticals, textile dyes, pesticides,
solvents, and explosives. These compounds can persist for years in
the environment, often causing toxicity to many forms of life. Environmental
microbes have evolved new metabolic pathways for degradation of some
of these anthropogenic chemicals by patching together promiscuous
activities of enzymes that normally serve other functions.

Promiscuous activities are often inefficient
because new substrates
with different steric and electronic properties do not bind optimally
relative to catalytic groups in the active site, and/or because additional
chemical steps not required for the original activity are needed.
Even so, enzymes with promiscuous activities often accelerate such
reactions by many orders of magnitude relative to the rates of uncatalyzed
reactions.− When a promiscuous activity becomes important for
fitness, amplification of the gene encoding the promiscuous enzyme
both provides more activity and sets the stage for divergence of the
gene, ultimately leading to the emergence of an efficient new enzyme.

PCP hydroxylase exemplifies this situation. Most flavin-dependent
phenol monooxygenases hydroxylate naturally occurring phenols at a
carbon bearing a hydrogen substituent and generate hydroquinone or
catechol intermediates. However, hydroxylation of PCP, obligatorily
at a carbon bearing a chlorine substituent, generates a benzoquinone
rather than a hydroquinone. The mechanism
expected for PCP hydroxylase based upon the well-studied mechanism
of p-hydroxybenzoate hydroxylase, is
shown in Figure . The reductive half-reaction
(blue) begins with substrate binding, which causes the flavin to move
to the “out” position where it can be reduced by NADPH.
The reduced flavin then moves back into the active site. During the
oxidative half-reaction (yellow), the reduced flavin reacts with O2 and then hydroxylates the substrate. Completion of the catalytic
cycle requires expulsion of HCl from the unstable nonaromatic intermediate
to form tetrachlorobenzoquinone (TCBQ), dehydration of the C4a-hydroxyflavin, and release of products.

Expected mechanism of
PCP hydroxylase. Blue box, reductive half-reaction;
yellow box, oxidative half-reaction.

Here we describe studies that reveal a deviation in the canonical
mechanism for this family of flavin-dependent monooxygenases, as well
as the reason for the unusually inefficient activity of PCP hydroxylase
(see Figure ). The catalytic events that occur
during turnover of PCP to TCBQ depart from those expected based upon
the mechanisms of related flavin-dependent monooxygenases due to the
unusual electronic characteristics endowed by the chlorine substituents
on the aromatic ring. The presence of a chloride leaving group at
the site of hydroxylation and the electron-withdrawing effect of the
remaining four chlorine substituents result in formation of an unusually
reactive product, TCBQ, which is both a potent electrophile and a strong oxidant. Presteady-state kinetic studies in conjunction with electron paramagnetic
spectroscopy (EPR) show that TCBQ rapidly abstracts an electron from
a donor in the active site, generating an unreactive complex (IV) containing tetrachlorosemiquinone (TCSQ) and an enzyme-based
radical that only slowly completes the catalytic cycle. We also describe
how this dead-end complex is rescued by TCBQ reductase, the second
enzyme in the PCP degradation pathway. TCBQ reductase is evolutionarily
related to reductases that transfer electrons derived from NADH to
Fe2S2 clusters in dioxygenases. Its role in PCP degradation is unusual because it transfers
electrons to an organic acceptor (or acceptors) at the active site
of PCP hydroxylase (pink box in Figure ),
rather than to an Fe2S2 cluster. Thus, the mechanisms
of both PCP hydroxylase and TCBQ reductase are distinctly different
from the typical mechanisms of their respective enzyme families.

Mechanism
of PCP hydroxylase alone and in combination with TCBQ
reductase. TCBQ is shown in red and TCSQ is shown in blue. Blue box,
reductive half-reaction; yellow box, oxidative half-reaction; green
box, off-pathway detour; pink box, proposed role of TCBQ reductase
in rescuing the off-pathway intermediate.

Experimental Procedures
Materials
PCP hydroxylase and TCBQ
reductase were prepared
and quantified as previously described., Concentrations
for the enzymes are reported as flavin equivalents. PCP, TCBQ, protocatechuate
dioxygenase and 3,4-dihydroxybenzoic acid were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich.
Tetrachlorohydroquinone (TCHQ) was purchased from Acros Organic and
dissolved in dimethyl sulfoxide at 50 mM prior to dilution into buffer.
TCBQ was dissolved in N′,N′-dimethylformamide at 50 mM prior to dilution into buffer.

Presteady State Kinetics
All enzymatic reactions were
followed by stopped-flow spectrometry performed in 50 mM potassium
phosphate, pH 7.0, at 22 °C by mixing equal volumes (30 μL)
from two preloaded syringes. The stopped-flow instrument (Hi-Tech
Scientific SF-61DX2) was used in diode-array mode to monitor wavelengths
between 320 and 700 nm. Anoxic conditions were achieved by pre-equilibrating
reagents in a glovebox flushed with nitrogen. Trace amounts of O2 were removed by treating solutions with protocatechuate dioxygenase
(0.05 U/μL) and 3,4-dihydroxybenzoic acid (400 μM) as
described by Patil and Ballou. Air-tight
syringes were used to transfer reagents from the glovebox to the stopped-flow
instrument.

The reductive half-reaction of PCP hydroxylase was
examined by mixing PCP hydroxylase (20 μM) that had been preincubated
with PCP (50 μM) with NAD(P)H (0.2–4 mM) under anoxic
conditions in the stopped-flow instrument. The oxidative half-reaction
was examined by preincubating PCP hydroxylase (20–50 μM)
with PCP (0.9 equiv/PCP hydroxylase) and excess NADPH (100–400
μM) under anoxic conditions and subsequently mixing the anoxic
reduced PCP hydroxylase with equal volumes of buffer containing O2 (0–360 μM) in the stopped-flow instrument. For
reactions in the presence of TCBQ reductase, TCBQ reductase (4–50
μM) and NADH (200–600 μM) were added to the anoxic
mixture containing PCP hydroxylase, NADPH, and PCP.

The reduction
of TCBQ reductase was studied by mixing the protein
with saturating concentrations of NADH (100–200 μM) under
anoxic conditions in the stopped-flow instrument. The reoxidation
of TCBQ reductase was studied by mixing an anoxic preparation of the
protein (27 μM) that had been incubated with NADH (200 μM)
(to fully reduce the flavin and Fe2S2 cluster)
with buffer containing atmospheric O2 in the stopped-flow
instrument.

Analysis of data collected by stopped-flow spectroscopy
was performed
using the software tools of Kinetic Studio (TgK Scientific) and ReactLab
Kinetics Software (Jplus Consulting). Time-dependent absorbance changes
at individual wavelengths were fit to single or double exponentials
in Kinetic Studio. Wavelengths for this analysis were chosen based
on favorable properties such as large differences in rate constants
for two sequential kinetic steps or appropriate isosbestic points
between intermediates, as described previously. Goodness-of-fit was evaluated by observation of residuals
and statistical values (R2 &gt; 0.995;
residual
standard error &lt; 0.0005). Global fitting of diode-array data was
performed in ReactLab using the rate constants derived from data collected
at individual wavelengths as starting estimates. Goodness-of-fit was
evaluated using observation of residuals and statistical values (standard
deviation &lt; 0.001; residual sum squares &lt;0.02). Good correlation
between fitting of individual rate constants and global fitting was
found. For example, the rate constant for formation of the C4a-hydroperoxyflavin (I) obtained by global fitting (2.6
± 0.4) × 105 M–1 s–1 was essentially identical to that derived by fitting the data at
402 nm to a single exponential (2.5 ± 0.3) × 105 M–1 s–1. Baseline-corrected
spectra of intermediates and products in the PCP hydroxylase-catalyzed
reaction in the presence of TCBQ reductase were computed as follows.
The initial spectrum of reduced PCP hydroxylase in the absence of
TCBQ reductase was subtracted from the corresponding spectrum in the
presence of a particular concentration of TCBQ reductase to provide
a spectrum of TCBQ reductase at the beginning of the experiment. This
spectrum was then subtracted from the spectra of intermediates at
that TCBQ reductase concentration to provide difference spectra that
reflect the absorption properties of PCP hydroxylase. (This procedure
is justified by the experiments described in the text that show that
the spectrum of TCBQ reductase does not change over the range of wavelengths
needed to analyze the PCP hydroxylation reaction.) For reactions containing
both PCP hydroxylase and TCBQ reductase, kinetic events after formation
of oxidized PCP hydroxylase (&gt;10 s) were not analyzed further as
they
displayed complex multiphasic spectral changes that may be due to
depletion of NAD(P)H, potential substrate cycling, and reoxidation
of the flavin of TCBQ reductase.

Electron Paramagnetic Resonance
(EPR) Spectroscopy
Samples for EPR were prepared as follows.
TCSQ was generated by mixing
equimolar concentrations (50 μM) of TCBQ and TCHQ in 50 mM potassium
phosphate, pH 7.0. TCSQ is formed rapidly by disproportionation. EPR
spectra of TCSQ were then acquired either at 140 K (frozen) or 298
K (in solution). (Measurements in solution were possible because TCSQ
is reasonably stable in the presence of O2; t1/2 for oxidation of TCSQ is 22 min at room temperature
in potassium phosphate, pH 7.) Samples for analysis of potential radicals
generated during turnover of PCP hydroxylase were generated by prereducing
the enzyme (170 μM) with NADPH (300 μM) in the presence
of limiting PCP (150 μM) under anoxic conditions, followed by
mixing with an equal volume of buffer containing ambient O2. Samples were quenched by immersion in liquid nitrogen at intervals
between 20 and 180 s and spectra were acquired at 140 K.

EPR
spectroscopy was performed using a Bruker Elexsys 500 spectrometer
equipped with a Bruker Super High QE (SHQE) cavity resonator and a
liquid nitrogen temperature control system. Spectra were recorded
at 140 or 293 K at 9.45 GHz. Typical parameters for low temperature
spectra were as follows: microwave power of 0.0796 mW, modulation
amplitude of 2 G, modulation frequency of 100 kHz, conversion time
and time constant both set to 20.48 ms, and a sweep width of 100 G.
Typical parameters for spectra recorded at 293 K were as follows:
microwave power of 2 mW, modulation amplitude of 1 G, modulation frequency
of 100 kHz, conversion time and time constant both set to 20.48 ms,
and a sweep width of 50G. Quantitation of the EPR signal was performed
by double integration. Five different concentrations of 4-hydroxy-2,2,6,6-tetramethylpiperidin-1-oxyl
(TEMPOL) in water were used as standards. The concentration of the
TEMPOL stock solution was determined using ε492 =
13.4 M–1 cm–1 for TEMPOL in water. Magnetic field calibration was performed using
1,3-bisdiphenylene-2 phenylallyl (BDPA) as a standard (peak-to-peak
line width, 0.45–0.8 G; g-value, 2.00254 ±
3.2 × 10–5; Bruker, Manual for Xenon software).

Results
Presteady State Kinetic Studies Reveal That the Reductive Half-Reaction
of PCP Hydroxylase Is Efficient
Presteady state kinetic experiments
were carried out to measure the rates of the elementary steps during
turnover of PCP by PCP hydroxylase and to identify the step that limits
turnover to an unusually slow rate of 0.02 s–1.
Reduction of the active site flavin by NADPH was monitored by stopped-flow
spectroscopy under anoxic conditions. The observed rate constant at
each concentration of NADPH can be derived from a fit of the kinetic
data to a single exponential function [A460 = A0,460 + Af,460 (exp(−kredt)]
(Figure ). Assuming that flavin reduction
is irreversible, values for kred over
a range of NADPH concentrations can be used to derive the KD,NADPH (850 ± 82 μM) and the maximal
rate of hydride transfer from NADPH to the flavin (22 ± 1.1 s–1) (inset, Figure ). In the
presence of physiological concentrations of NADPH (∼100 μM),
the rate of flavin reduction is 2 s–1, substantially
faster than kcat (0.02 s–1). For comparison, p-hydroxybenzoate hydroxylase
catalyzes reduction of the flavin in the presence of 2,4-dihydroxybenzoate
with a kred of 2.5 s–1 and a KD,NADPH of ∼4 mM. Phenol hydroxylase catalyzes reduction of the
flavin in the presence of resorcinol with a kred of 16 s–1 and a KD,NADPH of 67 μM. PCP hydroxylase
prefers NADPH over NADH; when NADH was used as the cosubstrate, saturation
was not observed and kred/KD was ∼10-fold lower than that for NADPH (Table ,  Figure 1).

Kinetics of the reductive half-reaction of PCP hydroxylase.
Oxidized
PCP hydroxylase (20 μM) in (A) the presence or (B) the absence
of 50 μM PCP was mixed with varying concentrations of NADPH
(0.2–8 mM) under anoxic conditions in a stopped-flow instrument.
Representative data sets collected at 446 nm are shown. Symbols represent
observed data points, and lines indicate the fit to a single exponential.
NADPH concentrations after mixing are (A) blue, 0.17 mM; green, 0.57
mM; black, 1.48 mM; and red, 4.0 mM; (B) blue, 0.16 mM; green, 0.54
mM; black, 1.4 mM; red, 3.8 mM. Replots derived from more extensive
data sets, including replicates, are shown in the inset.

Kinetic Parameters for the Reduction
of PCP Hydroxylase by NAD(P)H under Anoxic Conditions
substrates	KD for NAD(P)H (μM)	kred (s–1)	kred/KD (M–1 s–1)	
PCP/NADPH	850 ± 82	22 ± 1.1	(2.6 ± 0.2) × 104	
PCP/NADH	n.a.	n.a.	(2.4 ± 0.3) × 103	
none/NADPH	n.a.	n.a.	6.0 ± 0.6	
n.a.: not applicable.

Reduction of the flavin in
flavin-dependent monooxygenases is typically
very slow in the absence of substrate. This characteristic prevents formation of the C4a-hydroperoxyflavin
(I) when there is no substrate in the active site; elimination
of H2O2 from the C4a-hydroperoxyflavin
generates a reactive oxygen species and wastes a molecule of NADPH. Reduction of the flavin in PCP hydroxylase is
also slow in the absence of PCP, and the enzyme is not saturated by
NADPH concentrations up to 2.5 mM; kred/KD is ∼4000 times lower in the
absence than in the presence of PCP (Table , Figure B). We conclude that PCP effectively
promotes movement of the flavin to the “out” position,
which allows reduction by NADPH, and that this process occurs at a
rate comparable to those of other enzymes and substantially higher
than kcat.

An Unexpected Off-Pathway
Radical Intermediate Is Formed during
the Oxidative Half-Reaction of PCP Hydroxylase
The oxidative
half-reaction of PCP hydroxylase was examined by prereducing PCP hydroxylase
in the presence of a substoichiometric concentration of PCP under
anoxic conditions and mixing this solution with oxygenated buffer
in a stopped-flow instrument. We expected that all of the steps included
in the yellow box in Figure  would occur,
although some might not be detected. In general, an intermediate is
detectable if it accumulates due to a large difference between the
rate constant for its formation and the rate constant for its conversion
to the next intermediate in the catalytic cycle.

Three kinetic
processes were observed during the oxidative half-reaction in the
presence of 90 μM O2 (Figure A). The observed rate constant for the first process can be obtained
by fitting the change in absorbance at 402 nm over the first second
to the following equation: kobs = A0,402 + Af,402(1
– exp(−kobst). This process can be assigned to formation of the C4a-hydroperoxyflavin (I) because kobs is linearly dependent on the concentration of O2 (Figure ). The second-order rate constant
of (2.5 ± 0.3) × 105 M–1 s–1 (at 22 °C) is comparable to those for formation
of the C4a-hydroperoxyflavin intermediate by phenol hydroxylase and p-hydroxybenzoate hydroxylase,, (1–3 × 105 M–1 s–1 at 4 °C). Like
those enzymes, PCP hydroxylase is not saturated at concentrations
of O2 up to half the atmospheric concentration.,

Spectroscopic
changes and intermediates observed during the oxidative
half-reaction of PCP hydroxylase. Reduced PCP hydroxylase (28 μM,
anoxic) in the presence of PCP (22 μM) was mixed with an equal
volume of oxygenated buffer and the reaction was monitored by diode
array spectroscopy in a stopped-flow apparatus. (A) Time course of
changes at 402 nm, (blue), 426 nm (green), 446 nm (black), and 480
nm (red). (B) Calculated spectra for intermediates detected during
the oxidative half-reaction. Reduced flavin (red), C4a-hydroperoxyflavin
(blue), diradical intermediate (green), and oxidized flavin (purple).
Also shown is the spectrum of TCSQ (dotted black).

Dependence of the change in absorbance at 402 nm upon
the concentration
of O2. An anoxic solution of reduced PCP hydroxylase (40
μM) and PCP (36 μM) was mixed with buffer equilibrated
with varying concentrations of O2 in a stopped-flow apparatus.
Representative data sets acquired after mixing with various concentrations
of O2 [18 μM (blue), 60 μM (green), 90 μM
(black), and 180 μM (red)] O2 are shown. Symbols
represent observed data points. Lines are derived from the best fit
of the data to a single exponential. The observed rate constants from
these and additional data sets, including replicates, are plotted
against the final concentration of O2 in the reaction mixture
in the inset.

Further analysis of the
oxidative half-reaction of PCP hydroxylase
by global fitting of the kinetic data enabled measurement of the rate
constants for two additional steps as well as calculation of the spectra
of the C4a-hydroperoxyflavin and two additional intermediates.
The first of these steps occurs with a rate constant of 5.5 ±
0.6 s–1 and leads to formation of an intermediate
with a spectrum that has a double peak in the flavin region (Figure B; λmax at 429 and 457 nm). This
spectrum does not resemble that of any previously described flavin
intermediate seen during turnover by phenol hydroxylase or p-hydroxybenzoate hydroxylase.,−

The first hint to the identity of this intermediate came from
the
observation that its calculated spectrum shows peaks at 429 and 457
nm (Figure B), wavelengths at which the spectrum
of tetrachlorosemiquinone (TCSQ) also has distinctive peaks. EPR analysis
at 140 K of the PCP hydroxylase reaction mixture after manual mixing
of the reaction components and freezing at various times after mixing
revealed a radical signal that is essentially identical to that of
a sample of TCSQ at the same temperature (Figure ). This radical decayed during the hydroxylation reaction
with an apparent rate constant of 0.022 s–1 (Figure , inset). The EPR spectrum of TCSQ at 140 K has
not previously been reported. However, the radical spectrum of our
TCSQ standard at 298 K had g = 2.00535 and ΔH = 0.845 G ( Figure 2), consistent with a previous literature report of g = 2.00535, ΔH = 0.8 G.

EPR spectrum of the enzyme-bound radical and time-course
of radical
decay. PCP hydroxylase (170 μM) was incubated with NADPH (300
μM) in the presence of limiting PCP (150 μM) under anoxic
conditions, followed by mixing with an equal volume of buffer containing
ambient O2. The reaction was quenched at varying times
by freezing in liquid N2. The radical signal from PCP hydroxylase
has g = 2.0063 and line-width ΔH = 7.5 G (blue). For comparison, a sample of TCSQ under the same
conditions gave a signal at g = 2.0061 and line width
ΔH = 7.2 G (red). The inset shows the time-dependent
decrease in the radical signal on PCP hydroxylase. Symbols represent
observed data points and the line is derived from a best-fit using
a single exponential.

Taken together, the presteady state kinetic data and the
EPR spectrum
suggest that TCSQ is formed during the catalytic cycle of PCP hydroxylase.
We postulate that formation of TCSQ is an off-pathway detour resulting
from transfer of an electron from a donor at the active site to the
strongly oxidizing TCBQ (Figure ). [E(Q/Q•–) for TCBQ is +650 mv.] Comparison of the amplitude of the EPR signal obtained by freezing
the reaction 45 s after addition of O2 with the amplitude
of the signals from known concentrations of TEMPO indicated the presence
of 0.10 spin equivalents per flavin of PCP hydroxylase.

The
spectrum of intermediate IV (green line in Figure B) is noticeably broader than that of TCSQ alone.
The absorbance at wavelengths less than 450 nm can be attributed to
the C4a-hydroxyflavin. However, the absorbance at wavelengths
greater than 470 nm cannot be accounted for by either TCSQ or the
C4a-hydroxyflavin. (Spectra of complexes of the C4a-hydroxyflavin with various intermediates and products have little
absorbance above 460 nm (&lt;1 mM–1 cm–1).) The absorbance at 480 nm increases
in a biphasic manner (Figure A). The first
phase of this change correlates with the appearance of IV. We propose that this signal is due to a charge-transfer complex
between TCBQ and an electron donor on the enzyme that subsequently
converts to a diradical complex containing TCSQ and an enzyme-based
radical. The apparently concurrent observation of both a charge-transfer
complex and TCSQ is likely due to an inability to resolve the signals
resulting from the formation of the charge-transfer complex and its
rapid conversion to the diradical species.

The final step observed
by stopped-flow analysis corresponds to
the decay of the diradical to oxidized flavin (Figure ). The rate constant of 0.027 s–1 for this
step correlates well with kcat (0.02 s–1) and with the rate constant for the disappearance
of the radical signal as measured by EPR (0.022 s–1), suggesting that the diradical species is a kinetically competent
intermediate. These data suggest that the rate-limiting step for PCP
hydroxylase is the slow reversion of IV to III, which requires transfer of an electron from TCSQ back to the active
site radical. Once III is reformed, the rate constant
for dehydration to form the oxidized flavin must be faster than 0.027
s–1.

Intermediates II and III do not accumulate
during turnover of PCP. We can estimate the rate constants for formation
of these intermediates according to the following logic. The rate
of formation of I is 30 s–1 when the
anoxic solution of PCP hydroxylase and PCP is mixed with buffer containing
atmospheric O2. The rate of formation of TCSQ is 5.5 s–1. Thus, one of the steps between I and IV must occur at a rate of 5.5 s–1. Since
intermediates II and III do not accumulate,
conversion of I to II must be rate-limiting
for formation of TCSQ, and the subsequent steps must be much faster.
These suppositions agree with our chemical intuition; hydroxylation
of PCP is likely to be more difficult than elimination of HCl from
the unstable hydroxylation product and electron transfer to TCBQ from
an electron donor at the active site.

Spectroscopic Signals Due
to Reduction and Oxidation of TCBQ
Reductase Do Not Interfere with Analysis of Single Turnovers by PCP
Hydroxylase
We previously found that a transient physical
interaction between PCP hydroxylase and TCBQ reductase prevents release
of TCBQ to solvent. This interaction protects
cells from damage by the highly reactive TCBQ. This finding raises
the possibility that interaction with TCBQ reductase might alter the
mechanism and/or kinetics of the PCP hydroxylase reaction.

Since
both PCP hydroxylase and TCBQ reductase contain flavins, we first
performed a minimal kinetic characterization of TCBQ reductase to
identify potentially conflicting absorption and/or kinetic properties.
TCBQ reductase is homologous to phthalate dioxygenase reductase, and
mechanistic studies of this enzyme provide
a model for the reduction of TCBQ (Scheme ). TCBQ reductase is a homotrimer containing a flavin and an Fe2S2 cluster in each subunit. Reaction of NADH with
oxidized TCBQ reductase (FMNox–Fe2S2 ox) ( Figures 3 and 4) results in initial reduction of the flavin, followed
by rapid transfer of an electron to the Fe2S2 cluster to give an FMNSQ–Fe2S2 red monomer. Disproportionation between two such monomers generates
a fully reduced monomer (FMNred–Fe2S2 red) and a one-electron reduced monomer (FMNox–Fe2S2 red or FMNSQ–Fe2S2 ox) within 2 s. In the presence of excess
NADH, the spectroscopic signature of the FMNSQ (a peak
at 525 nm) forms and disappears rapidly, indicating that the one-electron
reduced monomer is rapidly reduced to the fully reduced FMNred–Fe2S2red. The fully reduced enzyme
can transfer an electron to O2, but this reaction is quite
slow; at 90 μM O2, electron transfer to O2 occurs at only 0.025
s–1 ( Figure 5). The presence of the semiquinone form of TCBQ reductase
produced by electron transfer to O2 was confirmed by EPR
( Figure 6).

This investigation revealed three fortunate characteristics
of
TCBQ reductase that enabled presteady state kinetic analysis of PCP
hydroxylase in the presence of TCBQ reductase. Fully reduced TCBQ
reductase (FMNred–Fe2S2 red) has little absorbance in the region where TCSQ and the oxidized
flavin formed at the active site of PCP hydroxylase absorb ( Figure 4). Further, oxidized
TCBQ reductase, which we expect to be generated during turnover in
the presence of PCP hydroxylase, is rapidly reduced by NADH (79 ±
2 s–1), preventing accumulation of oxidized flavin
on TCBQ reductase that would interfere with our ability to detect
oxidized flavin at the active site of PCP hydroxylase. Thus, TCBQ
reductase is spectroscopically silent at the wavelengths needed to
analyze the intermediates formed during the oxidative half-reaction
of PCP hydroxylase. However, the absorbance of the FMNSQ–Fe2S2 red form of TCBQ reductase
at a longer wavelength (525 nm) ( Figure 4) allows us to detect transfer of a single electron from
the fully reduced FMNred–Fe2S2 red form to a substrate.

TCBQ Reductase Rescues the Unreactive Diradical
Formed during
Turnover of PCP
Kinetic analysis of events during the oxidative
half-reaction of PCP hydroxylase in the presence of TCBQ reductase
revealed three observable processes, as for the reaction with PCP
hydroxylase alone. The calculated spectra of the TCSQ intermediate
and the final product (Figure ) are essentially
identical to those seen during the reaction of PCP hydroxylase alone
(Figure B), except for the presence of a peak
at 525 nm that can be attributed to the FMNSQ–Fe2S2 red form of TCBQ reductase. The rate constants
for formation of C4a-hydroperoxyflavin (I)
and TCSQ remained essentially unchanged in the presence of TCBQ reductase
(Table ). However, TCBQ reductase is directly
involved in the following steps (Figure ,
highlighted in pink). The intermediate state depicted by the green
line in Figure  includes both TCSQ (indicated
by the double peak in the region between 420 and 470 nm) and the FMNSQ–Fe2S2 red form of TCBQ
reductase (indicated by the peak at 525 nm). The concomitant appearance
of both species suggests that they form at the same time (unlikely
since TCSQ is formed in the absence of TCBQ reductase), or that formation
of TCSQ is followed immediately by a single electron transfer from
TCBQ reductase (Figure , pink box). This electron
must reduce the unidentified active-site radical in PCP hydroxylase
to form V because the absorbance spectrum indicates that
TCSQ is still present. The rate of this electron transfer is independent
of the concentration of TCBQ reductase (black data points in the inset
to Figure ) for reasons that are not understood,
yet not unprecedented.

Calculated spectra of
the diradical intermediate (green) and oxidized
PCP hydroxylase (purple) formed during the oxidative half-reaction
of PCP hydroxylase in the presence of TCBQ reductase. Reduced PCP
hydroxylase (28 μM) in the presence of PCP (22 μM), NADPH
(90 μM) ,and NADH (90 μM) and various concentrations of
TCBQ reductase (4.2–48.8 μM) was mixed with an equal
volume of oxygenated buffer and monitored by diode array spectroscopy
in a stopped-flow apparatus. The calculated spectra shown in the figure
were obtained from the reaction carried out in the presence of 24.4
μM TCBQ reductase. The inset shows kobs for the appearance of the peak at 525 nm (left axis, squares) and kobs for the disappearance of the signal at 464
nm due to TCSQ (right axis, circles). Observed rate constants were
obtained by fitting the Michaelis–Menten equation to the data.

Kinetic Parameters
for the Oxidative
Half-Reaction of PCP Hydroxylase in the Presence of Varying Concentrations
of TCBQ Reductase
[TCBQ reductase] (μM)	formation
of I (×10–5 M–1 s–1)	I → IV (s–1)	IV → V (at 525 nm; s–1)	V → VI (s–1)	
0	2.8 ± 0.19	6.0 ± 0.2	n.a.	n.a.	
2.1	3.0 ± 0.21	5.8 ± 0.3	5.4 ± 0.4	0.24 ± 0.029	
3.8	3.3 ± 0.28	6.7 ± 0.5	4.6 ± 0.6	0.42 ± 0.010	
7.7	3.6 ± 0.51	6.7 ± 0.4	6.4 ± 1.0	0.63 ± 0.010	
12.8	3.4 ± 0.32	8.3 ± 1.5	7.6 ± 0.6	0.95 ± 0.052	
24.4	3.2 ± 0.24	10.8 ± 3.4	7.7 ± 1.4	1.39 ± 0.063	
Derived from global
kinetic fitting
(unless indicated otherwise). n.a.: not applicable.

The final observed process is reduction
of TCSQ by TCBQ reductase
concomitant with dehydration of VI to form the oxidized
flavin (VII), which absorbs maximally at 460 nm (Figure ). Since this process is accelerated by TCBQ reductase
in a concentration-dependent manner (red data points in the inset
to Figure ), we conclude that the electron
transfer that results in reduction of TCSQ limits the rate of conversion
of VI to VII, and that dehydration of the
flavin occurs rapidly after the electron is transferred. Alternatively,
dehydration of the flavin might occur first, and be followed rapidly
by electron transfer. However, the observation that the rate constant
is proportional to the concentration of TCBQ reductase makes this
scenario less likely.

These data indicate that TCBQ reductase
rescues the unreactive
off-pathway state of PCP hydroxylase by two consecutive electron transfers
to different acceptors. This intervention accelerates the formation
of the oxidized flavin by up to 50-fold. However, kcat in the presence of TCBQ reductase is still remarkably
slow (0.04 s–1, ref ()). We conclude that a conformational change occurring
after reoxidation of PCP hydroxylase or release of product(s) limits
the rate of overall turnover in the presence of TCBQ reductase.

Discussion
Given the toxicity of PCP and its relatively
recent introduction
into the environment, the assembly of a new pathway for degradation
of PCP is an impressive feat. The PCP degradation pathway in S. chlorophenolicum begins with conversion of PCP
to an extremely toxic intermediate, TCBQ. This initial step may seem surprising from a teleological standpoint;
why would an organism “choose” to generate such a reactive
intermediate? The answer to this question is likely that formation
of TCBQ is an inevitable result of the enzymatic repertoire from which S. chlorophenolicum could have drawn an enzyme capable
of initiating degradation of PCP. Aerobic microbes typically initiate
degradation of phenols by hydroxylating a position ortho or para to
the existing hydroxyl substituent using a flavin-dependent monooxygenase.
Such enzymes are abundant in environmental microbes. Thus, the most
likely source of an enzyme that can do anything with PCP is a flavin-dependent
monooxygenase whose normal function is to hydroxylate a naturally
occurring phenol. Most commonly, phenols are hydroxylated at a position
carrying a hydrogen, a reaction that leads to formation of a hydroquinone
after elimination of H2O from the hydroxylated intermediate.
In contrast, hydroxylation at a position carrying a leaving group
leads to an intermediate that undergoes gem elimination
to form a benzoquinone. Phenol hydroxylase,p-hydroxybenzoate hydroxylase, and anthranilate hydroxylase have been shown to produce benzoquinone products from fluorinated
substrate analogs by this mechanism. Since PCP contains five chlorines,
formation of a benzoquinone is an inevitable consequence of hydroxylation
as catalyzed by a flavin-dependent monooxygenase.

PCP hydroxylase
is a remarkably slow enzyme; kcat is only
0.02 s–1. Our initial expectation
was that turnover was slow because hydroxylation of a phenol with
so many electron-withdrawing chlorine substituents was difficult.
Surprisingly, we found that PCP hydroxylase acts as efficiently and
via the same mechanism as other flavin-dependent monooxygenases even
through the hydroxylation step. The mechanism only departs from the
canonical phenol hydroxylase mechanism when the strongly oxidizing
TCBQ is formed in the active site. Electron transfer to TCBQ results
in a diradical intermediate (IV) that only slowly completes
the catalytic cycle. This unprecedented diradical intermediate is
not dictated by a change in the fundamental mechanism of typical flavin-dependent
monooxygenases, but rather by the unique characteristics of the polychlorinated
substrate.

Formation of TCSQ at the active site appears to be
preceded by
formation of a charge-transfer complex that absorbs at wavelengths
longer than 470 nm. A transient charge-transfer complex with similar
properties has been observed between ubiquinone and an active site
cysteine during oxidation of DsbA by DsbB., This charge-transfer complex shows a broad absorbance peak with
a maximal absorbance at about 525 nm and forms at rate comparable
to that of the increase in absorbance at 480 nm that we attribute
to formation of a charge-transfer complex at the active site of PCP
hydroxylase. Further, the increase in absorbance due to the charge-transfer
complex is comparable in the two systems. The OD480 increases
by ∼0.03 in a solution containing 10 μM PCP hydroxylase.
For the DsbB/DsbA reaction, the OD500 increases by ∼0.05
in a solution containing 40 μM of each protein.

An estimate
of the amount of TCSQ present at the active site can
be obtained by subtracting the estimated contributions of the C4a-hydroxyflavin and the charge-transfer complex from the absorbance
at 460 nm of the intermediate shown in the green line in Figure B. The absorbance of the C4a-hydroxyflavin
alone is not known, but in complexes of flavin-dependent monooxygenases
containing the C4a-hydroxyflavin and either an intermediate
or product, its absorbance is comparable to that of the C4a-peroxyflavin. If the absorbance of the charge-transfer complex is
symmetric around 480 nm, then the absorbance of 460 nm would be approximately
equal to that at 500 nm. Based upon these approximations and the extinction
coefficient of TSCQ (ε461 = 6600 M–1 cm–1, ref ()), complex IV contains about 0.7 enzyme equivalents
of TCSQ. While this is only an estimate, it suggests that a substantial
amount of TCSQ can be accounted for by the spectroscopic evidence.

Unexpectedly, the amplitude of the EPR signal we measure during
turnover is half that expected for a complex containing TCSQ and a
protein-based radical. Quantitation of the EPR signal 45 s after initiation
of the reaction indicates the presence of 0.10 spin equivalents per
active site. Based upon the stopped-flow data, we would expect 0.11
equiv of TCSQ at this point, as well as 0.11 equiv of the radical
formed from the electron donor. Clearly there must be a second radical
that was not observable via the methods we employed in these experiments.
Our attempts to trap the active site radical with the spin traps α-phenyl-N-tert-butyl nitrone (PBN) and 5-diethoxyphosphoryl-5-methyl-1-pyrroline-n-oxide (DEPMPO) were unsuccessful, probably because the
active site is inaccessible during turnover.

Possible sources
of the electron that reduces TCBQ to TCSQ include
the deprotonated forms of cysteine, tyrosine, or the C4a-hydroxyflavin. Formation of radicals from any of these species is
unprecedented in flavin-dependent monoxygenases. Although there is
no literature precedent for the spectrum of a deprotonated C4a-hydroxyflavin, such a radical should give a detectable EPR signal,
as the common neutral and anionic flavin radicals are easily detectable
by X-band EPR., Tyrosine radicals are easily
detectable by EPR and typically display hyperfine interactions with
protons on the aromatic ring and the methylene group., Our EPR signal shows no hyperfine coupling (as expected for TCSQ,
which lacks protons on the aromatic ring). In contrast, the electron
spin relaxation of thiyl radicals is so fast that they can only be
detected at temperatures below 80 K. Thus,
if the diradical complex contains a thiyl radical, its amplitude would
be half of that expected and the signal should look like that of TCSQ
alone. Further, cysteine radicals do not absorb above 400 nm, and therefore would not be detectable in the
region of the spectrum probed during our stopped-flow kinetic studies.

PCP hydroxylase is only 29% identical to p-hydroxybenzoate
hydroxylase (PDB 1DOC) and phenol hydroxylase (1FOH), for which structures are available.
Although multiple sequence alignments of PCP hydroxylase with pfam
01494, to which all three of these enzymes belong, suggest that one
or possibly two cysteines may be near the active site, the high level
of sequence divergence, the different structural and electronic properties
of the substrates, and the differences in the regiochemistry of hydroxylation
make extrapolation from the available structural information tenuous.
Future structural and kinetic experiments will probe the roles of
cysteine residues in catalysis and electron transfer between TCBQ
reductase and the active site of PCP hydroxylase.

Our data suggest
that elimination of H2O to regenerate
the oxidized flavin cofactor cannot occur in complex IV. If the active-site radical is indeed a thiyl radical, perhaps the
dehydration of the C4a-hydroxyflavin requires Cys to act
as a general acid or general base. A radical would be unable to perform
either function. Alternatively, formation of TCSQ and a side-chain-based
radical might perturb the structural and/or electronic environment
at the active site such that dehydration becomes very slow. We plan
to solve the crystal structure of PCP hydroxylase to reveal whether
a cysteine residue occupies a position close enough to donate an electron
to TCBQ, but not close enough to permit nucleophilic attack on the
electron-deficient ring. More detailed information about the structure
of the active site will help us interpret the results of site-directed
mutagenesis of residues that may be involved in electron transfer
to TCBQ and/or dehydration of the C4a-hydroxyflavin, as
well as in transfer of electrons from TCBQ reductase into the active
site of PCP hydroxylase.

Formation of the off-pathway diradical
intermediate IV is thermodynamically favored but not
irreversible; occasionally
the enzyme returns to a state in which the C4a- hydroxyflavin
can undergo dehydration. Because dehydration is fast and irreversible,
it eventually pulls the enzyme out of the unreactive diradical state.
Thus, we now understand why PCP hydroxylase has such a slow turnover
number in vitro.

Based upon our previous observation that TCBQ
reductase can reduce
TCBQ in solution, we anticipated that
it would transfer two electrons or a hydride to TCBQ at its own active
site. However, we now have clear evidence that the electrons are donated
one at a time to the PCP hydroxylase:TCSQ complex. We propose that
the first electron reduces the enzyme-based radical and the second
electron reduces TCSQ to TCHQ. Thus, in the case of both PCP hydroxylase
and TCBQ reductase, mechanistic studies of the individual enzymes
in solution give an only partially accurate picture of the mechanism
by which PCP is converted to TCHQ in the presence of both enzymes,
and by extension, in vivo.

It is particularly intriguing that
the dramatic mechanistic intervention
by TCBQ reductase has a large effect on the rate at which dehydration
of the C4a-hydroxyflavin can occur, but only a 2-fold effect
on kcat. We previously speculated that
the low turnover number of PCP hydroxylase might be a result of selective
pressure to minimize the possibility of TCBQ escaping to the cytoplasm
before the enzyme can interact with TCBQ reductase. However, the interaction between the proteins is very efficient;
delivery of electrons to the diradical intermediate IV is at least 50-fold faster than kcat. Our presteady state kinetic studies show that the rate-limiting
step in the coupled PCP hydroxylase:TCBQ reductase system is either
the conformational change needed to open the active site to allow
products to depart, or the release of TCHQ and/or chloride. Turnover
is clearly not limited by any of the multiple chemical steps required
for conversion of PCP to TCHQ. Whether the low turnover is a consequence
of selection to minimize the rate of formation of TCHQ or an indication
that PCP hydroxylase has not yet evolved to be a highly efficient
catalyst remains an open question.

In other cases in which benzoquinone
intermediates are known to
be formed during degradation of a phenol, the gene encoding the hydroxylase
is clustered with a gene encoding a reductase., This is the case in S. chlorophenolicum as well, which suggests that this two-enzyme
system had already evolved the ability to convert a naturally occurring
phenol with a leaving group at the position of hydroxylation to a
hydroquinone before it was recruited to deal with the more problematic
substrate PCP.

The results reported here beg the question of
how the reductases
in other hydroxylase:reductase systems deal with benzoquinone intermediates.
Interestingly, there are different pairings in hydroxylase:reductase
systems, as if the system can be made up of two interchangeable parts.
In Alcaligenes sp. strain NyZ215, which can metabolize o-nitrophenol,
the reductase is homologous to TCBQ reductase (38% identity), but
the hydroxylase is unrelated to PCP hydroxylase, containing an unusual
cytochrome b5 domain on the C-terminal
end that could serve to accept electrons from the reductase. In Pseudomonas WBC-3, which can mineralize p-nitrophenol, the hydroxylase is distantly
related to PCP hydroxylase (25% identity), but the reductase (PnpB)
is not related to TCBQ reductase. The hydroxylase involved in degradation
of 2,4,6-trichlorophenol by Cupriavidus necator() is a two-component monooxygenase that
is unrelated to PCP hydroxylase. A benzoquinone reductase has not
been identified. The benzoquinone intermediates formed in these systems
are considerably less reactive than TCBQ because they carry fewer
electron-withdrawing substituents. We do not know whether these systems
sequester benzoquinones like the PCP hydroxylase/TCBQ reductase system.
We also do not know whether diradical intermediates are generated
in the presence of benzoquinone intermediates that are weaker oxidants
than TCBQ.

Our studies have revealed interesting insights into
the consequences
of adopting an ancestral catalytic strategy to carry out a reaction
on a novel substrate. Typically, flavin-dependent monooxygenases that
hydroxylate phenols generate hydroquinone or catechol intermediates
that are neither electrophilic or strong oxidants. However, adoption
of the typical mechanistic strategy for this enzyme family for hydroxylation
of PCP leads to formation of a strong oxidant, TCBQ. The abstraction
of an electron from an unidentified electron donor at the active site
by TCBQ is responsible for the slow turnover of PCP hydroxylase in
vitro. This situation is remedied in the presence of TCBQ reductase.
We do not know whether the ability of TCBQ reductase to transfer electrons
to two different acceptors in the active site was part of its pre-existing
function, or is a new feature due to the presentation of two radicals
in the active site of PCP hydroxylase. Similarly, is not clear whether
the success of the two enzymes working in concert is an elegant mechanism
resulting from natural selection or just a fortuitous outcome of the
inherent catalytic capabilities of TCBQ reductase that manages to
correct a “fumble” on the part of PCP hydroxylase. In
either case, the net effect is conversion of PCP to TCHQ without damage
to either enzyme or other cellular molecules.

Supporting Information Available
Supplementary Figures 1–6.
This material is available free of charge via the Internet at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bi5010427_si_001.pdf

This work was
supported by NIH R01 GM078554 to S.D.C.

The authors declare no
competing financial interest.

Abbreviations
PCPpentachlorophenol

TCBQtetrachlorobenzoquinone

TCHQtetrachlorohydroquinone

TCSQtetrachlorosemiquinone

TEMPOL4-hydroxy-2,2,6,6-tetramethylpiperidin-1-oxyl

