Metals and Evolution of the Biosphere
The bioavailability of essential transition metals such as copper
(Cu), iron (Fe), molybdenum (Mo), nickel (Ni), and zinc (Zn) has varied
substantially over geological and evolutionary time., Most researchers agree that the variation in metal availability
through geological history has been driven largely by the advent of
oxygenic photosynthesis &gt;2.45 billion years ago (Ga)− and concomitant increases in the oxidative weathering of continental
sulfide minerals and delivery of these weathering products to ocean
basins.,, Importantly,
on geological time scales, the bulk oxidation state of oceans is determined
by the ratio of photosynthetic oxygen production to the sum of biological
respiration and chemical reducing equivalents. The oxidation state of oceans was critical to the bioavailability
of metals given the differential behavior of metals in their oxidized
and reduced states. While some metals such as Mo have decreased solubility
under anoxic conditions, in particular when in complex with sulfide,
other metals such as Fe are less soluble when they are oxidized and
rapidly precipitate because of hydrolysis and formation of iron hydroxo(oxo)
compounds. Thus, changes in the oxidation state of oceans and the
differential behavior of metals in their oxidized and reduced forms
have together impacted metal availability over geological history.

The bioavailability of metals strongly influenced early biological
evolution and the metabolic strategies that sustained life during
this time., Phylogenetic analysis of inferred proteomes
from available sequenced genomes that span all domains of life indicates
that selection for specific metalloprotein folds generally reflects
the availability of metals through geological time., As previously mentioned, during the Archean eon (&gt;2.5 Ga), Fe
ions
were bioavailable because of an absence or very low concentration
of O2 and the solubility of Fe2+ that is greater
than that of Fe3+. The delivery of Fe2+ from
hydrothermal waters circulating through midocean ridge basalts is
thought to be the predominant source of Fe for anoxic Archean ocean
basins. The flux of Fe2+ to oceans from this source is
thought to have greatly exceeded that of H2S or O2, leading to estimated free Fe2+ concentrations that range from 0.05 to 0.5 mM (Figure ). In contrast, soluble Fe concentrations
in modern oceans are far lower and rarely exceed several nanomolar
(Figure ). Consequently,
protein folds that specifically bind Fe are well-represented in early
evolving lineages, and their presence in biology can be mapped back
to the Last Universal Common Ancestor (LUCA), indicating their early
emergence. In contrast, protein folds specific for Cu and Zn ions
are enriched in the genomes of organisms that emerged after the Great
Oxidation Event (GOE) ∼2.45 Ga,, likely because
of the increased rate of delivery of these metals to ocean basins
through greater oxidative weathering of continental Cu or Zn sulfide
minerals as O2 became more available with the proliferation
of oxygenic phototrophs.

Model of core Suf pathway
evolution in response to increasing oxygen
concentrations in the biosphere. In the top graph, iron (red) and
oxygen (blue) concentrations refer to those in seawater as adapted
from published estimates. The bottom panels
show the addition of biogenesis components to the core SufBC scaffold
complex in response to decreased iron bioavailability (SufD), altered
sulfur metabolism (SufS), and oxidation of sulfur transfer intermediates
(SufE). Surface representation structures are of SufB (red), SufC
(green), SufD (blue), SufS homodimer (yellow), and SufE (orange).
The model shows SufBC performing its proposed role as an Fe–S
cluster scaffold. A proposed role for SufD in iron acquisition is
also shown. SufS and SufE are shown mobilizing sulfide (as persulfide)
from l-cysteine for cluster biogenesis in some species. See
Table  for a summary of proposed Suf protein
functions and the text for more details.

Biogenesis of Iron–Sulfur (Fe–S) Clusters
Fe2+ is common in ocean spreading centers and hydrothermal
discharge where it often forms complexes with sulfide, resulting in
iron–sulfur (Fe–S) mineral phases. Fe–S minerals,
in particular pyrrhotite (FeS), have been shown to catalyze numerous
small molecule interconversions, including the reduction of N2, reduction of CO2, and production of H2 using H2S as a reductant under high-pressure and high-temperature
conditions mimicking those of hydrothermal vents.− In modern biology,
enzymes with Fe–S centers are widely distributed and catalyze
a functionally diverse array of chemistry, including the reduction
of N2/CO2 and production of H2. The
strong parallels between the reactivity and structure of Fe–S
minerals and Fe–S cluster-containing metalloenzymes, coupled
with the presence of modern ancestors of these enzymes in early evolving
lineages, represent one of the primary arguments in support of an
“Fe–S World” theory for the origin of life. More recent phylogenetic analyses are consistent
with this theory and suggest Fe–S cluster metalloprotein folds
are among the most ancient and widely distributed, indicating a selective
advantage for fine-tuning Fe–S cluster stability and chemical
reactivity through ligation to a protein framework.,− The chemical reactivity of Fe–S clusters makes
them versatile cofactors for electron transfer and substrate binding/activation
reactions. Other functional folds for Fe–S proteins mediate
their roles in catalysis and redox sensing.

In the laboratory,
Fe–S clusters can be synthesized from
iron and sulfide salts using low-molecular weight compounds containing
suitable ligands such as sulfur (S) or nitrogen (N).− Fe–S metalloproteins can also be chemically reconstituted
using similar Fe and S sources or using purified physiological Fe
and S donor proteins.− However, in vitro reconstitution of Fe–S
metalloproteins usually requires strict anoxic conditions and often
generates polymeric Fe–S species not normally found in the
cellular environment. While in vitro reconstitution
is an important tool for studying active Fe–S metalloenzymes
and for dissecting stepwise Fe–S cluster assembly, it is important
to remember that the reconstitution procedure may not accurately reflect
the biogenesis pathway in vivo.

Numerous genetic
studies, starting with those focused on the maturation
of the nitrogenase enzyme in Azotobacter vinelandii, have shown that in vivo Fe–S cluster biogenesis
requires multiple protein components.,In
vivo Fe–S cluster biogenesis is conducted by a somewhat
bewildering array of proteins whose numbers seem to expand with each
new organelle, organ system, and/or model organism under study., The basic process of Fe–S cluster biogenesis requires donation
of iron (Fe2+ and/or Fe3+ depending on cluster
type) and sulfide (S2–), which serves as a bridging
ligand for the iron ions. In every system studied to date, these two
components are first combined on a protein that serves as a “scaffold”
for cluster assembly (Figure ). The Fe–S
cluster that is bound to the scaffold protein is often labile, which
facilitates release of the cluster after assembly. The scaffold protein
could theoretically transfer the assembled cluster to the appropriate
apo form of the desired Fe–S metalloprotein. In practice, it
appears that cells use a series of Fe–S cluster carrier proteins
to mediate downstream trafficking and targeting of the mature Fe–S
cluster. Some of the Fe–S carrier proteins may interact with
additional targeting proteins that help dictate the final destination
of the Fe–S cluster, providing an additional layer of control
(and complexity) to the system.

The Suf system is the most ancient
of the currently identified
Fe–S cluster biogenesis systems. The widespread taxonomic distribution of Suf and its presence in
both aerobes and anaerobes suggest this system evolved prior to the
widespread oxygenation of the biosphere and thus likely evolved mechanisms
or strategies for maintaining functionality in an oxidizing environment
(Figure  and Table ). The suf operon is diverse and can contain from
two to more than six genes organized as (presumed) single polycistronic
transcriptional units (Figures  and ). Furthermore, the physiological role of Suf appears
to have diverged over evolutionary time. In some organisms, the Suf
pathway for Fe–S cluster biogenesis is the only system present
and is therefore essential for viability. In other organisms, Suf
is one of multiple Fe–S cluster biogenesis systems and operates
in parallel with the Isc (iron–sulfur cluster) and/or Nif (nitrogen
fixation) pathways., While only a few Suf pathways
have been extensively studied, it appears that in organisms that contain
multiple Fe–S cluster biogenesis pathways, Suf functions as
a stress-response cluster assembly system that operates under conditions
of oxidative stress and iron starvation to augment other “housekeeping”
biogenesis pathways like Isc.− It is likely that much of the functional divergence of Suf across
multiple phyla stems from changes in the gene composition of the suf operon as well as modifications to Suf regulation in
response to the availability of iron and oxygen, which are interlinked
as discussed above.

Select examples of suf operon diversity
among
Archaea (top) and Bacteria (bottom). Genes for sufA, sufB, sufC, sufD, sufS, and sufU are color-coded
to reflect their homology in different organisms.

Proposed Functions of Suf Proteins
in the Fe–S Cluster Assembly Process
Suf protein	proposed
function	refs	
SufB	Fe–S scaffold protein	(−), ()	
SufC	ATPase	(), (), (), (), (−)	
SufD	iron trafficking	(), ()	
SufS	cysteine desulfurase	(), (), (−, −, −)	
SufE	sulfur transfer shuttle	(), (), (−)	
SufA	Fe–S carrier protein	(), ()	
SufU	sulfur transfer or Fe-S
scaffold protein	(), (), (), (), ()	
Over the past decade, we have studied
the physiological role of
one of the most complex suf operons, sufABCDSE, in the gamma proteobacterium Escherichia coli (Figure  and Table ). The E. coli Suf system is an example of the stress-responsive
class of suf operons as it is primarily used to augment
the Isc housekeeping pathway under conditions of oxidative stress
and iron starvation. In this review, we will attempt to correlate
the results of biochemical and physiological studies with the taxonomic
distribution of the core scaffold complex and sulfur delivery system
of the Suf system. We then examine the evolutionary history of Suf
to provide new insight into the influence of oxygen and its metabolism
on the evolution of Fe–S cluster biogenesis.

SufBC Scaffold
Complex
The simplest suf operon and that
which contains
the minimal functional core is comprised solely of sufBC (Figures  and ). Despite their widespread occurrence in many
Archaea and Bacteria, SufB and SufC have been most extensively studied
at the genetic and biochemical levels in Bacteria, specifically E. coli and Erwinia chrysanthemi. The E. coli SufB protein stimulates Fe–S cluster assembly
and insertion of a [2Fe-2S]2+ cluster into the adrenodoxin-like
ferredoxin protein Fdx when iron and sulfide salts are provided as
starting materials. SufB also assembles
a stable [4Fe-4S]2+ cluster during in vitro reconstitution., (His)6-SufB is purified
with both [4Fe-4S]2+ and linear [3Fe-4S] clusters after in vivo co-expression with the sufCDSE genes. Holo-SufB is competent to transfer intact Fe–S
clusters to native E. coli target proteins such as
SufA, Fdx, and aconitase (AcnA).,, On the basis of these results, we and others have
proposed that E. coli SufB is an Fe–S scaffold
protein in which the nascent Fe–S cluster assembles prior to
its transfer to Fe–S metalloproteins. As illustrated in Figure , early during the evolution of life the SufB scaffold
may have been selected on the basis of its ability to isolate reactive
intermediates that form during “spontaneous” cluster
assembly, to prevent polymerization of iron sulfide species during
cluster assembly, and/or to provide some specificity for downstream
targeting of mature Fe–S clusters to their respective metalloproteins.
Scaffold proteins like SufB may have represented the simplest biogenesis
system for capturing abiological Fe–S compounds from the environment
and incorporating them into proteins as cofactors. Support for this
notion, as discussed in more detail below, is suggested by phylogenetic
analysis that indicates Suf likely emerged in the Archaea but after
the divergence of Bacteria and Archaea from the LUCA, which indicates
the presence of other more primitive mechanisms for Fe–S cluster
biosynthesis in earlier evolving but likely extinct life forms. Thus,
the ancestral suf operon likely consisted of only sufBC, with subsequent acquisition of sufD through a duplication of sufB (Figures  and ).

SufC is encoded
along with the SufB scaffold protein in all suf operons
identified in sequenced genomes (Table 1 of
the ), which is consistent
with biochemical evidence indicating that the two proteins physically
interact to form a SufBC complex (Figure ).,,,− Primary sequence analysis of SufC reveals the presence of signature
motifs normally found in the ATPase subunit of ATP-binding cassette
(ABC) transporters.,− SufC has an
overall L-shaped structure consisting of two domains, a RecA-like
catalytic domain containing the Walker A (GxxxxGKT/S)
(Figure A, yellow) and Walker B (hhhhD)
(Figure A, yellow) motifs (where h denotes
a hydrophobic residue) and a helical domain that contains the ABC
signature motif (L/FSGGQ/E) (Figure A, yellow) that is strictly conserved among ABC ATPases. Upon dimerization,
the Walker motifs of one SufC monomer should orient with the ABC signature
motif of the other monomer to create two ATP-binding sites, both buried
at the dimer interface (Figure 1 of the ). A highly conserved glutamate residue immediately
following the Walker B motif is the proposed catalytic residue for
ATP hydrolysis in ABC ATPases (although this has not been conclusively
shown for SufC). In structures of other ABC ATPases, this glutamate
residue interacts with ATP in the nucleotide-binding site via a water
molecule. In the structure of the SufC monomer, this glutamate residue
(Glu171) is positioned away from the active site and forms a salt
bridge with Lys152 (Figure A,B).− Lys152 is adjacent to the ABC signature sequence, so the ionic bond
with Glu171 also serves to link the helical and catalytic domains.
Residues Lys152 and Glu171 are conserved in all SufC proteins, and
the Lys152–Glu171 salt bridge is observed in SufC structures
from E. coli and Thermus thermophilus. The SufC primary sequence also contains two other motifs peculiar
to ABC ATPases. The D-loop (Figure ) is a
flexible structure that seems to alter its position to facilitate
ATP hydrolysis. A putative dimer model of SufC, generated by superimposing
the structure of monomeric SufC onto the structure of an ATP-bound
form of the paralogous HlyB (H662A) dimer from E. coli, reveals possible steric hindrance
of SufC dimer formation due to protrusion of the D-loop into the putative
dimer interface. This feature distinguishes SufC from other ABC transporter
ATPases. The Q-loop (Figure ) connects the catalytic and helical domains in
ABC ATPases and mediates the interaction between the ATPase and transmembrane
domains of ABC transporters.− SufC instead forms soluble cytoplasmic complexes
with SufB (and SufD in some organisms)., The Q-loop
putatively contributes to the interaction of SufC with its partner
proteins.

(A) Structural alignment of the nucleotide-free SufC monomer (light
blue, PDB entry 2D3W) and one nucleotide-free SufC monomer from the SufC2D2 complex (green, chain C of PDB entry 2ZU0). C-Terminal helices
6 and 7 of SufD from SufC2D2 are shown at the
top (blue). The Walker A, Walker B, and ABC signature motifs are colored
yellow. The Q-loop is colored red (SufC monomer) or orange (SufC2D2). The D-loop is colored black (SufC monomer)
or purple (SufC2D2). (B) Close-up view of panel
A. Black dashed arrows indicate positional changes of those residues
going from the structure of SufC alone to the SufC from SufC2D2. Gln85 (red to orange), Lys152 (yellow), and Glu171
(pink to cyan) are shown as sticks, and the Lys152–Glu171 salt
bridge is shown as a red dashed line.

The interaction of SufC with both SufB and SufD is consistent
with
the considerable sequence homology between SufB and SufD (Figure ), the latter of which evolved from a duplication
of a sufB gene (discussed in more detail below).
The region of shared homology largely covers the β-helix structure
of SufD and SufB as well as α-helices shown to interact with
SufC. In E. coli, SufC can form three stable complexes.
SufB and SufC can interact to form a stable SufB2C2 heterotetramer in vivo.,, While it is not clear if SufB2C2 is physiologically relevant in E. coli, this complex may reflect the active SufBC complex in organisms
that lack SufD and have only the minimal sufBC operon
(Figure ). If the entire sufABCDSE operon is co-expressed in E. coli, the SufBC2D heterotetramer is the primary complex purified, which may
suggest that it is the most stable form of SufB, SufC, and SufD (Figures  and )., In addition, a SufC2D2 complex can form if
SufC and SufD are co-expressed in the absence of SufB., A crystal structure of SufC2D2 from E. coli has been determined. The quaternary structure of the E. coli SufC2D2 complex revealed that the SufC catalytic site
is remodeled by its interactions with SufD. The Glu171–Lys152
salt bridge is broken, and Glu171 is rotated toward the ATP-binding
pocket (Figure B). The D-loop is also rotated away from the dimer interface, making
the nucleotide-binding site of SufC more accessible and facilitating
the dimerization of SufC for ATP binding and hydrolysis. These structural
observations are supported by studies that show that the basal ATPase
activity of SufC alone is quite low but is significantly enhanced
when SufC forms a complex with either SufB or SufD., It is proposed that the salt bridge in the monomeric SufC structure
is used to downregulate ATP hydrolysis when SufC is not bound to SufB
or SufD (and perhaps in response to ATP occupancy of the active site)., All of these changes appear to be controlled by interaction of SufC
with its partner protein(s), indicating an appreciable degree of coordinated
regulation of SufC ATPase activity. At present, the exact function
of SufC in the Fe–S cluster biogenesis cycle is unknown.

(A) Structural
alignment of E. coli SufD (PDB
entry 1VH4)
and Methanosarcina mazei Go1 SufB (PDB entry 4DN7). The alignment
was generated using the FATCAT Pairwise Alignment tool. (B) Model
structure of the E. coli SufBC2D complex
generated by modeling E. coli SufB on one chain of
the SufC2D2 structure (PDB entry 2ZU0). SufB is colored
red; SufC monomers are colored green, and SufD is colored blue. The
alignment was generated using the FATCAT Pairwise Alignment tool.

There is currently no direct structural
characterization of SufB2C2 or SufBC2D. Presumably, similar interactions
occur between SufC and the SufB or SufD partner protein (Figures A and ). It is possible
the SufB2C2 and SufC2D2 complexes conduct discrete steps in cluster assembly, but this has
not been conclusively shown in vivo or in
vitro. A number of organisms contain the sufBC genes and lack sufD (Figure , discussed below);
however, there is currently no evidence of sufCD being
found in the absence of sufB in any genome (Table
1 of the ). This
finding coupled with the substantial sequence and structural homology
between SufB and SufD suggests that sufD results
from a duplication of sufB.

Rate-smoothed phylogenetic
reconstruction of concatenated SufBC
alignment blocks from 1094 bacterial and archaeal taxa (eukarya excluded).
Representative SufB and SufC were identified in available genome sequences
in October 2011 and were aligned individually with ClustalW specifying default alignment parameters. Paralogs
of SufB (i.e., SufD) and SufC (i.e., other members of the ABC transporter
ATP-binding protein family) were included in each alignment, respectively,
and were later used to root the phylogeny. SufB and SufC alignment
blocks were concatenated with PAUP (version 4.0, Sinauer Associates,
Inc.). The maximum likelihood phylogenetic reconstruction was inferred
using PhyML version 3.0 specifying the LG substitution matrix and
a four-category gamma substitution model. The concatenated SufBC phylogeny was rate-smoothed using the penalized-likelihood
approach as implemented by the “chronopl”
command in the R statistical package (version 2.15.0) Picante (version
1.3) specifying a smoothing parameter
of 1.0. The distribution of SufD (red), SufS (green), and SufE (blue)
in the suf operon in each taxon was mapped on the
phylogeny using base commands in the Picante package within R. The
primary taxonomic rank at the phylum level is indicated for major
clusters.

Taxonomic Distribution and Phylogeny of the
Core sufB and sufC Genes
The taxonomic distribution of Suf was determined via BLASTp analysis
of publically available genome sequences in October 2011 (full results
presented in Table 1 of the ). The genetic composition of operons was characterized using the
KEGG gene viewer, with manual verification using BLASTp or sequence
alignments. We found that 1094 genomes of a total of 1667 genome sequences
(65.6% of the total) were found to encode sufB and sufC. The sufB and sufC loci were almost exclusively found adjacent to one another in an
apparent operon leading us to define sufBC as the
minimal suf operon, with the only exceptions being
a single species of cyanobacterium (Cyanothece sp.
PCC 7425) and two clostridial species (Clostridium difficile CD196 and Clostridium tetani E88). As a percent
of available genomes, the sufBC genes were more prevalent
among archaeal genomes than bacterial genomes, with only a few eukaryal
genomes containing sufBC. Among the Archaea, sufBC was identified in nearly all of the available genomes,
including those affiliated with the Crenarchaeota (35 of 35 genomes),
Euryarchaeota (75 of 77 genomes), Nanoarchaeota (1 of 1 genome), and
Thaumarchaeota (2 of 2 genomes). Among the bacteria, sufBC was prevalent among phyla that are traditionally characterized as
anaerobes or facultative anaerobes, including the Bacteroidetes (60
of 62 genomes), Firmicutes (248 of 299 genomes), green-nonsulfur bacteria
(15 of 15 genomes), and Spirochaetes (14 of 31 genomes). In addition, sufBC was prevalent among Acidobacteria (147 of 151 genomes),
Chlamydiae (20 of 21 genomes), and Cyanobacteria (40 of 40 genomes)
but exhibited an uneven distribution among Proteobacteria. A higher
percentage of taxa affiliated with the alphaproteobacteria (121 of
155 genomes, or 78.1% of the total), deltaproteobacteria (26 of 42
genomes, or 61.9% of the total), and gammaproteobacteria (185 of 308,
or 60.1% of the total) were found to encode sufBC compared to the percentage in betaproteobacteria (29 of 105 genomes,
or 27.6% of the total) or epsilonproteobacteria (5 of 37 genomes,
or 13.5% of the total); both of the latter phyla tend to harbor aerobic
members. Other lineages in which sufBC was commonly
identified include the Aquificae, Dictyoglomi, Fibrobacteres, Fusobacteria,
Nitrospirae, Planctomycetes, Thermotogae, and Verrucomicrobia.

The sufBC genes are also present among several
eukaryal genomes, most notably in the chloroplast or mitochondrial
genomes of constituent taxa. sufBC was identified
among the chlorophytes (e.g., green algae; 3 of 4 genomes), rhodophytes
(e.g., red algae; 1 of 1 genome), and streptophytes (e.g., eudicots,
monocots, ferns, and mosses; 8 of 14 genomes). Among protists, sufBC was identified among taxa affiliated with stramenophiles
(e.g., diatoms; 1 of 2 genomes) and alveolates (1 of 16 genomes).

We determined the phylogeny of a concatenation of SufBC for use
in defining patterns in the evolution of the suf operon
and for predicting the composition of the ancestral suf operon (Figure ). Methods used to concatenate
SufBC, reconstruct the SufBC phylogeny, rate-smooth the phylogeny,
and map the distribution of ancillary genes on the resultant rate-smoothed
phylogeny are included in the figure legend. The earliest branching
lineage associated with the SufBC phylogeny is comprised of two sublineages,
one of which is comprised exclusively of Crenarchaeota and the other
of which is comprised of Euryarcheota, Proteobacteria, and Firmicutes
(Figure ). In the second sublineage, sequences
affiliated with the Euryarchaea nest the bacterial lineages (Figure ). Together, these observations may suggest that suf first emerged among the Archaea. This hypothesis is
supported by the observation that SufBC associated with Candidatus
Korarchaeota (i.e., unclassified Archaea) also cluster within this
second sublineage (data not shown). Branching after the large crenarchaeal/euryarchaeal/firmicute/proteobacterial
SufBC lineage is a cluster of sequences comprised of a second monophyletic
lineage of crenarchaea, adding further support for an archaeal origin
for suf. Importantly, the finding that euryarchaeal
SufBC nest SufBC sequences affiliated with bacteria in the earliest
branching lineage strongly suggests a role for lateral gene transfer
(LGT) during the early evolution of the suf operon.
Additional evidence supporting a role for LGT in the evolution of suf derives from the observation that proteobacterial SufBC
form a number of large polyphyletic clades (Figure ), which generally correspond to the phylum level (alpha,
beta, delta, epsilon, and gamma) classification of this lineage (data
not shown). This indicates that suf was likely acquired
in these lineages early, but after the primary divergence among proteobacteria
had taken place.

Consistent with previous reports indicating
that chloroplast suf genes associated with eukaryote
plants likely are the
result of the primary endosymbiosis of a cyanobacterium, SufBC proteins
from the red alga Cyanidioschyzon merolae and the
green alga Chlamydomonas reinhardtii cluster with
cyanobacterial SufBC (E. S. Boyd, unpublished data). Likewise, the
complements of genes encoded by plant chloroplast and cyanobacterial suf operons are similar, adding further support to this
hypothesis. Interestingly, the suf proteins encoded
by mitochondrian genomes in taxa such as Toxoplasma gondii are also very similar to cyanobacterial sequences (data not shown).
Recently, a chimeric fusion protein of SufB and SufC was discovered
in the human protozoan parasite Blastocystis. The Bh-SufCB fusion protein
was likely acquired by lateral gene transfer from an archaeon from
the Methanomicrobiales and now plays a role in cytosolic Fe–S
cluster metabolism in Blastocystis.

Diversification of the Core suf Operon
A number of accessory genes are found encoded with sufBC in many organisms (Figure ). A qualitative
examination of the operon composition (Figure ) in early evolving taxa when compared with more recently evolved
taxa suggests that the operon has grown in complexity with time, similar
to what has been observed in other operons, including that which encodes
the mercury detoxification systems (mer). Consistent with previous work, our analysis
clearly shows that suf operons associated with early
evolving taxa, such as members of the Euryarchaeota and Crenarchaeota,
as well as early evolving members of the Proteobacteria and Firmicutes,
all harbor operons that are simpler than those harbored by more recently
evolved taxa (e.g., most other Proteobacteria). This suggests that natural selection has promoted the recruitment
of new gene functions in the suf operon to optimize
the efficiency of Fe–S cluster biogenesis in the various ecological
niches inhabited by these taxa. Collectively, our analysis suggests
an evolutionary trajectory in which suf grew in complexity
from an operon encoding only sufBC through the sequential
recruitment of other genes such as sufD, sufS, and sufE (Figures  and ). Importantly, when the distribution
of accessory genes is mapped on the SufBC tree, numerous examples
of gene loss are also evident as evinced by large gaps in the phylogenetic
distribution of these genes. Thus, both gene recruitment and loss
are likely to have shaped the functional and evolutionary history
of suf.

For our initial analysis of suf operon evolution
and diversity, we chose to focus primarily on the recruitment of sufD, sufE, and sufS to
the operon (Figure ). Previous studies have
suggested a possible connection between SufD and the iron acquisition
step of Fe–S cluster assembly by SufBC. Similarly, extensive biochemical and genetic experiments
have shown that SufS and SufE act as a concerted sulfur transfer pathway
for donation of sulfide during cluster assembly.,,− Thus, our phylogenetic analysis of these genes can be used in conjunction
with extensive biochemical and genetic data to formulate new hypotheses
about their functional roles in the E. coli Suf system.

To predict the composition of the ancestral suf operon, as well as to define the trajectory of recruitment of genes
to the operon, we mapped the distribution of individual gene functions
on the SufBC tree (Figure ). The sufD gene appears earliest in evolutionary time among the suf genes when mapped on the SufBC tree. Sequence homology suggests
the sufD gene derives from a duplication of an ancestral sufB sequence. The earliest evolving sufD proteins are not yet present in the earliest evolved SufBC lineage
from the Euryarchaeota, Crenarchaeota, and several Firmicutes and
Proteobacteria. Rather, the earliest evolving sufD genes likely emerged as the crenarchaeal lineage diversified at
a time that likely predated the divergence of the Sulfolobales and
the Desulfurococcales (E. S. Boyd, unpublished data). Thus, the ancestral suf operon likely consisted of only sufBC, with acquisition of sufD through gene duplication
occurring early during the evolution of suf. Shortly
after the acquisition of sufD, the gene encoding
the cysteine desulfurase (sufS) was recruited to
the operon (Figure ). The SufS cysteine desulfurase
is likely to have predated in evolutionary time the emergence of the
ancillary sulfurtransferase component encoded by sufE (Figure ). Following the recruitment of
the cysteine desulfurase, other Fe–S cluster biogenesis proteins
were recruited to the operon, including the U-type scaffold or sulfur
trafficking protein SufU, the A-type cluster trafficking protein SufA,
and others. A detailed analysis of the evolution and complexity of
the complete array of suf operon genes is underway
but is beyond the scope of this review (E. S. Boyd, J. M. Boyd, and
F. W. Outten, manuscript in preparation).

Phylogenetic Distribution
and Function of sufD
The sufD gene was identified in 85% of the suf operons examined.
In general, suf operons
associated with Archaea appeared to have fewer gene complements than
those associated with bacteria. The majority of taxa that encode only sufBC (and do not include sufD) were affiliated
with the Euryarcheota (only 23.7% of genomes encode sufD), Crenarchaeota (74.3% of genomes encode sufD),
and Deltaproteobacteria (42.3% of genomes encode sufD) (Table 1 of the ). Close examination of the sufD distribution pattern
shows that 91.5% of Archaeal genomes that contain sufBC but lack sufD are obligate anaerobes or microaerobes.
A similar trend was observed among the Bacteria in which 86.5% of
the genomes that contain sufBC but lack sufD are also anaerobes or microaerobes. These observations suggest that
recruitment and selection for sufD in the core sufBC operon conveys an advantage for aerobic prokaryotes
but not necessarily for anaerobic or microaerobic Archaea and Bacteria
(Figure ).

As previously mentioned,
SufD is a paralog of SufB and evolved
from gene duplication. SufD and SufB harbor significant sequence homology
throughout their C-terminal domains but considerable divergence in
the N-terminal region, suggesting that the duplication of these genes
occurred prior to differentiation in the N-terminus. In E.
coli, SufD interacts with the SufC ATPase and SufB to form
the SufBC2D complex but can also form the SufC2D2 complex if SufB is absent.,,,,, Thus, it appears that
duplication of SufB allowed for new functionality of the core scaffold
complex, replacing (or perhaps expanding) the SufB2C2 stoichiometry with a new SufBC2D complex.

While studying the E. coli Suf system, we discovered
that if SufD is absent, in vivo incorporation of
iron on SufB during Fe–S cluster assembly is abolished while
the acquisition of sulfide is only modestly decreased. Similar results were obtained if the ATPase
activity of SufC is altered by introduction of a single point mutation
into the Walker A motif (K40R). On the
basis of these results, we proposed that SufC ATPase activity works
in concert with SufD to mediate the delivery of iron into the Suf
pathway. The iron donation step may require ATPase activity to provide
energy to mobilize iron for cluster assembly from an inert or inaccessible
form (such as an iron storage protein or ferric siderophore). Barras
and Expert discovered a number of intriguing genetic defects linked
to iron metabolism that are caused by deletion of the suf genes.,, In Er. chrysanthemi grown under iron-replete conditions, deletion
of the individual suf genes led to an increased sensitivity
to the iron-activated antibiotic streptonigrin, with the sufC deletion causing the greatest sensitivity. These results suggest that the size of the intracellular labile
iron pool increases in most suf deletion strains
(leading to an increase in the extent of streptonigrin activation).
Interestingly, a sufD mutant did not cause increased
sensitivity to streptonigrin, suggesting that sufD may be required for the phenotype observed in the other suf deletion strains. It was later found in Er.
chrysanthemi that deletion of sufA, sufB, or sufD leads to a decrease in the
iron-loaded form of the iron storage protein bacterioferritin (Bfr)
under iron-limited conditions. This result
suggests that in the absence of some suf genes, the
size of the labile iron pool is increased under iron-limited conditions
because of a decrease in iron storage capacity. That same work also
showed that sufC deletion actually causes the opposite
phenotype, an increase in the iron-loaded form of Bfr. Finally, it
was observed that deletion of sufC or sufD weakened the ability of Er. chrysanthemi to utilize
its native siderophore chrysobactin as an iron source when the cells
were stressed with the iron chelator 2,2′-dipyridyl. Together, these genetic studies suggest that
the suf system, especially sufC and sufD, plays an active role in modulating the intracellular
iron distribution to direct iron into the Fe–S cluster assembly
pathway. It remains to be seen if Suf plays this role through direct
interaction with the iron homeostasis system or if the cell indirectly
channels iron to Suf through altered expression of iron homeostasis
components by regulators like Fur and IscR.

The SufBC2D complex isolated from E. coli is copurified with
1 equiv of FADH2 per complex., All three Suf proteins are required for stoichiometric binding of
FADH2, which has a dissociation constant (Kd) of 12 μM. When the
bound FADH2 is oxidized to FAD by oxygen, the affinity
of SufBC2D for the flavin is decreased and FAD dissociates
from the complex. Reduced flavins are efficient ferric iron-reducing
agents, and SufBC2D-FADH2 was shown to mobilize
iron from ferric citrate or the ferric-loaded form of bacterial frataxin
(CyaY), presumably via a reductive mechanism. It was proposed that SufBC2D uses FADH2 as
a redox cofactor to mobilize iron for the Suf pathway, although the
physiological in vivo iron donor remains unclear.

The distribution of sufD in aerobic microorganisms
encoding suf is consistent with our hypothesized
role for SufD in iron trafficking during Fe–S cluster biogenesis
(Figure  and Table ). Iron bioavailability is more restricted in aerobic habitats because
of the insolubility of ferric iron, in particular in neutral to alkaline
environments such as the cytoplasm of most cells. Intracellular iron
metabolism (including Fe–S cluster metabolism) is also perturbed
by oxygen and reactive oxygen species, which can lead to increased
iron demand for metalloprotein maturation. The oxygen-dependent disruption
of iron metabolism likely led to selection for a multitude of adaptive
measures to acquire iron and protect it from spurious chemistry. It
is unclear how SufD may directly or indirectly mediate iron acquisition
for Fe–S cluster biogenesis, but part of the answer may lie
in the creation of a composite FADH2-binding site when
SufD joins the SufBC2D complex. This new functionality
may have provided SufBC with a way to funnel reducing equivalents
into ferric iron reduction to acquire iron by reductive release from
ferric siderophores, ferric iron storage proteins, or another unknown
ferric chelate.

Recruitment of SufS by SufBC Parallels the
Use of l-Cysteine as the Sulfur Source for Cluster Biogenesis
l-Cysteine is a major physiological sulfur source for
Fe–S cluster biosynthesis in bacteria as well as eukaryotic
mitochondria and chloroplasts. A family of cysteine desulfurases is
responsible for the mobilization of the sulfur atom via a pyridoxal
5′-phosphate (PLP) enzymatic mechanism first characterized
for the NifS cysteine desulfurase., In this mechanism,
substrate l-cysteine binds to PLP and forms a PLP–cysteine
adduct as a Schiff base (sometimes termed the external aldimine).
Next, a catalytic cysteine residue acts as a nucleophile to attack
the sulfhydryl group of the substrate cysteine, which has been activated
by binding to PLP. The nucleophilic attack results in formation of
an enzyme-bound persulfide (R-S-SH) and a PLP-bound enamine that is
ultimately released as l-alanine. The reactive enzyme-bound
persulfide group can then be transferred to cysteine residues on the
final scaffold protein directly or via a sulfur shuttle protein using
a mechanism similar to protein disulfide bond exchange. Despite some
disagreement about nomenclature, the persulfide (or sulfane sulfur)
species has a formal oxidation state of zero and is often termed S0 in the biochemical literature (even though it is not technically
zerovalent sulfur)., At some point, the persulfide
(S0) is reduced to sulfide (S2–) for
incorporation into the Fe–S cluster, although this likely occurs
on the scaffold protein (Figure ).

On
the basis of sequence similarity, the cysteine desulfurases
can be subdivided into group I (NifS and IscS) and group II (SufS
and CsdA) enzymes. Key differences between
the groups are observed in the structure around the catalytic cysteine
residue. The catalytic cysteine occurs as part of a short, more rigid
loop with a more hydrophobic environment in group II cysteine desulfurases
than in group I enzymes. On the basis
of multiple three-dimensional structures of SufS, the shortness and
decreased flexibility of the active site loop containing the catalytic
Cys364 likely explain the catalytic inefficiency of group II desulfurase
enzymes compared to group I enzymes, which have a flexible catalytic
cysteine loop that is 11 amino acids longer than the group II enzymes.− However, we now know that accessory proteins can enhance the activity
of SufS and other group II enzymes to a level comparable to that of
group I enzymes. For SufS in E. coli and Er. chrysanthemi, the accessory protein is SufE, while SufS
in other organisms, such as Bacillus subtilis, utilizes
SufU.,,,,,,−,

Despite its broad use in bacteria, the SufS cysteine desulfurase
exhibited a patchy taxonomic distribution in the Archaea, with 0.0
and 3.9% of total crenarchaeal and euryarchaeal suf operons encoding sufS, respectively (Table 1 of
the ). Even though l-cysteine is the sulfur source for Fe–S cluster biogenesis
in many organisms, most of the Archaea analyzed inhabit environments
characterized as sulfur- and/or sulfide-rich, which may explain the
lack of cysteine desulfurase homologues in these organisms (Figure ). The observed taxonomic distribution of SufS may
have resulted from evolutionary changes in l-cysteine biosynthesis
and metabolism in response to the advent of oxygenic photosynthesis.
In the absence of significant concentrations of atmospheric O2, the primary source of delivery of sulfate to ocean basins
was deposition of volcanogenic sulfur species (e.g., SO2) and more reduced species that had been photochemically oxidized
in the Archean atmosphere. Once the O2 concentration increased in the atmosphere, sulfate was delivered
to the oceans through continental weathering and oxidation of mineral
sulfides., The selection for dissimilatory and assimilatory
sulfate reduction pathways due to the greater availability of sulfate
in anerobes and microaerophiles likely had an impact on organisms
that eventually used SufS to synthesize Fe–S clusters. In many
organisms, sulfur is assimilated via sulfate reduction to sulfide
and incorporation into O-acetylserine for synthesis
of free l-cysteine. Free l-cysteine then serves
as the primary sulfur donor for sulfur-containing metabolites, including
Fe–S clusters (Figure ). In contrast,
methanogenic Archaea such as Methanococcus maripaludis use environmental sulfide, which is abundant in those organisms’
anaerobic habitats, to generate an uncharacterized protein persulfide,
which then donates sulfur to directly generate Cys-tRNACys in a reaction dependent on SepCysS.− Free cysteine is not
generated by this tRNA-dependent pathway, and free cysteine pools
in methanogens (arising primarily from protein turnover) can be 5–10-fold
smaller than cysteine pools in bacteria. Furthermore, it has been shown that free cysteine is not the in vivo sulfur source for Fe–S cluster biogenesis
in M. maripaludis where the sulfur donor is likely
an unknown compound derived from exogenous sulfide. Thus, SufS may have been incorporated into Suf to better
interface with the changing availability of sulfur because of the
accumulation of oxygen and with new sulfur metabolic pathways that
arose in response to such changes.

SufE and the Functional
Divergence of the Stress-Response suf Operon in Gammaproteobacteria
A SufE family member is found to be encoded with a group II cysteine
desulfurase in many Gram-negative bacterial genomes. However, suf operons from the Crenarcheota and Euryarcheota do not
encode sufE, and a lower percentage of bacterial suf operons encode sufE (16.8% of the total)
compared to sufS (88.4% of he total). Indeed, all suf operons from members of the Betaproteobacteria and Firmicutes
analyzed here lack homologues of sufE. A sufE gene is more commonly found in the suf operons of Bacteriodetes and Gammaproteobacteria. With the exception
of Salmonella enterica subsp. enterica serovar Paratyphi A AKU12601 and Shigella flexneri 301 (serotype 2a), all bacterial suf operons that
encode sufE also encode sufS, suggesting
an interaction between these proteins.

Early studies from Er. chrysanthemi showed that
SufS and SufE interact in a complex and that SufE increases the desulfurase
activity of SufS by ∼50-fold. The
highest specific activity was obtained upon addition of 1 equiv of
SufE. Preliminary steady-state kinetic results indicated that SufS
from Er. chrysanthemi, alone or in complex with SufE,
seems to display Michaelis–Menten behavior using cysteine as
a substrate. Binding of SufE to SufS had no effect on the KM value for cysteine (500 μM) but had
a large effect on Vmax (0.9 unit/mg compared
to 0.019 unit/mg). Fontecave and co-workers subsequently demonstrated
transfer of the sulfur from SufS to SufE via a SufS-bound persulfide
intermediate and suggested that the acceleration of persulfide cleavage
by SufE is primarily responsible for the observed activation of desulfurase
activity. However, a possible conformational
change in SufS upon SufE binding that may enhance substrate cysteine
binding has not been excluded.

We reported that E. coli SufE can stimulate the
cysteine desulfurase activity of the E. coli SufS
enzyme up to 8-fold and that SufE Cys51 accepts sulfane sulfur from
SufS. This sulfur transfer process from
SufS to SufE is sheltered from the environment on the basis of its
resistance to added reductants and the analysis of available crystal
structures of the proteins.,, We also found that in the presence of SufE, the SufBC2D or SufB2C2 complexes further stimulate SufS
activity up to 32-fold.,, The cysteine desulfurase SufS donates sulfur to the sulfur transfer
protein SufE, and then SufE in turn interacts with the SufB protein
for sulfur transfer to SufB. The interaction
occurs only if SufC is also present. On the basis of protein–protein
interaction and sulfur transfer experiments, the proposed route for
the persulfide intermediate is from the catalytic Cys364 of SufS to
the active site Cys51 of SufE, and finally transfer to SufB as part
of SufBC2D for cluster assembly. SufBC2D likely
enhances SufS–SufE activity by removal of the SufE persulfide
via sulfur transfer to SufB, which allows SufE to recycle faster.,

Approximately 87% of Gammaproteobacteria that contain sufE (as part of the suf operon) also contain
a second,
independent Fe–S cluster biogenesis machinery, the Isc (iron–sulfur
cluster) operon (E. S. Boyd, unpublished data). Those Gammabacteria
that contain Suf and Isc are predominantly facultative anaerobes from
the order Enterobacteriales. In most organisms in which both systems
are present and have been characterized, the Isc system is the basal,
housekeeping Fe–S cluster biogenesis pathway used under optimal
growth conditions while Suf has been adapted to function as a stress-responsive
cluster biogenesis pathway used under conditions that perturb Fe–S
cluster metabolism.,,,,, In E. coli and other related Gammaproteobacteria,
the sufABCDSE operon is induced by oxidative or nitrosative
stress and iron deprivation.,,,,, Under normal growth conditions, these organisms
express the iscRSUA-hscBA-fdx-iscX operon for basal
Fe–S cluster assembly. However, via intricate regulatory circuits
involving the Fur iron metalloregulatory protein, the IscR Fe–S
cluster sensor, the OxyR hydrogen peroxide sensor, and the Fur-regulated
small RNA rhyB, the Isc system is downregulated under
stress while the level of Suf expression increases to allow it to
play a more critical role in maintaining Fe–S cluster assembly
until the stress is removed.,,−In vivo studies in E. coli indicate
that the Suf pathway works better under oxidative stress than Isc., As little as 1 μM H2O2in vivo can deactivate the Isc machinery and lead to a growth requirement
for the Suf pathway.

The inclusion of sufE in
the subset of suf operons that are utilized for stress-responsive
Fe–S
cluster biogenesis suggests that SufE provides some protection against
disruption of cluster assembly by stress (Figure  and Table ). Fe–S cluster
biogenesis is sensitive to oxygen because of the proclivity of iron,
sulfide, and protein sulfhydryl groups to be modified by oxygen or
reactive oxygen species. The transfer of sulfur from a cysteine desulfurase
enzyme to other proteins is a key step in Fe–S cluster assembly.
Sulfur is transferred between active site cysteine residues as a highly
reactive S-sulfanyl cysteine moiety. The sulfanyl cysteine species
is sensitive to reduction or oxidation if exposed to the environment.
Because of the reactivity of both the persulfide intermediate and
active site sulfhydryl groups on the enzymes, oxidative stress may
block the sulfur donation step of Fe–S cluster biogenesis (Figure ). To test if sulfur trafficking by the Suf pathway
may be more resistant to disruption than the Isc system, we characterized
the sulfurtransferase reaction of E. coli SufS and
SufE and compared its kinetic features to those of the E.
coli IscS–IscU system. IscU is the scaffold protein for the Isc system that accepts sulfane
sulfur from IscS. Surprisingly, we found that the SufS–SufE
system is more active than the IscS–IscU system at low but
physiologically relevant concentrations of l-cysteine. The
enhanced activity at low l-cysteine concentrations may allow
Suf to function better than Isc under conditions of oxidative stress
when cellular l-cysteine pools might be depleted by oxidation
or by use in repair or new synthesis of damaged protein thiols.

We also directly compared the oxidative stress resistance of the E. coli SufS–SufE sulfur transfer pathway to that
of the IscS–IscU system during the cysteine desulfurase reaction
cycle. The results indicated that SufS–SufE
sulfurtransferase activity is more resistant to H2O2 exposure than that of the IscS–IscU system. The active
site Cys328 residue of IscS is more easily oxidized by H2O2 than the SufS active site when the enzymes are turning
over. IscU provided some protection to the IscS active site but was
itself sensitive to oxidation at the critical Cys63 and Cys106 residues,
which would presumably disrupt sulfur transfer between IscS and IscU.− In contrast, SufE active site Cys51 showed only mild sensitivity
to oxidation by H2O2 and was able to continue
to enhance SufS activity in the presence of oxidative stress. These
results coupled with the phylogenetic distribution of SufE suggest
that the addition of SufE transforms the Suf system from a housekeeping
system to a stress-response system in gammaproteobacteria.

Conclusions
and Unanswered Questions
Our phylogenetic analysis of the
core Suf system supports the biochemical
and physiological studies of the Suf system in E. coli. The recruitment of SufD and the SufS–SufE sulfurtransferase
pair to the core SufBC system parallels the extensive metabolic remodeling
necessary for early life forms to adapt to progressive increases in
the atmospheric oxygen level (Figure ). Fe–S
cluster metabolism can be perturbed by oxygen in multiple ways, including
decreased iron bioavailability, altered sulfur metabolism, disruption
of sulfur trafficking, and direct damage to Fe–S metalloproteins
(including Fe–S scaffold proteins). These stresses may have
selected for components to coordinate iron mobilization for cluster
assembly (SufD) and to protect sulfur donation steps (SufS–SufE).
Despite the genetic evidence of a connection among SufD, SufC ATPase
activity, and iron donation, there is still no clear iron donor protein
or chelate identified in E. coli for the Suf system.
It is not clear if flavin may be involved in this iron donation process
or if it plays a role in a different redox step of cluster assembly.
Further biochemical and physiological studies are necessary to fully
understand the drivers in the evolutionary diversification of the
Suf system.

These initial studies open the door to a much deeper
phylogenetic
analysis of Suf throughout the three domains of life. Although we
focus here on the SufD, SufE, and SufS accessory proteins, suf operons often contain a number of other genes, including
those encoding alternate scaffolds (SufU), Fe–S carrier proteins
(SufA), ferredoxins, iron storage proteins, iron transporters, and
iron metalloenzymes. For example, most Gram-positive bacteria, including B. subtilis, do not encode a SufE homologue. Instead, they
often contain a gene encoding SufU located adjacent to a group II
cysteine desulfurase gene sufS.−,, SufU is a homologue of IscU,
but there are significant sequence differences between the two genes.
In B. subtilis SufU is essential for viability. SufU has been shown to enhance SufS cysteine
desulfurase activity in a manner similar to that of SufE in other
organisms., SufU works as the second substrate
in the catalytic ping-pong mechanism of the overall sulfurtransferase
reaction of the SufS cysteine desulfurase. The mechanism of SufU enhancement
may be due to the acceleration of persulfide cleavage to recycle the
catalytic cysteine on SufS., The exact role of SufU
in these Suf systems is still an area of active study. We do note,
however, that the distribution of sufE in individual
operons shows a significant negative covariance with sufU, indicating those suf operons with sufU rarely encode sufE (E. S. Boyd, J. M. Boyd, and
F. W. Outten, manuscript in preparation). However, in many organisms, sufE homologues are separately encoded at locations outside
of the suf operon, so their presence cannot be excluded
by our analysis. While not homologous at the primary sequence level,
SufE and SufU proteins are structurally related, including similar
positioning of the Cys residues used to accept persulfide from SufS
(Figure ). They may therefore have been separately
selected to play similar roles in the mobilization of sulfur from
SufS-type cysteine desulfurases through convergent evolution. This intriguing gene covariance and the recruitment
of genes to the suf operon await further phylogenetic
and biochemical analysis.

(A) Structural alignment of E. coli SufE (purple,
PDB entry 1MZG) and B. subtilis SufU (green, PDB entry 2AZH). Active site Cys
residues are show as sticks. (B) Enlarged view of the alignment showing
the relative orientation of SufE Cys51 and SufU Cys41. The alignment
was generated using the FATCAT Pairwise Alignment tool.

Supporting Information Available
Locus tags used for bioinformatics
analysis provided as a Microsoft Excel file (Table 1) and a model
structure of the ATP-bound SufC dimer (Figure 1). This material is
available free of charge via the Internet at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bi500488r_si_001.xlsx

bi500488r_si_002.pdf

Author Present Address
⊥ Y.D.:
Department of Surgery, School of Medicine, University of
California—San Francisco, 2340 Sutter St., San Francisco, CA
94109.

This work was
supported by grants from NASA Exobiology and Evolutionary Biology
(NNX13AI11G) and NASA Astrobiology Institute (NNA13AA94A) to E.S.B.,
National Institutes of Health Grant GM81706 to F.W.O., and a United
Negro College Fund-Merck Graduate Science Research Dissertation Fellowship
to K.M.T. J.M.B. was supported by startup funds from Rutgers University,
the Charles and Johanna Busch Biomedical Foundation, and U.S. Department
of Agriculture Hatch Grant NE-1028.

The authors declare no
competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
We thank Dr. Lesa Offermann
and Dr. Leslie Lovelace for assistance
with structural analysis software and the members of the broader Fe–S
cluster biogenesis community for many insightful discussions.

Abbreviations
Fe–Siron–sulfur

Gabillion years ago

GOEgreat oxidation event

isciron–sulfur
cluster

nifnitrogen
fixation

PDBProtein
Data Bank

sufsulfur
formation

LUCALast
Universal Common Ancestor.

