The first
chemical model to
account for base substitution mutations was proposed by Watson and
Crick (W–C), who suggested that the natural bases, in normal
amino and keto forms, could occasionally become mispaired as disfavored
imino and enol tautomers. In the ensuing
60 years, it has been shown, principally by X-ray crystallography,
that the active-sites of DNA polymerases accommodate many types of
mispaired structures, including wobble mispairs, ionized and protonated base pairs,− Hoogsteen mispairs
in syn-conformations,, primer–template slipped
mispairs,, stacked bases, missing bases, bulky DNA adducts, and, most recently, an originally postulated
C•A W–C disfavored tautomer. A mechanistic understanding of how different W–C and non-W–C
structures are accommodated during DNA replication requires knowing
the structure and properties of the transition state (TS) for the
rate-determining step (RDS) in the DNA polymerase (pol) active-site.,− Little is known about pol TS structures apart from some evidence
that the TS may be either a chemical step where O–P bond making
and/or breaking is rate-determining or a conformational step taking
place prior to or perhaps even after chemistry involving an essential rate-determining slow change in
protein conformation occurring on the reaction pathway.

Among
pols believed to have a chemical RDS, DNA polymerase β
(pol β) is of particular importance.,,− Pol β is a member
of the X-family of DNA polymerases and plays a key role in base excision
repair (BER), a process that removes simple base lesions from the
genome. BER plays a role in the development
of anticancer drug resistance. Additionally,
it has been shown that pol β is overexpressed and/or found in
variant forms in a significant fraction of malignant tumor cells.−

Polymerase fidelity studies typically use rapid-quench and
stopped-flow
fluorescence kinetics measurements with natural dNTP substrates to
try to identify whether a conformational or chemical (kpol) step is rate-determining. For any DNA polymerase,
the key question is the relationship of the mechanism to the achievement
of fidelity (i.e., discrimination between right (R) and
wrong (W) deoxynucleotide incorporation). A current view
is that there are distinct check points accessed along the reaction
pathway that regulate fidelity. In construction
of conventional 2D free-energy reaction profiles for DNA polymerase,
the insertions of R and W dNTPs follow the
same reaction trajectories, each possibly having different barrier
heights for dNTP binding, prechemistry conformational changes, and
chemistry (reviewed in ref ()). A tacit assumption in the profiles is that these fidelity
check points are uncoupled from chemistry. If, for example, chemistry is the polymerase RDS for both R and W,, then pre-RDS conformational
changes, albeit different for R and W, would
presumably not affect the transition-state energy. In this article,
however, we provide evidence for a different concept, namely, dRTP- and dWTP-dependent active-site conformation
coupling directly to chemistry.

If a pol has a chemical RDS
and the critical chemistry involves
P–O bond breaking (i.e., release of pyrophosphate (PPi)to complete incorporation of the incoming dNTP (as dNMP)), then
can base-pairing/mispairing in the TS affect the overall TS energy,
where the key step occurs distally in the triphosphate moiety of the
bound nucleotide? What evidence could be adduced to support such a
hypothesis, which might seem counterintuitive, if base-pair/mispair
energy changes are postulated to occur earlier than the TS in checkpoints
preceding chemistry? Here, we have addressed this question using chemical
probes consisting of dNTP analogues having variable pyrophosphate-mimicking
leaving groups and different bases (R and W) in both purine (G) and pyrimidine (T) forms.

Previous experiments
investigating the nature of the RDS for pol
catalysis have usually compared incorporation of R and W dNTPs, where the PPi leaving group is the same
for R and W. The rates typically differ
significantly, but it is not clear whether this reflects a change
of mechanism in terms of the role of P–O bond breaking. Recently,
we elaborated a series of dNTP pol substrate analogues in which the
β,γ-bridging O is replaced by CXY moieties that alter
the stereoelectronic properties of the corresponding bisphosphonate
(BP) leaving group,,,,, (Figure ).

dGTP analogues as probes
for pol β in this study.

These β,γ-CXY-dNTP analogues, each having a different
leaving group mimicking PPi, can be structurally tuned
by varying the X and Y substituents to exhibit a large range of the
BP leaving group conjugate acid pKa4 values.
In the process of passing through a chemical RDS, a leaving-group
effect can thereby be interrogated, with the derivatives acting as
sensitive chemical probes of relative P–O charge stabilization
in the TS.− In a simplified view, as X and Y are made more electronegative,
pKa4 decreases, meaning that the BP leaving-group
aptitude increases because it is more stable as an anion. In this
case, if chemistry is rate-determining and the P–O bond breaking
is slow relative to P–O bond formation (attack of the terminal
primer 3′-OH on Pα of the dNTP analogue),
then a plot of the log of the catalytic rate constant (kpol) versus pKa4 (Brønsted
plot) is predicted to be linear (linear
free energy relationship, LFER) with
a negative slope whose magnitude reflects the sensitivity of the TS
to charge stabilization.,,

Two important experimental points in applying such a probe
are
that (a) it is preferable to utilize homologous X and Y substituents,
giving a wide range of pKa4, and (b) it
is highly desirable to obtain the structure of the ground-state pol–DNA
tertiary complexes of the analogues by X-ray crystallography to verify
that within a given series of dNTP analogues each has the same or
a highly similar configuration within the active-site of the enzyme.− Both criteria are satisfied by our probes, in which X and Y in the
CXY moiety are H, F, Cl, or Br,, as well as other useful substituents such as CH3 and
N3 and for which a range of
pol β ternary complex active-site structures have been determined.,,,−, Furthermore, we have
addressed the problem of CXY stereochemistry where X ≠ Y synthetically,
analytically, kinetically, and structurally.,,,

Here,
we employ these nucleotide probes to examine dNTP–template
H-bonding and base-stacking effects on the TS of pol β using
LFER analysis of pre-steady-state kpol data for a series of probes that includes new dTTP analogues (1b–8b), allowing comparison of the following
base-pairings in terms of their relative effects on the dNTP leaving-group
dependence of pol β kinetics: G•C, G•T, T•A,
and T•G. We also provide detailed synthetic procedures and
characterization data for the β,γ-CXY analogues of dTTP,
where X and Y are H, F, Cl, and Br (1b–8b). These compounds were synthesized utilizing a generalized approach, that was further extended to dCTP (X and Y = H, 1c;
see  for details).

Materials
and Methods
Synthesis of Nucleoside 2′-Deoxy-5′-triphosphate
β,γ-CXY Analogues
2′-Deoxy 5′-phosphomorpholidates
were prepared from the acid forms of the commercially available dNMPs
by DCC activation. Reactions proceeded with better than 90% conversion
(as monitored by 31P NMR) and required minimal purification
before advancing to the coupling step. To prepare dNTP analogues 1b–8b and 1c, the tri-n-butylammonium salts of the corresponding bisphosphonic
acids 1e–8e were reacted with the
appropriate nucleoside 5′-phosphoromorpholidate in anhydrous
DMSO at rt. The reactions were conveniently monitored by analytical
SAX HPLC with the starting material, dNMP side product, and desired
triphosphate all being well-separated in the chromatogram (). After 48 h, a typical reaction was approximately 60% complete
with &lt;10% thymidine 5′-monophosphate formed. The desired
products were purified by dual-pass HPLC with an SAX column eluted
with a 0–0.5 N TEAB gradient followed by passage through a
RP-C18 column eluted with 0.1 N TEAB 4% acetonitrile buffer. Final
products 1b–8b and 1c were obtained on a milligram scale as triethylammonium salts in
∼20% yield, as determined by UV absorbance at λmax.

By analytical SAX HPLC analysis,
the target compounds account for &gt;99% of the detected UV absorbance
(see the ). The 31P NMR spectra are free of any significant monophosphate or
other nucleotide side-product signals, and the 1H NMR spectra
show a clean aromatic region, demonstrating the integrity of the nucleobase.
As was the case for dGTP-β,γ-CXN3 analogues, under appropriate conditions, the 31P NMR resonances of dTTP β,γ-CXY diastereomers resulting
from the chirality of the bisphosphonate moiety when X ≠ Y
introduction of a pro-chiral bisphosphonate can be resolved. For example,
Chelex treatment of 4b followed by addition of Na2CO3 to raise the pH to 10 narrows the line width
of the resonances, revealing two doublets for Pα and
two doublets of doublets for Pβ (Figure ). As a result, the relative concentrations in individual
stereoisomers can be monitored in solution. The δ and J assignments were unambiguously confirmed by comparing
spectra acquired at different operating frequencies. For detailed
experimental procedures and complete characterization of all analogues 1b–8b and 1c, see the .

31P NMR spectra
of the Pα4b resonances: (A) before
Chelex treatment at neutral pH (162 MHz),
(B) after Chelex treatment at pH &gt; 10 (162 MHz), and (C) after
Chelex
treatment at pH &gt; 10 at higher operating frequency (202 MHz).

Pre-Steady-State Kinetic
Analyses
Radiolabeled 1 nt
gapped DNA (100 nM) was incubated with 600 nM pol β in reaction
buffer (2× mixture) for 3 min at 37 °C. Equal volumes of
the DNA/pol β mixture and a 2× solution of β,γ-CXY-dNTP
in reaction buffer at different concentrations were rapidly combined
using a KinTek model RQF-3 quench-flow apparatus. After the appropriate
reaction time, the reaction was quenched with 0.5 M EDTA (pH 8.0).
For times longer than 20 s, reactions were initiated and quenched
by manual mixing. Reaction products were separated by 20% denaturing
polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (39 cm × 33 cm × 0.4
mm). Dehydrated gels were exposed to a phosphor screen and detected
by phosphorescence emission. All reactions were carried out in triplicate.
For DNA sequences, radiolabeling procedures, and buffer condition,
see the .

For
each set of reactions, the percentage of primer extended is plotted
versus time, and the data for each concentration of analogue is fit
to the first-order exponential y = a(1 – e–kt), where a is the maximum percent of primer extension and k is the observed rate constant. The observed rate constant
(kobs) is then plotted versus the corresponding
analogue concentration, and the data are fit to the rectangular hyperbola kobs = kpol[dNTP]/(Kd + [dNTP]) to give kpol and Kd parameters (). An example of one replicate for the β,γ-CFCl-dTTP
analogue is shown in  of the . For each analogue, the
average log of kpol for the three replicates
is determined and averaged, and the standard error is calculated.
The average log(kpol) with error bars
is plotted versus the pKa4 for each analogue
to give the LFER. The data are fit to the linear equation log(kpol) = a + b × pKa4, where a is the y-axis intercept and b is the slope.

Results
dTTP Analogue Synthesis
A few β,γ-CXY dTTP
derivatives were previously reported using 1,1′-carbonyldiimidazole
activation of thymidine 5′-monophosphate to prepare 2b, 3b, and 7b in yields of 11–47%., However, 2b and 3b were characterized solely by 31P NMR, and 7b was characterized
by 1H and 31P NMR alone, with no other indication of purity. Our preferred synthetic
approach, as presented here, is to use DCC-mediated morpholidate coupling, of the commercially available 5′-dNMPs with the tributylammonium
salt of the appropriate bisphosphonic acid 1e–8e (Figure ), which furnishes the desired products in modest isolated yields
but avoids the generation of difficult to remove side products. Dual-pass
(SAX then RP-18) HPLC, provided pure dTTP analogues 1b–8b in high purity free of detectable
contaminating nucleotides, a sine qua non for reliable kinetics studies
of polymerases.

Synthesis of halogenated β,γ-dTTP and dCTP
analogues.
(a) 2d–3d: NaH, Selectfluor/THF/DMF,
−42 °C; 5d: NaOCl, 0 °C; 4d (from 5d): Na2SO3/H2O/EtOH, 0 °C; 7d: Br2, NaOH/H2O, 0 °C; 6d: (from 7d): SnCl2/H2O/EtOH, 0 °C; 8d (from 4d): NaH, Selectfluor/THF/DMF, −42 °C; (b) 1e–4e and 8e: HCl reflux; 6e and 7e: HBr, reflux.

Brønsted Plots
DNA polymerase catalysis and fidelity
studies typically measure the incorporation of R and W dNTPs, where the pyrophosphate leaving group is identical.
Replacing the β,γ-bridging O in PPi by CXY,,, results in leaving groups with markedly different stereoelectronic
properties. By varying leaving group size and basicity (pKa4), we can observe the resulting effect on TS by determining
the corresponding kpol rate constant in
each case. The familiar Brønsted plot, log kpol = a + b × pKa4 (where a and b are the parameters for linear intercept and slope, respectively),
is an example of an LFER that can be derived using modified Marcus
theory to analyze bond-forming and bond-breaking
processes in terms of changes in the TS charge stabilization caused
principally by substrate modifications that modify the surrounding
array of active-site interactions. We
have used pre-steady-state rapid-quench kinetics to measure pol β-catalyzed
incorporation for β,γ-dRTP and β,γ-dWTP analogues in a 1 nt gapped p/t DNA (). The polymerase insertion rate constants (log kpol) were plotted versus the pKa4 value for the corresponding bisphosphonic acid leaving
group for two classes of dNTP substrate analogues: β,γ-dGTPs
(1a–13a) and β,γ-dTTPs
(1b–8b).

Brønsted Plot for
β,γ-CXY dGTP Analogues 1a–13a
We constructed Brønsted
plots using 13 β,γ-CXY dNTP analogues (1a–13a), with the pKa4 values of the corresponding BP leaving groups 1e–13e spanning a range of 7.8 (CF2, 3e) to 12.3 (CMe2, 13e) and with pyrophosphate having a pKa4 of 8.9. For the rate constant to be sensitive to the pKa4 value of the leaving group, the bond forming
(associative process) and bond breaking (dissociative process) about
Pα must be concerted or dominated by P–O bond
breaking.,, The additional
negative charge generated by going from lower to higher pKa4 values at a fixed pH allows the analogues to serve
as sensitive chemical probes for the dependence of P–O bond
cleavage on electrostatic charge in the TS.−

Brønsted
plots depicting pol β-catalyzed R incorporations
(G•C) and W incorporations (G•T) are observed
to fit well to two separate lines (Figure ), in accord with our previously published data for a subset of eight
β,γ-CHX dGTP analogues.,

Brønsted
plots correlating log(kpol) and the leaving-group
pKa4 P-CXY-P
(1e–13e) for an expanded set of β,γ-CXY-dGTP
analogues (1a–13a) comparing right
(R) G•C (A) and wrong (W) G•T (B). For the correct pairing, the two lines
are parallel (b = −0.54), whereas for incorrect
pairing, the lines diverge significantly and exhibit nonsimilar slopes
(blower = −0.71, bupper = −1.1).

The two LFER lines for R (G•C) are closely
spaced and essentially parallel, having about the same negative slopes
(Figure A, b ∼ −0.54). The upper
line, which contains the parent dGTP, is composed of monohalo (2a, 6a, and 4a), azido (12a, and 13a), methylene (1a), and methyl
(9a, 10a, and 11a) derivatives,
whereas the lower line contains dihalo (3a, 5a, 7a, and 8a) substituents exclusively.
The two LFER lines for W (G•T) exhibit markedly
greater separation and steeper nonparallel slopes (Figure B, bupper ∼ −0.7, blower ∼ −1.1). The location of
the CMe2 (10a) and CMeAz (13a) data points on the upper line suggests that segregation of the
data into two separate LFER correlations cannot be explained by a
unique steric effect based solely on size because these points would
lie on the lower line between the CCl2 (5a) and CBr2 (7a) points, yet points 10a and 13a are clearly situated on the upper
line for R and W.

The pronounced negative
slopes of the linear correlations relating
log(kpol) to pKa4 constitute convincing evidence that chemistry is the RDS (chem-RDS)
along the reaction trajectories corresponding to the insertion of R and independently for the insertion of W. The
observation of two correlations, with steeper negative slopes, indicates
that the TS structures for these base-pairing series are more sensitive
to stabilization of P–O bond breaking. The data are consistent
with an altered active-site environment in the vicinity of the BP
analogue leaving group, which is an environment that is less adept
in stabilizing a net increase in negative charge generated as the
leaving group departs when the bases are mismatched. Perhaps more
flexible insertions that include dihalo G•C correct pairs and
mono and dihalo G•T mispairs can occur when the pol β
thumb and finger domains are in a more relaxed, partially open conformation.−

Brønsted Plot for β,γ-CXY dTTP Analogues 1b–8b
We have addressed whether
dNTP substrate-p/t DNA flexibility in the pol β active-site
conformation associated with a chemical TS might be detectible in
the LFER by comparing Brønsted plots for R and W dT incorporations (Figure ) with
those for dG (Figure ).

Brønsted plots correlating
log(kpol) and the leaving group pKa4 β,γ-pCXYp
(1e–8e) for the β,γ-CXY-dTTP
analogues (1b–8b) comparing right
(R) T•A (black) and wrong (W) T•G
(green). For the correct pairing, the slopes of the two lines have
a greater separation than that of correct G•C and also diverge
and exhibit nonsimilar slopes (bupper =
−0.64, blower = −1.1); for
incorrect pairing, the separation is even greater, and the lines diverge
significantly and exhibit nonsimilar slopes (bupper = −0.97, blower =
−1.9).

A combination of weaker
base stacking and H-bonding interactions
results in an increase in the flexibility of T•A base-pairs
compared to G•C pairs.,, The Brønsted plots corresponding to incorporation of T opposite
A (Figure , black lines) exhibit striking
differences. There are now two well-separated R correlations
in contrast to the plots for G opposite C (Figure A), where the upper and lower lines have nonparallel negative
slopes (Figure , bupper ∼ −0.64, blower ∼
−1.1). The dihalo slopes for R (T•A) and W (G•T) are about the same (Figures  and B, respectively, b ∼ −1.1). Thus, for the dihalo derivatives (3b, 5b, 7b, and 8b), the chemical
step (kpol) in forming W–C T•A
pairs is comparable to forming non-W–C G•T mispairs.
The difference between the negative slopes is significantly increased
for the W lines corresponding to the misincorporation
of T opposite G (Figure , green lines, bupper ∼ −0.97, blower ∼ −1.9). The pronounced differences
in the Brønsted plots comparing R (T•A and
G•C) and W (T•G and G•T) pairings
suggest that the base mispairs result in a change in the active-site
conformation to the detriment of the bonding interactions available
in the vicinity of the triphosphate group of the nucleotide that promote
catalysis by stabilizing developing charge on the leaving group in
the TS.

Discussion
Although it is well-established
that base-stacking and H-bonding
interactions modulate R and W nucleotide
incorporation rates,, our results provide the first
direct evidence that this involves significant stabilizing or destabilizing
contributions to P–O bond breaking in the TS and thus provides
the first evidence that active-site conformational changes resulting
from differences in base-pairs and mispairs as well as the chemical
structure of the bases (purine vs pyrimidine) can perturb the rate-determining
chemical step.

We previously reported, that LFER analysis
of pol β kinetics using dGTP analogues (i.e., incoming purine
nucleotide) interacting with a dC or dT in template DNA reveals a
fidelity-dependent chemical RDS, suggesting that R and W interactions for the incoming dG analogues have different
effects on the TS of the active-site. In this article, we examine
leaving-group effects on turnovers for an incoming pyrimidine nucleotide
analogue (β,γ-CXY-dTTP, 1b–8b). Here, H-bonding and stacking forces will be weaker, presumably
resulting in a more flexible active-site ternary complex. The question
then is whether this greater flexibility will be manifested in the
TS (i.e., in a conformational change affecting the region of the active-site
implicated in chemical catalysis and thus detectable by kpol changes). β,γ-CXY-dTTP analogues 1b–8b allow us to investigate this possibility
directly. We find that for the dTTP analogues (i.e., incoming pyrimidine
nucleotides) the different base-stacking and H-bonding interactions
for R (to dA DNA template) and W (to dG
DNA template) again affect the TS energy, but not in the same way.
In contrast to the previous results for R paired G•C,
the Brønsted plots for R paired T•A show
that the dihalo series (3b, 5b, 7b, and 8b) have an altered negative slope and distinctly
separated correlation line from the other probes. Once again, mismatched
bases (T•G) result in large differences in both the slopes
and line displacement.

The results demonstrate a fidelity-dependent kpol that also depends dramatically on the amount
of base-stacking
and base H-bonding energy available. In particular, the dihalo effect
is small with G•C, with an R pairing providing
the largest base-pairing energy among the possible base-pairs that
we examined. With W pairing of G•T, the active-site
complex appears to be less constrained, and a second reaction pathway
is distinctly used by the dihalo probes. R pairing of
T•A, although correct pairwise, provides less stabilizing interaction
energy from pairing to the overall complex, resulting in a more flexible
active-site complex that produces two distinct LFER correlations that
are similar to the W mispairing of G•T. This trend
is strongly enhanced in the corresponding W pairing of
T•G, which is expected to possess the most flexible active-site
in the series. With all analogues and base-pairings, a negative LFER
correlation is observed, indicating that P–O bond breaking
is implicated in the rate-determining step.

The TS for pol β
is hypersensitive to charge stabilization
for each mispair, as shown by a dramatic increase in the Brønsted
slope (≤−1). Therefore, fidelity (R vs W) as well as the particular partner pair in base stability
(G•C vs T•A) affect the active-site environment local
to the dNTP leaving group in the TS for the rate-limiting step. Our
data show how the Brønsted plots can be used as an exquisitely
sensitive method to detect in detail how H-bonding and base-stacking
determine kpol. Applying this analysis
to other pols should provide a new and powerful method to evaluate
and compare base-selection mechanisms taking place in the TS.

Supporting Information Available
Additional kinetics
details,
including a representative data set, detailed synthetic procedures,
and compound characterization data. This material is available free
of charge via the Internet at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bi500101z_si_001.pdf

Author Contributions
K.O. performed
and analyzed the kinetics experiments; B.T.C., Y.W., E.F., and B.A.K.
synthesized dNTP analogues; W.A.B. and S.H.W. provided DNA polymerase
β, provided important suggestions for the experiments, and critiqued
the manuscript; and C.E.M. and M.F.G. designed the experiments and
wrote the manuscript.

This research
was supported by research project nos. Z01-ES050158 and Z01-ES050159
to S.H.W. by the Intramural Research Program of the NIH, National
Institute of Environmental Health Sciences and was in association
with National Institutes of Health grant nos. 1U19CA105010 and 1U19CA177547.

The
authors
declare no competing financial interest.

Abbreviations
BERbase excision repair

BPbisphosphonate

LFERlinear free energy relationship

polDNA polymerase

PPipyrophosphate

RDSrate-determining
step

TStransition
state

W–CWatson–Crick

