Tethering
proteins to solid
surfaces is fundamental for the development of biochips and optical
biosensors for high-throughput analysis of molecular interactions
based on surface plasmon resonance and bio-layer interferometry.− In addition, tethering of spin-labeled proteins on a solid support
suitable for EPR spectroscopy offers a number of potential advantages
in site-directed spin labeling (SDSL) studies of protein structure
and dynamics.− For example, if a protein or complex can be rotationally immobilized
on a solid support, then existing CW and time-domain methods in SDSL-EPR
can be implemented to reveal internal dynamic modes of the protein
on the nano- to microsecond time scale, free from contributions due
to overall rotary diffusion,,, and for determination of interspin distances at room temperature
using dipolar spectroscopy.,,, Moreover, high local concentrations
needed for time-domain applications such as saturation recovery can be achieved without concern for protein
aggregation, and a continuous flow system could be designed that provides
for EPR-based rapid screening of binding partners, including small
ligands. In anticipation of this latter application, we refer to the
general strategy using tethered proteins in SDSL as stationary-phase
SDSL-EPR.

For these and other applications of tethered proteins
aimed at
investigating protein structure and function, it is important that
the attachment to the surface not substantially alter the protein
fold or conformational equilibria. SDSL can be used to determine the
secondary and tertiary structures of a protein, to reveal the existence of conformational equilibria, to determine structural features of the substates
involved,, and to determine the time scale of exchange
between them., Although other methods can be
employed to determine many of these features for proteins in solution,
SDSL-EPR may be unique in the capability to characterize proteins
in solution and tethered to a solid support with equal ease. The main
objectives of this work are to evaluate strategies for tethering spin-labeled
proteins to a Sepharose matrix with respect to retention of solution-like
structure, dynamics, and conformational equilibria and to determine
if the potential advantages of tethering for SDSL can be realized.
For SDSL applications, covalent attachment to CNBr-activated Sepharose
via lysine residues has been previously employed., However,
the nonselective nature of the attachment results in a heterogeneous
preparation arising from the random orientation of protein molecules
relative to the matrix and from differences in the number of linkages
to the matrix. Consequently, each of
the tethered molecules can potentially exhibit distinct structural,
conformational, and hence functional properties. Indeed, it has been
shown that enzyme activity and stability can be significantly altered
by the number of attachment points to solid surfaces., Such molecular heterogeneity precludes quantitative analysis of
structure-based changes in EPR spectra of tethered proteins due to
contribution from species with distinct physical properties. Site-specific
tethering strategies are expected to overcome the heterogeneous orientation
problem, but questions remain as to the effect of attachment on the
structure and conformation of the protein and the degree of rotational
immobilization.

For site-specific tethering of a spin-labeled
protein, it is necessary
to have at least two orthogonal reactive groups in the protein: one
selective for tethering and the other for introduction of the spin
label. In the present study, we employ the biosynthetically incorporated
unnatural amino acids (UAAs) p-azidophenylalanine
(p-AzF) or p-acetylphenylalanine
(p-AcF) for tethering to modified Sepharose together
with a unique cysteine residue for introduction of a nitroxide spin
label. The azidophenyl and acetylphenyl functionalities are not present
in the 20 naturally occurring amino acids and enable the use of highly
selective chemistry for tethering of proteins to solid matrices; indeed, p-AzF has already been employed for this purpose.− T4 lysozyme (T4L) and variants thereof are used in this study as
well-studied model systems to evaluate the immobilization strategy
and to compare the status of the tethered protein with that in solution
and that produced by the nonselective attachment to CNBr-activated
Sepharose.

Remarkably, it is found that a single site-specific
attachment
is sufficient to suppress the rotational motion of the attached protein
to a level beyond detection in the CW EPR line shape, a result similar
to that found in earlier studies for a multipoint attachment using
CNBr-Sepharose., Continuous wave (CW) EPR line
shape analysis of a set of spin-labeled mutants and interspin distance
mapping in doubly labeled proteins with double electron–electron
resonance (DEER) reveal that the native secondary structure, tertiary
fold, and backbone dynamics in the regions investigated are retained
in the site-specifically tethered state. Most importantly, conformational
equilibria in the native protein and in a ligand-binding cavity mutant
are unperturbed in the tethered proteins. For the cavity mutant, ligand
binding with a concomitant conformational shift previously observed
in solution is also retained in the tethered protein. In contrast,
tethering to CNBr-activated Sepharose is found to shift conformational
equilibria and populate new states.

Experimental Procedures
Construction
of T4L Mutants Containing Unnatural Amino Acids
The amber
codon (TAG) was introduced to the T4L gene (pET11a vector)
site-specifically using the QuikChange site-directed mutagenesis method.
All mutants were introduced in the pseudo-WT background (WT*) that
contains the mutations C54T and C97A. Mutations were verified by sequencing.
Expression, purification, and spin labeling of the mutants were done
as described in the .

Site-Specific Attachment of Proteins Bearing UAA to Modified
Sepharose Beads
The general strategies for tethering to Sepharose
are presented below in , and the detailed
procedures for site-specific biotinylation of spin-labeled mutants
bearing p-AcF or p-AzF and subsequent
attachment to Sepharose derivatives are described in the .

EPR Spectroscopy
CW EPR spectra of spin-labeled proteins
were recorded at X-band in a Bruker ELEXYS 580 spectrometer at 295
K either in the indicated buffer, in buffer containing 30% w/w sucrose,
or tethered to modified Sepharose beads as described in López
et al. Protein concentrations were in
the range of 100–500 μM. Samples on beads were loaded
into glass capillaries (0.60 i.d. × 0.84 o.d.; VitroCom Inc.,
NJ) via capillary action, and the ends were sealed using a nonparamagnetic
sealant (X-Sealant, Bruker). The beads were allowed to settle to the
bottom of the capillary prior to data collection. DEER spectroscopy
at Q-band was done according to standard procedures; details are provided in the .

Halothane Binding to the Immobilized T4L
128R1/121A/133A Mutant
For the halothane titration experiments,
a saturated solution of
halothane in buffer (20.6 mM) was diluted to the appropriate concentration
and added to the tethered protein. The EPR spectra were recorded immediately.

Results
General Strategy for Tethering Protein Mutants Bearing UAAs
A p-AzF unnatural amino acid in a protein reacts
with strained cyclooctynes at neutral pH and ambient temperature to
yield a 1,3 triazole linkage (Cu-free click chemistry). This chemistry is exploited here for site-specific
tethering of spin-labeled proteins. The azide group can be partially
reduced to an amine during bacterial expression and by reducing agents
such as DTT, and TCEP that are often used to maintain cysteine residues in a reduced state
( Methods and Figure
S1). Thus, the purification procedure for the T4L mutants bearing p-AzF was adapted accordingly to miminize reduction of the
azide during purification ( Methods).

The p-AzF amino acid was employed
for tethering in most experiments, but p-AcF was
also investigated for comparative purposes in particular cases. The p-AcF amino acid reacts selectively with hydroxylamines
to yield an oxime linkage, but it requires acidic conditions and elevated
temperatures (pH 4; 37 °C), which
can be incompatible with many proteins. However, effective catalysts
for the reaction have recently been reported that allow facile coupling
at neutral pH and ambient temperature. Considering the chemical reduction experienced in the p-AzF, the use of such catalysts may make p-AcF the
amino acid of choice in future studies.

The UAAs were introduced
at sites on a T4L surface distal to that
where a cysteine mutation was engineered for spin labeling to ensure
that direct contact of the spin label with the surface of the matrix
did not occur (Figure ). The proteins containing p-AzF were tethered via direct covalent attachment to Sepharose
4B beads functionalized with two different derivatives of dibenzylcyclooctyne
(DBCO) differing by the length of the linker to the Sepharose (schemes
1 and 2, Figure ). The attachment reaction
was efficient and specific, with 80–100% of the protein being
tethered in the mutant containing p-AzF, whereas
only ≈10% was nonspecifically bound in the WT* protein (). The maximum protein loading observed
on the DBCO beads was ∼13 mg/mL, corresponding to ≈700
μM. The high effective concentration of protein enabled EPR
data collection with a high S/N ratio.

Sites where the UAA and
cysteine mutations were introduced in T4L.
The left- and right-hand panels show the two UAA sites employed for
most studies (red spheres) together with the associated cysteine sites
for spin labeling (green spheres).

Tethering strategies employed in this study. For direct covalent
attachment, proteins containing p-AzF were covalently
attached to Sepharose beads functionalized with DBCO containing a
10-atom linker (scheme 1) or a 23-atom linker (scheme 2) as described
in the  and . For attachment mediated
by biotin–streptavidin (schemes 3 and 4), proteins containing p-AcF or p-AzF were biotinylated and subsequently
bound to Sepharose modified with streptavidin.

An alternative tethering strategy that relies on noncovalent
tethering
via bioaffinity using the biotin/streptavidin platform was evaluated
(scheme 3, Figure ). For proteins containing p-AcF, only the bioaffinity method was employed (scheme
4, Figure ). Although many other bioaffinity
strategies can be used, the biotin/streptavidin platform was selected
due to the high affinity of streptavidin for biotin (Kd ∼ 10–15 M) and the stability of the interaction even under conditions
normally associated with protein denaturation., For attachment using the biotin/streptavidin method, mutants bearing p-AzF or p-AcF amino acids were biotinylated
with a biotin derivative containing either a DBCO or hydroxylamine
functional group, respectively (schemes 3 and 4, Figure ), and subsequently incubated with commercial streptavidin–Sepharose
beads. For the examples tested, the biotinylation of the UAA-containing
protein was quantitative, as evaluated with mass spectrometry (). For all biotinylated mutants, the
attachment to the streptavidin beads was efficient and specific, i.e.,
≈90% or greater of the biotinylated protein was retained, whereas
no more than 5% was retained for a nonbiotinylated analogue (). The maximum binding capacity to
the commercially available streptavidin beads used here was ∼10
mg/mL, corresponding to a protein concentration of ∼540 μM.

Rotational Immobilization of T4L Tethered to Sepharose Beads
The extent of protein immobilization due to tethering can be investigated
with a spin label that is rigidly attached to the protein; in this
case, the EPR spectrum will reflect purely rotational diffusion of
the entire protein. One example is the side chain RX that cross-links
pairs of cysteine residues at positions i and i ± 4 in helices or at appropriately spaced positions
in β sheets (Figure , upper panel). Figure  (lower panel)
shows EPR spectra for RX linking cysteine residues 5 and 9 in T4L
(T4L 5RX9) under the indicated conditions.

Effect of tethering on
protein rotational motion. (Top) Ribbon
model of 5RX9 based on a crystal structure. (Bottom) EPR spectra of 5RX9 recorded under the indicated conditions.
The vertical dashed lines define the effective hyperfine splitting
(2Azz′) of T4L 5RX9 tethered on CNBr-Sepharose; the hyperfine
splitting values for the spectra are given. The site-specifically
tethered proteins were attached via residue 131p-AzF. The spectra for T4L 5RX9 in buffer, 30% sucrose, and nonselectively
attached to CNBr-activated Sepharose via native lysine residues have
been previously published and are reproduced here for reference.

The spectrum for T4L 5RX9 on CNBr has a powder line shape
characteristic
of a highly ordered nitroxide. A simulation of the spectrum was found
to be consistent with a rapid (correlation time, τ ≈
2 ns) but highly constrained (order parameter, S ≈
0.9) motion. Because the motion is highly
constrained relative to the protein, rotational diffusion of the entire
protein modulates the motion of 5RX9 in a manner that is directly
revealed in the CW EPR spectrum. A convenient measure of the nitroxide
motion in the slow motional regime is the overall effective hyperfine
splitting, 2Azz′ (Figure ); 2Azz′
increases with decreasing mobility. For reference, the value of 2Azz′
for T4L 5RX9 in the complete absence of protein rotational diffusion
is 70.8 ± 0.1 G at 295 K. As shown
in Figure , 2Azz′ for the protein covalently
attached to CNBr-activated Sepharose is close to this value; this
is not surprising considering that multiple attachment points, which
would strongly constrain protein motion, are likely., Thus, the rotational motion of T4L 5RX9 on CNBr is effectively frozen
on the X-band EPR time scale. For comparison, the spectra in buffer
and 30% sucrose have 2Azz′ of 63.5 and 67.5 G, corresponding
to T4L rotational correlation times of τR ≈
9 and 35 ns, respectively, consistent with predictions from the Stokes–Einstein
equation.

Figure  also shows representative data
sets for T4L 5RX9/131p-AzF tethered to Sepharose
via schemes 1 and 3; as is evident, the spectra have the characteristic
powder lineshapes, and the 2Azz′ values are only slightly less
(0.3 and 0.4 G, respectively) than that for multipoint attachment
using CNBr-activated Sepharose. Similar results were obtained for
attachment using 44p-AzF (). To investigate the effect of linker length between the
protein and the matrix in the covalent attachment method, T4L 5RX9/131p-AzF was attached using a Sepharose derivative with an
additional 16 atoms in a hydrophilic linker (Scheme 2). Remarkably,
the 2Azz′ decreased only slightly (∼0.3 G) compared
to that for the protein attached with the much shorter linker of Scheme
1 (Figure ).

Thus, T4L 5RX9 tethered
site selectively to Sepharose by a single
attachment site leads to a high degree of immobilization, close to
that for CNBr attachment. A similar conclusion was reached using another
strongly immobilized nitroxide side chain (R8) that is introduced
using a single cysteine residue ().

Effect of Tethering on Local Protein Structure and Dynamics
The R1 nitroxide side chain is the most commonly used in SDSL.
Unlike the internally constrained RX side chain, R1 at solvent-exposed
sites in helices has rapid internal motion about the two terminal
bonds adjacent to the nitroxide ring (Figure A). These internal modes dominate the
EPR spectrum, and rotational diffusion of the protein has little contribution
for T4L in 30% sucrose. Thus, the EPR
spectrum encodes only information on internal local interactions and
dynamics in the protein that modulate the motion of the nitroxide
ring. As a result, it has been found that the CW spectral lineshapes
of R1 faithfully report on both secondary and tertiary structures
in stable proteins.− Moreover, the rates and order of R1 motion at solvent-exposed
sites on helices serve as metrics for nanosecond time scale backbone
dynamics., Thus, R1 is well-suited to assess the effect
of attachment on the structure and flexibility of T4L.

Monitoring structure
and flexibility of T4L site-specifically attached
to a solid support with CW lineshape analysis. (A) Model of R1 side
chain in a helix showing points of internal flexibility about the
last two dihedral angles (X4/X5; see text). (B) EPR spectra of the
indicated sites recorded in 30% w/w sucrose (black), tethered to CNBr-Sepharose
(red), or tethered site-specifically to streptavidin–Sepharose
by scheme 3 (green) or by covalent attachment according to scheme
1 (cyan). The arrows identify new relatively immobile states observed
after attachment. Insets: The low field lines of the spectra of 72R1
and 131R1 tethered to streptavidin and CNBr-Sepharose are magnified
to reveal more clearly the spectral component corresponding to an
immobile nitroxide. T4L 68R1 and 72R1 were tethered via site 131p-AzF, 86R1 via 44p-AzF, and 109R1 via
68p-AzF. (C) Plot of the inverse central line width
(ΔH–1) along the sequence
128–135 in helix H; the proteins were tethered via 44p-AcF.

In order to first examine
the influence of the different attachment
strategies on the local backbone dynamics and tertiary fold, the spectra
of 68R1, 72R1, 86R1, 109R1, and 131R1 were recorded in sucrose solution,
bound nonspecifically to CNBr-activated Sepharose, and attached site-specifically
with a p-AzF amino acid using direct attachment (scheme
1) or the streptavidin strategies (schemes 3 and 4). The EPR spectra
are provided in Figure B.

The EPR spectra
of all R1-labeled mutants attached via lysine residues
to CNBr-Sepharose are essentially identical to those in sucrose solution
except for the appearance of a new minor population of a relatively
immobilized state of R1 in the former (arrows in Figure B). T4L contains 13 lysine residues distributed throughout
the protein surface, some of which are in close proximity to the labeling
sites (). Earlier work suggested
that the immobilized component arises, at least partially, from a
subset of proteins where the attachment places the nitroxide close
to the surface of the matrix.

This
is confirmed here by a reduction in the immobile component
upon replacing lysine residues at 84, 85, 124, and 147 that surround
131R1 by alanine and residue 135 by arginine (). Site-specific tethering by direct covalent attachment
(scheme 1) also gives rise to a small immobilized component R1 at
sites 68 and 72, each tethered via 131p-AzF. A possible
origin of this component will be discussed below. Importantly, site-specific
tethering mediated by streptavidin (scheme 3) gives EPR spectra that
are very similar to those in sucrose solution, indicating that the
structure of the protein near the R1 sites as well as the nanosecond
backbone dynamics, are similar in solution and on
the Sepharose support. For the sites investigated, similar results
were obtained by streptavidin-mediated tethering using p-AcF rather than p-AzF, suggesting that the two strategies
are equivalent, as expected ().

To further explore the influence of solid-phase immobilization
on secondary and tertiary structures, a continuous R1 scan was generated
through helix H from residues 128–135. In previous studies,
the variation of R1 mobility, and solvent accessibility along this sequence were shown to be periodic
in position, thus documenting the helical secondary structure and
its orientation in the fold. Qualitatively, the EPR spectra of the
tethered mutants are nearly identical in line shape to those in solution,
with subtle differences likely due to the reduction in protein correlation
time (). A plot of the inverse
central line width (ΔH–1)
as a semiquantitative measure of nitroxide mobility is shown in Figure C, which reveals
the same periodic dependence on position as for the protein in solution.
The maxima in the plot at 128, 131/132, and 135 identify the solvent-exposed
surface of the helix where R1 has relatively high mobility; the minima
at 129 and 133 correspond to the buried helix surface.

Effect of Tethering
on Global Tertiary Structure
While
the CW spectrum of R1 in a protein provides information on the local
structure, measurement of interspin distances in doubly spin-labeled
proteins using double electron–electron resonance (DEER) spectroscopy
provides global information on the tertiary structure. To investigate the tertiary structure of tethered
T4L, four R1 pairs were engineered, three of which contain the two
R1 side chains within the C-terminal domain (i.e., 68R1/109R1, 68R1/131R1,
and 109R1/131R1), whereas a 44R1/109R1 mutant monitored the relative
positions of the N and C domains (Figures A and A).

Interspin distance measurements within
the C-terminal domain of
T4L in solution and tethered to beads. (A) Ribbon diagram showing
the distances measured along with the expected values based on modeling.
(B) Background-corrected DEFs (left panel) and corresponding distance
distributions (right panel) for the indicated R1 doubles in solution
(black), tethered to CNBr-Sepharose (red), and tethered site-specifically
via site 44p-AzF and scheme 3 (green) are shown.
The dashed gray traces are the best fit of the DEF. The red arrows
identify an increase in the distance probability due to random attachment
compared to solution and site-specific attachment.

Interdomain distance measurements of T4L in solution and
tethered
to beads. (A) Ribbon models of the closed (gray, PDB 3lzm) and open states
(green, PDB 150L) of T4L aligned with the C-terminal domain (residues 83–164);
expected interspin distances for 109R1/44R1 in the two states are
indicated. (B) Background-corrected DEFs (left panel) and corresponding
distance distributions (right panel) in solution (black), tethered
to CNBr-Sepharose (red), and tethered site-specifically via 131p-AzF and scheme 3 (green) are shown. The dashed gray traces
are the best fit of the DEFs.

The background-corrected dipolar evolution functions (DEF)
and
corresponding distance distributions for 68R1/109R1, 68R1/131R1, and
109R1/131R1 tethered using scheme 3 are shown in Figure B (green traces); for the pairs tested, essentially identical
distance distributions were obtained using the direct covalent coupling
via scheme 1 (). For comparison,
data for the three pairs in solution and tethered nonspecifically
to CNBr-Sepharose are shown in black and red, respectively.

The most probable distances for the proteins tethered site-specifically
are within 0.5 Å of those in solution and are in excellent agreement
with distances predicted by modeling (Figure A). Moreover, the distance distributions show only subtle differences;
the three populations in 109R1/131R1 may be due to rotamers of R1.
Thus, the interspin distance measurements show unequivocally that
the tertiary fold of the protein in the C-terminal domain is retained
after site-specific attachment via either scheme 1 or 3. In contrast,
the distance distributions of the three mutants tethered to CNBr-Sepharose
show increased populations of minor states observed in the site-specific
attachment (see red arrows in Figure B) as
well as population shifts among the major states of 109R1/131R1; for
68R1/131R1, the distribution mode shifts by ∼2.5 Å.

The 44R1/109R1 double is of special interest because it measures
the distance between the two domains of T4L. The active site of the
enzyme is located between the two domains, and solution SDSL studies have shown that there is an equilibrium between
open and closed conformations related by a hinge-bending motion that
results in changes in the distance and relative angle between the
two domains. Thus, the interspin distance of 44R1/109R1 serves as
a metric to monitor conformational properties of the protein with
respect to the hinge-bending motion.

DEER data for 44R1/109R1
are shown in Figure B. In all cases, the widths
of the distributions observed for 44R1/109R1
are broader than those of Figure , consistent
with the structural heterogeneity expected between the domains. In
solution, populations at 26, 30, and 38 Å are resolved, the first
two of which correspond reasonably well with distances of 25 and 31
Å, corresponding to the crystallographic closed and open states,
respectively. The distance distribution of the protein tethered site-specifically
is very similar, with only subtle changes in the relative probability
of the populations (Figures  and ). On the other hand, tethering via CNBr-Sepharose
leads to significant changes in the distance distribution profile
relative to that for the solution state; the most probable distance
is ≈7 Å longer than that observed in solution, and new
populations are evident. Apparently, the nonspecific, multipoint,
and heterogeneous attachment via lysine residues modulates the conformational
properties of T4L.

Monitoring Ligand Binding to a Tethered T4L
Cavity Mutant
With a judiciously placed spin label, the EPR
spectrum can serve
to monitor ligand binding via associated shifts in conformational
equilibria. When the protein is tethered
to a solid support, the surrounding solution can be readily changed,
thereby allowing for facile screening of potential ligands with SDSL-EPR
on the same protein sample. This application requires that the tethering
does not substantially alter the conformational or ligand-binding
equilibria of the protein. The data in Figure  already indicate that site-specific tethering does not alter a known
conformational equilibrium, i.e., the T4L hinge bending.

To
investigate the influence of tethering on ligand-binding equilibria,
the cavity mutant T4L 121A/133A was selected. A recent SDSL-EPR study showed that this mutant exists in a conformational
equilibrium between at least two states of similar free energy, one
of which binds halothane and other organic ligands, thereby shifting
the equilibrium. Figure A shows a model of the mutant and the location of 128R1 used
to monitor the conformational equilibrium. Figure B shows the EPR spectra of T4L 128R1/121A/133A in the absence
(apo) and presence (holo) of halothane (10 mM) both in solution and
tethered site-specifically. For the latter, a complete set of spectra
for halothane concentrations from 0 to 20 mM is provided in . The spectra in solution are reproduced
from López et al., where it was
shown that each spectrum consists of two components, i and m, arising from distinct protein conformations,
and that the effect of ligand binding was to shift the conformational
equilibrium toward the m component. The structural
origins of the spectral components are discussed in López et
al. The spectra and spectral changes
upon halothane addition are remarkably similar for the protein in
solution and tethered to Sepharose, demonstrating that site-specific
tethering did not substantially alter either the protein conformational
equilibrium or the ligand binding and concomitant shift in equilibrium;
the small differences that do exist are attributable to the reduction
in correlation time for the tethered protein relative to that in sucrose
solution (e.g., Figure ).

Ligand binding to T4L
121A/131A tethered site-specifically via
site 44p-AzF and scheme 3. (A) Ribbon diagram showing
the structure of the T4L mutant 121A/133A (PDB 251L), the internal ligand
binding cavity as a green surface, and the location of the 128R1 site
used to detect ligand binding. (B) EPR spectra of 128R1/121A/133A
in the apo state (green) and with 10 mM halothane (blue) in solution
(top panel) and site-specifically tethered (bottom panel).

Discussion
Although nonspecific,
covalent attachment of proteins to commercially
available CNBr-activated Sepharose is convenient, the nonuniform orientation
of the tethered proteins leads to some fraction of the population
in which the spin label interacts directly with the matrix, giving
rise to immobilized states of the nitroxides that complicate the interpretation
of the EPR spectra in terms of protein structure. Moreover, the potential
of multipoint attachment to distort the structure make this method
unattractive for conformational analysis. These effects are illustrated
by the data of Figures –, and this method of tethering was not investigated further.

To overcome the above problems, the two basic strategies for site-specific
tethering to Sepharose shown in Figure  were
evaluated. The direct covalent attachment of T4L (scheme 1) resulted
in the appearance of a spectral component corresponding to an immobilized
state of R1 at certain sites (Figure B), much
like the case for CNBr attachment. The origin of this component is
likely to be R1–matrix interaction due to the short linker.
Such interaction will depend on the relative orientation of the surfaces
containing the linker and R1 and will not appear for every site, as
observed. For T4L tethering mediated by streptavidin/biotin, the streptavidin
molecule provides a rigid spacer of at least 40 Å between the
spin-labeled protein and the surface of the bead, so direct interaction
with the surface is not possible. This effect, together with the extremely
high stability of streptavidin, and the small Kd of the biotin/streptavidin association (≈10–15 M) make the streptavidin/biotin-mediated coupling the method of
choice for most applications. For the few examples compared, tethering
via either p-AzF or p-AcF mediated
by streptavidin/biotin was equivalent in terms of the metrics employed.

A single-site tether of T4L to Sepharose, either by direct covalent
attachment with a short linker or mediated by streptavidin/biotin,
is apparently sufficient to rotationally immobilize the protein on
the CW EPR time scale (Figure ), thus allowing
the EPR spectra of R1 side chains to be interpreted in terms of internal
protein dynamics on the nanosecond time scale. Presumably, the single-site
tether pays the entropic cost of localization, thus allowing multiple
weak enthalpically driven interactions with the matrix (or streptavidin)
that lead to rotational immobilization. Future studies will be needed
to determine whether immobilization extends to the micro- to millisecond
time domain. If so, the methods developed here will enable application
of CW saturation transfer and pulsed
EPR methods to directly monitor internal
modes of protein motion in this slow motional regime. The high effective
concentrations (≈700 μM) that can be achieved without
aggregation will provide high signal-to-noise data with these methods
and enable real-time recording of transient changes initiated, for
example, by pressure or temperature-jump methods designed to measure
the kinetics of conformational exchange.

SDSL-EPR offers a unique
opportunity to map sequence-specific secondary
structure and both local and global tertiary structure of tethered
proteins for comparison with their solution counterparts to assess
the effect of attachment. The EPR lineshapes of R1 spectra in a protein
are fingerprints of the local secondary structure and tertiary fold. For example, the periodic dependence of R1 dynamics
along the sequence 128–135 in T4L in solution reveals a helical
structure of orientation within the fold, as predicted for helix H
in the crystal structure (Figure ). The same periodicity and phase of R1 dynamics
are found for the protein site-specifically tethered, clearly showing
that helix H structure and interactions with the surrounding protein
are unperturbed by the streptavidin-mediated tether (Figures C and ). In addition
to structural information, the EPR lineshapes of R1 at solvent-exposed
sites on helices also reveal the amplitude of local backbone dynamics
on the nanosecond time scale.,, The near identity of such spectra for helix H in solution and in
the tethered state () confirms
that backbone dynamics are unperturbed in the tethered state. Although
complete R1 scans were not done throughout the structure, other helices
in the fold (C, D, F) were sampled by individual sites. In each case,
the spectral line shapes are consistent with an ordered helical structure
and are very similar to the corresponding spectra in solution (Figure ). These data provide strong evidence that the tertiary
fold and backbone dynamics of the C-terminal domain are retained in
the tethered protein.

The above conclusion is quantitatively
supported by the narrow
and very similar distance distributions between R1 pairs within the
C terminal domain for both the solution and tethered states of T4L
(Figure ); in each case, the distances are
in excellent agreement with the single conformation of the WT T4L
crystal structure (PDB 3LZM). On the other hand, the broad multimodal distance
distributions observed for an interdomain pair in solution is consistent
with the existence of a conformational ensemble, the members of which
are related by bending about an interdomain hinge that was identified
in crystal structures from different space groups. The fact that the same distribution is found for the tethered
protein indicates that this dynamic conformational equilibrium between
substates of a similar free energy is unperturbed (Figure ). A different conformational equilibrium, previously
identified in the ligand-binding cavity mutant T4L 121A/133A, gives a similar result. As shown in Figure , the tethered mutant retains not only the conformational
equilibrium observed in solution but also the striking conformational
selection due to ligand binding (halothane). Collectively, the data
make a convincing argument that single and site-specific tethering
has little effect on secondary or tertiary structure, backbone dynamics,
or conformational equilibria.

Summary and Conclusions
The main
conclusion of general interest is that the tertiary structure,
backbone dynamics, and conformational equilibria of T4L derivatives
attached site-selectively to a Sepharose matrix are unperturbed relative
to the protein in solution for the sites investigated. The spin-labeled
sites were chosen distal to the attachment point, and, while it is
likely that backbone dynamics and perhaps local structure are influenced
in close proximity to that point, the data clearly show that the global
structure and conformational equilibria as well as the free energy
of ligand binding are retained in the tethered state. Although here
it is shown that T4 lysozyme retains solution structure and conformational
equilibria upon site-specific tethering, like any strategy that requires
mutagenesis, the introduction of unnatural amino acids and subsequent
tethering to a solid support could potentially perturb the local structure
and dynamics in other proteins. Judicious selection of the attachment
sites far from functional regions and appropriate functional assays
should be performed in any protein of interest to assess the effect
of mutagenesis and subsequent attachment on the native properties

A general advantage of the strategy employed here is the broad
applicability, particularly for proteins expressed in Escherichia coli, where site-specific incorporation
of unnatural amino acids for attachment is relatively simple and produces
quantitative yields of functionalized proteins., For SDSL-EPR, the technology offers important advantages demonstrated
here, namely, the rotational immobilization of proteins on the EPR
time scale and the ability to achieve high local concentrations (≈1
mM) without aggregation. Thus, tethering, in principle, enables the
investigation of marginally stable states of proteins, such as molten
globules, that aggregate at concentrations needed for spectroscopic
study and for studies of unfolding/folding mechanisms under reversible
conditions. Site-specific tethering of spin-labeled proteins is also
an enabling technology for an EPR-based continuous flow system that
could be employed for structure-based screening of ligand binding
using the full complement of SDSL-EPR methods; this application is
currently under investigation.

Supporting Information Available
Full experimental procedures;
data showing reduction of p-AzF with DTT and TCEP;
EPR spectra of R1, R8, and RX labeled T4L; MALDI-TOF data; DEER data
of doubly labeled T4L mutants tethered to DBCO-Sepharose; and EPR
spectra of 128R1/121A/133A tethered to streptavidin beads showing
complete titration of halothane. This material is available free of
charge via the Internet at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bi5011128_si_001.pdf

Author Present Address
† (M.R.F.) Genzyme Corporation, 500 Kendall
Street, Cambridge, Massachusetts
02138, United States.

This work was
supported by National Institutes of Health Grant 5R01 EY005216, Jules
Stein Eye Institute Training Grant 2T32EY007026-36A1, and a Jules
Stein Professor Endowment.

The authors declare no
competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
We thank Dr. Peter
G. Schultz for providing the plasmids pSUPAR-p-AcF
and pEVOL-p-AzF used for incorporation
of UAA in E. coli. We would like to thank Liming
Tan for providing assistance in expression, purification, and tethering
of T4 lysozyme mutants 72p-AcF/131C and T4L 72C/131p-AcF. We thank Dr. Zhongyu Yang,
Michael T. Lerch, and Kevin Eden for careful reading of the manuscript.

Abbreviations
SDSLsite-directed
spin labeling

EPRelectron paramagnetic
resonance

DEERdouble
electron–electron resonance

CWcontinuous wave

CNBrcyanogen bromide

UAAunnatural amino acids

p-AzFpara-azidophenylalanine

p-AcFpara-acetylphenylalanine

DEFdipolar evolution function

