The spliceosomal
snRNPs each
consist of one snRNA bound by many proteins. The U1 snRNP is the simplest snRNP, with only three unique proteins
(in addition to the common Sm proteins), while the U2 snRNP not only
contains more than a dozen unique proteins but also undergoes a dynamic
rearrangement of its protein composition. Curiously, among the unique
proteins in the U1 and U2 snRNPs of jawed vertebrates are two phylogenetically
related proteins, U1A and U2B″, respectively. U1A and U2B″
are thought to uniquely localize to either snRNP, where they bind
similar RNA sequences in the respective snRNAs. The U1A protein binds
to U1 snRNA stemloop II (SLII), and U2B″ binds U2 snRNA stemloop
IV (SLIV) (Figure ). Protein localization
occurs despite the homology and strong sequence similarity between
U1A and U2B″, as well as the similarity between their RNA stemloop
binding sites within the snRNAs.

RRM structures and sequences. Sequence
alignment of human U1A and
U2B″ RRM1. β-Strands and α-helices are indicated
above the sequences. Structure of human U1A (from the SLII:RRM cocrystal 1URN) indicating Tyr13
that stacks with RNA, and the sites on α1 that potentially interact
with U2A′. Structure of U2B″ (from the SLIV/U2B″/U2A′
cocrystal 1A9N), in which Tyr10 stacks with RNA, while residues on α1 are
packed with U2A′. SLIV/U2B″ structure from 1A9N() and U2B″/U2A′ from 1A9N. To see the U2B″
interfaces, the two complexes are shown separately. Sequences of human
SLII and SLIV. Cartoons constructed with VMD.

U1A and U2B″ are related
in sequence and structure; both
have two RNA recognition motifs (RRMs) separated by an unstructured
linker, and there is &gt;70% sequence identity between RRM paralogs
(Figure ). Their N-terminal RRM1 structures
are highly homologous
(Figure ), and they display conserved amino
acids on their β-sheet surfaces where RNA binds. RNA binding
by the U1A protein has been studied extensively− and found to require only RRM1
for RNA recognition.− Its C-terminal RRM2 does not bind RNA, and there are no data regarding any protein–protein
interactions it may have. The N-terminal RRM (RRM1) of U2B″
has also been shown to be responsible for specific RNA binding., Biochemical experiments suggest that in vitro,
the U2B″ linker does make a contribution to RNA binding affinity
but that like U1A, its C-terminal RRM (RRM2) does not bind RNA.

Unlike U1A, U2B″ is bound not only
to the U2 snRNA but also
to the U2A′ protein., During pre-mRNA splicing,
the U2 snRNA undergoes significant conformational changes, and many
U2 snRNP proteins are exchanged during these rearrangements. However,
U2B″ and U2A′ are found in the U2 snRNP throughout its
tenure in the spliceosome. Human U2A′
is a modular protein with a 180-amino acid N-terminal leucine-rich
repeat (LRR) domain and a C-terminus predicted to be mostly disordered
(IUPRED). In a cocrystal of U2 snRNA
stemloop IV (SLIV), U2B″ RRM1, and the U2A′-LRR domain, the RRM is sandwiched between the RNA on the
surface of the β-sheet and the LRR that wraps around α1
on the opposite face of the RRM (Figure ).

In early studies, several reports, concluded
that U2B″ was unable to bind to the U2 snRNA specifically in
the absence of U2A′. These results also showed a direct protein–protein
interaction between U2B″ and U2A′ and suggested that
in spite of the similarity between the U1A and U2B″ protein
sequences, U1A was compromised in its ability to bind U2A′. More quantitative experiments established that
U2A′ did appear to increase the apparent binding affinity of
U2B″ for SLIV,, supporting the existing hypothesis
that U2A′ function was to increase the affinity of U2B″
for SLIV. In more recent in vitro experiments with
recombinant human U2B″, we showed that U2B″ does not
discriminate between SLII and SLIV but that the binding affinity is
still reasonably tight for both RNAs (KD values of ∼1 × 10–8 M in 250 mM KCl
and ∼2 × 10–9 M in 100 mM KCl).

Homologues of U1A, U2B″, and U2A′
have been found
to be essential for the viability of Drosophila and Caenorhabditis elegans, and in both Drosophila and C. elegans, U2A′ has functions that
are independent of snRNP.,, However, the cellular functions of U1A, U2B″, and U2A′
remain largely elusive. The U1 snRNP can be functionally reconstituted
without U1A. Deletion of U2 SLIV from Xenopus snRNA and the resulting loss of U2B″/U2A′
from the U2 snRNP do not inhibit pre-mRNA splicing, although levels
of truncated U2 snRNA and prespliceosomes were low,, suggesting that the U2B″/U2A′ complex has a function
in spliceosome integrity. A common feature of U1 and U2 snRNPs in
organisms as diverse as humans, Drosophila, C. elegans, and Saccharomyces cerevisiae is that U2A′ localizes uniquely to the U2 snRNP and is excluded
from the U1 snRNP.,, The apparent conservation of U2A′ snRNP localization therefore
appears to be an important feature of snRNP protein composition.

Here we quantify the interactions between human U1A and U2B″,
U1 snRNA SL II and U2 snRNA SLIV, and human U2A′ protein with
the goal of understanding the mechanism of protein localization to
specific snRNPs. We find that most of the ternary complexes formed
with RRM, RNA, and LRR domains exhibit positive thermodynamic linkage
(cooperativity) that enhances the stability of specific complexes.
U2B″ binds U2A′ with nanomolar affinity, and the SLIV/U2B″/U2A′
ternary complex is characterized by a large cooperativity (linkage)
parameter. Surprisingly, SLIV/U1A/U2A′ binding is also characterized
by a large linkage and/or cooperativity parameter, but the protein–protein
interaction is much weaker (micromolar), effectively preventing the
formation of this ternary complex in vivo. We find
that the localization of U2A′ to the U2 snRNP is a result of
its relative binding affinities for U1A and U2B″ proteins,
as well as the RNA dependence of thermodynamic linkage between binding
of SLIV and U2A′ to U2B″. The linkage between U2A′
and RNA binding also reinforces the protein partitioning of U1A and
U2B″ to the U1 and U2 snRNAs, respectively. Given the phylogenetics
of this protein–RNA system and the results of our analysis,
we posit that the protein–protein interactions serve primarily
to localize U2A′ to the U2 snRNP and exclude it from the U1
snRNP, rather than to enhance RNA binding of U2B″.

Experimental
Procedures
Protein Expression and Purification
Full-length human
U1A and U2B″ proteins were purified as described previously., The full-length human U2A′ protein was highly prone to aggregation
and went entirely into inclusion bodies when it was overexpressed
in Escherichia coli. A truncated form that included
the first 180 amino acids was subcloned into our Ptac expression vector
and transformed into BL-21(DE3) cells. The cells were grown in LB
medium at 37 °C to an optical density of 0.6–0.8 and were
induced with 0.1 mM IPTG overnight at 17 °C. Cells were harvested
and stored at −70 °C until they were lysed or processed
immediately. Cells were resuspended in 30 mM sodium acetate (pH 5.3),
200 mM NaCl, 2 mM EDTA, 8.5% sucrose, and 10 mM BME. PMSF, DNase II,
and a protease inhibitor cocktail (Sigma) were added prior to French
pressing the cells. The lysate was collected and spun down in an ultracentrifuge
at 4 °C and 45000g. The supernatant was filtered
through a 0.22 μm cellulose acetate membrane and loaded onto
an SP Sepharose column pre-equilibrated in 50 mM Tris (pH 7.5). U2A′
was eluted over 170 min, using a 50 to 375 mM NaCl gradient. All column
buffers were sterile-filtered through 0.45 μm cellulose nitrate
filters (Nalgene), and containers used in the purification were acid
washed to remove RNases. Fractions containing U2A′ were concentrated
using a Vivaspin concentrator with a molecular mass cutoff of 10 kDa
and buffer-exchanged into 100 mM arginine, 50 mM KCl, 10 mM cacodylate
(pH 7), and 5 mM DTT; arginine was necessary to maintain protein solubility
at high concentrations. Gel filtration of the protein with a Superdex
75 10/300 GL (GE) column was performed with a flow rate of 0.3 mL/min
to remove impurities. The protein was eluted as a single symmetric
peak. Clean fractions were collected and concentrated to ∼100
μM for further use, and the final protein concentration was
determined spectrophotometrically.

Fluorescently Labeled RNA
Hairpins
For fluorescence
binding experiments, we used chemically synthesized RNAs (IDT) with
5′-6-carboxyfluorescein (6-FAM): 5′-6-FAM-GGGCCCGGCAUUGCACCUCGCCGGGUCC (SLII)
and g5′-6-FAM-GGGCCCGGUAUUGCAGUACCGCCGGGUCC (SLIV).

Loop nucleotides are underlined. To assess whether the 5′-fluorescein
label affects RNA binding, these RNAs were 3′-end-labeled (using
T4 RNA ligase) with [α-32P]pCp (cytidine
3′,5′-bis-phosphate) for use in nitrocellulose filter
binding experiments. FAM-RNA and RNAs transcribed with T7 RNA polymerase
were bound with equal affinity by U1A and U2B″, so the FAM-RNAs
were used in fluorescence experiments to measure binding affinity.

Fluorescence Titrations
U1A or U2B″/U2A′
titrations were performed in 250 mM KCl, 10 mM potassium phosphate
(pH 8), 1 mM MgCl2, 40 μg/mL BSA, 5 mM DTT, and RNasin.
Titrations were performed at 23 °C, with constant stirring. For
a single titration of U1A/U2B″ or U1A/U2B″/U2A′
into fluorescein-labeled RNA, the cuvette and titrant concentration
of fluorescein-labeled RNA was held constant at 0.1 or 0.5 nM (the
lower concentration was used for the highest-affinity interactions).
The cuvette and titrant also contained identical concentrations of
U2A′. The sample was excited at 490 nm, and the emission intensity
at 520 nm was recorded (excitation and emission slit openings of 8
and 16 nm, respectively). U1A or U2B″ with or without U2A′
was titrated into the RNA, and the fluorescence emission intensity
was recorded for each addition of protein. The intensity data were
converted to fluorescence enhancement and normalized to the maximal
fluorescence enhancement to represent the fraction of bound RNA. Titrations
were collected at multiple concentrations of U2A′, and the
data were globally fit in Scientist (Micromath) to eqs –:where FM+UM is
the fraction of the total RNA, bound either to U1A/U2B″ (M)
or to U2A′:U1A/U2B″ (UM); RT, UT, and MT are the total RNA, U2A′, and U1A/U2B″ concentrations,
respectively; R, U, and M are the concentrations of free RNA, U2A′, and U1A
or U2B″, respectively; α is the cooperativity parameter;
and KR and KU are the bimolecular association constants for the SNF–RNA
and SNF–U2A′ interactions, respectively. The schematic
for data analysis in terms of a thermodynamic cycle of protein and
RNA binding is illustrated in Figure .

Schematics
of binding model and thermodynamic cycles for ternary
complex formation. R, U, and M represent the RNA, U2A′, and
RRM-containing protein (U1A or U2B″), respectively. α
is the linkage parameter. KR and KU are the bimolecular binding constants for
the RRM–RNA and RRM–U2A′ interactions, respectively.
The enthalpies associated with protein–protein and protein–RNA
binding are indicated by ΔHU and
ΔHR, respectively, and the enthalpy
associated with cooperativity between the two binding events is indicated
by Δh.

Titration series were performed at least twice for each RNA.
The
parameter values represent the average of the series fits, with uncertainties
that are the larger of either the propagated error or the standard
deviation between measurements. For SLII, the difference in binding
affinity with or without U2A′ is small, such that U2A′
binding affinity could not be extracted from these experiments. In
fits of the binding data, the U1A–U2A′ binding constant
was fixed to the value obtained from experiments with SLIV. This allowed
fitting of the linkage parameter α.

Partitioning surfaces
were calculated in Scientist based on the
model parameters determined in the fluorescence binding experiments.
For these surfaces, SLII and SLIV were considered competitive ligands.
The partitioning surfaces were plotted in MatLab.

ITC Experiments
RNAs for ITC experiments were transcribed in vitro using T7 RNA polymerase, purified via polyacrylamide
gel electrophoresis, and reconstituted in water following ethanol
precipitation. Concentrations were determined spectrophotometrically.
The RNA was refolded by being heated to 95 °C for 3 min and then
quenched on ice. Buffer was added to a total volume of 50 μL,
and this was placed in mini dialyzers [ThermoScientific, 2000 molecular
weight cutoff (MWCO)] to dialyze against the final buffer [250 mM
KCl, 10 mM potassium phosphate, and 1 mM MgCl2 (pH 8)].
The RNA sequences used in ITC experiments were 5′-GGGCACAUUGCACCUCGUGUCCAGACUUCGGUC
(SLII) and 5′-GGAGUUUUCCAGGACGUAUUGCAGUACCUCGUCCUGG (SLIV).
Loop nucleotides are underlined. The longer constructs were necessary
to reduce the level of RNA dimerization at concentrations up to 1
mM: SLII includes a UUCG tetraloop at its 3′-end, and SLIV
includes a poly-U tail at its 5′-end. Shorter constructs (like
those used in the fluorescence binding experiments) were found to
dimerize in a concentration-dependent manner, beginning at ∼10
μM (data not shown). The longer RNA constructs bind to the RRM
proteins with affinities that are identical within error to those
of shorter RNA constructs, when assayed by nitrocellulose filter binding
(not shown).

Protein samples were diluted to 2 times their final
concentration from stock solutions into 250 mM KCl, 10 mM potassium
phosphate, and 1 mM MgCl2 (pH 8) (buffer used in experiments)
and dialyzed in minidialyzers (ThermoScientific, 2000 MWCO) against
the experimental buffer. Final samples were prepared by diluting the
RNA and/or protein samples (U1A, U2B″, U2A′, or a mixture
of these) with equal volumes of the final buffer supplemented with
a final BME concentration of 5 mM. Samples were degassed prior to
being loaded into the ITC injection syringe or cell. Titrations were
performed on a NanoITC instrument (TAinstruments) and analyzed using
the Triple Complex model in SedPhat.

Results
RRMs, RNA, and U2A′
To determine the thermodynamic
parameters of ternary complex formation, we performed titrations of
full-length U1A and U2B″ into RNAs, with and without U2A′
(we use only the LRR domain of human U2A′). For these experiments,
the RNAs were labeled at the 5′-end with fluorescein (FAM).
Protein binding by either U1A or U2B″ results in a 20% increase
in FAM fluorescence upon saturation by either protein (not shown).
Addition of excess U2A′ to the RNA did not change the RNA fluorescence,
and the fluorescence of RNA/(U1A/U2B″) complexes was not altered
by the presence of U2A′.

Binding of U2B″ and U1A
to RNA was measured directly in the fluorescence experiments with
or without U2A′. Representative data are shown in Figure , and data series were fit to a binding model that
takes into account cooperativity between the protein–protein
and protein–RNA interaction (see schematic and Figure ). This provides estimates for the protein–protein
and protein–RNA bimolecular binding constants, as well as the
concentration-independent linkage parameter α (Tables  and ).

Binding experiments with
FAM-RNA. Titrations of FAM-SLII (top)
or -SLIV (bottom) into U1A (A) or U2B″ (B) were performed at
different concentrations of U2A′. The U2A′ concentration
was kept constant for any given titration and is indicated in the
figure. All fluorescence experiments were conducted in 250 mM KCl,
10 mM sodium phosphate, and 1 mM MgCl2 (pH 8) at 22 °C.
The linkage parameter for complex formation (α) is calculated
to be 7.3 for U1A/SLII/U2A′, 89 for U1A/SLIV/U2A′, 16
for U2B″/SLII/U2A′, and 140 for U2B″/SLIV/U2A′.

Binding Parameters
from Global Fits
of Titrations of U1A/U2A′ into Fluorescein-Labeled SLII and
SLIV
 	SLII	SLIV	
KD,RNA,app (M)	(3.3 ± 0.3) × 10–10	(5.8 ± 0.4) × 10–8	
ΔG°RNA (kcal/mol)	–12.8 ± 0.1	–9.8 ± 0.1	
KD,U2A′,app (M)	–	(1.4 ± 0.2) × 10–6	
ΔG°U2A′ (kcal/mol)	–	–7.9 ± 0.1	
α	7.3 ± 1.3	89 ± 11	
Δg (kcal/mol)	–1.2 ± 0.1	–2.6 ± 0.1	
Dissociation constants
are reported
here. The affinity of U1A for U2A′ was too weak to measure
accurately in these experiments. Parameter values reflect the average
values from at least two separate data series. The uncertainty represents
the larger of either the standard deviation of the parameter values
from different fits or the propagated error.

Binding Parameters from Global Fits
of Titrations of U2B″/U2A′ into Fluorescein-Labeled
SLII and SLIV
 	SLII	SLIV	
KD,RNA,app (M)	(1.5 ± 0.1) × 10–8	(1.7 ± 0.3) × 10–8	
ΔG°RNA (kcal/mol)	–10.6 ± 0.1	–10.5 ± 0.1	
KD,U2A′,app (M)	(5.1 ± 1.1) × 10–9	(4.4 ± 2.4) × 10–9	
ΔG°U2A′ (kcal/mol)	–11.2 ± 0.1	–11.3 ± 0.3	
α	15.8 ± 1.6	139 ± 49	
Δg (kcal/mol)	–1.6 ± 0.1	–2.9 ± 0.2	
Dissociation constants
are used
here. Parameter values reflect the average values from at least two
separate data series. The uncertainty represents the larger of either
the standard deviation of the parameter values from different fits
or the propagated error.

U1A binds with subnanomolar affinity to SLII, and as Figure A shows, addition of U2A′ modestly increases
the affinity. However, these titrations show that addition of U2A′
significantly increases the affinity of U1A for SLIV, and fitting
these data to our binding model allowed us to estimate the affinity
of U2A′ for U1A [KU2A′,app = (1.4 ± 0.2) × 10–6 M]. We used this
value for fitting the cooperativity parameter α for the U2A′/U1A/SLII
titrations; all of the binding parameters associated with U1A are
summarized in Table . Rather surprisingly
given the in vivo snRNA partitioning of U1A, the
linkage parameter (α) for SLIV/U1A/U2A′ binding is 89
± 11, corresponding to a substantial increase in the apparent
U1A/SLIV binding affinity when U2A′ is present.

As a
short aside, full length (FL) U1A bound to SLIV with an affinity
surprisingly high compared to values reported previously. However, most studies to date have used RRM1
constructs to study RNA binding by U1A, and indeed, U1A RRM1 and FL
U1A bind SLII with very similar affinities. In contrast, SLIV binding
is substantially influenced by U1A construct length, with FL U1A binding
more tightly to SLIV than U1A RRM1 (Figure 1 of the ), accounting for the discrepancies
in SLIV binding between this study and other studies. The U1A interdomain
linker is highly positively charged, in particular at its N-terminus,
which could contribute to the increased affinity of FL U1A for SLIV
(the affinity of RRM1 for SLII is so tight that an effect would not
be easily measured). Linker effects on binding affinity have been
seen in other members of this protein family, and we suspect that contributions of the interdomain linker to RNA
binding may be a fairly general method of increasing the binding affinity
of this family of proteins for RNA.

The most dramatic U2A′-dependent
enhancement in RNA binding
affinity was seen in the U2B″/SLIV titrations (Figure B and Table ). Formation
of the ternary complex is facilitated by thermodynamic linkage (cooperativity
α of 140). The affinity of U2B″ for SLII is also enhanced
by the presence of U2A′; however, the cooperativity parameter
is smaller than that for the SLIV interaction by a factor of ∼10
(α = 15). The free energy associated with this cooperativity
(Δg) is −2.9 ± 0.2 kcal/mol for
SLIV/U2B″/U2A′ and −1.6 ± 0.1 kcal/mol for
SLII/U2B″/U2A′. Linkage in the U2A′/U2B″/SLIV
ternary complex leads to preferential stabilization of this species
over the bimolecular species.

Localization of the Protein
to the snRNPs
Partitioning
of protein to the U1 and U2 snRNAs was modeled using the experimentally
determined binding parameters. This is illustrated in simulations
of the fractions of SLII and SLIV found in a bimolecular complex with
U1A and ternary complex with U2B″ and U2A′ (Figure ; the populations of other species on SLII and SLIV
are shown in Figures 2 and 3 of the ). The simulations were conducted assuming constant
cellular concentrations of the RNAs: 3 μM for U1 SLII and 1.5
μM for U2 SLIV. It is also known
that U1A is found at levels in the cell higher than those of U2B″,
so simulations were performed assuming [U1A] = 2[U2B″]. [Results
from additional simulations conducted at various U1A:U2B″ ratios
of ≥1 showed overall results similar to those found with a
2:1 ratio (Figure 4 of the ).]

Protein partitioning simulations. (a) Thermodynamic model including
all components (U1A, U2B″, U2A′, SLII, and SLIV) with
all binding parameters obtained from fluorescence titrations. Protein
partitioning surfaces were calculated over a wide range of U1A, U2B″,
and U2A′ concentrations, given the thermodynamic parameters
in panel a. (b) Fractions of SLII found in a bimolecular complex with
U1A (red) and of SLIV in a ternary complex with U2B″ and U2A′
(blue) are shown over a range of U1A, U2B″, and U2A′
concentrations. (C) Similar partitioning surface showing the fraction
of SLII in a ternary complex with U1A and U2A′ (red) and SLIV
in a ternary complex with U2B″ and U2A′ (blue). These
simulations were conducted assuming [U1A] = 2[U2B″].

Figure  shows that unless U2A′ concentrations
are in excess of U2B″, then U2B″ and U2A′ are
effectively excluded from binding U1 SLII, and the ternary complex
with U2B″ readily forms on U2 SLIV (U1A is also effectively
excluded from binding). The protein concentration ranges over which
a bimolecular complex is formed on the U1 snRNA and a ternary complex
is formed on the U2 snRNA indicate that the thermodynamics of the
systems effectively partition U2A′ to the U2 snRNP and prevent
incorporation into the U1 snRNP.

Protein–Protein
Interactions
The LRR domain
of U2A′ surrounds α1 of U2B″ as illustrated in
Figure . At this interface, several charged
residues from U2B″ (Arg25 and Glu22) form a polar patch that
makes contact with U2A′. In U1A, the same polar patch comes
from Lys28 and Glu25. Despite this conservation of charge, the difference
in the binding affinities of U1A and U2B″ for U2A′ is
quite large (nearly 3 orders of magnitude). To further probe the thermodynamics
of the interactions, we measured the protein–protein interactions
directly by ITC. Calorimetric titrations of binding of U1A and U2B″
to U2A′ are shown in Figure . Under
our experimental solution conditions, the apparent enthalpy of U1A/U2A′
binding is slightly unfavorable (ΔH° =
2 ± 1 kcal/mol), so this association is entropically driven.
In contrast, U2B″ binds to U2A′ with a favorable apparent
enthalpy of binding (ΔH° = −85
± 2 kcal/mol).

Protein–protein interactions. Calorimetric titrations
of
U1A (left) and U2B″ (right) into U2A′ show very different
thermodynamic signatures of binding. Calorimetric titrations were
conducted in 100 mM arginine, 50 mM KCl, and 10 mM cacodylate (pH
7) at 22 °C.

Using the cocrystal structure of SLIV/U2B″/U2A′
(Figure ) to estimate the surface areas, the
binding enthalpy (at 22 °C) that can be expected from the buried
surface area of the two proteins (ΔH°)
is −15 kcal/mol. Our experimental
U2B″/U2A′ binding enthalpy is 6-fold larger and favorable.
It could originate from conformational changes, linked protonation,
or both, which are linked to binding. U2B″ uses several charged
residues to contact the U2A′ surface, which suggests electrostatic
interactions also play a role at this interface.

Calorimetric
Analysis of Ternary Complex Formation
Having determined the
calorimetric thermodynamic parameters for the
binary protein–protein interactions, we determined the calorimetric
parameters for ternary complex formation. Figure  shows results from ITC experiments based on titrations of
U1A into U2A′, RNA into U1A, and RNA into an equimolar mix
of U1A and U2A′. Similar results are shown for U2B″
in Figure . These experiments were performed
under the same solution conditions as in the fluorescence binding
assays. Fitting parameters from global fits of the data are listed
in Tables  and .

Calorimetric
titrations and ternary complex formation for U1A.
Results for SLII are shown on the left, and results for SLIV are shown
on the right. Titrations of U1A into U2A′ (red squares), RNA
into U1A (purple squares), or RNA into an equimolar mix of U1A and
U2A′ (green diamonds) are shown, along with the results of
globally fitting the data for each set of experiments (lines). Titrations
were conducted in 250 mM KCl, 10 mM potassium phosphate (pH 8), and
1 mM MgCl2 at 22.5 °C, and parameters from the fits
are listed in Table .

Calorimetric titrations and ternary complex formation for U2B″.
A titration of U2B″ into U2A′ is shown on the left (red
squares), along with fits from global analyses of either SLII (top
right) or SLIV (bottom right). RNA was titrated into U2B″ (purple
squares) or into an equimolar mix of U2B″ and U2A′ (green
diamonds). The results of globally fitting the data for each set of
experiments (lines) are also shown. Titrations were conducted in 250
mM KCl, 10 mM potassium phosphate, and 1 mM MgCl2 (pH 8)
at 22.5 °C, and parameters from the fits are listed in Table .

Parameters
for Global Fits of Calorimetric
Titrations for U1A-Related Thermodynamic Parameters
 	SLII	SLIV	
KD,U2A′ (M)	(1.0 ± 0.9) × 10–6	(8.3 ± 2.2) × 10–7	
ΔG°U2A′ (kcal/mol)	–8.1 ± 1.5	–8.2 ± 0.9	
ΔH°U2A′ (kcal/mol)	2.9 ± 1.2	2.8 ± 0.6	
KD,RNA (M)	&lt;7 × 10–9	(1.0 ± 1.2) × 10–7	
ΔG°RNA (kcal/mol)	&lt;−11	–9.1 ± 0.4	
ΔH°RNA (kcal/mol)	–23.5 ± 0.7	–14.8 ± 1.7	
α	1.4 ± 7.9	34.0 ± 17.0	
Δg (kcal/mol)	–0.2 ± 1.4	–2.1 ± 0.6	
Δh (kcal/mol)	4.6 ± 2.5	1.5 ± 0.6	
Dissociation constants
are used
here. U1A binds too tightly to SLII to accurately measure affinity
by ITC. Parameter values reflect the average values from at least
two separate data series. The uncertainty represents the larger of
either the standard deviation of the parameter values from different
fits or the propagated error.

Parameters for Global Fits of Calorimetric
Titrations for U2B″-Related Thermodynamic Parameters
 	SLII	SLIV	
KD,U2A′ (M)	(5.9 ± 1.1) × 10–9	(6.0 ± 1.1) × 10–9	
ΔG°U2A′ (kcal/mol)	–11.1 ± 0.1	–11.1 ± 0.1	
ΔH°U2A′ (kcal/mol)	–73.2 ± 1.4	–73.2 ± 1.3	
KD,RNA (M)	(9.2 ± 3.9) × 10–8	(2.3 ± 0.5) × 10–9	
ΔG°RNA (kcal/mol)	–9.5 ± 0.5	–10.3 ± 0.2	
ΔH°RNA (kcal/mol)	–13.3 ± 1.0	–14.9 ± 0.2	
α	7.4 ± 6.8	&gt;30	
Δg (kcal/mol)	–1.2 ± 0.5	&lt;−2	
Δh (kcal/mol)	4.5 ± 0.8	2.1 ± 0.5	
Dissociation constants
are reported
here. Values of cooperativity (α) could not be accurately determined
in ITC experiments with SLIV. Parameter values reflect the average
values from at least two experiments. The uncertainty represents the
larger of either the standard deviation of the parameter values from
different fits or the propagated error.

The calorimetry data were fit in SEDPHAT to a binding
model that
used the injection heats as input., This provides
estimates for the binding enthalpies associated with both of the bimolecular
interactions (ΔH°U2A and ΔH°RNA) as well as the enthalpy associated
with linkage (Δh). The calorimetric measurements
are more limited in their sensitivity to tight binding than the fluorescence
measurements. In particular, the apparent binding of U2B″ to
SLIV in the presence of U2A′ is very tight, producing an extremely
steep transition in the titration (Figure , bottom right), making it impossible to estimate αU2A′/U2B″/SLIV with any reliability. Similarly, binding of U1A to SLII is very
tight (in the presence and absence of U2A′), making estimates
of KA,appU1A/SLII and αU2A′/U1A/SLII less reliable than those obtained from the fluorescence-based titrations.
Within the limitations of the calorimetric data, agreement between
spectroscopic and calorimetric data is reasonable, while the binding
enthalpies (including the enthalpic contribution to linkage) are accurate
and robust.

U2B″ binds to SLII and SLIV with similar
apparent enthalpies
of binding (ΔH° ∼ −14 kcal/mol
in these solution conditions). Binding is enthalpically driven, and
the entropic cost is relatively small. Binding of U1A to SLIV has
similar thermodynamic parameters. In contrast, the apparent binding
enthalpy for U1A/SLII is much larger (ΔH°
= −24 kcal/mol). This contributes to the higher binding affinity
but is also accompanied by a larger entropic penalty under these solution
conditions.

We have already noted that under the conditions
studied, there
is significant positive linkage (α) between U2A′ and
SLIV binding to U1A or U2B″. The calorimetric titrations show,
however, that this is not the result of a net increase in the apparent
enthalpy of binding. The enthalpy Δh associated
with the linked equilibria is approximately twice as large for binding
of protein to SLII (Δh = 4.5 kcal/mol) compared
to binding to SLIV (Δh = 2 kcal/mol); both
are unfavorable. Instead, the origin of the positive linkage is entropic.
For these complexes, possible entropic contributions could come from
water or ion release or the increased flexibility of a structural
element.

Binding of U1A and U2B″ to SLII and SLIV is
characterized
by salt dependence, enthalpy–entropy compensation, and a negative
heat capacity (ΔCp,obs)., Previous van’t Hoff determinations
of U1A/SLII binding thermodynamics gave the following values: ΔH° = −34 kcal/mol and ΔS° = −74 eu at 22 °C in 200 mM NaCl, 1 mM MgCl2, and 10 mM sodium cacodylate (pH 6), with a heat capacity
ΔCp,obs of −3.1
± 0.4 kcal mol–1 K–1. Binding
of SLIV to U2B″ in 250 mM KCl could be fit to a linear van’t
Hoff equation to give the following binding thermodynamics: ΔH° = −16 ± 1 kcal/mol and ΔS° = −21.2 ± 3.5 cal mol–1 K–1. These van’t Hoff values for the enthalpy
are in excellent agreement with our new calorimetric determinations
at the same temperature at nearly identical salt concentrations. The
effect of U2A′ on the temperature dependence of RNA binding
thermodynamics is still to be determined.

Discussion
Human
U1A and U2B″ proteins have very different affinities
and specificities for U1 snRNA SLII and U2 snRNA SLIV, and so segregate to the U1 and U2 snRNP., We propose, however, that the localization of U2A′ to the
U2 snRNP is the primary raison d’être for the combination of binding affinities and cooperativity among
these RNAs and proteins.

In humans, U2A′ localization
is largely accomplished by
different intrinsic affinities of the protein for U1A and U2B″
and by stronger linkage among SLIV, U2B″, and U2A′ than
among SLII, U2B″, and U2A′. The strong intrinsic affinity
of U1A for SLII and its relative abundance are also important, as
the binding affinity of U1A for SLII is still approximately 5-fold
tighter than the affinity of U2B″/U2A′ for SLII. These
factors, together with the relative paucity of U2A′, are sufficient
to maintain U1A localization to the U1 snRNP and restrict U2B″/U2A′
binding.

The molecular mechanism of the cooperativity we observe
in the
interaction of U2B″ with SLIV and U2A′ remains unknown,
and we can only speculate about its origins. Ternary complex formation
that includes SLIV is facilitated by cooperativity, so the SLIV sequence
certainly contributes to the binding mechanism. SLII and SLIV differ
in their loop-closing base pairs, in the identity of the seventh loop
nucleotide (C in SLII and G in SLIV), and in an A inserted on the
3′-side of the SLIV loop. How U2B″ interacts with these
sites on SLIV could determine how it responds to U2A′ binding,
resulting in the cooperativity we observe. However, in the reciprocal
pathway for ternary complex formation, U2B″ first interacts
with U2A′ and also leads to cooperative binding by SLIV. We
suspect that loop 3 of U2B″ interacts with SLII and SLIV very
differently, specifically near the loop-closing base pair, and that
its interactions and flexibility in either binary complex enhance
its subsequent interactions in the ternary complex. Loop 3 is a notable
site of amino acid variation in this family of RRMs, particularly at its N-terminus, and the unique combination
of U2B″ loop 3 amino acids, SLIV, and (uncharacterized) U2A′
amino acids could lead to cooperativity in forming the SLIV/U2B″/U2A′
ternary complex.

Linkage in the U1A/U2B″/SNF Family
The binding
parameters that we have determined for this system are sufficient
to explain the in vivo localization of the different
protein components to the U1 and U2 snRNPs. Their reliance on intrinsic
differences in binding affinity for SLII and SLIV as a dominant mechanism
of localization is strikingly different from that of SNF, the single Drosophila protein that binds to both snRNAs. In the protein
phylogeny, U1A and U2B″ emerged after a relatively recent gene
duplication, while SNF is more closely related to the single ancestral
protein. U1A, U2B″, and SNF share
many properties, and among these is strong linkage with SLIV binding.
All three proteins use an RNA-dependent cooperative binding mechanism
to guide their snRNP localization, but while these properties of linked
equilibria are fundamental to SNF segregation and contribute significantly
to U2B″ ternary complex formation, they would appear to be
vestigial for U1A function.

The localization of U2A′
to the U2 snRNP is accomplished through distinct mechanisms in humans
and Drosophila, and it is of interest to compare
the two systems. SNF binds to both U1 snRNA SLII and U2 snRNA SLIV,
but only when it is in the U2 snRNP does it form the ternary complex
with RNA and dmU2A′ (dm is Drosophila). SNF’s affinity for dmU2A′ is modest, but binding
is very strongly coupled to SLIV binding, increasing the apparent
affinity for the RNA by a factor of 350. This effect is a reciprocal one, so SLIV binding increases the apparent
binding affinity of the SNF–dmU2A′ interaction by 350-fold.
In contrast, dmU2A′ binding has almost no effect on SNF–SLII
interactions. The result is that the very large difference in cooperativity
is effective in partitioning U2A′ to the U2 snRNP.

Following
the gene duplication in an ancestor of jawed vertebrates,
one protein evolved to bind U1 SLII with very high affinity and specificity,
eventually becoming human U1A. In contrast, the second protein evolved
to lose specificity for SLII. The system
also evolved a large difference in the intrinsic binding affinities
of the two RRM paralogs for U2A′. Given the single protein
origin of the phylogeny, it is instructive to think about how the
proteins would be expected to partition if a single protein with the
characteristics of either U1A or U2B″ were present in humans.
Results from simulations similar to those shown in Figure  (maintaining the U1A and U2B″ binding parameters
but considering only U1A or U2B″ to be present) are shown in
Figure 5 of the .
If U2B″ were to be lost from human cells, the partitioning
of U2A′ to the U2 snRNP would be significantly compromised
over a substantial range of protein concentrations. If U1A were lost,
the population of U2A′ on the U2 snRNP would be much more significant.

Reports of U2A′ function suggest that its principal biochemical
role is to increase the binding affinity of U2B″ for SLIV.
While linkage analysis shows that this effect undoubtedly occurs,
it seems unlikely that this is the purpose of the protein. Most metazoans
function with a single SLII/SLIV binding protein (as in flies), for
which a duplicate high-affinity RNA target on the U2 snRNA could easily
circumvent the need for an auxiliary protein. In systems with separate
U1A and U2B″ proteins, the system would again be more parsimonious
with two high-affinity, high-specificity RNAs determining protein
partitioning. Therefore, it seems more likely that both systems evolved
to exclude U2A′ from the U1 snRNP and localize it to the U2
snRNP.

Biological Necessity of U2B″/U2A′
In
experiments with Xenopus oocytes in which endogenous
U2 snRNA was inactivated, pre-mRNA splicing could be rescued when
exogenous U2 snRNA was expressed., This system
was used to investigate the regions of U2 snRNA that are required
for spliceosome formation and splicing. In independent experiments,
these investigators deleted SLIV in exogenous U2 snRNA and observed
that splicing was impaired but not inactivated. Examination of spliceosome
assembly revealed that complex A (containing U1 snRNP and U2AF protein)
was present in large amounts but complex B (where U2 snRNP is added)
and complex C were not detected. Because splicing was observed (complex
C is the active spliceosome), Hamm et al. concluded that with the truncated U2 snRNA and the consequent absence
of U2B″/U2A′, these complexes were unstable and did
not survive purification. Pan and Prives came to a similar conclusion, as they monitored splicing of endogenously
transcribed SV40 pre-mRNA in Xenopus oocytes. They
concluded that U2 snRNA lacking SLIV (and therefore also U2B″/U2A′)
was unstable.

Yeast (S. cerevisiae) contain
both U2B″ (Yib9p or YU2B″) and U2A′ (Lea1p). Cells lacking
Lea1p, Yip9p, or both spliced at greatly reduced levels had slow growth,
and levels of U2 snRNA were low. Those yeast cells accumulated Commitment
Complex 2 (lacking U2 snRNP), and no prespliceosome was detected.
In other studies, the yeast U2 snRNA SLIV was deleted; the result
was that pre-mRNA splicing was inhibited but not abolished., As Caspary and Seraphin concluded, both
Yip9p and Lea1p are essential for efficient prespliceosome formation.
Yeast U2B″ has only one RRM, and unlike U2A′, the C-terminal
domain of Lea1p is not predicted to be disordered. These different
features of the proteins did not seem to preclude their binding to
human U2 snRNA when it replaced the yeast snRNAin vivo. In another report, the association
of a GST-YU2B″ with human SLIV by an electrophoretic mobility
shift assay could not be detected, although the protein did bind to
human U1 SLII.

The necessity for
sequestering U2B″/U2A′ to the U2
snRNP may have its origin in the (unknown) function of the C-terminal
tail of U2A′. This region of U2A’ is predicted to be
mostly disordered, although there is a putative helical region in
human and Drosophila proteins. There are many proteins associated with the
U2 snRNP, and a large proportion of them are transiently bound. On the basis of the Xenopus and
yeast results, it has been suggested that U2B″/U2A′
may be essential for stable spliceosome formation. Our investigations
have provided a mechanism that explains how the SLIV/U2B″/U2A′
ternary complex is localized to the U2 snRNP. We propose that U2A′
provides protein–protein interactions that stabilize the U2
snRNP and the prespliceosome and that U2B″ is the scaffold
that anchors U2A′ to the snRNP.

Supporting Information Available
Binding isotherms and simulations
of protein distributions on snRNAs. This material is available free
of charge via the Internet at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bi500438e_si_001.pdf

The authors
declare no
competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
We thank Michael Rau for his help finding RNA constructs that
were not prone to dimerization. He also transcribed and purified some
of the RNAs used in this work. We thank Dr. Kim Delaney for cloning
the human U2A′ protein.

Abbreviations
RNPribonucleoprotein

RRMRNA recognition motif

LRRleucine-rich repeat

ITCisothermal titration
calorimetry

snRNPsmall nuclear ribonucleoprotein.

