Despite its apparent simplicity, the prokaryotic potassium
channel KcsA displays a complex gating cycle characterized by the
coupled action of a H+-activated gate at the inner bundle
crossing and a H+-independent gate at the selectivity filter. Previous studies have shown that low pH promotes
interhelical separation at the inner gate, seen from the central axis
of symmetry., Several studies have suggested
that these changes are allosterically coupled to the selectivity filter
and promote the transition from a conductive (activated) to a nonconductive
(inactivated) channel., The role of the C-terminus as
the regulator of this process has been suggested by the effects of
its deletion on the rate of C-type inactivation and exaggerated opening
of the inner gate during pH gating.,, Conversely, mechanisms that tend to stabilize the
conductive conformation of the selectivity filter (KcsA-E71A, permeation
by Rb+ or other long dwell-time ions) lower the proton
concentration required to open the inner gate. These results strongly support the idea of a bidirectional coupling
between the two gates.

Despite extensive static structural and
functional studies of KcsA, understanding the extent of conformational
dynamics at the inner gate during activation gating remains incomplete.
One question is how far the inner gate opens to trigger the conformational
wave leading to inactivation. Crystallographic studies suggest that
critical reorientations in the selectivity filter that ultimately
lead to a loss of ion occupancy take place beyond inner gate openings
of 17–23 Å.

Here, we
have conducted a systematic measurement of inner gate fluctuations
in KcsA using electron paramagnetic resonance (EPR), nuclear magnetic
resonance (NMR), and molecular dynamics (MD) simulations to evaluate
the conformational space of the inner helical bundle during pH-induced
gating. The extent of opening at the inner gate was measured in full-length
KcsA using both continuous wave (CW) and double-electron–electron
resonance (DEER) EPR spectroscopy in lipids and detergent micelles
at residue G116. These observations have been extended using solution
NMR to monitor inner gate dynamics. We demonstrate a correlation between
the sigmoidal pH dependence in the chemical shift at residue G116
and changes in local backbone dynamics. In both cases, local dynamics
are maximal at or near the pKa of activation,
suggesting an increase in the total number of conformers at the midpoint
of activation. Finally, we suggest that the extent of opening in full-length
KcsA at position G116 is ∼24 Å under physiological conditions.

Dynamics
of Inner Gate Opening
In wild-type (WT) KcsA, singly spin-labeled
monomers generate two sets of interspin interactions: adjacent (α)
and diagonally related (δ), with a distance relation of δ
= √2α. The use of tandem dimer constructs allows the
placement of a cysteine residue on diagonally related subunits, simplifying
the distance distribution determination by EPR spectroscopy to a single
peak. With this approach, we determined
intersubunit distances and distance distributions at sequential pHs
from a spin-label placed at the bottom of TM2 (residue G116). We observed
an abrupt increase in the diagonal intersubunit distance at G116 near
pH 4.0 (Figure A), which is in good agreement
with previously measured values (functional pKa of 4.2). Intersubunit distances
range from 10 to 23.7 Å over the pH range, a gate opening that
is narrower than the largest diameter determined from crystal structures
of truncated KcsA (∼32 Å). This result furthers the observation
that deletion of the C-terminus promotes inner gate opening beyond
its physiological range., In Figure A, each pH measurement is associated with a distance distribution
(Figures 2 and 3 of the ), where the width of these distributions (i.e., error) reflects
the total number of interconverting conformations of the KcsA inner
bundle gate. A key observation from this data set is that distance
distributions broaden as the pH reaches the pKa (i.e., pH 3.9), a minimum for the energetic costs to interconvert.
As expected, these distributions narrow at extreme pHs when either
the open or closed conformations are most stable and must overcome
larger energy barriers to interconvert. Further, the degree of opening
in the full-length channel appears to be more restrained than in the
open mutant KcsA structural studies. Notably,
residue F103, which has been implicated in allosteric coupling of
the inner gate to the selectivity filter, and residue F114, located near the inner gate (facing outward),
display a similar abrupt change in distance and orientation of the
side chain (Figure B).

Conformational changes
at the inner gate. (A) EPR measurements of G116. Error bars are half-maximal
population widths normalized to pH 4 and the pKa indicated with a vertical dashed line. (B) Conformational
changes at residues F103 and F114.,, The top trace shows the Cα–Cβ
vector relative to the α-helix at F103. The bottom trace shows
the Cα–Cα diagonal distance of F103 and F114 in
angstroms.

NMR of the Inner Gate
In solution
NMR, inherent conformational dynamics can be estimated through three
primary observables: chemical shift, signal intensity (relative population),
and line width. A C-terminally truncated
version of KcsA (Δ125, 2H–15N)
in detergent micelles was evaluated at sequential pHs by monitoring
chemical shift changes using transverse relaxation-optimized spectroscopy
(15N–1H TROSY). The cross-peak corresponding
to G116 (a key reporter in previous EPR analyses) was tracked at several
titration points (Figure A). In agreement
with the EPR data in Figure A, the pH dependence
of the chemical shift is sigmoidal and can be fit with a Boltzmann
function [pKa = 4.27 ± 0.24; ρ
= 0.97 (Figure B)]. The shift in the observed
pKa reflects the C-terminal truncation
also seen by EPR and agrees well with the functional data., The shape of the cross-peaks during pH-dependent gating suggests
a change in dynamics and underscores the need for further analysis. Finally, the T2 times
of residue G116 differ with respect to pH, with an increase seen at
pH 3 (Figure C). These observations correlate
well with previous EPR studies showing mobility increases (and, thus,
dynamic changes) at G116 as the pH decreases.

NMR
TROSY spectra of KcsA Δ125 residue G116. (A) Cross-peaks of
associated chemical shifts for G116 for 15N and 1H. See the  for
methods for δ calculations. (B) Line graph of chemical shifts
with a Boltzmann fit (blue) and pKa (blue
dashed line). (C) T2 times for residue
G116 at pH 7 (green), pH 4 (orange), and pH 3 (red) (inset shows two
or three experiments and fits).

Inner Gate and Allosteric Coupling
Multiple lines of spectroscopic,
crystallographic, and functional evidence point to the C-terminus
as an important modulator of inner gate opening and dynamics.,,, Additionally, inspection of the Cα–Cα distances
at F103 (implicated in allosteric
coupling of the inner gate to the selectivity filter) and F114 (located
near the inner gate) in several structures, together with correlation
of the extent of opening at the inner gate by CW and DEER EPR, suggests
that the maximal distance achieved during inner gate opening is roughly
23 Å, (Figure B, bottom
trace). The Cα–Cβ vector relative to the α-helix
also shows a maximal degree of change (Figure B, top trace) at the same opening. To elucidate the membrane-bound
conformation of open KcsA, MD simulations were performed starting
from a series of open structures of KcsA: the crystallographic fully open conformation (∼32 Å)
and two narrower open states (at 23 and 17 Å openings). Of the
three structures tested, only the 23 Å opening (Protein Data
Bank entry 3F7V) maintains a stable conformation in the membrane (Figure ). We suggest that while the inner gate can open
to a greater extent, steric hindrance from the C-terminal bundle and
allosteric coupling to the selectivity filter (and thus C-type inactivation)
likely set the energy optimal for open KcsA at ∼24 Å.
Interestingly, the abrupt changes observed via NMR and EPR at the
midpoint of activation correlate well with the set of inner bundle
distances associated with the largest conformational changes at the
selectivity filter (17–23 Å). This observation will lead to future evaluations of the inner gate
conformational dynamics and the establishment of the minimal set of
conformational excursions in the inner gate required to allosterically
induce selectivity filter reorientations that lead to C-type inactivation.
We propose that the nature of this energetic coupling will improve
our understanding of the structural underpinnings of subconductance
states by defining such thresholds.,,

Dynamics of the inner gates of different structures in
the membrane observed via MD simulations. Distances between Cα
atoms of G116 of diagonally related subunits in different KcsA simulations.
The inset shows the cytoplasmic view of the inner gate at the end
of the simulation (t = 100 ns). Time series of distances
are displayed (purple and green) at diagonal G116.

Supporting Information Available
Methods, supplemental Table
1, and supplemental Figures S1–S4. This material is available
free of charge via the Internet at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bi500168u_si_001.pdf

This work was supported by National
Institutes of Health Grants U54-GM087519, R01-GM57846, and P41-GM104601.
MD simulations were performed on XSEDE (Grant MCA06N060).

The authors declare no competing
financial interest.

