

   
BiochemistryBiochemistrybibichawBiochemistry0006-29601520-4995American
Chemical Society 10.1021/bi501225tCurrent TopicHyperpolarized Magnetic Resonance as a Sensitive Detector
of Metabolic Function Comment Arnaud *†Merritt Matthew E. *‡† Institute
of Physics of Biological Systems, Ecole
Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne, CH-1015 Lausanne, Switzerland‡ Advanced
Imaging Research Center, Department of Radiology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, Texas 75390, United States* E-mail: arnaud.comment@epfl.ch.* E-mail: matthew.merritt@utsouthwestern.edu.04 11 2015 04 11 2014 02 12 2014 53 47 7333 7357 28 09 2014 31 10 2014 Copyright © 2014 American
Chemical Society2014American
Chemical SocietyThis is an open access article published under an ACS AuthorChoice License, which permits copying and redistribution of the article or any adaptations for non-commercial purposes.

Hyperpolarized magnetic resonance
allows for noninvasive measurements
of biochemical reactions in vivo. Although this technique
provides a unique tool for assaying enzymatic activities in intact
organs, the scope of its application is still elusive for the wider
scientific community. The purpose of this review is to provide key
principles and parameters to guide the researcher interested in adopting
this technology to address a biochemical, biomedical, or medical issue.
It is presented in the form of a compendium containing the underlying
essential physical concepts as well as suggestions to help assess
the potential of the technique within the framework of specific research
environments. Explicit examples are used to illustrate the power as
well as the limitations of hyperpolarized magnetic resonance.

National Institutes of Health, United Statesdocument-id-old-9bi501225tdocument-id-new-14bi-2014-01225tccc-price

   
Magnetic
resonance (MR) has
historically been characterized by outstanding chemical selectivity
and poor sensitivity. MR imaging (MRI) can be performed at relatively
high spatial resolution only because of the large abundance of water
protons being imaged, on the order of 80 M in the human body. The
wealth of biological and biochemical information characterizing the
state of living tissues is however hidden because of the low concentration
of the other chemical species, a few millimolar for the largest pools
but typically of submillimolar levels. An additional limitation associated
with in vivo measurements of non-water proton resonances
is the low spectral resolution characteristic of 1H MR
spectroscopy (MRS), making it difficult to separate the various metabolites
and requiring the necessary and sometimes delicate suppression of
the inherently large water signal. This spectroscopic problem can
be partly solved by detecting the 13C resonances of metabolites. 13C has a low natural isotopic abundance of 1.1%, which means
that besides a few compounds such as lipids and glycogen, in vivo13C signals are detectable only with
increased isotopic enrichment. However, the absence of a background
signal allows quantitative measurements of the incorporation of 13C-labeled substrates and their metabolites, thereby allowing
specific metabolic pathways to be studied using selective isotopic
labeling. Many 13C MRS metabolic studies have been performed in vivo following the injection of substrates such as [13C]glucose in animal models and humans.1−5 However, the lower abundance of 13C together
with its ∼4-fold lower gyromagnetic ratio compared to that
of 1H makes the issue of poor sensitivity even more pronounced. 13C MRS metabolic studies are thus limited to measuring the
most abundant amino acids such as glutamate, glutamine, and aspartate
in relatively large tissue volumes with low temporal resolution (∼5
min in a state-of-the-art cerebral metabolic study performed in vivo in rats at 14.1 T6).
This implies that numerous metabolic intermediates between the injected13C-labeled precursor and the detected metabolites
are invisible, and many assumptions are required to derive the underlying
enzymatic fluxes.7−9

The recent development of hyperpolarization
schemes to enhance
the 13C signal by several orders of magnitude allows observing
metabolic processes with much higher spatial and temporal resolution
than what can be done with thermally polarized 13C substrates.
It also gives access to many intermediates in various metabolic pathways
that would otherwise be undetectable. Three schemes have so far been
developed to provide hyperpolarized (HP) 13C metabolic
precursors dissolved in room-temperature aqueous solutions: the brute
force method, parahydrogen-induced polarization (PHIP), and a method
based on dynamic nuclear polarization (DNP), now commonly called dissolution
DNP. The latter is currently the most versatile and established method,
and we herein propose to review the field of dissolution DNP from
physical and biological perspectives (a comparison of the three techniques
can be found in ref (10)). The dissolution DNP technique has recently reached a point at
which it is ready to move from proof-of-principle studies toward applications
aimed at solving specific biological and medical problems. This shift
has already started with an increasing number of articles published
in biology-oriented and medical journals in the past few years. The
motivation for this review at the current stage of evolution of the
technique is to help (bio)medical researchers understand the technology
and determine if HP experiments can address questions in their own
areas of interest.

Physical Concepts and Technical Aspects
The idea that electron spins can be used to enhance the polarization
of nuclear spins was proposed in a seminal theoretical work by Overhauser11 and was shortly thereafter confirmed experimentally
by Carver and Slichter.12 DNP found application
in the field of particle physics for the production of polarized targets
for scattering experiments13 and also in
solid-state nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) where a host of researchers
applied it to structural elucidation and analytical analysis in conjunction
with magic-angle spinning (MAS) techniques, a method sometimes termed
MAS DNP.14 The feasibility of using DNP
to directly enhance the water proton NMR signal in biological samples
has also been demonstrated and even used in vivo,15 and it is now commonly termed Overhauser DNP.
However, the potential of DNP for investigating metabolism became
clear only after the demonstration by Ardenkjaer-Larsen et al. that
a frozen pellet of metabolically active compound could be dissolved
while maintaining the large nuclear spin polarization that can be
achieved at low temperatures.16 To understand
the value of this technique for in vitro and in vivo biological 13C MRS studies, and the important
parameters to take into account in experimental design, we present
here the main physical concepts and some practical considerations.

The principle of DNP is to enhance the nuclear spin polarization
by driving highly polarized unpaired electron spins out of thermal
equilibrium, thereby allowing cross-polarization between electron
spins and their surrounding nuclear spins. An external magnetic field
for polarizing the spins and a microwave source for saturating the
electron spin resonance (ESR) are thus required for DNP. Unpaired
electron spins can be introduced inside the sample either chemically
by adding persistent radicals or through gamma or UV irradiation.17−21

It is feasible to enhance the MRS signal by performing DNP in situ, i.e., directly within the biological system under
investigation, but restrictions on the working field and temperature
are imposed by the sample environment. For instance, MAS DNP experiments
are usually performed at ∼100 K and at high magnetic fields
for compatibility with standard MAS NMR methods. The constraints are
even tighter when Overhauser DNP has to be performed in living cells,
or even in vivo, because the process has to take
place at physiological temperature and, for potential human applications,
in a magnetic field strength imposed by the available MRI scanner.
The other two main issues inherent to in situ DNP
are, first, the necessity to incorporate high concentrations of unpaired
electron spins within the biological system, which might affect its
physiology, and, second, heating due to the large microwave power
required to saturate the ESR. In the context of in vitro and in vivo biological studies, the clear advantage
of an ex situ method, such as dissolution DNP, coupled
to a substrate injection protocol is that the field strength as well
as the temperature at which the DNP processes take place can be chosen
in a manner completely independent of the parameters used for the
MR measurements. It is thus possible to select optimal temperature
and field values to obtain the greatest substrate polarization within
a given amount of time. Note that schemes based on ex situ Overhauser DNP were also proposed for biological studies, but the 13C polarization that can be obtained is 3–4 orders
of magnitude lower than the 13C polarization reached by
dissolution DNP.22−24 Therefore, ex situ Overhauser DNP
cannot be used for 13C MRS metabolic studies.

The
two essential parameters determining the efficiency of DNP
are the electron spin polarization (Pe) and the electron spin longitudinal relaxation time (T1,e). At first approximation, the nuclear spin longitudinal
relaxation time (T1,n) is not an independent
parameter because it is directly proportional to T1,e, as the main relaxation mechanism of the nuclear spins
is dipolar coupling to the unpaired electron spins. Ideally, Pe should be as large as possible and T1,e sufficiently long to allow a saturation
of the ESR with a minimal amount of power, thereby avoiding excessive
sample heating. When these two parameters are evaluated as a function
of temperature at 5 T (Figure 1), it is clear
that the conditions are much more advantageous at 1 K than at liquid
nitrogen temperature (77 K) or 300 K. Indeed, whereas at 1 K Pe is essentially 100% and T1,e is close to 1 s, at 77 K the former is only ∼4%
and the latter is on the order of a few hundred microseconds, meaning
that a much larger amount of power is required to saturate the ESR.
The situation is clearly even worse at 300 K. Note that the values
of T1,e given here are only representative
of nitroxyl radicals at 0.35 T,25 but the
temperature dependence of T1,e for other
radicals and at higher field strengths is expected to follow a similar
trend.26 Around 1 K, the maximal 13C polarization that can be obtained via DNP is expected to be inversely
proportional to the temperature, at least for samples containing wide-ESR-line-width
radicals.17 Whereas cooling and maintaining
a sample at ∼1 K via immersion in a bath of liquid 4He at a pressure of ∼0.1 mbar is rather straightforward, decreasing
the bath temperature substantially below 1 K becomes technically much
more challenging and requires the use of the rare and expensive 3He isotope. Note also that at 1 K the 13C polarization
is only ∼0.1% (Figure 1), which demonstrates
that directly polarizing 13C-labeled substrates without
DNP (the brute force method) requires much more complex cryogenic
technologies.

Figure 1 13C (dashed black curve) and electron (solid
black curve)
spin polarization at 5 T together with the electron spin longitudinal
relaxation time (red curve) at 0.35 T as a function of temperature.
The relaxation times for nitroxyl radicals were calculated from the
fitting curved given in ref (25).

Besides the temperature,
the other external parameter that can
be adjusted to optimize the DNP process is the magnetic field. The
original dissolution DNP apparatus was set to operate at 3.35 T,16 but it has been shown that larger maximal 13C polarization can be obtained in a field of 4.6–5
T with all common radical types28,29 and, at least with
nitroxyl radicals, the maximal 13C polarization is even
larger at 7 T.30 A challenging technical
issue arising when the field is increased is the fact that microwave
losses become dramatically larger inside the transmission lines carrying
the high-frequency microwaves from the source to the sample. Gold-plated
or corrugated waveguides can be used to reduce these losses.30,31

On the basis of the information described above, it must be
concluded
that the higher the field and the lower the temperature, the larger
the polarization. The drawback of working at a larger field and a
lower temperature is that the polarization buildup times may become
prohibitively long. A working temperature of 1 K and a magnetic field
of 5 T thus seem to be a good compromise for dissolution DNP. Increasing
the microwave power should aid in the acceleration of the polarization
processes, but an exceedingly large power will lead to sample heating
that will affect the polarization efficiency (the typical optimal
power as measured at the microwave source output is on the order of
10–50 mW). A recent study showed that the maximal polarization
expected when the ESR is fully saturated might be restricted due to
sample heating.32

Required Hardware
The hyperpolarizer or dissolution
DNP polarizer that needs to be coupled to a NMR or MRI instrument
to perform HP MR consists of three main hardware components: (1) a
superconducting magnet to set the external magnetic field, (2) a helium
cryostat connected to vacuum pumps to cool the sample to ∼1
K, and (3) a microwave source to enable the polarization transfer
from the incorporated unpaired electron spins to the nuclear spins.
The original system developed by Amersham Health based on a variable-temperature
insert (Figure 2) has served as a basis for
the implementation of the commercial HyperSense developed by Oxford
Instruments. The HyperSense operates at 3.35 T and 1.2–1.6
K. A hyperpolarizer for clinical use (SPINlab) has been developed
by GE Healthcare. It operates at 5 T and 1.1 K. Alternative home-built
systems have been implemented using room-temperature bore magnets.17,33−35

Figure 2 Schematic drawing of the original hyperpolarizer developed
by Ardenkjaer-Larsen
et al.: (1) DNP polarizer, (2) vacuum pump, (3) variable-temperature
insert, (4) microwave source, (5) pressure transducer, (6) sample
port, (7) microwave container, (8) sample holder, (9) sample container,
and (10) dissolution wand. Reproduced with permission from ref (16). Copyright 2003 National
Academy of Sciences.

When installing a HP MR setup for metabolic studies, one
must take
into account the following practical considerations. (a) A helium
recovery system is strongly recommended because the currently available
preclinical systems require a substantial amount of liquid helium
for running HP 13C MR experiments; SPINlab does however
not require a supply of cryogenic liquids. (b) The quantification
of the solid-state 13C polarization inside the hyperpolarizer
is nontrivial because of the extremely long T1 and the short T2 inherent to 13C nuclear spins in frozen glassy samples at ∼1 K.
The authors suggest using a dedicated NMR spectrometer adapted for
solid-state NMR measurements independent of the main MR system used
for the biological studies. (c) An inadequate magnetic field profile
between the hyperpolarizer and the main NMR/MRI magnet can lead to
a dramatic reduction in the liquid-state 13C polarization
of the substrate (this will be further discussed in the following
sections). The location of the hyperpolarizer with respect to the
MR system is thus crucial and should be carefully chosen. Once the
hardware and the physical parameters of the sample environment have
been optimized, the sample chemical composition needs to be carefully
adjusted to maximize the 13C polarization of metabolic
substrates.

Impact of the Choice of Radical
In a field of 3–7
T and at a temperature of ∼1 K, 13C polarizations
on the order of 10–50% can be typically reached within a few
hours. The maximal nuclear polarization and the time necessary to
reach it strongly depend on sample content and preparation. Radicals,
also called polarizing agents, and solvents are the crucial components
that must be carefully selected. The typical concentration of polarizing
agents is in the range 15–60 mM, and to date, trityl radicals
and the persistent 1,3-bisdiphenylene-2-phenylallyl (BDPA) radical
have proven to be the most efficient agents for polarizing 13C-labeled substrates.16,36 One of the most important characteristics
of a radical in the context of DNP is its ESR line width, which correlates
with the width of the frequency-dependent 13C polarization
enhancement microwave spectrum (Figure 3).
The essential feature behind the high DNP efficiency of radicals such
as trityls is that their ESR line width is narrower than the 1H resonance frequency. As a consequence, the probability of
enabling electron spins to cross-polarize proton spins using microwave
irradiation is very low, increasing the probability of polarization
transfer to 13C spins and thereby producing larger maximal 13C polarization. It has however been observed that the 1H polarization reaches a level nearly 4 times higher than
the 13C polarization in typical nitroxyl-doped samples
used in dissolution DNP, and that the characteristic polarization
buildup time constant is substantially shorter for 1H than
for 13C.37 Researchers can take
advantage of the fact that nitroxyl radicals efficiently and rapidly
polarize protons to obtain large 13C polarizations in a
short amount of time through 1H–13C cross-polarization
schemes, although the maximal 13C polarization in the liquid
state is still lower than the levels obtained using BDPA or trityl
radicals.38 Solvent deuteration leads to
increased maximal 13C polarization with wide-ESR-line-width
polarizing agents such as nitroxyl radicals, whereas it causes a reduction
in maximal 13C polarization when trityl or BDPA is used.37,39 It must be stressed that although the maximal 13C polarization
that can be reached in samples doped with the widely available nitroxyl
radicals will generally not be as large as in trityl- or BDPA-doped
samples, the difference will not exceed a factor 2–3 for most
substrates in optimized sample preparations, which makes nitroxyl
radicals suitable for in vitro and in vivo preclinical studies (see, e.g., ref (40)). The nonpersistent radicals that can be photoinduced
in frozen pyruvic acid following UV irradiation at liquid nitrogen
temperature do not exhibit an ESR line width as narrow as that of
trityls or BDPA, but it seems to be narrow enough to limit proton
polarization (Figure 3), with the additional
advantage of not requiring a filtration process prior to injection
into subjects.19,41

Figure 3 Microwave spectra at 5 T and 4.2 K. Comparison
between the microwave
spectra measured by 13C MR in [1-13C]pyruvic
acid doped with 16 mM OX063 trityl radicals (∗), UV-irradiated
[1-13C]pyruvic acid (●), and a frozen 3 M sodium
[1-13C]pyruvate aqueous solution doped with 50 mM TEMPO
nitroxyl radicals (○). The frequency separation Δ between
the central and the left or right vertical dotted lines corresponds
to the 1H MR frequency at 5 T. Reproduced with permission
from ref (19). Copyright
2013 National Academy of Sciences.

It was demonstrated that the maximal 13C polarization
that can be achieved at 3.35 T and 1.2–1.4 K can be more than
doubled by adding Gd3+ compounds or complexes to the sample,42 but this considerable improvement seems to be
restricted to samples prepared with trityl radicals.43 The incorporation of Gd3+ in trityl-doped samples
also accelerates the 13C polarization buildup, and it is
now widely used in the composition of many substrate preparations
for dissolution DNP.44

In the following
two sections, we describe the crucial steps to
minimize the 13C polarization losses during the process
of bringing the DNP-enhanced 13C-labeled metabolic substrates
from the polarizer 1 K environment into the biological system under
MR investigation.

From Solid to Liquid: The Key Dissolution
Step
As already
mentioned above, the groundbreaking innovation that brought DNP into
the realm of in vitro and in vivo biological MR was the addition of a dissolution procedure for producing
HP liquid-state imaging agents at physiological temperatures.16 Dissolution is performed by propelling a hot
solvent onto the frozen sample to rapidly melt it. The resulting solution
is chased out of the polarizer using pressurized helium gas and collected
for injection into an NMR tube, an animal, or a human. The technique
has been used to hyperpolarize 1H, 6Li, 13C, 15N, 89Y, and both 107Ag and 109Ag,16,45−52 and the liquid-state nuclear polarizations are typically enhanced
by 3–4 orders of magnitude compared to the room-temperature
thermal polarizations at common magnetic field strengths. A pivotal
point that has made dissolution DNP feasible was the determination
of the appropriate environment in which to perform the solid-to-liquid
phase transformation. It is indeed required to nearly instantaneously
cross the region of the magnetic field-temperature parameter space
where 4.2 K &lt; T &lt; Tmelt in which T1,n can become extremely short,
especially at low magnetic field, because of the presence of the paramagnetic
centers embedded inside the DNP-enhanced frozen sample (Tmelt is defined as the melting temperature of the sample).
The key for the dissolution step is thus to use a hot solvent with
a large heat capacity to rapidly melt the frozen sample (water has
the highest specific heat capacity of all solvents that are liquid
at room temperature) and to perform the dissolution in situ, in the low-temperature and high-magnetic field environment set
for DNP, i.e., inside the cryostat placed in the bore of the superconducting
magnet. When persistent radicals are used for the solid-state DNP
process, their dilution in the solvent also reduces the paramagnetic
spin relaxation rate.

Transfer and Injection of Hyperpolarized 13C Substrates
The DNP-enhanced 13C-labeled
substrates, once dissolved
in hot water, have to be rapidly transferred into the bore of the
MR system to minimize the 13C polarization losses occurring
through longitudinal spin relaxation processes (the standard room-temperature T1 of 13C-labeled metabolic substrates
is shorter than 1 min44). The 13C spins will usually experience drastic magnetic field variations
during the transfer, and for many substrates, T1,n becomes extremely short in the low-field region located
between the two magnets. For this reason, the distance between the
hyperpolarizer and the MR instrument should be kept as short as possible
and a fast transfer procedure is greatly important. T1,n is influenced by the chemical environment of the nuclear
spins, the magnetic field, and the temperature. Field and temperature
are in most cases imposed by the experimental conditions and can often
not be set to optimal values. Note that when the solution containing
the HP 13C-labeled substrates is being transferred, it
is mandatory not to cross very large gradients (avoid, for instance,
passing the solution in the proximity of strongly magnetized material)
to avoid destroying the 13C polarization via nonadiabatic
passage; the reviewers also advise to map the field between the hyperpolarizer
and the MR system to determine where the low-field regions are located
and whether the solutions containing the HP substrates should be transported
within a permanent magnet. In terms of temperature, the solution can
be rapidly thermalized using an appropriately controlled container,
thus allowing the establishment of an optimal temperature for minimizing
the relaxation prior to injection (Figure 4).53 The chemical environment of the nuclear
spins can be partially controlled by choosing an appropriate solvent
(deuteration helps reduce the nuclear dipolar relaxation) and by reducing
the concentration of paramagnetic centers dissolved in the HP solutions.36,53,54 Isotopic substitution can also
be used to reduce the intramolecular relaxation in the molecules of
interest. In many cases, the main relaxation mechanism is via interactions
with paramagnetic impurities. Because paramagnetic centers are required
for the DNP process, the solution usually contains a substantial amount
of radicals, unless nonpersistent radicals are used like in the method
proposed by Eichhorn et al.19 These radicals
need to be filtered, using an anion-exchange or reverse phase column
or polyethylene filters,16,36,55,56 or scavenged with an antioxidant
such as vitamin C.53,54 Note that it has been shown that
on specific molecules it is possible to store the enhanced polarization
in long-lived singlet states, the relaxation times of which can be
&gt;10 times longer than the T1 of the
nuclear
spins forming the singlet states.57,58

Figure 4 Sketch of the
dissolution DNP setup installed at the Center for
Biomedical Imaging (CIBM) of the Ecole Polytechnique Fédérale
de Lausanne (EPFL). A 5 T, 1 K hyperpolarizer is located ∼4
m from a 9.4 T rodent MR scanner. A specific device minimizing the
delay between the dissolution and the infusion of DNP-enhanced molecules
has been implemented for in vivo applications. The
delay can be as short as 3 s.53

Optimizing 13C MR Acquisition
Following
the injection of the HP 13C-labeled substrates, the nuclear
polarization will inevitably and irreversibly decrease back to its
thermal equilibrium value, and the typical time window available for
performing a metabolic study is on the order of 1 min. The polarization
decay will additionally be accelerated by the application of the radiofrequency
pulses that are used to perform the MR measurements. How long the
signal will be detectable will depend on the sensitivity (noise level)
and the magnetization flip angle related to the radiofrequency pulses.
Several schemes have been proposed to perform multiecho acquisitions
or to use spatially and spectrally selective radiofrequency excitations
to increase the time over which the HP nuclear spins can be measured
by limiting the amount of enhanced longitudinal magnetization that
is required for each acquisition.59−62 It is also possible to highly
enhance and detect nuclear spins with short relaxation times via in vitro or in vivo polarization transfer
from long-T1 HP nuclear spins.51,63,64 Such methods can potentially
lead to increased sensitivity or increased spectral resolution even in vivo.65 A complete review
of the acquisition schemes and hardware is beyond the scope of this
review, and it is the reviewers’ opinion that, to date, no
all-purpose or standard scheme has been defined. Each type of MR experiment
will most likely require its own optimal scheme because of the irreversible
destruction of the 13C magnetization after each acquisition.

Biological Applications
As one can gather from the introduction
to hyperpolarization technology,
the chemistry and physics of DNP is a field unto itself. While the
current versions of commercially available hyperpolarizers are designed
for turnkey operation, the researcher would do well to understand
some of the finer points of the process to avoid misinterpretation
of data. Basic physical sciences are however not driving the development
of this technology; it is the biomedical applications that have animated
the field, as DNP-enhanced 13C MRI has unique potential
as a molecular imaging tool. First, the technology does not use ionizing
radiation, so its repeated use in children or in other vulnerable
populations is not restricted in any way. Second, with the chemical
shift that is endemic to the MR technique itself, kinetics of chemical
reactions are naturally detected, not simple uptake of a substrate.
The specificity of MR-based methods is rivaled only by mass spectrometry,
which is limited to ex vivo samples. To aid the reader
in gaining a global understanding of the power of the method as well
as its weaknesses, the review of the biological applications is broken
down into pathways as opposed to a review of current agents. For a
very complete review of available agents, see ref (66). A particularly helpful
overview of the targets and/or challenges of imaging cancer with HP
agents was published recently as well.67 Krishna et al. have also published an insightful review that surveys
methods for measuring tissue oxygen partial pressure (pO2) as well as intermediary metabolism using HP methods,68 a work similar in scope to the review published
by Tyler in 2011.69

Glycolysis
Glucose
metabolism is subject to control at multiple points within
the glycolytic pathway.70 Warburg proposed
nearly 70 years ago that glycolysis and lactic acid fermentation was
the primary cause of cancer.71 While this
theory has been disproven, abundant lactate is nonetheless phenotypically
conserved across most cancer cell types. Much like the detection of
cancer drove the early development of MRI itself, cancer diagnosis
is the most obvious “killer application” for imaging
with probes that reflect glycolytic metabolism.72 HP glucose itself is the most obvious agent for detecting
glycolytic flux, but the short T1 of the
protonated carbons can limit its effective use. [U-13C6,U-2H7]Glucose has therefore been the
primary metabolite used in studies to date, as the deuteration removes
the effects of 1H–13C dipolar relaxation,
increasing the T1 to ∼10 s for
each site. The first application of this probe was in yeast, where Saccharomyces cerevisiae rapidly metabolized the glucose
to a variety of downstream metabolites.73 Experiments in cell culture were completed using a high-resolution
NMR system, where line shape and the small coil volume allowed optimal
shimming conditions and rapid detection of metabolism (Figure 5). Every metabolite in the glycolytic chain was
detected, each showing a delay in the kinetics that was appropriate
for its position in the pathway relative to the glucose probe. The
visually striking data demonstrate the power of DNP-NMR for detecting
kinetics in living systems.

Figure 5 Aliphatic region of the 13C NMR spectrum
acquired after
injection of HP [U-2H,U-13C]glucose into yeast
cell culture shown as a surface plot with time on the y-axes. Stepwise kinetics of each enzyme in glycolysis was observed.

Frydman and co-workers used the
same probe in T47D breast cancer
cells and noted a similar set of metabolites.74 Using a shaped pulse detection scheme, they were also able to make
estimates of kinetics for enzyme-catalyzed reactions that do not require
direct detection of the intermediate species. The power of this technique
has not been fully grasped by the HP imaging community at large, and
methods like this deserve extended development in the opinion of the
reviewers. Unfortunately, normal mammalian tissues do not have glycolytic
rates that are as high as those of yeast or cancer cells, as in vivo mouse studies have initially failed to detect the
metabolism of glucose.75 This somewhat
disappointing result was confirmed in the work of Rodrigues et al.
in which heart, brain, and kidney all failed to produce HP lactate
subsequent to the injection of the HP glucose probe.76 However, the work of Rodrigues was focused on detecting
cancer, and in orthotopically implanted EL4 and LL2 tumor lines, metabolism
of glucose to lactate was detected and imaged in real time (Figure 6). It should be mentioned that the method used is
analogous to 2-deoxy-2-[18F]fluoroglucose (FDG) positron
emission tomography (PET), with the exception that the actual metabolic
flux is detected as opposed to simple probe uptake. FDG-PET retains
a large absolute sensitivity advantage, but the DNP method might be
superior when it is imperative to measure in vivo enzyme kinetics. Very recently, HP [U-13C,U-2H]glucose has been used to measure cytosolic NAD+/NADH
ratios in cancer cell culture.77 Strong
correlations were found between the lactate/pyruvate ratio as detected
by HP-NMR and the cytosolic redox state.

Figure 6 (a) Glycolytic metabolism
in subcutaneously implanted xenografts
of EL4 and LL2 cancer cell lines as detected with HP [U-2H,U-13C]glucose. Note the lack of lactate signal detected
in normal tissues. (b) Images of glycolytic metabolism in the EL4
cancer model. Courtesy of Kevin Brindle.

Glycolytic metabolism is of course active in the heart, liver,
muscle, brain, etc., but the failure to detect its metabolism (to
date) using HP glucose illustrates that a variety of factors influence
the sensitivity of the experiment. The detected signal intensity is
a product of several factors: 1  

This value is of course
convolved with the sensitivity of the MR
hardware. Even though these tissues can turn over large amounts of
glucose daily, the kinetics on the time scale of ∼1 min has
been slow enough to prevent detection so far. Glucose has not been
polarized as effectively as pyruvate or other targets to date, for
reasons that are not easily explained. A typical value is ∼20%,
while pyruvic acid with the trityl radical can easily yield twice
that number. Given the data presented so far, significant advances
in the production and delivery of HP glucose will be needed to detect
flux in any case outside of cancer metabolism. Physiologic states
(besides cancer) that emphasize glucose utilization, i.e., brain metabolism
or heart failure, may be the targets most likely to produce significant
results.

Another tack on measuring glycolytic flux is simply
determining
the size of the lactate pool in the targeted tissue. Detection of
lactate in tissue by 1H MR spectroscopic imaging methods
is difficult because of its low concentration [low signal-to-noise
ratio (SNR)] and because it co-resonates with the methylene protons
of fat. Imaging the lactate concentration with HP pyruvate does not
suffer from any background signals because of the unique 13C chemical shift of all the carbons of lactate. In practice, a number
of considerations have made pyruvate the imaging agent of choice not
just for cancer detection but for a variety of experiments in living
systems. Pyruvic acid makes an ideal target for DNP in the solid state.
Neat pyruvic acid will solubilize the trityl radical, allowing high
concentrations of the 13C isotope to be attained. Higher
concentrations of isotope speed the polarization process.17 The neat acid also has few protons, which can
increase the absolute polarization levels.39 Following dissolution, the NMR properties of pyruvate are favorable,
as well. The C1 and C2 positions of pyruvate are not protonated and
hence have long T1 values (∼1 min)
at 3 T, which preserves the HP magnetization for periods long enough
to image using even relatively slow protocols like chemical shift
imaging (CSI). Pyruvate exchange with lactate is catalyzed by lactate
dehydrogenase, an enzyme common to every tissue type. The production
of lactate from pyruvate consumes a reducing equivalent derived from
NADH, and the reverse reaction transfers a hydride to NAD+. The NAD+/NADH ratio maintained under normal physiological
conditions manifests as a 10/1 lactate/pyruvate ratio in the cytosol.80 In cells exhibiting high levels of anaerobic
(as in exercising muscle) or aerobic (as in the Warburg effect) glycolysis,
the lactate level can increase significantly. HP [1-13C]pyruvate
was first used to image cancer by the original developers of the dissolution
technique in a rat model.81 Using a simple
CSI protocol, an enhanced lactate signal was detected in a P22 tumor
model. These first images exerted a tremendous influence on the field,
as the diagnostic potential of the technique was apparent. The authors
proposed that ratiometric imaging, images based on the ratio of a
metabolite to the parent pyruvate signal, might carry the most diagnostic
potential. It is important to understand that any ratio of intensities
observed probably does not represent the actual concentrations of
the metabolites because of the confluence of eq 1 and the vascular concentrations of the probe that is delivered.
For this reason, comparison of ratios of upstream versus downstream
metabolites between control and experimental groups is a ubiquitous
method for extracting metabolic information from HP experiments. Almost
immediately, a flurry of papers reported on various aspects of pyruvate
metabolism in tumor tissue. Day et al. were the first to use HP pyruvate
to detect the response to the treatment of a cancer cell line.82 Treatment of EL-4 cancer cells with etoposide
resulted in lower apparent rate constants for pyruvate to lactate
flux, kPL, while the activity of lactate
dehydrogenase (LDH) was not significantly changed. Interestingly,
the impact of pool size (eq 1) on the HP signal
intensity was first investigated in this paper, where the addition
of exogenous lactate to the cell culture allowed serially increasing
HP [1-13C]lactate signals to be observed. A discussion
of modeling of the kinetics of the HP species is presented in a following
dedicated section.

In vivo experiments at the
University of California
San Francisco (UCSF) using a transgenic adenocarcinoma model of a
mouse prostate (TRAMP) mouse illustrated a new method for acquiring
chemically selective images.83 While a
review of imaging sequences is not our goal, the echo planar spectroscopic
imaging (EPSI) sequence84 used represented
a significant acceleration in the speed of acquisition of dynamic
data in living animals, reducing the time needed for consecutive images
to 3 s. Lactate resonances were detected in the liver, muscle, and
kidney, but the tumor region produced the highest lactate/pyruvate
ratio as expected. The same team quickly followed this work with a
study designed not only to detect but also to grade tumors using the
same TRAMP model.85 From a development
perspective, this paper was the first to build a metric based on the
total HP carbon (THC) for analysis of the results. THC integrates
the total intensity for every resonance as a function of time to produce
a total signal for normalization of each individual resonance. In
this way, the method works much like total activity measurements in
radioactive tracer experiments. A plot of the THC versus the HP lactate
SNR showed an increasing THC value in the tumor as a function of tumor
grade, as well as grade-dependent increases in the lactate signal.
Higher THC values in the tumor were rationalized by increased levels
of expression of monocarboxylate transporters (MCTs) in the higher-grade
tumors. Park et al. applied HP pyruvate imaging to an orthotopic brain
tumor model, generating a large number of significant differences
between control and experimental groups.86

Subsequent studies by the UCSF team have probed the effects
of
phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase inhibition87 and hypoxia-inducible factor-1 and Myc activity on the production
of HP lactate.88 Both these papers were
encouraging for the field, as they applied 13C imaging in vivo in a straightforward, reproducible manner to gain
insight into metabolic questions without emphasizing technology development;
publications of this nature emphasize a “coming of age”
of the technology. Similar observations relating tumor viability to
the lactate/pyruvate ratio were made by Senadheera et al.89 They observed that radiation treatments decreased
the lactate/pyruvate ratio significantly in tumors from the TRAMP
model. Other work by Seth et al. hypothesized that reduced flux through
LDH would result in negative consequences for tumor viability, and
that treatment of tumors with dichloroacetic acid (DCA) would enhance
the vulnerability of tumors to further treatment.90 DCA enhances oxidation of pyruvate, effectively draining
the pool of pyruvate that would naturally exchange with lactate. Indeed,
DCA treatment not only lowered the lactate/pyruvate ratio but also
enhanced the sensitivity of tumors to therapeutic paclitaxel doses.
Experimentally, this paper highlights the unique kinetic information
that can be collected using HP methods, but it also illustrates just
how complicated modeling of the phenomena can be. A decreased lactate
signal can arise from increased exchange or flux of pyruvate into
other pools of metabolites, not just a change in the activity of the
enzyme catalyzing the reaction of interest. In a similar vein, the
hypothesis that interrupted glycolytic metabolism could further sensitize
tumors to radiation treatment was tested using HP pyruvate in an anaplastic
thyroid cancer (ATC) model.91 Sandulache
et al. demonstrated that 2-deoxyglucose (2-DG) significantly inhibited
the generation of HP [1-13C]lactate production in xenografts
of established ATC cell lines. Using a variety of assays of cell viability,
the authors confirmed that inhibition of glycolytic flux increased
the efficacy of radiation treatment but ultimately concluded that
drugs more effective than 2-DG would be necessary to show similar
effects in human cancers. Recently, the same group has studied the
generation of reactive oxygen species (ROS) by radiation treatment
of the same ATC model.92 The impact of
ROS on the reductive potential of cancer cells changed the availability
of NADH in the cytosol, thereby downregulating HP [1-13C]lactate production. Further insight into the phenomena governing
the amplitude of the lactate signal was gained by Bohndiek and co-workers;
they used a battery of examinations to study the effects of bevacizumab
on tumor progression in a mouse model of colorectal cancer.93 This study used dynamic contrast enhanced (DCE)
and diffusion-weighted MRI to measure tumor perfusion and necrosis.
In addition to [1-13C]pyruvate, the HP protocol included
[1,4-13C2]fumarate, which is a marker of tumor
necrosis.94 These experiments showed that
a weakened lactate response originated from reduced tumor perfusion
(reduced delivery of the HP pyruvate precursor), not necessarily from
a change in the kinetics of LDH. LDH inhibition can, however, certainly
control the appearance of lactate, as well, as evidenced in a lymphoma
model.95 In contrast, the lab of Ronen
compared the MCF-7 breast cancer cells to PC3 prostate cancer cells
under treatment with a mitogen-activated protein kinase inhibitor.96 The MCF-7 cells showed a similar decrease in
the level of lactate generation upon treatment, but the prostate cancer
cell line showed an increased level of lactate generation. Assays
of the cellular redox state, LDH expression and activity, and intracellular
lactate levels yielded similar increases across both cell lines. Ultimately,
downregulation of MCT expression was used to rationalize the difference
in HP lactate levels, but the complexity of the system reiterates
the necessity of a global view of intermediary metabolism and enzyme
expression and/or activity for interpretation of the HP pyruvate results.
In one of the few papers to discuss a negative result, Butt et al.
did not note significant changes in pyruvate to lactate flux when
tamoxifen was used to treat a breast cancer model.97 It should be noted that only the apparent rate constant
was measured; analysis of areas under the curve was omitted for unknown
reasons. Most recently, the connection between tumor lactate and higher
metastatic potential has been probed in another model of breast cancer.98 In a somewhat surprising observation, metastatic
risk was positively correlated with a decreased pyruvate to lactate
rate constant. Once again, the surprising differences in the apparent
rate constant were rationalized by changes in the lactate pool size.
Somewhat related to these applications to cancer metabolism is the
recent examination of the effects of radiation upon the observed lactate/pyruvate
ratio in radiation-damaged rat lung.99 An
increase in the lactate/pyruvate ratio was attributed to the onset
of inflammation associated with the radiation damage. Strong positive
correlations between the lactate/pyruvate ratio and the macrophage
count produced a convincing narrative about the effectiveness of HP
pyruvate for the detection of inflammation.100

FDG-PET is a clinically well-established technique that assays
glucose uptake that presages glycolytic flux. It is quite natural
that comparisons be made between FDG-PET and HP pyruvate imaging.
Witney et al. were the first to compare the two methods using the
lymphoma model common to their experiments and an etoposide treatment
regimen.101 Treatment of the tumor produced
changes in FDG uptake within a short time span, but the conversion
of HP pyruvate to lactate was downregulated only after a longer treatment
regimen. Ultimately, the authors suggested that HP pyruvate might
be a superior imaging agent when used in the brain to detect tumors
(high level of background uptake) or prostate cancer (low level of
glucose uptake). A more comprehensive comparison of resolution and
other imaging parameters was not given. A similar study design was
used by Weidl and co-workers in a model of hepatocellular carcinoma,102 but a final comparison of the relative merits
of the imaging modalities was not forthcoming. The authors suggested
that a combination of FDG-PET and HP pyruvate imaging might be advantageous,
as the information content of such an experiment would exceed the
individual contributions.

Oxidative Flux
In addition to the
aforementioned favorable properties of pyruvic
acid as a substrate for the DNP process, pyruvate can transit the
pyruvate dehydrogenase complex, yielding a CO2 and an acetyl-CoA
that can be subsequently oxidized in the tricarboxylic acid (TCA)
cycle (Figure 7). Oxidative phosphorylation
depends upon the reducing equivalents generated by the TCA cycle.
The acetyl-CoA that condenses with oxaloacetate to make citrate at
the entry point of the TCA cycle can be derived from carbohydrates,
fatty acids, or ketones. Glycolysis directly produces pyruvate, and
lactate can also be easily oxidized because of the abundance of lactate
dehydrogenase in most tissues. Likewise, alanine amino transferase
(ALT) allows alanine oxidation through pyruvate. However, alanine’s
primary fate is transport to the liver; its production usually presages
the transport of nitrogen back to the liver for disposal as urea.103 Of the three-carbon glycolytic products, pyruvate
has dominated hyperpolarization in practice, despite compelling arguments
that either lactate or alanine (each more abundant in living systems)
should be a superior imaging substrate. It is clear that supraphysiologic
concentrations of the agent are needed for HP imaging, even with the
increased sensitivity provided by DNP. However, this is a case in
which the short time window for the imaging experiment determined
by the T1 of the agent is an advantage.
The high concentrations injected do not produce large changes in metabolite
pool sizes on the time scale of the experiment, at least in the perfused
heart.104,105 The data presented in these two studies
has been underappreciated in the literature, to the detriment of the
entire field of HP studies of metabolism. The essential conclusion
of the papers is this: the bolus of HP material intended for use as
an imaging agent does not affect intermediary metabolism before the
useful kinetic information has been measured. The HP experiment essentially
produces a snapshot of normal metabolism at the time of injection.
Further papers addressing dose-dependent aspects of kinetic measurements
are important experimentally but do not address the direct biological
consequences of a pyruvate bolus.106,107 Furthermore,
the multiplicity of metabolic fates for pyruvate makes it an ideal
substrate for molecular imaging, as it can report on a host of enzyme-catalyzed
reactions in living systems. Pyruvate and lactate both are translated
into the cytosol via a monocarboxylate transporter (MCT1).108 This is a kinetic advantage for the rapid delivery
of the polarized molecule to the intracellular machinery. Alanine
transport is primarily electrogenic in nature and has kinetic properties
similar to those of lactate and pyruvate transport.109 A factor that distinguishes pyruvate from other three-carbon
intermediates is its low abundance relative to that of lactate and
alanine. This means that a bolus of pyruvate can exchange into the
larger lactate and alanine pools, producing intense resonances as
measured as a fraction of the total carbon signal. Instances in which
lactate or alanine is used as the imaging probe typically produce
lower SNR for the downstream metabolites than for pyruvate.85,110 Nonetheless, HP [1-13C]lactate oxidation can be detected
in skeletal muscle if experimental parameters are optimized.111 Pyruvate itself was first used as an agent
in the work of the original team led by Golman.112 All the advantages of [1-13C]pyruvate were used
to good effect, as [1-13C]lactate, [1-13C]alanine,
and [13C]bicarbonate were detected. The HP [13C]bicarbonate generated from [1-13C]pyruvate is a direct
readout of flux through the pyruvate dehydrogenase complex and is
hence correlated with the production of acetyl-CoA from pyruvate (Figure 7). If the 13C label is placed at the
C2 position of pyruvate, the label is passed to acetyl-CoA, where
it can be subsequently detected in citrate or glutamate. Pyruvate
dehydrogenase (PDH) flux in the heart is the primary and probably
the only source of [13C]bicarbonate when HP [1-13C]pyruvate is used as the imaging agent.113 Merritt and co-workers demonstrated that PDH flux, and therefore
HP [13C]bicarbonate generation, could be modulated by the
availability of a medium-chain fatty acid in the perfused heart. Furthermore,
they suggested that the appearance of both bicarbonate and CO2 in the measurements might facilitate an estimate of pH in
the tissue, a goal that became the subject of further publications
by multiple groups.114,115

Figure 7 Distribution of the 13C label
following metabolism of
[1-13C]- or [2-13C]pyruvate. Four alternate
pathways for producing HP [13C]bicarbonate from [1-13C]pyruvate exist, including PDH flux, a forward turn of the
TCA cycle after pyruvate carboxylation, or alternately flux through
pyruvate kinase (PK) or the malic enzyme. PK acts to decarboxylate
oxaloacetate as opposed to malate.

Similar observations about competition between fatty acid
and pyruvate
metabolism were made in the rat in vivo, where fasting
was shown to decrease the rate of appearance of HP [13C]bicarbonate,
presumably because of the increased availability of free fatty acids.116 Induction of type 1 diabetes by streptozotocin
treatment produced similar changes in PDH flux. In vivo spectra were acquired using a simple surface coil arrangement with
no other source of localization. Almost concurrently, the progenitors
of the dissolution DNP technique produced some of the most compelling
images that have been observed in the heart using a porcine model
of myocardial infarction and a relatively simple CSI method.117 Brief local ischemia or alternately infarction
was achieved using a balloon catheter for either 15 or 45 min to produce
an occlusion in the left circumflex artery. Once the occlusion was
released, subsequent images obtained with the injection of HP [1-13C]pyruvate showed the restoration of perfusion, as measured
by the specific lactate or alanine measurements, but decreased PDH
flux. Furthermore, the longer occlusion time produced images that
showed a larger defect in [13C]bicarbonate production.
Confirmation of reperfusion was validated using a standard gadolinium-based
method. These observations animated the field of HP imaging, as clinical
applications to myocardial hypertrophy, failure, and infarction were
obvious. An imaging sequence capable of producing multislice 13C images of the heart was subsequently developed and applied
to porcine models, producing compelling evidence that 13C imaging of the heart is not only possible but also likely to be
easily implemented in humans (Figure 8).118 Work by others in the perfused rat heart confirmed
that transient ischemia reduced PDH flux as measured by [13C]bicarbonate production.ref118 Furthermore,
ischemia is known to cause the cytosol of the heart to become more
reduced. Taking the [13C]bicarbonate/[1-13C]lactate
ratio produces a metric sensitive to both these processes; it was
noted that in short time periods following reperfusion the ratio increased
dramatically as the heart sought to restore its energy balance. It
was also noted that 31P spectroscopy did not have the sensitivity
to detect changes in metabolism
on a time scale that was the same as that of HP experiments. While
[1-13C]pyruvate imaging of the heart is quite sensitive
to changes in PDH flux, the generation of [13C]bicarbonate
from HP [1-13C]pyruvate is not guaranteed to reflect TCA
cycle turnover. HP [2-13C]pyruvate theoretically should
be more sensitive to a forward turn of the cycle, as its product,
acetyl-CoA labeled at the carbonyl position, can condense with oxaloacetate
to produce labeled TCA cycle intermediates. This labeling scheme was
used successfully by Tyler and co-workers to study the perfused heart
under normal conditions and following mild ischemia.ref119 With the injection of HP [2-13C]pyruvate, [1-13C]acetylcarnitine, [5-13C]citrate,
and [5-13C]glutamate were observed, as well as the appropriate
isotopomers of lactate and alanine. Ischemia-reperfusion reduced the
magnitudes of the signals of the products of PDH flux, an observation
interpreted as reduced TCA cycle turnover, though total pool sizes
were not addressed as a possible source of the decreased magnitude
of the signal. The low signal intensities associated with the [5-13C]glutamate and [5-13C]citrate do not bode well
for the clinical use of HP [2-13C]pyruvate, as the sensitivity
of any experiment is likely to be challenging even with hyperpolarization.
Shortly thereafter, the same lab produced a dose–response study
of the response of the in vivo rat heart to HP [1-13C]pyruvate concentration.ref120 Injection of 1 mL of 40 mM HP [1-13C]pyruvate produced
a maximal response as measured by [13C]bicarbonate production,
with injections at higher concentrations producing insignificant increases.
The resulting data showed Michaelis–Menten-type kinetics for
PDH flux, while HP lactate and alanine production remained linear
across the concentrations used. This study immediately preceded a
flurry of publications by the same lab exploring the activation and
control of PDH flux in a variety of systems. An in vivo study of PDH regulation used co-administration of malate to study
the interplay between acetyl-CoA/CoA and NADH/NAD+ ratios
on the detected [13C]bicarbonate signal observed after
injection of HP [1-13C]pyruvate.119 Malate caused a 27% increase in the level of bicarbonate in the
fed state, while producing insignificant changes in the fasted state,
suggesting the mechanism of PDH inhibition is different between the
conditions. A similar experimental design was used in a paper focused
on the effects of high-fat feeding and DCA.104 While significant correlations were found between PDH activity and
[13C]bicarbonate generation, the best fit line did not
intersect the origin. The researchers correctly pointed out that ex vivo assays of PDH activity could not account for other
effects in vivo, such as product inhibition by high
levels of acetyl-CoA derived from fatty acid oxidation. In a study
of hyperthyroidism, the same group used both HP [1-13C]pyruvate
and [2-13C]pyruvate separately to study known increases
in cardiac metabolic rate.ref121 The onset
of the malady in a rat model corresponded to decreases in apparent
PDH flux and an increase in pyruvate anaplerosis through pyruvate
carboxylase (PC). Both acute and long-term treatment with DCA resulted
in a restoration of PDH flux, increasing the metabolic flexibility
of the heart and resulting in decreased hypertrophy associated with
the hyperthyroid condition. Interestingly, the use of [2-13C]pyruvate in this case allowed the observation of HP [3-13C]citrate, which can be derived only from oxaloacetate generated
by PC flux followed by its condensation with acetyl-CoA. The efficacy
of DCA for increasing PDH flux was studied in a different context
by Mayer et al., where it was shown that an increased level of [13C]bicarbonate could be generated from HP [1-13C]lactate injected into rats.120

Figure 8 Images of porcine
myocardial metabolism as imaged with HP [1-13C]pyruvate.
Courtesy of A. Z. Lau and C. H. Cunningham.

Pyruvate oxidation was the primary target of study in a methodological
paper that for the first time used HP [1,2-13C2]pyruvate as the imaging agent.121 This
agent has the unusual ability to simultaneously measure PDH flux as
well as incorporation of label into the TCA cycle as it combines both
of the pathways illustrated in Figure 7. While
this can be translated into a tremendous gain in the amount of information
from a single experiment, excellent resolution is required to capture
both pathways, as the J coupling present in lactate
and alanine arising from the doubly labeled pyruvate can impede the
detection of [5-13C]glutamate, the most interesting downstream
product of [2-13C]pyruvate. More applications of HP [1-13C]pyruvate and [2-13C]pyruvate to studies of cardiac
metabolism appeared subsequently; one particularly cohesive paper
studied heart failure (HF) in a porcine model.122 Using an implantable pacemaker, dilated cardiomyopathy
was induced by rapid pacing, with longitudinal study by cine-MRI for
function, 31P NMR for cardiac energetics, and HP 13C NMR for intermediary metabolism. As seen in earlier studies, HP
[2-13C]pyruvate produced signals in [5-13C]glutamate
and [1-13C]acetylcarnitine, both of which decreased significantly
with progression of HF. Perhaps the most encouraging result was a
significant decline in the [5-13C]glutamate signal at 2
weeks of pacing that preceded any other measure of change in heart
function, including cardiac index, end-diastolic volume, and ATP production
as assessed by 31P NMR. A more comprehensive study of HP
[1-13C]acetylcarnitine kinetics was conducted in the rat
using DCA and dobutamine interventions.123 Using saturation transfer experiments, the acetylcarnitine pool
was shown to be in rapid equilibrium with both the [5-13C]citrate and [5-13C]glutamate pools. DCA administration
enhanced the [1-13C]acetylcarnitine signal, consistent
with increased PDH flux, while dobutamine apparently drained the acetylcarnitine
pool, indicative of increased cardiac workload. Similar experiments
with a larger pyruvate dose also noted changes in the [5-13C]glutamate signal and detected for the first time acetoacetate labeled
at positions C1 and C3.124 This was a truly
remarkable result, as the heart is not believed to be a ketogenic
organ. Future work should focus on the exact origin of the signal,
as the large pyruvate dose could have facilitated export of ketone
bodies from the liver to the heart. If the source of HP acetoacetate
is truly the heart, then pathways previously considered irrelevant
to the heart should be reexamined.

Up to this point, pyruvate
metabolism has primarily been reviewed
in the context of its oxidation or reduction, but its fate is different
in the liver, which prefers to use fatty acids for oxidation, preserving
three-carbon intermediates for gluconeogenesis. Liver metabolism has
been less well studied in the context of hyperpolarization than cancer
or myocardial metabolism. The first publication studied the in vivo rat liver in fed and fasted conditions.125 A key observation from the data was that oxidative
flux was much reduced in the liver compared to that in the heart,
as [13C]bicarbonate was largely undetectable using a small
flip-angle inspection pulse. As a surrogate of the redox state of
the liver, the ratio of the lactate/alanine signal was elevated, indicating
a more reduced cytosol.80 Given that the
experiments were conducted at 3 T, where the 13C chemical
shift resolution is limited, it is perhaps not unsurprising that data
in the perfused liver collected at higher fields led to the detection
of more metabolic products of [1-13C]pyruvate, including
[1-13C]- or [4-13C]malate and [1-13C]- or [4-13C]aspartate.126 The perfused liver also had the advantage of being placed inside
a relatively small diameter (18 mm) volume coil, enhancing the sensitivity
of the experimental protocol. The primary fate of pyruvate in the
liver is carboxylation to form oxaloacetate, which is in rapid equilibrium
with malate and fumarate. The initial carboxylation step produces
only [1-13C]oxaloacetate, but fumarate is a symmetric intermediate;
rapid exchange to the level of fumarate produces malate, oxaloacetate,
and therefore aspartate that is labeled at both positions C1 and C4.
The relative ratio of the C1 and C4 signals gives kinetic information
about the rate of exchange between fumarate and the other four-carbon
compounds. HP [13C]bicarbonate was also observed, the appearance
of which was quenched by using a phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase
knockout (PEPCK-KO) mouse as a control. PEPCK can compete with PDH
as a source of HP [13C]bicarbonate when [1-13C]pyruvate is used as an imaging agent. In vivo work
in the mouse liver assigned the production of [13C]bicarbonate
exclusively to PDH flux without further proof.127 This apparent disconnect led to further experiments in
the in vivo rat liver, which favored the interpretation
that PDH flux is primarily responsible for HP [13C]bicarbonate
production in vivo.128 It is likely that the use of the medium-chain fatty acid octanoate,
which bypasses carnitine palmitoyl transferase-I (CPT-I), in the perfused
livers resulted in high levels of acetyl-CoA and a concomitant drop
in PDH flux due to product inhibition. In all cases in which the chemical
shift resolution is sufficient, the equilibrium products of oxaloacetate
have signal amplitudes larger than those of [13C]bicarbonate,
indicating that PC flux is larger in the liver than PDH flux.

Kinetics
Central to the appeal of hyperpolarization for metabolic imaging
is the capture of time-resolved kinetics that reflects flux through
enzyme-catalyzed reactions. As evidenced in the preceding text, tremendous
progress has been made using rudimentary but highly stable ratios
of metabolites to their HP precursors. The most intellectually satisfying
solution to the reduction of HP data would fit the time-dependent
evolution of the metabolites, thereby extracting rate constants and
flux values for the enzyme-catalyzed reactions. This goal has been
the target of multiple publications spanning a variety of systems
from simple spectroscopy in cell culture to in vivo imaging experiments. The kinetics of HP signals is complicated by
multiple factors, primarily relating to accounting for the disappearance
of the HP magnetization. T1 destroys the
HP magnetization at a predictable rate, but the mathematics describing
first-order reaction rates is identical to that of longitudinal relaxation.
This results in the superposition of exponentials with similar decay
constants; extraction of decay rate constants in this case is well-known
as being computationally difficult. Furthermore, each excitation of
the magnetization consumes a portion of the polarization. While this
factor can be exactly modeled, uncertainty about flip angles in the
active volume of the transmit coil adds a further layer of uncertainty
to the simulations of the data.129 Other
considerations make the inference of exact rate constants difficult
at best.

The primary experimental issue is accounting for the
delivery of
the HP substrate to the site of the reaction. Without the concentration
of the substrate being measured, any rate constant derived from a
fitting procedure per force yields only an apparent rate constant
(kapp). Additionally, any reaction rate
measured by the appearance of a product must represent a sum of transport
phenomena and the action of the enzyme, unless the intra- and extracellular
fractions can be resolved in some manner. Nonetheless, extensive efforts
by multiple laboratories have yielded compelling results. To facilitate
a more cohesive discussion of the modeling, Figure 9 illustrates the reaction pathways of pyruvate with the attendant
nomenclature of the relevant rate constants. All discussion of modeling
in this paper uses this nomenclature to describe the metabolic pathways
as opposed to that used in any individual paper. Equation B1 shows
a matrix formulation for the differential equations that govern the
time evolution of the detected signal. The matrix formulation allows
an intuitive visualization of the reactions relevant to the system,
as off-diagonal components describe the rate of flow from one pool
to the other. The vector [x] is a column vector with
an entry for each compartment and/or metabolite; A is
an exchange matrix, and F is a column vector with an
entry f that can be any function that accurately
describes the arrival of pyruvate at the region being examined. Computationally,
the solution of eq 2 involves a matrix inversion that is notably faster
than any numerical methods for integrating the differential equations
themselves. The resulting gain in speed results in much faster simulations
in the context of fitting acquired data.

Figure 9 (A) Model of pyruvate
metabolism including compartmentalization
and enzyme-catalyzed reactions. (B1) Generalized solution for the
time evolution of the signals in an HP pyruvate experiment. (B2) Rx refers to a longitudinal relaxation rate for the metabolite,
and kcyt = kPL + kPA + kIM – kLP – kAP – kMI. The rate
constant, k, is defined for each reaction or transport
step. Abbreviations: kEI, extracellular
to intracellular; kIM, intracellular to
mitochondrial; kPL, pyruvate to lactate; kPA, pyruvate to alanine; kCO2, production of CO2 following PDH
flux; kCB, production of bicarbonate following
forward flux of CO2 through carbonic anhydrase.

Foundational observations were reported by the
Brindle lab in 2007
in an EL-4 cancer cell culture, with experiments subsequently generalized
to an orthotopic tumor model.82 Using the
two-pool modified Bloch equations to describe only pyruvate and lactate,
an apparent rate constant was extracted for LDH in culture. Furthermore,
reverse flux from lactate to pyruvate was neglected. Using a known
amount of pyruvate, kPL was used to calculate
a flux in units of nanomoles per second per 108 cells.
Treatment of the cells with etoposide reduced the measured flux significantly.
From the perspective of kinetic measurements, perhaps the most important
observation was that addition of exogenous lactate at concentrations
of 20 and 40 mM to the cell culture resulted in 1.4- and 2.4-fold
increases, respectively, in the apparent flux from pyruvate to lactate.
As accurately described in the paper, this effect reflects the exchange
between pyruvate and lactate that is mediated by the bidirectional
LDH enzyme. A larger pool of lactate is more capable of accepting
the HP 13C label while returning to the pyruvate pool only
the unpolarized [12C]lactate. A larger pool size exchanging
with the source of HP magnetization will record a signal that is larger
than that arising from a smaller pool. While CSI experiments were
used to produce color maps of tumor metabolism, the in vivo kinetic data were collected with a slice-selective spectroscopy
protocol. In the current literature, this is the case more often than
not, as the development of fast imaging sequences that can be used
for quantitative kinetic studies is challenging. Not only do pulse
flip-angle effects have to be accurately accounted for, but sampling
of k-space and general imaging considerations require
sophisticated approaches to pulse sequence design.130 To avoid the problem of delivery, the in vivo data were fit for time points only after the lactate signal had
reached a maximum. This removes the need to model the delivery, but
it is not clear how this compromise affects the estimation of kPL. Another paper of fundamental importance
carefully studied the apparent Michaelis–Menten kinetics of
HP pyruvate metabolism in rats and TRAMP mice.131 Rats were studied using increasing concentrations of HP
pyruvate to construct the dose–response curves. Using a slice-selective
detection protocol, HP pyruvate arrival and subsequent metabolism
were modeled using a piecewise description of the kinetics. In addition,
consumption of magnetization by the finite excitation pulses was also
modeled, allowing estimates of in vivo T1 values of the metabolites to be made. Again, the flux of lactate
to pyruvate was neglected to simplify the fitting procedure, and modeling
of the effects of the MCTs was not included in the simulations. The
apparent Vmax and Km for the pyruvate to lactate conversion were 11.12 ±
1.28 μmol kg–1 s–1 and 160
± 30 μmol/kg, respectively. Alanine had an almost equivalent Vmax, but the apparent Km was larger (280 ± 67 μmol/kg). Initial velocities
of each reaction were also calculated. In the TRAMP model, the ratio
of apparent kPL to kPA increased over time in animals that were untreated, but
hormone deprivation therapy prevented this rise, suggesting that quantitatively
accounting for reaction rates might provide a stable metric for assessing
treatment efficacy and tumor progression. An important observation
in the study was that the measured T1 values
of pyruvate, lactate, and alanine depended upon the tissue in which
they were observed. One of the most complete attempts to assess in vivo kinetics using a Michaelis–Menten model was
undertaken in the rat kidney.132 In this
case, an external reference was added to help estimate the total pyruvate
concentration at the site of imaging. Using this method, Vmax and Km values were estimated
for the production of HP lactate and alanine. The authors demonstrated
that under the appropriate infusion conditions, the size of the pyruvate
bolus (1, 2, or 3 mL) did not compromise estimates of the Michaelis–Menten
constants. This observation deserves to be reproduced in other laboratories.
If their method of kinetic analysis is shown to be sufficiently robust,
it would allow discussion of in vivo kinetics in
general terms understood by any scientific field, enhancing the likelihood
of collaborations between the basic science groups driving the technology
and more applied medical research teams.

Taking a step back
in biological complexity, but a step forward
in the complexity of the modeling, Harris et al. studied a T47D cell
culture model of human breast cancer using a perfusion rig placed
in a vertical bore spectroscopy system.133 In this case, pyruvate extra- to intracellular transport was modeled
in addition to pyruvate to lactate flux. One of the primary advantages
of cell culture systems for measuring kinetics is that pyruvate delivery
can accurately be approximated by a Heaviside step function, with
only subsequent metabolism resulting in a change in pyruvate concentration.
The addition of an MCT1 inhibitor to the system caused large drops
in the HP lactate signal, as did a washout protocol that rapidly removed
the HP pyruvate bolus. The combination of these two methods allowed
the authors to state that pyruvate extra- to intracellular transport
was the primary site of control of the total HP lactate signal, though
generalizing this conclusion to other situations should be done with
circumspection. Using a similar perfusion system, Keshari et al. studied
an immortalized hepatoma cell line using HP pyruvate but arrived at
different conclusions about the minimal model needed to describe the
system.134 Experimentally, the data were
acquired in a manner different from that of Harris et al., who used
a stopped flow technique. Here the system was under constant perfusion,
and therefore, the data were modeled using an exponential delivery
function. Using a 5° nonselective pulse, both lactate and alanine
were observed and the resulting data were fit to derive kPL and kPA values without
reference to MCT function. Despite the divergence in the choice of
model, the ultimate fluxes estimated by the two methods were within
1 order of magnitude of each other. A third lab studied similar questions
of MCT versus LDH activity in the EL4 cancer cell line, concluding
that both MCT and LDH were responsible for controlling the intensity
of the lactate signal.135 As detailed above,
the majority of studies have approached the modeling problem assuming
unidirectional flux. While this certainly appears to be a reasonable
simplification of the modeling, data demonstrating that exchange has
a negligible effect on the observed kinetics were scant. Using SF188-derived
glioblastoma cells in suspension in an NMR tube, Harrison and co-workers
proposed six models of pyruvate metabolism that included exchange,
flux, and separate pools of intra- and extracellular lactate.136 Previously, independent measures of 13C isotope distribution had not been included in the experimental
protocol, but here for the first time, mass spectrometry was used
to independently assess 13C enrichment of the lactate pool.
The experimental design included parallel experiments with [3-13C]pyruvate in cells that could be rapidly frozen to arrest
metabolism; three time points at short, intermediate, and long times
after introduction of pyruvate were used as gold standards for flux
and/or exchange between pyruvate and lactate. To boost the NMR sensitivity
further, a shaped pulse protocol was used to provide minimal excitation
for the pyruvate while using an 18° flip angle for the [1-13C]lactate signal. As one might expect, only exchange models
could fit the mass spectrometry and HP data simultaneously, with the
three-pool bidirectional exchange model producing the fit with the
lowest residuals overall. Remarkably, most models produced an accurate
estimate of the initial pyruvate to lactate reaction as measured via
hyperpolarization. The key point of this observation is that due to
the shortness of time that the HP signal is observed, rather simple
approximations can yield quantitative estimates of metabolic flux
when using simple excitation–detection protocols. All four
of these papers that used cell culture as a model system produced
estimates of pyruvate to lactate flux (V0) that were within 1 order of magnitude, probably well within the
biological variability of the various tumor cell lines used. Oxidative
metabolism is also active in cancer cells, as detected using HP [1-13C]pyruvate in cell culture.137 Using a selective excitation pulse to amplify the observed [13C]bicarbonate signal, kinetics in two different cancer cell
lines were studied. The SFxL cell line primarily oxidizes pyruvate,
as opposed to the hepatocellular carcinoma cell line, Huh-7, which
metabolizes pyruvate more avidly via anaplerosis. The exact cell count
along with a known volume and concentration of injected HP pyruvate
facilitated an absolute measure of PDH flux, which could then be used
to assign quantitative fluxes to a network of reactions probed by
steady-state isotopomer analysis.

The conclusion that exchange
is not important for accurate estimates
of initial flux stands in apparent contradiction to methods that use
more sophisticated pulse sequences to encode metabolic information
into the HP data. Magnetization transfer experiments used to study in vivo cancer metabolism demonstrated the necessity of
modeling bidirectional flux in an orthotopic tumor model.138 In this experiment, after injection of the
HP pyruvate, signals from pyruvate or lactate were irradiated for
1 s, producing changes in the signal intensity for the exchanging
peak. These experiments parallel the MAD-STEAM method for in vivo spectroscopy, which uses specific echo times in
a stimulated echo experiment to measure the change in phase of signal
that arises when exchange takes place.139 In both these experiments, bidirectional exchange is easily detected,
even if estimates of flux are complicated by a lack of quantitative
estimates of HP pyruvate concentration at the tumor. The key to understanding
the disconnect between these experiments and those performed in cell
culture is the preliminary encoding of the magnetization (either through
saturation or by relative frequency) prior to its detection. The resulting k values are measures of exchange throughout the experiment
as opposed to the initial velocity, V0, that is measured in the cell culture models. Determination of which
methods yield the best insights into the biological process that is
being studied is up to the designer of the experiment. The desire
to accurately model exchange in vivo has recently
prompted thoughtful development of phantoms for use in horizontal
bore imaging systems.140 Future development
of imaging sequences would benefit from a uniform standard such as
the one proposed by Walker et al. in benchmarking results from multiple
laboratories concurrently. Another alternate method for assessing
label exchange between lactate and pyruvate uses both HP [1-13C]pyruvate and HP [1-13C]lactate that is specifically
deuterated. Using a pulse sequence similar to that of the POCE experiment,141 the intensity of the free induction decay versus
the echo can be used to detect exchange.

Fatty Acid and Ketone Metabolism
Long-chain fatty acids (LCFAs) and ketones are preferentially oxidized
in the majority of the organs, as the body ideally reserves glucose
for utilization by the brain. Fatty acid β-oxidation is a large
source of reducing equivalents as well as acetyl-CoA, but a technical
factor has completely stopped the development of LCFAs as imaging
agents, namely the fact that they require albumin to be solubilized
in water. Albumin is a large, slowly tumbling molecule that has a
strong negative impact on the 13C T1 values of the LCFAs when the compounds are complexed together,
essentially depolarizing the agent upon binding. Water-soluble short-chain
fatty acids like butyrate seem like obvious targets for development,
so it is somewhat surprising that the first published results with
butyrate are relatively new.142 Initially
using a perfused heart model, the injected HP [1-13C]butyrate
was rapidly metabolized to [1-13C]acetoacetate, [1-13C]-β-hydroxybutyrate, [1-13C]acetylcarnitine,
[5-13C]citrate, and [5-13C]glutamate. It is
of note that [1-13C]butyrate produces the same isotopomers
as [2-13C]pyruvate, but the additional information gained
from the observation of the ketone bodies is a significant enhancement
of the available information. The heart is generally not considered
a ketogenic organ, yet a process known as pseudoketogenesis is known
to be active in muscle/heart tissue.143 This process, a subject of much contention in the literature, uses
circulating acetoacetate to exchange with acetoacetyl-CoA in a process
that redistributes the 13C label without actually producing
new ketone bodies. Experiments with HP [1-13C]butyrate in vivo were also quite successful in the same study, though
the spectral resolution is lower compared to that in the perfused
heart. As detailed in the section on [2-13C]pyruvate, the
production of [1-13C]acetylcarnitine can also be interpreted
as a readout of the energy state of the myocardium; higher acetylcarnitine
levels indicate a greater energy reserve available for the heart.

Acetate is not strictly a fatty acid, but it is the smallest two-carbon
precursor to acetyl-CoA and is avidly metabolized by a number of tissues.
As an imaging agent, HP [1-13C]acetate was first discussed
by Jensen et al. in the context of heart and skeletal muscle metabolism in vivo.144 Under an ischemia-reperfusion
protocol, the signal associated with [1-13C]acetylcarnitine
was dramatically lower during ischemia and was significantly depressed
with even a 1 h reperfusion of the hindlimb. Unfortunately, because
of the chemical shift of the parent [1-13C]acetate molecule,
it is surprisingly difficult to resolve the [5-13C]glutamate
signal that should be derived from exchange between α-ketoglutarate
and glutamate. Mishkovsky et al. have demonstrated that by using uniformly 13C-enriched acetate and a polarization transfer pulse sequence,
the metabolism of acetate to the level of α-ketoglutarate can
be detected in the rat brain.65 It was
very surprising that α-ketoglutarate could be detected, as it
is typically present at concentrations much lower than that of glutamate
in the brain. The same group subsequently conducted a thorough kinetic
analysis of [1-13C]acetate and its appearance in [1-13C]acetylcarnitine in the muscle, as well.146

Ketone bodies themselves have long T1 carbonyls that should be amenable to hyperpolarization
studies.
To date, no papers have been published using HP acetoacetate or β-hydroxybutyrate
as an imaging agent, but these compounds are clearly on the mind of
many researchers as evidenced by two abstracts presented at a recent
meeting.147,148 Given the rapid uptake of ketone
bodies by the brain and heart during fasting, it would be surprising
if compelling in vivo results were not forthcoming.

As a conclusion to this portion of the review, truly original insights
into in vivo oxidative metabolism are now being generated
using dissolution DNP and a variety of 13C-labeled precursors.
The incredible specificity of MR allows the observation of kinetics
in real time in a straightforward manner unmatched by other molecular
imaging techniques. This section has outlined how the redox state
of the cell is important in both cancer and normal physiology. The
lactate–pyruvate equilibrium has long been an important target
for measurement, but the NAD+/NADH ratio on which it reports
should not be confused with the NADPH-mediated detoxification processes
that are also a part of normal cell function. This pool of redox active
metabolites is reviewed in the next section.

Oxidative Stress: Vitamin
C and Its Regeneration
As mentioned above, ROS play a central
role in many normal cellular
processes, including intracellular signaling and mitochondrial electron
transport, but an excessive concentration of ROS lead to oxidative
stress and may cause cell damage.149 Antioxidants
such as ascorbate (Asc or vitamin C) are essential in maintaining
intracellular and extracellular redox homeostasis, and the extent
of their usage increases in the case of oxidative stress. Through
the ROS-scavenging process, ascorbate is oxidized to dehydroascorbate
(DHA), the membrane transport of which is facilitated by the GLUT
protein family, making DHA the prevalent form for cells to incorporate
vitamin C.150 As soon as DHA enters cells,
it is nearly instantaneously reduced to ascorbate via processes that
can involve several reductants, allowing vitamin C recycling, as detailed
below, but before entering the cell, DHA can also be hydrolyzed to
diketogulonate (DKG). The in vivo formation of DKG
from DHA is thought to be an extracellular irreversible reaction that
will prevent part of the DHA from being reduced to vitamin C, although
this point seems to be controversial.151 The recycling of DHA to vitamin C is a crucial step in the maintenance
of cellular redox balance.

The idea proposed essentially at
the same time by Keshari et al.
and Bohndiek et al. is to hyperpolarize and inject solutions containing
[1-13C]DHA to probe the intracellular redox status by measuring
the 13C NMR signal intensity ratio between [1-13C]DHA and [1-13C]Asc.152,153 The properties
of these two compounds are indeed very attractive for HP 13C NMR measurements because the C1 of each compound has a relatively
long T1, especially at moderate and clinically
compatible magnetic fields, and their chemical shift difference is
large enough to be easily distinguished (Figure 10). The attractiveness of DHA as a HP probe might, however,
be hindered by its relative acute toxicity (the LD50 of
rats with unbuffered iv DHA is ∼0.32 g/kg),154 and to a lesser extent its tendency to be hydrolyzed to
DKG.

Figure 10 (A and B) Sequential coronal T2-weighted
images and corresponding 13C three-dimensional MRSI demonstrating
the distribution of HP DHA and vitamin C (VitC) in a TRAMP mouse after
intravenous injection of 350 μL of 15 mM HP [1-13C]DHA. The liver and kidneys are best seen in panel A, and the prostate
tumor is best seen in panel B. (C) Representative 13C spectra
from liver, kidney, and prostate tumor in a TRAMP mouse. (D) Axial T2-weighted image of a normal mouse with a voxel
encompassing the normal prostate. (E) Summary of average metabolite
ratios [VitC/(VitC + DHA)] for normal liver, kidneys, and prostate
(n = 5), as well as TRAMP tumor and surrounding benign
tissue (surround) (n = 4). Reproduced with permission
from ref (153). Copyright
2011 National Academy of Sciences.

An additional significant issue for biological applications
of
HP [1-13C]DHA lies in the difficulty of interpreting the
origin of the 13C NMR signal intensity ratio inherent to
the intricate reduction mechanisms. Reduction of DHA to vitamin C
can be either spontaneous, through a reaction with glutathione (GSH),
another major intracellular antioxidant, or enzymatically catalyzed
with the direct or indirect involvement of NADPH (Figure 11). GSH, which unlike vitamin C can be directly
synthesized by human (and many other mammalian) cells, is also involved
in the most prominent reduction pathway via a thiol cycle (Figure 11B). The concentration ratio of glutathione disulfide
(GSSH) to GSH, namely [GSSG]/[GSH], has been determined to be a direct
indicator of oxidative stress.155 For this
reason, and because of the high intracellular concentration of GSH
(ranging from 0.5 to 10 mM), it is tempting to hypothesize that the
[1-13C]DHA to [1-13C]Asc intensity ratio should
correlate with [GSSG]/[GSH]. However, one has to be cautious because,
first, GSH-independent processes that depend on NADPH can directly
reduce DHA (Figure 11A), for instance, via
the thioredoxin reductase,156 or 3α-hydroxysteroid
dehydrogenase,157 and, second, the concentration
of NADPH could be the rate-limiting factor, even with the involvement
of GSH, because it is required to reduce GSSG through glutathione
reductase (GR). It must also be noted that three different types of
GSH-dependent enzymes have been shown to have dehydroascorbate reductase
(DHAR) activity, namely, thioltransferases (also known as glutaredoxins),
glutathione S-transferases, and protein disulfide
isomerases.158,159

Figure 11 Schematic representation
of the enzymatically catalyzed DHA reduction
processes. The cofactor NADPH is involved either directly (A) or via
a thiol cycle (B). The most prominent thiol cycle couples the reduction
of DHA to the oxidation of glutathione, the recycling (reduction)
of which involves the oxidation of NADPH. Abbreviations: DHAR, dehydroascorbate
reductase; GR, glutathione reductase.

Despite its limitations, [1-13C]DHA is the only
HP substrate
for probing the intracellular NADPH availability in vivo that has been proposed to date, and it can provide crucial information
in ROS-related diseased tissue, in particular for clinically relevant
cardiovascular and neurodegenerative diseases as well as cancer. So
far, the only two published studies based on HP [1-13C]DHA
have been performed in tumor models.152,153 The fast
proliferation of cancer cells is associated with an increased concentration
of ROS, which is partly compensated by an increase in intracellular
antioxidant concentration, principally GSH and NAPDH from the upregulated
pentose phosphate pathway.160,161 There is therefore
a direct relationship between the concentration of reducing molecules
and tumor cell development, and HP [1-13C]DHA could provide
an assessment of the aggressiveness of cancer cells and their response
to drugs.

Amino Acid Metabolism and Nitrogen Homeostasis
Nitrogen
homeostasis is tightly regulated in animals, on one hand,
because of the nitrogen requirements in essential processes such as
nucleic acid and protein synthesis and neurotransmission and, on the
other, because of the high toxicity of ammonia. Nitrogen is assimilated
by the organism through the diet in the form of nucleotides, proteins,
and amino acids. The release (deamination) or intermolecular transfer
(transamination) of an amino group is an essential enzymatically catalyzed
process in the metabolism of amino acids.162 Among the TCA cycle intermediates connecting the glucogenic amino
acids to carbohydrate metabolites, two α-keto acids, namely,
α-ketoglutarate (α-KG or 2-oxoglutarate) and oxaloacetate,
are key molecules because they participate in the transfer of reducing
equivalents between the cytosol and the mitochondrion to regulate
metabolism and in particular oxidative phosphorylation. This transfer
via the malate–aspartate shuttle involves the two associated
amino acids aspartate and glutamate. The latter, participating in
several transamination reactions and functioning as both a nitrogen
acceptor and a nitrogen donor, plays a prominent role in the intracellular
transport of nitrogen as well as in biosynthesis (Figure 12).

Figure 12 Schematic representation of the transamination and transamidation
reactions involving glutamate. Abbreviations: GLS, glutaminase; ATR,
aminotransferase; GDH, glutamate dehydrogenase.

Several HP probes have been proposed and tested to detect
the metabolism
of these key compounds in amino acid metabolism and their associated
pathways. To date, applications in oncology and neurosciences have
been proposed, and we review here the probes within their potential
fields of application.

Cancer Metabolism
Because it has
been shown that glutamine
is, along with glucose and lactate, a major fuel for the proliferation
of tumor cells, HP [13C]glutamine was evaluated to probe
cancer metabolism. Early in vitro experiments by
Gallagher et al. showed that [5-13C]glutamate can be readily
detected in cultured human hepatoma cells (HepG2) following the injection
of HP [5-13C]glutamine into cell suspensions and that the
rate of conversion is determined by both the glutaminase (GLS) activity
and the kinetics of the glutamine transporters.163 Cabella et al. later showed that similar HP 13C experiments can be performed in vivo in rat liver
injected with rat hepatoma cells (McA-RH7777).164 Although the T1 and chemical
shift of both the [5-13C]glutamine precursor and the [5-13C]glutamate metabolite are suitable for hyperpolarization,
the challenges associated with such an experiment have two main origins.
First, glutamine is quite unstable in aqueous solution and tends to
be converted to [5-13C]pyroglutamate.164 Second, the cellular uptake of glutamine is relatively
slow, even in cancer cells [typically 2–3 nmol min–1 (mg of protein)−1 (see, e.g., ref (165))]. Note that although
[1-13C]glutamine has a 13C T1 longer than that of [5-13C]glutamine because
of the larger intramolecular distance between the 13C label
and a quadrupolar 14N atom, the small chemical shift difference
between [1-13C]glutamine and [1-13C]glutamate
makes it less suitable for in vivo experiments.

The transamination of glutamate to α-ketoglutarate can be probed
using HP [1-13C]glutamate and has been demonstrated in vitro in human hepatoma cells (HepG2).166 This probe is also attractive in tumors because of the
high intracellular glutamate concentration resulting from the high
rate of glutamine uptake and glutaminase activity that has been reported
in cancer cells.167 In addition, the labeling
of [1-13C]-α-ketoglutarate could give access to the
measurement of oncogenic hypoxia-inducible factor (HIF) pathways that
have been recently discovered.168 In fact,
[1-13C]-α-ketoglutarate has been recently proposed
as a HP probe to assess the IDH1 mutational status in glioma.169 The transfer of the 13C from [1-13C]-α-ketoglutarate to [1-13C]-2-hydroxyglutarate
was detectable only in tumor cells expressing mutant IDH1. One of
the main challenges for further applications of this probe will be
the relatively weak signal of [1-13C]-2-hydroxyglutarate
coupled to the fact that it overlaps with the signal from [5-13C]-α-ketoglutarate (the chemical shift difference is
only 0.1 ppm), which is present at natural abundance but is also HP
and thus gives rise to a detectable signal.

Besides pyruvate,
which is converted to alanine, the other α-keto
acid coupled to the glutamate−α-ketoglutarate transamination
reaction that has been proposed as an HP probe is α-ketoisocaproate
(KIC). KIC, along with the other two branched-chain α-keto acids
(BCKAs), namely, α-keto-β-methylvalerate and α-ketoisovalerate,
transforms into a branched-chain amino acid (BCAA) following the incorporation
of the amino group from glutamate (see Figure 12). Leucine is associated with KIC, isoleucine with α-keto-β-methylvalerate,
and valine with α-ketoisovalerate. Karlsson et al. demonstrated
that the intensity of the [1-13C]leucine signal intensity
following the injection of [1-13C]KIC in a rat lymphoma
model correlates with the activity of the branched-chain aminotransferase
(BCAT) (Figure 13).170 The glutamate pool size also plays an important role in the conversion
of [1-13C]KIC to [1-13C]leucine because the Km of BCAT for glutamate is ∼50-fold larger
than for KIC. As the glutamate concentration tends to be high in tumor
tissue, it could be expected that the probe has a poor specificity
and cannot be used to distinguish between different types of tumors.
However, the authors nicely demonstrated that because BCAT is upregulated
in specific cancer cells only, HP [1-13C]KIC can be used
as a probe for tumor profiling. While the reviewers believe that this
compound might be one of the most clinically viable HP probes for
applications in oncology suggested to date, no other studies have
been published since this initial application in subcutaneous tumors.

Figure 13 Imaging
of BCAT activity in vivo. The anatomical 1H image of an EL4 mouse is shown at the top left. Chemical
shift images of [1-13C]leucine and [1-13C]KIC
after injection of HP [1-13C]KIC are overlaid onto the
anatomical image. The tumor position is indicated by a dashed line.
[1-13C]Leucine is specifically observed inside the tumor.
One-dimensional 13C spectra for volume elements of the
tumor and intestine (blue and red dots) demonstrate the difference
in the [1-13C]leucine signal between the tumor and surrounding
tissue. The position of the surface coil is indicated by the two white
dots at the top left. Reproduced with permission from ref (170). Copyright 2009 UICC.

Brain Metabolism
Because glutamate is the main excitatory
neurotransmitter in the central nervous system (CNS), many in vivo thermally polarized NMR studies have been performed
to examine how the 13C from [13C]glucose, [13C]acetate, or [13C]-β-hydroxybutyrate is
incorporated into brain glutamate.7 Although
no glutamate was initially detected in the rat brain following the
injection of HP [2-13C]pyruvate,171 HP 13C had the promise of offering the possibility of
directly measuring metabolic intermediates involved in cerebral metabolism.
Perhaps one of the most remarkable observations obtained with HP 13C in terms of brain metabolism was the detection of [5-13C]-α-ketoglutarate from [1-13C]acetate and
the absence of a [5-13C]glutamate signal within the 30
s time frame of the experiment.65 Interestingly,
Park et al. detected [5-13C]glutamate but no [5-13C]-α-ketoglutarate in the rat brain following the injection
of HP [2-13C]pyruvate.172 This
difference might be due to the fact that acetate is exclusively taken
up by astrocytes whereas pyruvate is most likely incorporated in both
neurons and astrocytes.

The essential glutamate/glutamine cycle
sustains the formation of the glutamate neurotransmitter within neurons
while preventing its superfluous and toxic accumulation within the
synaptic cleft. Because both glutamate and glutamine can be oxidized,
the brain requires an abundant source of amino groups for synthesizing
these vital amino acids. BCAAs and notably leucine are known to be
a major source of nitrogen for the synthesis of glutamate and glutamine,
and Yudkoff et al. hypothesized that BCAAs should play a crucial role
in the recycling of glutamine in astrocytes and the buffering of glutamate
within neurons (see Figure 14).173 Experimental evidence of the role of BCAAs
in de novo glutamate synthesis and glutamate recycling
via a BCAA shuttle was provided by Hutson et al.174 Together with the high level of expression of BCAT in the
rodent and human brain,175 the facilitated
transport of BCKAs through the ubiquitous cerebral MCTs makes HP [1-13C]KIC an ideal compound for probing nitrogen homeostasis
in the brain, and Butt et al. demonstrated that its metabolic product
[1-13C]leucine can be readily detected in the rat brain.176 A potential application of this HP compound
would be to probe the dysfunctions in amino acid metabolism linked
to neurodegenerative diseases.177

Figure 14 Schematic
representation of the KIC/leucine BCAA cycle along with
the coupled glutamine/glutamate cycle active between astrocytes and
neurons. To transfer nitrogen from a neuron to an astrocyte, the amino
group can be fixed to KIC to form leucine. Abbreviations: GS, glutamine
synthetase; BCATm, mitochondrial branched-chain aminotransferase;
BCATc, cytosolic branched-chain aminotransferase; GLS, glutaminase;
GDH, glutamate dehydrogenase. To effectively move the NH4+ from a neuron to an astrocyte, the latter has to be
fixed to α-ketoglutarate by mitochondrial GDH.

Future Prospects for Analytical Applications
In view of the physical considerations presented in the first part
of this review, we now propose to discuss what the features of an
ideal hyperpolarizer for preclinical experiments should be. First,
it should be clear from Figure 1 that the working
temperature has to be close to 1 K; i.e., the sample should be placed
in superfluid liquid helium, although we recommend to stay above 1
K because of the prohibitively long polarization buildup time constants.
Also, because the amount of microwave power required for efficient
DNP is non-negligible (typically 10–50 mW), the sample cannot
be placed in a vacuum chamber while being cooled by a cryogenic cold
head and should instead be immersed in superfluid liquid helium. However,
because of the scarcity as well as the cost of helium, we advocate
for a system that will not require external cryogenic fluids. The
idea would thus be to have a small amount of condensed helium inside
the sample space that can be internally recycled (this is what is
actually done in the SPINlab). Second, as discussed earlier, the most
convenient magnetic field seems to be 5 T (the current version of
SPINlab is also set to operate at 5 T). Third, the sample volume and
dilution factor should be small, so that it is possible to produce
adapted volumes of highly concentrated solutions for cell cultures
(in 5 or 10 mm outer diameter NMR tubes) or rodents without wasting
expensive labeled material. Finally, besides the obvious necessity
for high performance, two prominent practical aspects should also
be put forward: the ease of use and the reproducibility. For this
reason, we strongly advocate a nearly all automated system, including
transfer, infusion/perfusion system, and MR acquisition, similar to
what was proposed by Cheng et al.53 We
are confident that the implementation of such a system is technically
feasible and that it will soon be developed.

While HP MR has
unlocked a new era in in vivo imaging
with an incredible array of insights into normal and pathophysiology,
it has not gained widespread use in traditional areas of (bio)chemical
research. There are both scientific and economic concerns that underlie
the current state of the field. From the point of view of potential
applications of dissolution DNP, metabolomic studies of analytical
samples seem like the most clear-cut opportunity for the technology.
Progress in this area has been hindered by sample preparation issues.
The efficiency of dissolution DNP is highly dependent on the formation
of a glass and the uniform distribution of radical in the target sample.
It can be challenging to meet these conditions in a sample for a metabolomic
study that is composed of hundreds or thousands of compounds. The
most typical samples for metabolomic studies have been urine or blood,
two biofluids that are characterized by the presence of high-molecular
weight proteins or high salt concentrations. It is the authors’
experience that samples with high salt concentrations are difficult
to polarize, primarily because of solubility limitations, though there
are few discussions of this in the literature. It is most likely that
these samples do not glass well, preventing efficient polarization.
The presence of simple salts does not prevent extremely high polarizations
from being achieved.178 The Danish company
Albeda Research has specialized in the development of substrate preparations
for HP 13C MR.44,179 Assuming that a proper
sample matrix could be identified for a wide range of metabolomic
analyses, issues of heterogeneity of nuclear T1 values complicate the interpretation of 13C spectra
that might be collected. Chemical sites with long nuclear T1 values are inherently more sensitive when
they are used with dissolution DNP, as opposed to thermally polarized 13C spectroscopy in which shorter T1 values allow faster repeat times and therefore higher sensitivities.
These various factors have combined to make DNP sparsely used at best
in metabolomics studies. Another possible field of application could
be mechanistic studies in enzymology, where the chemical selectivity
of NMR implies that kinetics measurements in isolated systems could
be highly informative. Dissolution DNP has already been found to be
useful in chemical kinetics, primarily through the excellent technical
work of the Hilty lab.180−183 However, another experimental detail has
prevented the use of DNP for small samples. Both commercially available
systems are equipped to solubilize large volumes of sample. The most
common dissolution DNP system currently is the HyperSense, which uses
a minimum of 3 mL of superheated water to solubilize the frozen sample.
Given the sizes of samples regularly produced for enzymology studies,
this volume of solvent renders a sample with concentrations too low
for study by NMR, or too expensive in terms of sample production.
In addition, 3 mL of sample is a volume larger than what can be efficiently
used in current systems unless a 10 mm NMR probe is available. Finally,
even with rapid delivery systems that have been developed, shimming
of the HP sample remains a challenge.184 From an economic perspective, the HyperSense system costs something
more than 600000 USD and the GE SPINlab system is more than 1.5 million
USD. This is outside the means of most basic science departments.
With all these considerations in mind, development of a dissolution
DNP system suitable for use in analytical chemistry should be able
to successfully polarize and quantitatively dissolve extremely small
samples, preferably using a capillary-based system for sample delivery.
A capillary-based NMR system would address concerns about shimming
as the sample location does not change relative to the detection coil.
The small volumes necessary for capillary NMR systems are ideally
suited for analytical applications like metabolomics and enzymology.
The primary engineering hurdle that impedes such development is identifying
a means for maintaining a small sample at cryogenic temperatures while
leaving it subject to dissolution, either by mating a dissolution
wand to it or by flushing hot solvent through the containing capillary.
Prospects for such a system seem dim unless individual researchers
are inclined to take up the development, as biomedical (in
vivo) applications are driving the field strongly.

Biomedical
Research
Given the large number of successful preclinical
applications of
HP 13C imaging, it is clear that clinical trials are the
next logical step for the technique’s development. A trial
aimed at establishing safe concentrations of pyruvate for human use
was recently completed at UCSF (Figure 15).56 The ascending dose study found no dose-limiting
toxicity even at the maximum dose of 0.43 mL/kg of 230 mM HP [1-13C]pyruvate. Comparison to 1H MRSI methods yielded
approximately equivalent SNR levels between the methods, but in at
least one case, the lactate/pyruvate ratio identified a previously
undiagnosed malignant lesion that was later confirmed as cancerous
by biopsy and histopathology. A key point not emphasized in the paper
was that because of the extended period needed for the pharmacist
to confirm that the sample was suitable for injection (∼52
s), a large amount of polarization was lost due to the T1 of the sample. The new GE SPINLab polarizer has an inline
quality control system that will significantly streamline sample production;
the take-home message is that in a very real sense the data presented
in this paper are the worst we will see from in vivo human studies. The quality of the data will only improve.

Figure 15 Results from
the first in vivo human experiments
using HP [1-13C]pyruvate. A CSI sequence identified regions
of increased lactate production in prostate cancer that was independently
confirmed by biopsy.

The Killer Application?
The acceptance into practice of
an imaging modality often hinges
on identifying the “killer app”, the clinically important
problem that can be addressed only with the new technology. Two candidates
for HP 13C imaging have been covered in detail in this
review: cancer detection and assessment of healthy and/or damaged
cardiac tissue. In the context of cancer in general, prostate cancer
may be the most viable clinical target for two reasons. First, while
FDG-PET is a very sensitive detector of glucose uptake, prostate cancer
is often phenotypically less avid for glucose metabolism than other
malignancies. Second, the background signal associated with the bladder
can often obscure at least a portion of the prostate. It is no accident
that the first use of HP [13C]pyruvate in humans was clinically
motivated by prostate cancer. Myocardial metabolism seems to be an
equally viable target, as the heart consumes such a profligate amount
of pyruvate that SNR ratios for imaging experiments can be quite large.
The general observation that PDH flux as detected by the production
of HP [13C]bicarbonate from [1-13C]pyruvate
is lower in a variety of models of myocardial pathophysiology should
certainly motivate numerous clinical trials once human-use polarizers
are fully installed. While this review is hardly all inclusive, it
seems clear that HP imaging as a clinical technique will stand or
fall on the basis of the success of pyruvate as the agent. With the
intellectual and monetary investment already made in HP pyruvate,
it is unlikely that other agents, though scientifically important,
will have a chance to move forward into clinical practice unless pyruvate
is first shown to be a viable agent. Progress with pyruvate as an
imaging agent has been considerable. We believe that within a decade
“pyruvate scans” for detection of cancer or heart dysfunction
(or both) will likely be reimbursed through Medicare.

M.E.M.
is supported
by funding through National Institutes of Health Grants P41 EB015908,
R21 EB016197, R37 HL34557, and CPRIT RP-101243. A.C. is supported
by the Swiss National Science Foundation (Grant PP00P2_133562) and
the Centre d’Imagerie BioMédicale (CIBM) of the UNIL,
UNIGE, HUG, CHUV, EPFL, and the Leenards and Jeantet Foundations.

The
authors
declare no competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
We thank
Dr. Hikari Ananda Infinity Yoshihara for his suggestions
and for proofreading the manuscript and Emine Can for preparing Figure 4.

Abbreviations
MRmagnetic resonance

MRImagnetic resonance imaging

MRSmagnetic resonance spectroscopy

HPhyperpolarized

DNPdynamic nuclear
polarization

PHIPparahydrogen-induced polarization

NMRnuclear magnetic resonance

MASmagic-angle spinning

pO2oxygen partial
pressure

FDG2-deoxy-2-[18F]fluoroglucose

PETpositron emission tomography

NADnicotinamide adenine dinucleotide

SNRsignal-to-noise ratio

CSIchemical shift
imaging

LDHlactate
dehydrogenase

UCSFUniversity of California San Francisco

TRAMPtransgenic adenocarcinoma model of mouse
prostate

EPSIecho
planar spectroscopic imaging

THCtotal hyperpolarized carbon

MCTmonocarboxylate transporter

DCAdichloroacetic acid

ATCanaplastic thyroid cancer

2-DG2-deoxyglucose

ROSreactive oxygen
species

DCEdynamic
contrast enhanced

CoAcoenzyme A

TCAtricarboxylic acid

ALTalanine aminotransferase

PDHpyruvate dehydrogenase

PKpyruvate kinase

PCpyruvate carboxylase

HFheart failure

PEPCKphosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase

KOknockout

kappapparent rate constant

POCEproton-observed carbon-edited

LCFAlong-chain fatty acid

Ascascorbate

DHAdehydroascorbate

GLUTglucose transporter

DKGdiketogulonate

LDlethal dosage

GSHglutathione

GSSHglutathione disulfide

GRglutathione reductase

DHARdehydroascorbate
reductase

α-KGα-ketoglutarate

GLSglutaminase

ATRaminotransferase

GDHglutamate dehydrogenase

HIFhypoxia-inducible factor

IDHisocitrate dehydrogenase

KICα-ketoisocaproate

BCKAα-keto acid

BCAAbranched-chain
amino acid

BCATbranched-chain aminotransferase

CNScentral nervous system

GSglutamine synthetase

BCATmmitochondrial branched-chain aminotransferase

BCATccytosolic branched-chain
aminotransferase.



   
References
Gruetter R. ; Novotny E. J. ; Boulware S. D. ; Mason G. F. ; Rothman D. L. ; Shulman G. I. ; Prichard J. W. ; Shulman R. G.  (1994 ) Localized C-13 Nmr-Spectroscopy
in the Human Brain of Amino-Acid Labeling from d-[1-C-13]Glucose . J. Neurochem. 
63 , 1377 –1385 .7931289 
Gruetter R. ; Seaquist E. R. ; Kim S. ; Ugurbil K.  (1998 ) Localized in vivo C-13-NMR
of glutamate metabolism in the human brain: Initial results at 4 T . Dev. Neurosci. (Basel, Switz.) 
20 , 380 –388 .
Maher E. A. ; Marin-Valencia I. ; Bachoo R. M. ; Mashimo T. ; Raisanen J. ; Hatanpaa K. J. ; Jindal A. ; Jeffrey F. M. ; Choi C. H. ; Madden C. ; Mathews D. ; Pascual J. M. ; Mickey B. E. ; Malloy C. R. ; DeBerardinis R. J.  (2012 ) Metabolism of [U-13C]glucose
in human brain tumors in vivo . NMR Biomed. 
25 , 1234 –1244 .22419606 
Shulman R. G. ; Rothman D. L.  (2001 ) 13C NMR
of intermediary metabolism: Implications
for systemic physiology . Annu. Rev. Physiol. 
63 , 15 –48 .11181947 
van
de Ven K. C. C. ; de Galan B. E. ; van der Graaf M. ; Shestov A. A. ; Henry P. G. ; Tack C. J. J. ; Heerschap A.  (2011 ) Effect of
Acute Hypoglycemia on Human Cerebral Glucose Metabolism Measured by
C-13 Magnetic Resonance Spectroscopy . Diabetes 
60 , 1467 –1473 .21464446 
Duarte J. M. ; Lanz B. ; Gruetter R.  (2011 ) Compartmentalized
Cerebral Metabolism
of [1,6-C]Glucose Determined by in vivoC NMR Spectroscopy at 14.1
T . Front. Neuroenerg. 
3 , 3 .
Henry P. G. ; Adriany G. ; Deelchand D. ; Gruetter R. ; Marjanska M. ; Oz G. ; Seaquist E. R. ; Shestov A. ; Ugurbil K.  (2006 ) In vivo C-13 NMR spectroscopy
and metabolic modeling in the brain: A practical perspective . Magn. Reson. Imaging 
24 , 527 –539 .16677959 
Lanz B. ; Gruetter R. ; Duarte J. M.  (2013 ) Metabolic Flux and Compartmentation
Analysis in the Brain In vivo . Front. Endocrinol. 
4 , 156 .
Sherry A. D. , and Malloy C. R.   (2002 ) 13C Isotopomer Analysis of Glutamate: A NMR Method to
Probe Metabolic Pathways Intersecting in the Citric Acid Cycle . In In Vivo Carbon-13 NMR  (Berliner L. J. , and Robitaille P.-M. ,  Eds.) pp 59 –97 , Kluwer Academic Publishers , Dordrecht, The Netherlands .
Comment A.   (2013 ) CHAPTER 9 Hyperpolarization: Concepts, Techniques and Applications . In New Applications of NMR in Drug Discovery and Development , pp 252 –272 , The Royal Society of Chemistry , Cambridge,
U.K. 
Overhauser A. W.  (1953 ) Polarization
of Nuclei in Metals . Phys. Rev. 
92 , 411 –415 .
Carver T. R. ; Slichter C. P.  (1953 ) Polarization of
Nuclear Spins in Metals . Phys. Rev. 
92 , 212 –213 .
Abragam A. , and Goldman M.   (1982 ) Nuclear
Magnetism: Order and Disorder , Oxford University
Press , Oxford, U.K. 
Becerra L. R. ; Gerfen G. J. ; Temkin R. J. ; Singel D. J. ; Griffin R. G.  (1993 ) Dynamic
Nuclear-Polarization with a Cyclotron-Resonance Maser at 5-T . Phys. Rev. Lett. 
71 , 3561 –3564 .10055008 
Golman K. ; Leunbach I. ; Petersson J. S. ; Holz D. ; Overweg J.  (2002 ) Overhauser-enhanced
MRI . Academic Radiology 
9 , S104 –S108 .12019840 
Ardenkjaer-Larsen J. H. ; Fridlund B. ; Gram A. ; Hansson G. ; Hansson L. ; Lerche M. H. ; Servin R. ; Thaning M. ; Golman K.  (2003 ) Increase in
signal-to-noise ratio of &gt; 10,000 times in liquid-state NMR . Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 
100 , 10158 –10163 .12930897 
Comment A. ; van den Brandt B. ; Uffmann K. ; Kurdzesau F. ; Jannin S. ; Konter J. A. ; Hautle P. ; Wenckebach W. T. ; Gruetter R. ; van der Klink J. J.  (2007 ) Design and performance of a DNP prepolarizer
coupled to a rodent MRI scanner . Concepts Magn.
Reson., Part B 
31B , 255 –269 .
Eichhorn T. R. ; Haag M. ; van den Brandt B. ; Hautle P. ; Wenckebach W. T. ; Jannin S. ; van der Klink J. J. ; Comment A.  (2013 ) An apparatus for pulsed
ESR and DNP experiments using optically excited triplet states down
to liquid helium temperatures . J. Magn. Reson. 
234 , 58 –66 .23838526 
Eichhorn T. R. ; Takado Y. ; Salameh N. ; Capozzi A. ; Cheng T. ; Hyacinthe J. N. ; Mishkovsky M. ; Roussel C. ; Comment A.  (2013 ) Hyperpolarization
without persistent radicals for in vivo real-time metabolic imaging . Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 
110 , 18064 –18069 .24145405 
Goertz S. T. ; Harmsen J. ; Heckmann J. ; Hess C. ; Meyer W. ; Radtke E. ; Reicherz G.  (2004 ) Highest polarizations in deuterated
compounds . Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res.,
Sect. A 
526 , 43 –52 .
Wolber J. ; Ellner F. ; Fridlund B. ; Gram A. ; Johannesson H. ; Hansson G. ; Hansson L. H. ; Lerche M. H. ; Mansson S. ; Servin R. ; Thaning M. ; Golman K. ; Ardenkjaer-Larsen J.
H.  (2004 ) Generating
highly polarized nuclear spins in solution using dynamic nuclear polarization . Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res., Sect. A 
526 , 173 –181 .
Krahn A. ; Lottmann P. ; Marquardsen T. ; Tavernier A. ; Turke M. T. ; Reese M. ; Leonov A. ; Bennati M. ; Hoefer P. ; Engelke F. ; Griesinger C.  (2010 ) Shuttle DNP
spectrometer with a two-center magnet . Phys.
Chem. Chem. Phys. 
12 , 5830 –5840 .20461246 
Krummenacker J. G. ; Denysenkov V. P. ; Terekhov M. ; Schreiber L. M. ; Prisner T. F.  (2012 ) DNP in MRI: An in-bore approach at 1.5 T . J. Magn. Reson. 
215 , 94 –99 .22248644 
Lingwood M. D. ; Siaw T. A. ; Sailasuta N. ; Ross B. D. ; Bhattacharya P. ; Han S. G.  (2010 ) Continuous flow Overhauser dynamic nuclear polarization
of water in the fringe field of a clinical magnetic resonance imaging
system for authentic image contrast . J. Magn.
Reson. 
205 , 247 –254 .20541445 
Kveder M. ; Merunka D. ; Jokic M. ; Makarevic J. ; Rakvin B.  (2009 ) Electron spin-lattice relaxation
in solid ethanol:
Effect of nitroxyl radical hydrogen bonding and matrix disorder . Phys. Rev. B 
80 , 052201 .
Lumata L. ; Kovacs Z. ; Sherry A. D. ; Malloy C. ; Hill S. ; van Tol J. ; Yu L. ; Song L. ; Merritt M. E.  (2013 ) Electron
spin resonance studies of trityl OX063 at a concentration optimal
for DNP . Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 
15 , 9800 –9807 .23676994 
Jannin S. ; Comment A. ; Kurdzesau F. ; Konter J. A. ; Hautle P. ; van den Brandt B. ; van der Klink J. J.  (2008 ) A 140 GHz prepolarizer for dissolution
dynamic nuclear polarization . J. Chem. Phys. 
128 , 241102 .18601309 
Johanneson H. ; Macholl S. ; Ardenkjaer-Larsen J.
H.  (2009 ) Dynamic Nuclear Polarization
of [1-13C]pyruvic acid at 4.6 T . J. Magn. Reson. 
197 , 167 –175 .19162518 
Cheng T. ; Capozzi A. ; Takado Y. ; Balzan R. ; Comment A.  (2013 ) Over 35% liquid-state
C-13 polarization obtained via dissolution dynamic nuclear polarization
at 7 T and 1 K using ubiquitous nitroxyl radicals . Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 
15 , 20819 –20822 .24217111 
Armstrong B. D. ; Edwards D. T. ; Wylde R. J. ; Walker S. A. ; Han S. I.  (2010 ) A 200 GHz
dynamic nuclear polarization spectrometer . Phys.
Chem. Chem. Phys. 
12 , 5920 –5926 .20461268 
Jannin S. ; Comment A. ; van der Klink J. J.  (2012 ) Dynamic Nuclear Polarization by Thermal
Mixing Under Partial Saturation . Appl. Magn.
Reson. 
43 , 59 –68 .
Comment A. ; Rentsch J. ; Kurdzesau F. ; Jannin S. ; Uffmann K. ; van Heeswijk R. B. ; Hautle P. ; Konter J. A. ; van den
Brandt B. ; van der Klink J. J.  (2008 ) Producing over 100 mL of highly concentrated
hyperpolarized solution by means of dissolution DNP . J. Magn. Reson. 
194 , 152 –155 .18595751 
Comment A. ; van den Brandt B. ; Uffmann K. ; Kurdzesau F. ; Jannin S. ; Konter J. A. ; Hautle P. ; Wenckebach W. T. ; Gruetter R. ; van der Klink J. J.  (2008 ) Principles of operation of a DNP
prepolarizer coupled to a rodent MRI scanner . Appl. Magn. Reson. 
34 , 313 –319 .
Lumata L. ; Martin R. ; Jindal A. ; Kovacs Z. ; Conradi M. ; Merritt M.  (2014 ) Development and performance of a 129-GHz dynamic nuclear
polarizer in an ultra-wide bore superconducting magnet . Magn. Reson. Mater. Phys., Biol. Med. 
1 –11 .
Lumata L. ; Ratnakar S. J. ; Jindal A. ; Merritt M. ; Comment A. ; Malloy C. ; Sherry A. D. ; Kovacs Z.  (2011 ) BDPA: An Efficient
Polarizing Agent for Fast Dissolution Dynamic Nuclear Polarization
NMR Spectroscopy . Chemistry 
17 , 10825 –10827 .21919088 
Kurdzesau F. ; van den Brandt B. ; Comment A. ; Hautle P. ; Jannin S. ; van der Klink J. J. ; Konter J. A.  (2008 ) Dynamic nuclear
polarization of small
labelled molecules in frozen water-alcohol solutions . J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys. 
41 , 155506 .
Bornet A. ; Melzi R. ; Linde A. J. P. ; Hautle P. ; van den
Brandt B. ; Jannin S. ; Bodenhausen G.  (2013 ) Boosting Dissolution
Dynamic Nuclear Polarization by Cross Polarization . J. Phys. Chem. Lett. 
4 , 111 –114 .
Lumata L. ; Merritt M. E. ; Kovacs Z.  (2013 ) Influence of deuteration in the glassing
matrix on 13C dynamic nuclear polarization . Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 
15 , 7032 –7035 .23552448 
Bastiaansen J. A. M. ; Merritt M. E. ; Comment A.  Measuring
In Vivo Myocardial Substrate Preference
in Real Time Using Hyperpolarized 13C Magnetic Resonance . In Proceedings of the International
Society for Magnetic Resonance in Medicine , 2014 , Vol. 22 , Milan.
Comment A.  (2014 ) The benefits
of not using exogenous substances to prepare substrates for hyperpolarized
MRI . Imaging Med. 
6 , 1 –3 .
Ardenkjaer-Larsen J. H. ; Macholl S. ; Johannesson H.  (2008 ) Dynamic nuclear polarization with
trityls at 1.2 K . Appl. Magn. Reson. 
34 , 509 –522 .
Lumata L. ; Merritt M. E. ; Malloy C. R. ; Sherry A. D. ; Kovacs Z.  (2012 ) Impact of
Gd3+ on DNP of [1-13C]Pyruvate Doped with Trityl
OX063, BDPA, or 4-Oxo-TEMPO . J. Phys. Chem.
A 
116 , 5129 –5138 .22571288 
Karlsson M. ; Jensen P. R. ; Duus J. O. ; Meier S. ; Lerche M. H.  (2012 ) Development
of Dissolution DNP-MR Substrates for Metabolic Research . Appl. Magn. Reson. 
43 , 223 –236 .
Cudalbu C. ; Comment A. ; Kurdzesau F. ; van Heeswijk R. B. ; Uffmann K. ; Jannin S. ; Denisov V. ; Kirik D. ; Gruetter R.  (2010 ) Feasibility of in vivo N-15 MRS detection of hyperpolarized
N-15 labeled choline in rats . Phys. Chem. Chem.
Phys. 
12 , 5818 –5823 .20461252 
Gabellieri C. ; Reynolds S. ; Lavie A. ; Payne G. S. ; Leach M. O. ; Eykyn T. R.  (2008 ) Therapeutic
target metabolism observed using hyperpolarized
N-15 choline . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
130 , 4598 –4599 .18345678 
Gallagher F. A. ; Kettunen M. I. ; Brindle K. M.  (2009 ) Biomedical
applications of hyperpolarized
C-13 magnetic resonance imaging . Prog. Nucl.
Magn. Reson. Spectrosc. 
55 , 285 –295 .
Lumata L. ; Merritt M. E. ; Hashami Z. ; Ratnakar S. J. ; Kovacs Z.  (2012 ) Production
and NMR characterization of hyperpolarized (107,109) ag complexes . Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 
51 , 525 –527 .
Merritt M. E. , Mishkovsky M. , Cheng T. , Jindal A. , Kovacs Z. , Malloy C. R. , Gruetter R. , Sherry A. D. , and Comment A.   (2010 ) In vivo
hyperpolarized 89Y studies in a 9.4T animal scanner . In Proceedings of the International Society of Magnetic
Resonance in Medicine , Vol. 18 , Stockholm.
Mishkovsky M. ; Frydman L.  (2008 ) Progress in hyperpolarized ultrafast
2D NMR spectroscopy . ChemPhysChem 
9 , 2340 –2348 .18850607 
Sarkar R. ; Comment A. ; Vasos P. R. ; Jannin S. ; Gruetter R. ; Bodenhausen G. ; Hall H. ; Kirik D. ; Denisov V. P.  (2009 ) Proton
NMR of N-15-Choline Metabolites Enhanced by Dynamic Nuclear Polarization . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
131 , 16014 –16015 .19848401 
van
Heeswijk R. B. ; Uffmann K. ; Comment A. ; Kurdzesau F. ; Perazzolo C. ; Cudalbu C. ; Jannin S. ; Konter J. A. ; Hautle P. ; van den Brandt B. ; Navon G. ; van der
Klink J. J. ; Gruetter R.  (2009 ) Hyperpolarized Lithium-6 as a Sensor
of Nanomolar Contrast Agents . Magn. Reson. Med. 
61 , 1489 –1493 .19353663 
Cheng T. ; Mishkovsky M. ; Bastiaansen J. A. M. ; Ouari O. ; Hautle P. ; Tordo P. ; van den Brandt B. ; Comment A.  (2013 ) Automated transfer
and injection of hyperpolarized molecules with polarization measurement
prior to in vivo NMR . NMR Biomed. 
26 , 1582 –1588 .23893539 
Mieville P. ; Ahuja P. ; Sarkar R. ; Jannin S. ; Vasos P. R. ; Gerber-Lemaire S. ; Mishkovsky M. ; Comment A. ; Gruetter R. ; Ouari O. ; Tordo P. ; Bodenhausen G.  (2010 ) Scavenging
Free Radicals To Preserve Enhancement and Extend Relaxation Times
in NMR using Dynamic Nuclear Polarization . Angew.
Chem., Int. Ed. 
49 , 6182 –6185 .
Ardenkjaer-Larsen J. H. ; Leach A. M. ; Clarke N. ; Urbahn J. ; Anderson D. ; Skloss T. W.  (2011 ) Dynamic Nuclear Polarization Polarizer for Sterile
Use Intent . NMR Biomed. 
24 , 927 –932 .21416540 
Nelson S. J. ; Kurhanewicz J. ; Vigneron D. B. ; Larson P. E. ; Harzstark A. L. ; Ferrone M. ; van Criekinge M. ; Chang J. W. ; Bok R. ; Park I. ; Reed G. ; Carvajal L. ; Small E. J. ; Munster P. ; Weinberg V. K. ; Ardenkjaer-Larsen J. H. ; Chen A. P. ; Hurd R. E. ; Odegardstuen L. I. ; Robb F. J. ; Tropp J. ; Murray J. A.  (2013 ) Metabolic Imaging
of Patients with Prostate Cancer Using Hyperpolarized [1-13C]Pyruvate . Sci. Transl. Med. 
5 , 198ra108 .
Vasos P. R. ; Comment A. ; Sarkar R. ; Ahuja P. ; Jannin S. ; Ansermet J. P. ; Konter J. A. ; Hautle P. ; van den
Brandt B. ; Bodenhausen G.  (2009 ) Long-lived states to sustain hyperpolarized
magnetization . Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 
106 , 18469 –18473 .19841270 
Warren W. S. ; Jenista E. ; Branca R. T. ; Chen X.  (2009 ) Increasing Hyperpolarized
Spin Lifetimes Through True Singlet Eigenstates . Science 
323 , 1711 –1714 .19325112 
Larson P.
E. Z. ; Kerr A. B. ; Chen A. P. ; Lustig M. S. ; Zierhut M. L. ; Hu S. ; Cunningham C. H. ; Pauly J. M. ; Kurhanewicz J. ; Vigneron D. B.  (2008 ) Multiband excitation pulses for hyperpolarized C-13
dynamic chemical-shift imaging . J. Magn. Reson. 
194 , 121 –127 .18619875 
Lau A. Z. ; Chen A. P. ; Hurd R. E. ; Cunningham C. H.  (2011 ) Spectral-spatial
excitation for rapid imaging of DNP compounds . NMR Biomed. 
24 , 988 –996 .21751271 
Leupold J. ; Mansson S. ; Petersson J. S. ; Hennig J. ; Wieben O.  (2009 ) Fast multiecho
balanced SSFP metabolite mapping of 1H and hyperpolarized 13C compounds . MAGMA 
22 , 251 –256 .19367422 
von
Morze C. ; Reed G. ; Shin P. ; Larson P. E. Z. ; Hu S. ; Bok R. ; Vigneron D. B.  (2011 ) Multi-band frequency
encoding method for metabolic imaging with hyperpolarized [1-C-13]pyruvate . J. Magn. Reson. 
211 , 109 –113 .21596601 
Chekmenev E. Y. ; Norton V. A. ; Weitekamp D. P. ; Bhattacharya P.  (2009 ) Hyperpolarized
H-1 NMR Employing Low gamma Nucleus for Spin Polarization Storage . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
131 , 3164 –3165 .19256566 
Mishkovsky M. ; Cheng T. ; Comment A. ; Gruetter R.  (2012 ) Localized in vivo hyperpolarization
transfer sequences . Magn. Reson. Med. 
68 , 349 –352 .22190079 
Mishkovsky M. ; Comment A. ; Gruetter R.  (2012 ) In vivo detection
of brain Krebs
cycle intermediate by hyperpolarized magnetic resonance . J. Cereb. Blood Flow Metab. 
32 , 2108 –2113 .22990416 
Keshari K. R. ; Wilson D. M.  (2014 ) Chemistry and biochemistry of 13C hyperpolarized
magnetic resonance using dynamic nuclear polarization . Chem. Soc. Rev. 
43 , 1627 –1659 .24363044 
Zhang H.  (2014 ) The Potential
of Hyperpolarized 13C MRI in Assessing Signaling Pathways
in Cancer . Academic Radiology 
21 , 215 –222 .24439335 
Krishna M. C. ; Matsumoto S. ; Saito K. ; Matsuo M. ; Mitchell J. B. ; Ardenkjaer-Larsen J. H.  (2013 ) Magnetic
resonance imaging of tumor oxygenation and
metabolic profile . Acta Oncol. 
52 , 1248 –1256 .23957619 
Tyler D. J.  (2011 ) Cardiovascular
Applications of Hyperpolarized MRI . Current
Cardiovascular Imaging Reports 
4 , 108 –115 .21475403 
Pilkis S. J. ; Granner D. K.  (1992 ) Molecular Physiology of the Regulation of Hepatic Gluconeogenesis
and Glycolysis . Annu. Rev. Physiol. 
54 , 885 –909 .1562196 
Warburg O.  (1956 ) On the origin
of cancer cells . Science 
123 , 309 –314 .13298683 
Kurhanewicz J. ; Vigneron D. B. ; Brindle K. ; Chekmenev E. Y. ; Comment A. ; Cunningham C. H. ; Deberardinis R. J. ; Green G. G. ; Leach M. O. ; Rajan S. S. ; Rizi R. R. ; Ross B. D. ; Warren W. S. ; Malloy C. R.  (2011 ) Analysis of cancer
metabolism by imaging hyperpolarized nuclei: Prospects for translation
to clinical research . Neoplasia 
13 , 81 –97 .21403835 
Meier S. ; Karlsson M. ; Jensen P. R. ; Lerche M. H. ; Duus J. Ø.  (2011 ) Metabolic
pathway visualization in living yeast by DNP-NMR . Mol. BioSyst. 
7 , 2834 –2836 .21720636 
Harris T. ; Degani H. ; Frydman L.  (2013 ) Hyperpolarized 13C NMR
studies of glucose metabolism in living breast cancer cell cultures . NMR Biomed. 
26 , 1831 –1843 .24115045 
Allouche-Arnon H. ; Wade T. ; Waldner L. F. ; Miller V. N. ; Gomori J. M. ; Katz-Brull R. ; McKenzie C. A.  (2013 ) In vivo magnetic resonance imaging
of glucose: Initial experience . Contrast Media
Mol. Imaging 
8 , 72 –82 .23109395 
Rodrigues T. B. ; Serrao E. M. ; Kennedy B. W. ; Hu D. E. ; Kettunen M. I. ; Brindle K. M.  (2014 ) Magnetic
resonance imaging of tumor glycolysis using
hyperpolarized C-labeled glucose . Nat. Med. 
20 , 93 –97 .24317119 
Christensen C. E. ; Karlsson M. ; Winther J. R. ; Jensen P. R. ; Lerche M. H.  (2014 ) Non-invasive
In-cell Determination of Free Cytosolic [NAD+]/[NADH] Ratios
Using Hyperpolarized Glucose Show Large Variations in Metabolic Phenotypes . J. Biol. Chem. 
289 , 2344 –2352 .24302737 
Williamson D. H. ; Lund P. ; Krebs H. A.  (1967 ) The redox state of free nicotinamide-adenine
dinucleotide in the cytoplasm and mitochondria of rat liver . Biochem. J. 
103 , 514 –527 .4291787 
Golman K. ; In’t Zandt R. ; Lerche M. H. ; Pehrson R. ; Ardenkjaer-Larsen J. H.  (2006 ) Metabolic
imaging by hyperpolarized 13C magnetic resonance imaging
for in vivo tumor diagnosis . Cancer Res. 
66 , 10855 –10860 .17108122 
Day S. E. ; Kettunen M. I. ; Gallagher F. A. ; De-En H. ; Lerche M. ; Wolber J. ; Golman K. ; Ardenkjaer-Larsen J. H. ; Brindle K. M.  (2007 ) Detecting tumor response to treatment
using hyperpolarized 13C magnetic resonance imaging and
spectroscopy . Nat. Med. 
13 , 1382 –1387 .17965722 
Chen A. P. ; Albers M. J. ; Cunningham C. H. ; Kohler S. J. ; Yen Y. F. ; Hurd R. E. ; Tropp J. ; Bok R. ; Pauly J. M. ; Nelson S. J. ; Kurhanewicz J. ; Vigneron D. B.  (2007 ) Hyperpolarized C-13
spectroscopic imaging of the TRAMP mouse at 3T-initial experience . Magn. Reson. Med. 
58 , 1099 –1106 .17969006 
Chen A. P. ; Cunningham C. H. ; Ozturk-Isik E. ; Xu D. ; Hurd R. E. ; Kelley D. A. ; Pauly J. M. ; Kurhanewicz J. ; Nelson S. J. ; Vigneron D. B.  (2007 ) High-speed 3T MR spectroscopic imaging
of prostate with flyback echo-planar encoding . J. Magn. Reson. Imaging 
25 , 1288 –1292 .17520729 
Albers M. J. ; Bok R. ; Chen A. P. ; Cunningham C. H. ; Zierhut M. L. ; Zhang V. Y. ; Kohler S. J. ; Tropp J. ; Hurd R. E. ; Yen Y. F. ; Nelson S. J. ; Vigneron D. B. ; Kurhanewicz J.  (2008 ) Hyperpolarized 13C lactate, pyruvate, and alanine: Noninvasive biomarkers
for prostate cancer detection and grading . Cancer
Res. 
68 , 8607 –8615 .18922937 
Park I. ; Larson P. E. ; Zierhut M. L. ; Hu S. ; Bok R. ; Ozawa T. ; Kurhanewicz J. ; Vigneron D. B. ; Vandenberg S. R. ; James C. D. ; Nelson S. J.  (2010 ) Hyperpolarized 13C magnetic
resonance metabolic imaging: Application to brain tumors . Neuro-Oncology (Cary, NC, U.S.) 
12 , 133 –144 .
Ward C. S. ; Venkatesh H. S. ; Chaumeil M. M. ; Brandes A. H. ; VanCriekinge M. ; Dafni H. ; Sukumar S. ; Nelson S. J. ; Vigneron D. B. ; Kurhanewicz J. ; James C. D. ; Haas-Kogan D. A. ; Ronen S. M.  (2010 ) Noninvasive Detection of Target Modulation following
Phosphatidylinositol 3-Kinase Inhibition Using Hyperpolarized 13C Magnetic Resonance Spectroscopy . Cancer Res. 
70 , 1296 –1305 .20145128 
Dafni H. ; Larson P. E. ; Hu S. ; Yoshihara H. A. ; Ward C. S. ; Venkatesh H. S. ; Wang C. ; Zhang X. ; Vigneron D. B. ; Ronen S. M.  (2010 ) Hyperpolarized 13C spectroscopic
imaging informs on hypoxia-inducible factor-1 and myc activity downstream
of platelet-derived growth factor receptor . Cancer Res. 
70 , 7400 –7410 .20858719 
Senadheera L. ; Mayer D. ; Josan S. ; Darpolor M. ; Luong R. ; Yen Y. ; Spielman D. ; Xing L.  (2011 ) TU-A-BRC-02: Hyperpolarized 13C MRSI for Assessing Radiation Response of Prostate Cancer
in Transgenic Mice . Med. Phys. 
38 , 3741 –3742 .
Seth P. ; Grant A. ; Tang J. ; Vinogradov E. ; Wang X. ; Lenkinski R. ; Sukhatme V. P.  (2011 ) On-target inhibition
of tumor fermentative glycolysis as visualized by hyperpolarized pyruvate . Neoplasia 
13 , 60 –71 .21245941 
Sandulache V. C. ; Skinner H. D. ; Wang Y. ; Chen Y. ; Dodge C. T. ; Ow T. J. ; Bankson J. A. ; Myers J. N. ; Lai S. Y.  (2012 ) Glycolytic
Inhibition Alters Anaplastic Thyroid Carcinoma Tumor Metabolism and
Improves Response to Conventional Chemotherapy and Radiation . Mol. Cancer Ther. 
11 , 1373 –1380 .22572813 
Sandulache V. C. ; Chen Y. ; Lee J. ; Rubinstein A. ; Ramirez M. S. ; Skinner H. D. ; Walker C. M. ; Williams M. D. ; Tailor R. ; Court L. E. ; Bankson J. A. ; Lai S. Y.  (2014 ) Evaluation
of hyperpolarized [1-13C]-pyruvate by magnetic resonance
to detect ionizing radiation effects in real time . PLoS One 
9 , e87031 .24475215 
Bohndiek S. E. ; Kettunen M. I. ; Hu D.-e. ; Brindle K. M.  (2012 ) Hyperpolarized 13C Spectroscopy Detects
Early Changes in Tumor Vasculature
and Metabolism after VEGF Neutralization . Cancer
Res. 
72 , 854 –864 .22223844 
Gallagher F. A. ; Kettunen M. I. ; Hu D. E. ; Jensen P. R. ; Zandt R. I. ; Karlsson M. ; Gisselsson A. ; Nelson S. K. ; Witney T. H. ; Bohndiek S. E. ; Hansson G. ; Peitersen T. ; Lerche M. H. ; Brindle K. M.  (2009 ) Production
of hyperpolarized [1,4-13C2]malate from [1,4-13C2]fumarate is a marker of cell necrosis and treatment
response in
tumors . Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 
106 , 19801 –19806 .19903889 
Dutta P. ; Le A. ; Vander Jagt D. L. ; Tsukamoto T. ; Martinez G. V. ; Dang C. V. ; Gillies R. J.  (2013 ) Evaluation
of LDH-A
and Glutaminase Inhibition In Vivo by Hyperpolarized 13C-Pyruvate Magnetic Resonance Spectroscopy of Tumors . Cancer Res. 
73 , 4190 –4195 .23722553 
Lodi A. ; Woods S. M. ; Ronen S. M.  (2013 ) Treatment with the MEK inhibitor
U0126 induces decreased hyperpolarized pyruvate to lactate conversion
in breast, but not prostate, cancer cells . NMR
Biomed. 
26 , 299 –306 .22945392 
Asghar
Butt S. ; Søgaard L. V. ; Ardenkjaer-Larsen J. H. ; Lauritzen M. H. ; Engelholm L. H. ; Paulson O. B. ; Mirza O. ; Holck S. ; Magnusson P. ; Åkeson P.  (2014 ) Monitoring
mammary tumor progression and effect of tamoxifen treatment in MMTV-PymT
using MRI and magnetic resonance spectroscopy with hyperpolarized
[1-13C]pyruvate . Magn. Reson. Med. 
DOI: 10.1002/mrm.25095 .
Xu H. N. ; Kadlececk S. ; Profka H. ; Glickson J. D. ; Rizi R. ; Li L. Z.  (2014 ) Is Higher Lactate an Indicator of
Tumor Metastatic Risk? A Pilot
MRS Study Using Hyperpolarized 13C-Pyruvate . Academic Radiology 
21 , 223 –231 .24439336 
Thind K. ; Jensen M. D. ; Hegarty E. ; Chen A. P. ; Lim H. ; Martinez-Santiesteban F. ; Van Dyk J. ; Wong E. ; Scholl T. J. ; Santyr G. E.  (2014 ) Mapping metabolic changes associated
with early radiation induced lung injury post conformal radiotherapy
using hyperpolarized 13C-pyruvate magnetic resonance spectroscopic
imaging . Radiother. Oncol. 
110 , 317 –322 .24440041 
MacKenzie J. D. ; Yen Y. F. ; Mayer D. ; Tropp J. S. ; Hurd R. E. ; Spielman D. M.  (2011 ) Detection of Inflammatory Arthritis
by Using Hyperpolarized C-13-Pyruvate with MR Imaging and Spectroscopy . Radiology 
259 , 414 –420 .21406626 
Witney T. H. ; Kettunen M. I. ; Day S. E. ; Hu D.-E. ; Neves A. A. ; Gallagher F. A. ; Fulton S. M. ; Brindle K. M.  (2009 ) A Comparison
between Radiolabeled Fluorodeoxyglucose Uptake and Hyperpolarized 13C-Labeled Pyruvate Utilization as Methods for Detecting Tumor
Response to Treatment . Neoplasia 
11 , 574 –582 .19484146 
Weidl E. ; Menzel M. ; Janich M. ; Khegai O. ; Wiesinger F. ; Haase A. ; Nekolla S. ; Schulte R. ; Schwaiger M.  (2012 ) In vivo detection of tumor metabolism
with 18F-FDG PET and hyperpolarized [1-13C]-pyruvate
magnetic
resonance spectroscopic imaging . Journal of
Nuclear Medicine Meeting Abstracts 
53 , 516 .
Holmes F. L.  (1980 ) Hans Krebs
and the discovery of the ornithine cycle . Fed.
Proc. 
216 .6986292 
Atherton H. J. ; Schroeder M. A. ; Dodd M. S. ; Heather L. C. ; Carter E. E. ; Cochlin L. E. ; Nagel S. ; Sibson N. R. ; Radda G. K. ; Clarke K. ; Tyler D. J.  (2011 ) Validation of the
in vivo assessment of pyruvate dehydrogenase activity using hyperpolarised 13C MRS . NMR Biomed. 
24 , 201 –208 .20799252 
Moreno K. , Sabelhaus S. , Merritt M. , Sherry A. , and Malloy C.   (2009 ) Effect of Rapid Changes in 13C Pyruvate
Concentration
on Lactate and Alanine Pool Sizes and 13C Enrichment in
the Heart . In Proceedings of the 17th Scientific
Meeting, International Society for Magnetic Resonance in Medicine , Vol. 17 , Honolulu, HI.
Janich M. A. ; Menzel M. I. ; Wiesinger F. ; Weidl E. ; Khegai O. ; Ardenkjaer-Larsen J. H. ; Glaser S. J. ; Haase A. ; Schulte R. F. ; Schwaiger M.  (2012 ) Effects of
pyruvate dose on in vivo metabolism and quantification of hyperpolarized 13C spectra . NMR Biomed. 
25 , 142 –151 .21823181 
Santarelli M. F. ; Positano V. ; Giovannetti G. ; Frijia F. ; Menichetti L. ; Ardenkjaer-Larsen J.-H. ; De Marchi D. ; Lionetti V. ; Aquaro G. ; Lombardi M. ; Landini L.  (2012 ) How the signal-to-noise ratio influences hyperpolarized 13C dynamic MRS data fitting and parameter estimation . NMR Biomed. 
25 , 925 –934 .22213413 
Halestrap A. P. ; Wilson M. C.  (2012 ) The monocarboxylate transporter family:
Role and regulation . IUBMB Life 
64 , 109 –119 .22162139 
Joseph S. K. ; Bradford N. M. ; McGivan J. D.  (1978 ) Characteristics
of the transport of alanine, serine and glutamine across the plasma
membrane of isolated rat liver cells . Biochem.
J. 
176 , 827 –836 .747655 
Jensen P.
R. ; Karlsson M. ; Meier S. ; Duus J. Ø. ; Lerche M. H.  (2009 ) Hyperpolarized Amino
Acids for In Vivo Assays of Transaminase
Activity . Chem.—Eur. J. 
15 , 10010 –10012 .19714690 
Bastiaansen J. M. ; Yoshihara H. I. ; Takado Y. ; Gruetter R. ; Comment A.  (2014 ) Hyperpolarized 13C lactate as a substrate
for in vivo metabolic studies in skeletal muscle . Metabolomics 
10 , 986 –994 .
Golman K. ; in’t Zandt R. ; Thaning M.  (2006 ) Real Time Metabolic
Imaging . Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 
103 , 11270 –11275 .16837573 
Merritt M. E. ; Harrison C. ; Storey C. ; Jeffrey F. M. ; Sherry A. D. ; Malloy C. R.  (2007 ) Hyperpolarized 13C allows
a direct measure of flux through a single enzyme-catalyzed step by
NMR . Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 
104 , 19773 –19777 .18056642 
Gallagher F. A. ; Kettunen M. I. ; Day S. E. ; Hu D.-E. ; Ardenkjaer-Larsen J.
H. ; Zandt R. i. t. ; Jensen P. R. ; Karlsson M. ; Golman K. ; Lerche M. H. ; Brindle K. M.  (2008 ) Magnetic resonance
imaging of pH in vivo using hyperpolarized 13C-labelled
bicarbonate . Nature 
453 , 940 –943 .18509335 
Schroeder M. A. ; Swietach P. ; Atherton H. J. ; Gallagher F. A. ; Lee P. ; Radda G. K. ; Clarke K. ; Tyler D. J.  (2010 ) Measuring intracellular
pH in the heart using hyperpolarized carbon dioxide and bicarbonate:
A 13C and 31P magnetic resonance spectroscopy
study . Cardiovasc. Res. 
86 , 82 –91 .20008827 
Schroeder M. A. ; Cochlin L. E. ; Heather L. C. ; Clarke K. ; Radda G. K. ; Tyler D. J.  (2008 ) In vivo assessment of pyruvate dehydrogenase
flux in the heart using hyperpolarized carbon-13 magnetic resonance . Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 
105 , 12051 –12056 .18689683 
Golman K. ; Petersson J. S. ; Magnusson P. ; Johansson E. ; Åkeson P. ; Chai C. ; Hansson G. ; Månsson S.  (2008 ) Cardiac metabolism measured noninvasively by hyperpolarized 13C MRI . Magn. Reson. Med. 
59 , 1005 –1013 .18429038 
Lau A. Z. ; Chen A. P. ; Ghugre N. R. ; Ramanan V. ; Lam W. W. ; Connelly K. A. ; Wright G. A. ; Cunningham C. H.  (2010 ) Rapid multislice
imaging of hyperpolarized 13C pyruvate and bicarbonate
in the heart . Magn. Reson. Med. 
64 , 1323 –1331 .20574989 
Schroeder M. A. ; Atherton H. J. ; Heather L. C. ; Griffin J. L. ; Clarke K. ; Radda G. K. ; Tyler D. J.  (2011 ) Determining
the
in vivo regulation of cardiac pyruvate dehydrogenase based on label
flux from hyperpolarised [1-13C]pyruvate . NMR Biomed. 
24 , 980 –987 .21387444 
Mayer D. ; Yen Y.-F. ; Josan S. ; Park J. M. ; Pfefferbaum A. ; Hurd R. E. ; Spielman D. M.  (2012 ) Application of hyperpolarized
[1-13C]lactate for the in vivo investigation of cardiac
metabolism . NMR Biomed. 
25 , 1119 –1124 .22278751 
Merrit M. E. ; Harrison C. ; Storey C. J. ; Sherry A. D. ; Malloy C. R.  (2008 ) Inhibition
of carbohydrate oxidation during the first minute of reperfusion after
brief ischemia: NMR detection of hyperpolarized 13CO2 and H13CO3− . Magn. Reson. Med. 
60 , 1029 –1036 .18956454 
Schroeder M. A. ; Atherton H. J. ; Ball D. R. ; Cole M. A. ; Heather L. C. ; Griffin J. L. ; Clarke K. ; Radda G. K. ; Tyler D. J.  (2009 ) Real-time
assessment of Krebs cycle metabolism using hyperpolarized 13C magnetic resonance spectroscopy . FASEB J. 
23 , 2529 –2538 .19329759 
Schroeder M. A. ; Atherton H. J. ; Cochlin L. E. ; Clarke K. ; Radda G. K. ; Tyler D. J.  (2009 ) The effect of hyperpolarized tracer
concentration on
myocardial uptake and metabolism . Magn. Reson.
Med.  
61 , 1007 –1014 .19253408 
Atherton H. J. ; Dodd M. S. ; Heather L. C. ; Schroeder M. A. ; Griffin J. L. ; Radda G. K. ; Clarke K. ; Tyler D. J.  (2011 ) Role of
pyruvate dehydrogenase inhibition in the development of hypertrophy
in the hyperthyroid rat heart: a combined magnetic resonance imaging
and hyperpolarized magnetic resonance spectroscopy study . Circulation 
123 , 2552 –2561 .21606392 
Chen A. P. ; Hurd R. E. ; Schroeder M. A. ; Lau A. Z. ; Gu Y. P. ; Lam W. W. ; Barry J. ; Tropp J. ; Cunningham C. H.  (2012 ) Simultaneous
investigation of cardiac
pyruvate dehydrogenase flux, Krebs cycle metabolism and pH, using
hyperpolarized [1,2-13C2]pyruvate in vivo . NMR Biomed. 
25 , 305 –311 .21774012 
Schroeder M. A. ; Lau A. Z. ; Chen A. P. ; Gu Y. ; Nagendran J. ; Barry J. ; Hu X. ; Dyck J. R. B. ; Tyler D. J. ; Clarke K. ; Connelly K. A. ; Wright G. A. ; Cunningham C. H.  (2013 ) Hyperpolarized 13C magnetic resonance reveals
early- and late-onset changes to in vivo pyruvate metabolism in the
failing heart . Eur. J. Heart Failure 
15 , 130 –140 .
Schroeder M. A. ; Atherton H. J. ; Dodd M. S. ; Lee P. ; Cochlin L. E. ; Radda G. K. ; Clarke K. ; Tyler D. J.  (2012 ) The Cycling
of Acetyl-CoA through Acetylcarnitine Buffers Cardiac Substrate Supply:
A Hyperpolarised 13C Magnetic Resonance Study . Circulation: Cardiovascular Imaging 
5 , 201 –209 .22238215 
Josan S. ; Park J. M. ; Hurd R. ; Yen Y. F. ; Pfefferbaum A. ; Spielman D. ; Mayer D.  (2013 ) In vivo investigation
of cardiac metabolism in the rat using MRS of hyperpolarized [1-13C] and [2-13C]pyruvate . NMR Biomed. 
26 , 1680 –1687 .23904148 
Hu S. ; Chen A. P. ; Zierhut M. L. ; Bok R. ; Yen Y. F. ; Schroeder M. A. ; Hurd R. E. ; Nelson S. J. ; Kurhanewicz J. ; Vigneron D. B.  (2009 ) In vivo carbon-13 dynamic MRS and
MRSI of normal and
fasted rat liver with hyperpolarized 13C-pyruvate . Molecular Imaging and Biology 
11 , 399 –407 .19424761 
Merritt M. E. ; Harrison C. ; Sherry A. D. ; Malloy C. R. ; Burgess S. C.  (2011 ) Flux through
hepatic pyruvate carboxylase and phosphoenolpyruvate
carboxykinase detected by hyperpolarized 13C magnetic resonance . Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 
108 , 19084 –19089 .22065779 
Lee P. ; Leong W. ; Tan T. ; Lim M. ; Han W. ; Radda G. K.  (2013 ) In Vivo hyperpolarized carbon-13 magnetic resonance
spectroscopy reveals increased pyruvate carboxylase flux in an insulin-resistant
mouse model . Hepatology 
57 , 515 –524 .22911492 
Moreno K. X. , Jin E. S. , Wang J.-X. , Sherry A. D. , Merritt M. E. , and Malloy C. R.   (2014 ) Metabolism of Hyperpolarized [1-13C]Pyruvate
to Plasma
Glucose in the Rat Liver . In Proceedings of
the International Society of Magnetic Resonance in Medicine , Vol. 27 , May 10−16, Milan.
Patyal B. R. ; Gao J. ; Williams R. F. ; Roby J. ; Saam B. ; Rockwell B. A. ; Thomas R. J. ; Stolarski D. J. ; Fox P. T.  (1997 ) Longitudinal Relaxation and Diffusion Measurements
Using Magnetic Resonance Signals from Laser-Hyperpolarized 129Xe Nuclei . J. Magn. Reson. 
126 , 58 –65 .9177796 
Yen Y. F. ; Kohler S. J. ; Chen A. P. ; Tropp J. ; Bok R. ; Wolber J. ; Albers M. J. ; Gram K. A. ; Zierhut M. L. ; Park I. ; Zhang V. ; Hu S. ; Nelson S. J. ; Vigneron D. B. ; Kurhanewicz J. ; Dirven H. A. ; Hurd R. E.  (2009 ) Imaging
considerations for in vivo 13C metabolic mapping using
hyperpolarized 13C-pyruvate . Magn.
Reson. Med. 
62 , 1 –10 .19319902 
Zierhut M.
L. ; Yen Y. F. ; Chen A. P. ; Bok R. ; Albers M. J. ; Zhang V. ; Tropp J. ; Park I. ; Vigneron D. B. ; Kurhanewicz J. ; Hurd R. E. ; Nelson S. J.  (2009 ) Kinetic
modeling of hyperpolarized 13C1-pyruvate metabolism
in normal rats and TRAMP mice . J. Magn. Reson. 
202 , 85 –92 .19884027 
Xu T. ; Mayer D. ; Gu M. ; Yen Y. F. ; Josan S. ; Tropp J. ; Pfefferbaum A. ; Hurd R. ; Spielman D.  (2011 ) Quantification
of in vivo metabolic kinetics of hyperpolarized pyruvate in rat kidneys
using dynamic 13C MRSI . NMR Biomed. 
24 , 997 –1005 .21538639 
Harris T. ; Eliyahu G. ; Frydman L. ; Degani H.  (2009 ) Kinetics of
hyperpolarized 13C1-pyruvate transport and metabolism
in living human breast cancer cells . Proc. Natl.
Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 
106 , 18131 –18136 .19826085 
Keshari K. R. ; Kurhanewicz J. ; Jeffries R. E. ; Wilson D. M. ; Dewar B. J. ; Van Criekinge M. ; Zierhut M. ; Vigneron D. B. ; Macdonald J. M.  (2010 ) Hyperpolarized 13C spectroscopy and an NMR-compatible
bioreactor system for the investigation of real-time cellular metabolism . Magn. Reson. Med. 
63 , 322 –329 .20099325 
Witney T. H. ; Kettunen M. I. ; Brindle K. M.  (2011 ) Kinetic modeling
of hyperpolarized 13C label exchange between pyruvate and
lactate in tumor cells . J. Biol. Chem. 
286 , 24572 –24580 .21596745 
Harrison C. ; Yang C. ; Jindal A. ; Deberardinis R. J. ; Hooshyar M. A. ; Merritt M. ; Dean Sherry A. ; Malloy C. R.  (2012 ) Comparison of kinetic models for analysis of pyruvate-to-lactate
exchange by hyperpolarized 13C NMR . NMR Biomed. 
25 , 1286 –1294 .22451442 
Yang C. ; Harrison C. ; Jin E. S. ; Chuang D. T. ; Sherry A. D. ; Malloy C. R. ; Merritt M. E. ; Deberardinis R. J.  (2014 ) Simultaneous
Steady-state and Dynamic 13C NMR Can Differentiate Alternative
Routes of Pyruvate Metabolism in Living Cancer Cells . J. Biol. Chem. 
289 , 6212 –6224 .24415759 
Kettunen M. I. ; Hu D. E. ; Witney T. H. ; McLaughlin R. ; Gallagher F. A. ; Bohndiek S. E. ; Day S. E. ; Brindle K. M.  (2010 ) Magnetization
transfer measurements of exchange between hyperpolarized [1-13C]pyruvate and [1-13C]lactate in a murine lymphoma . Magn. Reson. Med. 
63 , 872 –880 .20373388 
Larson P. E. Z. ; Kerr A. B. ; Leon Swisher C. ; Pauly J. M. ; Vigneron D. B.  (2012 ) A rapid
method for direct detection
of metabolic conversion and magnetization exchange with application
to hyperpolarized substrates . J. Magn. Reson. 
225 , 71 –80 .23143011 
Walker C. M. ; Lee J. ; Ramirez M. S. ; Schellingerhout D. ; Millward S. ; Bankson J. A.  (2013 ) A catalyzing phantom
for reproducible
dynamic conversion of hyperpolarized [1-13C]-pyruvate . PLoS One 
8 , e71274 .23977006 
Fitzpatrick S. M. ; Hetherington H. P. ; Behar K. L. ; Shulman R. G.  (1990 ) The Flux
from Glucose to Glutamate in the Rat Brain In Vivo as Determined by 1H-Observed, 13C-Edited NMR Spectroscopy . J. Cereb. Blood Flow Metab. 
10 , 170 –179 .1968068 
Ball D. R. ; Rowlands B. ; Dodd M. S. ; Le Page L. ; Ball V. ; Carr C. A. ; Clarke K. ; Tyler D. J.  (2014 ) Hyperpolarized
butyrate: A metabolic probe of short chain fatty acid metabolism in
the heart . Magn. Reson. Med. 
71 , 1663 –1669 .23798473 
Fink G. ; Desrochers S. ; Des Rosiers C. ; Garneau M. ; David F. ; Daloze T. ; Landau B. R. ; Brunengraber H.  (1988 ) Pseudoketogenesis in the perfused rat heart . J. Biol. Chem. 
263 , 18036 –18042 .3056937 
Jensen P. R. ; Peitersen T. ; Karlsson M. ; In’t
Zandt R. ; Gisselsson A. ; Hansson G. ; Meier S. ; Lerche M. H.  (2009 ) Tissue-specific short chain fatty acid metabolism and
slow metabolic recovery after ischemia from hyperpolarized NMR in
vivo . J. Biol. Chem. 
284 , 36077 –36082 .19861411 
Bastiaansen J. A. ; Cheng T. ; Mishkovsky M. ; Duarte J. M. ; Comment A. ; Gruetter R.  (2013 ) In vivo enzymatic activity
of acetylCoA synthetase in skeletal muscle revealed by 13C turnover from hyperpolarized [1-13C]acetate to [1-13C]acetylcarnitine . Biochim. Biophys.
Acta 
1830 , 4171 –4178 .23545238 
Serra S. C. , Jensen P. R. , Miragoli L. , Karlsson M. , Cabella C. , Poggi L. , Venturi L. , Tedoldi F. , and Lerche M.   (2014 ) Hyperpolarized
[1,3-13C2]ethyl acetoacetate is a novel diagnostic
marker of liver cancer . In Proc. Intl. Soc. Mag. Res. in Med. , Vol. 22 , May 10−16, Milan.
Tyler D. J. , Lau A. Z. , and Ball D. R.   (2014 ) Hyperpolarized Ketone Body Metabolism in the Perfused Rat Heart . In Proc. Intl. Soc. Mag. Res. in
Med. , Vol. 22 ,
May 10−16, Milan.
Brieger K. ; Schiavone S. ; Miller F. J. ; Krause K. H.  (2012 ) Reactive
oxygen species: From health to disease . Swiss
Med. Wkly. 
142 , w13659 .22903797 
Deutsch J. C.  (2000 ) Dehydroascorbic acid . J. Chromatogr.,
A 
881 , 299 –307 .10905713 
Deutsch J. C. ; SanthoshKumar C. R.  (1996 ) Dehydroascorbic
acid undergoes hydrolysis
on solubilization which can be reversed with mercaptoethanol . J. Chromatogr., A 
724 , 271 –278 .
Bohndiek S. E. ; Kettunen M. I. ; Hu D. E. ; Kennedy B. W. C. ; Boren J. ; Gallagher F. A. ; Brindle K. M.  (2011 ) Hyperpolarized [1-C-13]-Ascorbic
and Dehydroascorbic Acid: Vitamin C as a Probe for Imaging Redox Status
in Vivo . J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
133 , 11795 –11801 .21692446 
Keshari K. R. ; Kurhanewicz J. ; Bok R. ; Larson P. E. Z. ; Vigneron D. B. ; Wilson D. M.  (2011 ) Hyperpolarized C-13
dehydroascorbate
as an endogenous redox sensor for in vivo metabolic imaging . Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 
108 , 18606 –18611 .22042839 
Patterson J. W. ; Mastin D. W.  (1951 ) Some Effects of Dehydroascorbic Acid
on the Central Nervous System . Am. J. Physiol. 
167 , 119 –126 .14885478 
Jones D. P.  (2002 ) Redox potential of GSH/GSSG couple:
Assay and biological
significance . Methods Enzymol. 
348 , 93 –112 .11885298 
May J. M. ; Mendiratta S. ; Hill K. E. ; Burk R. F.  (1997 ) Reduction
of dehydroascorbate to ascorbate by the selenoenzyme thioredoxin reductase . J. Biol. Chem. 
272 , 22607 –22610 .9278416 
Del
Bello B. ; Maellaro E. ; Sugherini L. ; Santucci A. ; Comporti M. ; Casini A. F.  (1994 ) Purification of
NADPH-Dependent Dehydroascorbate Reductase from Rat-Liver and Its
Identification with 3-α-Hydroxysteroid Dehydrogenase . Biochem. J. 
304 , 385 –390 .7998972 
Nordberg J. ; Arnér E. S. J.  (2001 ) Reactive oxygen species, antioxidants,
and the mammalian thioredoxin system . Free Radical
Biol. Med. 
31 , 1287 –1312 .11728801 
Wells W.
W. ; Xu D. P. ; Yang Y. F. ; Rocque P. A.  (1990 ) Mammalian
Thioltransferase (Glutaredoxin) and Protein Disulfide Isomerase Have
Dehydroascorbate Reductase-Activity . J. Biol.
Chem. 
265 , 15361 –15364 .2394726 
Cairns R.
A. ; Harris I. S. ; Mak T. W.  (2011 ) Regulation of cancer
cell metabolism . Nat. Rev. Cancer 
11 , 85 –95 .21258394 
Vander Heiden M. G. ; Cantley L. C. ; Thompson C. B.  (2009 ) Understanding
the
Warburg Effect: The Metabolic Requirements of Cell Proliferation . Science 
324 , 1029 –1033 .19460998 
Krebs H. A.  (1938 ) Metabolism
of amino acids and proteins . Annu. Rev. Biochem. 
7 , 189 –210 .
Gallagher F. A. ; Kettunen M. I. ; Day S. E. ; Lerche M. ; Brindle K. M.  (2008 ) C-13 MR spectroscopy measurements
of glutaminase activity
in human hepatocellular carcinoma cells using hyperpolarized C-13-labeled
glutamine . Magn. Reson. Med. 
60 , 253 –257 .18666104 
Cabella C. ; Karlsson M. ; Canape C. ; Catanzaro G. ; Serra S. C. ; Miragoli L. ; Poggi L. ; Uggeri F. ; Venturi L. ; Jensen P. R. ; Lerche M. H. ; Tedoldi F.  (2013 ) In vivo and
in vitro liver cancer metabolism observed with hyperpolarized [5-C-13]glutamine . J. Magn. Reson. 
232 , 45 –52 .23689113 
Reynolds M. R. ; Lane A. N. ; Robertson B. ; Kemp S. ; Liu Y. ; Hill B. G. ; Dean D. C. ; Clem B. F.  (2014 ) Control of glutamine
metabolism by the tumor suppressor
Rb . Oncogene 
33 , 556 –566 .23353822 
Gallagher F. A. ; Kettunen M. I. ; Day S. E. ; Hu D. E. ; Karlsson M. ; Gisselsson A. ; Lerche M. H. ; Brindle K. M.  (2011 ) Detection
of Tumor Glutamate Metabolism In Vivo Using C-13 Magnetic Resonance
Spectroscopy and Hyperpolarized [1-C-13]glutamate . Magn. Reson. Med. 
66 , 18 –23 .21695718 
DeBerardinis R. J. ; Cheng T.  (2010 ) Q’s next: The diverse functions
of glutamine in metabolism, cell biology and cancer . Oncogene 
29 , 313 –324 .19881548 
Dang L. ; White D. W. ; Gross S. ; Bennett B. D. ; Bittinger M. A. ; Driggers E. M. ; Fantin V. R. ; Jang H. G. ; Jin S. ; Keenan M. C. ; Marks K. M. ; Prins R. M. ; Ward P. S. ; Yen K. E. ; Liau L. M. ; Rabinowitz J. D. ; Cantley L. C. ; Thompson C. B. ; Vander Heiden M. G. ; Su S. M.  (2009 ) Cancer-associated IDH1 mutations produce 2-hydroxyglutarate . Nature 
462 , 739 –744 .19935646 
Chaumeil M. M. ; Larson P. E. Z. ; Yoshihara H. A. I. ; Danforth O. M. ; Vigneron D. B. ; Nelson S. J. ; Pieper R. O. ; Phillips J. J. ; Ronen S. M.  (2013 ) Non-invasive
in vivo assessment of
IDH1 mutational status in glioma . Nat. Commun. 
4 , 2429 .24019001 
Karlsson M. ; Jensen P. R. ; in’t Zandt R. ; Gisselsson A. ; Hansson G. ; Duus J. O. ; Meier S. ; Lerche M. H.  (2010 ) Imaging of branched chain amino acid metabolism in
tumors with hyperpolarized 13C ketoisocaproate . Int. J. Cancer 
127 , 729 –736 .19960440 
Marjanska M. ; Iltis I. ; Shestov A. A. ; Deelchand D. K. ; Nelson C. ; Ugurbil K. ; Henry P. G.  (2010 ) In vivo C-13 spectroscopy
in the rat brain using hyperpolarized [1-C-13]pyruvate and [2-C-13]pyruvate . J. Magn. Reson. 
206 , 210 –218 .20685141 
Park J. M. ; Josan S. ; Grafendorfer T. ; Yen Y. F. ; Hurd R. E. ; Spielman D. M. ; Mayer D.  (2013 ) Measuring
mitochondrial metabolism in rat brain in vivo using MR Spectroscopy
of hyperpolarized [2-C-13]pyruvate . NMR Biomed. 
26 , 1197 –1203 .23553852 
Yudkoff M. ; Daikhin Y. ; Grunstein L. ; Nissim I. ; Stern J. ; Pleasure D. ; Nissim I.  (1996 ) Astrocyte
leucine metabolism: Significance of branched-chain amino acid transamination . J. Neurochem. 
66 , 378 –385 .8522978 
Hutson S. M. ; Lieth E. ; LaNoue K. F.  (2001 ) Function of leucine
in excitatory neurotransmitter metabolism in the central nervous system . J. Nutr. 
131 , 846s –850s .11238772 
Suryawan A. ; Hawes J. W. ; Harris R. A. ; Shimomura Y. ; Jenkins A. E. ; Hutson S. M.  (1998 ) Molecular model of human branched-chain
amino acid metabolism . Am. J. Clin. Nutr. 
68 , 72 –81 .9665099 
Butt S. A. ; Sogaard L. V. ; Magnusson P. O. ; Lauritzen M. H. ; Laustsen C. ; Akeson P. ; Ardenkjaer-Larsen J. H.  (2012 ) Imaging
cerebral 2-ketoisocaproate metabolism with hyperpolarized 13C magnetic resonance spectroscopic imaging . J. Cereb. Blood Flow Metab. 
32 , 1508 –1514 .22453630 
Ikonomidou C. ; Turski L.  (1996 ) Neurodegenerative disorders: Clues
from glutamate and energy metabolism . Crit.
Rev. Neurobiol. 
10 , 239 –263 .8971131 
Bowen S. ; Ardenkjaer-Larsen J.
H.  (2013 ) Formulation and utilization
of choline based samples for dissolution dynamic nuclear polarization . J. Magn. Reson. 
236 , 26 –30 .24036470 
Lerche M. H. ; Jensen P. R. ; Karlsson M. ; Meier S.  (2014 ) NMR Insights
into the Inner Workings of Living Cells . Anal.
Chem. 
DOI: 10.1021/ac501467x .
Bowen S. ; Hilty C.  (2009 ) Temporal Chemical Shift
Correlations
in Reactions Studied by Hyperpolarized Nuclear Magnetic Resonance . Anal. Chem. 
81 , 4543 –4547 .19388628 
Bowen S. ; Zeng H. ; Hilty C.  (2008 ) Chemical shift correlations
from hyperpolarized NMR by off-resonance decoupling . Anal. Chem. 
80 , 5794 –5798 .18605696 
Zeng H. ; Bowen S. ; Hilty C.  (2009 ) Sequentially acquired
two-dimensional NMR spectra from hyperpolarized sample . J. Magn. Reson. 
199 , 159 –165 .19447055 
Zeng H. ; Lee Y. ; Hilty C.  (2010 ) Quantitative Rate Determination
by Dynamic Nuclear Polarization Enhanced NMR of a Diels–Alder
Reaction . Anal. Chem. 
82 , 8897 –8902 .20942386 
Bowen S. ; Hilty C.  (2008 ) Time-Resolved Dynamic Nuclear Polarization
Enhanced NMR Spectroscopy . Angew. Chem., Int.
Ed. 
47 , 5235 –5237 .



