Alzheimer’s
disease (AD)
is characterized by the extracellular accumulation of amyloid-β
(Aβ) in compact plaques of the brain. These plaques are hypothesized
to be directly related to the development of this disease. There are,
however, many additional factors implicated in the development of
Alzheimer’s disease. Among these is the protein apolipoprotein
E4 (apoE4), which is known to be the major genetic risk factor for
developing late-onset AD., How apoE4 influences
the pathology of AD is not fully understood, but a large body of literature
points to its role in influencing the aggregation and clearance of
Aβ from the brain.− The presence of both soluble complexes− and insoluble
deposits, of the apoE–Aβ complex in the
mouse and human brain suggests the importance of a direct interaction
between apoE and Aβ in the development of AD. There are many
conflicting reports in the literature about the nature of this interaction.,,,,,,− We believe that these apparent
contradictions can be traced to the complex properties of both apoE
and Aβ themselves. For example, most reported biophysical experiments
have used recombinant lipid-free apoE that is both structurally and
functionally different from apoE complexed with lipids.− Lipid-free apoE has a compact structure comprising a four-helix
bundle N-terminal domain and a C-terminal helical domain that displays
extensive interactions with the N-terminal domain. There is no high-resolution structure available for lipidated
apoE, but a low-resolution structure obtained by X-ray diffraction
of dipalmitoylphosphatidylcholine (DPPC)-bound apoE particles shows
that the DPPC–apoE complex adopts an extended conformation
forming a beltlike structure around the lipid core. ApoE lipoproteins derived from cultured cells, plasma,
or cerebrospinal fluids vary widely in terms of their content of lipids,
sterols, and other associated lipoproteins. Similarly, both common
alloforms of Aβ, Aβ1–40 and Aβ1–42, are intrinsically disordered peptides with strong
tendencies to aggregate. Thus, biophysical experiments with apoE and
Aβ need to consider the different forms of apoE as well as the
various self-associated forms of Aβ. Particularly important
are the interactions of apoE with the soluble oligomeric intermediates
of Aβ that are believed to be the major toxic species in AD;
the monomers are considered to be nontoxic.,− In this study, we examine the interactions between apoE and Aβ
in detail by investigating the effects of the apoE obtained from different
sources on the aggregation of Aβ in vitro.

To understand the effect of apoE on Aβ aggregation, it is
important to understand the mechanism of aggregation of Aβ itself.
In a recent publication, we analyzed the full time course of self-association
of Aβ by using Aβ labeled with tetramethylrhodamine (TMR). We observed that aggregation of Aβ can
be divided into three phases, an early oligomerization phase, an intermediate
phase, and a growth phase. Here we examine the apoE–Aβ
interactions by measuring the effect of apoE on the different phases
of aggregation of Aβ. Our data, which show strong effects of
apoE on the aggregation kinetics of Aβ, are consistent with
high-affinity binding of apoE to oligomeric intermediates and, at
higher concentrations, to fibrils of Aβ, leading to an enhancement
of the stability of the amyloid aggregates.

Experimental Procedures
Preparation
of Aβ and ApoE
Unlabeled (WT-Aβ)
and TMR-labeled Aβ (TMR-Aβ) peptides were chemically synthesized
and purchased from the Keck Foundation (Yale University, New Haven,
CT). The TMR was chemically attached to the N-terminus of Aβ
using FMOC-Lys(5-TMR)-OH. We have previously
verified that N-terminal labeling of Aβ with TMR does not appreciably
alter the aggregation properties of Aβ. The peptides were further purified according to protocols described
previously. Stock solutions of purified
WT-Aβ and TMR-Aβ were prepared in 3 mM NaOH, 150 mM NaCl,
5 mM β-mercaptoethanol (βME), and 1 mM EDTA. Recombinant
lipid-free apoE was prepared according to the protocol described previously. Lipidation of recombinant apoE was performed
by incubating 30 μM apoE with 2 mg/mL small unilamellar vesicles
(SUV) of 1,2-dimyristoyl-sn-glycero-3-phosphocholine
(DMPC) in 20 mM phosphate, pH 7.4 buffer containing 150 mM NaCl and
5 mM β-mercaptoethanol (βME). The solution was incubated at 25 °C overnight. The unbound
apoE was removed by ultracentrifugation of the apoE–lipid sample
in a KBr gradient. The unbound lipids
were then removed by size exclusion chromatography using a Superdex
200 column (GE Healthcare) in 20 mM phosphate, pH 7.4 buffer containing
150 mM NaCl, 5 mM βME, and 1 mM EDTA. ApoE containing lipoproteins
from astrocytes stably expressing human apoE isoforms were collected
and purified by immunoaffinity chromatography as described previously.

Fluorescence Time Course Measurements
The TMR-Aβ
stock solution (20 μM) prepared in 3 mM NaOH was diluted to
an appropriate final concentration in 20 mM phosphate, pH 7.4 buffer
containing 150 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, and 5 mM βME and incubated
in a clean glass test tube while being continuously stirred in a temperature-controlled
cuvette holder. Aggregation of TMR-Aβ
samples was monitored continuously using TMR fluorescence (λex = 520 nm; λem = 600 nm). To increase the
rate of fibrillization, all samples were stirred using a stir bar
(3 mm × 6 mm).

Electron Microscopy of the ApoE–Aβ
Protein
Aggregation of 5 μM WT-Aβ1–42 in 20
mM phosphate, pH 7.4 buffer containing 150 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, and
5 mM βME at 37 °C that was being continuously stirred was
monitored in the spectrofluorometer using Thioflavin T (ThT) fluorescence
(λex = 438 nm; λem = 480 nm). Aliquots
(20 μL) of an Aβ solution were collected at time zero,
after 4 h (in the intermediate phase), and after 24 h (in the growth
phase). These aliquots were mixed with apoE4 at a 10:1 (Aβ:apoE)
molar ratio and incubated at room temperature for 30 min. The apoE4
used in this experiment had a six-His tag at the N-terminal end for
labeling with Ni-NTA gold nanoparticles for visualization via electron
microscopy (EM). There are five additional mutations (F257A, W264R,
V269A, L279Q, and V287E) in the C-terminal domain to keep apoE monomeric. For EM measurements, a Formvar carbon-coated
200 mesh copper grid (Electron Microscopy Sciences, Hatfield, PA)
was placed inverted on a 12 μL drop of an Aβ–apoE
sample for 1 min. The grid was then washed with water followed by
incubation on a 10 μL drop of a 20 nM solution of 5 nm Ni-NTA
nanogold (Nanoprobes, Yaphank, NY) for 5 min at room temperature.
The grid was then washed twice with 20 mM Tris, pH 7.4 buffer containing
30 mM imidazole and 150 mM NaCl. Washing the grid with an imidazole
solution prevents nonspecific attachment of the nanoparticles to the
Aβ aggregates (see Figure S4 of the ). The grid was further washed with water followed
by negative staining with 0.5% uranyl acetate for 1 min. The images
were recorded with a JEOL 100CX transmission electron microscope (TEM)
equipped with an AMT digital camera.

Stability of the Fibrils
following Sonication
Aliquots
of a fibrillized Aβ1–42 solution obtained
at the end of the experiment described in the legend of Figure  were incubated with or without WT-apoE4 (5:1 Aβ:apoE
molar ratio) at room temperature for 30 min. These solutions were
then subjected to sonication in a water bath sonicator for 5 min.
The sonicated samples were then imaged using EM.

Time course of TMR-Aβ
aggregation in the presence of various
forms of the apoE proteins. Panels A–C show the aggregation
of TMR-Aβ1–40: (A) 4 μM TMR-Aβ1–40 in the presence of 0, 50, 100, and 200 nM recombinant
lipid-free apoE4 and (B and C) 4 μM TMR-Aβ1–40 in the absence or presence of 150 nM recombinant lipid-free apoE
(B) and DMPC–apoE (C), respectively. Panels D–F show
the aggregation of TMR-Aβ1–42: 2 μM
TMR-Aβ1–42 in the absence or presence of recombinant
lipid-free apoE (50 nM), DMPC–apoE (50 nM), and astrocyte-derived
apoE (11 nM) respectively.

Fluorescence Time Course of Urea-Induced Dissociation of the
Fibrils
A 50 μL aliquot of fibrillized TMR-Aβ1–42 (4 μM) was diluted 20-fold into 2 M urea
in 20 mM phosphate, pH 7.4 buffer containing 150 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA,
and 5 mM βME. The solution was continuously stirred at room
temperature in the spectrofluorometer. The dissociation of the fibrils
was monitored by the change in TMR fluorescence.

Results
Effects of
ApoE on Aβ Aggregation
We examined
the role of apoE on Aβ aggregation by observing the effects
of recombinant lipid-free and lipidated apoE isoforms on the aggregation
of both Aβ1–40 and Aβ1–42. Aggregation of Aβ was monitored by TMR fluorescence when
using TMR-labeled Aβ or by ThT fluorescence when using unlabeled
Aβ. As previously shown using TMR-labeled
Aβ, the aggregation of Aβ
can be described by three phases: an oligomeric phase resulting in
the formation of dimers, trimers, and higher-order oligomers, an intermediate
phase during which there is little change in monomer concentration
but rather clustering of oligomers, and the final fibrillization phase
reflecting the formation and growth of fibrils. In this work, the term “aggregation” refers
to all three phases. Figure A shows the effect of different concentrations of recombinant
lipid-free apoE4 on the aggregation of TMR-labeled Aβ1–40. In this experiment, the concentration of apoE4 (0.05–0.2
μM) was considerably lower than that of TMR-labeled Aβ1–40 (4 μM) but the overall aggregation process
was much slower in the presence of apoE4 because of a longer intermediate
phase and a slower fibrillization phase. As discussed elsewhere, the
oligomerization phase of Aβ1–40 is hardly
noticeable at these concentrations (4 μM). The effect on the intermediate phase is evident at all
apoE concentrations, but the effect on the fibrillization phase is
observed only at relatively higher concentrations of apoE4. Figure B compares the effects of the three isoforms of
apoE (0.15 μM) on the aggregation of TMR-Aβ1–40 (4 μM). The apoE isoforms differ in terms of their effect,
with apoE4 showing the strongest and apoE2 the weakest effect on the
overall aggregation of Aβ1–40. Figure C shows that the differential effects of the apoE
isoforms on the overall aggregation of Aβ1–40 are similar in the presence of apoE lipidated with 1,2-dimyristoyl-sn-glycero-3-phosphocholine (DMPC–apoE). While a
published low-resolution structure of lipidated apoE was obtained
using DPPC–apoE lipoproteins, we have used DMPC–apoE
in our experiments because DMPC–apoE particles form readily
at room temperature. Additionally, DMPC–apoE and DPPC–apoE
lipoprotein particles are shown to be similar both functionally and
structurally., The data presented in panels
A–C of Figure  use TMR-Aβ1–40. Consistent with our previous results, the formation
of oligomers that occurs within approximately 1 h is much poorer for
Aβ1–40 than for Aβ1–42. Similar observations are made using
unlabeled Aβ1–40 as shown in Figure S1A–C
of the .

Panels
D–F of Figure  show the effects of
substoichiometric amounts of recombinant lipid-free and lipidated
apoE, as well as lipoproteins derived from cultured astrocyte cells,
on the time course of aggregation of TMR-Aβ1–42. With Aβ1–42, and in the absence of apoE,
the oligomerization phase is clearly observed. As described elsewhere, observation of the early oligomerization
step is a consequence of self-quenching of TMR moieties from two or
more Aβ monomers coming into direct contact. This early phase is not observed in the presence of apoE
(Figure D,E). We discuss this issue later.
Both the intermediate phase and the fibrillization phase of Aβ1–42 aggregation are strongly influenced by apoE irrespective
of the source of origin of the apoE lipoproteins present. Differential
effects, if any, between the apoE isoforms on Aβ1–42 aggregation are small (see Figure D–F).
Figure S1D of the  provides data using recombinant lipid-free apoE isoforms that differ
in terms of their effects on the aggregation of unlabeled Aβ1–42, although again the differences appear to be small.
We have also used the human cerebral spinal fluid-derived apoE lipoproteins
that have strong effects on the aggregation of Aβ1–42 (see Figure S2 of the ). Taken together, the results described above indicate that all
three isoforms of apoE derived from different sources strongly alter
the aggregation of both Aβ1–40 and Aβ1–42.

Effects on Fibrillization
The pronounced
effects observed
at the substoichiometric concentrations of apoE suggest that apoE
is binding to some form(s) of Aβ other than the unstructured
monomers, i.e., to prefibrillar oligomers and/or fibrils. The data
presented above may be explained by assuming that apoE may bind to
the oligomers to slow their conversion to fibrils, as proposed previously., Additionally, apoE may alter fibril growth because of its interactions
with the fibrillar intermediates of Aβ. To verify whether apoE
binds to fibrils, we examined the time course of the aggregation of
Aβ upon addition of apoE in the fibrillar phase. Figure  shows that the time course of TMR-Aβ1–40 (4 μM) fluorescence is dramatically altered
when a substoichiometric amount of apoE4 (200 nM) is added to this
solution both at the beginning of the fibrillization phase (corresponding
to an ∼10% loss of TMR fluorescence) and in the middle of the
fibrillization phase (corresponding to an ∼40% loss of TMR
fluorescence). Because this phase is coincident with the appearance
of β-structure fibrillar forms of Aβ, pronounced effects of apoE in this phase indicate interactions
of apoE with the Aβ fibrils. Similar effects on the growth of
the Aβ1–40 fibrils can also be observed upon
addition of DMPC–apoE4 (see Figure S3 of the ).

Effect of apoE on the Aβ growth
phase. The black line represents
the time course of aggregation of TMR-Aβ1–40 (4 μM) in the absence of apoE. The dark gray and light gray
lines represent the time courses when 200 nM recombinant lipid-free
apoE4 is added during the growth phase at times t1 and t2, respectively.

Electron Microscopy of
the ApoE–Aβ Complexes
Electron microscopy (EM)
was used to examine the nature of apoE–Aβ
complexes. In these experiments, the apoE molecules were visualized
by being labeled with Ni-NTA gold nanoparticles that attach to a six-His
tag at the N-terminal end of apoE4. To rule out effects from self-association
of apoE, we used a monomeric mutant of apoE4 for this experiment.,, The experiments were conducted
by taking an aliquot of unlabeled Aβ1–42 (5
μM) at different stages of aggregation and incubating the aliquot
with apoE4 (final concentration of 500 nM) at room temperature for
15 min. We note that labeling of apoE with the gold nanoparticles
is performed following plating of the sample on the EM grids. Figure A represents an EM image of the apoE4–Aβ1–42 solution at time zero. The gold nanoparticles,
which represent the location of apoE molecules, are seen as black
dots in the image. Clearly, the isolated nanoparticles indicate that
most of apoE exists as monomers at time zero. Figure B is a representative image of the apoE4–Aβ1–42 solutions during the intermediate phase of Aβ
aggregation. Here, in addition to the monomers, a significant fraction
of apoE is found to be clustered in a linear or random geometry. Because
self-association of apoE is ruled out under our experimental conditions,
the presence of clusters of apoE molecules indicates binding of apoE
with the oligomers and/or protofilaments of Aβ1–42 in this phase. Figure C represents an image
of the apoE4–Aβ1–42 complex in the
fibrillization phase of aggregation. Numerous fibrils can be observed
in this phase with apoE bound to the surface of the fibrils. It may
be noted here that the preparation of grids for EM requires extensive
washing of the grids with both buffer and water, which prevents nonspecific
labeling of the Aβ fibrils with the gold nanoparticles and most
likely washes away weakly bound apoE molecules from the apoE–Aβ
complexes. Figure S4 of the  shows that the nonspecific labeling of the Aβ fibrils in the
absence of apoE is minimal under our experimental conditions. Thus,
data presented in Figure  indicate binding
of apoE to the soluble oligomeric and insoluble fibrillar aggregates
of Aβ.

Electron microscopy of the apoE–Aβ complexes.
Representative
images of the apoE4–Aβ1–42 solution
collected (A) at time zero, (B) during the intermediate phase, and
(C) during the growth phase of aggregation. The black dots represent
gold nanoparticles attached to the molecules of apoE4 via a six-His
tag at the N-terminus of apoE.

Effect of ApoE on the Stability of the Aβ Fibrils
We then asked how the interactions with apoE might alter the stability
of Aβ fibrils. It has previously been shown that continuous
stirring (a commonly used method for accelerating fibril formation)
of the Aβ solution causes fragmentation of the amyloid fibrils. Hence, under our conditions, the rate of fragmentation
of the fibrils can strongly influence the rate of formation of new
fibrils in the growth phase. As noted in , all of our experiments have been performed under
continuous stirring of the samples. To examine whether interaction
of apoE alters the stability of the Aβ fibrils, we tested whether
apoE changes (i) the fragmentation of the fibrils induced by sonication
and/or (ii) the denaturation of the fibrils induced by urea. Figure A shows a representative EM image of the Aβ1–42 fibrils following sonication for 4 min in a water
bath sonicator. The fibrils are much shorter than those prior to sonication
(see Figure S5 of the ), indicating fragmentation caused by sonication. Figure B shows EM images of Aβ1–42 fibrils that were incubated with apoE4 for 30 min prior to sonication.
Clearly, these fibrils can be seen to be long and networked, quite
similar to the fibrils prior to sonication (Figure S5 of the ), indicating that apoE
increases the mechanical stability of the fibrils. We then examined
whether Aβ fibrils could be denatured or dissociated using urea
and whether apoE can affect this process. In this experiment, fibrils
of TMR-Aβ1–42 (4 μM) were incubated
without or with apoE4 (1 μM) prior to dilution in 2 M urea.
Figure C shows that TMR fluorescence increases
with time in both cases, indicating dissociation of the fibrils as
a result of denaturation. Clearly, the rate of dissociation of the
fibrils incubated with apoE4 is considerably slower than the rate
of those without any apoE. Thus, interaction of apoE with the Aβ
fibrils increases both the mechanical and conformational stability
of fibrils.

Stability of the fibrils. Electron microscopy images following
sonication of Aβ1–42 fibrils that have been
incubated in the absence (A) or presence (B) of apoE4. (C) Fluorescence
of TMR-Aβ1–42 following dilution into 2 M
urea of fibrillized TMR-Aβ1–42 that had been
previously incubated without (black line) or with apoE4 (gray line)
at a 10:1 (Aβ:apoE) molar ratio.

Discussion
According to the amyloid hypothesis, a major
causative factor in
the development of Alzheimer’s disease (AD) is the presence
of extracellular plaques that contain amyloid-β. It is well-established
that the major genetic risk factor for the development of late-onset
Alzheimer’s disease is the presence of the apoE4 isoform. The
apoE isoforms strongly influence amyloid deposition in the human brain
(apoE4 &gt; noncarriers) and in amyloid
precursor protein (APP) mouse models expressing human apoE isoforms
(apoE4 &gt; apoE3 &gt; apoE2). Several
mechanisms
of action for the role of apoE in AD have been proposed. The most
relevant one in relation to this study involves apoE–Aβ
interactions. A large body of literature data suggests the importance
of apoE in modulating the clearance, degradation, and aggregation
of Aβ in the brain.,,,,,,− The goal of this study is to clarify the interactions between apoE
and Aβ by examining the kinetic behavior of apoE on Aβ
aggregation.

The data presented here suggest that in
vitro Aβ
aggregation is slowed by all three isoforms of apoE irrespective of
the source or lipidation status of apoE. We have used recombinant
apoE, in both lipid-free and lipidated forms, and astrocyte-secreted
apoE to show that the overall nature of the effects of apoE on Aβ
aggregation is independent of the preparation of apoE (Figure ). ApoE lipoproteins derived from human cerebral
spinal fluid also exhibit strong effects on the aggregation of Aβ1–42 (see Figure S2 of the ). A putative model for the role of apoE in aggregation
of Aβ based on our experimental results is presented in Figure . In this model, Aβ monomers self-associate
to form small oligomers that then grow larger, presumably by forming
an ensemble of clusters. Fibrils are
formed following nucleation within the larger clusters. The fibrils
then grow by monomer addition and by fragmentation. Our model of Aβ
aggregation is consistent with the recent observations that the rate
of fibril formation of Aβ peptides in vitro is not determined by homogeneous nucleation but rather by processes
such as formation of oligomers from the monomers, followed by conversion
of the oligomers to the fibrils and the fragmentation and secondary
nucleation of the fibrils.,,− We have omitted secondary nucleation from our model
because fragmentation is more important under our experimental conditions
involving, as it does, continuous stirring of the samples. The EM data presented in Figure  suggest that apoE binds both to the oligomeric intermediates
and to the surface of the fibrils. We propose in the model presented
in Figure  that apoE alters Aβ aggregation
primarily by two possible mechanisms: (1) by binding to the oligomeric
intermediates, perhaps altering the nature of the intermediates with
respect to fibril formation, and (2) by reducing the rate of fibril
fragmentation. The increase in the duration of the intermediate phase
at all concentrations of apoE is consistent with binding to the oligomeric
intermediates., The slow kinetics of growth of
the fibrils at higher apoE concentrations is mediated by the interaction
of apoE with the Aβ fibrils and subsequent fibril stabilization.
The data presented in Figure  clearly show
that apoE reduces both the rate of fragmentation of the fibrils induced
by sonication and the rate of dissociation of the fibrils induced
by urea.

Effect of apoE on Aβ aggregation. The top panel shows Aβ
monomers self-assemble to form small oligomers (O1) that grow to larger
oligomers (O2) by monomer addition and/or by clustering. The fibrils
(F1) are formed within the large oligomers following nucleation. The
fibrils subsequently undergo fragmentation (F1 → F2) and growth
(F2 → F3). The bottom panel shows that at low concentrations
apoE interacts with the Aβ oligomers (O1 and O2) only, but at
higher concentrations, it binds to the fibrils (F1–F3), as
well. The broken lines indicate slow growth (L1) and nucleation (L2)
of the Aβ oligomers and a reduced rate of fragmentation (L3)
of the Aβ fibrils due to interactions with apoE. Stabilization
of the oligomers increases the duration of the intermediate phase,
while stabilization of the fibrils slows the growth phase.

Several previous in vitro studies
have shown that
apoE isoforms delay Aβ aggregation,,,,− consistent with the observations reported here. In contrast, some
early studies reported the role of apoE as accelerating the fibrillization
of Aβ.,, These
latter studies, however, used only the lipid-free form of apoE and
unusually high concentrations (∼100 μM) of Aβ at
which almost all Aβ exists as a mixture of oligomers.,, Under these conditions, apoE
may bind to the oligomers and promote fibril formation by inhibiting
nonspecific growth of the oligomers to amorphous aggregates.

ApoE Binding
to Aβ Oligomers
The fact that substoichiometric
amounts of apoE (1:200 apoE:Aβ) affect Aβ aggregation
(see Figure ) indicates that apoE either does
not bind or binds only poorly to the monomeric form of Aβ. As
noted earlier, TMR-Aβ1–42 shows a clear oligomerization
phase that arises because of quenching of the TMR fluorescence in
the oligomers. This phase is abolished
by apoE (Figure D,E). This could happen for
two reasons: either the Aβ oligomers are not forming, or the
fluorescence of the oligomers is not quenched when they are bound
to apoE. We favor the latter that is most likely a consequence of
a change in the spatial proximity of the TMR moieties of TMR-Aβ,
suggesting that the TMR moieties are not in direct contact on the
surface of the apoE molecules. Previous in vitro studies
have reported that apoE binds to the Aβ oligomers and stabilizes
them., Furthermore, complexes of apoE and Aβ
oligomers have been observed in the synapses in the human brain using
an Aβ oligomer specific antibody such as NAB61 and apoE specific
antibody WU-E4. Thus, we would suggest
that binding to apoE leads to stabilization of the Aβ oligomers
that are in a different orientation.

While apoE–Aβ
interactions have been studied extensively, there are considerable
differences in the published results on the nature of these interactions. Many studies have reported strong interactions
between apoE and Aβ,,−, but a recent study by Verghese
et al. suggests that the apoE proteins do not bind to soluble (i.e.,
monomeric) Aβ. Our results summarized
in the model presented in Figure  illustrate
that apoE interacts with the Aβ oligomers and fibrils that form
in a time- and concentration-dependent manner. Hence, little interaction
may be observed at low Aβ concentrations that consist predominantly
of monomeric populations of Aβ. While the biophysical properties of the Aβ oligomers that
interact with apoE are still unclear, the EM images of the nanogold-apoE
and Aβ complexes shown in Figure B indicate
that there is considerable heterogeneity in the size and structures
of the Aβ oligomers. It is likely that the interactions are
strongly dependent on both the size of the oligomers and the conformations
of Aβ in the oligomers.

ApoE4 is the strongest risk factor
for AD and is also associated
with a higher amyloid plaque load in the brain. In amyloid precursor protein (APP) mouse models, the presence
of human apoE4 has been associated with accelerated deposition of
Aβ in the brain.,, This apparently contradicts the in vitro observations
reported here that show delayed aggregation of Aβ in the presence
of apoE4. However, recent experiments suggest that soluble intermediates
and not the fibrillar deposits of Aβ are the primary cytotoxic
species in AD.,−, Hence, we believe that the detrimental effects of
apoE4 are mediated by the stabilization of the toxic intermediates
of Aβ. Fibrillar deposition of Aβ in the brain is possibly
a later event that occurs as a consequence of the accumulation of
the toxic intermediates. The effects of apoE4 could be further exacerbated
because of the retarded clearance of soluble Aβ from the extracellular
space in the brain in the presence of apoE4. Our results are consistent with the in vivo observations
that apoE proteins are colocalized with the amyloid plaques in the
brains of those with late-onset Alzheimer’s disease. In particular,
apoE is found associated with the dense core plaques. It has been observed that transgenic AD mouse models show
an abundance of dense core plaques in the brain, but apoE (−/−)
knockout mice show only diffuse plaques. We speculate that stabilization of the amyloid fibrils by apoE leads
to the formation of the dense plaques as opposed to the formation
of diffuse plaques in vivo.

The Issue of Lipidation
of ApoE
An important issue
is the role of lipid with respect to binding of Aβ to apoE.
Lipid-free apoE has a compact structure comprising a four-helix bundle
N-terminal domain and a C-terminal domain containing stretches of
helical and unstructured regions. The
proposed models for binding of apoE to lipid particles (DPPC), using
X-ray and small angle X-ray scattering measurements, are clearly different
from the structure of lipid-free apoE. Using various C-terminally truncated forms of apoE, Strittmatter
et al. postulated that the Aβ binding region is localized in
the C-terminal region of apoE. This is
consistent with our preliminary data presented in Figure S6 of the  that indicate that the
C-terminal region of apoE has a much stronger effect on the aggregation
of Aβ than does the N-terminal domain. The C-terminal region
is also shown to be required in the initiation of lipid binding of
apoE. Thus, the initiation of lipid binding
and Aβ binding may occur in the same region of the apoE structure.
Why lipid-free and lipid-bound forms of apoE have similar effects
on Aβ aggregation is still unclear. It is possible that apoE
monomers may dissociate from the lipid surface to bind to the Aβ
fibrils. However, establishing or eliminating such possibilities requires
further investigation. We note here that although Aβ is known
to interact with lipids we have verified
that the low concentrations of lipids used in our experiments do not
alter the aggregation kinetics of Aβ (data not shown).

Differences
between the ApoE Isoforms
The data of Figure  indicate that effects of apoE on the aggregation
of Aβ1–40 are isoform specific, with apoE4
having the strongest and apoE2 the weakest effects. As mentioned above,
data shown in Figure S5 of the  suggest that the interaction with Aβ most likely involves
the C-terminal region of apoE, and it is certainly possible that there
are structural differences between the isoforms in this region. This
would be consistent with the structural differences that occur at
the regions distant from the Cys-Arg mutation sites between the apoE
isoforms as postulated by Frieden and Garai on the basis of hydrogen–deuterium
exchange and mutation data. The structural
differences may lead to differences in the binding with the Aβ
oligomers or fibrils. It is surprising that apoE isoform specific
differences were less pronounced in the case of Aβ1–42 than in the case of Aβ1–40. Why apoE isoforms
differ in their interactions with Aβ1–40 but
not with Aβ1–42 is unclear. However, it should
be pointed out that the aggregation of Aβ1–40 is considerably slower than that of Aβ1–42 in part because of the less extensive formation of oligomers. Interesting speculation would be that the oligomeric
intermediates of Aβ1–42 differ from those
of Aβ1–40.

Characterization of Oligomers
and Fibrils
We have used
quenching of TMR fluorescence and enhancement of thioflavin T fluorescence
to detect the appearance of the oligomers and/or the fibrils of Aβ.
We have previously shown that during the early phase of aggregation
there is quenching of TMR-Aβ fluorescence but no increase in
the thioflavin T fluorescence, indicating the appearance of unstructured
oligomers. However, during the growth
phase of aggregation, there is both quenching of TMR fluorescence
and an increase in ThT fluorescence indicating the appearance of the
fibrils. The presence of oligomers and/or
fibrils could also be detected by oligomer and fibril specific antibodies
that are regularly used in cell culture and in vivo studies in which the assays mentioned above cannot be applied because
of a lack of both sensitivity and specificity.

Conclusions
The
results presented here clearly indicate
that apoE interacts with both oligomeric intermediates and fibrils
of Aβ with high affinity, which is evident from the striking
effects observed even with very low concentrations (nanomolar) of
apoE used in our experiments. The binding of apoE affects the kinetics
of fibrillization of Aβ by altering the mechanism of growth
of the intermediates and the fibrils. Particularly important is the
apoE–fibril interaction because the fibrils have a defined
structure. Our results open the possibility for future studies toward
identification and hence therapeutic targeting of the residues at
the interface of the apoE–Aβ complexes.

Supporting Information Available
Time course of ThT fluorescence
of WT-Aβ1–40 and Aβ1–42 in the presence of the apoE isoforms (Figure S1), effect of apoE
lipoproteins derived from human cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) on the aggregation
of TMR-Aβ1–42 (Figure S2), effect of DMPC–apoE
on the growth of the Aβ fibrils (Figure S3), control image for
examination of nonspecific labeling of the Aβ1–42 fibrils (Figure S4), EM images of the WT-Aβ1–42 fibrils before sonication (Figure S5), and a comparison of the effects
of the N- and C-terminal fragments of the apoE isoforms on the aggregation
of Aβ (Figure S6). This material is available free of charge
via the Internet at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bi5008172_si_001.pdf

Author Present Address
∥ P.B.V.: C2N Diagnostics, Center for Emerging
Technologies, St.
Louis, MO 63108.

This work was
supported by the BrightFocus Foundation (to C.F.), a BrightFocus Fellowship
Grant (to P.B.V.), and National Institutes of Health Grant AG13956
and the Cure Alzheimer’s Fund (to D.M.H.).

The authors declare the
following competing financial interest(s): D.M.H. is a co-founder
and scientific advisor to C2N Diagnostics, LLC, as well as a consultant
for Genentech, AstraZeneca, and Forum pharmaceuticals. For other authors,
there is no conflict of interest.

Acknowledgments
We thank Drs. Scott Crick and Jan Bieschke for
useful discussions.

