In mammals, the cAMP- and cGMP-dependent
protein kinases (PKA and PKG) are major mediators of cyclic nucleotide
signaling critical for physiological processes such as memory formation
and vasodilation. Clinically, aberrant
PKA signaling causes Carney complex, while mutations in PKG cause
thoracic aortic aneurysms and dissections (TAAD).− PKA is better
understood than PKG—structures of PKA in the cAMP bound and
holoenzyme forms showed how, without cAMP, the cyclic-nucleotide binding
(CNB) domains in the regulatory (R) subunit of PKA bind and inhibit
the catalytic (C) subunit, and subsequently, how cAMP binding drives
conformational change in the R subunit to release the C subunit, allowing
phosphorylation.−

In contrast, only PKG structures of truncated
CNB domains are available.− Unlike in PKA, the R- and C-domains
in PKG are fused into one polypeptide.
Low-resolution structural data have shown that PKG undergoes large
conformational changes upon cGMP binding to its tandem CNB domains
(CNB-A/B), driving kinase activation. In agreement, recent structures show that the C-terminal CNB domain
of PKG I (CNB-B) undergoes large rearrangement upon cGMP binding,
providing a glimpse into the structural changes required for kinase
activation. Furthermore, while CNB-A
binds both cGMP and cAMP comparably, the C-terminal CNB-B domain is
200-fold selective for cGMP over cAMP. However, the mechanism of reduced
affinity for cAMP remains unknown. Because hydrogen bonds with the
guanine moiety enhance affinity for cGMP in other CNB domains, we
directly studied the hydrogen bonding interactions between PKG and
cGMP., Here we present a room-temperature joint
X-ray/neutron (XN) structure of CNB-B in complex with cGMP (PDB: 4QXK) at 2.2 Å resolution,
the first neutron structure of any CNB domain, and a low-temperature
X-ray structure of CNB-B with cAMP at 1.3 Å resolution (Figures  and , PDB: 4QX5). The XN structure
with cGMP provides direct determination of deuterium positions and
visualization of all hydrogen bonds. Comparison of the XN structure
with the low-temperature X-ray structures reveals that the interaction
of Arg297 with cGMP is more dynamic than previously appreciated, while
Arg297 interacts with cAMP only through van der Waals (VDW) interactions.
Furthermore, cAMP binds as both syn and anti conformers, further weakening the interaction with CNB-B. Taken
together, these structures provide new mechanistic insight into the
ability of CNB-B to filter out cAMP. Because PKG activation causes
vasodilation in vascular smooth muscle cells, these structures will
assist the rational design of PKG activators in the treatment of hypertensive
disease.

PKG Iβ (219–369):cGMP and PKG Iβ (219–369):cAMP
complexes. (A) XN structure of PKG Iβ (219–369):cGMP
at room temperature (293 K), with interacting side chains rendered
in sticks and colored by atom type, with carbon gray, oxygen red,
nitrogen blue, hydrogen black, and deuterium magenta. The 2|Fo| – |Fc|
nuclear density for cGMP (syn) is contoured at 1σ
and shown as a gray mesh. (B) X-ray structure PKG Iβ (219–369):cAMP
at low temperature (100 K). The 2|Fo|
– |Fc| electron density map for
cAMP (anti and syn) is contoured
at 1σ and shown as a gray mesh.

The recent low-temperature X-ray structure of CNB-B in complex
with cGMP indicated interactions with the binding pocket potentially
crucial for cGMP selectivity. To directly
visualize hydrogen bonds in CNB-B, we solved the XN structure of CNB-B:cGMP
(Figures  and ). The sugar–phosphate moiety of cGMP is captured by residues
of the phosphate binding cassette (PBC) motif, comprising residues
306–317 (). In the PBC, a hydrogen bond is formed between the main-chain amide
of Gly306 and the 2′-hydroxyl group of d-ribose, with
an N···O distance of 2.9 Å. Furthermore, the 2′-hydroxyl
donates deuterium in a relatively short hydrogen bond with the carboxylate
side chain of Glu307 (O···O separation of 2.4 Å),
which is oriented by a similarly short hydrogen bond with the phenolic
oxygen of Tyr351 and a 2.8 Å hydrogen bond with its own main-chain
amide (Figures A and ). At the top of PBC, the phosphate oxygen atoms in cGMP each form
two hydrogen bonds. The equatorial oxygen forms hydrogen bonds with
the main-chain amide of Ala309 and the guanidinium moiety of Arg316,
while the axial oxygen hydrogen bonds to the main-chain amide and
the side-chain hydroxyl of Thr317. All four hydrogen bonds are similar
in length in the XN structure, ranging from 2.8 to 3.0 Å, although the bonds formed by Thr317
are shorter in the low-temperature X-ray structure, with distances
of 2.6–2.8 Å ( and A). In addition to donating its deuterium in a hydrogen
bond with cGMP, the hydroxyl of Thr317 accepts a deuterium in a hydrogen
bond with guanine’s 2-ND2 group of cGMP bridging
the cyclic phosphate and guanine moieties (). Consistent with this, it was demonstrated that Thr317
and the analogous residue at the N-terminal CNB-A, Thr193, are key
residues responsible for high affinity for cGMP. Thus, hydrogen bonding between Thr317 and cGMP is very
important for cGMP affinity to CNB-B.

XN versus low temperature X-ray structures.
(A) Room temperature
XN (left, PDB: 4QXK) and low-temperature X-ray structures (PDB: 4KU7) bound to cGMP (right).
(B) Superposition of the XN (black) and low temperature structures
(red-cGMP bound, cyan-cAMP bound) in stereo. (C) Zoomed in view of
cGMP pocket and interacting residues in stereo.

Another key interaction with the guanine moiety of cGMP occurs
at the flexible side chain of Arg297 (Figures A and ). The low-temperature X-ray
structure showed short hydrogen bonds between the Arg297’s
guanidinium group and O6 and N7 of guanine at distances of 2.7–2.8
Å, indicating tight hydrogen bonding interactions. At room temperature,
however, Arg297’s side-chain moves slightly outward, showing
increased distances of 3.0–3.1 Å, implying that interactions
between Arg297 and guanine are weaker than the low-temperature X-ray
structure suggested (Figures A and ). Therefore, we propose the Arg297’s
side-chain position is a “frozen out” conformation in
the low-temperature structure. Indeed, this is consistent with structures
solved at low temperature. The cGMP binding
is further stabilized by Tyr351 at the αC helix (). Tyr351’s phenol group makes
π–π interactions with the guanine moiety, sandwiching
the nucleotide against Val283 and Leu296 on strands β4 and β5.
Furthermore, the phenol group is stabilized through hydrogen bonds
with an ordered water molecule and Glu307 in the binding pocket. Our
XN structure shows that the amide hydrogens of the peptide backbone
behind cGMP at residues 305–310 are not exchanged with deuterium,
suggesting the cGMP pocket is not accessible to solvent, agreeing
with earlier H/D exchange mass spectrometry studies on the full-length
regulatory domain of PKG Iβ. Thus,
the protein dynamics are slowed substantially in the pocket when cGMP
is bound, and tight interaction with cGMP shields the pocket from
solvent.

To further investigate the cGMP selectivity mechanism
of CNB-B,
we solved a low-temperature X-ray structure bound with cAMP at 1.3
Å (Figures B and ). The main differences from the XN structure occur at
the contacts with the purine base moieties (). In the cGMP complex, hydrogen bonding between the 2-NH2 group of guanine and Thr317 ensures that cGMP is bound in
the syn-conformation; however, cAMP lacks this NH2 group and binds to the pocket in both syn- and anti-conformations (Figure ). Consequently, the adenine moiety in the syn-conformation forms a weaker C–H···O hydrogen
bond with Thr317 (3.3 Å) (). Likewise, the anti-conformer also
makes a weak contact using its C8–H methine group (3.6 Å).
Notably, Arg297 moves away from adenine to avoid collision and is
positioned only within VDW distance of cAMP ( and B). Finally, while the capping
interaction of Tyr351 with cAMP still forms similar to the cGMP-bound
structure, superimposing the two structures reveals that Tyr351 is
positioned slightly further from the binding pocket in the presence
of cAMP (Figure B,C). Thus, cAMP, like cGMP,
rotates Arg297 outward and recruits Tyr351, though the weakened contacts
with Arg297, Thr317, and Tyr351 suggest that the cAMP-bound conformation
is energetically less stable than the cGMP-bound conformation.

Our new data provide additional details for the high selectivity
mechanism for cGMP., From these structures, we conclude
that cGMP stabilizes the flexible side chain of Arg297 through hydrogen
bonds, while cAMP forms VDW contacts with Arg297, creating a higher
energy state than cGMP. Thus, our new structures clarify the mechanism
of how CNB-B filters out cAMP. Additionally, hydrogen bonds formed
by exocyclic oxygens of the cyclic phosphate moiety combined with
the observed conformational changes in the PBC associated with cGMP
binding may explain previous observations that (Rp)-cGMPS or (Sp)-cGMPS
analogues of cGMP act as either agonists or antagonists of PKG I., For example, (Rp)-cGMPS, which has the equatorial exocyclic oxygen
of cGMP replaced with sulfur, is a competitive inhibitor with a Ki value of 20 μM while (Sp)-cGMPS, which
has the axial exocyclic oxygen of cGMP replaced with sulfur, is a
weak agonist with over 100-fold less potency than cGMP. Since sulfur-mediated hydrogen bonds are weaker
than oxygen-mediated hydrogen bonds, we speculate that in the case
of the (Rp)-cGMPS, replacing the equatorial exocyclic oxygen with
sulfur would disrupt the hydrogen bonding interaction with Ala309,
which may be crucial for causing the conformational change at the
PBC that leads to activation (). Thus, the weakened interaction with
Ala309 may allow (Rp)-cGMPS to be an antagonist. Additionally, in
the case of (Sp)-cGMPS, replacing the equatorial oxygen with sulfur
would weaken its interaction with Arg316 and Thr317 without affecting
its interaction with Ala309. Thus, unlike (Rp)-cGMPS, (Sp)-cGMPS weakly
activates PKG.

To conclude, our CNB-B:cGMP neutron structure,
the first neutron
structure of a CNB domain, provides an unprecedented view of the hydrogen
bonding interactions that could serve as a model for other CNB domains,
accomplished through direct observation of hydrogen bonds that mediate
cyclic nucleotide coordination. Furthermore, because of the importance
of PKG as a drug target, the directly
observed hydrogen bonds provide new information required for the rational
design of PKG activators. Small molecules will need to accommodate
these interactions to activate PKG—consistent with this idea,
cAMP does not stabilize the same interactions as cGMP and can only
weakly activate PKG. Thus, the new insight into the structure and
dynamics of PKG is vital for rational design of PKG activators and
for explaining the differences in kinase activation.

Supporting Information Available
Methods for all experiments
and supporting figures and tables (Figures S1–S8, Tables S1
and S2) are available free of charge via the Internet at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bi501012v_si_001.pdf

Author Contributions
# G.Y.H. and O.O.G. contributed equally.

The authors
declare no competing financial interest.

Abbreviations
CNBcyclic-nucleotide binding

cAMPcyclic adenosine monophosphate

cGMPcyclic guanosine
monophosphate

VDWvan der Waals

PKGcGMP-dependent protein kinase

PKAcAMP-dependent protein kinase

CAPcatabolite activator protein

XNjoint X-ray/neutron

PBCPhosphate Binding
Cassette

