Escherichia coli dihydrofolate
reductase (ecDHFR
or ecE) has long been a paradigm for the study of the relationship
between enzyme dynamics and function.− Interestingly, its human counterpart (hDHFR or hE) achieves the
same catalytic function, with arguably better efficiency, by utilizing quite different dynamic behavior. hDHFR and ecDHFR share the same major catalytic
cycle (Figure ). The flexible Met20 loop of
ecDHFR samples distinct closed and occluded conformations as ecDHFR
proceeds through its enzymatic cycle: the ground states of the ecE:NADPH
complex and the ecE:FOL:NADP+ complex (a model for the
Michaelis complex, ecE:DHF:NADPH) have a closed Met20 loop, whereas
the product complexes have an occluded Met20 loop., The
equivalent “Met20 loop” region of hDHFR has an LPWPP sequence instead of a MPWN sequence in ecDHFR
and is locked in a closed conformation throughout the catalytic cycle. Ligand binding in hDHFR occurs through a hinge
opening motion of the adenosine subdomain relative to the loop subdomain
(Figure ), rather than from the conformational
sampling of the Met20 loop as in ecDHFR. The hinge motion in hDHFR
is likely mediated by hinge loops longer than those present in ecDHFR:
in hDHFR, hinge 1 is defined as residues Thr39–Leu49 and hinge
2 as His127–Leu131, compared to Thr36–Pro39 and Pro105–Gln108
in ecDHFR, respectively. Substrate complexes
of hDHFR adopt the hinge-closed conformation, where the active site
is tightly packed, thereby favoring the hydride transfer reaction. 15N R2 relaxation dispersion experiments
reveal conformational fluctuations on a millisecond time scale in
all of the intermediates of the major enzymatic cycle of ecDHFR., In contrast, millisecond time scale dynamics are not observed in
the corresponding complexes of hDHFR, but motions on a faster microsecond
time scale are observed in the hE:FOL:NADP+ complex.

Full kinetic schemes for ecDHFR and hDHFR. hDHFR rates
are shown
in bold, and ecDHFR rates are shown in parentheses. Black arrows indicate
the major catalytic cycle for both ecDHFR and hDHFR. The minor “upper”
cycle, shown by blue arrows, is also used by hDHFR because the release
of THF from the product complex is much faster than for ecDHFR. Approximately
35% of the product is channeled through the upper branch by human
DHFR. Gray arrows show kinetics involving the apoprotein, E, which
do not constitute a significant part of the enzymatic cycle for either
protein under cellular conditions. ecDHFR kinetic parameters (25 °C,
pH 7) were taken from ref (), and hDHFR parameters (20 °C, pH 7.65) were taken
from ref (). First-
and second-order rates are given in units of s–1 and μM–1 s–1, respectively.

(A) Structure of human DHFR. The Met20 loop
(residues 12–27,
light blue) remains closed for all hDHFR complexes. The FG loop (residues
139–159) and GH loop (residues 172–175) are colored
green and navy, respectively. The adenosine-binding subdomain (residues
40–129) is colored pink for the hE:FOL:NADP+ complex
[Protein Data Bank (PDB) entry 4M6K] and dark red for the hE:NADPH complex
(PDB entry 4M6J). The structures are aligned on the loop subdomain to illustrate
the motion of the subdomains between the hinge-closed (pink) and hinge-opened
(dark red) conformations. The Cα atoms of hinge 1 and hinge
2 are shown as small spheres. The NADP/H coloring is consistent with
the adenosine domain: dark red for NADPH and pink for NADP+. Folate is colored yellow. (B) View rotated 90° relative to
that in panel A. In the hinge-open conformation (hE:NADPH), helix
αF slides toward the active site, relative to the hinge-closed
conformation (in the hE:FOL:NADP+, hE:THF:NADP+, and hE:THF complexes). Except for the difference in the ligand,
the X-ray structures of the hE:FOL (PDB entry 1DHF) and hE:ddTHF:NADP+ (PDB entry 4M6L) complexes are highly
similar to that of the hE:FOL:NADP+ complex. Structures
of the ternary complexes and the hE:NADPH complex were from ref ().

We have recently demonstrated the exquisite sensitivity of 3JCγCO and 3JCγN couplings to the average χ1 dihedral angle conformation and rotamer averaging of side
chains in the complexes of ecDHFR that constitute intermediates in
the enzymatic cycle. Here, we extend
this analysis to hDHFR, with the time scale-independent side chain
χ1 conformational information for γ-methyl
and aromatic residues obtained from 3JCγCO and 3JCγN coupling measurements. These coupling-derived rotamer data are augmented
by rotamer population estimates based on 13Cmethyl chemical shifts for leucine residues.

Methods
Protein Purification
and Sample Preparation
Human DHFR
was expressed and purified as described previously. Briefly, hDHFR was expressed in BL21(DE3)(DNAY) cells in
M9 minimal medium with 2 mM folate at 37 °C. Different isotope
labeling patterns were used for assignment, dynamics, and rotamer
experiments. Samples uniformly labeled with 1H and 15N were produced using [15N]ammonium chloride (0.5
g/L) and [15N]ammonium sulfate (0.5 g/L). All 3J coupling experiments were performed with samples
uniformly labeled with 1H, 13C, and 15N and grown in 100% H2O, [U-13C]glucose (3
g/L), and 15N salts. A sample uniformly labeled with 13C and 15N and labeled with 1H or 2H (with a CHD2 dominant methyl isotopomer) was
prepared by growth in 100% D2O medium. Samples for [13C]methyl CPMG relaxation dispersion experiments were prepared
using 100% H2O, 15N salts, and [1-13C]glucose to achieve the labeling pattern described by Lundström
et al. Samples for the stereochemical
assignment of leucine and valine methyls were produced by the method
of Neri et al. using 10% [13C]glucose (0.4 g/L) and 90% [12C]glucose (3.6 g/L). Cultures
(1 L) were grown to an OD600 of ∼0.9 and induced
with 1 mM IPTG at 15 °C. Cells were harvested after ∼24
h, and pellets were frozen until they were purified. Cells were lysed
in the presence of folate. hDHFR was eluted from a Q-Sepharose column
with weak salt (&lt;100 mM NaCl) and further purified by high-performance
liquid chromatography purification, taking care to avoid an impurity
that elutes at a slightly higher percentage of acetonitrile. Complexes
were prepared by unfolding lyophilized protein in 8 M urea containing
10 mM DTT, followed by rapid dilution into Tris buffer (pH 8.5) containing
the desired ligands. After concentration of the solution, exchange
into the final degassed buffer was performed in an argon-equilibrated
glovebox because of the highly oxygen-sensitive nature of THF and
NADPH solutions. NMR buffer contained a 10% D2O/90% H2O mixture or 100% D2O, as applicable, with 50 mM
KPi, 50 mM KCl, 1 mM DTT, and 1 mM EDTA (pH 6.5) for all
samples, except for the hE:NADPH complex, which was prepared at pH
8.0 for increased stability. Final sample concentrations ranged from
∼300 μM for binary complexes to 1 mM for ternary complexes.
The complexes were formed by addition of a 6-fold excess of cofactor
(NADP+ or NADPH) and a 10-fold excess of substrate or product
(FOL or THF), as applicable. NMR samples were further degassed on
a vacuum line, overlaid with argon, and flame-sealed in an amberized
tube. Under these conditions, the hE:FOL:NADP+ sample is
very stable, the hE:THF:NADP+ and hE:THF samples are stable
for up to 1 month, the hE:NADPH sample is stable for ∼1 week,
and the hE:THF:NADPH sample is extremely unstable, with spectra changing
in a matter of hours. The quality of the ligands in the final samples
was ascertained by comparison of one-dimensional proton spectra of
the samples to reference ligand spectra. High-purity (6S)-THF was purchased from Schircks Laboratories, and high-purity NADPH
and NADP+ were purchased from Sigma.

Methyl Side
Chain Assignments
Backbone assignments
(HN, N, Cα, and partial Cβ) for all hDHFR complexes were
made using triple-resonance methods, as reported previously. Side chain assignments for the hE:FOL:NADP+ complex were determined at 300 K utilizing standard two-dimensional 15N and 13C HSQC experiments and the following three-dimensional
NMR experiments, with the labeling scheme, the percent D2O in the NMR buffer, and 1H spectrometer frequency given
in parentheses: HCCH-TOCSY and HCCH-COSY ([U-1H,13C,15N] in 100% D2O, 600 MHz), 120 ms mixing time 13C NOESY ([U-1H,13C,15N] in 100%
D2O, 900 MHz), 15N TOCSY ([U-1H,15N] in 10% D2O, 600 MHz), and CHD2-selective
TOCSY and HNCACB ([U-13C,15N], 1H/2H
in 10% D2O, 800 MHz). Stereochemical assignments for the
hE:FOL:NADP+, hE:THF, and hE:NADPH complexes were obtained
from 10% 13C- and 15N-labeled protein using
the CHD2-selective 13C HSQC experiment described
by Otten et al. in which Leu-δ2
and Val-γ2 resonances have the same phase as Met-ε resonances.
Methyl assignments obtained for the hE:FOL:NADP+ complex
were used as a starting point for assignments of 13C methyl
resonances in the hE:THF and hE:NADPH complexes, which were finalized
using 13C NOESY and 15N TOCSY experiments for
each complex.

13C Methyl R2 Relaxation
Dispersion Experiments
Relaxation dispersion experiments
report on millisecond to microsecond time scale exchange processes.
Methyl 13C CPMG relaxation dispersion experiments were
performed on a [1-13C,15N]hE:FOL:NADP+ sample at multiple temperatures (280, 300, and 310 K) using a Bruker
DRX 800 MHz spectrometer and the pulse schemes described by Skrynnikov
et al. and Lundström et al. Using [1-13C]glucose as the sole
carbon source leads to isolated 13C-enriched methyls for
most methyl side chains; however, the presence of 13C–13Cmethyl labeling for Thr-γ2 and Ile-δ1
methyls can interfere with accurate spin relaxation measurements due
to the one-bond C–C coupling. Experiments
were performed using a total relaxation period (TCPMG) of 40 ms and refocusing delays (1/τcp) of 100, 200, 400*, 600, 1000, 1400*, 1800, and 1900 s–1, where asterisks denote experiments completed in duplicate. Dispersion
curves were fit using GLOVE.

Measurement
of 3J Couplings and
Determination of χ1 Rotamer Populations
The 3JCγCO and 3JCγN coupling constants
describe the average χ1 orientation of the side chain
with respect to the backbone. There are established NMR experiments
for measuring 3JCγCO and 3JCγN coupling constants
for Ile, Thr, and Val γ-methyls, and for aromatic
residues. These rely on 13C HSQC and 15N HSQC difference spectra, respectively.
A reference spectrum has maximal intensity as coupling is not evolved,
and a second spectrum, where the coupling of interest is allowed to
evolve, results in peak intensities that are attenuated as a function
of that coupling. For the methyl-containing residues, the couplings
are calculated from the relationship (Ia – Ib)/Ia = 2 sin2(πJCγXT), where Ia is the
reference spectrum intensity, Ib is the
intensity for either the 3JCγCO or 3JCγN experiment,
and the delay T is 28.6 ms. Similarly, for aromatic
residues, the couplings are calculated from the relationship Ib/Ia = cos(2πJCγXT), where Ia is the reference spectrum intensity and Ib is the intensity for the amide of residue i + 1 in the 3JCγCO experiment or for residue i in the 3JCγN experiment. The delay T was 25 ms for 3JCγCO experiments and 50 ms for 3JCγN experiments. All 3J measurements were
taken in triplicate or better to reduce the contribution of spectral
noise to rotamer calculations.

The measured coupling constants
allow for the calculation of χ1 rotamer populations
assuming a three-site jump model according to the following equations:,where 3Jmeas,CγN and 3Jmeas,CγCO are
the experimentally measured coupling constants; p–60, p60, and p180 are the populations of the respective χ1 rotamer states; and Jt, Jg, and Jh for CγCO
and CγN are the expected coupling values for the fully populated
180°, 60°, and −60° χ1 rotamers,
respectively (Table  and Figure S1 of the ). Populations were fit
by minimizing the squared difference between measured and calculated 3JCγN and 3JCγCO couplings for each residue: ∑(1/σJmeas)2(Jcalc – Jmeas)2, where σ is the standard deviation based on three or more
measurements of 3J. Populations for Val
residues represent a simultaneous fit of γ1 and γ2 couplings. The extent of rotamer averaging is related to
the major rotamer population by the relationship pmajor ≡ max[p60, p180, p–60], where more rotamer averaging is associated with a smaller pmajor value. Population ranges were determined
using 3J ± σ. Note that small
values of 3J are prone to larger errors
(by percent) when the primary contribution to error is from noise
in the NMR spectra. Unique rotamer averaging is present when the 3J values of a residue in one or more complexes
have nonoverlapping error ranges.

Predicted Values
for 3J Couplings at χ1 Rotamer Angles of 180°,
60°, and −60°
 	3JCγN (Hz)	3JCγCO (Hz)	
residue type	Jt	Jg	Jh	Jt	Jg	Jh	
His	2.73	0.50	0.50	1.09	1.09	4.97	
Phe, Trp, Tyr	2.62	0.38	0.38	0.55	0.55	4.43	
Ile	0.95	0.31	2.01	0.79	3.83	0.45	
Thr	0.27	0.73	1.65	1.18	3.35	0.18	
Val Cγ1	2.00	0.47	0.68	0.45	0.79	3.83	
Val Cγ2	0.31	2.01	0.95	3.83	0.45	0.79	
Expected 3J values for fully
populated staggered rotamers. All values are given
with respect to the χ1 angle. Values for the aromatic
residues are derived from fits of Karplus curves to the DHFR 3J data vs the χ1 angle as
reported previously. Values for the γ-methyl
residues are from the parametrizations of Chou et al. Plots of each Karplus curve are shown in Figure S1 of the .

While the interpretation of these 3J coupling values in terms of a three-site rotamer hopping
model is
generally justified, there are clear cases in which the predicted
minor rotamer is not sterically feasible, as was observed also for
ecDHFR. This is especially evident for
some well-packed aromatic residues. In such cases, it is more appropriate
to interpret the 3J couplings in terms
of local motions within a rotamer well, where these side chains undergo
local averaging about the χ1 angle, or in terms of
a relatively fixed but skewed rotamer (i.e., with a noncanonical χ1). Case and co-workers have demonstrated that local χ1 averaging can lead to a broadening of the expected Karplus
curves such that the maximal values are reduced and the minimal values
are increased. Consideration of these
issues for individual residues can provide insights into local conformational
changes between complexes for residues that can clearly not accommodate
the otherwise predicted minor rotamers; pmajor remains a proxy for these types of in-well rotamer averaging because
it is a measure of the deviation of the 3J couplings from the expected values for the fully populated staggered
rotamers.

Chemical Shift-Derived Rotamer Populations
There has
been recent success in correlating 13C methyl chemical
shifts with valine χ1 and leucine and isoleucine
χ2 rotamer populations., The correlation between the chemical shift and dihedral angle has
been largely attributed to a γ-substituent effect, the influence
of an atom in the gauche position three bonds away,
based upon early studies of small molecule 13C chemical
shifts., For leucines, a simple relationship between
the chemical shifts of the methyls has been reportedwhere ptrans is
the population of the χ2 = 180° rotamer. Despite
the nine possible χ1, χ2 pairs for
leucine, only two of these are significantly sampled in structures
in the Protein Data Bank (PDB): (180°, 60°) and (−60°,
180°). Therefore, knowledge of the
χ2 rotamer is largely predictive of the χ1 rotamer conformation. This approach was used to determine
Leu χ1, χ2 rotamer populations in
hDHFR based on the 13Cmethyl chemical shift
assignments for the hE:FOL:NADP+, hE:THF, and hE:NADPH
complexes. To account for contributions of neighboring aromatic rings
to the 13C chemical shift, ring current corrections were
calculated using Shifts-4.3.

Results
Resonance
Assignments
Methyl side chain assignments
for several intermediates of the hDHFR major enzymatic cycle are summarized
in Table S1 of the . The methyl and backbone assignments for all complexes have been
deposited in the BioMagResBank. The 15N HSQC and 13C HSQC spectra of the hE:THF:NADP+ and hE:FOL:NADP+ complexes are virtually indistinguishable, whereas the spectrum
of the hE:THF:NADPH complex shows extensive broadening for resonances
of residues near the active site. Complete assignments could not be
obtained for this complex. There are substantial chemical shift changes
in the hE:NADPH and hE:THF binary complexes for both backbone and
side chain atoms relative to the ternary complexes. The average chemical
shift differences from the ternary hE:FOL:NADP+ Michaelis
model complex are plotted on the structures of the hE:NADPH and hE:THF
complexes in Figure .

Backbone and methyl side
chain chemical shift differences between
the binary complexes (hE:NADPH, left; hE:THF, right) and the ternary
hE:FOL:NADP+ complex. The backbone color and ribbon diameter
report on the average amide and Cα chemical shift differences:
ΔδNHC = [ΔδH2 + (ΔδN/5)2 + (2ΔδCα/5)2]1/2. The backbone is colored
by a gradient from white, indicating minimal chemical shift difference,
to red for ΔδNHC values of &gt;1.0 ppm. Ile,
Thr,
Val, and Leu side chains are shown as sticks, with the methyl groups
shown as spheres. The methyl groups are colored with a white to red
gradient according to the average methyl chemical shift difference:
ΔδCH3 = [ΔδHmethyl2 + (ΔδCmethyl/3)2]1/2, where red indicates a ΔδCH3 of &gt;0.4 ppm. Leu residues with unassigned
or
ambiguous methyl chemical shifts are shown as small blue spheres.

Millisecond Time Scale
Methyl Dynamics
We have shown
previously using 15N CPMG R2 relaxation dispersion experiments that there are no detectable millisecond
time scale backbone fluctuations in the hE:FOL:NADP+, hE:THF:NADP+, hE:THF, and hE:NADPH complexes. To determine whether hDHFR side chains experience microsecond to
millisecond time scale conformational fluctuations, such as those
observed for ecDHFR, 13Cmethyl CPMG relaxation
dispersion experiments were performed on the hE:FOL:NADP+ complex at temperatures ranging from 280 to 310 K. A representative
set of methyl relaxation dispersion data is shown in Figure S2 of
the . While some
residues show hints of dispersion at 280 K, e.g., Ile114-Cδ
and Ile151-Cγ2, none of the methyl-containing residues show
clearly defined 13Cmethyl dispersion curves.
This is contrary to what was observed for ecDHFR, which exhibits exchange
on the microsecond to millisecond time scale for most methyls, but is consistent with 15N CPMG experiments
for hDHFR. On the basis of these results,
and given that the hE:FOL:NADP+ complex exhibits a single
set of resonances in HSQC spectra, any conformational exchange processes
must be occurring on a time scale faster than the scale that can be
detected by CPMG relaxation dispersion experiments and/or involve
very small changes in chemical shifts.

3JCγCO and 3JCγN Couplings and Side
Chain Rotamer Populations
χ1 rotamer populations
for the complexes corresponding to the intermediates in the major
enzymatic cycle of hDHFR have been determined from 3JCγCO and 3JCγN coupling constants for Ile, Thr, Val, and aromatic
residues. Populations were determined by minimizing the difference
between 3Jmeas and 3Jcalc as described in . The rotamer populations at each residue are summarized
graphically in Figures S3 and S4 of the . χ2 rotamer populations for Leu
residues were estimated from 13C methyl chemical shift
values according to eq . The χ2 rotamer populations for the Leu residues imply a similar population
of the corresponding χ1 rotamer because Leu rotamer
pairs are predominantly (χ1, χ2)
= (180°, 60°) or (−60°, 180°). The 3J coupling
constants for methyl and aromatic residues are shown in Figures  and , respectively, with
complete tables of measured couplings and rotamer populations for
each complex given in Tables S2–S11 of the . The 13C chemical shifts
values and calculated χ2 rotamer populations for
Leu residues are listed in Table S12 of the , and the χ2 180° populations
are shown in Figure .

3JCγN and 3JCγCO values for Ile, Thr, and
Val residues of the hE:FOL:NADP+ (squares), hE:THF:NADP+ (circles), hE:NADPH (diamonds), and hE:THF (triangles) complexes.
Blue, green, and red bars show the expected 3J values for fully populated 180°, 60°, and −60°
χ1 rotamers, respectively; shaded areas represent
the variation in 3J values over a ±5°
span about the staggered rotamer, according to the relevant Karplus
curves (Figure S1 of the ). The average coupling over all complexes is shown as an X, except
for residues with different rotamer populations in one or more complexes,
which are labeled with an asterisk. Complexes are excluded from the
average if the error in the coupling constant is &gt;1 Hz. The standard
deviation of 3Javg is shown
as a dark gray vertical bar.

3JCγN and 3JCγCO values for aromatic residues
of the hE:FOL:NADP+ (squares), hE:THF:NADP+ (circles),
hE:NADPH (diamonds), and hE:THF (triangles) complexes. Symbols are
as described in the legend of Figure . The 3JCγCO value for Phe142 of
the hE:THF complex is a lower bound because of resonance overlap.
The average coupling over all complexes is shown as an X, except for
residues with different rotamer populations in one or more complexes,
which are labeled with an asterisk. Complexes are excluded from the
average if the error in the coupling constant is &gt;1 Hz. The standard
deviation of 3Javg is shown
as a dark gray vertical bar.

Population of the χ2 = 180° rotamer for Leu
residues, determined from the 13Cmethyl chemical
shifts. The hE:FOL:NADP+ and hE:THF:NADP+ complexes
have essentially identical chemical shifts and therefore similar rotamer
populations. The Leu side chains are assumed to populate only the
χ2 = 180° or 60° rotamer (eq ). Asterisks denote residues with a unique average χ2 rotamer conformation in one or more hDHFR complexes.

As was the case for ecDHFR, many
residues exhibit the same rotameric
averaging in all complexes of hDHFR. These are shown as spheres in
Figure , colored according to pmajor with a white (pmajor = 1) to red (pmajor &lt; 0.5) gradient.
Residues that exhibit rotamer populations that differ in one or more
of the hDHFR complexes are colored teal. These “variable population”
residues cluster largely in the active site and in regions proximal
to the ligand binding pockets. Some residues beyond these zones also
exhibit variations in rotamer averaging: of particular note are three
residues (Tyr156, His127, and Leu97) proximal to helix αF, which
slides ∼2.5 Å between the hinge-closed and hinge-open
states of the protein. Rotamer populations determined using the three-site
staggered rotamer assumption are indicated for all residues, but as
mentioned in , this interpretation
may not be appropriate for some well-packed aromatic residues, for
which the 3J couplings are better interpreted
as reporting on local motions about the major χ1 rotamer
instead of rotamer hopping.

Average χ1 rotamer conformation for the complexes
of hDHFR shown on the hE:FOL:NADP+ structure. Ile, Thr,
Val, Leu, and aromatic side chains are shown as spheres, when the pmajor could be determined. Each quadrant (clockwise
from the top left) is rotated 90° into the page. Residues with
a unique rotamer conformation in one or more complexes of hDHFR are
colored and labeled in teal. Residues showing the same average χ1 rotamer conformation in each hDHFR complex are labeled in
red and colored with a white (pmajor =
1) to red (pmajor &lt; 0.5) gradient.

Discussion
As
Dunbrack and co-workers have shown, the backbone dihedral angles
are predictive of the primary χ1 rotamer sampled
by side chains. Indeed, the major rotamers
for the hDHFR complexes in solution are consistent with the favored
rotamer based on the X-ray backbone dihedrals for that complex (Figure
S5 of the ). 3J couplings and chemical shift values can
provide information about the distributions of rotamer populations
sampled in solution, in terms of both staggered rotamer hopping and
in-well rotamer averaging. Analysis of these rotamer distributions
in the intermediate complexes of the hDHFR enzymatic cycle provides
insights into the structural variation hDHFR undergoes during catalysis.

Comparison
of Rotamer Averaging in the hDHFR and ecDHFR Michaelis
Model Complexes
Rotamer populations were previously determined
for the complexes representing the intermediates in the E.
coli DHFR catalytic cycle. Many
residues in the active sites of hDHFR and ecDHFR are conserved. These
are colored green in Figure A if the side
chains are identical or cyan if the residue is conserved (Leu, Ile,
or Val in both ecDHFR and hDHFR, or aromatic in both). A comparison
of the 3J couplings for the identical
methyl and aromatic residues indicates that the average χ1 conformation is essentially the same in the human and E. coli enzymes (Figure B). The
residues showing the greatest deviation are Val50 and Tyr121 (Val40
and Tyr100 in ecDHFR), which are sensitive to the bound ligands.

Identical
residues in human and E. coli DHFR show
remarkably similar average χ1 rotamer conformations.
(A) Spheres are shown for Ile, Thr, Val, Leu, and aromatic side chains
on the structures of the human and E. coli E:FOL:NADP+ complexes. Identical residues are colored green. Conserved
residues (Leu, Val, and Ile in both species or aromatic in both species)
are colored cyan. Methyl (aromatic) residues that are aromatic (methyl)
residues in the other species are colored red. (B) 3JCγCO and 3JCγN couplings for the identical residues (colored
green in panel A) are plotted for the ecE:FOL:NADP+ complex
vs the hE:FOL:NADP+ complex. Triangles indicate methyl
residues; squares indicate aromatic residues. Val50 and Tyr121, which
deviate the most from the line with a slope of 1 (broad gray line),
are sensitive to the bound ligands in both human and E. coli DHFR.

Differences in rotameric averaging
are observed for those residues
that are not conserved between hDHFR and ecDHFR (termed nonequivalent
residues). In situations where an aromatic residue has been substituted
for a methyl residue (red residues in Figure A), the aromatic residue shows a decrease in rotamer averaging relative
to the methyl residue. An example of this is a residue at the interface
of the Met20 and FG loops, Phe142 in hDHFR, which is replaced by Val119
in ecDHFR. Val119 displays a very high level of rotamer averaging
in the occluded, but not the closed, complexes of ecDHFR. In hDHFR,
which has a closed Met20 loop throughout the catalytic cycle, Phe142
is predominantly in the χ1 = −60° rotamer
conformation in all complexes. The nonequivalent Ile, Thr, and Val
residues of hDHFR show an enhanced degree of rotameric averaging compared
to that of the residues of ecDHFR, with an average pmajor of 0.68 ± 0.18 in hDHFR versus a value of 0.90
± 0.07 in ecDHFR for the E:FOL:NADP+ complex (see
Figure S6 of the  for histograms of the pmajor distributions
for hDHFR and ecDHFR E:FOL:NADP+ complexes). Many of the
residues with enhanced rotamer averaging in hDHFR are located in loop
regions that represent insertions into the core secondary structure
shared by the human and E. coli enzymes. This is
particularly apparent in the hDHFR hinge regions, where increased
rotamer averaging of small side chains along domain interfaces may
facilitate the quasi-rigid body movements seen in the hinge-open versus
hinge-closed states.

Rotamer Averaging in the hDHFR Catalytic
Intermediates
Residues showing variable rotamer averaging
in one or more complexes
of hDHFR (teal residues in Figure ) are located
predominantly in the adenosine binding subdomain (top half of each
structure). Unlike ecDHFR, which exhibits variable rotamer averaging
for numerous residues in the loop subdomain, hDHFR, in which the Met20 loop remains closed throughout the catalytic
cycle, shows similar levels of rotamer averaging in the loop subdomain
for all complexes (Figure ). The major exception
is Phe31 on helix αC, which has a different primary rotamer
in the hE:NADPH complex and in the substrate/analogue-bound complexes.
Many of the residues with variable rotamer averaging in the hDHFR
complexes appear to be sensitive to variations in the position of
helix αF, which is adjacent to hinge 2 (Figure ). In contrast, the methyl side chains in and around the hinge
1 region show similar, elevated levels of rotamer averaging in each
of the hDHFR complexes.

The hE:FOL:NADP+ Complex Compared
to the hE:THF:NADP+ Complex
The 15N
HSQC and 13C HSQC spectra for the hE:THF:NADP+ and hE:FOL:NADP+ complexes are virtually identical, indicating
that the bound
FOL and THF interact in very similar manner with the protein backbone
and side chains in the ternary complexes (Figure S7 of the ). This is in marked contrast
to the case for E. coli DHFR, where substantial changes
in chemical shift are observed between FOL and THF complexes due to
different interactions between the protein and the pterin ring; the
protonated N8 atom of the pterin ring in THF (and DHF) forms a hydrogen
bond with the carbonyl of Ile5, an interaction that cannot be made
by FOL., It is interesting that these differences
between the human and E. coli enzymes are paralleled
in the binding affinities. FOL, DHF, and THF all bind hDHFR with similar
affinities. In contrast, ecDHFR binds
FOL, DHF, and THF incrementally more tightly, with ∼1 order
of magnitude difference in affinity between each successive ligand.

Methyl 13C chemical shifts
are very sensitive to rotamer populations.,− The 13C HSQC spectra of the hE:FOL:NADP+ and hE:THF:NADP+ complexes are very similar, indicating
that the distributions of rotamers for these complexes are virtually
indistinguishable. This is also confirmed by comparison of 3JCγCO and 3JCγN coupling constants. On the basis of the 3J couplings, Val8 is an apparent exception;
however, the large uncertainties in the small 3J values for this residue make the rotamer analysis unreliable,
and methyl 13C chemical sifts suggest that the rotamer
population is similar (predominantly χ1 = 60°)
in all complexes.

Average χ1 Conformation
in the hE:NADPH Complex
As shown in Figure , many backbone and
side chain resonances of the hE:NADPH complex, generally associated
with residues in the substrate binding pocket and the cofactor binding
site, exhibit different chemical shifts than in the ternary complexes.
The changes in the average χ1 conformation also span
these regions. Unlike the ecE:NADPH complex, which shows a widespread
increase in χ1 rotameric averaging throughout the
complex compared to the ecE:FOL:NADP+ complex, several
residues in the hE:NADPH complex show decreased rotamer averaging
relative to that of the ternary complexes. This is the case for Tyr156,
which has an average χ1 conformation that depends
on the conformation of helix αF, which will be discussed in
detail below. Val50 also shows decreased rotamer averaging in the
hE:NADPH complex compared to that of each of the other complexes.
This is likely to be a consequence of the hinge-open conformation
of the hE:NADPH complex compared to the hinge-closed conformation
of each of the other complexes. Phe31 adopts a unique χ1 conformation in the hE:NADPH complex compared to the conformations
in the other complexes, as will be discussed below. Several residues
do show increased rotamer averaging in the hE:NADPH complex compared
to the rotamer averaging in the other hDHFR complexes. The reduced 3JCγN and 3JCγCO coupling constants of Trp57 and Phe58,
respectively, in the hE:NADPH complex compared to those of the hinge-closed
complexes (Tables S7–S11 of the ) suggest an increase in in-well χ1 rotamer averaging of these residues. Ile114 also shows an increase
in rotamer averaging. Ile114 and Val115 are analogous to Val93 and
Ile94, respectively, of ecDHFR. In ecDHFR, Ile94, with its side chain
oriented toward the substrate, was found to be especially sensitive
to the nature of the bound ligand in the substrate binding pocket. Val115, which is oriented toward the substrate
in hDHFR, does not appear to have the sensitivity to substrate that
the larger Ile side chain in ecDHFR does. Instead, Ile114 of hDHFR
faces away from the substrate binding pocket and toward helix αF
and shows elevated rotamer averaging in the binary complexes. It is
not clear if this is a consequence of changes in the position of helix
αF, which appears to drive the rotamer averaging in numerous
other residues, or if it is an effect propagated from the substrate
binding site.

Average χ1 Conformation
in the hE:THF Complex
As in the hE:NADPH complex, several
residues in the hE:THF complex
are sensitive to the conformation of helix αF, discussed below.
Unlike the hE:NADPH complex, most of the chemical shift differences
in the hE:THF complex relative to the ternary complexes are associated
with residues clustered near the vacant cofactor binding site (Figure ). The absence of NADP/H leads to an increase in
rotamer averaging for Leu75. Ile60, Ile114, and Val115 also show increased
rotamer averaging relative to the ternary complexes. Ile114 shows
elevated rotamer averaging that is similar to that of the hE:NADPH
complex. In the hE:THF complex, the methyl groups of Ile60 and Val115
show significant chemical shift changes relative to those of the hE:FOL:NADP+ complex, which is consistent with a change in rotamer averaging.
Increased averaging of these residues, which are both near the bound
substrate, may be a consequence of their position along the trajectory
taken by helix αF as it slides from one position to the other.

Phe31 Is a Substrate and Product Gatekeeper
It has
been suggested on the basis of X-ray structures and molecular dynamics
simulations that Phe31, located on helix αC following the Met20
loop, functions as a gatekeeper residue that controls access to the
active site.,, In solution, the 3J coupling constants
show that the Phe31 side chain is fully in the χ1 = −60° rotamer when the substrate or product is bound
and fully occupies the χ1 = 180° rotamer in
the hE:NADPH complex, where the substrate/product binding pocket is
empty (Figure ). The combination of hinge
opening and rotation of Phe31 into the χ1 = 180°
rotamer in the hE:NADPH holoenzyme opens the active site to facilitate
entry of the substrate. However, once bound, the p-aminobenzoylglutamate (pABG) moiety of the substrate would clash
sterically with the phenyl ring,, triggering
the conformational transition to the −60° rotameric state
of Phe31. In the −60° rotamer, the phenyl ring is packed
tightly against the pterin ring of the substrate and may contribute
to transition state stabilization, because the hydride transfer rate
of Phe31 mutants is significantly decreased. Indeed, when the equivalent residue at this site in ecDHFR, Leu28,
is mutated to phenylalanine, the hydride transfer rate is greatly
enhanced, emphasizing the importance of this residue in active site
organization. Product release requires
the reverse transition, in which the conformation of the Phe31 side
chain changes from the χ1 = −60° rotamer
to the χ1 = 180° rotamer of the holoenzyme.
It is notable that the energetics are such that Phe31 fully populates
the −60° or 180° rotamer in the various catalytic
intermediates, and we see no evidence of rotamer averaging in any
of the complexes at the level of uncertainty of our measurements.

Phe31
acts as a gatekeeper for the substrate and product. (A) Phe31
(blue spheres) is fully in the χ1 = −60°
rotamer when THF or FOL (yellow spheres) is bound, packing tightly
against the substrate and pseudosubstrate. (B) In the hE:NADPH complex,
with the vacant substrate binding pocket, Phe31 is fully in the χ1 = 180° rotamer, with the side chain packing against
helix αC, leaving the substrate pocket accessible.

Role of Side Chain Disorder in the Movement
of Helix αF
The primary conformational change that
hDHFR undergoes as it progresses
through the catalytic cycle is between a hinge-closed state, in complexes
where the substrate or product is bound, and a hinge-open state, formed
when the substrate or product binding pocket is vacant, i.e., in the
E:NADPH complex. One of the structural consequences of this is a change
in the location of helix αF, which is adjacent to hinge 2. In
undergoing the transition from the hinge-open state to the hinge-closed
state, helix αF slides ∼2.5 Å toward the active
site (Figure B). In the hinge-closed state, helix αF is restrained by a pair
of hydrogen bonds involving the side chains of His127 and Tyr156.
Tyr156, which is on the β-sheet of the loop subdomain, forms
a hydrogen bond from its hydroxyl group to the backbone CO group of
Met125 in the hinge-closed complexes but not in the hinge-open complexes,
because the shift in helix αF in the hinge-open conformation
increases the distance between these atoms from 2.6 to 4.3 Å
(Figure A,B). In the hE:THF:NADP+ and hE:FOL:NADP+ complexes, the 3JCγCO value is reduced relative to those of the binary
complexes, suggesting that Tyr156 in the ternary complexes adopts
a more skewed χ1 rotamer to form the hydrogen bond
or that the side chain undergoes more in-well rotamer averaging while
tethered to the Met125 backbone.

Role of rotamer averaging in conformational
changes associated
with hinge motions. (A) Location of helix αF in the X-ray structure
of the hE:FOL:NADP+ complex (PDB entry 4M6K). Helix αF is stabilized in its hinge-closed conformation
by hydrogen bonds, shown by the black dashed lines. (B) X-ray structure
of the hE:NADPH complex (PDB entry 4M6J), showing movement of helix αF
toward the active site and breaking of the restraining hydrogen bonds
upon opening of the hinges. Leu97 undergoes
increased rotamer averaging in the hE:NADPH complex. Helix αF
is colored red in panels A and B, and side chains are shown as sticks.
NADP/H is colored cyan and atom colors and folate yellow and atom
colors. (C) Superposition of the structures of the hE:NADPH (green)
and hE:FOL:NADP+ (pink) complexes, showing conformational
changes associated with sliding of helix αF and at the C-terminus
of helix αE. Methyl-containing side chains (in PDB entry 4M6J) that undergo rotamer
averaging in the hE:NADPH complex are shown as spheres: red for side
chains on or in contact with helix αF, blue for side chains
that pack against the C-terminal region of helix αE, pink for
side chains in hinge 1, and gray for all other methyl-containing side
chains with rotamer averaging. Leu133 also exhibits rotamer averaging
in the crystal structure of the hE:NADPH complex. The NADPH in PDB
entry 4M6J is
colored cyan and atom colors; the folate and NADP+ ligands
have been omitted from the structure of the hE:FOL:NADP+ complex for the sake of clarity.

His127 is located in hinge 2, at the C-terminus of helix
αF.
In the hinge-closed conformation, His127 Nε2 is close enough
to Asp94 COδ to form a hydrogen bond, which cannot be formed
in the hinge-open hE:NADPH complex (Figure A,B). The 3JCγN coupling
constants for His127 in the ternary complexes and the hE:NADPH complex
indicate a fully populated χ1 = 180° rotamer,
in accord with the X-ray structures. The 3JCγN value is decreased in the E:THF complex, consistent
with the skewed rotamer (χ1 = 209°) observed
in the crystal structure of the E:FOL complex (PDB entry 1DHF). Leu97 is close
in space to His127. In the hinge-closed complexes, the Leu97 Cδ1
methyl is next to the face of the His127 aromatic ring (Figure A) and is subject to a ring current shift; in the
hinge-open hE:NADPH complex, Leu97 Cδ1 moves away from the face
of the histidine ring (Figure B). The 13Cmethyl chemical shifts of Leu97, corrected for
the ring current contributions from His127, indicate increased χ2 rotamer averaging of the Leu97 side chain in the hE:NADPH
complex compared to that of either of the ternary complexes or the
hE:THF complex (Table S12 of the ). In each of the hDHFR complexes, the space is available to Leu97
to sample multiple rotamer conformations and the backbone dihedrals
would support either rotamer (Figure S5 of the ), but the chemical shifts suggest a
very low level of rotamer averaging for the hinge-closed complexes.
The χ2 = 60° conformation would cause the hydrophobic
methyl groups to be substantially solvent-exposed, such that the better
packed χ2 = 180° rotamer is substantially preferred.
This suggests that in the hE:NADPH hinge-open state that the χ2 = 60° rotamer of Leu97 is more protected from solvent
than in the hinge-closed complexes, primarily as a consequence of
the changed conformation of the adjacent αF helix.

The
methyl-containing side chains that undergo rotamer averaging
in the hinge-open hE:NADPH complex cluster in functionally important
regions (Figure C). One such cluster (colored
red in Figure C) includes Leu75, Leu93, Leu97,
Ile114, and Leu133, all of which are in contact with helix αF;
Val120 on helix αF also displays rotamer disorder. Dynamic disorder
in these side chains may well play a direct functional role by facilitating
sliding of helix αF during the hinge-open to hinge-closed transition.
A second cluster [Leu49, Leu99, Thr100, Leu105, Val109, and Val112
(colored blue in Figure C)] is located at
the packing interface between the C-terminal end of helix αE
and the β-sheet of the adenosine-binding subdomain, a region
that contacts hinge 1 and undergoes structural rearrangement during
opening or closing of the hinges. Several side chains in hinge 1 (colored
pink) also exhibit rotamer averaging. Thus, it appears that the core
of the adenosine-binding subdomain has intrinsic side chain flexibility
that may function to “lubricate” the movement of secondary
structure elements during hinge transitions. Most of these residues
also undergo rotamer averaging in the hinge-closed complexes (hE:FOL:NADP+, hE:THF:NADP+, and hE:THF), showing that the flexibility
is an intrinsic property of the adenosine-binding subdomain and is
not influenced by the nature of the bound ligands. In contrast to
the adenosine-binding domain, relatively few residues in the loop
subdomain exhibit side chain disorder. Rotamer averaging is observed
for Val135 and Ile151, which pack against Leu133 and may help accommodate
its motions.

Conclusions
Conformational and dynamics
data for a wide range of time scales
have been collected for side chain residues of various complexes of
human DHFR that represent intermediates in the catalytic cycle. Consistent
with what has been found for the backbone, there is no evidence of millisecond time scale motions of the side
chains in hDHFR complexes. This occurs either because there are exchange
processes that are too fast to detect with CPMG relaxation dispersion
experiments or because any exchange processes present do not cause
significant changes in the chemical shift. Backbone R1ρ dispersion experiments show microsecond exchange
processes in the hE:FOL:NADP+ complex, suggesting that similarly fast dynamics may be present
for hDHFR side chains.

In contrast to ecDHFR, which undergoes
transitions between closed
and occluded active site conformations that influence side chain rotamer
populations in the various catalytic intermediates, hDHFR remains in the closed conformation in all complexes.
As a consequence, differences in side chain χ1 and/or
χ2 rotamer populations and averaging between the
various hDHFR complexes are relatively small and are influenced more
by the presence or absence of ligands, rather than the conformational
change. For hDHFR, the only substantial structural change is associated
with a subdomain rotation that opens the active site cleft and causes
helix αF to slide relative to neighboring secondary structural
elements; most of the residues that pack against this helix exhibit
rotamer disorder in all complexes studied and may lubricate the movement
of the helix.

These data paint a picture of hDHFR as an enzyme
that requires
minimal conformational rearrangement as it proceeds through its enzymatic
cycle. The hinge-open or hinge-closed state of the adenosine-binding
subdomain and the side chain conformation of Phe31 appear to contribute
in important ways to ligand flux and active site packing in human
DHFR. However, we have thus far found no evidence of transient sampling
of higher-energy conformational substates in the catalytic intermediates
of hDHFR that may facilitate progression through the reaction cycle.
This is in marked contrast to the E. coli enzyme,
in which millisecond time scale fluctuations play a major role in
modulating the energy landscape and regulating ligand flux. Backbone motions may be present and necessary
for hDHFR activity but have not been detected by the experiments thus
far performed, which probe only millisecond time scale fluctuations.
On the basis of our observation of pervasive backbone motions on the
microsecond time scale in human DHFR, it seems highly likely that catalytically relevant motions in the
human enzyme are much faster than in E. coli DHFR.
Characterization of these motions will be the subject of future investigations
of human DHFR complexes.

Supporting Information Available
Tables showing methyl chemical
shift assignments and complete rotamer populations and 3JCγCO and 3JCγN coupling constants for each of the complexes
and supplementary figures. This material is available free of charge
via the Internet at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bi4015314_si_001.pdf

bi4015314_si_002.pdf

Accession Codes
Chemical shift
assignments and values for the 3JCγN and 3JCγCO coupling constants have been deposited in the BioMagResBank as accession
numbers 19567 (hE:FOL:NADP+), 19566 (hE:NADPH), 19565 (hE:THF:NADP+), 19564 (hE:THF), and 19563 (hE:FOL).

The authors
declare no competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
We thank Gerard
Kroon for his assistance with NMR experiments
and Maria Martinez-Yamout and Gira Bhabha for helpful discussion and
assistance in sample preparation.

Abbreviations
hDHFR
or ecDHFRhuman or E.
coli dihydrofolate reductase, respectively

NADP+nicotinamide adenine
dinucleotide phosphate

NADPHreduced nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate

DHF7,8-dihydrofolate

THF(6S)-5,6,7,8-tetrahydrofolate

FOLfolate

MTXmethotrexate

NMRnuclear magnetic resonance

HSQCheteronuclear
single-quantum correlation.

hDHFR does not contain a Met at position
20, but for the sake of being consistent with the ecDHFR terminology,
we refer to the region of residues 12–27 of hDHFR as the Met20
loop. Note also that the residue numbering in hDHFR starts from Met0
to be consistent with the numbering in X-ray structures.

