High-density
lipoprotein (HDL) possesses anti-atherogenic properties that arise,
in part, from its participation in the reverse cholesterol transport
pathway in which the principal protein, apolipoprotein A-I (apoA-I),
plays a central role., As a result, there is great interest
in understanding the structure–function relationships of apoA-I
(for reviews, see refs (−)). ApoA-I in a double-belt arrangement
stabilizes discoidal HDL particles, and in a trefoil
arrangement, which has similar protein–protein contacts, stabilizes
spherical HDL particles. The apoA-I molecules
in HDL particles are in a highly dynamic state,, and
besides participating in the “scaffold” structures that
control particle stability described above, apoA-I also exists in
a labile pool that can dissociate from the particle surface and exchange
between different HDL particles.− This exchangeable pool is a precursor of lipid-free
(poor) apoA-I or pre-β1 HDL that
plays a key role in promoting ABCA1-mediated efflux of cellular phospholipid
(PL) and cholesterol, and formation of nascent HDL particles. Higher levels of circulating pre-β1 HDL
are apparently cardioprotective, so knowledge
of how to increase the increase the size of the precursor pool of
apoA-I molecules on spherical HDL particles could be beneficial. It
follows that understanding the factors that control binding of apoA-I
to HDL particles is significant. Previously, we used surface plasmon
resonance (SPR) to show that the binding of apoA-I to HDL is reversible
and that protein–protein as well as protein–phospholipid
interactions are involved.

Here
we explore in detail the influences of apoA-I tertiary structure domain
properties and spherical HDL surface characteristics on the binding
process. Also, by comparing the binding of apoA-I variants to a lipid
emulsion on one hand and HDL on the other, we address the question
of how the lipid binding capabilities of apoA-I influence binding
to the lipoprotein particle. The results demonstrate that the hydrophobicity
of the C-terminal domain of human apoA-I and the availability of free
space in the surface of HDL particles play critical roles in determining
the degree of apoA-I binding. These findings are pertinent to how
other minor protein components, detected by proteomic analysis,, associate with HDL particles and are transported in plasma.

Experimental
Procedures
Materials
HDL2 (1.065 g/mL &lt; d &lt; 1.125 g/mL) and HDL3 (1.125 g/mL &lt; d &lt; 1.21 g/mL) were isolated by sequential ultracentrifugation from a pool of normolipidemic frozen human plasma
obtained by combining several single units. These preparations were
characterized as described previously. HDL was delipidated in an ethanol/diethyl ether mixture, and purified apoA-I and apoA-II were isolated by anion
exchange chromatography on Q-Sepharose.
Human and mouse apoA-I and engineered variants were expressed as thioredoxin
fusion proteins in Escherichia coli and isolated
as reported previously., Cleavage of the thioredoxin
fusion protein with thrombin leaves the target apoA-I with two extra
amino acids, Gly and Ser, at the amino terminus. The preparation and
chacterization of the full-length proteins, their isolated N- and
C-terminal domains, and human–mouse hybrid apoA-I molecules
have been described previously.,, The human apoA-I variants containing C-terminal mutations at positions
225, 229, 232, and 236 have also been described previously. The apoA-I preparations were at least 95% pure
as assessed by sodium dodecyl sulfate–polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis
(SDS–PAGE). The proteins were stored as lyophilized powders
at −20 °C and, prior to being used, were dissolved in
6 M GdnHCl and dialyzed extensively at 4 °C against the appropriate
buffer. Protein concentrations were determined by either a modified
Lowry procedure or the absorbance at
280 nm. Egg yolk phosphatidylcholine (PC) and triolein were purchased
from Avanti Polar Lipids (Birmingham, AL) and Sigma (St. Louis, MO),
respectively. Laurdan was obtained from Molecular Probes (Eugene,
OR).

Binding of ApoA-I to HDL2 and HDL3
The apoA-I preparations were labeled with 14C to specific
activities of ∼2 μCi/mg of protein by reductive methylation
of lysine residues using [14C]formaldehyde, as described
previously; this level of trace labeling
does not alter the lipid affinity of apolipoproteins. A mixture containing
0.45 mg of HDL2 and 0.45 mg of HDL3 (on a protein
basis) and 5 μg of [14C]apoA-I in 1.0 mL of TBS (pH
7.4) at 4 °C was prepared. Under this condition, there is insignificant
remodeling of the HDL particles because of the binding of apoA-I. Three 10 μL aliquots were removed, and
the total initial 14C radioactivity was determined by liquid
scintillation counting using Scintiverse. The mixture was incubated
for 30 min at 4 °C and then mixed with 7 mL of a cold KBr solution
to adjust the density to 1.125 g/mL. The HDL2 (top 1.5
mL) was isolated by ultracentrifugation at 4 °C (24 h at 50000
rpm in a Beckman 70.1 Ti rotor). The density of the remaining solution
was adjusted to 1.21 g/mL by addition of solid KBr, and the HDL3 (top 2.0 mL) was separated from the bottom fraction (unbound
apoA-I) by respinning. The isolated fractions were dialyzed against
TBS to remove KBr using Slide-A-Lyzer mini dialysis units (3500 molecular
weight cutoff) (Pierce) before liquid scintillation counting was used
to determine the distribution of [14C]apoA-I between HDL2, HDL3, and the unbound fractions. The recovery
of HDL in each fraction was determined by measuring the protein concentration.

Binding of ApoA-I to Lipid Emulsion Particles
Emulsion particles
were prepared by sonication of a triolein/egg yolk PC mixture (3.5:1,
w/w) in TBS (pH 7.4)., The triolein and PC contents
of the emulsion were measured using enzymatic assay kits from Thermo
Scientific (Middleton, VA) and Wako (Richmond, VA), respectively.
The triolein:PC molar ratio in the emulsion after isolation by ultracentrifugation
was 4.6 ± 0.3:1, and the average particle diameter determined
by quasi-elastic light scattering was 86 ± 7 nm. The binding
of apoA-I was monitored by incubation of the 14C-labeled
protein with the emulsion for 1 h at room temperature and separation
of free and bound apoA-I by centrifugation, as described previously.

HDL Modification
The apoA-II contents
of HDL2 and HDL3 were increased by incubation
with a 1.2:1 (w/w) apoA-II:HDL protein ratio in TBS for 2 h at room
temperature.− After reisolation of the HDL by ultracentrifugation,
the protein:phospholipid ratio (w/w) was measured. As a result of
apoA-II binding with displacement of most of the apoA-I (monitored
by SDS–PAGE), the protein:phospholipid ratios of the HDL2 and HDL3 preparations increased by ∼45%.
LpA-I and LpA-I with A-II were isolated from HDL by covalent chromatography
on thiopropyl Sepharose., The LpA-I samples obtained
in this fashion contained &lt;5% apoA-II as assessed via SDS–PAGE.
The HDL surface charge was modified by acetylation of protein lysine
residues with acetic anhydride., In brief, HDL in a
sodium acetate solution on ice was incubated while being stirred for
several hours with 1.5 times its mass on a protein basis of acetic
anhydride. After dialysis, the acetylated HDL2 and HDL3 preparations were subjected to electrophoresis in agarose
gels to determine the surface potentials of the particles. The negative surface potential of unmodified
HDL3 was ∼15% higher than that of unmodified HDL2, and for both HDL fractions, acetylation increased the negative
surface charge by 30–40% (data not shown).

Fluorescence
Spectroscopy
HDL samples were labeled with Laurdan via addition
of small aliquots of a stock solution of Laurdan in dimethyl sulfoxide
to yield a PL:probe molar ratio of 100:1., After incubation for 1 h at 37 °C to equilibrate the probe
with HDL, steady-state Laurdan fluorescence emission spectra were
collected with a Hitachi F-4500 fluorescence spectrophotometer. The
generalized polarization (GP) value was calculated from the emission
intensities using the equation GP = (IB – IR/IB + IR), where IB and IR are the emission intensities
at the blue (425 nm) and red (485 nm) edges of the emission spectrum,
respectively.

Results
In an
earlier study, we used SPR to monitor the kinetics of reversible interaction
of apoA-I with HDL particles and determine the mechanism of binding. The results are consistent with apoA-I interacting
with both PL and protein sites on the HDL particle surface. To improve
our understanding of the contributions of these two types of interactions
and the reasons for differential binding to the HDL2 and
HDL3 subclasses, we now compare the binding of apoA-I variants
with altered tertiary structural domain characteristics to HDL and
lipid emulsion particles.

Influence of ApoA-I Structure on HDL Binding
Figure  compares the binding of human and
mouse apoA-I and their N- and C-terminal tertiary structure domains
when added to a mixture containing equal amounts (on a protein basis)
of HDL2 and HDL3. In agreement with prior SPR
data, the N-terminal helix bundle domain
(residues 1–189) of human apoA-I binds relatively poorly compared
to the intact protein. In marked contrast, the relatively hydrophobic
C-terminal domain (residues 190–243) binds like the intact
protein; this domain bound poorly in the SPR experiments presumably
because at the higher concentrations used it was self-associated. The more hydrophobic human apoA-II molecule,,, binds to HDL somewhat better than apoA-I (Figure A). The N- and C-terminal domains of mouse apoA-I (residues
1–186 and 187–240, respectively) have characteristics
different from those of their human apoA-I counterparts, leading to different HDL binding abilities.
As shown in Figure B, mouse apoA-I and its
isolated N- and C-terminal domains bind approximately half as well
as human apoA-I. The observation of a reduced level of binding of
mouse apoA-I to human HDL is consistent with prior reports., Furthermore, the finding that apoA-I (black) containing the C-terminal
Q225-V226 amino acid sequence characteristic of C57BL/6 mice binds
to human HDL less well than apoA-I (white) with the K225-A226 sequence
characteristic of FVB mice agrees with a recent report. The data in Figure B
indicate that the N- and C-terminal domains of mouse apoA-I possess
similar HDL binding capabilities, unlike the situation for human apoA-I
in which the C-terminal domain binds much better.

Binding of human and
mouse apoA-I, the N- and C-terminal domains of apoA-I, and human apoA-II
to HDL. The binding assay described in  was used to determine the fraction of each apoA-I
variant that bound to the HDL2 and HDL3 mixture,
and this value is normalized to the fraction (68 ± 2%) of human
apoA-I bound. (A) Relative binding of human apoA-I (residues 1–243),
the N-terminal helix bundle domain (residues 1–189), the C-terminal
domain (residues 190–243), and apoA-II. (B) Relative binding
of mouse apoA-I (residues 1–240) with the K225-A226 sequence
characteristic of FVB mice (white) and the Q225-V226 sequence characteristic
of C57BL/6 mice (black). The relative binding of the N-terminal domain
(residues 1–186) and the C-terminal domain (residues 187–240
with the K225-A226 sequence) is also shown. All values are plotted
as means ± the standard deviation (SD); the numbers of measurements
(n) are 63 and 30, respectively, for human apoA-I
(residues 1–243) and mouse apoA-I (residues 1–240).
For the apoA-I variants, the number of values is at least six. One-way
analysis of variance (ANOVA) followed by a Dunnett’s multiple-comparison
test using Graphpad Prism 4.0 indicated that, apart from the human
apoA-I C-terminal domain of residues 190–243, the fractional
binding of all the other proteins was significantly different (p &lt; 0.01) from the reference value for human apoA-I.
Direct comparison of the values for apoA-I from the two mouse strains
by an unpaired t test indicated that white apoA-I
binds significantly more (p &lt; 0.0001) than black
apoA-I.

Figure  compares the abilities of the proteins described in the legend of
Figure  to bind to lipid emulsion particles.
Comparison of Figures A and A shows that the abilities of the human apoA-I domains and
apoA-II to bind to a lipid emulsion parallel their abilities to bind
to HDL. The observation that, relative to the intact human apoA-I
molecule, the isolated N-terminal domain (residues 1–189) binds
poorly to lipid emulsion particles agrees with a prior report from
this laboratory. Mouse apoA-I binds approximately
half as well as human apoA-I to lipid emulsion particles (Figure B), but in this case, the isolated N-terminal domain
(residues 1–186) binds somewhat better than the intact protein.
The isolated C-terminal domain (residues 187–240) binds poorly,
explaining why its presence in the intact mouse apoA-I molecule gives
rise to relatively limited lipid emulsion binding. It is noteworthy
that, while the emulsion binding ability of mouse apoA-I residues
187–240 is poor (Figure B), the HDL
binding ability of this segment is more similar to that of the intact
mouse apoA-I molecule (Figure B). However,
the HDL and lipid emulsion binding abilities of all the proteins described
in the legends of Figures  and  are correlated (Figure ); this effect
is expected because interaction of apoA-I with the PL-covered surface
occurs with both types of particles. The r2 value indicates that ∼70% of the variance between the apoA-I
molecules in HDL binding is due to differences in PL binding ability.
The lack of a perfect correlation between HDL and emulsion binding
abilities presumably reflects the contribution of apoA-I–resident
protein interactions to HDL binding.

Binding of human and mouse apoA-I, the
N- and C-terminal domains of apoA-I, and human apoA-II to lipid emulsion
particles. The binding assay described in  was used to determine the fraction of each apoA-I
variant that bound to the egg PC/triolein emulsion particles, and
this value is normalized to the fraction (50 ± 2%) of human apoA-I
bound. The designations of the proteins in panels A and B are the
same as in the legend of Figure . The fractional
binding values are plotted as means ± SD (n ≥
3). Application of the statistical test described for Figure  indicated that the fractional binding of all proteins
was significantly different (p &lt; 0.01) from the
reference value for human apoA-I.

Correlation of the HDL and emulsion binding capabilities of human
and mouse apoA-I variants, and apoA-II. The relative binding data
from Figures  and  are plotted and fit by linear regression.

To further explore how apoA-I tertiary structure domain properties
influence the ability to bind to HDL particles, we compared the HDL
and emulsion binding behaviors (Figure ) of
some previously characterized human–mouse apoA-I hybrids in
which the N- and C-terminal domains are swapped., The HDL and emulsion binding results for the apoA-I molecules described
in panels A and B of Figure  are highly correlated
[r2 = 0.89 (data not shown)]. The results
in Figure A demonstrate that substitution
of either the mouse C-terminal domain (residues 187–240) or
the C-terminal segment (residues 218–240) in the human apoA-I
molecule reduces the level of HDL binding by approximately 50%, whereas
substitution of the human apoA-I C-terminal domain (residues 190–243)
or segment (residues 221–243) into mouse apoA-I enhances its
HDL binding ability. These substitutions have similar effects on emulsion
binding (Figure B). Introduction of the mouse
C-terminal residues into human apoA-I causes a larger reduction in
the level of emulsion binding (∼70%) of the human–mouse
apoA-I hybrids, consistent with the poor lipid binding ability of
this region of the mouse apoA-I molecule (Figure B)., Overall, the results in Figure  demonstrate the important role played by the C-terminal
domain and α-helix in apoA-I HDL and lipid emulsion binding.
It is evident that the presence of the more hydrophobic human apoA-I
C-terminal amino acids enhances binding to both types of particles.

Influence
of the apoA-I C-terminal domain and α-helix on HDL and lipid
emulsion binding ability. The relative binding abilities of the apoA-I
variants were determined as described in the legends of Figures  and . (A) Relative HDL
binding of human apoA-I (Hu 1–243), the human–mouse
apoA-I hybrid containing the human N-terminal domain and the mouse
C-terminal domain (Hu 1–189/Mo 187–240), the human–mouse
apoA-I hybrid with the human C-terminal segment swapped for the mouse
(white) sequence (Hu 1–220/Mo 218–240), mouse (white)
apoA-I, the mouse–human apoA-I hybrid containing the mouse
N-terminal domain and the human C-terminal domain, and a mouse–human
apoA-I hybrid with the mouse C-terminal segment swapped for the human
sequence (Mo 1–217/Hu 221–243). (B) Relative emulsion
binding of the same proteins as listed for panel A. The fractional
binding values are plotted as means ± SD (n ≥
6). For the data in both panels, ANOVA followed by a Dunnett’s
multiple-comparison test indicated that the fractional binding of
all proteins was significantly different (p &lt;
0.01) from the reference value for human apoA-I.

Given the importance of the human apoA-I C-terminal domain
that is the most hydrophobic region of the protein,, experiments summarized in Figure  were conducted
to examine in more detail how alterations in hydrophobicity influence
HDL and emulsion binding. As seen for the proteins studied in Figures  and , the HDL and lipid
emulsion binding behaviors of the apoA-I variants described in Figure  are linearly correlated [r2 = 0.72 (data not shown)]. Consistent with the entire C-terminal
domain being required for effective lipid binding,,, deletion of residues 190–220 (variant
Δ190–220) reduces the level of binding to HDL and lipid
emulsion by 50–60%, and removal of residues 223–243
(variant 1–222) has similar effects (cf. panels A and B of
Figure ). Substitution of the aromatic residues
in the C-terminal helix with leucine and alanine residues (variant
F225L/F229A/Y236A) reduces the hydrophobicity and reduces the level of both HDL and emulsion binding, with the
reduction in the level of emulsion binding being larger. Restoration
of the C-terminal helix hydrophobicity to the level for human apoA-I
by substitution of leucine residues (variant F225L/F229L/A232L/Y236L) also restores the HDL and emulsion binding abilities
(Figure A,B). These manipulations of the hydrophobicity
of the human apoA-I C-terminal helix induce parallel effects on the
ability of the protein to solubilize dimyristoyl PC multilamellar
vesicles.

Influence of apoA-I C-terminal
domain shortening and altered hydrophobicity on HDL and lipid emulsion
binding ability. The relative binding abilities of the apoA-I variants
were determined as described in the legends of Figures  and . (A) Relative HDL binding of
human apoA-I (1–243), apoA-I (Δ190–220), apoA-I
(1–222), apoA-I (F225L/F229A/Y236A), and apoA-I (F225L/F229L/A232L/Y236L).
(B) Relative emulsion binding of the same proteins .listed for panel
A. The fractional binding values are plotted as means ± SD (n ≥ 3). For the data in both panels, ANOVA followed
by a Dunnett’s multiple-comparison test indicated that the
fractional binding of all proteins was significantly different (p &lt; 0.01) from the reference value for human apoA-I.

Influence of HDL Structure
on ApoA-I Binding
The ultracentrifugation assay described
in  gives information
about the relative binding of apoA-I to HDL2 and HDL3. As shown in Figure A, when a small
amount of [14C]apoA-I is added to a mixture containing
equal amounts of HDL2 and HDL3 (on a protein
basis), human apoA-I and its N- and C-terminal domains bind more to
HDL3. In the case of the intact human apoA-I molecule,
the level of binding to HDL3 is approximately twice that
to HDL2. Removal of the C-terminal domain (variant 1–189)
causes a larger reduction in the level of binding to HDL2 than to HDL3, so that the relative partitioning to HDL3 is enhanced. A relative enhancement in binding to HDL3 is also observed with the isolated C-terminal domain (variant
190–243) (Figure A). The data in Figure B show that either removal of the C-terminal segment
(variant 1–222) or a decrease in the hydrophobicity of this
segment (variant F225L/F229A/Y236A) reduces the level of binding of
human apoA-I to HDL2 more than to HDL3. Restoration
of the C-terminal segment hydrophobicity (variant F225L/F229L/A232L/Y236L)
restores the relative HDL2–HDL3 binding
to that seen with wild-type human apoA-I. Substitution of either the
human C-terminal domain with the relatively polar mouse apoA-I counterpart
(variant Hu1–189/Mo187–240) or the mouse apoA-I C-terminal
sequence in human apoA-I (variant Hu1–220/Mo218–240)
reduces the level of binding to HDL2 and HDL3 similarly and does not have much effect on the relative binding
to the two HDL subclasses (Figure C). Mouse
apoA-I gives rise to differently sized HDL particles compared to those
with human apoA-I, and the two species of apoA-I can be distributed
differently between HDL2 and HDL3, with the
segment of the protein spanning residues 165–209 contributing
to this effect., We compared the HDL2 versus HDL3 distributions of the isolated mouse apoA-I
N- and C-terminal domains together with those of mouse–human
apoA-I hybrids (Figure ) to determine the
influence, if any, of these structural domains on HDL2 versus
HDL3 partitioning. Under the conditions of our assay that
contains equal amounts of HDL2 and HDL3, mouse
apoA-I binds relatively well to HDL3. This result is in
contrast to an earlier finding that mouse apoA-I binds more to HDL2; the discrepancy is presumably
a consequence of different experimental conditions. The isolated N-
and C-terminal domains of mouse apoA-I partition more to HDL3 than to HDL2, with the relative preference for HDL3 being weaker for the N-terminal domain (variant 1–186).
As expected, introduction of either the hydrophobic human apoA-I C-terminal
domain or segment to give the Mo1–186/Hu190–243 and
Mo1–217/Hu221–243 apoA-I hybrids enhances binding (relative
to the binding of mouse apoA-I) to both HDL2 and HDL3. The enhancement of apoA-I binding is greater with HDL2, so that these hybrids partition approximately equally between
HDL2 and HDL3 (Figure ). Overall, the data in Figure  indicate
that the properties of the C-terminal domain or segment of apoA-I
influence the relative binding to HDL2 and HDL3.

Relative abilities of human apoA-I variants to bind to HDL2 and HDL3. The binding assay described in  was used to determine the fraction
of each protein that bound to HDL2 and to HDL3, and these values are normalized to the fraction (52 ± 1%)
of human apoA-I bound to HDL3. The apoA-I variants have
been identified in the legends of Figures , , and . The white
and hatched bars in panels A–C refer to binding to HDL2 and HDL3, respectively. (A) HDL2 vs
HDL3 partitioning of human apoA-I and its N- and C-terminal
domains. (B) Influence of the C-terminal segment and its hydrophobicity
on binding of apoA-I to HDL2 and HDL3. (C) HDL2 vs HDL3 partitioning of human apoA-I and human–mouse
hybrid molecules described in the legend of Figure . The fractional binding values are plotted as means ±
SD (n ≥ 9). For the data in all panels, ANOVA
followed by a Dunnett’s multiple-comparison test indicated
that the fractional binding of all proteins was significantly different
(p &lt; 0.01) from the reference value for human
apoA-I.

Relative abilities of mouse apoA-I variants
to bind to HDL2 and HDL3. The experimental data
were obtained and are presented as described in the legend of Figure . The white and hatched bars refer to binding to
HDL2 and HDL3, respectively. The mouse apoA-I
(white) and the N- and C-terminal domains have been identified in
the legend of Figure B. The mouse–human
hybrid apoA-I molecules are identified in the legend of Figure . The fractional binding values are plotted as means
± SD (n ≥ 6). ANOVA followed by a Dunnett’s
multiple-comparison test indicated that the fractional binding of
all proteins was significantly different (p &lt;
0.01) from the reference value for human apoA-I binding to HDL3.

Our prior SPR experiments demonstrated that binding of apoA-I to HDL involves,
in part, protein–protein interactions, and because HDL3 has a higher ratio of apoA-II to apoA-I than HDL2,, we tested the hypothesis that increased
apoA-I–apoA-II interactions are responsible for the enhanced
binding of apoA-I to HDL3 (Figure ). We separated the LpA-I and LpA-I with A-II fractions from HDL2 and HDL3 and compared the binding of apoA-I to
each. The presence of apoA-II did not affect the partitioning of apoA-I
between the HDL2 and HDL3 fractions (data not
shown). To further explore any potential effects of the presence of
apoA-II on the HDL particle surface, we pretreated HDL with apoA-II
to displace apoA-I and create apoA-II-enriched HDL particles. The
protein content relative to the content of PL in these particles treated
in this fashion is increased (cf. ), and rather than enhanced apoA-I binding, the binding to HDL3 is not significantly affected and the level of binding to
A-II-HDL2 greatly reduced (Figure ). It follows that the higher apoA-II content of HDL3 relative
to that of HDL2 is not the reason for apoA-I binding better
to HDL3. Furthermore, the enrichment of the HDL2 particle surface with apoA-II reduces the level of apoA-I binding,
presumably by eliminating free space in the surface.

Effect of pretreatment
with apoA-II on the binding of human apoA-I to HDL2 and
HDL3. The characteristics of the apoA-II-pretreated HDL2 and HDL3 (A-II-HDL) are described in . The percent of [14C]apoA-I bound to each HDL fraction was determined using mixtures
containing either HDL2 and HDL3, A-II-HDL2 with HDL3, or HDL2 with A-II-HDL3. The amounts of bound apoA-I are plotted as means ±
the standard error of the mean (SEM) (n = 3). The
amounts of apoA-I bound to HDL2 and A-II-HDL2 are significantly different (p = 0.0001) by an
unpaired t test, whereas the values for HDL3 and A-II-HDL3 are not significantly different.

Another property of the HDL particle
that may affect apoA-I binding is the net surface charge. The surface
potentials of HDL2 and HDL3 are different, with
the latter particle being more negatively charged. To test the concept that the extra negative charge on HDL3 promotes the binding of apoA-I molecules, we increased the
negative charge at the HDL particle surface by acetylating the lysine
residues on resident proteins (cf. ) and examined the consequences for apoA-I binding. The greater negative
surface charge of acetylated HDL2 and HDL3 increases
the level of binding of apoA-I to both particles (Figure A). A possible explanation for this effect is that
the increased net negative charge disorders the HDL particle surface,
thereby creating additional free space into which apoA-I molecules
can adsorb. To test this concept, we measured the Laurdan generalized
polarization (GP) in HDL particles containing this fluorescent probe
on the surface (cf. ). A lower value of GP indicates less PL order (looser molecular
packing) in the PL monolayer., The Laurdan GP is lower
in HDL3 than in HDL2 (Figure B), indicating that the PL order is lower in the former particle.
The greater free space in the HDL3 particle surface leads
to enhanced apoA-I binding. Consistent with this idea, acetylation
of HDL2 and HDL3 reduces the Laurdan GP, with
the effect being larger for HDL2 (Figure B), reflecting a reduction in PL packing density that leads
to enhanced apoA-I binding (Figure A).

Influence of
HDL surface charge and fluidity on apoA-I binding. (A) Effect of acetylation
on the binding of human apoA-I to HDL2 and HDL3. The characteristics of acetylated HDL2 (acHDL2) and HDL3 (acHDL3) are described in . The percent of [14C]apoA-I bound to each HDL fraction was determined using mixtures
containing either HDL2 and HDL3, acHDL2 and HDL3, or HDL2 and acHDL3. The
amounts of bound apoA-I are plotted as means ± SEM (n = 3). By an unpaired t test, the level of binding
of apoA-I to acHDL2 is significantly greater (p = 0.002) than to HDL2 and the level of binding to acHDL3 is significantly greater (p = 0.04) than
to HDL3. (B) Effect of acetylation on the PL order on the
surfaces of HDL2 and HDL3 particles. The Laurdan
generalized polarization (GP) was measured as described in , and the values are plotted
as means ± SEM (n ≥ 7). By an unpaired t test, the Laurdan GP in acHDL2 is significantly
lower (p = 0.0005) than that in HDL2,
whereas the values for acHDL3 and HDL3 are not
significantly different (p &gt; 0.05).

Discussion
Influence of ApoA-I Structure
on HDL Binding
Deletion of the C-terminal domain weakens
the ability of human apoA-I to bind to HDL, indicating that this domain
plays a critical role, namely that of mediating the initial interaction
with the HDL surface., This process is followed by a
second step in which the N-terminal helix bundle domain opens to allow
helix–PL interactions (reviewed in refs () and ()). The strong HDL binding
properties of the C-terminal domain are demonstrated by the fact that
this domain in isolation binds as well as the intact apoA-I molecule
(Figure A). This ability of the human apoA-I
C-terminal domain to bind well to HDL is a consequence of its hydrophobicity,
and increasing the hydrophobicity of this domain increases the level
of HDL binding (Figure A). Conversely, apoA-I
molecules possessing a relatively polar C-terminal domain, such as
the one that occurs in mouse apoA-I and the hybrid human–mouse
apoA-I molecules described in Figure A, bind
less well to HDL. These results and the observation that the relatively
nonpolar human apoA-II molecule binds well (Figure A) together demonstrate clearly that hydrophobic interactions
promote binding of apoA-I to HDL. These interactions occur as the
nonpolar faces of the apoA-I amphipathic α-helices insert among
the PL molecules present as a monomolecular film at the HDL particle
surface. This apoA-I–PL interaction occurs on the surfaces
of both PL-stabilized emulsion particles and HDL particles, explaining
the strong correlation in the abilities of apoA-I variants to bind
to both types of particles (Figure ). However,
binding of apoA-I to HDL particles can also involve protein–protein
interactions. Such interactions are responsible
for the isolated mouse C-terminal domain, which is relatively polar and has very limited ability to bind to a PL-stabilized
emulsion (Figure B), binding to HDL essentially
as well as the intact mouse apoA-I molecule (Figure B).

Influence of HDL Structure on ApoA-I Binding
The results in Figures  and  indicate that most of the apoA-I variants bind more to HDL3 than to HDL2 when both lipoproteins are present
at the same protein concentration. Under this condition, it can be
estimated from the dimensions and compositions of the spherical HDL2 and HDL3 particles that the total surface area of each type of particle in the mixture
is similar (the total HDL2 surface area is ∼10%
greater). It is of interest to understand the mechanisms responsible
for the preferential binding of apoA-I to HDL3. Estimates
of the areas occupied by the PL and protein constituents present at
the particle surface, indicate that ∼30 and
∼20%, respectively, of the surfaces of HDL2 and
HDL3 particles are PL-covered. The greater availability
of PL-covered surface in HDL2 that can give rise to enhanced
nonpolar apoA-I helix–PL interactions is presumably the reason
that, relative to the HDL3 case, binding to HDL2 is more affected by changes in apoA-I C-terminal segment hydrophobicity
(Figure B). The greater enhancement of binding
of mouse–human apoA-I hybrids containing either the human C-terminal
domain or segment to HDL2 compared to HDL3 (Figure ) is most likely also due to hydrophobic apoA-I–PL
interactions being more important for HDL2 binding than
for HDL3 binding. Obviously, because the HDL2 and HDL3 particle surfaces are mostly occupied by protein,
polar and nonpolar protein–protein interactions can also occur
readily when an apoA-I molecule binds. Because apoA-I–apoA-II
attractive interactions have been demonstrated, it is possible that the higher apoA-II content of HDL3 might be responsible for the observed binding preference
of apoA-I for this particle. However, this seems not to be the case
because apoA-I binds equally well to LpA-I and LpA-I with A-II HDL
particles, and enrichment of HDL2 and HDL3 particles
with apoA-II does not increase the level of binding. Indeed, this
enrichment with apoA-II inhibits apoA-I binding (Figure ). The simplest explanation of this effect is that the higher
protein content on the HDL particle surface reduces the amount of
free space available to apoA-I.

If greater availability of free
space at the particle surface is the reason for apoA-I binding more
to HDL3 than to HDL2, it is to be expected that
PL molecular packing is looser on the HDL3 particle surface.
The Laurdan fluorescence polarization results (Figure ) demonstrate the PL order is indeed lower in HDL3 than in HDL2, explaining why apoA-I binds relatively
well to HDL3. This finding is consistent with comparisons
between different classes of lipoproteins showing that increased surface
fluidity enhances the reactivity to lipolytic enzymes. Why is the HDL3 particle surface
more disordered than that of HDL2? The net negative surface
charge is higher for HDL3 particles, and the resultant strengthened electrostatic repulsion
may lower the molecular packing density. Altering HDL particle surface
charge does affect the molecular structure because acetylation increases
the net negative charge, thereby decreasing the PL order, especially
in the case of HDL2. This change in PL molecular packing
allows an increased level of apoA-I binding (Figure ). Thus, HDL3 is a better substrate than HDL2 for apoA-I binding because the greater net negative charge
gives rise to a lower molecular packing density and more free interfacial
space into which apoA-I molecules can adsorb.

Most of the apoA-I
on the surface of spherical HDL particles is organized as a stabilizing
scaffold,, but a labile pool of easily dissociable
apoA-I molecules also exists., The current observation
that the surface structure of HDL3 favors apoA-I binding
suggests that there should be a larger pool of weakly bound apoA-I
on this HDL subclass, as has been observed. This observation coupled with the fact that in normal human plasma
the concentration of apoA-I in HDL3 is greater than that
in HDL2 suggests that HDL3 is the major source of dissociable apoA-I; this apoA-I is
the precursor for pre-β1-HDL that plays a key role in reverse
cholesterol transport.,, Because
apoA-I interacts through protein–PL and protein–protein
interactions at the HDL particle surface, it is likely that the many
minor protein constituents of HDL detected by proteomics analysis, also interact similarly and become transported in plasma as part
of HDL. There is evidence that, compared
to HDL2, the HDL3 subclass contains relatively
more of these minor proteins.

The authors declare no competing
financial interest.

Abbreviations
ABCA1ATP binding cassette transporter A1

apoapolipoprotein

GdnHClguanidinium hydrochloride

GPgeneralized polarization

HDLhigh-density lipoprotein

PCphosphatidylcholine

PLphospholipid

SPRsurface plasmon resonance.

