The P-glycoprotein
drug pump (P-gp, ABCB1) catalyzes the ATP-dependent
efflux of a wide range of lipophillic compounds such as hydrophobic
drugs, steroids, peptides, and detergents out of the cell.− It is expressed in the epithelium of liver, kidney, and gastrointestinal
tract and at the blood–brain or blood–testes barrier
where it functions to protect us from cytotoxic compounds. It is clinically
important because it affects the absorption, distribution, and clearance
of a wide range of drugs and contributes to multidrug resistance in
diseases such as cancer and AIDS. Because of its clinical importance,
intensive efforts have been made to understand how it works and develop
specific inhibitors to improve chemotherapy.

An accurate model
of human P-gp is important for understanding
its mechanism and for in silico docking studies for
the discovery of novel inhibitors and identification of the drug-binding
sites.− The 1280 amino acids of human P-gp are
organized as two tandem repeats that are joined by a linker region.
Each repeat consists of an NH2-terminal transmembrane domain
(TMD) containing six transmembrane (TM) segments followed by a nucleotide-binding
domain (NBD) (Figure A). The drug-binding
pocket consists of 12
TM segments and has multiple and overlapping drug-binding sites., Studies of P-gp truncation mutants show that the TMDs alone are
sufficient
to mediate binding of drug substrates.

Homology models of human P-gp based on the mouse and Caenorhabditis
elegans crystal structures generally yielded similar structures., There were, however, significant differences in the orientation
of
TM3–TM5 in the two models. Accurate knowledge of the orientation
of TM5
is particularly critical for understanding P-gp–drug interactions
because residues in TM5 have been shown to play critical roles in
binding of drug substrates and coupling of drug binding to activation
of ATPase activity. For example, there is biochemical evidence that
Ile306 in TM5 forms part of the drug translocation pathway. It was
found that labeling of the I306C mutant with a thiol-reactive derivative
of the substrate verapamil activated ATPase activity ∼8-fold and labeling was blocked by verapamil. In addition,
it was found that the I306R mutation inhibited binding of a subset
of P-gp drug substrates. These results
suggest that residue Ile306 is important
for binding of drug substrates and activation of ATPase activity.
Models of human P-gp based on the mouse or C. elegans structures, however, predict very different locations for Ile306.
The model based on the mouse crystal structure (mouse model) shows
that Ile306 lies on the lipid face, while that based on the C. elegans structure shows that it faces the internal aqueous
chamber (C. elegans model). Therefore, we developed
a drug rescue method to differentiate between the two competing models.

Accordingly, the ability of drug substrates to promote maturation
of a processing mutant (G251V) containing an arginine at each position
in TM5 was used to map the
locations of residues that faced the lipid bilayer (would prevent
rescue) or the aqueous channel (would be rescued). The rationale for
using this assay was that drug substrates such as cyclosporine A can
promote maturation of a P-gp processing mutant (G251V). The G251V mutation is located in the second
intracellular loop (ICL2) (Figure A) and appears
to trap P-gp in a partially
folded conformation as a 150 kDa core-glycosylated protein. Expression
in the presence of a drug substrate induces G251V to complete the
folding process to yield an active mature 170 kDa protein. Introduction of an arginine onto the lipid face
of TM5
would inhibit drug rescue. Arginine has a large free energy barrier
(17 kcal/mol) for insertion into the lipid bilayer. Insertion of an arginine on the aqueous face would not
inhibit drug rescue.

Examples of drug rescue of G251V and TM5
mutants G251V/I297R and G251V/S298R are shown in Figure B. When processing mutant G251V is expressed
in the absence of cyclosporine A, the major product was the immature
150 kDa protein (∼95% of total P-gp). Expression in the presence
of cyclosporine A promoted maturation such that mature 170 kDa P-gp
became the major product (∼90% of total P-gp). Mutant S298R
but not I297R could be rescued by cyclosporine A.

Drug rescue of TM5 and
TM9 G251V P-gp arginine mutants. (A) Schematic model of human P-gp.
(B) Immunoblot
analysis of P-gp mutants expressed in the absence (−) or presence
(+) of cyclosporine A (Cyclo). (C and D) Amounts of mature protein
in TM5 (C) or TM9 (D) arginine mutants after expression in the presence
of cyclosporine A. An asterisk indicates a significant difference
from the amount of the mature form observed when the G251V parent
was expressed without cyclosporine A (∼5% mature).

Arginine mutations were then introduced into each
position of TM5
or TM9 in the G251V background. TM9 was selected as a control because
the models based
on the mouse and C. elegans structures predicted
that the residues had similar orientations in the membrane. The mutants
were expressed in HEK 293 cells in the presence of 5 μM cyclosporine
A, and P-gp was detected following immunoblot analysis of whole cell
extracts. Expression was essentially the same for all mutants, but
they differed in the relative amounts of mature or immature P-gp.
The amount of mature 170 kDa P-gp relative to total P-gp (170 + 150
kDa proteins) was determined. Figure C shows
that cyclosporine A promoted maturation
of 11 of the 17 mutants tested (positions 295, 296, 298, 299, 302,
303, 305–307, 309, and 310) by 6–18-fold. In TM9, cyclosporine
A promoted maturation of seven (positions 834–836, 838, 839,
842, and 846) of the 17 arginine mutants to yield mature 170 kDa P-gp
as the major product (Figure D).

Arginines
introduced at positions 297, 300, 301, 304, 308, and
311 in TM5 and positions 833, 837, 840, 841, 843–845, and 847–849
in TM9 could not be rescued with cyclosporine A. The locations of
some of these residues that could not be rescued are shown in the
homology models of human P-gp based on the mouse (Figure A) or C. elegans (Figure B) crystal structures.

Homology models of human
P-gp based on the crystal
structures of
mouse (A) or C. elegans (B) showing the results of TM5 or TM9
arginine mutagenesis viewed from the lipid side. Some rescued (green)
and nonrescued (red) residues are labeled.

There is agreement in both models that TM9 mutants that could
not
be rescued are consistently found to be facing the lipid environment
(Figure A,B). Mutants that could be rescued
faced
the internal aqueous chamber.

There were considerable differences,
however, when the TM5 results
were interpreted in the two models. Arginines at positions 297, 300,
301, 304, 308, and 311 that could not be rescued with cyclosporine
A would be expected to face the lipid environment. In the model based
on the mouse structure (Figure A), these residues
are found to be facing
the drug-binding pocket while residues that could be rescued with
cyclosporine A (positions 295, 298, 302, 305, and 309) face the lipid
environment. By contrast, the results are consistent with the model
based on the C. elegans structure (Figure B). The residues that were rescued with cyclosporine
A face the drug-binding pocket, while those not recued with substrate
(positions 297, 300, 301, 304, 308, and 311) face the lipid environment
(Figure B).

These results suggest that
the orientation
of TM5 is more consistent
with that based on the C. elegans crystal structure.
The recent report that the presence of a Glu256–Arg276 salt
bridge in ICL2 is critical for folding is also more consistent with the model based on the C. elegans crystal structure.

The results show that drug rescue of arginine
mutants can be a
useful approach for mapping the orientation of P-gp TM segments. Arginine
mutagenesis alone can be useful for mapping because insertion of a
charged residue at a lipid interface would be expected to inhibit
maturation or would not be rescued with drug substrates. Arginine
is particularly useful because it differs from other charged amino
acids because it will remain charged in a lipid environment. P-gp contains an aqueous translocation pathway, so arginines inserted onto an aqueous face would
not affect maturation. In some cases, insertion of an arginine into
a P-gp TM segment will promote maturation of a processing mutant by
forming hydrogen bonds with an amino acid in an adjacent TM segment.

In conclusion, the biochemical data are
more consistent with the
human P-gp model based on the C. elegans crystal
structure. In addition, the results demonstrate that arginine mutagenesis
and drug rescue are valuable tools for learning about the structure
of P-gp and other membrane proteins. For example, arginine mutagenesis
was successfully used to map the orientation of TM6 in CFTR.

Supporting Information Available
Details of
experimental procedures. This material is available free
of charge via the Internet at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bi401269m_si_001.pdf

Author Contributions
The manuscript
was written through contributions of both authors.
Both authors approve the final version of the manuscript.

This work was supported
by a grant from the Canadian
Institutes of Health Research (25043). D.M.C. is the recipient of
the Canada Research Chair in Membrane Biology. We thank M. Claire
Bartlett for technical contributions.

The authors
declare no competing financial interests.

Three new structures of mouse P-gp
were recently published [Ward,
A. B., et al. (2013) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.110, 13386–13391] that are consistent with
our biochemical results and the C. elegans structure.

