Newly synthesized
DNA single
strands, generated by catalysis of nucleotide addition by DNA polymerases,
are sometimes not completely complementary to the DNA single strands
used as templates. If the lack of complementarity
is due to a frameshift involving insertion or deletion of bases in
the new (primer) strand, and the frameshift is not in multiples of
three bases, then the protein encoded by the genetic code past the
initial frameshift position is completely different. DNA replication
errors occur in all DNA polymerases in vitro, but
their frequency can vary exponentially among different polymerase
types. Replicative DNA polymerases are
intrinsically more accurate but also cannot process templates with
lesions or damage, while lesion-repair
polymerases can process damaged templates but do not have good intrinsic
fidelity.

Multiple mechanisms have
been proposed to explain the origin of
indel mutations, including DNA strand slippage, misinsertion–misalignment, melting–misalignment, and dNTP-stabilized
misalignment., All of these mechanisms include
a base unstacking process that changes the probability of the right
template:primer base pair at the polymerase active site. Experimental
studies of error-prone lesion-bypass polymerases have provided important
insights into the structural details of indel mutation mechanisms.
For example, in a crystal structure of the error-prone Y-family polymerase
Dpo4, the correct template base was observed to be unstacked with
its neighboring base acting as the template instead. Unstacking of a primer base was also observed in this polymerase
for templates containing abasic or O6-benzyl-dG
modifications. In a crystal structure
of the Y-family polymerase Dbh, an unstacked template base was found
three base positions from the active site. For this polymerase, it was also shown using 2-aminopurine fluorescence
that base unstacking at the primer terminus can result in template
slippage that restores pairing at the primer terminus but results
in a single-base deletion mutation.

A specific GCCC sequence motif was found to be an indel mutation
hot spot for the Y-family polymerase Dbh, with the exceptionally high
error probability of ∼50%. As
shown in Figure , unstacking of one of the
three template cytosines is likely involved in the presentation of
an incorrect template base and the occurrence of single-base deletion
mutations. However, the relative propensities of unstacking of each
of these cytosines are not clear. A series of nuclear magnetic resonance
studies on a hairpin DNA model system have shown that the neighboring
sequence affects slippage propensity.− In this study, explicit solvent molecular dynamics
(MD) simulations are used to characterize the intrinsic probability
of unstacking of the three cytosines in the context of a duplex representing
the scenario at a DNA replication site where the 5′ hot-spot
cytosine does not yet have a primer strand partner base. Free energy
profiles of unstacking of the three cytosines starting from state
I are examined. Unrestrained MD simulations are used to characterize
the unrestrained behavior of the four states depicted in Figure . The dynamics of the overhang template strand is
also analyzed during the unrestrained simulations to understand its
contribution to the unstacking process. The implications for the observed
dynamics of these unstacking processes in affecting DNA polymerase
fidelity are discussed.

Schematic depiction of the three cytosine unstacked
states that
could result in a single-base deletion mutation during DNA replication
of the template strand. State I is the cytosine stacked state that
would result in proper replication because an incoming guanine nucleotide
would be incorporated into the primer strand at the active site (indicated
by the asterisk). States II–IV are cytosine unstacked states
that would all result in an incoming cytosine nucleotide being incorporated
in the primer strand because they would present a guanine template
base at the active site.

Methods
The MD simulations were performed using CHARMM, (version c33b1) with the CHARMM27 force field,, the TIP3P water model, and sodium and
chloride parameters from Beglov and Roux. Models for each state were constructed on the basis of a ternary
complex structure of Dbh (Protein Data Bank entry 3BQ1) showing DNA elongation
after the creation of a single-base deletion. This complex has an extrahelical template base located three nucleotides
to the 3′-side of the templating base. For state IV, the sequence
of the DNA was altered to position the 5′-G of the deletion
hot-spot sequence (5′-GCCC-3′) in the nascent base pair
binding pocket. For states II and III, the extrahelical nucleotide
in state IV was moved to positions one and two nucleotides to the
3′-side of the templating base, maintaining the same extrahelical
conformation. For state I, the duplex DNA in the state II model was
translocated away from the active site by 1 bp, and the extrahelical
base in state II was moved to stack between the 5′-G of the
deletion hot-spot sequence and the template base paired with the primer
terminus. This left a gap between the incoming nucleotide and primer
terminal base. All models were energy minimized by conjugate gradient
minimization with no experimental energy terms in CNS., The minimized models for the four states of the B-form DNA duplex
with the 9-mer strand CGCCCGGCT
pairing with a complementary strand 6-mer AGCCGG
were solvated in a 54 Å dimension cubic box with a random distribution
of 21 sodium ions and 7 chloride ions obtained through Monte Carlo
optimization. For the analogy with a DNA replication site, the 9-mer
strand is considered the template strand and the 6-mer strand the
primer strand. The final systems consisted of 15221 atoms for state
I, 15188 atoms for state II, 15191 atoms for state III, and 15209
atoms for state IV. All DNA non-hydrogen atoms were harmonically restrained
with a force constant of 10 kcal mol–1 Å–2, and the full system was minimized using 1000 steps
of steepest descent (SD) and 500 steps of adopted-basis Newton–Raphson
(ABNR) algorithms. This minimized system for state I was used as the
starting point for all the umbrella sampling simulations of base unstacking.
For all simulations, long-range electrostatic interactions were treated
using the particle mesh Ewald (PME) approach with a B spline order of 4, a Fast Fourier Transform
grid of one point per angstrom, and a real-space Gaussian width (κ)
of 0.3 Å–1. Real-space and Lennard-Jones (LJ)
interaction cutoffs of 12 Å were used with nonbond interaction
lists heuristically updated to 16 Å. For the unrestrained simulations,
the entire system was minimized and the solvent environment was equilibrated
for 20 ps using a constant-pressure and -temperature (NPT) ensemble with the same harmonic restraint
on the solute non-hydrogen atoms, and a weak center-of-mass restraint
on all DNA non-hydrogen atoms (1 kcal mol–1 Å–2) to prevent a drift to the edges of the solvent box.
The harmonic force constant maintaining the internal structure of
the DNA non-hydrogen atoms was gradually lowered in the next five
20 ps increments to 5.0, 2.0, 1.0, 0.5, and finally 0.0 kcal mol–1 Å–2. Each simulation was then
continued without any structural harmonic restraints for up to 10
ns, yielding a total of 40 ns for the four states that were studied.

The umbrella sampling free energy profiles for cytosine unstacking
were obtained using a previously described periodic pseudodihedral
restraint,, which is illustrated in Figure
1 of the . The full
360° range of this coordinate was covered in 72 windows spaced
5° apart. The initial structures in each window were generated
starting from the stacked state by imposing a pseudodihedral restraint
of 25000 kcal mol–1 rad–2 (or
7.6 kcal mol–1 deg–2) and enforcing
base unstacking in 5° increments through the minor and major
grooves using 500 steps of SD minimization and 500 steps of NPT dynamics for each window. To obtain a better approximation
of a relaxed solvent environment for the starting structures in each
window, all water molecules were deleted and the DNA and ions were
resolvated in the previously equilibrated 54 Å water box. The
DNA non-hydrogen atoms were then harmonically restrained with a force
constant of 10 kcal mol–1 Å–2, which was gradually lowered in the next five 20 ps increments to
5.0, 2.0, 1.0, 0.5, and 0.0 kcal mol–1 Å–2. The initial 0.1 ns of the umbrella sampling simulations
in each window therefore includes gradually decreasing harmonic restraints
in addition to the pseudodihedral restraint, which results in an artificially
lowered free energy profile. The simulations in each window were continued
for up to 0.8 or 1.4 ns, yielding a total of 232 ns for all three
cytosine unstacking potential of mean force (PMF) profiles. Strand
slippage subsequent to cytosine unstacking, which is required for
complete transition to states II–IV from state I, was not enforced
through a restraint. The pseudodihedral coordinate value, saved every
0.2 ps of the dynamics, was used for calculating the PMF using a periodic
version of the weighted histogram analysis method as described elsewhere., The slippage coordinate consists of two component distance cutoffs
between (1) G2:C4 and C1:C4 bases for C3 unstacking, (2) C3:C5 and
G2:C5 bases for C4 unstacking, and (3) C4:G6 and C3:G6 bases for C5
unstacking. The slippage coordinate is increased by 0.4 for the first
distance being &lt;9 Å and by 0.6 for the second distance being
&lt;6 Å to yield a slippage coordinate value of 1.0 for the fully
slipped state. Molecular movies were produced using VMD version 1.9, and molecular pictures were produced using Rasmol
version 2.7. Graphs were made using gnuplot
version 4.4 (http://www.gnuplot.info), and all figures
were compiled using GIMP version 1.2 (http://www.gimp.org).

Results
Free Energy Profiles for Cytosine Unstacking
Base unstacking
and flipping in DNA duplex contexts can occur through the major or
minor groove of the DNA duplex and can be simplified into a one-dimensional
coordinate using a center-of-mass pseudodihedral definition (Figure 1 of the ). Although improvements in the original coordinate
have been explored, they are applicable
only for base flipping in a stacked duplex context, and not at duplex
termini. The potential of mean force (PMF) or free energy profiles
for cytosine unstacking were therefore obtained using explicit solvent
umbrella sampling MD simulations with the original pseudodihedral
restraint and are shown in Figure . The starting
state for all these umbrella sampling simulations was the fully stacked
state I shown in Figure . The convergence
of the free energy profiles was tested by calculating progressive
free energy profiles for an increasing amount of sampling in 0.16
ns increments. As shown in panels A–C of Figure , the profiles were mostly converged after the first two increments,
i.e., in &lt;0.4 ns of sampling per window, and extension of sampling
to 0.8 ns per window did not change the converged profiles. For cytosine
4 unstacking, the sampling was extended even further to 1.4 ns per
window, which also did not change the profile significantly. The overall
base unstacking profiles for the three cytosines in the hot-spot GCCC
sequence near the template terminus are shown in Figure D. These profiles are similar to those obtained in previous
studies,, with a well-defined minimum for the lowest-energy
stacked state and a relatively flat landscape for the fully unstacked
states. The stacked state energy well is located in the periodic pseudodihedral
range of 300° to 0° to 60°, with the rest of the range
occupied by unstacked states. There are clear differences among these
unstacked states for the three profiles, with the free energy increases
from the lowest-energy stacked state showing the following trend:
cytosine 5 (C5) &gt; cytosine 4 (C4) &gt; cytosine 3 (C3). This suggests
that unstacking is easiest for C3. The flat parts of the energy landscape
of the unstacked states for the three cytosines are separated by ∼3
kcal/mol. These observations agree with the expectation that the lack
of nearby stacked bases at duplex termini would decrease stability
and result in easier unstacking.

Free energy profiles and their convergence
for cytosine unstacking
in the template strand sequence CGCCCGGCT:
(A) cytosine 3, (B) cytosine 4, (C) cytosine 5, and (D) a comparison
among cytosines 3–5. In panels A–C, the black line represents
the overall free energy profile while the other lines represent the
profiles for different extents of sampling per window as follows:
0.16 ns (red), 0.32 ns (dotted green), 0.48 ns (dotted blue), 0.64
ns (dotted cyan), 0.80 ns (dotted yellow), 0.96 ns (dotted black),
and 1.12 ns (dotted orange). All profiles are mostly converged at
0.4 ns per window, but sampling was extended to at least 0.8 ns in
each window for confirmation. In panel D, all lines represent overall
free energy profiles with data for cytosines 3–5 shown as cyan,
blue, and purple bold lines, respectively.

For C4 and C5 unstacking, the first 30° in the pseudodihedral
coordinate around the stacked state minimum are very similar through
the major and minor groove pathways. However, these two free energy
profiles begin to diverge from each other at a pseudodihedral of ∼40°
in the minor groove pathway and ∼340° in the major groove
pathway. In the case of C3, both pathways show a much more gradual
free energy increase, which suggests that the base pairing interaction
with a partner guanine (absent for C3) is involved in the steepness
of the energy well near the cytosine fully stacked state. A distinct
energy well can be observed at ∼60° for C5, which has
previously been ascribed to a noncanonical trans Watson–Crick:sugar
edge, hydrogen bonding interaction with an opposite
strand guanine on the 5′-base
pair. This distinct energy well is not visible in C3 or C4 unstacking,
which is consistent with the absence of the opposite strand guanine
for these two cytosines. A broader energy well past the minor groove
unstacking barrier is visible for C4 unstacking at a pseudodihedral
value of ∼90°. These three profiles clarify the intrinsic
location-dependent energetic effects for an unstacking base in an
overhang-containing duplex terminus that resembles DNA at a polymerase
active site.

Template Strand Slippage in Response to Cytosine
Unstacking
The umbrella sampling MD simulations looking at
cytosine unstacking
do not enforce the strand slippage required to precisely convert from
state I to the other three states shown in Figure . To attain states II–IV, additional strand slippage
in the template strand by one base position is required. Whether these
transitions can occur spontaneously in response to base unstacking
can be examined by additionally monitoring a strand slippage coordinate.
A simple measure of strand slippage (shown in Figure ), which can be applied to all three cytosine unstacking scenarios,
can be obtained by combining two center-of-mass distances between
template strand non-hydrogen base atoms: (1) G2:C4 and C1:C4 for C3
unstacking, (2) C3:C5 and G2:C5 for C4 unstacking, and (3) C4:G6 and
C3:G6 for C5 unstacking. In each case, the distances between the two
neighboring 5′-bases and the base 3′ to the unstacking
base are combined. For example, if C5 is the unstacking base, C4 coming
within 6 Å of G6 increases the slippage coordinate by 0.6. If,
in addition, C3 also comes within 9 Å of G6, the slippage coordinate
value increases by 0.4 to a total value of 1. The unequal weighting
for the two individual distances allows them to be distinguished in
the free energy profiles and has no physical basis. The two-dimensional
(2D) profiles for unstacking and strand slippage are created from
unrestrained evolution of the strand slippage as previously described., It is therefore possible that sampling in this unrestrained degree
of freedom is not fully converged.

Depiction of the slippage coordinate and
its two component center-of-mass
distances. (A) Base centers of mass for nonslipped and fully slipped
states with dotted lines showing the two slippage coordinate component
distances. (B–D) Before and after states in unstacking and
strand slippage for cytosines 3–5, respectively.

Figure  shows a greater
population of the
slippage coordinate value of 0.6 for C3 and C5 unstacking, which suggests
that slippage of the immediate neighboring 5′-base occurs to
a larger extent than slippage of the next base, or both 5′-bases
together. For C4 unstacking, the greater population of the slippage
coordinate value of 0.4 indicates that slippage of the immediate neighboring
5′-base occurs to a lesser extent than the next base, suggesting
a weaker tendency for C3 to stack onto C5. As shown in Figure A–C and Table , full
strand slippage (indicated by a slippage coordinate value of 1) accompanies
unstacking of all three cytosines through either the minor (5°
to 90° to 180°) or the major grooves (180° to 270°
to 5°). The number of windows showing strand slippage are greater
for C3 unstacking (18 windows) than for C4 or C5 unstacking (10 windows).
For C3 unstacking, there is parity between strand slippage in the
minor groove and the major groove (9 windows each), which also exists
for C4 unstacking (5 windows each). For C5 unstacking, 6 minor groove
windows show strand slippage as opposed to only 3 in the major groove
(of which 2 have &lt;0.05% sampling). These observations may be due
to the fact that all three cytosines are associated with a duplex
terminus and an overhang and do not have the usual groove environments
that they would encounter in the central regions of a DNA duplex.
Especially for C3, which is beyond the duplex region, and for C4,
which is just at the duplex region terminus, the number of intramolecular
groove interactions is limited.

Two-dimensional free energy profiles showing
the possibility of
strand slippage in response to enforced base unstacking of three template
cytosines in an overhang containing DNA duplex. The 2D profiles for
unstacking and slippage of cytosines 3–5 are shown in panels
A–C, respectively. The base unstacked geometries prior to and
after strand slippage are shown in panels D–F on the left and
right, respectively. The structures belong to umbrella sampling simulation
windows with the following pseudodihedral values: (D) 115°, (E)
90°, and (F) 110°. The color scheme for the structures in
panels D–F for the template strand is as follows: C1 in red,
G2 in purple, C3 in cyan, C4 in blue, C5 in green, and the rest in
orange. For the primer strand, G5 is colored green, G6 is colored
blue, and the rest are colored orange.

Proportions of Strand Slippage in
Umbrella Sampling Windows Enforcing Base Unstacking through a Pseudodihedral
Restraint
C3	C4	C5	
window	%	window	%	window	%	
55	16.6	90	50.2	45	1.6	
65	0.0	95	2.4	90	4.4	
85	1.0	105	9.1	105	17.2	
90	1.0	145	0.0	110	21.3	
105	0.2	155	1.7	125	35.0	
115	36.2	185	0.0	135	19.4	
135	14.4	190	0.0	180	2.6	
155	3.0	200	28.8	215	30.5	
170	0.4	235	61.3	230	0.0	
195	81.6	335	59.2	260	0.0	
200	25.3	 	 	 	 	
215	40.1	 	 	 	 	
225	0.2	 	 	 	 	
240	1.3	 	 	 	 	
245	83.8	 	 	 	 	
265	7.1	 	 	 	 	
300	8.1	 	 	 	 	
315	12.4	 	 	 	 	
Pseudodihedral
restraint minimum
values in degrees.

Windows
with non-zero but less
than 0.05% sampling of strand-slipped states.

Stability of Strand-Slipped States and Template Strand Overhang
Dynamics
The DNA model used in this study includes a template
overhang sequence consisting of three bases (Figure ). To assess the localized dynamics of states I–IV
and this three-base template strand overhang in the absence of added
restraint forces, unrestrained MD simulations were conducted on these
models for 10 ns each. The base unstacking behavior of the three cytosines
in the mutation hot-spot sequence during these unrestrained simulations
is assessed in Figure  using pseudodihedral
definitions shown in Figure 1 of the . Pseudodihedral values near 0° are indicative
(but not necessarily confirmative) of the base being stacked on its
3′-base pair, and this is the starting point for at least two
of these three cytosines in all four states. The C3 base in state
II, the C4 base in state III, and the C5 base in state IV start out
in their unstacked state. The C3 base, which is part of the overhang,
remains unstacked in state II and tends to become unstacked in states
I and III, with large fluctuations in its unstacked state geometries
in these three states. It seems to remain stably stacked in state
IV. The C4 base tends to remain unstacked in state III but with relatively
smaller unstacked state fluctuations and tends to remain stacked in
states I, II, and IV. The C5 base remains stably stacked in states
I–III and remains unstacked in state IV with large fluctuations.
Even when the cytosines seem to remain stacked, they show a greater
range of reversible fluctuations in the direction of the major groove
(180° to 270° to 5°) than the minor groove (5°
to 90° to 180°), which is consistent with the more gradual
increase in free energy in the major groove in the PMF profiles (Figure ). Except for the C4 base in state III, once a cytosine
is unstacked, it seems to be able to cover the entire expanse of unstacked
state pseudodihedral values on a subnanosecond time scale. This is
also consistent with the relatively accessible landscape of the unstacked
states seen in the PMF profiles once the major or minor groove barriers
for unstacking are crossed (Figure ). This
suggests that a limited pseudodihedral range of ∼140°
between and including the minor and major groove barriers probably
has the strongest influence on the overall rate of base unstacking.

Base unstacking
pseudodihedral behavior for the three template
strand cytosines in unrestrained 10 ns simulations of states I–IV
shown in Figure . The pseudodihedral for cytosines
3–5 are shown in panels A1–D1, A2–D2, and A3–D3,
respectively. Values for states I–IV are shown in panels A1–A3,
B1–B3, C1–C3, and D1–D3, respectively. The definition
of these pseudodihedrals is illustrated in Figure 1 of the .

Figure  shows the effective 2D free
energy
profiles of strand slippage and base unstacking derived from these
unrestrained simulations. Spontaneous strand slippage does not seem
to occur stably in simulations started in state I (panels A1–A3),
even though the C3 base is completely unstacked after 5 ns. The strand
slippage in state II is also not stable as the stacking between G2
and C4 is lost (panel B1), but this does not affect the stacking of
its neighboring duplex region C4 and C5 bases (panels B2 and B3).
The strand slippage in state III is also not fully stable (panel C2),
and possible C3 base unstacking and corresponding slippage accompanying
this unstacking are observed (panel C1). In contrast, the strand slippage
in state IV is much more stable (panel D3) and is not accompanied
by unstacking of the C4 and C3 bases (panels D1 and D2). It should
be noted that a change in the slippage coordinate from 1 to 0 is indicative
of departure from the slipped state, but not necessarily proper restacking.
An example is the slippage coordinate value of 0 seen in the major
groove near 180° for C5 unstacking in state IV (panel D3), which
cannot be due to full reversal of slippage as this requires restacking
of the C5 base. Unstacking of the C3 and C4 bases seems to precipitate
dynamic variability in their 5′-bases, but unstacking of the
C5 base does not do so. This difference is readily explained by the
presence of two Watson–Crick base pairing interactions between
C3:G6 and C4:G5 that stabilize the strand slippage in state IV, which
prevent its loss on the 10 ns time scale.

Two-dimensional effective
free energy profiles showing strand slippage
and template strand cytosine base unstacking in unrestrained 10 ns
simulations of states I–IV shown in Figure . States I–IV are shown in panels A1–A5, B1–B5,
C1–C5, and D1–D5, respectively. Unstacking and corresponding
slippage for C3–C5 are shown in panels A1–D1, A2–D2,
and A3–D3, respectively. Panels A4–D4 show the starting
conformations and panels A5–D5 the final conformations for
states I–IV, respectively. The free energies indicated by the
color bars are in kilocalories per mole. The color scheme in panels
A4–D4 and A5–D5 is the same as in Figure .

The pseudodihedral measure of
C3 unstacking in state III and C4
unstacking in state IV, in addition to being coarse-grained, is complicated
by the base pair forming the first center of mass starting off disrupted.
To analyze Watson–Crick base pairing directly, the N3–N1
or N1–N1 distances between specific C:G pairs were monitored
as shown in Figure . The C3:G6 pairing interaction
(panel E1) is absent in states I and II and remains that way (panels
A1 and B1, respectively). It is present in state III and could stabilize
the strand slippage but is lost within 1 ns of sampling and is not
regained (panel C1). It is also present in state IV and remains stable
on the 10 ns time scale in this case (panel D1). The C3:G5 pairing
interaction (panel E2) is not present, nor does it dynamically form,
in states I–IV (panels A2–D2, respectively). The C4:G6
interaction (panel E3) is present and persistent in states I and II
and is only lost twice transiently in state I for durations of &lt;1
ns (panels A3 and B3, respectively). It is absent in states II and
IV and never formed in those states (panels C3 and D3, respectively).
The C4:G5 interaction (panel E4) is absent in states I–III
(panels A4–C4, respectively) and is present persistently in
state IV (panel D4). The C5:G5 interaction (panel E5) is present and
persistent in states I–III (panels A5–C5, respectively)
and is absent in state IV (panel D5). The lack of C5:G5 base pairing
in state IV (panel D5) provides an example in which pseudodihedral
values transiently close to 0° (Figure , panel D3) are not representative of restacking. These results also
suggest that the most stable strand-slipped state is state IV, where
C5 is unstacked, and template strand slippage allows C3 and C4 to
pair with primer strand G6 and G5, respectively.

Base pairing of the three
template strand cytosines in unrestrained
10 ns simulations of states I–IV shown in Figure . Data for states I–IV are shown in panels A1–A5,
B1–B5, C1–C5, and D1–D5, respectively. The distance
between the N3 atom in template strand C3 and the N1 atom in primer
strand G6 is shown in panels A1–D1. The distance between the
N3 atom in template strand C3 and the N1 atom in primer strand G5
is shown in panels A2–D2. The distance between the N3 atom
in template strand C4 and the N1 atom in primer strand G6 is shown
in panels A3–D3. The distance between the N3 atom in template
strand C4 and the N1 atom in primer strand G5 is shown in panels A4–D4.
The distance between the N3 atom in template strand C5 and the N1
atom in primer strand G5 is shown in panels A5–D5. These atoms
are illustrated in panels E1–E5 as yellow and gray spheres,
respectively. The color scheme in panels E1–E5 is the same
as in Figure .

The template strand overhang is not restrained by Watson–Crick
base pairing and is therefore expected to be mobile. Its dynamics
is examined using center-of-mass distances among the C1, G2, and C3
overhang bases and the primer strand G5 base in states I–IV,
as shown in Figure . In its standard B-form
orientation (starting conformation for state I), the center-of-mass
distances between C1:G5, G2:G5, and C3:G5 should be around 15.2, 11.6,
and 8.3 Å, respectively. A simple swinging of the overhang with
little internal change in stacking is expected to maintain this distance
trend, whereas an internal distortion of the overhang is not. In state
I, the trend is maintained for the C1:G5 and G2:G5 distances, but
not for C3:G5, which agrees with the C3 base unstacking seen in panel
A1 of Figure . In state II, C3 starts out
unstacked and remains so, and C1 also seems to become unstacked. In
state III, the trend is disrupted by possible unstacking of C1, followed
by G2 unstacking. In state IV, the trend is mosty maintained with
transient fluctuations, which mirrors the maintenance of slippage
seen in Figure  and its associated base pairing
in Figure . This suggests that the stability
of the strand-slipped state that accompanies C5 unstacking also extends
to the overhang bases.

Center-of-mass distances to primer strand G5 for overhang
template
strand bases in unrestrained 10 ns simulations of states I–IV
shown in Figure . Data for states I–IV
are shown in panels A1–A3, B1–B3, C1–C3, and
D1–D3, respectively. The distance for C1 is shown in panels
A1–D1, that for G2 in panels A2–D2, and that for C3
in panels A3–D3. The base atoms used for the distances are
shown as yellow and gray spheres in panels E1–E3, with the
rest of the atoms colored as in Figure .

Discussion
Even
within the confines of a polymerase active site, nucleic acid
strand extension is a multistep process involving incoming nucleotide
binding, conformational transitions in the enzyme, phosphoryl transfer,
pyrophosphate release, and nucleic acid translocation., In the midst of these is the internal dynamics of the DNA, in which
the template strand is present in a duplex with the existing primer
strand and as an overhang for its parts that are still to be replicated.
This study provides insights into the intrinsic susceptibility of
such an entity to strand slippage by examining the energetics and
dynamics of base unstacking and strand slippage for an indel hot-spot
sequence in an overhang-containing DNA duplex. The model used in this
study places the second of the three cytosines in the hot-spot sequence
(C4) at the duplex region terminus such that its 5′-cytosine
(C3) is in the overhang and its 3′-cytosine (C5) is inside
the DNA duplex. The PMF profiles of base unstacking for these three
cytosines show that the unstacking likelihood decreases as the environment
starts resembling the center of a DNA duplex (C3 &gt; C4 &gt; C5).
Strand
slippage can accompany unstacking of all three cytosine bases through
the major or minor groove, albeit with a decreased frequency of strand
slippage in the major groove unstacking of C5. In the strand-slipped
states, the unstacked C3 and C5 bases show fast traversal of a large
range of pseudodihedral values, suggesting that they can diffusively
access a variety of unstacked states. Such motion is weaker for the
C4 base, which is consistent with a shallow minimum in its unstacking
PMF profile around 90°. Unrestrained simulations starting from
four states (one non-strand-slipped and three distinct strand-slipped)
suggest that spontaneous strand slippage is unlikely on a multinanosecond
time scale, except in the overhang, where it is short-lived even when
it does occur. On the other hand, if the strand-slipped state is achieved
for cytosines within the DNA duplex, it is likely to be persistent
on the multinanosecond time scale or a longer time scale, which is
likely due to the base pairing interactions that form on the 5′-side
of the unstacked base in the template strand. These base pairing interactions
also seem to stabilize the rest of the 5′-overhang. In the
context of a polymerase active site, this increases the probability
of a single-base deletion mutation because it stabilizes the wrong
template base at the active site.

Starting from a correct template
base at the active site of a polymerase,
a single-base deletion mutation could occur due to unstacking of this
base followed by strand slippage, which does not need disruption of
any Watson–Crick base pairing in the overhang template. It
could also occur due to unstacking of any of the paired template bases
in its 3′-duplex region, followed by strand slippage, but this
does require disruption of Watson–Crick base pairing, for the
initial unstacking or strand slippage. These results suggest a balance
between three trends that are at work the further one moves away from
the active site and into the duplex region along the template strand:
(1) a greater initial energetic cost of unstacking (up to a maximum
unstacking cost similar to that in the center of a duplex region),
(2) a greater barrier for strand slippage because of the larger number
of 5′-bases that need to disrupt their base pairing to slip,
and (3) a greater stabilization of the slipped state because of a
larger number of rearranged 5′-base pairs. In other words,
even though the initial unstacking and subsequent strand slippage
can be less favored, once they occur, the strand-slipped state can
be further stabilized by the increased number of pairing 5′-template
bases. In this study, this trend is explicitly studied only up to
the first nonterminal duplex region base, but while the increase in
the cost of initial base unstacking may have a limit (∼20–30
kcal/mol), both the increase in barrier height for slippage and the
stabilization of the strand slippage by 5′-base pairs are likely
to be progressively greater as the number of 5′-base pairs
increases for the base to be unstacked.

If the barrier height
for reversal of base unstacking is small
(Figure ), restacking is expected to be thermally
accessible. Restacking has been observed within a few nanoseconds
in MD simulations starting from an unstacked base conformation. The barrier for strand slippage subsequent to
base unstacking will be progressively higher as the number of already
paired 5′-template bases increases. However, once such strand
slippage occurs, each additional strand-slipped 5′-template
base pair could subtantially increase the likelihood of introduction
of a single-base deletion mutation by increasing the barrier for reversal
of slippage and restacking. A repetitive sequence in the 5′-region
of an unstacking base would provide the rearranged base pairing required
to stabilize the strand-slipped state, while a nonrepetitive sequence
might not. The observation of stabilization of unstacking and subsequent
strand slippage in the present repetitive hot-spot sequence captured
in crystal structures of the Dbh Y-family polymerase for the C5 base, and not the C4 or C3 bases, agrees with
this scenario. The protein and solvent environment could also greatly
influence the probability of such conformational transitions by altering
the underlying energy landscapes through specific interactions. To
maintain intrisic fidelity, nucleic acid polymerases might therefore
need to prevent base unstacking and strand slippage not only at the
active site but also in the regions in the immediate 3′-duplex
region. Future analysis of the relationship between structural architectures
of nucleic acid polymerases and their fidelity needs to account for
this possibility revealed by the MD simulations presented here.

Supporting Information Available
Three videos showing spontaneous
strand slippage in response to base unstacking and one figure explaining
the geometric coordinate used to characterize base unstacking. This
material is available free of charge via the Internet at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bi500189g_si_001.pdf

bi500189g_si_002.mpg

bi500189g_si_003.mpg

bi500189g_si_004.mpg

J.D.P. acknowledges
support from National Institutes of Health Grant GM080573.

The authors declare no
competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
This work primarily used computing resources
provided by the
Wadsworth Center, New York State Department of Health. Additional
resources were provided through the Extreme Science and Engineering
Discovery Environment (XSEDE), which is supported by National Science
Foundation Grant OCI-1053575, and CCNI housed at the Rensselaer Polytechnic
Institute were also used.

Abbreviations
indelinsertion–deletion

MDmolecular dynamics

PMFpotential of mean
force

SDsteepest
descent

ABNRadopted-basis
Newton–Raphson

PMEparticle mesh Ewald

LJLennard-Jones.

