Channelrhodopsins
(ChRs) found
in green flagellate algae form a distinct branch of the phylogenetic
tree of the type 1 “microbial rhodopsin” family., Recently, ChRs have become important optogenetic tools because of
their ability to function as light-gated ion channels when expressed
in neurons.− In neuronal cells expressing CrChR2,
light causes an inward flow of cations along the electrochemical gradient
causing a depolarization of the neuronal membrane and triggering action
potentials. This new photonic capability
has led to many incisive applications, including the high spatial
mapping of brain circuits and the potential
use of light instead of electrical stimulation with cardiac pacemakers.

Although ChRs exist in a variety of environments,
channelrhodopsin-2
from Chlamydomonas reinhardtii (CrChR2), is thus far the most extensively studied
ChR. On a molecular level, it exhibits significant differences compared
to the model light-driven proton pump bacteriorhodopsin (BR) as well
as many other microbial rhodopsins (for a recent review, see ref ()). For example, resonance
Raman spectroscopy (RRS) and retinal extraction show that unlike the
almost pure all-trans composition of light-adapted
BR, the CrChR2 retinal
chromophore for both light- and dark-adapted forms exists as a mixture
of all-trans, 13-cis, and possibly
9-cis isomers.

Furthermore, although ChRs conserve residues from BR, including
the homologues to Asp85, the proton acceptor and primary counterion
to the Schiff base (SB), and Asp212, which is also located near the
SB and believed to exist in a negative form at neutral pH (see Figure ), their role may be different in ChRs. For example,
the X-ray structure of a chimera of CrChR1 and CrChR2 (C1C2) shows that the position of these residues
relative to the SB proton is altered along with their hydrogen bonding
to other residues and position of an internal water molecule (W402)
in the retinal binding pocket. This suggests
that the relative pKa values of these
two critical counterion residues are altered in CrChR2 as well as their function, consistent with recent FTIR measurements
of CrChR2.

Sequence of CaChR1 and predicted folding pattern
in the membrane based on earlier models of archaerhodopsins and other
microbial rhodopsins (see, for example, ref ()). Highlighted residues
are the homologues of Asp85 and Asp212 in BR that comprise the complex
counterion to the SB.

An important question is whether the molecular structure
and functional
mechanism of CrChR2 are common to other ChRs. Channelrhodopsins
are phylogenetically diverse and display a range of spectroscopic,
photocycle, and channel properties. It
is possible that the molecular mechanism of light-gated channel activity
will also exhibit variations. To explore this question, near-infrared
confocal RRS was used to study the retinal structure and the interaction
of the SB with nearby residues in the binding pocket of a ChR1 from Chlamydomonas augustae (CaChR1). Although
a low-efficiency ChR compared to CrChR2, CaChR1 has a red-shifted λmax (525 nm vs
470 nm) and slower light inactivation, making it a possible candidate for some optogenetic applications.

We report here RRS measurements revealing that CaChR1 exhibits a predominantly all-trans-retinal
chromophore structure that is remarkably similar to sensory rhodopsin
II from Natronobacterium pharonis (NpSRII) and to a large extent also bacteriorhodopsin (BR) in contrast
to the mixed isomer composition of CrChR2. Its more homogeneous chromophore makes CaChR1 an attractive protein for the study of ChR photochemistry.
On the basis of pH titration measurements, deuterium–hydrogen
(D–H) exchange, and the effects of substitutions of the two
putative SB counterion residues, Glu169 and Asp299 (Asp85 and Asp212
in BR), we conclude that at pH 7 Glu169 exists in a protonated form
(i.e., neutral state) whereas Asp299 exists in an ionized form and
serves as the predominant counterion for the SB, in agreement with
recent UV–visible absorption and current measurements of CaChR1 and some of its mutants., The
relatively unchanged vibrational spectrum of CaChR1
with a decrease in the pH of CaChR1 from pH 9 to
2 suggests that charge neutrality is maintained near the SB over a
broad pH range.

Materials and Methods
Expression, Purification,
and Reconstitution of ChRs
The 7TM domain of CaChR1 was expressed in Pichia pastoris and reconstituted
using a procedure similar
to that described in ref (). Cells were grown in BMGY (Buffered Minimal Glycerol Yeast)
medium; expression was induced by the addition of 0.5% methanol every
24 h in the presence of 5 μM all-trans-retinal.
Cells were grown for 2 days, harvested by low-speed centrifugation,
and disrupted by a bead beater. Membrane fragments were collected
by centrifugation for 1 h at 38000 rpm. The protein was partially
purified on a Ni-NTA agarose column (Qiagen, Hilden, Germany) after
solubilization by incubation overnight in 3% dodecyl maltoside (DDM).
For membrane reconstitution, the protein was eluted in 20 mM HEPES
(pH 7.4), 100 mM NaCl, 0.05% DDM, and 300 mM imidazole and then mixed
with Escherichia coli polar lipids (ECPL) (Avanti
Polar Lipids, Alabaster, AL) at a concentration of 5 mg/mL in 10%
octyl glucoside at a ratio of 1:10 (CaChR1:ECPL)
and incubated at room temperature for 1 h after which 0.25 g of SM-2
Bio-Beads (Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA) was added, and the mixture was incubated
for 1 h at room temperature with slow rotation. The protein-lipid
suspension was transferred to a fresh tube with 0.25 g of SM-2 Bio-Beads
and the mixture incubated at room temperature overnight with slow
rotation, and the reconstituted CaChR1 proteoliposomes
were pelleted at 10000 rpm for 10 min. The pellet was resuspended
in 10 mM phosphate buffer (pH 7.0) and washed twice.

Similar
procedures were used to express and reconstitute CrChR2 as described above except the cDNA of CrChR2
encoded residues 1–309 with a C-terminal six-His tag sequence
that was cloned in the pPIC9K vector (Invitrogen) within its EcoRI
and NotI sites. The production of detergent-purified CrChR2 followed the methods of Bamann et al. and Li et al. For liposome reconstitution, CrChR2 in 1% decyl maltoside (DM) was mixed with DMPC (Avanti
Polar Lipids, Alabaster, AL) at a ratio of 1:20 (w/w).

Near-Infrared
(IR) Resonance Raman Spectroscopy
The
reconstituted ChRs prepared as described above were used for resonance
Raman studies. ChR samples were measured using confocal near-IR RRS
using methods similar to those previously reported for Archaerhodopsin-3. Approximately 20 μg of reconstituted ChR
was pelleted using a SCI Logex D2012 centrifuge spun at 15000 rpm
for 5 min, resuspended in a wash buffer (50 mM K2HPO4 and 10 mM NaCl) adjusted to various pH values using H3PO4/KOH titration, and recentrifuged and washed
at least two additional times to form a final pellet. A similar procedure
was used to prepare a sample with 2 M NaCl and 1 M Na2SO4, except the pH was adjusted to 3 using HCl or H2SO4 and the K2HPO4 was omitted.
A portion of the pellet was inserted into a square borosilicate glass
capillary (0.5 mm by 0.5 mm cross section inside diameter, Wale Apparatus,
Hellertown, PA) using a 10 μL syringe (Hamilton Co., Reno NV).
One end of the capillary was sealed prior to addition of protein,
and a short centrifugation (&lt;1 min at 15000 rpm) was used to concentrate
the protein at the sealed end. The other end is sealed with Critoseal
(Leica Microsystems, Buffalo Grove, IL) to prevent dehydration. The
level of water in the pellet was sufficient to keep the membranes
fully hydrated during the course of the measurements.

RRS was
conducted at room temperature on a Bruker Senterra confocal Raman
microscope (Olympus BX51M) equipped with a 20× objective with
a numerical aperture (NA) of 0.4 using 785 nm laser excitation. A
laser power of 100 mW (40 mW measured at the sample) was used for
most measurements unless otherwise noted at an effective resolution
of 3–5 cm–1. Averaged spectra were obtained
by measuring the sample for 120 s, leaving the sample in the dark
for 1 min, and then repeating this cycle over 4–6 h. Spectra
obtained from an empty capillary were subtracted to eliminate the
fluorescence background. Resonance Raman spectra obtained in this
way were also compared to spectra of a CaChR1 proteoliposome
preparation that was heat-denatured at 75 °C for 30 min to identify
possible nonresonance contributions from protein and lipid vibrations.

UV–Vis Spectroscopy
Between 100 and 200 μg
of reconstituted CaChR1 in ECPL was washed in wash
buffer (same that was used for RRS) at pH 7. Samples were then placed
in a quartz cuvette (Agilent Technologies Inc., Santa Clara, CA),
and UV–vis absorption data were acquired at room temperature
with a Cary 6000 spectrometer equipped with a diffuse scattering apparatus
(both from Agilent Technologies, Inc.) using an averaging time of
0.5 s per step size of 1 nm. The total data acquisition time was 300
s. Measurements on light-adapted samples were recorded immediately
after illumination for 5 min using a 530 nm LED operating at 10 mW/cm2 at the sample. Dark-adapted spectra were recorded immediately
after the sample had been kept in the dark for 60 min.

Spectral Analysis
Baseline corrections, spectral subtractions,
and peak fitting were performed using Grams/AI version 7.02 (Thermo
Fisher Scientific, Inc.). The UV–vis baseline was corrected
by fitting a quartic baseline. Resonance Raman spectra of samples
were corrected for fluorescence and Raman background arising from
the empty capillary by subtraction of its spectrum using a least-squares
minimization algorithm.

To calculate the subcomponent bands
in the ethylenic region of the resonance Raman spectra as shown in
Figure S4 of the , a curve-fitting program that is part of Grams/AI version 7.02 was
utilized, which incorporates iterative χ2 minimization.
The resonance Raman spectra, including those as a function of pH,
were fit from 1488 to 1578 cm–1 with a linear baseline,
and the routine found in all cases two Voigtian peaks, which resulted
in an R2 value of &gt;0.99. Similar methods
were used to fit the UV–vis data shown in Figure S1 of the , which resulted in three
Voigtian peaks with an R2 value of &gt;0.99.

Results
Similarity of the Raman Spectra of CaChR1,
BR, and NpSRII
The near-IR resonance Raman
spectrum of CaChR1 is remarkably similar to the near-IR
resonance Raman spectrum recorded under identical conditions for BR
and even more similar to that of NpSRII (Figure ). This is particularly true in the configurationally
sensitive fingerprint region (1150–1300 cm–1) that involves mainly the C–C stretching modes of the retinal
chromophore. In the case of both BR and NpSRII, previous
RRS and FTIR studies− led to the conclusion that the retinal chromophore exists in an
all-trans protonated SB configuration. For example,
bands in the BR spectrum were previously assigned to an all-trans-retinal chromophore using model retinal compounds
and isotope labeling.13C
solid state NMR also provides strong confirmation of the existence
of an almost pure all-trans configuration of the
retinal chromophore in the case of BR. In addition, NpSRII appears to exist in a pure
all-trans form in both light-adapted and dark-adapted
states.

Resonance Raman spectra of BR (purple
membrane), CaChR1 reconstituted into E. coli polar lipids, and CrChR2 reconstituted into DMPC
recorded in H2O at pH 7. Data were recorded at room temperature
using a 785 nm
probe laser with a 100 mW power (40 mW measured at the sample). A
background spectrum of the quartz capillary and buffer was subtracted
from the sample. The spectra were scaled using the intensity of the
ethylenic band at 1526 cm–1. Additional details
are given in .

Bands in the fingerprint region
of retinal are particularly sensitive
to the isomeric state of retinal and arise mainly from the various
mixed C–C stretching modes of the chromophore.,, The similarity of the relative
intensities and frequencies of bands in this region for CaChR1, BR, and NpSRII strongly indicates that all
three chromophores have a similar all-trans-retinal
configuration. For example, bands appear in this region in CaChR1, BR, and NpSRII near 1272, 1256,
1207 (shoulder), 1201, 1184, 1172, and 1163 cm–1 (CaChR1). While the 1172 cm–1 band in CaChR1 and the 1170 cm–1 band in NpSRII do not appear clearly in BR, this
is most likely due to an upshift of the 1163 cm–1 band to 1168 cm–1. The latter band in BR is assigned
mainly to the C10–C11 stretching mode and may indicate some differences in structure
in this region of the chromophore compared to the structures of CaChR1 and NpSRII. Many other microbial
rhodopsins with all-trans chromophores such as AR3 and green- and blue-absorbing proteorhodopsin
(GPR and BPR, respectively) also exhibit
very similar resonance Raman spectra in the fingerprint region, reflecting
a similar all-trans-retinal configuration.

The agreement between the intensity and frequency of many bands
outside the fingerprint region also provides strong evidence of the
similar configurations of BR, NpSRII, and CaChR1 chromophores. For example, the 1006 cm–1 band assigned in BR to in-plane methyl rocking vibrations of the
two methyl groups at positions C9 and C13 appears at a similar frequency
in CaChR1. A second
example is in the hydrogen out-of-plane (HOOP) region, where bands
appear at 961, 901, and 881 cm–1 in CaChR1 and 958, 889, and 881 cm–1 in BR.

Visible absorption measurements indicate
that there is very little
change in the absorption of CaChR1 between the light-
and dark-adapted states (Figure S1 of the ). The curve-fit major component appears at 524
nm, close to the peak for the maximal wavelength of the action spectrum
for the current generation of CaChR1. Furthermore, the spectrum of BR recorded under identical
conditions (Figure ) using 785 nm Raman excitation
exhibits no major bands characteristic of the dark-adapted state (e.g.,
the 1536 cm–1 ethylenic band), indicating that even if CaChR1 did exhibit
dark adaptation it should remain in the light-adapted state during
the Raman measurement. Reducing the 785 nm excitation power from 100
to 10 mW or continuously illuminating the sample with a 530 nm LED
during the measurement did not significantly alter the resonance Raman
spectrum (Figure S2 of the ). Thus, we do not consider it likely that the Raman spectrum recorded
with 785 nm excitation shown in Figure  reflects
a long-lived photoproduct in the photocycle.

In contrast to CaChR1, the RSS of CrChR2, particularly
in the fingerprint region, differs significantly
from that of BR and CaChR1 (Figure ). This reflects the heterogeneity of the chromophore structure
of CrChR2 that has been found to exist in a mixture
of all-trans and 13-cis isomers
both in the light- and dark-adapted states.,, For example, Nack et al. found on the basis of RRS and extraction–high-performance
liquid chromatography analysis that there were significant contributions
from 13-cis-retinal and small amounts from 9-cis-retinal, both of which increased with light adaptation.
Note that even though the earlier study was performed using a different
laser excitation frequency (647 nm), almost
all of the bands appear at similar frequencies and intensities as
in the resonance Raman spectrum shown in Figure  recorded using 785 nm excitation.

The most outstanding differences
between CrChR2
and BR, NpSRII, and CaChR1 appear
in the fingerprint region. The magnitude of the 1185 cm–1 band, which is highly characteristic of the 13-cis isomer, increases relative to that of the 1200 cm–1 band, which is characteristic of the all-trans form., This increase is also apparent in both the resonance Raman spectrum
and FTIR difference spectrum of many of the BR photointermediates
with a 13-cis-retinal configuration., For example, bands at 1186 and 1198 cm–1 are almost
equal in magnitude in the resonance Raman spectra of the N intermediate, very similar to bands reported here and previously
for CrChR2. An almost
identical fingerprint profile is also found for BR548,
the 13-cis-retinal-containing component of dark-adapted
BR. On the basis of normal mode calculations,
the 1185 cm–1 band is assigned primarily to the
C10–C11 stretching mode of the retinylidene
chromophore. In contrast, microbial rhodopsins
that contain the predominantly all-trans-retinal
chromophore such as light-adapted BR, NpSRII (see
Figure ), display a much weaker band intensity
near 1185 cm–1 relative to that near 1200 cm–1, which is most likely due to a different C–C
stretching mode.

Additional differences
in the resonance Raman spectra of CrChR2 compared
to BR and CaChR1 appear
in the in-plane methyl rocking vibration and HOOP mode regions (Figure ). Overall, this comparison indicates that CrChR2 has a significantly higher fraction of the 13-cis isomer in the light-adapted ground state than CaChR1 does.

Assignment of the CaChR1
Ethylenic C=C
Stretching Vibration
One significant difference between the
resonance Raman spectra of BR, NpSRII, CaChR1, and CrChR2 is in the ethylenic C=C
stretching region where intense bands appear at different frequencies
(BR at 1526 cm–1, CaChR1 at 1532
cm–1, NpSRII at 1547 cm–1, and CrChR2 at 1553 cm–1) (Figure ). Importantly, these variations are in agreement
with the expected inverse relationship between λmax and νC=C found for most microbial rhodopsins.
For example, λmax and νC=C of CaChR1 fall close to a best fit line that includes
several microbial rhodopsins, including the dark-adapted form and
M intermediate of BR (see Figure S3 of the ).

In addition to the 1532 cm–1 band, a shoulder appears near 1545 cm–1 in the
resonance Raman spectrum of CaChR1, which reflects
an underlying band near 1549 cm–1 as revealed by
curve fitting (see Figure S4 of the ). It is possible that this band arises from a second
form of CaChR1 that on the basis of the empirical
correlation shown in Figure S3 of the  would have a λmax near 480 nm.
In fact, curve fitting of the visible absorption of light-adapted CaChR1 (Figure S1 of the ) reveals a second component near this wavelength.
However, this does not establish the existence of a second form of CaChR1, because multiple bands can appear in the visible
absorption of retinal-containing proteins because of vibronic coupling.
For example, in the case of NpSRII, a major band
appears at ∼500 nm and two others attributed to vibronic coupling
appear at 460 and 420 nm., The first vibronic
band is separated from the major band by 1760 cm–1, which is not significantly different from the separation of the CaChR1 main band and curve-fit shoulder (1781 cm–1).

In the case of CrChR2, a second ethylenic
band
in the resonance Raman spectrum was also found by curve fitting at
1557 cm–1 and assigned to the presence of a second
species having predominantly 13-cis-retinal. However, in the case of CaChR1,
the two bands in the resonance Raman spectrum may arise from a single
chromophore species that has two Raman-active ethylenic stretching
modes as previously observed for the resonance Raman spectrum of the
L intermediate of BR., The existence of multiple ethylenic
modes is common for vibrational spectra of retinals and is actually
expected for microbial rhodopsins, although in some cases only one
mode dominates the resonance Raman spectrum. An additional possibility
is that the second band at 1549 cm–1 arises from
nonresonant Raman contributions of the protein (nonchromophore) such
as the amide II vibration mode characteristic of α-helical protein
structure. However, this mode is relatively weak in the nonresonance
Raman spectra of proteins such as bovine opsin relative to the amide
I and III modes. Because we do not observe
contributions from the amide I mode except in the case in which CaChR1 is partially heat denatured where it appears at 1652
cm–1 (data not shown), it is unlikely the amide
II mode contributes significantly to this shoulder. Further studies
using differential isotope labeling of the retinal chromophore and
protein are needed to distinguish among these various possibilities.

Assignment of the CaChR1 SB C=N Stretching
Mode and Strength of Hydrogen Bonding
In general, the C=N
SB stretching frequency (νC=N) depends on
the bond strength of the C=N bond as well as coupling to other
normal modes of the retinal. The C=N bond strength is directly
influenced by molecular interactions with the SB such as hydrogen
bonding to water molecules and the presence of nearby counterions
(in the case of BR, Asp85 and Asp212). As shown in Figure , a small band appears
at 1639 cm–1 in the resonance Raman spectrum of
BR, which has been previously assigned to the SB C=N stretching
mode (νC=N = 1639 cm–1). In contrast, a band appears at 1646 cm–1 in CaChR1 and at an even higher frequency, 1659
cm–1, in the case of CrChR2.

To further confirm the assignment of the
1646 cm–1 band in CaChR1, D–H
exchange was performed, which is expected to cause a frequency downshift. In addition, the magnitude of the downshift
increases with the hydrogen bonding strength of the SB., As seen in Figure , in the case of CaChR1, this downshift is 26 cm–1 (from
1646 to 1620 cm–1) compared to 17 cm–1 for BR and 28 cm–1 for CrChR2. Thus, we concluded that CaChR1
and CrChR2 have stronger SB hydrogen bonds than BR.
Interestingly, NpSRII, which as previously noted
has a resonance Raman spectrum very similar to that of CaChR1, also has a similar H–D exchange-induced shift (23 cm–1). Other microbial rhodopsins
with appreciable H–D exchange-induced shifts include green-
and blue-absorbing proteorhodopsins (GPR at 23 cm–1 and BPR at 21 cm–1).

Comparison
of resonance Raman spectra of BR and CaChR1 recorded
in H2O and D2O. Data were recorded
using the same conditions that are described in the legend of Figure . Additional details are given in .

Effects of pH and Anions on the Resonance Raman Spectrum of CaChR1
The resonance Raman spectrum of CaChR1 remains largely unaltered over a wide pH range (Figure ), including the configurationally sensitive fingerprint
region. However, curve fitting the main ethylenic band reveals it
undergoes a monotonic downshift of ∼2–3 cm–1 with a decrease in pH from pH 9 to 2 (Figure S5 of the ), which corresponds to
a red shift of λmax of ∼8–12 nm based
on the correlation shown in Figure S3 of the . This is fully consistent with the visible absorption
changes observed for pH titration of CaChR1 in detergent
where three pKa values are found at pH
9, 5.5, and 2. Although the pKa values are expected to be somewhat shifted upon comparison
of membrane-reconstituted and detergent-solubilized CaChR1, it is likely the red shifts we deduce from the shifts in νC=C of only 8–12 nm correspond to the red shift
observed in detergent micelles going from pH 8 to 2 and involve mainly
titratable groups with pKa values of 5.5
and 2.

Resonance Raman spectra of CaChR1 recorded at
various pH values ranging from 2 to 9. All conditions used for RRS
were the same as those described in the legend of Figure . Additional details are given in .

The relatively small downshift of the ethylenic stretching
frequency
and insensitivity in other regions such as the fingerprint of the CaChR1 resonance Raman spectrum between pH 9 and 2 are very
unusual. For example, the primary counterion, Asp85, in BR undergoes
a protonation below pH 3 that causes a pronounced red shift in λmax from 570 to ∼600 nm and a downshift in νC=C from 1527 to 1518 cm–1. This effect can be partially explained if the
homologous residue Glu169 in CaChR1 is already protonated
at pH &lt;9 as recently predicted on the basis of visible absorption
pH titration studies. However, at lower
pH values, one might then expect that a second counterion (i.e., Asp299)
undergoing protonation would cause a red shift larger than that observed
as discussed below.

The effect of changing the anion species
from Cl– to SO42– at
pH 3 was also measured.
As shown in Figure S6 of the , increasing the NaCl concentration from 10 mM to 2 M or switching
to 1 M Na2SO4 has little effect on the ethylenic
or fingerprint region, indicating that an anion does not interact
closely with the SB proton at this pH (see ). Note that contributions from opsin are also detected in the 2
M NaCl spectrum as apparent from bands appearing at 1652, 1450, and
1003 cm–1 that are assigned to the amide I, methyl,
and phenylalanine vibrations, respectively (for example, see ref ()). In the case of the Na2SO4 spectrum, opsin contributions were partially
removed by subtracting the spectrum of CaChR1 opsin
obtained after bleaching of the chromophore due to prolonged illumination.
In addition, the band at 961 cm–1 is assigned to
a sulfate vibration.

Effects of Substitution of Glu169 and Asp299
The CaChR1 residues homologous to the SB counterions
Asp85 and
Asp212 in BR are Glu169 and Asp299, respectively. These residues are
located in helices C and G, respectively (see Figure ), and comprise along with a nearby water molecule (W402)
the SB counterion complex. Conservative substitution of Glu169 with
a neutral residue (Glu to Gln), based on effects of such substitutions
in BR and other type 1 rhodopsins, would be expected to cause a substantial
red shift of λmax and upshift of νC=C. For example, the λmax of the mutant BR D85N (Asp
to Asn) is red-shifted ∼30 nm and the νC=C is downshifted 7 cm–1, similar to the case for the acidified or deionized blue membrane. In addition, the full width at half-maximum
of D85N increases significantly from 19 to 31 cm–1, which was attributed to an increase in 13-cis-retinal
content. Similar effects result from
the low pH or deionization-induced purple-to-blue transition of BR
in which Asp85 is neutral due to protonation. In both cases, a mixture of all-trans- and 13-cis-retinal as in dark-adapted BR was deduced from the resonance
Raman spectrum. One exception to this type of effect is Anabaena sensory rhodopsin (ASR), in which the Asp212 homologue is replaced
with a neutral threonine.

In contrast,
the νC=C of the ethylenic band for the CaChR1 E169Q mutant upshifts ∼2 cm–1 relative to the WT and does not undergo a change in the intensity
of the full width at half-maximum (Figure ). On the basis of curve fitting (see Figure S3 of the ), the full width at half-maximum
of the main component band and shoulder-fit band are 21 and 11 cm–1 versus 20 and 15 cm–1 for WT and
E169Q, respectively. As predicted by the inverse relationship between
λmax and νC=C (Figure S3
of the ), in contrast
to the significant red shift in BR D85N, a blue shift of λmax by ∼10 nm should occur, which is confirmed by visible
absorption measurement in both films and membrane suspensions (data
not shown) and also is in agreement with E169Q CaChR1 solubilized in detergent.

Resonance Raman
spectra of CaChR1 and mutants
E169Q and D299N. All conditions used for RRS were the same as those
described in the legend of Figure . Additional
details are given in .

The C–C stretch fingerprint
region indicates that E169Q
remains mainly in an all-trans configuration with
only a small increase observed in the intensity of the 1184 cm–1 band as compared, for example, to that of acid blue
or deionized BR for which significant increases in intensity of a
band near 1184 cm–1 are observed. We conclude that the small blue shift observed in CaChR1 E169Q is not due to increased 13-cis-retinal content in the mutant masking a red shift of the all-trans component. It is also noted that the SB C=N
stretch frequency upshifts to 1652 cm–1 even though
neutralization of this homologous residue in other microbial rhodopsins
causes a downshift. For example, in D85N
the SB C=N downshifts 6 cm–1 and in acid blue or deionized BR the SB C=N downshifts
approximately 10 cm–1..

Interestingly, almost identical changes compared to WT occur
in
the resonance Raman spectrum of the mutant D299N. For example, the
νC=C upshifts ∼3 cm–1, slightly more than that of E169Q, which is confirmed by a slightly
greater blue shift of the visible λmax. Like that of E169Q, the νC=N upshifts to 1652 cm–1, and the fingerprint region
remains substantially unchanged.

Discussion and Conclusions
The light-gated channel activity of heterologously expressed ChRs
in neurons has led to significant interest in their structure and
molecular mechanisms of action. Despite
this interest, relatively few studies have focused on the molecular
mechanism of ChRs besides CrChR2. However, ChRs display
considerable diversity even within the same genus of Chlamydomonas. This includes differences in visible absorption, photocycle and
current kinetics, light inactivation, pH sensitivity, and channel
conductivity.

In this work, we
used near-IR confocal RRS to study the chromophore
and electrostatic interactions near the protonated SB of a ChR1 from C. augustae (CaChR1). On the basis of these
measurements and earlier studies, several conclusions about the retinal
structure in CaChR1 and the interaction of the nearby
counterions Glu169 and Asp299 with the SB have been reached.

Light-Adapted CaChR1 Has an all-trans-Retinal Composition
Similar to That of BR and NpSRII in Contrast to That
of CrChR2
RRS
indicates that the retinal chromophore of CaChR1
is similar to the structure and isomeric composition of light-adapted
BR. Recent FTIR difference measurements of the CaChR1 primary phototransition at low temperatures also confirm that CaChR1 has a predominantly all-trans retinylidene
chromophore in contrast to a mixed isomeric composition of the retinylidene
chromophore in CrChR2 (unpublished experiment). One
difference in the chromophore configuration of CaChR1 and BR may be near the C10–C11 portion
of the retinal that has a slightly lower frequency for the fingerprint
band assigned to that mode in CaChR1 compared to
BR (see Figure ). However, this effect may
also be due to differences in the interaction of the protein with
other regions of the retinal chromophore, causing mode mixing to which
this band is very sensitive. Importantly,
these results with CaChR1 contrast with RRS measurements
of CrChR2, which contains bands in the fingerprint
region reflecting a mixture of all-trans- and 13-cis-retinal-containing species (see Figure ) and earlier results.,

Even more striking
are the nearly identical resonance Raman spectra of CaChR1 and the phototaxis receptor NpSRII (Figure ). This spectrum recorded using 785 nm excitation
is almost identical to the resonance Raman spectra reported previously
using 514 nm excitation and a spinning cell designed to eliminate
contributions from long-lived intermediates of the NpSRII photocycle (M, N, and O) and minimize contributions from K (0.1%)
and L (1.3%). This similarity strongly
indicates that both microbial rhodopsins have very similar retinal
structures. Furthermore, a combined quantum chemical/normal mode approach
indicates that the spectrum of NpSRII best reflects
an all-trans 15-anti protonated
Schiff base (PSB) structure similar to that of BR. However, differences
with the BR resonance Raman spectrum such as shifts in band frequency
and intensity in the ethylenic and fingerprint region were attributed
to a stronger interaction of the counterion(s) with the SB in NpSRII, thus also explaining the blue-shifted λmax relative to that of BR. On
this basis, we surmise that the differences between the resonance
Raman spectra of BR and CaChR1 are also due to differences
mainly near the SB region of the chromophore and its interaction with
its counterion(s).

Several other features also suggest the similarity
of the CaChR1 and NpSRII retinal
chromophores.
As discussed below, NpSRII and CaChR1 both have much stronger hydrogen bonding of the SB than BR. In addition, the absence of dark adaptation
in both proteins indicates that the binding pocket does not easily
accommodate a 13-cis-retinal configuration as previously
suggested for NpSRII based on measurement of the
rate of 13-cis-retinal regeneration. It is also noted that like CaChR1, the
ethylenic band of NpSRII measured by RRS was fit
by two subcomponent ethylenic bands both attributable to the same
all-trans-retinal species.

Confirming the absence of significant light–dark adaptation,
we observed no significant resonance Raman spectral changes upon green
light illumination during the acquisition of resonance Raman spectra
(Figure S2 of the ). Furthermore, the 785 nm laser excitation used to record the resonance
Raman spectra is far from the visible absorption λmax of CaChR1 near 525 nm and hence not likely to produce
photocycle intermediates even in cases where the longest photointermediate
decay time is a few seconds. As noted above, the similarity of the
resonance Raman spectra of NpSRII that has a slowly
decaying O intermediate of a few seconds recorded using photostationary
785 nm excitation here and under conditions where the photointermediates
are minimized also supports this conclusion.

The Schiff Base Has Hydrogen Bonding Stronger Than That of BR
The RRS-measured H–D exchange-induced downshift of the C=N
vibrational mode (νC=N) of the retinylidene
SB in CaChR1 indicates that the SB forms a hydrogen
bond that is stronger than that of BR. A similar conclusion was also
reached on the basis of the H–D exchange-induced shift for
the C=N vibrational mode of CrChR2. One possible explanation is suggested by the
crystal structure of the C1C2 chimera that shows a movement of water
molecule W402 found in BR away from the SB (Figure ). In this position, the water closest
to the SB in CaChR1 may not be able to act to “soften”
the hydrogen bonding interaction of the counterion(s) with the SB
(see below).

Three-dimensional structure of the C1C2 chimera from ref () (Protein Data Bank entry 3UG9) showing an internal
water molecule (blue sphere) located 4.4 Å from the SB (blue
bond). Residues of CaChR1 are homologous to E162
and D292 in the CrChR1 sequence.

Glu169 Exists in a Neutral Form at Neutral pH
With
a decrease in pH from 9 to 2, a red shift in λmax of ∼8–12 nm was deduced. Furthermore, substitution
of the neutral residue Gln for Glu169 caused a small upshift in νC=C confirming a reported blue shift in λmax. However, on the basis of the
effect of neutralizing the homologous residue Asp85 in BR, a significant
downshift in νC=C and a red shift in λmax should occur if Glu169 functioned as the predominant SB
counterion at neutral pH. Furthermore,
the absence of a smaller than expected red shift or even a blue shift
as observed in the case of E169Q cannot be explained by postulating
that the chromophore adopts a non-all-trans configuration
(e.g., 13-cis) because the fingerprint region remains
substantially unchanged and characteristic of an all-trans chromophore.

An explanation for these effects is that Glu169
has a very high pKa. In this case, substitution
with another neutral group (Gln) should not cause a red shift, and
pH titration below the pKa would also
not cause a substantial change in λmax. In fact,
the pKa of Glu169 was determined to be
near 9 in detergent micelles by pH titration of the visible absorption
of CaChR1 and the mutant E169Q.CaChR1 reconstituted in E. coli polar lipid membranes may have a pKa even higher than that in detergent micelles because we do not observe
a substantial blue shift in λmax deduced from the
νC=C. Such a pKa shift would be expected if the surface charge near CaChR1 were altered in these two different environments as is observed
in the case the BR for the pKa of the
purple-to-blue transition.

Asp299 Serves
as the Predominant SB Counterion over a Broad
pH Range
The CaChR1 SB has a hydrogen bond
strength that is greater than that of BR (), yet Glu169,
the residue homologous to Asp85 that in BR acts as the primary counterion,
exists in a neutral form () over a wide pH range. This indicates that
another counterion or counterion complex interacts strongly with the
SB. An attractive candidate is Asp299, which is homologous to Asp212
in BR and exists in an ionized form along with Asp85.

However,
one problem with this model is that the pKa for Asp299 was determined on the basis of site-directed mutagenesis
and pH titrations to be near 5. This would
thus indicate that below pH 5, both Glu169 and Asp299 exist in a neutral
form, providing no effective counterbalancing negative anionic charge
for the positively charged SB. Under these circumstances, we would
expect to observe a downshift of νC=C much
larger than that observed (∼1–2 cm–1) upon titration from pH 7 to 2 (corresponding to only a 4–8
nm red shift in λmax) (see Figure S3 of the ), in good agreement with
the reported red shift for CaChR1 in detergent over
the same pH range. Furthermore, the νC=N does not shift appreciably over this pH range, which
would be expected if the SB counterions were neutral. For example,
neutralization of the primary BR counterion, Asp85, by either lowering
the pH or substituting a neutral residue results in ∼7 and
6–10 cm–1 downshifts in νC=C and νC=N, respectively.,

It is likely for this reason that another source(s) of negative
charge compensation near the PSB comes into play at very low pH in CaChR1. One possibility is that a negative anion enters
the active site of CaChR1 and serves as the counterion
to the PSB. FTIR difference studies indicate that movement of a Cl– ion to near the PSB occurs in BR when both counterions
are neutral at pH ∼0. On the basis
of resonance Raman spectra, the retinal chromophore for this acid
form of BR has an all-trans-retinal chromophore very
similar to light-adapted BR, including similar ethylenic and C=N
SB stretching frequencies. Entry of an
anion has also been reported in sensory rhodopsin I from Salinibacter
ruber (SrSRI) but near the β-ionone
ring of the retinal chromophore., However, no
spectral changes in the resonance Raman spectra were observed for CaChR1 when measured in 2 M NaCl or 1 M Na2SO4, as described in . In addition,
no difference in the visible absorption was found between mutants
E169Q and D299N for 100 mM NaCl and Na2SO4 solutions.

A second possibility is that other negatively
charged residues
located nearby the PSB assume the role of counterion(s). In the case
of ChRs, there are several residues with yet unknown pKa values that could serve this role. For example, Glu136
(Glu90 in CrChR2) located on helix B is ∼6
Å from the PSB in the C1C2 structure and may be pulled closer
below pH 5 when both Glu169 and Asp299 are expected to be neutral.
Other residues such as Glu128 and Glu129 also on helix B are possible
candidates but are located &gt;9 Å from the PSB.

Another possible explanation for the absence of larger
changes
in the resonance Raman spectra at lower pH is that protonation of
Asp299 causes a concerted deprotonation of Glu169, which then becomes
the predominant counterion for the SB. Such a deprotonation was also
proposed to occur when Asp299 is replaced with Asn, to explain the
apparent ability of Glu169 to function as the SB proton acceptor in
D299N at neutral pH. Such an effect might
be caused by a strong mutual electrostatic interaction among Glu169,
Asp299, and the SB, which acts to maintain overall change neutrality
in the active site between the positively charged SB and the Glu169–Asp299
complex. Such a direct interaction is suggested by the position of
an internal water molecule in C1C2 that is similar to that of W402
in BR but is located 4.4 Å from the SB compared to 2.8 Å
in BR (see Figure ). Because W402 in BR is in a position to mediate the electrostatic
interaction of the SB with Asp85 and Asp212, moving this water farther
away may allow more direct interactions of these residues with the
SB. In fact, on the basis of low-temperature FTIR measurements of
C1C2, it was concluded recently that Glu162, the homologue of Glu169
in CaChR1, interacts directly with the PSB without
the intervening water molecule found in BR. However, this model contrasts with the one we propose for CaChR1 where Glu169 exists in a protonated form and Asp299
acts as the predominant counterion for the PSB at neutral pH. Further
studies are now underway, including low-temperature FTIR measurements
of CaChR1, to distinguish these various possibilities.

Supporting Information Available
Examples of peak fitting for
both UV–vis data and RRS data (Figures S1 and S4), a comparison
of resonance Raman spectra taken with low laser power and CW illumination
(Figure S2), illustration of the inverse linear correlation between
the resonance Raman spectral ethylenic frequency and the visible absorption
wavelength maximum for various microbial rhodopsins (Figure S3), dependence
of the ethylenic frequency on pH obtained by peak fitting RRS data
(Figure S5), and RRS data showing the effect of concentration and
anion type (Figure S6). This material is available free of charge
via the Internet at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bi500445c_si_001.pdf

This work was
supported by National Science Foundation Grant CBET-1264434 and National
Institutes of Health Grant 5R01EY21022 to K.J.R. and National Institutes
of Health Grants R01GM027750 and R21MH098288, the Hermann Eye Fund,
and Endowed Chair AU-0009 from the Robert A. Welch Foundation to J.L.S.

The authors declare
no
competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
We thank Erica Saint-Claire and Jihong
Wang who participated
in the early stages of this project.

Abbreviations
ChRschannelrhodopsins

RRSresonance Raman spectroscopy

FTIRFourier transform
infrared

CaChR1channelrhodopsin-1 from C. augustae

CrChR2channelrhodopsin-2
from C. reinhardtii

BRbacteriorhodopsin

H–D exchangehydrogen–deuterium
exchange

SBSchiff
base

C1C2chimera
of CrChR1 and CrChR2

PSBprotonated Schiff base.

