Signaling
through the phosphorylation
of proteins by protein kinase enzymes plays an important role in the
regulation of a variety of physiological responses. ATP-dependent
protein kinases are phosphotransferases that deliver the γ-phosphoryl
group from the nucleotide to the hydroxyl of a serine, threonine,
or tyrosine of a substrate protein to produce the phosphomonoester
and ADP products. Among the diverse serine/threonine protein kinase
family, cAMP-dependent protein kinase A (PKA) has served as an extensively
studied model for investigations of the mechanism of all kinases.−In vivo, the inactive PKA holoenzyme consists of
two catalytic (C) and two regulatory (R) subunits. An increase in
cAMP concentration, due to β-adrenergic stimulation of cells,
activates PKA by providing four cAMP molecules that bind to the R
subunits, which in turn dissociate from the C subunits (referred to
here as PKAc) that had been bound in an inactive holoenzyme state.

Experiment and theory have demonstrated
that the catalytic cycle
of PKAc involves several structural and dynamic steps. apo-PKAc is in a dynamically uncommitted open conformation, showing
very little conformational exchange on the microsecond to millisecond
time scale.− Catalysis initiates when MgATP binds to produce the
binary PKAc–MgATP complex, which causes PKAc to transition
to an intermediate conformation that itself is partially rate-limiting
at physiological Mg2+ concentrations (∼0.5 mM).− Substrate binding to PKAc–MgATP produces the ternary complex
in which PKAc adopts the closed conformation necessary for chemical
catalysis, although the ternary Michaelis
complex may cycle between the closed and intermediate conformations
multiple times before phosphorylation actually take place. Following the dissociation of the phosphorylated
product from the active site, MgADP is released, which is concurrent
with the enzyme’s return to the open conformation and is the
second potentially rate-limiting step.,

Divalent
metal cations are thought to play important roles throughout
the catalytic cycle. Early studies pointed to a fundamental role for
divalent metal cations in PKAc activity., The PKAc active site possesses two metal-binding sites (M1 and M2;
Figure ). The occupancy of one site is sufficient
for activity, whereas occupancy of the second site improves the affinity
to both ATP and ADP. Indeed, in the absence of divalent cations in
solution, no nucleotide binding or phopshotransferase activity has
been detected. Early reports suggested
that at low physiological concentrations Mg2+ binds first
to the M1 site, coordinated by β- and γ-phosphates of
ATP.− The M2 site, coordinated by α- and γ-phosphates
of ATP, becomes occupied at higher metal concentrations.,, When both sites are occupied
at high metal concentrations, ADP release becomes the rate-limiting
process.

A close-up view of the PKAc structure
in cartoon representation
(PDB ID 4IAC, Gerlits et al.). The two Mg2+ cations at sites M1 and M2 are represented by magenta spheres, while
a nucleotide is shown in stick representation colored by atom type.
SP20 peptide is colored blue, and the substrate’s Ser21 is
shown in stick representation colored by atom type.

Our understanding of the role of metal in the catalytic
cycle has
been challenged recently by X-ray crystallography studies that revealed
that M2 rather than M1 is occupied at low Mg2+ concentrations. Computational studies also supported greater
involvement of M2 in chemical catalysis than M1.− Further, although
Mg2+ is considered to be the physiologically relevant metal
based on its relatively high concentration in cells,, it has been demonstrated that all other divalent alkaline earth
metals (Ca2+, Sr2+, and Ba2+) support
the phosphoryl transfer in complexes with the 20-residue substrate
analogue peptide SP20. This unexpected
result contradicted early kinetic measurements showing no PKAc activity
in the presence of Ca2+ or Sr2+ using the Kemptide
(LRRASLG) peptide substrate and no nucleotide binding when Ba2+ was present.

The fact
that ATP binding to PKAc is undetectable in the absence
of divalent metals leads us to propose
that high substrate binding affinity can produce PKAc activity in
a metal-free environment. SP20 has nanomolar binding affinity to PKAc., Here, X-ray crystallography and single turnover enzyme activity
measurements with [γ-32P]ATP were used to determine
whether PKAc can bind ATP and transfer the γ-phosphoryl group
to Ser21 of SP20 in the absence of free divalent metal ions. The results
show that a stable PKAc–SP20 binary complex forms that can
coordinate ATP to form the catalytically active ternary complex. The
results reinforce the conclusions of several computational studies− that suggest that the primary role of the metal ions is to lower
the transition state energy through electrostatic effects, rather
than bond making or breaking during the chemical reaction. Importantly,
the current study provides a major revision to our understanding of
the role of the different components involved in the catalytic cycle
of PKAc.

Materials and Methods
General Information
Pseudosubstrate
peptide SP20 (TTYADFIASGRTGRRASIHD;
residues 5–24 of the heat-stable PKAc inhibitor PKI, where
positions 20 and 21 have been mutated to alanine and serine) was custom-synthesized
by and purchased from Biomatik (Wilmington, Delaware, USA). ATP, as
the disodium salt, and ATP-γS (in which sulfur replaces one
of the terminal oxygen atoms), as a tetralithium salt, were purchased
from Sigma-Aldrich (St. Louis, Missouri, USA). Protein purification
supplies were purchased from GE Healthcare (Piscataway, New Jersey,
USA). Crystallization reagents were purchased from Hampton Research
(Aliso Viejo, California, USA).

Protein Expression and
Purification
His6-tagged recombinant mouse PKAc
was expressed in Escherichia
coli using Luria-Bertani (LB) media at 16–24 °C
for 16–20 h. The recombinant enzyme was purified by affinity
chromatography using HisTrap fast-flow chromatography columns supplied
by GE Healthcare. The enzyme was then buffer-exchanged with 50 mM
2-(N-morpholino)ethanesulfonic acid (MES)–NH4OH, 250 mM NH4Cl, 2 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) at
pH 6.5 on a desalting column. For PKAc–Na2ADP–pSP20,
the enzyme was buffer-exchanged with 50 mM MES–NaOH, 250 mM
NaCl, 2 mM DTT, pH 6.5. Isoforms of PKAc, which differ by the number
and positions of autophosphorylated residues, were not separated,
without any obvious effect on crystallization of the ternary complexes.

Enzyme Activity Measurements
The activity of PKAc in
the presence and absence of monovalent and divalent metals was measured
in the single turnover regime utilizing 32P-labeled ATP
(ATP*) and SP20 as substrates. The kinetics measurements were carried
out in the presence of 40 μM ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid
(EDTA) at 25 °C. The common reaction mix contained 50 mM 3-(N-morpholino)propanesulfonic acid (MOPS), pH 7.4, 10 μM
SP20, 2 μM enzyme, 1 mM ATP, and ATP radiolabeled with 32P in the γ-position (ATP*, specific activity 500–1500
cpm/pmol) in a final volume of 20 μL. The various metal ions
used were Mg2+, Ca2+, K+, and Na+ at final concentrations of 1 mM. The reaction was carried
out as a time course experiment with 0, 60, and 300 min.

The
reaction was initiated by adding 10 μL of the mix containing
ATP, ATP*, and PKAc to 10 μL of the solution with metal (or
no metal) and SP20. The γ-phosphoryl group of ATP* containing
the radioactive marker was transferred to Ser21 of SP20 during the
measurements. After each time-point, the reaction was quenched with
90 μL of 30% acetic acid. A 50 μL portion of the quenched
reaction was then spotted on p81 phosphocellulose paper, washed 3
times for 5 min each with 5% phosphoric acid and once with acetone,
air-dried, and counted on a liquid scintillation counter. The background
counts were subtracted from the measured values. The difference in
counts (total counts minus background counts) was divided by the activity
of 32P ATP (cpm/pmol) to get the concentration of the phosphorylated
pSP20 product.

Crystallization and Data Collection
For crystallization
trials, PKAc was concentrated to 8–12 mg/mL. The ternary and
binary complexes with no metals, Na+ or K+,
ATP (or ATP-γS), and SP20 were made before crystallization trials
were set up. For the metal-free binary PKAc–SP20 complex, the
enzyme solution was mixed with the peptide substrate, and (NH4)2EDTA was added to reach a final concentration
of 20 mM. For the metal-free ternary complexes, the enzyme solution
was combined with a premade solution of Na2ATP in 50 mM
MES–NH4OH, 250 mM NH4Cl, 1 M (NH4)2EDTA, and 2 mM DTT at pH 6.5, and then peptide
substrate was added. The molar ratio of PKAc/ATP(or ATP-γS)/SP20
was kept at 1:5:5. The final concentration of EDTA in the ternary
complex solutions was 50 mM, and that of ATP was 5 mM. EDTA has about
105 higher affinity than ATP for Mg2+ and other
divalent and trivalent metal ions, so it should chelate any trace
amounts of metal present. For PKAc–Na2ADP–pSP20
and PKAc–K2ADP–pSP20, the enzyme solutions
were mixed with Na2ATP and SP20. Crystals were grown in
sitting drop microbridges or in 9-well glass plates using well solutions
consisting of 100 mM MES–NH4OH, pH 6.5, 5 mM DTT,
15–20% PEG 4000, and 150 mM NaCl for PKAc–Na2ADP–pSP20 or 50 mM KCl for PKAc–K2ADP–pSP20
at 4–14 °C. PKAc–SP20 crystallized in 15–20%
PEG3350.

Structure Determination and Refinement
X-ray crystallographic
data were collected from frozen crystals at 100 K for all complexes.
The data sets were collected on a Rigaku HomeFlux system, equipped
with a MicroMax-007 HF generator and Osmic VariMax optics. The diffraction
images were obtained using an RAXIS-IV++ image-plate detector. For
the binary PKAc–SP20 complex, a 1.7 Å resolution diffraction
data set was collected at the Advanced Photon Source on the beamline
19-ID. Diffraction data were collected, integrated, and scaled using
HKL3000 software suite. The structures
were refined using SHELX-97 for PKAc–ADP–pSP20,
PKAc–Na2ADP–pSP20, and PKAc–K2ADP–pSP20, and PHENIX for
PKAc–SP20, PKAc–ADP–psSP20. A summary of the
crystallographic data and refinement is given in Supporting Table
1, . Similar to our
previous observations,, all of the structures were of
isoform 2 and contained three post-translationally phosphorylated
residues, Ser139, Thr197, and Ser338.

The structure of the ternary
complex of PKAc with 2Mg2+, ADP, and phosphorylated peptide
pSP20 (PDB ID 4IAD) was used as a starting model for structure
determination. Structures were built and manipulated with program Coot, whereas the figures were
generated using the PyMol molecular graphics software
(v.1.5.0.3; Schrödinger LLC). The absence of metal ions was
confirmed by the lack of electron density at the M1 and M2 sites in
the FO – FC difference electron density maps. The presence of metal ions
(Na+ and K+) was established by ensuring that
the strongest peaks in FO – FC maps with metals omitted and 2FO – FC maps with metals
present corresponded to positions M1 and M2 and by checking that the
coordination spheres of seven ligands were present around the metal
ions. Differences in coordination geometries were also used to distinguish
between metal ions. As an example, in the case of PKAc–Na2ADP–pSP20, we determined that the metal was sodium
because the coordination around the metal ions differed from that
found in our previously published product complex with magnesium,
and because no magnesium was used during the sample preparation. Potassium
has almost twice the number of electrons as sodium or magnesium; therefore,
K+ was identified by a much larger electron density peak
than that for the smaller sodium metal. The representative electron
densities in the active sites of PKAc–ADP–psSP20, PKAc–Na2ADP–pSP20, and PKAc–K2ADP–pSP20
complexes are shown in Supporting Figures 1 and 2, , while coordination of metals in Na+ and K+ complexes are given in Supporting Table
2 and Supporting Figure 3, .

The structures have been deposited to the Protein Data Bank
and
were assigned the following PDB codes: 4IB3 for PKAc–ADP–pSP20 (ternary
complex of PKAc with products ADP and phosphorylated SP20); 4O21 for PKAc–ADP–psSP20
(ternary complex of PKAc with products ADP and thiophosphorylated
SP20); 4IB0 for
PKAc–Na2ADP–pSP20 (ternary complex of PKAc
with two sodium cations and products ADP and phosphorylated SP20); 4IB1 for PKAc–K2ADP–pSP20 (ternary complex of PKAc with two potassium
cations and products ADP and phosphorylated SP20); and 4O22 for PKAc–SP20.

Results
Enzyme Activity
In the presence of Mg2+ and
Ca2+, the phosphotransfer reaction was already at equilibrium
after 60 min, and the amount of the product remained unchanged after
300 min (Figure ). The PKAc activity was significantly
lower when no metal or monovalent metals were present in the reaction
mixture, producing ∼2% and 5–10% of the phosphorylated
product after 60 and 300 min, respectively. The enzyme’s activity
is substantially impaired, but not abolished, without divalent metal
ions relative to its performance with Mg2+ and Ca2+. Interestingly, metal-free PKAc was as active as that with Na+ or K+, indicating that the alkali metal ions do
not play a role in the phosphoryl transfer.

Amounts of pSP20 synthesized
by PKAc at two time points of 60 (green
bars) and 300 min (blue bars) in the presence of no metal, Na+, K+, Mg2+, and Ca2+.

Ternary Complexes with
ADP, pSP20, and No Metal
The
active site of PKAc–ADP–pSP20 is shown in Figure a and is free of bound metal. Contrary to previous
studies, the phosphotransfer reaction has occurred, and the products,
ADP and pSP20, are trapped (Figure b). The
positions of the products are stabilized by a network of potential
hydrogen bonds and water-mediated interactions. The PKAc–ADP–psSP20
structure is very similar to PKAc–ADP–pSP20, with the
only structural difference confined to the glycine-loop region (Supporting
Figure 4, ). This
flap-like hairpin structure spans residues 49–57, contains
three glycine residues, and acts as a lid for the catalytic site cavity.
The flap is slightly more compact in PKAc–ADP–psSP20
due to a 1.5 Å shift of residues 52–54 away from the alternate
conformation of thiophosphate side chain of psSer21SP20. As a consequence, a hydrogen bond does not form between the thiophosphate
of psSer21SP20 and the side chain OH of Ser53 in the glycine-rich
loop in PKAc–ADP–psSP20, unlike in PKAc–ADP–pSP20
and the divalent metal-bound ternary product complexes reported previously. Instead, a new hydrogen bond forms between the
amide of Gly52 and the carbonyl of Gly55 of PKAc–ADP–psSP20.
This 2.8–3.2 Å long hydrogen bond is found in all product
complexes containing divalent metals, indicating that, in addition
to being flexible as a whole, the flap is also internally flexible.

(a) A
close-up view of the enzyme active site in PKAc–ADP–pSP20
product complex showing ADP, phosphorylated pSer21SP20,
and the enzyme’s residues important for catalysis. Possible
hydrogen bonds are represented as red dashed lines. (b) Electron density
for the active site components ADP, Asp166, Lys168, and pSer21SP20 contoured at the 1.5σ level (the contour level is
1.0σ for ADP to show the phosphates). (c) Superposition of the
active sites from PKAc–ADP–pSP20 and PKAc–Mg2ADP–pSP20. The distance between the phosphorus atoms
in pSer21SP20 residues is shown as black dashed arrow,
indicating that the product phosphate moved over 1 Å in the metal-free
structure toward Asp166 and Lys168 relative to its position in the
magnesium structure. Distances are in Å.

The β-phosphate of ADP is quite mobile in both metal-free
ternary complexes, having B factors of the order
of 70–100 Å2, whereas the pSer21SP20 phosphate and psSer21SP20 thiophosphate groups are less
mobile, having the B factors of the order of 40–50
Å2. The pSer21SP20’s phosphate group
is drawn 1.3 Å closer to the active site residues relative to
its position in PKAc–Mg2ADP–pSP20, possibly due to the lack of metal ions. This
shift is accomplished without a rotation around the Oγ–Cβ
bond of the phosphorylated serine (Figure c). The pSer21SP20 side chain position creates hydrogen
bonds with Asp166 and Lys168 in the metal-free PKAc–ADP–pSP20
structure that are absent from the metal–product complexes.
Similar hydrogen bonds form with the sulfur atom of psSer21SP20 in one of the alternate conformations.

Ternary Complexes with
ADP, pSP20, and Excess Na+ and K+
Metal
was observed in both the M1 and
M2 sites of the PKAc–Na2ADP–pSP20 and PKAc–K2ADP–pSP20 structures with the phosphotransfer products
despite the fact that ionic radii of Na+ (1.0 Å) and
K+ (1.38 Å) are significantly larger than that of
Mg2+ (0.7 Å). The active sites of the Na+ and K+ structures are very similar to PKAc–Mg2ADP–pSP20, including the position and orientation of
the ADP and pSer21SP20 phosphate groups. Further, the pSer21SP20 phosphoryl groups are
both oriented away from Asp166 and Lys168, which maintains a 2.5–2.6
Å long hydrogen bond to the OH of Ser53 in the glycine-rich loop
(Supporting Figure 5, ), which compares well with the 2.8 Å distance in PKAc–Mg2ADP–pSP20. Ser53’s side chain (Cβ–Oγ
bond) is rotated by almost 180° from its conformation in PKAc–Mg2ADP–pSP20, which allows it to face Phe54 and to make
a hydrogen bond with the imidazole of His23SP20.

The octahedral geometry around the magnesium ions in PKAc–Mg2ADP–pSP20 does not form in PKAc–Na2ADP–pSP20 or PKAc–K2ADP–pSP20. Na+ and K+ have seven ligands at M1 and M2, consistent
with preferences of alkali metals for coordination numbers above six.
Here, the seventh ligands are water molecules. The metal ion coordination
spheres, metal–ligand distances, and metal hydration in the
alkali metal complexes differ from the magnesium product complex (Supporting
Table 2 and Supporting Figures 3 and 5, ). As was observed in the Ca2+, Sr2+, and Ba2+ complexes, the terminal phosphoryl
groups on ADP and pSer21SP20 are slightly (∼0.5
Å) father away from each other compared with their locations
in PKAc–Mg2ADP–pSP20. These different active
site geometries may be explained by the larger Na+ and
K+ ionic radii, as well as the higher coordination numbers.

Binary Complex with SP20 and No Metal
The active site
of the PKAc–SP20 complex is shown in Figure a. The intact peptide substrate is bound to the enzyme, and
the unmodified OH group of Ser21SP20 can be seen (Figure b). No density that can be attributed to metal
ions is present in either the M1 or M2 sites. The side chain of Ser21SP20 is rotated toward PKAc, forming hydrogen bonds with Asp166
and Lys168. In contrast, the Cβ–Oγ bond is rotated
by ∼140° toward the bulk solvent in the metal-free and
metal-bound product complexes (Figure ). The
absence of a nucleotide causes PKAc to adopt a conformation that is
intermediate between the apo-form open conformation and the closed
conformation of the ternary complexes. There is a significant shift
of the glycine-rich loop (4 Å for Ser53) upward toward the α-helix
in the small lobe of PKAc, displacing residues 76 through 84 from
the positions adopted in PKAc–ADP–pSP20 and PKAc–Mg2ADP–pSP20 (Supporting Figure 5, ).

(a) A close-up view of the enzyme active
site in PKAc–SP20
binary complex showing intact Ser21SP20 and the enzyme’s
residues important for catalysis. Possible hydrogen bonds are represented
as red dashed lines. (b) Electron density for the active site residues,
Ser21SP20, and water molecules contoured at the 2.0σ
level (the contour level is 1.5σ for H2O). Distances
are in Å.

Superposition of PKAc–SP20
and PKAc–ADP–pSP20
showing the conformation of the Cβ–Oγ bond of the
Ser21SP20 side chain before and after the phosphotransfer
reaction. Hydrogen bonding formed by Ser21SP20 and pSer21SP20 with active-site residues Asp166 and Lsy168 is shown as
dashed lines. Distances are in Å.

Discussion
The phosphotransferase activity of PKAc
is highly dependent on
divalent metal ions. It has been previously shown that PKAc binds
divalent metals weakly in the absence of a nucleotide, with KD &gt; 1 mM. Similarly,
PKAc does not bind ATP without divalent metals. For a short peptide substrate Kemptide, which has moderate
binding affinity, PKAc shows activity with only a few types of divalent
metal ions. In contrast, PKAc is capable
of transferring the γ-phosphoryl group from ATP to the SP20
peptide substrate, which binds tightly to PKAc, when any alkaline
earth metal is present. Further, the
results presented here conclusively demonstrate that phosphotransfer
can take place without divalent metals (Figure ), although the enzyme activity is greatly diminished. Interestingly,
alkali metal ions have no effect on the kinase activity with SP20,
because the amount of pSP20 was measured to be similar in the reactions
with no metal, Na+, and K+, raising the possibility
that these cations may not be present when the phosphotransfer takes
place. The only other kinase known to function without divalent metal
ions is the pseudokinase CASK, whose activity is actually inhibited
by divalent cations in the order of Mg2+ &gt; Mn2+ &gt; Ca2+. It is important
to note that previous studies have investigated removal of key functionalities
from the PKAc active site, albeit by mutagenesis, and also failed
to completely abolish the enzyme’s activity. The single mutation
variants Lys72Ala, Lys168Ala, and Asp166Ala showed greatly diminished
phosphotransferase activity, being below 1% that of the wild-type
protein,, much like the present results. These three
residues form hydrogen bonds with the phosphate groups of ATP and
substrate,,,,, and their
primary roles in the reaction are to facilitate the phosphoryl transfer. Substitutions of the other active site residue,
Ser53, had no effect on the steady-state phosphorylation of the substrate
Kemptide, indicating that it does not participate in the reaction.

In the current study, the single-turnover
enzyme activity measurements
quantitatively determined the amounts of pSP20 that were phosphorylated
by metal-free PKAc, although SP20 phosphorylation was not detected
in steady-state kinetics experiments. While the measurements did not
provide a reaction rate constant and utilized reaction incubation
times much longer than steady-state techniques, the results demonstrate phosphorylation of a substrate
in the absence of divalent cations. In contrast, no kinase activity
was detected via steady-state kinetics measurements when PKAc was
reacted with Kemptide in the metal-free environment or in the presence
of Na+ or K+. The ability of PKAc to phosphorylate
SP20, but not Kemptide, in metal-free conditions may be related to
the extremely high binding affinity (∼100 nM) of SP20, whose
sequence is based on the heat-stable protein kinase inhibitor (PKI)., The productive binding of a substrate and MgATP to the apo-active site of PKAc has been considered formally random, but almost simultaneous, with the preferred initial binding of MgATP. Based on the present results, we propose that the sequence
of binding events may become ordered in a metal-free environment,
with SP20 binding first to prime the enzyme for subsequent ATP binding.
The PKAc–SP20 binary complex is stable and has an intermediate,
partially closed, conformation (Supporting Figure 6, ), suggesting that such a sequence of
events is possible. Previously, the X-ray structure of the similar
binary complex containing phosphorylated SP20 has been reported. In addition, studies on the pH dependence of
the kinetic mechanism demonstrated that pSP20 bound prior to MgADP
in the reaction in the direction of MgADP phosphorylation at pH 6.5, which supports our hypothesis. An equimolar
mixture of ATP and Mg2+ contains predominantly the MgATP2– complex, with low but appreciable amounts of ATP4– and HATP3–. HATP3–, in which one of the γ-phosphoryl
oxygens is protonated, has the ionization constant (pKa) of 6.5; therefore, it
is expected that 50% of ATP will be in the form of HATP3– in the studies reported here. The PKAc active site has a net negative
charge, which would repel the bare ATP4– more strongly
than it would the singly protonated HATP3–. Consequently,
it is reasonable to propose that the monoprotonated nucleotide species
HATP3– is the reactive molecule that binds to the
PKAc–SP20 binary complex to generate a catalytically viable
ternary complex that subsequently reacts to produce the product complex
PKAc–ADP–pSP20 observed in our crystal structure.

Cook et al. previously showed that
KCl increases the KM of MgATP and the Ki of MgADP at physiological magnesium concentrations,
when one Mg2+ ion binds to the PKAc active site. The same
phenomenon was observed for Na2SO4, which eliminates
competitive inhibition of PKAc by chloride ions. These observations
can be explained by the alkali metal binding to the second metal site
at concentrations of ∼100 mM, thereby increasing the counterion
charge to 3 and resulting in the diminished affinity of ATP and ADP
for the active site. The product structures PKAc–Na2ADP–pSP20 and PKAc–K2ADP–pSP20 demonstrate
that alkali metals can bind to PKAc even though alkali metals have
extremely low ATP-binding constants (∼100 mM). However, the single turnover kinetics data indicate that
the rate of SP20 phosphorylation is about the same in the presence
of Na+ or K+ as it is in the absence of any
metals. We propose that Na+ and K+ may not come
to the PKAc active site bound to ATP but instead diffuse opportunistically
into the PKAc–ADP–pSP20 complex after the reaction takes
place.

Recent molecular dynamics simulations of the Michaelis
complexes
reported that the OH group of a substrate peptide’s serine
adopts a substrate-dependent conformation. In Kemptide, the OH was
rotated toward Asp166, whereas in SP20, it is pointed away from Asp166
into the bulk solvent. In PKAc–SP20,
the side chain of Ser21SP20 is rotated toward Asp166 and
Lys168, forming hydrogen bond interactions with the aspartate’s
carboxylic and the lysine’s amino groups. The same “inward”
conformation of the hydroxyl was found in earlier PKAc complexes that
mimicked the transition state and product structures., Intriguingly, in PKAc–ADP–pSP20 and in all product
complexes with metals the hydroxyl moiety
of pSP20 adopts a different “outward” conformation,
being rotated out by ∼140° relative to its position in
PKAc–SP20 (Figure ). Conformational
flexibility of the substrate’s OH may be an important factor
in the mechanism of phosphoryl transfer.

Enzymes are remarkable
catalysts that can dramatically lower the
energy barrier that a chemical reaction has to overcome in several
ways including lowering the reaction entropy by bringing together
and correctly positioning reactants (which improves the chance of
collision between the reactants relative to solution) and lowering
the activation energy of the reaction by distorting reactants and
stabilizing the transition state through the creation of a favorable
environment., Each part of an enzyme, whether
it be the catalytic residues, cofactors, or moving ensembles of residues
(loops or domains), can be involved, but the reaction pathway is not
dramatically altered relative to solution chemistry. In the case of
PKAc, computational studies suggest that metals stabilize the phosphotransfer
reaction’s transition state having the pentacoordinated γ-phosphorus.−,, Our observations of structures of PKAc and its activity when no
free metal is present indicate that divalent cations do not constrain
the active site geometrically to promote the reaction and are not
engaged in the chemical transformation. Instead, they provide a favorable
electrostatic environment for the reaction thereby lowering the energy
of the transition state.

It follows that the absence of PKAc
bound metals dramatically increases
the reaction energy barrier for the tightly bound SP20, but the reaction
still proceeds because the enzyme promotes a favorable reduction in
reaction entropy through the binding of reactants. Baseline catalytic
activity has also been reported for other enzymes (which may be reduced
by orders of magnitude) in the absence of seemingly critical functionalities.
For example, NADH oxidase from Thermus thermophilus showed detectable activity, albeit reduced by about 2 orders of
magnitude, in the absence of flavin adenine mononucleotide, which
is an essential electron acceptor. Similarly,
the metalloenzyme cytidine 3′,5′-cyclic monophosphate
phospho-diesterase can catalyze the hydrolysis reaction with no divalent
metal cofactor present. For these other
enzymes, it is likely that a less optimal pathway has been found to
facilitate the reaction. However, the results presented here for PKAc
suggest that we should not discount the general significance of the
simple reduction in reaction entropy provided by enzymes when they
bind reactants, that is, the “entropy trap” effect remains
an important aspect of enzyme catalysis.

Conclusions
We
have provided new evidence that PKAc is active in the presence
of other divalent metal cations, rather than just with the previously
assumed physiological Mg2+ cofactor. This raises the important
possibility that Ca2+ may also be a physiological cofactor.
Further, we have demonstrated that PKAc is active in the absence of
metals, which is only the second example of such a kinase. This result
has profound implications for our understanding of the role that metals
play in PKAc catalysis, expanding on our previous work showing activity
in the presence of all alkali earth metals. Excitingly, the metal-free catalytic cycle appears to involve an
ordered binding sequence of substrate followed by ATP, in contrast
to the random, nearly simultaneous binding that takes place with divalent
metals. This raises the interesting possibility that the metal-free
complex may be a suitable model system for resolving dynamic states,
and the transitions between them associated with ATP binding.

Supporting Information Available
Crystallographic
data collection,
refinement, and additional figures. This material is available free
of charge via the Internet at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bi5000965_si_001.pdf

Author Contributions
O.G.
and
A.D. contributed equally to the current study.

The authors declare no
competing financial interest.

Abbreviations 
PKAccatalytic subunit of the protein
kinase A

PKIheat-stable
protein kinase inhibitor

SP2020-residue peptide substrate

