Inhibitory
members of the serpin
superfamily regulate serine and cysteine proteases required for critical
physiological processes, including blood coagulation and inflammation., Unlike canonical protease inhibitors that simply bind to the protease
active site, inhibition by serpins requires mechanical deformation
of the protease active site, mediated by extensive structural rearrangements
and repacking of the serpin structure., Serpin structural
remodeling is triggered when a target protease cleaves the serpin’s
solvent-exposed reactive center loop (RCL) leading to insertion of
the cleaved RCL into the center of β sheet A in the serpin and
translocation of the covalently attached protease ∼70 Å
from one end of the serpin to the other (Figure ).,− Because the energy needed for serpin structural remodeling
and the associated protease inhibition is stored in the strained,
metastable structure of active inhibitory serpins,− inhibitory serpins
must fold to a kinetically trapped, metastable conformation that is
not the global energy minimum.

α1AT anatomy and conformational
gymnastics. (A)
Two 90° views of the native α1AT structure (PDB
entry 1qlp()) showing β sheets A–C colored yellow,
light blue, and blue, respectively, helix F colored turquoise, and
the RCL colored magenta. The labeled residues are shown as van der
Waals spheres. As shown by the blue ellipses, the separation of residues
232 and 313 approximately coincides with the long axis of α1AT while the separation of residues 232 and 47 is close to
one of the short axes. (B) Covalent complex between α1AT and bovine trypsin (green) (PDB entry 1ezx()). (C) Inactive,
latent serpin conformation of α1AT (PDB entry 1iz2()). Protein images were generated using UCSF Chimera.

The ellipsoidal fold of active serpins is characterized by
one
long axis, ∼70 Å in length for the canonical serpin, α1-antitrypsin (α1AT, also known as α1-proteinase inhibitor), and two approximately equal short
axes, ∼45 Å each for α1AT (Figure ). This watermelon-shaped fold is composed of three
β sheets, A–C, and nine α helices in two well-connected
domains., The watermelon shape is defined by the serpin
long axis that is largely coincident with sheet A, the largest of
the β sheets and the β sheet most directly involved in
protease inhibition as well as other, nonproductive conformations.
These lower-energy, nonfunctional conformations include the latent
form in which the intact RCL inserts into β sheet A in the absence
of cleavage, and polymeric forms involving
insertion of the RCL and/or other β strands into an adjacent
serpin.−

The watermelon shape or asphericity of crystallized serpin
conformations
may be quantified using the asphericity, Δ, and shape, S, measures developed by Dima and Thirumalai, where S = Δ = 0 for spheres. For active, metastable α1AT, Δ = 0.19 ±
0.01, where a positive Δ indicates that the protein is not spherical,
and S = 0.16 ± 0.01, where a positive S indicates a prolate (watermelon) shape. A high value of
Δ is also observed for other serpins, making most active serpins
more aspherical than &gt;70% of the monomeric proteins studied by
Dima
and Thirumalai. Interestingly, while functional insertion of the cleaved
RCL does not alter the asphericity of α1AT, the values
of S and Δ are unchanged, the latent conformation
with its intact RCL is significantly less aspherical [Δ = 0.15,
and S = 0.11 (Table S1 of the )]. Similar trends are observed for
the inhibitory human serpin plasminogen activator inhibitor 1 where
the latent form, is significantly less aspherical
than the active,, or cleaved forms. Nor is this trend
confined to human serpins; the latent state of the inhibitory bacterial
serpin tengpin is also significantly
less aspherical than the active state (Table S1 of the ). These shared structural
characteristics suggest that decreased asphericity may be a hallmark
of lower-energy, nonproductive serpin conformations.

While permanent
alterations in serpin asphericity are associated
with inactivation, transient expansion of the serpin structure is
required for loop insertion and has also
been implicated in polymerization, and equilibrium
unfolding. How then do serpins fold to
the aspherical final structure while avoiding more stable and more
spherical structures such as the latent state? Serpins have been shown
to fold using a mechanism with at least three states, via a molten globule intermediate− that is associated with aggregation., Previous studies of serpin folding indicate that structures oriented
along the long axis unfold first,,− emphasizing the importance of this axis for folding, function, and
dysfunction. However, to the best of our knowledge, there are no direct
measurements of changes in the overall dimensions of a serpin during
unfolding.

In more general terms, do aspherical proteins fold
and/or unfold
differently along different axes? Previous experiments aimed at addressing
structural anisotropies used mechanical force and showed that the
force required for protein unfolding can depend on the axis along
which the force is applied.− However, these experiments were performed on relatively
spherical proteins (Δ &lt; 0.1, and S &lt;
0.06), and the energy landscapes for mechanical unfolding with its
directional perturbation of protein folds can be quite different than
those for chemical denaturation, which acts isotropically.−

We have used single-pair Förster resonance energy transfer
(spFRET) to monitor the chemically induced equilibrium unfolding and
refolding of active α1AT. spFRET data for two different
α1AT variants, one labeled approximately along one
of the short axes and the second labeled approximately along the long
axis, suggest that chemically denatured α1AT unfolds
and refolds via at least two intermediates and that formation of the
molten globule intermediates involves collapse of the long axis and
an increase in the time-averaged sphericity. In addition, as observed
in spFRET experiments with other proteins,− the unfolded
state expands, along all axes, as the denaturant concentration increases.
These results indicate the importance of the serpin long axis for
both function and folding.

Experimental Procedures
Asphericity (Δ) and
Shape (S) Parameters
Δ and S were calculated as described by
Dima and Thirumalai using Mathematica
(Wolfram Research). The Mathematica scripts for reading the PDB file
and performing the calculations were extensively modified versions
of the Mathematica notebook Inertiatensor. All of the calculated values are listed in Table S1 of the .

α1AT Preparation
and Labeling
Wild-type
α1AT contains a single Cys at position 232. To create
double-Cys variants for spFRET experiments, a second Cys was introduced
into the wild-type background, Ser47Cys (2Cys47) or Ser313Cys (2Cys313),
in plasmid pEAT8-137, using the Quikchange XL (Agilent)
site-directed mutagenesis protocol. Control fluorescence experiments
required single-Cys variants: wild-type (containing Cys232), Ser47Cys/Cys232Ser
(S47C), and Ser313Cys/Cys232Ser (S313C). The previously characterized
single-Cys variants, S47C and S313C, do not alter α1AT stability or activity., All double- and single-Cys
α1AT variants were expressed as inclusion bodies
in Escherichia coli BL21(DE3) cells, refolded, and
purified as previously described. For
all α1AT variants, this procedure yielded protein
that was &gt;98% pure as judged by sodium dodecyl sulfate–polyacrylamide
gel electrophoresis and gel densitometry.

Single-Cys variants
were labeled with the donor Alexa Fluor 488 maleimide (AF488) (Invitrogen)
or the acceptor Texas Red maleimide (TR) (Invitrogen) according to
the manufacturer’s instructions. Double-Cys variants were first
labeled with AF488, using a 1:1 dye:protein ratio. For spFRET measurements,
a MonoQ anion exchange column (GE Healthcare) was used to separate
singly labeled protein from unlabeled and doubly labeled species.
The resulting singly labeled protein was further labeled with TR according
to the manufacturer’s instructions. Labeling efficiencies for
both fluorophores were measured by absorption according to the manufacturer’s
instructions. For the doubly labeled variants, the shorter labeling
time used for AF488 (donor), to avoid double labeling, resulted in
80–100% labeling, while longer labeling times used for TR (acceptor)
labeling resulted in approximately 100% labeling. Single-Cys variants
S47C and S313C were &gt;70% labeled by both AF488 and TR. In contrast,
the wild-type, with a single Cys at position 232, was &gt;70% labeled
by TR, but only ∼10% labeled using AF488. These results indicate
that most of the doubly labeled α1AT variants have
the acceptor, TR, attached to Cys232 and the donor, AF488, attached
to either residue 47 or 313.

The stoichiometry of inhibition
(SI), the number of moles of α1AT needed to inhibit
bovine trypsin (Sigma-Aldrich), was determined
as previously described. Wild-type α1AT has an SI of 1.0, while the SI is 1.1 for unlabeled and
labeled single- and double-Cys variants.

Far-UV Circular Dichroism
(CD)
Room-temperature far-UV
CD spectra from 200 to 250 nm were recorded on a Jasco J-810 spectropolarimeter
using a 0.1 cm path length at room temperature. Samples containing
1.8 μM α1AT variants in 10 mM sodium phosphate
(pH 7.4) and 50 mM NaCl with 0–6 M guanidinium chloride (GdmCl)
were equilibrated for 2 h. GdmCl concentrations were determined from
the index of refraction. In 0 M GdmCl,
the spectra of folded, doubly labeled Cys variants are essentially
identical to that of wild-type α1AT, indicating that
the mutations do not significantly alter the α1AT
structure (Figure ). The apparent fraction
of unfolded protein, fapp, was determined
from the far-UV CD unfolding data:where θ222 is the measured
ellipticity at 222 nm, N is the native, fully folded protein in 0
M GdmCl, and U is the unfolded protein in 6 M GdmCl. fapp was fit to a three-state model for unfolding ( and Table S2).

α1AT structure and stability not significantly
affected by Cys mutations and fluorescent labeling. (A) Far-UV CD
spectra of the native state of wild-type (black), doubly labeled 2Cys47
(blue), and doubly labeled 2Cys313 (red) α1AT in
10 mM sodium phosphate (pH 7.4) and 50 mM NaCl. (B) GdmCl-induced
unfolding of α1AT monitored by far-UV CD for the
wild-type (black squares), doubly labeled 2Cys47 (blue circles), and
doubly labeled 2Cys313 (red triangles). The line is a three-state
fit to the wild-type data ( and Table S2).

Steady State Fluorescence
Spectra and Anisotropies
Increasing concentrations of GdmCl
and/or protein unfolding can alter
the absorption and emission spectra as well as the quantum yields
of the fluorophores, potentially changing Ro, the Förster distance at which there is 50% energy transfer.
To account for these effects, the steady state absorption spectra
(data not shown), fluorescence emission spectra (data not shown),
and steady state fluorescence anisotropies (Figure S1 of the ) were measured for all
three single-Cys variants labeled with AF488 or TR. Absorption spectra
were collected using a UV–vis spectrometer (PerkinElmer), while
fluorescence spectra and steady state anisotropy data were collected
using a Fluorolog fluorometer (ISA) as previously described. Singly labeled α1AT variants
were incubated in 50 mM HEPES (pH 7.4), 50 mM NaCl, 0.01% Tween 20
buffer containing 0–6 M GdmCl for 2 h at room temperature to
reach equilibrium. Surprisingly, both
the AF488 emission spectra and the TR absorption spectra red shift
with an increasing GdmCl concentration, resulting in a very slight
dependence of Ro on the GdmCl concentration
(Figure S2 of the ).

The effective value of Ro in
the spFRET experiments, Ro,eff, is influenced
by differences in quantum yield and detection efficiency between the
donor (AF488) and acceptor (TR) asFor singly labeled samples
with identical
optical densities at the donor excitation wavelength, 488 nm, γ
is the ratio of the fluorescence intensity of the acceptor-only samples
to that of donor-only samples measured on the single-molecule setup and γ was measured as a function of GdmCl
concentration (Figure S2 of the ). Analytically, γ = (ϕAηA)/(ϕDηD), where A and D refer to
the donor and acceptor, respectively, ϕ is the quantum yield,
and η is the detection efficiency. The resulting Ro,eff is 51 Å for
all GdmCl concentrations (Figure S2 of the ).

spFRET Data Collection and Analysis
Doubly labeled
α1AT variants were incubated in 50 mM HEPES (pH 7.4),
50 mM NaCl, 0.01% Tween 20 buffer containing 0–6 M GdmCl for
2 h at room temperature to reach equilibrium. After 2 h, the micromolar samples were diluted to &lt;50 pM for
spFRET experiments. For refolding experiments, α1AT variants were first unfolded in buffer containing 8 M GdmCl for
2 h and then allowed to refold in 0–6 M GdmCl for 2 h.

spFRET data were collected on a home-built confocal microscope based
on an IX-70 inverted microscope (Olympus) that has been previously
described, (and ). Data from the donor and acceptor channels were binned at 1 kHz,
and a threshold of 30 total (acceptor plus donor) photon counts was
used to identify photon bursts arising from α1AT
diffusing through the focal volume. The apparent spFRET efficiency, Eapp, for these bursts was calculated using,where IA is the
photon count for the acceptor corrected for background and leakage
of donor photons into the acceptor channel (crosstalk) and ID is the photon count for the donor corrected
for background. The apparent mean spFRET efficiency, ⟨Em⟩, and the peak half-width, σm, were determined from Gaussian fits to the data. The upper
bound for peak half-widths, σsn, due to shot noise
were calculated using,where Pt = 30
photon counts (donor + acceptor) is the threshold used to identify
photon bursts arising from single α1AT molecules
traversing the observation volume.

Radius of Gyration of the
Denatured State Ensemble (DSE)
Assuming that unfolded α1AT behaves as a Gaussian
chain, the average radius of gyration of the DSE, Rg, can be calculated from the mean square distance between
the dyes, ⟨r2⟩:where Nt is the
total number of peptide bonds in the protein (393 for α1AT) and Ndyes is the number of
peptide bonds between the donor and acceptor fluorophores. AF488 has
a five-carbon linker, while TR maleimide has a two-carbon linker adding
the equivalent of three peptide bonds between the donor and acceptor.
The mean square distance between the dyes, ⟨r2⟩, can be determined from ⟨Em,γ⟩ for the DSE according to,where c is the distance of
closest approach, lc is the contour length
between the fluorophores, assuming 0.38 nm per peptide bond,r is the distance between the
fluorophores, E(r) is the energy
transfer efficiency at distance r, and P(r) is the probability of observing a particular
distance assuming that the unfolded protein behaves as a Gaussian
chain. The Gaussian chain approximation assumes that the DSE behaves
as an ideal freely jointed polymer with negligible interactions between
amino acids. This model allows us to calculate the approximate radius
of gyration but neglects confounding factors such as residual structure
in the DSE. Note that to obtain distances from the FRET efficiencies,
it is necessary to correct for differences in quantum yield and detection
efficiency between the donor (AF488) and the acceptor (TR) given by
γ, and ⟨Em,γ⟩
is the γ-corrected apparent mean FRET efficiency, ⟨Em,γ⟩ = ⟨Em⟩/[⟨Em⟩
+ γ(1 – ⟨Em⟩].
(The FRET efficiency histograms were not γ-corrected because
the relationship between the γ-corrected efficiencies and the
counts in a histogram bin is not straightforward.) For these experiments, γ varied from 0.85 in 0 M
GdmCl to 0.95 in 6 M GdmCl (Figure S2 of the ). To determine the value of ⟨r2⟩ associated with ⟨Em,γ⟩ for each concentration of GdmCl, eq  was numerically integrated using Mathematica for
various values of ⟨r2⟩.
For each denaturant concentration, the Rg of the DSE was calculated using the value of ⟨r2⟩ for which the numerical integral matched the
experimentally observed values of ⟨Em,γ⟩.

Fluorescence Correlation Spectroscopy (FCS)
FCS was
used to monitor α1AT translational diffusion and
to look for conformational changes on time scales faster than that
of diffusion through the observation volume. The correlations, Gjk(τ), were calculated
by the ISS Vista program according to,where the broken brackets
denote the time
average, Ij(t) is the photon count for channel j, and δIj(t) = ⟨Ij(t)⟩
– Ij(t). j = k for the autocorrelation,
while j ≠ k for the crosscorrelation.

The correlations were calculated using the photon counts from the
spFRET experiments, collected with a 100 μm confocal pinhole.
Additional FCS experiments were performed as previously described using a 30 or 100 μm confocal pinhole
and α1AT variants labeled only with the donor or
with the donor and acceptor fluorophores. The ratio of the donor autocorrelation
to the donor–acceptor crosscorrelation, GDD(τ)/GDA(τ), for spFRET–FCS
experiments and the ratio of the fluorescence autocorrelation of the
donor, GDD(τ), in the presence and
absence of acceptor fluorophore for FCS-only experiments were calculated
using Origin (OriginLab).

To determine diffusion times, τD, correlation
curves for α1AT variants labeled only with the donor
fluorophore, AF488, were fit towhere ⟨N⟩ is
the effective number of molecules in the observation volume and the
exponential expression accounts for AF488 fluorophores that are nonfluorescent
due to quenching interactions. F is the fraction
of molecules residing in the dark state at any time, and τdark is the lifetime of the dark state. The last term accounts
for fluorescence fluctuations due to translational diffusion with
τD = ωo2/D where ωo is the radius of the three-dimensional
Gaussian observation volume and S = zo/ωo is the ratio of the axial to the
radial extent. S and ωo were determined
from FCS experiments using Alexa Fluor 488 hydrazide as a diffusion
standard.

The correlation curves also allowed us to easily check
for α1AT aggregation because such aggregates will
diffuse slowly
and have large values of τD. Increases in τD were observed as α1AT expanded due to unfolding,
but these increases were within the range expected for increased viscosity
at higher GdmCl concentrations and chain expansion. Large deviations
and bumps, the hallmarks of significant aggregation, were not observed
(data not shown). Using the 100 μm pinhole, the diffusion time
of native α1AT in the absence of GdmCl was 240 ±
20 μs and τD increased to 550 ± 50 μs
in 5 M GdmCl, reflecting both a 1.3-fold increase in viscosity and
α1AT unfolding.

Results
To monitor
changes in the shape of α1AT during
equilibrium unfolding, the donor (AF488) and acceptor (TR) fluorophores
for spFRET were placed approximately along either a short axis or
the long axis (Figure ). α1AT has a single native Cys, residue 232, located at the C-terminal
end of β sheet B strand 1 (s1B), and this Cys was labeled in
all of the variants. For the short axis variant, 2Cys47, the second
Cys, located in a short loop between helix A and s6B, was introduced
by mutating Ser47 to Cys, resulting in a donor–acceptor separation
of ∼27 Å in the native state. For the long axis variant,
2CyS313, Ser313, located in a flexible region near β sheet A, was mutated to Cys, resulting in a donor–acceptor
separation of ∼43 Å in the native state. All of the labeled
variants were active, inhibiting bovine trypsin with an SI of 1.1
similar to that of the wild-type.

Stability of the Labeled α1AT Variants
The stability of wild-type α1AT and its labeled
variants was monitored using far-UV CD. As expected, on the basis
of previous ensemble studies of α1AT unfolding,,,, α1AT unfolding is biphasic as indicated by the
plateau around 1 M GdmCl (Figure ). The Cys
mutations and double labeling do not significantly alter the α1AT stability, and fits to the far-UV CD unfolding curves are
similar for the wild-type and doubly labeled variants (Figure  and Table S2 of the ).

Unfolding along the Short Axis
In
0 M GdmCl, spFRET
histograms for doubly labeled 2Cys47 show two peaks, a small, “zero”
peak arising from proteins containing only AF488 (donor) and proteins
in which TR (acceptor) has photobleached as well as a much larger
peak with an apparent mean efficiency, ⟨Em⟩, of 0.95 (0.96 when corrected for γ) (Figure A). The short distance, ∼27 Å, between
residue 47 and Cys232 in the native structure would yield a native
state spFRET signal centered at 0.97. However, the five-carbon (AF488)
or two-carbon (TR) flexible chains linking the fluorophores to the
Cys residues can increase this distance, and the peak centered at
0.95 efficiency with a half-width of 0.04 can easily be assigned to
the α1AT native state (Figure A).

α1AT unfolding is different along the short and
long axes. spFRET histograms for the unfolding of 2Cys47 (A) and 2Cys313
(B) in increasing concentrations of GdmCl as indicated on the plots.
The total Gaussian fits to the histograms are indicated by red lines,
and the resulting single Gaussians for the native, intermediate, unfolded,
and zero peaks are indicated by green, blue, black, and yellow lines,
respectively. The distance between residues 232 and 47 (2Cys47) increases
as α1AT unfolds, while the distance between residues
232 and 313 (2Cys313) first decreases and then increases. (C and D)
Centers, ⟨Em⟩, and half-widths,
σm, of the spFRET peaks, determined from the Gaussian
fits, as a function of GdmCl concentration for 2Cys47 (C) and 2Cys313
(D). Data for the native, intermediate, and unfolded species are colored
green, blue, and black, respectively. Filled symbols were determined
from unfolding experiments, while empty symbols were determined from
refolding experiments.

As expected from the ensemble experiments, as the concentration
of GdmCl increases to 0.5 M, a third peak appears in the spFRET histogram
centered at 0.85. Because of its appearance at low GdmCl concentrations,
and the subsequent appearance of a fourth lower-efficiency peak at
even higher concentrations of denaturant, this ⟨Em⟩ = 0.85 peak must arise from equilibrium unfolding
intermediates. The flexibility of the region around the fluorophores
can increase the range of interfluorophore distances that can be sampled,
thus increasing the width of the spFRET peaks. The spFRET peaks centered
at 0.85 have half-widths of 0.08, only slightly higher than the half-width
of 0.07 predicted from shot noise., The α1AT equilibrium folding intermediate, which has been characterized
as a molten globule,− should be able to access multiple conformations leading to a spFRET
peak wider than what would be predicted simply from shot noise. However,
the observed difference between the predicted half-width and the measured
half-width is quite small and likely arises from experimental noise.
The lack of resolvable heterogeneity for the separation between fluorophores
at residues 232 and 47 illustrates the limits of the spFRET measurements.
Because FRET has an r–6 distance
dependence, FRET measurements are most sensitive between efficiencies
of 0.8 and 0.2 (40.5 to 64.3 Å for an Ro of 51 Å), and much less sensitive at the extremes. Thus,
conformational heterogeneity of the intermediate state(s) that changes
the separation between residues 232 and 47 by ∼3.5 Å or
less will be masked by noise for an spFRET efficiency peak centered
at 0.85.

Around 2.5 M GdmCl, a fourth peak appears centered
at 0.65. However,
unlike the native and intermediate states, for which the peak centers
are independent of denaturant concentration, the center of this peak,
arising from the DSE, shifts to lower efficiencies as the GdmCl concentration
increases (Figure A,B and Table ). These DSE peaks are considerably wider than what would
be predicted from shot noise. Using an Ro,eff of 51 Å to convert the spFRET efficiency peak half-widths to
approximate distance changes between the fluorophores reveals that
these large half-widths change the fluorophore separation by more
than 5 Å. Thus, while experimental noise makes a small contribution
to these half-widths, the widths of the spFRET peaks for the DSE likely
reflect conformational heterogeneity (Table ). Such heterogeneity could arise from metastable states separated
by low-energy barriers,, i.e., states with lifetimes
longer than the time it takes to diffuse through the observation volume,
∼1 ms.

Changes in the Peak Centers and Widths
for the α1AT DSE
[GdmCl] (M)	2Cys47 ⟨Em⟩	2Cys47 σm	2Cys47 σsn	2Cys313 ⟨Em⟩	2Cys313 σm	2Cys313 σsn	
1.5	NA	NA	NA	0.61 (0.02)	0.16 (0.01)	0.09	
2	NA	NA	NA	0.61 (0.02)	0.16 (0.01)	0.09	
2.5	0.63 (0.02)	0.13 (0.01)	0.09	0.62 (0.02)	0.17 (0.01)	0.09	
3	0.61 (0.01)	0.22 (0.01)	0.09	0.62 (0.01)	0.16 (0.01)	0.09	
3.5	0.38 (0.01)	0.22 (0.01)	0.09	0.61 (0.01)	0.18 (0.01)	0.09	
4	0.26 (0.01)	0.16 (0.01)	0.08	0.52 (0.01)	0.18 (0.01)	0.09	
5	0.20 (0.01)	0.13 (0.01)	0.07	0.40 (0.01)	0.18 (0.01)	0.09	
6	0.18 (0.01)	0.12 (0.01)	0.07	0.38 (0.01)	0.19 (0.01)	0.09	
Peak centers, ⟨Em⟩,
and half-widths, σm, were determined from Gaussian
fits to the unfolded peaks in the
spFRET histograms. The predicted half-widths from shot noise, σsn, were calculated according to eq .,

The number in parentheses is the
standard deviation from fits to histograms from at least two independent
spFRET experiments.

Not
Applicable. For 2Cys47, the
DSE is not observed at moderate GdmCl concentrations.

The decrease in the apparent efficiency
as the denatured states
expand in increasing concentrations of GdmCl is commonly observed
in spFRET unfolding experiments−,,, and is expected
due to solvation of the polypeptide chain., At low GdmCl concentrations, more compact configurations are favored
because of interactions between amino acids, but at higher denaturant
concentrations, solvent–amino acid interactions dominate and
the unfolded states are, on average, more extended.,, The unfolding of 2Cys47 is reversible, and
the locations of the spFRET peaks for the native, intermediate, and
unfolded ensembles are the same for equilibrium unfolding and refolding
(Figure S3 of the ). Thus, spFRET measurements approximately along one of the short
axes show the expected three-state unfolding and reveal that the intermediate
and unfolded ensembles are distinct conformational ensembles separated
by an energy barrier.

Unfolding along the Long Axis
In
0 M GdmCl, the spFRET
histogram for doubly labeled 2Cys313 displays two peaks, the zero
peak and a peak centered at an apparent efficiency of 0.80 (0.82 when
corrected for γ) corresponding to the native state (Figure B). The half-width of the native state peak is 0.14,
considerably wider than the half-width of 0.07 that would be predicted
from shot noise. This large half-width indicates significant flexibility
around and/or between residues 232 and 313. Cys232 is at the end of
s1B, and the region from residue 232 to 313 contains four β
strands and three α helices (s2B–s3B−αG–αH–s2C–s6A−αI).
Data from mass spectrometry experiments including hydrogen–deuterium
exchange mass spectrometry (HDXMS) and oxidative labeling,, as well as PEGylation of single
introduced buried Cys residues as a function of GdmCl concentration suggest that β sheet B is quite stable
and that the region from residue 275 to 313 (end of αH to 313)
is more labile with large fluctuations likely in the loopy hI–s5A
region (residues 299–331).

The effects of loop motions
on the spFRET peak shape, location, and width depend on the time scale
of the motion relative to the time it takes α1AT
to diffuse through the observation volume (∼475 μs) and
the bin time used for the histogram (1 ms). On the basis of these time scales, loop conformational changes that
are ∼200 μs or longer would likely increase the peak
width. Modeling long-time scale protein fluctuations using coarse
graining combined with Monte Carlo methods as implemented by the CABS-flex
Web server, suggests that the hI–s5A
loop may occasionally fold back on itself, allowing it to populate
both less flexible and more flexible metastable states perhaps accounting
for the large width of the 2Cys313 native spFRET peak (data not shown).

Surprisingly, as the GdmCl concentration is increased, a third
peak appears to be centered at a higher spFRET efficiency of 0.95,
corresponding to a decrease in the distance between the two fluorophores.
This contraction is not due to fluorescence artifacts, because the
absorption and emission characteristics of AF488 and TR do not significantly
change from 0 to 3 M GdmCl (Figures S1 and S2 of the ). This signal must, therefore, arise
from intermediates in equilibrium folding for which the long axis
has contracted relative to the native, folded structure. Note that
the relative insensitivity of FRET to distance changes at such high
efficiencies results in very narrow peak widths despite the conformational
heterogeneity observed for the 2Cys313 native state and expected for
the intermediate ensemble.

For the 2Cys47 α1AT variant, the location of the
native state peak is independent of denaturant concentration (Figure ). However, when the 2Cys313 α1AT variant was incubated in higher concentrations of GdmCl, expansion
of the intermediate ensemble made it difficult to distinguish between
spFRET signals arising from intermediate conformations and those arising
from the native state with its intact long axis. At 0.85 M GdmCl,
the center of the 2Cys313 peak center assigned to the native state
shifts from an apparent efficiency of 0.80 to 0.86. The location of
this peak, between the intermediate peak at 0.95 and the original
native peak at 0.80, suggests that two intermediate ensembles may
be populated.

Unlike 2Cys47, in which an unfolded state peak
does not appear
until ∼2 M GdmCl, for 2Cys313 an unfolded peak appears at 1.5
M GdmCl, revealing that the region between residues 232 and 313 likely
unfolds at denaturant concentrations lower than those for the region
between residues 232 and 47. As observed for the 2Cys47 unfolded peak,
the apparent spFRET peak efficiency for the 2Cys313 unfolded peak
decreases with increasing GdmCl concentrations, and the half-widths
are wider than those predicted from shot noise (Figure D and Table ). These results are consistent
with previous ensemble fluorescence experiments indicating that the
region around residue 313 unfolds in low GdmCl concentrations, and that the region near Trp238 in strand 2B,
within 10 Å of Cys232, unfolds only at high GdmCl concentrations. In addition, equilibrium unfolding studies of
α1AT variants in which buried residues were mutated
to Cys and the exposure of buried residues was probed by reactivity
with high-molecular weight poly(ethylene glycol)-maleimide (PEG-Mal)
revealed that residue 302 in helix I (15 Å from residue 313)
and residue 332 in strand 5A (13 Å from residue 313) are fully
accessible to PEG-Mal at GdmCl concentrations of &lt;1 M while residue
237 in strand 2B (6 Å from residue 232) is fully accessible only
at GdmCl concentrations of &gt;2.5 M. Thus,
multiple probes of folding show that the helix I to strand 5A region
containing residue 313 is quite labile while β sheet B containing
residue 232 is much more stable.

The unfolding of 2Cys313 is
reversible, and peak centers and half-widths
similar to those observed upon unfolding are observed upon refolding
(Figure S3 of the ). The 2Cys47 and 2Cys313 results suggest that the α1AT long axis and short axes behave differently during equilibrium
unfolding and refolding. The monitored short axis shows the expected
expansion as the protein unfolds via the intermediate; in contrast,
the long axis contracts in the initial folding intermediates and then
expands upon further unfolding.

Characterizing the DSE
Fully denatured proteins can
be modeled as unstructured, random polymer chains with mean square
end-to-end distances that follow a Gaussian distribution.,,,− In this model, a Gaussian distribution also describes
the root-mean-square distance between donor and acceptor fluorophores
separated by ≥80 amino acids. The Gaussian chain model and
eqs – can then
be used to determine the radius of gyration, Rg, which should be the same for both the short and long axis
spFRET variants if the denatured states are truly unstructured polymers.
Above 3.5 M GdmCl, the radii of gyration determined from the γ-corrected
centers of the unfolded peaks are similar for both 2Cys47 and 2Cys313,
confirming that the time-averaged α1AT conformation
is no longer asymmetric (Figure ). As observed
for other proteins, the Rg of the DSE
increases with increasing concentrations of GdmCl., In 6 M GdmCl, the Rg is 58 ± 2
Å, a 145% increase relative to the Rg of 23.7 Å measured by small angle neutron scattering for the
native state.

Radius of gyration (Rg) tracks α1AT expansion with
increasing GdmCl concentrations. Rg calculated
from 2Cys47 spFRET histograms (circles)
and 2Cys313 spFRET histograms (triangles). The filled symbols were
calculated from unfolding experiments, and the empty symbols were
calculated from refolding experiments.

Limits on the Kinetics of Interconversion between States
While the equilibrium spFRET data provide information about conformational
distributions, the time scales of fluorescence fluctuations due to
translational diffusion and fast structural fluctuations may be determined
using FCS.,,, At low protein concentrations, diffusion
of fluorescent proteins in and out of the observation volume leads
to fluorescence fluctuations on the time scale of diffusion (hundreds
of microseconds) that are reflected in the decay of the correlation
function (Figure S4A of the )., Fluorescence fluctuations on time scales
faster than that of diffusion, arising, for example, from significant
structural fluctuations that alter the donor to acceptor distance,
will lead to exponential decays of the correlation with time constants
of microseconds or longer in addition to the contributions from diffusion
and fluorophore photochemistry (eq ).,,− In the absence
of dynamic changes in distance between the donor and acceptor, the
fluorescence correlation can be expressed as G1(τ) = Gpc(τ)Gdiff(τ), which has contributions from
diffusion, Gdiff(τ), and photochemistry
such as excursions into the triplet states and quenching by Trp residues, Gpc(τ) (see eq ). In the presence of structural dynamics that alter the distance
between the donor and acceptor fluorophores, an additional term, Gdynamics(τ), contributes to the fluorescence
fluctuations and the correlation function can be expressed as G2(τ) = Gdynamics(τ)Gpc(τ)Gdiff(τ). The ratio between these functions will
reveal the time scale(s) of the structural fluctuations:,−This ratio may be
calculated
in two ways: (i) the donor autocorrelation for protein labeled with
both the donor and acceptor may be divided by the crosscorrelation
between the donor and acceptor channels, or (ii) the donor autocorrelation for protein labeled with both
the donor and acceptor may be divided by the donor autocorrelation
for protein labeled only with the donor. In both of these cases, the
diffusion and photochemistry contributions should cancel out and the
contribution of fluorescence fluctuations due to conformational changes
should be obvious.,

To put limits on how fast
α1AT can interconvert between states, we performed
FCS experiments on α1AT labeled only with the donor,
AF488, and on α1AT labeled with both the donor, AF488,
and the acceptor, TR, for both 2Cys47 and 2Cys313 and calculated both
types of ratios. The resulting ratios are essentially flat and similar
for all concentrations of GdmCl, including 0 M GdmCl (Figure S4 of
the ). These results
indicate that the average interconversion between states occurs more
slowly than diffusion through the observation volume. This puts a
lower limit of ∼250 μs for interconversion between the
folded and intermediate ensembles and of ∼500 μs for
interconversion between the intermediate ensemble and the DSE. (The
approximate doubling of the diffusion time arises from both the increase
in viscosity at higher GdmCl concentrations and expansion associated
with unfolding.)

Discussion
Native α1AT is a watermelon-shaped ellipsoid.
In 2Cys47, the two fluorophores are located approximately along one
of the short axes of the ellipsoid, while in 2Cys313, the two fluorophores
are close to the long axis (Figure ). By combining
these labeling schemes with spFRET, we tracked the overall symmetry
of α1AT during equilibrium unfolding and refolding.
The spFRET histograms were calculated for data binned at 1 kHz, and
the shape of α1AT is therefore averaged over the
time (hundreds of microseconds) it takes for the molecules to traverse
the observation volume. This is particularly important for the DSE
at high GdmCl concentrations where the instantaneous conformation
of unfolded α1AT can be quite extended and aspherical,
but the lack of preferred conformations leads to a relatively spherical
time-averaged conformation. Our time-averaged results indicate that
the first events in equilibrium unfolding involve contraction of the
long axis and expansion of the short axes, resulting in a more spherical
overall conformation, followed by overall expansion of α1AT as shown in Scheme , in which the
dots indicate the approximate locations of the fluorophores; N, I1, I2, and U indicate the native, intermediate,
and denatured state ensembles, respectively; and the braces denote
the heterogeneity of the intermediate ensembles and the DSE.

α1AT Equilibrium Folding Showing the Initial Compaction
of the Long Axis and Expansion of the Short Axes
A number of α1AT equilibrium
unfolding studies
suggest that the unfolding intermediates are classic molten globules,, with a compact conformation,
and significant, but fluctuating, secondary structure. For α1AT, GdmCl-induced equilibrium
intermediates show significant secondary structure as determined by
far-UV CD,, (Figure ), and the backbone amide hydrogens throughout the
protein show no significant protection from hydrogen exchange [with
the exception of a peptide in sheet B (residues 241–251) that
shows some protection up to 4 M GdmCl], indicating that the structure
fluctuates, and no significant heat capacity peak is observed for
the transition between the intermediates and the unfolded states in
differential scanning calorimetry (DSC) experiments. Collapse of some structural constraints is also supported
by the accessibility of buried Cys residues in helix I, s5A, and helix
F regions to PEGylation even at low GdmCl concentrations. Residue 313 is in the helix I–turn–s5A
region, and the 2Cys313 spFRET results, which report on the lability
of the long axis in this region, clearly agree with the HDXMS and PEGylation results
at low GdmCl concentrations (&lt;1 M) as well as the significant stabilization
afforded by mutating Lys335 in s5A to small residues (Ala, Gly, and
Val).,, Overall, the
decrease in asphericity observed for the intermediates is entirely
consistent with the intermediates’ molten globule character
because relaxation of the anisotropic constraints imposed by the tertiary
structure will increase the overall, time-averaged symmetry during
serpin unfolding.

Compared to the region around residue 313,
the helix A–strand
6B region containing residue 47 is more stable. It is accessible to
PEGylation only above 1 M GdmCl and gains
40–60% protection from hydrogen–deuterium exchange and oxidative labeling after refolding for ∼10 min. The 2Cys47 spFRET histogram
even shows a small native state peak for 2Cys47 at 3 M GdmCl (Figure A), suggesting that some regions of α1AT retain small but significant amounts of native state character
even in the presence of moderate to high denaturant concentrations.
This retention of local tertiary constraints is supported by HDXMS
data for the peptide containing residues 241–251 that is not
fully exchanged even at 4 M GdmCl, indicating the presence of some
hydrogen bonding in β sheet B and
the lack of complete PEGylation at 3 M GdmCl for the Cys residues
introduced at positions 55 and 65, near Ser47, and at position 237,
near Cys232. In addition, fluorescence
from Trp238, near Cys232, shows only one transition with unfolding
midpoints at 5.3 M for urea denaturation and 1.8 M for guanidinium
sulfate denaturation, again indicating the retention of local native
state character in β sheet B even at high denaturant concentrations.
The higher local stability reported by 2Cys47 is also evident in the
intermediate ensemble(s); the 2Cys47 intermediate ensemble shows significant
population even at 4 M GdmCl where the 2Cys313 histogram shows only
the DSE (Figure ).

These differences
in the spFRET histograms are consistent with
the greater stability of the short axis monitored in the 2Cys47 experiments
relative to the long axis monitored in the 2Cys313 experiments. Differences
in stability between the 2Cys313 and 2Cys47 intermediate ensembles
suggest that the s1B–s2B region probed by Cys232 in both constructs
is quite stable. As discussed above, the stability of this region
is further supported by fluorescence data from the Trp residue in
s2B (Trp238), PEGylation data, and the early acquisition of structure in this
region during kinetic experiments., Thus, the
B/C barrel region is the most stable part of α1AT.
All of these data, along with fragment complementation studies that
lead to stable, folded serpins for both α1AT and ovalbumin, support
a model of α1AT equilibrium folding in which secondary
structure formation at moderate concentrations of GdmCl results in
a molten globule, and while significant structure is present between
1 and ∼3 M GdmCl, particularly in the B/C barrel region, the
entire ellipsoidal structure does not snap into place and is not stable
until low GdmCl concentrations (&lt;0.5 M) are reached.

How Different
Are the Intermediate Ensembles and the DSE?
Far-UV CD unfolding
experiments reveal a gradual transition between
the intermediate ensemble and the DSE (Figure ),,, while in DSC
experiments, no heat capacity peak is observed for the intermediate
to unfolded transition. This behavior
would be expected in the absence of an energy barrier between these
conformational ensembles resulting in a continuous expansion of the
α1AT structure. In spFRET
experiments, continuous expansion from the intermediate to the denatured
ensembles would be detected as a GdmCl-dependent change in the mean
energy transfer efficiency of the intermediate peaks, as observed
for the DSE (Figure ). However, the peak centers
for the intermediates are not dependent on GdmCl (Figure ), and the peaks for the intermediate ensembles
and the DSE are distinct, indicating that these are two different
conformational ensembles separated by an energy barrier. In contrast
to the DSC, which might not detect a small change in heat capacity,
the spFRET data reveal that there is likely a small energy barrier
between the intermediate and denatured state ensembles.

The DSE
Trp fluorescence studies of serpin unfolding
suggest that serpins have residual secondary structure even in high
concentrations of chemical denaturants, and that this residual structure
helps serpins refold., This residual structure is reported
to be in the B/C barrel,, a region that is particularly
stable in the native α1AT conformation. In spFRET experiments, such residual structure
should reduce the Rg of the DSE. Above
5.5 M GdmCl, the Rg for α1AT levels out around 60 Å (Figure ),
which is significantly lower than the mean Rg value of 69 Å predicted for a 394-amino acid protein
based on small angle X-ray scattering data from a number of proteins
but is within the 95% confidence limits. It is likely that the relatively low Rg arises from residual structure because Cys232 (used in all of our
labeling schemes) is located in the B/C barrel and would therefore
be affected by any residual structure.

These results demonstrate
the utility of using multiple labeling locations for spFRET studies
to probe global protein symmetry, particularly for larger proteins.
They also suggest that the ellipticity of the serpin fold, which likely
facilitates the conformational changes required for protease inhibition,
may also play a role in serpin folding. Interestingly, insertion of
the RCL into β sheet A increases the internal symmetry of α1AT and can result in two-state unfolding, indicating that both internal and global symmetry can play
a role in serpin folding.

Supporting Information Available
Experimental details for the
spFRET and CD experiments, asphericity and shape values, fits to the
CD data, and bulk fluorescence and FCS figures. This material is available
free of charge via the Internet at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bi401622n_si_001.pdf

Author Present Address
§ L.L.:
Amazon.com, Inc., Irvine, CA 92618.

Author Present Address
∥ M.W.:
Rush Medical College, Chicago, IL 60612.

Research reported
in this publication was supported by National Science Foundation Grant
MCB-0446220 and National Institute of General Medical Sciences Grant
R01GM09848.

The authors declare the
following competing financial interest(s): A.G. was the recipient
of an Alpha-1 Foundation &amp; Talecris Biotherapeutics Research Initiative
Grant. Talecris Biotherapeutics markets α1-antitrypsin
as a pharmaceutical.

Acknowledgments
We thank
Daniel Oprian for use of his fluorescence spectrometer,
J. Alejandro D’Aquino for assistance in analyzing protein structures,
and Nicole Mushero for critical reading of the manuscript.

Abbreviations
α1ATα1-antitrypsin

AF488Alexa Fluor 488

CDcircular dichroism

DSCdifferential scanning
calorimetry

DSEdenatured state ensemble

FCSfluorescence correlation spectroscopy

GdmClguanidinium chloride

HDXMShydrogen–deuterium
exchange mass spectrometry

PDBProtein Data Bank

Rgradius of gyration

RCLreactive center loop

spFRETsingle-pair
Förster resonance energy transfer

SIstoichiometry of inhibition

TRTexas Red.

