Bacteriorhodopsin
(BR) is a
retinal-containing protein of the halophilic Archaea., Absorption of an actinic photon by BR initiates a catalytic cycle
that drives the outward-directed translocation of a proton. The collective
activity of numerous BRs thereby generates an electrochemical proton
gradient that can be used to drive various cellular processes. The
retinal chromophore is covalently bound, via a protonated Schiff base,
to Lys216, which is located in the middle of the membrane. In addition
to their role in light absorption, the retinal and the Schiff base
also constitute a central component of the proton translocation pathway,
dividing it into cytoplasmic and extracellular halves. The catalytic
cycle is composed of a linear sequence of spectroscopically distinct
intermediates called J, K, L, M, N, and O, with each described by
a characteristic absorption maxima.− A requirement for vectorial proton transport is that deprotonation
and reprotonation of the Schiff base occur from the opposite sides
of the membrane. The transition between these two different accessibilities
is termed the “hydration switch”. Because the M state
is the only state in which the Schiff base is deprotonated, there
must be two substates of M that differ in their accessibility and
are, therefore, called Mec (M with extracellular accessibility)
and Mcp (M with cytoplasmic accessibility).−

Various biophysical methods have been used to characterize
the
photointermediate states in detail and to relate them to transport
function (for reviews, see refs ( and −)). The high-resolution crystal structures of the unilluminated state
of the protein and photointermediates,− have supplied molecular details regarding the changes that occur
in the configuration of the retinal upon illumination as well as the
resulting conformational changes of the protein. In short, the structures
show that on the extracellular side of the proton conducting pathway
the ground-state Schiff base associates with a complex counterion
composed of Asp85 and Asp212 through a highly polarized water molecule.
Furthermore, a network of polar residues and bound water is thought
to couple the protonation state of Asp85 to a complex proton release
group (PRG) on the extracellular side.− One such residue, Arg82, has even been shown to alternate between
upward- and downward-facing orientations during the photocycle and
may thus serve a key role in shuttling protons between Asp85 and the
PRG.− Structural changes in the cytoplasmic half-channel are initiated
by the 13-methyl group of the retinal that pushes after isomerization
and relaxation against the indole ring of Trp182., This, and other molecular stresses, leads to a transient outward
tilt of the upper part of helix F and an inward movement of helix
G in the second half of the photocycle., This helix
repacking leads to the lowering of the pKa of Asp96, which is initially high (&gt;12), and the establishment
of
a hydrogen-bonded chain to the Schiff base, which together facilitate
the reprotonation of the Schiff base from the cytosol.,−

In a previous paper, we demonstrated that the transport activity
of the bacteriorhodopsin Asp96Gly/Phe171Cys/Phe219Leu triple mutant
is 66% that of the wild type in whole haloarchaeal cell measurements. Surprisingly, substantial conformational changes
were absent during the photocycle of this mutant given that its conformational
ground state resembled that of the wild-type BR M conformation, which
is called the open state. Recently, a
three-dimensional X-ray structure has been reported for the triple
mutant. This structure suggests that the open state may be more even
open than previously appreciated (). Accompanying molecular dynamics (MD)
simulations in which the mutant residues were reverted back to wild
type suggested that substrate access to the cytoplasmic half-channel
is tightly regulated by the protonation state of Asp96, even in the
structurally highly open conformation. This would indicate that although
the large-scale structural change likely remains functionally important
it alone is not sufficient to regulate substrate flow and that other
mechanisms are also involved.

In this article, we demonstrate
that haloarchaeal cells expressing
the triple mutant BR can use light energy to synthesize 85% of the
ATP synthesized by the wild-type protein but, nevertheless, they cannot
grow photoheterotrophically. To resolve some of the seemingly contradictory
functional results (e.g., the triple mutant pumps protons, cells expressing
it make reasonable amounts of ATP, and this activity does not support
growth) in the context of what we know about its structure, we expressed
wild-type and mutant BR in Xenopus oocytes and examined
the effect of membrane potential on the generation of light-induced
proton current. We also conducted MD simulations to help provide dynamic
structural context for the biophysical measurements. In so doing,
we show that the constitutively open state of the triple mutant may
make the protein nonfunctional at physiological membrane potentials
by providing a route for substrate back flow in the presence of a
inwardly negative membrane potential. This realization, in combination
with alternate, non-BR-mediated routes for short-term light-driven
ATP synthesis help to bring clearer focus on the functional potential
of the triple mutant.

Materials and Methods
ATP Measurements
Light-driven ATP synthesis rates were
measured by growing halobacterial cells to the end of the logarithmic
phase and then harvesting and resuspending the cells in basal salt
(growth medium without peptone) at a pH value of 5.7. Cellular ATP concentration was determined by a luciferin/luciferase
assay (Sigma, product ID: FLAAM) according to the manufacturer’s
protocol. Photon emission was used as a measure of the ATP concentration
(Lumac Biocounter, Abimed, Germany). Absolute ATP concentration was
determined by comparison to a standard curve. The light-driven ATP
synthesis rate was determined by illuminating the cell suspension
with green light emitted from a halogen bulb-equipped slide projector.
Projected light was filtered by a OG515 cutoff filter (Schott, Mainz,
Germany) and a Calflex 3000 heat glass (Balzers, Liechtenstein) prior
to sample illumination. The light intensity was 19.2 mW cm–2. Light was switched on at time t = 0, and ATP concentration
was determined as the mean value of triplicate samples taken at time
points −600, −300, −5, 5, 15, 25, 35, 45, 60,
120, 180, 240, and 300 s. the ATP synthesis rate was calculated by
linear regression of the five time points after switching on the light.

Gene Constructs
The wild-type and mutant bacterioopsin
genes were cloned into pGEMHE, providing a multiple cloning site surrounded
by the noncoding regions of β-globin from Xenopus laevis. The DNA insert was generated by standard
PCR.

Preparation of the Oocytes
After removal from the frog,
ovarian lobes were cut into small pieces, washed three to four times
in oocyte Ringer ORI (82.5 mM NaCl, 2.5 mM KCl, 1 mM MgCl2, 1 mM Na2HPO4, and 5 mM HEPES, pH 7.4) and
subjected to collagenase treatment (approximately 0.5 μg/mL
of collagenase A (Sigma) depending on the lot) in ORI for 4 to 5 h.
Thereafter, the oocytes were washed thoroughly with ORI medium and
stored for further treatment in ORI II buffer (82.5 mM NaCl, 2.5 mM
KCl, 1 mM MgCl2, 1 mM Na2HPO4, 1
mM CaCl2, 1 μg/mL of sodium pyruvate, 50 ng/mL of
gentamycin (Boehringer), and 5 mM Hepes, pH 7.4) at 18 °C in
the dark.

Expression in Xenopus laevis
Plasmids
were linearized using the restriction enzyme PstI
and treated with Klenow fragment I to eliminate the 3′ overhang.
Capped cRNA was produced in an in vitro transcription
reaction using T7 RNA polymerase (New England Biolabs). After injection
of 50 −100 ng of cRNA, the oocytes were incubated in the dark
at 18–20 °C for 3 to 4 days in ORIII solution additionally
containing 1 μM all-trans retinal for reconstitution of bacteriorhodopsin.

Protein Quantification
Ten to 15 oocytes were homogenized
in 1 mL HOMO buffer (0.1 mM DTT, 1 mM PMSF, and 10 mM Tris/HCl, pH
8). The homogenate was centrifuged to pellet the nuclei (10 min, 4
°C, 2700g). The supernatant was then subjected
to an ultracentrifugation at 100 000g for
45 min at 4 °C to pellet the membrane fraction. This pellet was
washed with HOMO buffer and solubilized in 10 μL/oocyte of RIPA
buffer (1% Triton X-100, 1% Na deoxycholate, 0.1% SDS, and 20 mM Tris/HCl,
pH 7.3).

Approximately 1–5 μg of protein was separated
on a 13% SDS polyacrylamide gel (PAGE) and blotted onto a nitrocellulose
membrane. Bacterioopsin (BO) was visualized using a BO antibody and the ECL immuno-staining kit (Amersham, Freiburg,
Germany). For quantification, each gel was calibrated with known amounts
of BO. Signal intensities were calculated using the ImageJ software
package (http://rsb.info.nih.gov/ij).

Electrophysiological Measurements
Two-electrode voltage-clamp
experiments were performed using a GeneClamp500 amplifier and the
pClamp7 software package (Axon Instruments). The measurements were
performed in a bath solution containing 80 mM NaCl, 3 mM NaN3, 10 mM CsCl, 10 mM TEACl, 5 mM BaCl2, 2 mM CaCl2, 2.5 mM Na-pyruvate, and 10 mM MES, pH 5.5. Actinic light was produced
from a mercury arc lamp (HBO 300 Oriel, Darmstadt, Germany) that was
filtered by an OG515 cutoff (Schott, Mainz Germany) and a heat glass
(Balzers, Liechtenstein) and applied via fiber optics. The light intensity
at the cuvette surface was 16.3 mW cm–2. Data were
filtered at 10 Hz and were further processed (data reduction) before
extracting the photocurrent from whole cell currents. The photocurrents
were extracted from the raw data by calculating the difference between
the linear approximation of the dark current and the current during
illumination. The leak conductance of the measurements was typically
in the range of 1–10 mS. The access resistance was 5–15
MΩ.

Molecular Dynamics Simulations
Two sets of molecular
dynamics simulations were performed starting from the X-ray crystal
structure of the triple mutant (PDB ID: 4FPD). In the
first set of five replicates simulations (named G1–G5), the
protonation states of the ionizable residues were set as in the ground
state (i.e., Asp85 and Asp212 were deprotonated, and Asp115 was protonated).
In the second set of three replicates simulations (name M1–M3),
Asp85 was modeled in the protonated state to mimic the M intermediate
state (residue Asp115 remained protonated, and Asp212 remained deprotonated).
In addition, three replicates simulations were performed starting
from the earlier low-resolution electron microscopy (EM) structure
of the triple mutant (PDB ID: 1FBK), and in
these simulations, D85 was modeled in the protonated state. In each
simulation, the BR protein was embedded in a phospholipid bilayer
of palmitoyloleoyl-phosphatidylcholine (POPC) and solvated in water
with an ion concentration of 200 mM (the concentration was selected
on the basis of previous experiments that (a) determined 1 M to be
a practical upper bound for accurately modeling ionic composition, (b) our own previous comparison between 200
mM and 1 M ionic concentrations, and
(c) the functional observation that BR retains function at these relatively
low ionic strengths).

The detailed methods for modeling the
BR proteins in the solvated membrane environment were previously described. All of the MD simulations were carried out using
the GPU-CUDA version of the AMBER11 program of the Amber biomolecular
simulation programs. The protocol for
setting up the MD simulations, including energy minimization, equilibration,
and product run, was previously described. We highlight a few key parameters: The parameters of the POPC lipid
molecules were taken from our previous work, which were derived by using the Antechamber module and GAFF force
field in the AMBER program. The parameters of protein residues were
assigned on the basis of the AMBER ff03 force field, a point-charge force field for molecular mechanics simulations
of proteins based on condensed-phase quantum mechanical calculations.
For water molecules, the TIP3P model was used. The simulations range
from 224.01 to 753.92 ns for a total of 4.0 μs.

Water Channel
Analysis
We analyzed water occupancy
in the cytoplasmic proton uptake channel, which we defined as the
cavity between Asp96 and Lys216. This cavity is approximated by a
sphere that is centered at the midpoint of the line connecting the
Gly96:CA and Lys216:CA atoms. The radius of the sphere was set to
be the half of the distance between those two atoms minus 1 Å.
In the triple-mutant structure (PDB ID: 1FPD), the distance between the Gly96:CA and
Lys216:CA atoms is 11.52 Å, and there is only one crystal water
molecule located in the cavity. For each simulation trajectory, we
computed the number of the water molecules present in the cavity at
every frame. Increases in the number of water molecules present in
the cavity is used as a proxy for the formation of a water channel.
From prior experience, we set the cutoff as 4; that is, when the number
of water molecules is larger than 4, we considered the channel to
be open. In addition, we analyzed the dynamic exchange of the channel
water molecules with the bulk by computing the total number of unique
individual water molecules that ever access the G96-K216 cavity during
the simulation. Lastly, the water channel was visualized with the
MolAxis program.

Results
ATP Synthesis
The report demonstrating proton transport
activity in the Asp96Gly/Phe171Cys/Phe219Leu mutant of BR in the absence
of a significant conformational change raised the question about whether the mutant’s activity could
be physiologically functional in the cell. Namely, could the transport
activity generate sufficient proton motive force to measurably increase
the cellular ATP synthesis rate in response to light? To answer this,
light-induced ATP synthesis rates were determined in Halobacterium salinarum cells expressing either wild-type
or triple-mutant BR.

ATP levels were measured in cells prior
to illumination (negative time points in Figure A) and at time points up to 300 s postillumination. In both wild-type
(Figure A) and triple-mutant BR (Figure B), the ATP levels increased and leveled off after
120 s. The initial ATP synthesis rate was determined by regression
analysis (dotted lines in Figure A,B) through
the linear range (45 s after light on). Wild-type and triple mutant
rates were 0.095 and 0.082 nmol ATP/BR, respectively. The initial
light intensity was 19.2 mW cm–2. To ensure that
the ATP synthesis rates were not measured under conditions that saturated
the ATP synthase, the experiments were repeated at different light
intensities. As shown in Figure C, a clear dependence of the ATP synthesis rates
on the applied light intensities was found. Therefore, light-induced
ATP-synthase saturation was excluded, and we presumed that the measured
ATP synthesis rates reflected the increased proton motive force by
the activity of BR in wild-type as well as in the triple-mutant cells.

Light-induced
change of ATP concentration in halobacterial cells
containing (A) wild-type BR (strain S9) or (B) mutant BR (strain TOM,
two opsin minus, derived from L33 expressing the triple mutant from
a plasmid). Data points shown represent the mean value of three independent
determinations. The standard deviations were less than 10% for all
data points; therefore, the error bars are not shown. For determination
of the initial ATP synthesis rate, the linear regression of the first
five data points was calculated, and the result is indicated by the
dashed lines. (C) Dependence of the ATP synthesis rate on different
light intensities. Note that the y-axis scale in
panels A and B are different.

In a second experiment, cells expressing the triple mutant
were
exposed to photoheterotrophic growth conditions. In contrast to wild-type
cells, mutant cells did not grow under these conditions and all others
tested (see the ). This indicates
that the increased ATP synthesis rates that were found in the time
range of 300 s were nevertheless not sufficient to maintain the required
ATP levels for cellular growth.

The BR content in halobacterial
cells was determined spectroscopically
after the lysis of the cells and preparation of the total membrane
fraction. For BR, a molar extinction coefficient of 63 000
M–1 cm–1 was used, and scattering
was corrected by assumption of a standard scattering curve. This method
is used routinely in the lab and turned out to be sufficient for determining
BR abundance.

Expression in Oocytes
To understand
the function of
an ion transport protein fully, it is critical to know its current–voltage
relationship (e.g., the current that the protein can generate in the
context of varying transmembrane voltages). For context, the previously
reported light-induced proton-pumping activities of BR and its mutants
were measured in haloarchaeal cells under conditions of zero membrane
potential (short-circuit conditions) by addition of 200 or 400 μM tetraphenylphosphonium (TPP). Because of their small size, haloarchaeal
cells were not suitable for manipulations with microelectrodes for
electrophysiological experimentation. Therefore, a heterologous expression
system (oocytes) had to be used.

Quantification of Expression
As was shown by the pioneering
work of Bamberg and colleagues,− functional expression of BR in
oocytes allows direct measurement of the voltage dependence of light-induced
proton pumping. Microinjection of wild-type or mutant mRNA into oocytes
led to expression of the respective BR molecule in the cell membrane
of oocytes as detected by western blot analysis. Total membrane fractions
from 10 oocytes were separated by SDS-PAGE, transferred to a nylon
membrane, and incubated with an antibody to bacterioopsin. A clear
band with an apparent molecular weight of 19 kD was identified for
expressed wild-type as well as mutated BR (Figure A, lanes 5 and 6). For quantitation, increasing amounts of
BR, 12.5, 18.8, 25, and 32.2 ng from purple membranes, were electrophoresed
on the same gel (Figure A, lanes 1–4).
Densitometric analysis of lanes 1–6 is shown in Figure B, and the integrals of the traces were subjected
to regression analysis (Figure C). All values
fell on a straight line, so the expression values of 75 and 42 ng
for wild-type and mutant BR, respectively, were directly determined.
This corresponds to 0.25 and 0.14 pmol per oocyte. In different expression
experiments, a range from 0.11 to 0.56 pmol per oocyte was found.
For the sake of clarity, the following calculations were done for
the wild type value. The value of 0.25 pmol corresponds to 1.5 ×
1011 molecules per oocyte. Assuming a surface area for
the oocyte of 20 mm2, a density
of 7500 molecules μm–2 is calculated. This
is roughly five times lower than the density of BR in the haloarchaeal
cell, where as many as 600 000 molecules per cell are distributed
on a surface of 15 μm2.

Quantification of expression
of wild-type and mutant BR in oocytes.
(A) Western blot of total membrane fractions of wild-type (lane 5)
or mutant (lane 6) BR-expressing oocytes. In lanes 1–4, 12.5,
18.8, 25, and 32.2 ng of BR were applied for calibration, respectively.
(B) Densitograms of lanes 1–6. (C) Regression analysis of the
integrals of the curves shown in panel B (standard values, dots; wild-type
BR, open circle; and mutant BR, cross).

Electrophysiological Experiments
The ability of wild-type
BR and the triple mutant to generate light-induced currents against
various transmembrane potentials (i.e., the current–voltage
(IV) relationship) was determined by patch clamping
these proteins after heterologous expression in oocytes. Average current
recordings of wild-type (n = 18) and mutant BR (n = 19) are reported in Figure ,
panels A and B, respectively. Voltages, varying from −150 (bottom)
to +50 mV (top), were applied for 6 s. This process began 1 s after
the start of each experiment when the membrane potential was set to
a defined holding potential. After the current stabilized (ca. 2.5
s), samples were irradiated with a 1 s pulse of actinic light. The
current usually returned to the t = 0 value following
the light pulse. After 4 s, the holding membrane potential was switched
off.

Averaged current recordings of oocytes expressing (A) wild-type
BR (n = 18) or (B) mutant BR (n =
19). Voltages are applied in the range of −150 to 50 mV in
20 mV increments from bottom to top. A 1 s light pulse (source: HBO
300, Oriel filtered through OG515, Schott and Calflex 3000, Balzers,
16.3 mW cm–2) was applied between 2.5 and 3.5 s.
The rough illumination region is depicted with a gray rectangle. The
bath solution contained 80 mM NaCl, 3 mM NaN3, 10 mM CsCl,
10 mM TEACl, 5 mM BaCl2, 2 mM CaCl2, 2.5 mM
Na-pyruvate, and 10 mM MES at pH 5.5; electrodes were filled with
3 M KCl.

Because the opsins are the only
light-induced transport system
in the oocytes, the difference in current at fixed membrane potentials
between the stationary photoinduced current and the dark current can
be attributed to the activity of the opsin proteins. Plotting these
opsin-associated currents versus the applied membrane potential shows
the stationary current–voltage (IV) relationship
of each opsin. Figure A,B reports these data
for wild-type and triple-mutant BRs, respectively. First, we note
that only positive photoinduced currents were measured for both wild-type
and triple-mutant BR, indicating that reversal of the pump was not
observed. Second, the currents driven by wild-type BR are larger than
the currents from the triple mutant. Note that the ordinates in panels
A and B are scaled differently and that the currents were normalized
to the amount of expressed protein. Third, the IV curve of the triple mutant BR is nonlinear (convex), whereas that
of the wild type was only slightly nonlinear and concave. In conclusion,
the currents in wild type are 10 times higher at −150 mV compared
to the mutant, but this value reduces to five times higher at +40
mV because of the nonlinear characteristic of the current–voltage
relationship.

Averaged current–voltage relationship of wild-type
BR (A)
and mutant BR (B) from 18 and 19 independent measurements, respectively,
as shown in Figure . The standard deviation
is indicated by the bars. Experimental conditions were as described
in Figure . Note that the y axis in panels A and B is on different scales.

The physiological relevance of current–voltage relationships
determined for oocyte-expressed BR was assessed and reported in previous
work using the same methods. Therein,
current–voltage curves of wild-type BR expressed in oocytes
showed the BR turnover rate in the oocyte to be about 1 s–1 at zero membrane potential. This value is very close to the experimentally
determined value of 5 H+/BR s–1 for the
maximal transport rate of BR in the halobarchaeal cell. Moreover, if one considers that previous experiments
using the oocyte system suggested that only 10% of the translated
BRs actually appear in the plasma membrane, then the turnover in oocytes from 1 to 10 s–1 is
closer still to the value of 5 s–1 reported in halobarchaeal
cells.

Molecular Dynamics Simulations
To provide mechanistic
context for our current–voltage data, we analyzed the X-ray
structure of the triple mutant and conducted
a series of molecular dynamics simulations. The 2.65 Å structure
of the triple mutant is characterized by large displacements of the
cytoplasmic ends of helices E, F, and G (). The largest displacement from the wild-type ground-state
structure is a 14.7° outward tilt of helix F that initiates at
Pro186. Notably, despite this large tilt, solvent-accessible surface
calculations show that in the static structure the proton uptake pathway
remains functionally closed. That is, access of bulk water to the
cytoplasmic interior extends only to Phe42, which, along with a hydrophobic
leucine ring (), appears to act
as a cap for the cytoplasmic half-channel.

For this study, a
total of eight simulations, termed G1–5 (modeling ground state)
and M1–3 (modeling an M-like state), were conducted with starting
atomic coordinates derived from 4FPD. In seven of the eight simulations, we
observed that a water channel readily formed along the putative proton
uptake pathway, connecting the backbone carbonyl group of Lys216 (and
thus possibly the Schiff base during the M-to-N transition and N-intermediate)
and the cytoplasm. The opening was created by the outward swinging
of Phe42 and loosening of the packing of the leucine-rich cluster
around Gly96. This opening was characterized by an increase in the
distance between Phe42 and Gly96 and the increase of the radius of
gyration of the leucine-rich cluster, which led to a dramatic increase
in the number of water molecules in the Gly96–Lys216 cavity
(Figures  and ). As described in the  section of the , four
or more water molecules present in the cavity indicates the formation
of the water channel. Charged residues including Arg227 at the C-terminal
of helix G, Asp38 and Lys41 of helix B, and Asp102 at loop BC lined
the entrance of the channel. In the open state, water molecules filled
the cytoplasmic channel and underwent rapid and dynamic exchange with
the bulk (Figures  and  and Table ). In the region around
Gly96, the channel was bottlenecked to a narrow gate with a diameter
of 2–2.5 Å, allowing only one water molecule to pass at
a time between the exterior and interior portions of the cytoplasmic
half-channel (the pink pipe shown in Figure ). The location of the channel determined in these simulations is
the same as the one previously reported from simulations of wild-type
BR in which D96 was modeled in the deprotonated state.

Dynamics in the vicinity of Gly96 in four of the simulations
starting
structure 4FPD. For each simulation, the Gly96–Phe42 side chain Ca–Cg
distance (green), the number of water molecules in the Gly96–Lys216
cavity (red), and the radius of gyration of the leucine-rich cluster
(black) are each plotted against the simulation time. A horizontal
dashed line indicates 4 water molecules, the threshold value for defining
an open channel. See  for the
other four simulations.

Representative conformation of the open proton uptake channel.
(A) Model viewed from the CP side. Six water molecules (red balls)
are shown in the Gly96–Lys216 cavity. The opening is surrounded
by a leucine-rich hydrophobic cluster formed by Phe42, Ile45, Leu97,
Leu99, and Leu223 (green stick and yellow surface); (B, C) side view.
The pink pipe depicts a contiguous water channel that connects the
cytoplasm with Lys216 and passes by Gly96.

Summary of the MD Simulation Results
simulation	state	trajectory length (ns)	number of different water molecules
that accessed
the G96-K216 cavity	
Eight Simulations
Starting from Structure 4FPD	
G1	ground	289.38	363	
G2	ground	256.48	32	
G3	ground	530.12	12	
G4	ground	753.92	774	
G5	ground	753.92	43	
M1	M	626.88	877	
M2	M	627.01	106	
M3	M	627.01	883	
Three Simulations
Starting from Structure 1FBK	
E1	ground	229.01	3	
E2	ground	229.01	23	
E3	ground	224.11	13	
D85 is protonated in the simulations
mimicking the ground state and deprotonated in those mimicking the
M state.

The formation of
the water channel exhibited different kinetics
and dynamics in different simulations. In simulations G1, G2, and
G4, the water channel formed almost immediately after the restraints
on the protein were removed, whereas in simulations M1, M2, and M3,
it took several tens of nanoseconds. The slowest opening occurred
in simulation G5, which took ca. 450 ns. In most of the simulations,
we observed that the protein spontaneously alternated between the
channel opened and closed conformations, as characterized by the rapid
fluctuation of the number of water molecules in the Gly96–Lys216
cavity (Figures  and ). By contrast, in simulations G2 and G5, the channel reclosed, and
the closed state lasted until the end of the simulations. In simulation
G2, the number of the water molecules in the Gly96–Lys216 cavity
dropped back to one after about 5 ns because Leu219 was kicked into
the Gly96–Lys216 cavity by a surrounding lipid molecule (). In simulation G5, the open state
lasted for only 100 ns, and the channel closed as a result of Phe42
rotating back to cover Gly96. Simulation G3 was the only simulation
in which the proton uptake channel never opened but a few water molecules
penetrated into the protein from the transiently created cavity between
helices B and G ()

A second,
lower-resolution structure of the triple mutant determined
by electron diffraction (PDB ID: 1FBK) was also used to simulate an M-like
state in the triple mutant. The EM structure is also characterized
by helical tilts on the cytoplasmic side of the protein. However,
the structural deviations relative to the wild-type ground-state BR
structure are generally smaller in 1FBK than they are in 4FPD: the outward tilts
of helix F in 4FPD and 1FBK are
∼15 and ∼6°, respectively (). To investigate whether the differences in starting
states might influence the simulation results, we conducted three
additional MD simulations with protonatable residues modeled in M-like
states. In contrast to the simulations conducted on 4FPD, the proton uptake
channel remained closed in each of the three simulations that started
from 1FBK (simulations
E1–E3). In these simulations, a few water molecules penetrated
into the protein from the transiently created cavity between helices
B and G (). This behavior is similar
to what was seen in simulation G3 and suggests that the water channel
observed in simulations based on the 4FPD structure is unlikely to be observed
in the simulation based on the 1FBK structure. Although both 4FPD and 1FBK model the BR triple
mutant structure in the ground state, different experimental approaches
and conditions led to notably different structures and apparently
different stabilities of the cytoplasmic half-channel. This suggests
that factors that influence the degree of opening on the cytoplasmic
side of the triple mutant may modify the transport kinetics.

Discussion
Analysis of the triple mutant structure and the accompanying molecular
dynamics simulations reveal that the constitutively open cytoplasmic
side of the triple mutant may help to explain both its ability to
pump protons (reprotonate the Schiff base) in the absence of the internal
proton donor Asp96 and its inability to pump against a physiologically
relevant negative membrane potential. Each of these two phenomena
can be directly linked to the dynamic hydration of the cytoplasmic
half-channel. In the case of the former, direct hydration of the Schiff
base from the cytoplasmic bulk provides a path for reprotonation.
This hypothesis is supported by the experimental observation that
the reprotonation rate of the Schiff base is pH-dependent in the triple
mutant, in contrast to the external pH-independent
manner of the wild type. Likewise, the increased hydration provides
a low resistance route for substrate back flow, particularly when
the direction of pumping is energetically contrary to the membrane
potential.

In a recent paper by Geibel et al., the authors report photocurrents for the triple mutant
(as well
as the respective single mutations) expressed in the oocyte expression
system. In addition to the photocurrents triggered by actinic green
light, the authors also report the response of the triple mutant to
flashes of blue light pulsed at intervals after a stimulus by green
light. These experiments showed that the lifetime of the M intermediate
is prolonged in Asp96Gly and the triple mutant but shortened in the
Phe171Cys and Phe219Leu mutants. All of these experiments were carried
out at pH 7.5. A comparison of the electrical data presented herein
with those of Geibel et al. shows agreement
of the current–voltage curves in the triple mutant. We note,
however, that our measurements were performed at pH 5.5 and that because
of the absence of Asp96 as the intrinsic proton donor for reprotonation
of the Schiff base the BR photocycle, especially the M decay component,
is highly pH-dependent in these mutants. Lastly, we also note that
the observation of Geibel at al. that
the blue light response changes its sign exclusively in the triple
mutant could be interpreted as an indication that this mutant has
altered the directionality of proton currents and that this would
be compatible with our suggestion of back flow under conditions of
positive potential.

It is worth noting that the dynamics of
water molecules in the
cytoplasmic half-channel described above are in sharp contrast to
the MD simulations recently published by Wang et al. in which residues in the triple mutant (PDB ID: 4FPD) were returned in silico to the wild-type BR identities. The simulations
in Wang et al. preserve the large structural change observed in the
mutant while probing the role of wild-type side chain chemistry in
that context. Surprisingly, even in the open state, the wild-type
substitutions serve to control access to the cytoplasmic half-channel
despite the presence of large-scale conformational changes. Only when
Asp96 is modeled in a deprotonated state does the cytoplasmic half-channel
open to allow rapid water exchange, not unlike that seen in the present
study. The apparent design feature, which requires complex molecular
control of hydration on the cytoplasmic side (e.g., the large-scale
changes are insufficient), suggests moreover that this functional
property has been honed carefully by natural selection and that it
is critical for the proper function of the pump. The opening appears
to be timed to occur well after proton transfer from the Schiff base
(a process that may be mediated by a chain of water molecules not
unlike those observed in this study)
linked to the protonation state of Asp96 and exists only long enough
to fulfill the function of reprotonating Asp96.

Understanding
that the perpetually open cytoplasmic half-channel
(mediated by the absence of an ionized Asp96 in the triple mutant)
may contribute to back flow when the mutant pump is operating against
a transmembrane potential, which may also provide some explanation
for the previously contradictory results: (a) proton pumping by the
triple mutant shows 66% of wild-type efficiency and (b) the inability of cells expressing the triple mutant
to sustain photoheterothrophic growth. First, we note that pumping
efficiency data were collected in the presence of high concentrations
of the lipophillic cation tetraphenylphosphonium (TPP). This compound
effectively set the membrane potential to zero, which was useful for
comparing wild-type and mutant internal thermodynamics but masked
the inability of the mutant to pump against a voltage. Second, the
conclusion that cells expressing the triple mutant, which we have
now shown to be effectively nonfunctional at physiological membrane
potentials, cannot grow photoheterotrophically is consistent with
previous data showing that cells lacking a functional BR can likewise
not sustain photoheterotrophic growth.−

What remains unanswered
by the current work, however, is the data
showing light-mediated ATP synthesis in double knockout cells lacking
wild-type BR or halorhodopsin but expressing the triple mutant. If
the triple mutant proton pump is nonfunctional at physiological membrane
potentials, then how can it still seemingly mediate light-dependent
ATP synthesis? Previous work had implicated the membrane potential
established by the light-mediated activity of halorhodopsin (the inward-driven
Cl– transporter) in the synthesis of ATP in H. salinarum mutants lacking functional BR.− This halorhodopsin activity was similarly implicated as a primary
driver of light-driven ATP synthesis in haloarchaeal species lacking
BR. However, cells utilized in this study
lack functional halorhodopsins. Previous work has shown light-dependent
ATP synthesis in the absence of a proton motive force, although the
mechanism by which this happens remains unclear. Thus, we suggest that the observed initial ATP production
is only transient in the mutant in contrast to the situation in wild-type
cells. Photoautotrophic growth would require steady-state ATP production,
as has been demonstrated previously by growth deficiencies in BR-minus
strains.

Collectively, the new
current–voltage data for the triple
mutant and their analysis in the context of protein structure and
MD simulations helps to explain some of the seeming contradictions
of previous experimental data on this protein. These results also
reinforce the notion that minimizing the potential for back flow is
a critical element in the design of BR that is tightly regulated.
The structural opening that occurs during the late M and N photointermediates
likely serves to mediate a temporary increase in channel hydration,
whereas the closing is required to minimize the potential for back
flow when pumping against physiological membrane potential.

Supporting Information Available
The Supporting
Information
include graphical summaries of key data derived from MD simulation
trajectories and cartoon style diagrams of protein structures that
depict the starting X-ray crystal structures used in the MD simulations
and snapshots of particularly illustrative structures derived from
MD simulations. This material is available free of charge via the
Internet at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bi4013808_si_001.pdf

Author Contributions
§ T.W. and C.O. contributed equally to this
work.

This work was
funded by SFB533, the Ministry of Science and Technology of China
(CB2013910200 to Y.D.), and the National Institutes of Health (GM67168
to Y.D.) as well as by computing resources at the TeraGrid (MCA06N028
to Y.D. and MCB100132 to T.W.) and startup funds to M.T.F.

The authors declare no
competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
We thank E. Bamberg
for helpful discussions and S. Subramaniam
and A. K. Werenskiold for critical reading of early manuscript drafts.
Skillful technical assistance from B. Brustmann is acknowledged.

