Genomic DNA
is constantly exposed
to endogenous and exogenous damaging agents that threaten its integrity.
To preserve the genetic information, multiple DNA transactions operate
in cells, and most of these transactions involve the synthesis of
new DNA by polymerases. Included among these polymerases are members
of family X that are conserved in most organisms from bacteria to
humans and are even encoded by viruses., The X family
contains four subfamilies, DNA polymerases
(pols) β, λ, and μ and terminal deoxynucleotidyl
transferase (TdT). Only vertebrates encode polymerases from each subfamily, suggesting that vertebrates require diversification
and specialization of family X polymerase functions. Of the four eukaryotic
family X members, pol λ is the most widely distributed across
the biological kingdoms. Therefore, pol λ may be most similar
to the common ancestor from which eukaryotic family X polymerases
diversified. Consistent with this idea,
the properties of mammalian pol λ overlap with both of its template-dependent
family X siblings, pols β and μ. Thus, like pol β,
pol λ participates in base excision repair (BER), and like pol
μ, it participates in repair of double-strand DNA breaks and
has also been implicated in translesion DNA synthesis (TLS). In this
review, we first consider the biological evidence of the participation
of pol λ in these processes and then explore how our understanding
of the biology has been advanced by structural studies of pol λ
published over the past decade.

Base Excision Repair
Base excision repair is the major pathway for repair of small DNA
base lesions resulting from alkylation, oxidation, depurination/depyrimidination,
and deamination. Two BER subpathways, the short patch and long patch
BER, operate in eukaryotic cells. In contrast to long patch BER, with
the repair tract of two or more nucleotides, short patch repair (Figure A) results in the replacement of a single damaged
nucleotide, and DNA pol β is the primary polymerase involved
in this process. The repair is initiated
via the excision of the damaged base by a lesion-specific DNA glycosylase;
this step is followed by AP-endonuclease cleavage of the sugar–phosphate
backbone 5′ of the AP site and replacement of the missing nucleotide
by the polymerase. Finally, the lyase removes the 5′-deoxyribose
phosphate (5′-dRP) group, allowing the ligase to seal the nick
(Figure A). Pol β contributes two activities
to the repair process, the polymerase catalytic activity and the dRP
lyase activity, and seminal studies showed that the latter is rate-limiting
for single-base BER by pol β. Like
pol β, pol λ has dRP lyase activity and can substitute for pol β in reconstituted BER
reactions in vitro. Furthermore,
it has been shown that pol β(−/−), pol λ(−/−)
double-knockout chicken DT40 cells and mouse embryonic fibroblasts are significantly more sensitive than pol β(−/−)
cells to oxidizing DNA-damaging agents and oxidizing and alkylating
DNA-damaging agents, respectively. These results indicating a function
in backup repair in pol β knockout cells support pol λ’s
role in BER.

DNA polymerase λ participates in BER and NHEJ. (A)
Schematic
representation of the short patch BER pathway. The nucleotide with
the damaged base is colored red. 5′-dRP denotes the 5′-deoxyribose
phosphate group. (B) Schematic representation of the NHEJ pathway.
A damaged 5′-end nucleotide is colored red. Abbreviations:
Ku, KU70–80 heterodimer; DNA-PKcs, catalytic subunit of DNA-dependent
protein kinase; LigIV, ligase IV; PNKP, polynucleotide kinase phosphate;
XLF, XRCC4-like factor; Aptx, aprataxin; Tdps, tyrosine phosphodiesterases.

One of the most common DNA lesions
repaired by BER is 8-oxo-7,8-dihydro-2′-deoxyguanosine
(8-oxodG) induced by reactive oxygen species. Because of its dual
coding potential (it can pair with both C and A), 8-oxodG is highly
mutagenic generating GC to TA transversions. OGG1 glycosylase-dependent
BER is the primary pathway responsible for removal of this lesion.
In addition, the MutYH glycosylase-dependent BER pathway replaces
the misincorporated dATP with dCTP opposite 8-oxodG. The 8-oxodG can
then be removed by the OGG1 glycosylase.

Pol λ relatively
efficiently incorporates both dATP and dCTP
opposite 8-oxodG. However, it has been
shown that in the presence of replication protein A and PCNA, pol
λ has a stronger preference, compared to those of other cellular
polymerases, for incorporation of C rather than A opposite template
8-oxodG. Consistent with this property,
pol λ has been implicated in long patch, MutYH-dependent BER.

Nonhomologous End Joining
Nonhomologous
end joining (NHEJ) is the main pathway in higher
eukaryotes for repair of DNA double-strand breaks (DSBs). Chromosomal
DSBs are the most severe type of DNA damage. They may be caused by
exposure to ionizing radiation or chemicals such as DNA-cleaving chemotherapeutics.
They may also result from indirect causes, including collapsed replication
forks or aborted DNA repair reactions. Programmed chromosomal DSBs
are intermediates in recombination associated with adaptive immune
response [V(D)J and class switch recombination] and meiosis. Damage-unrelated DSBs in neurons have been linked
to physiological brain activity involving learning and memory. Failure to repair a double-strand break may
lead to cell death.

NHEJ is initiated by the alignment of broken,
largely incompatible,
and often damaged DNA ends using limited base pairing (Figure B). This process involves the key end-joining factors,
the Ku70–80 heterodimer, XRCC4, ligase IV, DNA-dependent protein
kinase (DNA-PK), and XLF/Cernunnos.,− Moreover, additional factors such as polynucleotide kinase phosphate
(PNKP), aprataxin (Aptx), and tyrosine phosphodiesterases (Tdps) are
usually required to process damaged DNA ends (reviewed in refs (), (), and () and references cited therein).
Duplexes generated by alignment of the broken DNA ends often contain
small gaps that need to be filled by a DNA polymerase, and family
X members have been implicated in this function. While the role of
TdT in DSB repair is restricted to V(D)J recombination, pol λ
and pol μ function both in V(D)J recombination and in general
NHEJ. V(D)J recombination is a specialized form of end joining that
occurs in cells of the immune system at the antigen receptor gene
loci and is responsible for the diversification of the antigen recognition
site. Pol λ’s role in V(D)J recombination is in heavy
chain gene rearrangement at a step preceding the action of TdT, although lack of pol λ activity does not
impair B-cell development. In contrast, pol μ promotes the accuracy
of light chain gene rearrangement. Its absence results in excessive
deletions at the light chain junctions causing B-cell deficiency. These results indicate that the functions of
pol λ and pol μ in V(D)J recombination clearly do not
overlap.

Pol λ has been shown to participate in NHEJ reactions
in
HeLa cell extracts. In addition, in the
extract-based end joining reaction, pol λ is able to extend
an 8-oxodG-terminated primer. This ability
is consistent with a role in joining of damaged DNA ends. Pol λ
can also perform gap filling synthesis in reconstituted NHEJ reactions in vitro., Furthermore, studies with cultured
cells support pol λ’s involvement in NHEJ but suggest
some redundancy in the function of pol λ and pol μ., These observations are consistent with results showing that pol
μ can utilize substrates similar to those of pol λ during in vitro() NHEJ reactions.

Translesion
Synthesis
Translesion synthesis is a damage tolarance system
in which specialized
polymerases substitute for replicative polymerases in copying across
DNA lesions during replication. It has
been suggested that pol λ is involved in translesion synthesis
of abasic sites, and 8-oxodG lesions, and that
DNA polymerase δ-interacting protein 2 (PolDIP2) stimulates
the 8-oxodG bypass activity of pol λ. Pol λ has also been shown to perform gap filling opposite
thymine glycol and a benzo[a]pyrene-derived DNA adduct.

Biochemical Properties
and Domain Organization of Pol λ
Like its family X
siblings, pol λ is a single-subunit, monomeric
enzyme with limited processivity and no intrinsic 3′ →
5′ exonucleolytic activity to proofread errors.− Its base substitution error rate (Table ) is similar to that of pol β. However, pol λ generates
single-nucleotide deletions at an exceptionally high rate (Table ), higher even than that of the Y family polymerases. Pol λ has a high affinity for dNTPs, which may allow it to conduct synthesis when
the concentration of precursors in the cell is low, e.g., outside
S-phase in cycling cells or in quiescent cells.

Biochemical Properties of Pol λ
Pol λ may fill in two-nucleotide
gaps in the context of BER and upon alignment of broken DNA ends during
NHEJ.

Catalytic efficiency
values taken
from refs () and (), processivity values taken
from ref (), and
fidelity values taken from ref ().

With 575 amino
acids and a molecular mass of 65 kDa, pol λ
is the largest of the four human family X polymerases.,, Its catalytic core (residues
252–575) comprises a C-terminal polymerase domain containing
the fingers, palm (containing the three catalytic aspartates), and
thumb subdomains, and an N-terminal 8 kDa domain (Figure A,B). In addition to the catalytic core, pol λ
has a single N-terminal breast cancer carboxy-terminal (BRCT) domain
separated from the catalytic core by a serine-proline-rich domain
(Ser/Pro) (Figure A,C).

Domain organization of
polymerase λ. (A) Schematic representation
of domains in pol λ. (B) Crystal structure of the ternary complex
of the catalytic domains of polymerase λ with bound one-nucleotide
gapped DNA and an incoming nucleotide (PDB entry 2PFO). The 8 kDa dRP
lyase domain, fingers, palm, and thumb subdomains are colored lime
green, lemon, salmon, and slate, respectively. The DNA templating
strand (T) is colored olive, the primer strand (P) orange, and the
downstream strand (D) violet. The position of the 5′-phosphate
is marked with a red asterisk. A space-filling model of the incoming
nucleotide is colored cyan. (C) Nuclear magnetic resonance solution
structure of the BRCT domain of pol λ. Secondary structural
elements as well as potential protein-interacting residues Arg57 and
Leu60 are labeled. All structural figures were created with PyMol
from Schrödinger (http://www.pymol.org).

The amino acid sequence of Pol λ’s
catalytic core
is 34 and 30% identical with those of pol β and the catalytic
core of pol μ, respectively. Its X-ray crystal structure in
complex with DNA containing a one-nucleotide gap and an incoming nucleoside
triphosphate reveals an overall protein
fold common to pol β, pol μ, and TdT (Figure B), with the same secondary structure elements.
As observed in the structures of pols β and μ,, pol λ also binds both sides of the gap, imposing a 90°
bend in the DNA to expose the primer terminus and the templating nucleotide (Figure B). The polymerase
domain binds the 3′-end of the gap, interacting with the primer-terminal
base pair and the upstream duplex DNA. The 8 kDa domain interacts
with the 5′-end of the gap, with binding facilitated by the
5′-phosphate.

BRCT Domain
The involvement of pol λ in NHEJ of broken DNA ends depends
on its N-terminal BRCT domain, which is required for interactions
with two essential NHEJ complexes, Ku and XRCC4-ligase IV.,,,− The BRCT domain is not critical for polymerase catalytic
activity, as indicated by the ability of a pol λ variant lacking
the BRCT domain to perform gap filling synthesis in vitro. However, consistent with the role of the BRCT domain in mediating
interactions with the end-joining factors, the variant fails to perform
synthesis in the context of NHEJ. The amino acid sequence of the pol
λ BRCT domain is only 23 and 20% identical with those of the
BRCT domains of pol μ and TdT, respectively. Despite this relatively
low level of sequence conservation, the nuclear magnetic resonance
solution structure of the pol λ BRCT domain shows an overall fold and spatial arrangement of secondary
structural elements (five short β-strands that constitute the
core of the domain, flanked by α-helices 1–3) that is
observed in the structures of the BRCT domains of pol μ and
TdT., In the BRCT domains of all three polymerases,
α-helix 1 is pivotal to interactions with the end-joining factors,
with structural variations in the interaction surface observed among
the three. Three conserved residues of
α-helix 1, an N-terminal arginine and two solvent-exposed hydrophobic
residues, are critical for binding of pol μ and TdT to Ku and
XRCC4-ligase IV. Only two of these residues are conserved in pol λ,
the N-terminal Arg57 and Leu60, which replaces a phenylalanine in
pol μ and TdT. Substitutions at either of these two pol λ
residues impair complex formation with the end-joining factors and
activity in NHEJ. These structural differences
between the BRCT domains of pol λ and its siblings suggest functional
differences in the formation of the complex with the NHEJ partners.

Serine-Proline-Rich
Region
The serine-proline-rich region is present only in
pol λ and
its Saccharomyces cerevisiae homologue, pol IV. This
region was originally suggested to be a target for post-translational
modification. More recent studies have
shown that several serine residues in this region are indeed modified
by phosphorylation, thereby protecting pol λ from ubiquitin-dependent
degradation and modulating its activity in the MutYH glycosylase-dependent
BER pathway. This region has also been
suggested to play a role in modulating the fidelity of pol λ.

The 8 kDa Domain
The 8 kDa domain
(Figure A,B) is a characteristic
feature of most X family polymerases. In a manner similar to what
was originally reported for pol β, the 8 kDa domain of pol λ binds to the 5′-end of a
DNA gap, allowing the enzyme to bridge both ends of the gap. The phosphate
moiety is bound in a positively charged pocket formed by pol λ
residues Arg275, Arg308, and Lys312. The binding of the 5′-phosphate
stimulates the gap filling activity of pol λ and increases its
processivity. A helix–hairpin–helix motif (HhH) in the
8 kDa domain also contributes to DNA binding through interactions
with the DNA backbone on the downstream side of the gapped substrate.
It spans α-helices C and D (Figure B)
and contains a characteristic hairpin loop sequence GϕG (ϕ
represents a hydrophobic residue) that is conserved in HhH motifs
of other DNA binding proteins. The 8 kDa domain also harbors one of
the two catalytic activities of pol λ’s catalytic core,
the dRP lyase. As with pol β, the lyase activity of pol λ
is proposed to proceed through a β-elimination mechanism with
formation of a Schiff base intermediate. The main catalytic nucleophile is Lys312, located in the pocket that binds the 5′-phosphate end of
the DNA gap.

Pol λ also has a short sequence preceding
the 8 kDa domain
termed the “brooch”. In
human pol λ, the brooch contains residues Trp239–Gln243
and is conserved in other members of the pol λ subfamily. Similar
sequences are also present in pol μ and TdT, but not in pol
β. The residues of the brooch mediate interactions between the
8 kDa domain and the thumb subdomain, leading to the suggestion that
the function of the brooch is to facilitate enzyme–substrate
interactions during synthesis to fill gaps longer than one nucleotide.

Catalytic Mechanism for Correct Incorporation
Although DNA polymerases from different families have distinctive
subunit compositions, biochemical properties, and biological functions,
they all catalyze the same basic nucleotidyl transfer reaction. This involves incorporating of a nucleoside
monophosphate onto a 3′-end of a DNA primer and releasing a
pyrophosphate, in a reaction requiring activation by (at least) two
divalent metal ions. Studies of polymerases from different families
show that assembly of the active site for polymerization involves
multiple conformational changes triggered by binding of the incoming
dNTP. Some of these conformational changes are believed to function
as kinetic checkpoints to discriminate against incorporation of incorrect
nucleotides. In many polymerases, including
members of families A and B as well as pol β, dNTP binding induces
large subdomain motions, wherein the fingers and thumb subdomains
relocate relative to each other, leading to a catalytically competent,
“closed” conformation.,, Interestingly, pol λ does not undergo this
large “open to closed” transition. Rather, a comparison of the X-ray crystal structures of
pol λ pre- and postcatalytic complexes (Figure ) indicates that the polymerase remains closed throughout
the catalytic cycle. Nonetheless, binding of the incoming dNTP does
induce a shift of the template strand to bring the templating nucleotide
into the active site. Concurrently, loop1 between β-strands
3 and 4 in the palm subdomain relocates to allow the template strand
to assume its active conformation (Figure A,B). In addition, several amino acid side chains reposition to form
the nascent base pair binding pocket and establish interactions with
the DNA minor groove (Figure A) that are important
for base selectivity and catalysis. For example, in the minor groove
of duplex DNA, the positions of the O2 atoms of pyrimidines and the
N3 atoms of purines (both hydrogen bond acceptors) are almost identical
for all four correct Watson–Crick base pairs, but not for mispairs.
DNA polymerases are thought to check for correct base pair geometry
using side chain interactions that probe the position of the minor
groove hydrogen bond acceptors (reviewed in ref (), and see references cited
therein). In pol λ, this role appears to be played by Tyr505
and Arg517, which together with Phe506 are repositioned in the minor
groove of DNA upon binding of a correct dNTP. Once in their active
conformation, the side chains of Tyr505 and Arg517 interact with the
minor groove of the primer-terminal base and its template counterpart,
respectively. Arg517 may also interact with the minor groove atoms
of the templating base, while yet another residue, Asn513, interacts
with O2 or N3 of the incoming nucleotide. Assembly of the active site
also involves relocation of Arg514 to a position that stabilizes the
templating nucleotide through stacking interactions with the base.
Compared to minor groove interactions of polymerases in families A
and B extending several base pairs upstream of the primer terminus,
existing structures suggest that pol λ requires correct Watson–Crick
geometry only for the two base pairs directly involved in catalysis,
i.e., the primer-terminal base pair and the newly forming base pair.

Conformational
changes during catalysis. (A) Superimposition of
the binary structure of pol λ (salmon) with a one-nucleotide
gap DNA substrate (pink) onto that of the precatalytic ternary complex
(royal blue) with a one-nucleotide gap DNA substrate (light blue)
and an incoming nonhydrolyzable nucleotide, dUMPNPP, 2′-deoxyuridine
5′-[(α,β)-imido]triphosphate (cyan) (PDB entries 1XSL and 2PFO, respectively).
(B) Different orientation of the structures from panel A (blue for
ternary complex and red for binary) showing loop 1 and DNA template
movement upon binding the nucleotide. (C) Superimposition of the active
sites of the postcatalytic complex (DNA colored yellow) on that of
the ternary, precatalytic complex (colored as in panels A and B) (PDB
entries 1XSP and 2PFO,
respectively). The catalytic metals are colored purple for metal A
and green for metal B, with the metal coordination displayed as solid
black lines. The phosphate of the incoming nucleotide that undergoes
a stereochemical inversion upon attack by the 3′-OH of the
primer is circled. (D) Global view of the structures in panel C with
the protein from the postcatalytic complex colored wheat. Loop 1 is
marked with a red asterisk. (E) Schematic of the DNA present in the
crystal structures of the binary, ternary, and postcatalytic nick
complexes.

Structures of pol λ pre-
and postcatalytic complexes (Figure A–E)
combined with quantum mechanics/molecular
mechanics simulations,, strongly support the two-metal-ion-catalyzed phosphoryl transfer
mechanism requiring two divalent metal
ions. While Mg2+ is likely to be the metal ion most often
used by polymerases in vivo, it is well-known that
Mn2+ can substitute for Mg2+in vitro, and it has been proposed that some DNA polymerases, including pol
λ, may use Mn2+ as the preferred activating metal
ion in vivo. The involvement
of a third metal ion in the catalytic reaction was recently reported
for pol η and pol β, (for related information
on these two polymerases, please refer to refs () and ()). The possible involvement
of a third metal in catalysis by pol λ has yet to be investigated.
In the structure of the pol λ precatalytic complex with a one-nucleotide
gap DNA and a correct nonhydrolyzble nucleotide, all atoms required
for catalysis are present at the active site (Figure C). The two catalytic metals (A and B) coordinate with the
three active site aspartate residues (Asp490, Asp427, and Asp429),
O3′ of the primer, and the incoming nucleoside triphosphate.
The nonbridging oxygens of the triphosphate moiety of the incoming
dNTP coordinate metal B. Coordination of metal A results in a conformational
change in the primer-terminal ribose and is believed to facilitate
the transfer of the proton from the nucleophilic O3′ to the
proposed proton acceptor, Asp490. In
the structure of the postcatalytic complex containing the newly incorporated
nucleotide bound at the active site, the conformation of the enzyme
and the DNA is nearly identical to that of the precatalytic complex
(Figure D). The only apparent changes in the
postcatalytic complex are the stereochemical inversion of the α-phosphate
group and the breakage and formation of a new phosphorus–oxygen
bond (Figure C). These structures suggest
a catalytic path that is in agreement with the reaction mechanism
originally proposed for pol β. This
reaction involves an in-line attack of the deprotonated O3′
on the α-phosphate of the incoming dNTP, leading to a trigonal-bipyramidal
pentacoordinated transition state and resulting in the inversion of
the stereochemistry of the α-phosphate. Release of the pyrophosphate
is the final step in single-nucleotide gap filling synthesis.

Template
Scrunching Facilitates Filling Gaps Longer Than One
Nucleotide
NHEJ or long patch BER involves filling gaps longer
than one nucleotide.
Biochemical data suggest that when filling a gap of up to five nucleotides,
pol λ simultaneously interacts with both ends of the gap. As
discussed below, such a mode of interaction requires that the polymerase
is able to accommodate the as-yet uncopied template nucleotides while
engaging both ends of the gap in a catalytically competent manner.

When pol λ binds to a one-nucleotide gap-containing DNA,
despite the absence of an incoming dNTP, the 3′-end of the
gap is located adjacent to the nucleotide binding site, while the
5′-end is bound by the 8 kDa domain in a manner similar to
that depicted in Figure B. Except for some
adjustments in the conformation of the ribose and the positioning
of the 3′-OH, the general location of the 3′-terminal
nucleotide and the position of the primer strand do not change upon
binding of the incoming dNTP (Figure A). This
is not the case when the gap is longer. In the structure of the pol
λ binary complex with a two-nucleotide gap DNA, the 8 kDa domain
binds the 5′-end of the gap, as in the complex with the one-nucleotide
gap. However, the 3′-primer-terminal nucleotide is not productively
engaged and is shifted upstream from the position adjacent to the
dNTP binding site (Figure A). This structure suggests that DNA binding by pol λ
is directed predominantly by the 8 kDa domain, which anchors the polymerase
at the 5′-end regardless of the conformation of the 3′-end.
When the incoming dNTP binds, the 3′-primer-terminal nucleotide
as well as amino acid residues that form the active site and the nascent
base pair binding pocket assume an identical position as observed
in the structure of the ternary complex with a one-nucleotide gap.
The incoming dNTP is bound opposite the 3′-template nucleotide
of the gap, which is located at the active site (Figure B). Though the gap is one nucleotide longer, the distance
between the 3′-end of the gap and the 5′-end bound by
the 8 kDa domain is the same as in the one-nucleotide gap structure.
This is possible because the template strand is scrunched, such that
the 5′-template nucleotide of the gap is in an extrahelical
conformation. The extrahelical nucleotide
is bound in a pocket created by three amino acid residues, Leu277,
His511, and Arg514, with minimal distortion of the DNA geometry (Figure B,C). The three residues that form the scrunching
pocket are conserved in pol λ orthologs but not in other pol
X polymerases from vertebrate cells. This suggests that relative to
other family X members, pol λ has a unique way of binding a
gap longer than one nucleotide, a property that may be relevant to
its role in DNA repair in vivo.

Filling of a two-nucleotide
gap. (A) Superimposition of a binary
structure of pol λ (pink) bound to a two-nucleotide gap substrate
(yellow) superimposed with the ternary one-nucleotide gap complex
(colored as in Figure ) (PDB entries 1RZT and 2PFO, respectively).
(B) Superimposition of the two-nucleotide gap precatalytic ternary
complex (DNA colored brown, scrunch pocket residues colored yellow,
and the incoming nucleotide colored brown) with the one-nucleotide
gap precatalytic ternary complex colored as in panel A. The red asterisk
denotes the 5′-phosphate on the downstream DNA strand (PDB
entries 3HWT and 2PFO,
respectively). (C) Schematic of DNA present in the binary and ternary
two-nucleotide gap complexes.

Molecular dynamics simulations of pol λ ternary complexes
indicate that even when the gap is longer (containing three or four
nucleotides) the template strand assumes a scrunched conformation
in which the nucleotide immediately 5′ to the templating nucleotide
is preferentially bound in the pocket. Furthermore, the polymerase can accommodate the additional 5′-uncopied
template nucleotides while maintaining the same conformation as observed
in the structure. These models are consistent with biochemical data
suggesting that, when filling a gap of up to five nucleotides, pol
λ engages both ends of the gap.

The X-ray crystal structure of a ternary complex of a pol
λ
mutant with alanine substitutions at all three residues of the binding
pocket suggests that the binding of the extrahelical nucleotide in
the pocket stabilizes the scrunched conformation. Failure to stabilize the scrunched conformation, as in
the case of the triple mutant, decreases the processivity of gap filling
synthesis by causing the enzyme to dissociate from the DNA more readily
and/or to translocate less efficiently. It also reduces the efficiency
of end joining in NHEJ reactions that require filling of a two-nucleotide
gap, indicating that the ability to bind
the uncopied template nucleotide in the scrunching pocket is important
in repair-related synthesis.

Catalysis Using Misaligned Substrates
All DNA polymerases occasionally introduce errors during DNA synthesis,
usually generating base substitutions at a rate higher than the rate
of insertion–deletion (indels) errors. Pol λ is unusual because its exceptionally high rate of single-nucleotide
deletions exceeds its rate of base substitutions. Typically, DNA polymerases introduce indels more frequently
in repetitive sequences than at noniterated nucleotides., In addition, on the basis of results for polymerases from different
families, including pol β, the rate of single-nucleotide deletions
increases as a function of the polymeric run length. These results are in agreement with the explanation proposed
by Streisinger for insertions and deletions caused by DNA strand slippage
during DNA synthesis. Slippage in repetitive
sequence allows the formation of a misaligned template-primer in which
the unpaired base within the duplex DNA upstream of the active site
may be stabilized by one or more correct base pairs., Furthermore, the longer the repeated sequence, the larger the number
of correct base pairs between the unpaired nucleotide and the primer
terminus. This, in turn, results in increased stability of the misaligned
substrate, allowing for more efficient extension by the polymerase.

Similar to other polymerases, pol λ generates single-nucleotide
deletions more frequently in short homopolymeric repeats than in noniterated
sequences. However, unlike the case with other polymerases, the rate
of these deletions does not increase further when the length of the
nucleotide repeats increases from two to three (or more). This specificity,
together with its relatively high noniterated nucleotide deletion
rate, suggests that pol λ can efficiently utilize a misaligned
primer-template stabilized by as few as one correct base pair. This
ability is likely related to pol λ’s minimal interactions
with the template strand, as well as the DNA minor groove. The latter
interactions, used by the polymerase to probe for correct Watson–Crick
base pair geometry, are limited in pol λ to the primer terminus
and the newly formed base pairs. Consistent with this observation
are structures of pre- and postcatalytic complexes of pol λ
with a gapped DNA substrate containing an extra, unpaired template
nucleotide upstream of the primer-terminal base pair, mimicking a
misaligned single-nucleotide deletion intermediate (Figure A,B). Superposition
of the precatalytic misalignment-containing complex structure with
that of an equivalent complex with a correctly aligned one-nucleotide
gap DNA indicates that the only apparent difference between the two
is the presence of the extra nucleotide and a slight repositioning
of the phosphate 5′ to the extra base in the former (Figure A). The unpaired nucleotide is positioned immediately
upstream from the primer-terminal base pair in an extrahelical conformation
(Figure A,B). It is stabilized by interactions
with a loop in the thumb subdomain (residues 540–548), specifically
by interaction of Lys544 with the 5′-neighboring phosphate.
A similar type of interaction, between a lysine residue and the 5′-phosphate
next to the extrahelical base, has been described for base-flipping
enzymes., The fact that among family X enzymes the
loop in the thumb is conserved only in pol λ may be in part
responsible for its unique mutational specificity.

Creating a single-nucleotide
deletion. (A) Crystal structure of
a precatalytic ternary complex of pol λ (protein colored violet
and DNA and incoming nucleotide colored light green) representing
creation of a single-nucleotide deletion, superimposed with the DNA
and incoming nucleotide (light blue and cyan, respectively) from the
ternary complex of a one-nucleotide gap structure (PDB entries 2BCV and 2PFO, respectively).
The extrahelical nucleotide on the template strand is marked with
a red asterisk. (B) Schematic of the single-nucleotide deletion intermediate
in the structure.

The good agreement between
the two structures indicates that pol
λ bound to the misaligned substrate is trapped in a conformation
consistent with catalysis. Consequently, similar to the pre- and postcatalytic
complexes with the correctly aligned substrates, the only major differences
between the pre- and postcatalytic complexes with the misalignment
are the making and breaking of the phosphorus–oxygen bond and
the inversion of the stereochemistry of the α-phosphate. These
structures, corresponding to steps in the path to a single-nucleotide
deletion, provide mechanistic insights into the basis of the mutational
specificity of pol λ. They also indicate that pol λ can
tolerate distortion of the DNA substrate immediately upstream of the
active site.

Thus, the deletion signature of pol λ and
the structures
of complexes with single-nucleotide deletion intermediates, showing
that pol λ can tolerate distortion of the primer-template immediately
upstream of the active site, reveal properties of the enzyme that
are ideal for a role in NHEJ of DNA ends containing damaged or mismatched
nucleotides.

Catalytic Mechanism for Misincorporation
DNA polymerases are believed to use the prechemistry conformational
changes as fidelity checkpoints, for exclusion of incorrect nucleotides., Despite the fact that pol λ remains in a closed conformation
throughout the catalytic cycle and does not undergo extensive conformational
changes upon dNTP binding, it discriminates against incorrect nucleotides
relatively efficiently. Its base substitution error rate is only 4-fold
higher than that of pol β. This
is a relatively modest difference compared to its 30-fold higher single-nucleotide
deletion rate. The base selectivity of pol λ is modulated by
loop 1, located upstream of the active site in the palm subdomain.
This loop is absent in pol β, but a longer loop 1 is present
in pol μ and TdT and has been implicated in DNA substrate selectivity. Loop 1 of pol λ relocates in response
to dNTP binding to allow the templating nucleotide to enter the active
site (Figure B). Alteration of loop 1 in pol
λ via removal of five residues and replacement of four residues
with the corresponding sequence from pol β does not reduce the
catalytic activity or alter the geometry of the active site for correct
incorporation. However, consistent with the elimination of one or
more kinetic checkpoints that prevent misincorporation, the base substitution
error rate of the loop deletion mutant increases for all 12 mispairs
and its sugar selectivity decreases., These data
support the idea that elimination of this fidelity checkpoint, by
deletion of loop 1, lowers the energy barrier for establishing active
site geometry consistent with catalysis.

Because of its properties,
the loop 1 deletion variant proved to
be a good model for structural studies of nucleotide misincorporation.
The structure of the loop 1 variant in a ternary, precatalytic complex
(Figure A,C) with an incoming nonhydrolyzable
dGTP homologue opposite a template T demonstrates that the nascent
dGTP·T mismatch at the polymerase active site maintains Watson–Crick
geometry (Figure A). This result supports Watson and Crick’s suggestion, 60 years
ago, that spontaneous base substitutions could originate from mispairs
having correct base pair geometry. The
original hypothesis implicated the involvement of bases in rare tautomeric
forms, whereas subsequent studies suggested that ionized bases also
could form mispairs with correct Watson–Crick geometry. It remains to be determined which of the two
forms, rare tautomers or ionized bases, contribute to the dGTP·T
mispair at the active site in the pol λ structure. Nevertheless, consistent with the correct Watson–Crick
geometry of the mispair, there is no distortion at the active site.
All atoms needed for catalysis are present, and their positions overlay
well with those in the structure of a precatalytic complex with a
correct base pair (Figure A). This suggests that the catalytic mechanism for insertion
of an incorrect nucleotide can be the same as for the correct one.
A C·A mispair with a correct Watson–Crick geometry was
observed in the structure of a precatalytic complex of Bacillus
stearothermophilus polymerase I large fragment (BF). This C·A mispair is reported to form with
rare tautomers and not ionized bases.

Mispairing in the active site of polymerase
λ. (A) Ternary
complex structure of an incoming dGMPCPP 2′-deoxyguanosine-5′-[(α,β)-methyleno]triphosphate
analogue opposite a templating dT (green) superimposed with a ternary
complex with the correct incoming dNTP shown in transparent gray (PDB
entries 3PMN and 2PFO,
respectively). Potential hydrogen bonds are displayed with black dashed
lines. (B) Ternary complex structure of a G·T mispair at the
primer terminus with an incoming dGMPCPP (green) superimposed with
a ternary complex with correctly paired DNA shown in transparent gray
(PDB entries 3PNC and 2PFO,
respectively). (C) Schematic of the DNA with a G·T mispair at
the nascent base pair binding site (left) and at the end of the primer
terminus (right).

The following step on
the path to a stable misincorporation is
the extension of the mispaired primer terminus. The second mismatch-containing
structure of the pol λ variant precatalytic complex indicates
that upon misincorporation the now primer-terminal G·T mispair
assumes a wobble conformation wherein the template T is shifted toward
the major groove (Figure B,C). This distortion,
however, does not affect the conformation of the nascent base pair
or the catalytically competent geometry at the active site. These
two structures visualize how a G·T mispair can be stably incorporated
by pol λ and suggest why errors resulting from misincorporation
of dGTP opposite T are the most frequent base substitutions generated
by this polymerase.

Catalytic Mechanism
for Ribonucleotide Incorporation
rNTPs appear to be the most
common noncanonical nucleotides incorporated
into the genome. Recent studies indicate that large numbers of rNTPs
are incorporated by high-fidelity polymerases during DNA replication., It is believed that the probability of incidental rNTP incorporation
is increased because of the higher cellular levels (10–200-fold)
of rNTPs relative to dNTPs.

Discrimination
against rNTPs by family X members varies by several
orders of magnitude depending on the enzyme, with TdT and pol μ
discriminating much less efficiently− than pols λ and
β., In fact it was suggested that TdT and pol
μ may use rNTPs as legitimate substrates during repair of DSBs
by NHEJ in nonproliferating cells when the levels of rNTPs are high
relative to the levels of dNTPs.−, The relatively high sugar selectivity of pols λ and β
is nevertheless lower than that of most replicative polymerases from
families A and B. Therefore, pol λ and β could also occasionally
incorporate rNTPs during repair synthesis. The structural characterization
of the catalytic cycle for ribonucleotide incorporation by the pol
λ loop deletion variant provides insights into the distinct
steps on the path for stable ribonucleotide incorporation. In the precatalytic ternary complex structure,
the incoming nonhydrolyzable analogue of an rNTP occupies a position identical to that of an incoming dNTP
in a corresponding precatalytic complex (Figure A,D). It is accommodated in the nucleotide-binding pocket without
any distortion of the primer-terminal base pair or the active site.
This is despite an unfavorable, short-range interaction (2.4 Å)
between the 2′-OH on the ribose and the backbone carbonyl of
Tyr505, which indicates an energetically unstable binding state for
the rNTP. Consistent with this result, a study of sugar selection
by pol λ suggested that the 2′-OH of the ribose is excluded
mainly because of a steric clash with the segment of the backbone
between Y505 and G508. A similar unfavorable
interaction with an incoming rNTP and a homologous tyrosine residue
(Tyr271) has been described for pol β. This is in contrast to polymerases from other families, which depend
on bulky side chains for steric exclusion of the incorrect sugar. The unfavorable binding state for the incoming
rNTP appears to be stabilized by interactions of arginine side chains
(Arg386 and Arg420) with the β- and γ-phosphates. Thus,
the correct geometry at the active site is maintained, allowing for
catalysis to occur upon substitution of the nonhydrolyzable nucleotide
by a normal rNTP. However, unlike insertion of a dNTP, the breakage
and formation of the new phosphorus–oxygen bond during incorporation
of a ribonucleotide results in severe distortion of the postcatalytic
product complex (Figure B,D). The 2′-OH
on the sugar of the newly inserted dNMP is displaced from its precatalytic
position and occupies the precatalytic position of the 3′-OH,
causing the phosphate of the newly inserted nucleotide and the sugar
of the preceding nucleotide to shift into the minor groove. Despite
the distortion of the sugar–phosphate backbone, the base of
the newly incorporated rNMP remains in its precatalytic position,
forming the expected hydrogen bonds with its corresponding template
nucleotide. Concurrently with the distortion of the primer strand,
side chains Tyr505 and Phe506 revert to their inactive conformation.
The distortion of the postcatalytic complex is consistent with the
unstable binding state for the incoming rNTP in the precatalytic complex
and suggests that once the bond between the α- and β-phosphate
is broken, the energetically unstable binding state cannot be maintained.

Ribonucleotide
incorporation by pol λ. (A) Precatalytic ternary
complex with an incoming nonhydrolyzable ribonucleotide, rAMPNPP,
adenosine 5′-[(α,β)-imido]triphosphate (magenta),
superimposed with the ternary complex with an incoming deoxyribonucleotide
(transparent gray) (PDB entries 3UPQ and 2PFO, respectively). The hydrogen bond between
the 2′-OH and the carbonyl of Y505 is displayed as a dashed
line. (B) Superimposition of the ternary complex with an incoming
ribonucleotide (transparent magenta) with the postcatalytic complex
with the newly incorporated rNMP (lemon) (PDB entries 3UPQ and 3UQ0, respectively).
(C) Superimposition of precatalytic (green) and postcatalytic (peach)
complexes with a ribonucleotide at the primer terminus. Also superimposed
is the structure of the precatalytic ternary complex with the incoming
deoxyribonucleotide (transparent gray) (PDB entries 4FO6, 3UQ2, and 2PFO, respectively).
(D) Schematic of DNA in the pre- and postcatalytic structures with
a ribonucleotide at the incoming position.

It is not clear if and how this distortion affects translocation.
However, upon translocation, when the rNMP is at the primer terminus,
there is no distortion of the DNA or the protein (Figure C) and the primer-terminal rNMP does not hinder
extension. This suggests that pol λ
could easily extend a ribonucleotide-terminated primer.

Concluding Remarks
The four mammalian family X members share common traits, but like
pol λ, each has its own distinct features, including specific
structural elements that define their functional properties. Although
the exact cellular roles, including substrate specificities and specific
protein partnerships, of family X members remain to be elucidated,
their individual features and differences in behavior provide some
clues about their in vivo functions. Future structural
studies of pol λ and its siblings with substrates specific to
each of their unique activities together with studies in cell-based
systems and animal models should dramatically enhance our understanding
of how these enzymes carry out their specific roles in DNA repair.

The authors declare no
competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
We thank Bill Beard and Andrea Moon for
critical reading of
the manuscript as well as the Ramsden and Blanco laboratories for
helpful discussions and collaboration.

Abbreviations
polpolymerase

DSBsdouble-strand breaks

BERbase excision repair

NHEJnonhomologous
end joining

TdTterminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase

dRP lyasedeoxyribose phosphate lyase

8-oxodG8-oxo-7,8-dihydro-2′-deoxyguanosine

BRCTbreast cancer
susceptibility gene 1 C-terminal

TLStranslesion synthesis

dNTPdeoxyribonucleoside triphosphate

rNTPribonucleoside triphosphate

PDBProtein Data Bank.

