Recent advances
in the use of
atomic force microscopy (AFM) to record nanomechanical
properties of live cells in liquid media make it possible to map quantitatively
heterogeneous differences in cellular topography, elasticity, and
viscosity at high resolution. For example,
local property maps of rat fibroblasts using multiharmonic AFM are
sufficiently detailed for visualization of components and
properties of the actin cytoskeleton. Unlike
conventional quasi-static techniques in which the bending of the cantilever
probe is monitored as a function of indentation into the cell at each
pixel, multiharmonic AFM is a dynamic AFM method in which the cantilever
probe is excited
by Lorentz forces and changes in amplitude, the phase of the oscillator,
and other relevant harmonics are converted into quantitative local
property maps. This mode works in the
amplitude modulation (AM-AFM) scheme in which the oscillation amplitude
is regulated as the probe scans over the cell. Changes in the physical
properties of cells caused by rearrangements in cytoskeletal networks
underlie the ability of cancer cells to progress from a static phenotype
to a metastatic phenotype. This process
is, in turn, controlled by signaling cascades regulated through multiple
effectors,, including the protein-tyrosine kinase Syk,, but the mechanisms involved are poorly understood. In this study,
we examined the utility of multiharmonic AFM for the characterization
of Syk-dependent changes in the physical
properties of cancer cells as a method of both quantifying physical
differences in cells expressing or lacking the kinase and identifying
the underlying mechanisms.

Syk is a 72 kDa protein-tyrosine
kinase and well-characterized
component of the apparatus required for transducing signals initiated
by the activation of immune recognition receptors in the innate and
adaptive immune systems., While a critical role
for Syk in immune cell function is clear, a less familiar role in
the progression of cancer cells of nonhematopoietic origins has become
evident. Syk has been described both as a tumor promoter on the basis
of its pro-survival functions in Ras-transformed pancreatic and lung
cancer cells and retinoblastoma and as a tumor suppressor on the basis of its
loss from many highly invasive tumor cells.− For example, while Syk is present in relatively nonaggressive breast
cancer cells and cell lines, it is absent from cancer cells with a
highly invasive, metastatic phenotype. Reintroduction of the kinase into malignant breast carcinomas inhibits
their motility,
invasion, and metastasis., Similarly, the loss
of Syk from relatively noninvasive breast epithelial cells decreases
the number of cell–cell junctions, enhances cell motility and
invasion, and promotes the
conversion of cells from an epithelial phenotype to a mesenchymal
phenotype., Changes in the mechanical properties of
tumor cells that accompany an epithelial to mesenchymal transition
(EMT) require rearrangements in their cytoskeletal networks, involving
both microtubules and microfilaments.,, In general, cells move through an extension of lamellipodia
at the front of the cell driven primarily by actin polymerization and retraction of the trailing edge driven by
dynamic microtubules that target focal adhesions to trigger their
disassembly. Thus, dynamic rearrangements
in both structural networks are required for malignant cells to move
and metastasize. Consequently, critical components of malignant transformation
and metastasis include changes in a cell’s mechanical phenotype,
including elasticity, viscosity, adhesion, and force generation.,

To begin to explore Syk-dependent changes in the mechanical
properties
of tumor cells, we examined cells expressing or lacking the kinase
using AFM to map the topography and mechanical properties of live
cells. Interestingly, we found that the expression of Syk in highly
invasive breast carcinoma cells dramatically reduced cell height,
increased elasticity, increased viscosity, and allowed visualization
of a more substantial microtubule network. Consistent with these observations,
the microtubules of Syk-expressing cells were more stable to nocodazole-induced
depolymerization and were more highly acetylated than those of Syk-deficient
cells. This effect of Syk on microtubule stability, which required
protein phosphorylation, was modulated, in part, through the microtubule-associated
protein, MAP1B, a major substrate for Syk in MDA-MB-231 tumor cells. Consequently, down modulation of MAP1B levels
in cells attenuated the Syk-dependent increase in microtubule stability
and reversed much of the effect of Syk expression on the nanomechanical
properties of invasive cancer cells.

Experimental Procedures
Cells
MDA-MB-231 and BT549 breast cancer cells were
purchased from ATCC. A line of MDA-MB-231 cells expressing Syk-EGFP
upon incubation with tetracycline was constructed using the T-REx
system (Invitrogen) as described previously. Cells were cultured in Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s
medium (DMEM) containing 10% FBS, 100 units/mL penicillin, and 100
μg/mL
streptomycin. The expression of Syk-EGFP was induced where indicated
by the addition of 1 μg/mL doxycycline for 24 h.

Immunofluorescence
Microscopy
Cells cultured on coverslips
were fixed with cold methanol for 10 min, blocked in PBS containing
10% goat serum and 0.01% Triton X-100, and then stained with antibodies
against α-tubulin (T5168, Sigma), acetylated tubulin (T6793,
Sigma), MAP1B (4528, Sigma), or c-Src (ab47405, Abcam). Bound primary
antibodies were detected using an AlexaFluor 594-conjugated goat anti-mouse
IgG secondary antibody (Invitrogen). Coverslips were mounted with
ProLong Gold Antifade reagent (Invitrogen) for fluorescence microscopy.
Slides were examined by an Olympus BH2-RFCA fluorescence microscope
with a 60× objective equipped with a Sony DXC-950 3CCD color
camera and Northern Eclipse version 5.0 from Empix Imaging (Mississauga,
ON).

Microtubule Stability Assay
MDA-MB-231 or BT549 cells
either expressing or lacking Syk-EGFP or transfected to overexpress
c-Src were cultured on coverslips and treated with 10 μM nocodazole
suspended in DMEM for 30 min. Cells were fixed and stained for α-tubulin.
Microtubule stability was assessed by measuring from microscopic images
the length of the residual microtubule network extending from the
nucleus to the farthest exterior edge of the cell. More than 100 cells
of each type were measured for each treatment.

Western Blotting
Cells were lysed in buffer containing
50 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.4), 150 mM NaCl, 1% NP-40, 0.25% sodium deoxycholate,
1 mM EGTA, 10% glycerol, and protease inhibitor cocktail (65621, AbCam).
The lysates were centrifuged at 14000g for 1 min.
Proteins in the supernatant were separated by sodium dodecyl sulfate–polyacrylamide
gel electrophoresis (SDS–PAGE) and analyzed by immunoblotting
with antibodies against Syk (N19, Santa Cruz), acetylated tubulin
(T6793, Sigma), acetylated lysine (9441, Cell Signaling Technologies),
or MAP1B (N-19, Santa Cruz).

Transfection and shRNA Experiments
A stable line of
Tet-inducible MDA-MB-231 cells with reduced levels of MAP1B was generated
starting with a set of five TRC small hairpin RNAs (shRNA) individually
packaged into lentiviral particles (Thermo Scientific). Cells were
plated in 10 cm plates at approximately 70% confluence and infected
with each shRNA-expressing lentivirus according to the manufacturer’s
protocol. Cells containing integrated lentiviral sequences were selected
using puromycin (1 μg/mL). Medium containing puromycin was replaced
every 2 days until resistant colonies were observed. Knockdown of
MAP1B
was confirmed by immunofluorescence and Western blotting using antibodies
against MAP1B. MDA-MB-231 cells were transiently transfected with
expression plasmids encoding Syk-EGFP or c-Src (Addgene plasmid 13663)
using lipofectamine 2000.

Atomic Force Microscopy Experiments
A MFP3D-Bio (Asylum
Research) atomic force microscope mounted on an Olympus IX71 inverted
optical microscope inside an acoustically isolated enclosure was used.
Standard soft biolevers (BL-TR400PB, Olympus) with a nominal spring
constant of 0.09 N/m, nominal tip half-angle of 35°, and nominal
radius of 42 ± 12 nm were used for imaging and measurements.
For cantilever calibration, an atomically flat and stiff mica substrate
with culture medium was used to determine a force–distance
curve to calculate the photodetector sensitivity value. The spring
constant was obtained by using the thermal noise method. The typical estimated values for the effective
cantilever spring constant were in the range of 0.06–0.1 N/m
and Q factors in the range of 1.6–2. Prior
to AFM experiments, cancer cells were plated on gelatin-coated
fluorodish cell culture dishes (WPI, FL) and grown with culture medium
for a period of 1–2 days in an incubator at 37 °C and
5% CO2. Where
indicated, the expression of Syk-EGFP was induced. Cancer cells were
then transferred and mounted on the AFM XY scanner for the experimental
procedure. Two different AFM modes were used in this study. For quantitative
high-spatial resolution images of cancer cells, an adaptation of AM-AFM
known as multiharmonic AFM was used.,, The iDrive (Asylum Research) AC mode was used for
these experiments,
which uses Lorentz force excitation to directly oscillate the AFM
probe near the resonance frequency of its first frequency flexural
mode (typically 7–8.5 kHz). We used the multiharmonic AFM theory
as described previously to
calculate the local nanomechanical properties, specifically the stiffness
and damping of a local Kelvin–Voigt element. The multiharmonic
AFM experiments were performed under near-physiological conditions
in PBS at 37 °C. To measure the Young’s modulus of cancer
cells, the force–volume (F–V) mode was used, yielding 32 pixel ×
32 pixel images with an approximate time of 35 min per
image. The relative trigger used for
these experiments was to adjust the cantilever loading force to 1.5
nN to minimize the damage to the cells. The Sneddon’s contact
mechanics model, which is a modification of the standard Hertz contact
mechanics model for conical tips, was used to fit all of the recorded
force–distance
(F–Z) curves., The Sneddon model for a cone-shaped AFM tip used in this studywhere Fts is the tip–sample
interaction force (newtons), E elastic Young’s
modulus (pascals), vs Poisson’s
ratio of 0.5 for soft samples, θ the half-space cone angle of
the cantilever, and δ the sample mean indentation. The main assumptions in this model are that
(a) the tip can be modeled as a rigid conical indenter, (b) the cell
can be modeled as an elastic half-space with a well-defined boundary,
and (c) the tip indentation is much smaller than the cell thickness.
The first assumption is widely made even when pyramidal tips are used,
as in this case; however, it is known that this assumption leads to
small errors in the estimation of Young’s modulus. The second assumption has been called into question
because AFM elasticity measurements on cells are affected by artifacts
from the brushlike structure and the large stiffness of the underneath
substrate. This effect is particularly
strong for AFM probes with microspheres attached at the end. Thus, in this work, we used a sharp tip that
significantly reduces the number of interactions with the brushlike
layer, allowing the direct use of Sneddon’s contact mechanics
model. The third assumption is usually violated when the tip indentation
exceeds 10–20% of the cell thickness. In this case,
a multiplicative correction of Sneddon’s model has been proposed
by Gavara and Chadwick, named BECC, which
corrects for the bottom effect for conical AFM tips. For a cell thickness
of ∼4 μm as used in this work, an indentation of more
than 400–800 nm would be needed to violate the assumptions
of the standard Sneddon
model. However, all the measurements made here have been for indentations
of less
than 400 nm. This, together with the fact that the coefficients of
determination (R2) of the fits of the
Sneddon model to the data are very high, gives us confidence that
the model is appropriate to use to quantify these measurements. All
AFM force–volume experiments were performed in culture medium
at 37 °C, while multiharmonic imaging was performed in PBS.

Results
Multiharmonic AFM Mapping of Physical Properties of Breast Cancer
Cells
Tumor suppressor functions attributed to Syk reflect
its ability
to inhibit motility and metastasis when re-expressed in highly invasive
cancer cells., Because the molecular mechanisms
underlying this property are poorly understood, we examined how the
expression of Syk would affect the physical properties of an invasive
breast cancer cell line. MDA-MB-231 cells have a mesenchymal phenotype,
are highly motile, and readily form metastases upon being introduced
into mice. The expression of exogenous
Syk in metastatic breast cancer cells inhibits their motility and
markedly attenuates the formation of distant metastases. We generated a stable line of MDA-MB-231 cells
in which the expression of Syk with a C-terminally enhanced green
fluorescent protein tag (Syk-EGFP) was under the control of a tetracycline-inducible
promoter. These cells lack endogenous
Syk but, upon being treated with tetracycline, express Syk-EGFP.

As shown previously, the expression of Syk-EGFP in MDA-MB-231 cells
markedly attenuates their motility. To
begin to explore possible mechanisms by which Syk influences the properties
of MDA-MB-231 cells, we used multiharmonic AFM to image at high spatiotemporal
resolution live cells either lacking Syk or induced to express Syk-EGFP.
In multiharmonic AFM, a microcantilever is excited near the natural
first flexural
frequency, pressed down against the cell, and scanned across the cell
to collect the resulting changes in the vibration harmonic content,
which represents changes in nanomechanical physical properties of
the cells. The topography and nanoscale
compositional contrast images [mean cantilever deflection or the zeroth
harmonic
(A0) and first
harmonic phase lag (ϕ1)] for a typical pair of cells
are illustrated in Figure . Second harmonics
were not observed on these cells. The compositional contrast
images of cells lacking Syk (Figure A–C)
exhibit very few cellular features and no well-defined cytoskeletal
organization consistent with the nature of these cells, which are
highly motile with a dynamic internal cytoskeleton. These cells exhibited
a rounded phenotype and were often removed easily from the gelatin-coated
dish during scanning likely because of their high level of motility
and decreased strength of adhesion. In contrast, the cells expressing
Syk-EGFP were characterized by an increased level of cell spreading
(decreased cell height) and a more organized subsurface cytoskeletal
structure (Figure , bottom
panels). Syk-EGFP-expressing cells also were less likely to evade
the cantilever, because of decreased motility and increased adhesion.
The measured compositional contrast images A0 and ϕ1 were combined to extract the local
nanomechanical properties, specifically the stiffness and damping
of local Kelvin–Voight element ksample and csample. ksample is a measurement of the differences in stiffness or
rigidity within the cell, and csample illustrates
differences in the damping or cell viscosity (Figure ; a second example is illustrated in Figure S1 of the )., The
induction of Syk-EGFP expression in MDA-MB-231 cells dramatically
increased both cell stiffness and viscosity.

High-resolution (256
pixels × 256 pixels) AM-AFM images showing
nanoscale changes of material compositional contrast resulting from
the expression of Syk. (A) Topography images of live MDA-MB-231 cells
lacking Syk (top panel) or induced to express Syk-EGFP (bottom panel).
(B and C) AM-AFM compositional contrast images of mean cantilever
deflection A0 and phase lag (ϕ1) showing subcellular feature details. (D and E) Maps of local
nanomechanical properties, dynamic stiffness ksample, and damping csample of
a local Kelvin–Voigt element extracted using multiharmonic
theory.

Effects of Syk on Microtubule
Stability
The actin and
microtubule cytoskeletons provide the intracellular networks that
determine many of the physical properties of cells., AFM compositional contrast images of cells expressing Syk-EGFP revealed
subcellular structures consistent with that of a cytoskeletal network
(Figure , bottom panels). The size and morphology
of this network were more consistent with those of microtubules than
those of actin microfilaments when compared to images of cells stained
with antibodies against α-tubulin or labeled with rhodamine-phalloidin
(Figure S2 of the ). F-Actin staining was observed primary at the cell cortex, while
microtubule polymers were found throughout the cytoplasm and resembled
the cytoskeletal features revealed by AFM.

To study in more
detail possible effects of Syk on microtubules, we examined the stability
of the microtubule network. MDA-MB-231 cells either lacking or expressing
Syk-EGFP were treated with low concentrations of nocodazole for 30
min to promote microtubule depolymerization. It has been shown that
differences in the stability of the microtubule network manifest themselves
as changes in resistance to nocodazole-induced depolymerization. Cells were fixed and stained with an antibody
against α-tubulin and examined by fluorescence microscopy. There
was a pronounced difference in the morphology of the nocodazole-treated
cells between those lacking Syk, in which the microtubule network
was largely disassembled, and those expressing Syk-EGFP, in which
cells retained microtubule structures resistant to drug-induced depolymerization
(Figure A). To quantify these differences,
we determined the persistence of the microtubule network by measuring
the distance of α-tubulin staining from the nucleus to the perimeter
of each cell. Results from a comparison of more than 200 cells are
shown in Figure B. Nocodazole-treated cells
expressing Syk-EGFP exhibited a much greater level of retention of
α-tubulin-containing polymers than did cells lacking Syk. In
contrast to the expression of Syk, the overexpression of c-Src, which
typically enhances cell motility, failed
to prevent cells from rounding up following treatment
with nocodazole (Figure S3 of the ).

Stabilization of microtubules through the expression of Syk. (A)
MDA-MB-231 cells lacking Syk (−Syk) or expressing Syk (+Syk)
and treated with nocodazole were stained with an antibody against
α-tubulin and a fluorescently tagged secondary antibody, and
with DAPI to mark the nucleus. Cells were examined by phase contrast
and fluorescence microscopy to detect α-tubulin (red), nuclei
(blue), and Syk-EGFP (green). (B) Distances from the cell nucleus
to the cell boundary as marked by α-tubulin fluorescence. Cells
were grouped into three categories as indicated. The bar is 10 μm.

Because MDA-MB-231 cells are somewhat
unique
among breast cancer cell lines in that they express activated K-Ras,
we also examined the effects of Syk expression in BT549 human breast
carcinoma cells, which do not express activated K-Ras and also lack
endogenous Syk. Again, the expression
in these cells of Syk stabilized the microtubule networks and inhibited
the rounding up of cells in response to nocodazole, similar to the
results observed for MDA-MB-231 cells (Figure S4 of the ).

A hallmark of
stable microtubules is an increase in their extent
of acetylation on lysine. Consequently,
we asked if tubulin from Syk-EGFP-expressing cells was more highly
acetylated than tubulin from cells lacking Syk. MDA-MB-231 cells either
not induced or induced to express Syk-EGFP (Figure A) were lysed in microtubule stabilizing buffer containing
1% NP-40 and separated by centrifugation into soluble (monomer) and
insoluble (polymer) fractions. Proteins in each fraction were separated
by SDS–PAGE and analyzed by Western blotting using an antibody
that recognizes lysine-acetylated α-tubulin. Acetylated tubulin
was found predominantly in the polymer fraction as expected (Figure B). Tubulin from Syk-EGFP-expressing cells contained
an approximately 3-fold higher level of acetylated lysine, consistent
with the increased stability of the microtubule network in these cells.
An increase in the level of highly acetylated microtubules in the
Syk-EGFP-expressing cells was confirmed by immunofluorescence microscopy
(Figure C). When treated with nocodazole,
the Syk-EGFP-expressing cells also retained more lysine-acetylated
microtubule polymers than cells lacking Syk-EGFP. Similar results
were observed in MDA-MB-231 cells transiently transfected to express
Syk-EGFP as compared to Syk-deficient cells (Figure S5 of the ).

Syk expression increases
the levels of acetylated tubulin. (A)
Western blot analysis of Syk expression in MDA-MB-231 cells lacking
Syk (−Syk) or induced to express Syk-EGFP (+Syk). GAPDH was
detected as a loading control. (B) Lysates of MDA-MB-231 cells lacking
Syk (−Syk) or induced to express Syk (+Syk) were separated
into soluble and insoluble fractions to separate α-tubulin/β-tubulin
monomers (m) from tubulin polymers (p). Lysine-acetylated tubulin
(KA) and α-tubulin (Tub) were detected by Western blotting.
(C) MDA-MB-231 cells lacking Syk (−Syk) or expressing Syk-EGFP
(+Syk) and treated without (−) or with (+) nocodazole were
stained with an antibody against acetylated α-tubulin and a
fluorescently tagged secondary antibody, and with DAPI to mark the
nucleus. Cells were examined by phase contrast (bottom panels) and
fluorescence microscopy to detect α-tubulin (red) and nuclei
(blue) (top panels) and Syk-EGFP (green) (middle panels). The bar
is 10 μm.

Role of Phosphorylation
in the Stabilization of Microtubules
To determine if Syk-dependent
protein phosphorylation was involved
in modulating cytoskeletal dynamics, we asked if the catalytic activity
of Syk was required for the promotion of microtubule stability. We
generated a line of MDA-MB-231 cells in which the expression of a
catalytically inactive version of Syk-EGFP [Syk-EGFP(K396R)] was under
the control of a tetracycline-inducible promoter. Cells induced to
express Syk-EGFP or Syk-EGFP(K396R) were treated with nocodazole (10
μM) for 30 min, fixed, immunostained with an α-tubulin
antibody, and examined under the fluorescence microscope. There was
an obvious difference in the morphology of drug-treated cells expressing
active versus inactive kinase (Figure ). As
compared to cells expressing Syk-EGFP, Syk-EGFP(K396R)-expressing
cells were more rounded because of microtubule depolymerization and
resembled cells that lacked Syk. Thus, the ability of Syk to stabilize
microtubules was a function of its catalytic activity.

Stabilization of microtubules
requires the catalytic activity of
Syk. (A) MDA-MB-231 cells expressing Syk-EGFP (Syk) or Syk-EGFP(K396R)
(KD-Syk) and treated with nocodazole were stained with an antibody
against α-tubulin and a fluorescently tagged secondary antibody,
and with DAPI to mark the nucleus. Cells were examined by phase contrast
and fluorescence microscopy to detect α-tubulin (red), nuclei
(blue), and Syk-EGFP (green). (B) Distances from the cell nucleus
to the cell boundary as marked by α-tubulin fluorescence. Cells
were grouped into three categories as indicated. The bar is 10 μm.

Identification of a Syk
Substrate Involved in Microtubule Stability
To investigate
how active Syk might promote microtubule stability,
we searched for proteins from MDA-MB-231 cells that were both phosphorylated
on tyrosine in a manner dependent on the exogenous expression of Syk
and involved in the stabilization of microtubules. The results of
this large-scale phosphoproteomic analysis of Syk-dependent phosphorylated
substrates were published recently.

Among the Syk-dependent phosphoproteins identified in our study was
MAP1B, a microtubule-associated protein known to enhance microtubule
stability.− We identified 17 distinct sites
of tyrosine phosphorylation on MAP1B isolated from MDA-MB-231 cells
expressing exogenous Syk that were not phosphorylated in cells lacking
the kinase. Ten of these sites (and an
additional six) were also phosphorylated on MAP1B isolated from DG75
B lymphoma cells, which are cells that express endogenous Syk at normal
levels. Multiple MAP1B-derived phosphopeptides were also identified
when tyrosine-phosphorylated tryptic peptides from MDA-MB-231 or DG75
cells were isolated, dephosphorylated in vitro, and
then rephosphorylated by recombinant Syk. Many of these sites
are clustered within an area of MAP1B known as the imperfect repeat
region (Table SI of the ).,

Effect of the Depletion
of MAP1B on Microtubule Stability
To determine if MAP1B was
critically involved in microtubule stabilization
in MDA-MB-231 cells, we reduced the level of the protein through RNA
interference. A collection of five different lentiviruses were used
individually to deliver small hairpin RNAs (shRNAs) targeting MAP1B
to MDA-MB-231 cells either expressing or lacking Syk-EGFP. Two of
the five shRNAs successfully reduced the level of MAP1B as measured
by the immunofluorescence of infected and antibiotic-selected cells
(an example of one of these is illustrated in Figure A) or by Western blotting (Figure C). To ascertain a role for MAP1B in Syk-dependent microtubule stability,
we induced the expression of Syk-EGFP in MDA-MB-231 cells expressing
normal or reduced levels of MAP1B. Cells were treated with nocodazole
(10 μM) for 30 min, fixed, and immunostained using an antibody
against α-tubulin (Figure B). The size
of the drug-resistant microtubule cytoskeleton was then measured (Figure C). Despite the expression of Syk-EGFP, the MAP1B
knockdown cells displayed a morphology similar to that of cells lacking
Syk as cells were more rounded and failed to retain stable microtubule
networks.

Syk-dependent stabilization of microtubules is attenuated by the
loss of MAP1B. (A) MDA-MB-231 cells were treated (shMAP1B) or were
not treated with a lentivirus expressing a short hairpin RNA directed
against the MAP1B mRNA. Cells were not induced (−Syk) or induced
(+Syk) to express Syk-EGFP. Cells were stained with an antibody against
MAP1B and a fluorescently tagged secondary antibody, and with DAPI
to mark the nucleus. Cells were examined by phase contrast (bottom
panels) and fluorescence microscopy to detect MAP1B (red), nuclei
(blue), and Syk-EGFP (green). (B) MDA-MB-231 cells without or with
knockdown of MAP1B (shMAP1B), induced to express Syk-EGFP, and treated
with nocodazole were stained with an antibody against α-tubulin
and a fluorescently tagged secondary antibody, and with DAPI to mark
the nucleus. Cells were examined by phase contrast and fluorescence
microscopy to detect α-tubulin (red), nuclei (blue), and Syk-EGFP
(green). (C) MDA-MB-231 cells without (−) or with knockdown
of MAP1B with one of three example shRNAs and induced to express Syk-EGFP
were analyzed by Western blotting for the presence of MAP1B, Syk-EGFP
(Syk), or α-tubulin. (D) Lengths of residual microtubules measured
from the cell nucleus to the cell boundary. Cells were grouped into
four categories as indicated. The bar is 10 μm.

Influence of MAP1B on the Physical Properties
of MDA-MB-231
Cells
To investigate roles for Syk in conjunction with MAP1B
in modulating the physical properties of cancer cells, we measured
the influence of Syk on the topography and elasticity of MDA-MB-231
cancer cells in the presence or absence of normal levels of MAP1B.
We estimated elasticity values by AFM using the force–volume
(F–V) mode to compare changes
in
the relative elastic modulus. In F–V imaging, the AFM probe approaches,
is pushed against, and is retracted from the cell surface on a grid
of points predefined by the user to record a resulting force–distance
curve. Subsequently, the images are processed offline to extract
two quantities of interest: cell height and elasticity.

Examples
of the topography and elasticity measurements of cells lacking Syk,
induced to express Syk-EGFP, or induced to express Syk-EGFP and lacking
MAP1B are shown in Figure A. A second example
is shown in Figure S6 of the . The respective topography maps are shown in the top panels and
elasticity maps in the bottom panels. The comparative maximal cell
height and elasticity histograms in the nuclear region from multiple
cells are illustrated in panels B and C of Figure , respectively. The induction of Syk-EGFP expression in MDA-MB-231
cells dramatically decreased the height of the average cell from 5.62
± 1.58 to 3.83 ± 1.26 μm. The cell height was increased
to 4.87 ± 1.22 μm by decreasing the intracellular level
of MAP1B in the Syk-EGFP-expressing cells. Similarly, the expression
of Syk-EGFP increased the cellular elasticity from 0.488 ± 0.199
to 1.35 ± 0.387 kPa. Again, the knockdown of MAP1B partially
reversed this effect, reducing the elasticity of Syk-expressing cells
to 0.812 ± 0.224 kPa.

Knockdown of MAP1B attenuates the Syk-dependent
changes in the
cellular phenotype. (A) Topographic images and elasticity maps of
MDA-MB-231 cells lacking Syk (−Syk) or expressing Syk (+Syk)
without or with shRNA directed against MAP1B (shMAP1B) were acquired
by AFM using force–volume mode. On the elasticity maps are
insets (squares) marking the locations of 3 pixels × 3 pixels
extracted to analyze the resulting cell height and elasticity. Images
were taken at a trigger force of 2 nN (32 pixels × 32 pixels).
The bar is 10 μm. (B) Histogram illustrating the distribution
of heights for 45 MDA-MB-231 cells either lacking Syk (−Syk)
or expressing Syk (+Syk) without or with shRNA directed against MAP1B
(shMAP1B). (C) Histogram illustrating the distribution of elasticities
for 45 MDA-MB-231 cells either lacking Syk (−Syk) or expressing
Syk (+Syk) without or with shRNA directed against MAP1B (shMAP1B).

These results indicate that the
expression of
Syk has pronounced effects on the physical properties of MDA-MB-231
cells (decreased height and increased stiffness) and that these are
mediated in part, but not in full, by the phosphorylation of MAP1B.
Thus, many of the changes in the physical properties of MDA-MB-231
cells resulting from the expression of Syk are mediated by alterations
in the microtubule cytoskeleton.

Discussion
To
disseminate from the site of a primary tumor, a cancer cell
of epithelial origin must detach from neighboring cells, migrate from
the tumor site, extravasate into either the vascular or lymphatic
systems, travel to a distant site, extravasate from the circulation,
and establish through cell division a new tumor mass.,, To accomplish this, transformed
epithelial cells undergo EMT, whereby they lose E-cadherin-mediated
contacts, develop strong cell–extracellular matrix adhesions,
and undergo cytoskeletal rearrangements that allow them to achieve
enhanced migratory and invasive properties. Considerable work has been done using AFM to measure variations
in mechanical properties as a function of metastatic potential, allowing
the detection of tumor progression. The resulting changes in the mechanical
properties of tumor cells that accompany EMT as measured by AFM include
decreased stiffness, consistent with many observations that cancer
cells exhibit an elasticity significantly decreased in comparison
to those of their normal counterparts., Prior work
has shown that metastatic cancer cells are more than 70% softer than
benign cells. A decrease in the Young’s
moduli has been reported for prostate cancer cells with increasing
metastatic potential. The inhibition
or knockdown of Syk in breast epithelial cells or Ras-dependent pancreatic
carcinomas induces phenotypic changes characteristic of EMT., Consistent with these observations, the re-expression of Syk in
highly invasive MDA-MB-231 cells, which have a mesenchymal phenotype,
substantially decreases cellular elasticity and increases viscosity
and the level of adhesion.

The intrinsic stiffness of cells
is a property of cellular cytoskeletal
networks including microtubules and actin microfilaments. The appearance
of subcellular structures resembling microtubules revealed by AFM
selectively in Syk-expressing cells prompted us to explore the effects
of the kinase on tubulin polymers. Microtubules were more stable in
Syk-expressing cells as measured by their insensitivity to drug-induced
depolymerization and an increased content of acetylated lysine, which
is a marker of more stable microtubules. Several studies have demonstrated
interactions between Syk and microtubules or proteins involved in
the regulation of microtubule organization. Syk can bind to and phosphorylate
tubulin, and a fraction of the kinase localizes to centrosomes and
associates with a number of centrosomal proteins.,, The movement of Syk to the centrosome is
dependent on both the catalytic activity of Syk and its movement along
microtubules mediated by the dynein–dynactin complex. A phosphoproteomic analysis of Syk-dependent
substrates identified several centrosomal and microtubule-associated
proteins., The substrate with the most identified sites
of phosphorylation was MAP1B, a microtubule-associated protein found
most prominently in the nervous system. The expression of MAP1B in MDA-MB-231 cells was unexpected. However,
the abnormal expression of tissue differentiation markers has been
noted previously in many cancer cells, including MDA-MB-231 and other
breast cancer cells. We also detected
the phosphorylation of MAP1B on multiple tyrosines in DG75 cells,
an EBV-transformed human B cell lymphoma cell line unrelated to MDA-MB-231. On the basis of the PhosphoSitePlus database,
phosphotyrosine-containing peptides derived from MAP1B also have been
identified in a variety of tumor cell types, including bladder, colorectal,
non-small
lung, esophageal, Hodgkins lymphoma, and chronic myelogenous leukemia.

MAP1B is developmentally regulated in
the nervous system where
it plays an important role in neurite and axon extension through its
ability to bind to dynamic microtubules in growth cones.,− The exogenous expression of MAP1B
in non-neuronal cells stabilizes microtubules to drug-induced depolymerization
and increases the abundance of acetylated microtubules., When present in MDA-MB-231 cells, these activities of MAP1B are
enhanced considerably by the co-expression of Syk, which phosphorylates
the protein on multiple tyrosines.
MAP1B has previously been shown to be extensively phosphorylated by
serine/threonine kinases on a variety of sites spread out throughout
the central region of the molecule. Phosphorylation
has been shown to modulate the ability of the protein to bind to and
stabilize microtubules depending on the site or sites that are modified. The sites phosphorylated by Syk are largely
clustered within the hydrophilic imperfect repeat region of MAP1B,
a region not directly involved in binding microtubules. This region contains multiple consensus sites
of serine phosphorylation for casein kinase 2 (CK2), which phosphorylates
MAP1B and enhances its binding to microtubules., It is reasonable to predict that the phosphorylation of MAP1B by
Syk within this same acidic region would also enhance MAP1B–microtubule
interactions, accounting for the ability of Syk to promote microtubule
stability. Interestingly, three of these sites are found within pYXXL/I
motifs, which are sequences recognized by a subset of SH2 domain-containing
proteins, including Syk itself. Such an interaction may help explain
the abundance of tyrosines on MAP1B that become phosphorylated in
cells expressing both MAP1B and Syk. Because dynamic microtubules
play major roles in motility by modulating the disassembly of focal
adhesions and retraction of the trailing edge of migrating cells,
increased stability conferred by the enhanced binding of phosphorylated
MAP1B could reasonably account for many aspects of Syk’s ability
to limit the motility of highly invasive cancer cells. It is interesting
that modulation of the activity of a microtubule-stabilizing factor
produces such dramatic changes in the mechanical properties of cancer
cells as changes in the stiffness of cells are most often attributed
to alterations in the actin cytoskeleton.,, However, there is considerable cross-talk
between cytoskeletal systems. For example, Rho family GTPases, which
control actin dynamics, are, in turn, regulated by dynamic microtubules
that interact in a polymerization-dependent fashion with Rho guanine
nucleotide exchange factor 190RhoGEF. Thus, dynamic microtubules are major modulators of the mechanical
properties that affect fundamental processes such as cell adhesion
and motility.

Supporting Information Available
A high-resolution
AM-AFM image of material composition maps of cells expressing Syk-EGFP,
fluorescence staining of microtubule and actin microfilament networks
of MDA-MB-231 cells, a comparison of MDA-MB-231 cells overexpressing
either Syk-EGFP or c-Src, the effect of Syk-EGFP expression on the
stability of microtubules in BT549 cells for nocodazole treatment,
a close-up image of nocodazole-stable acetylated microtubules in MDA-MB-231
cells lacking or expressing Syk-EGFP, and topographic images and elasticity
maps of MDA-MB-231 cells without or with knockdown of MAP1B. This
material is available free of charge via the Internet at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bi500325n_si_001.pdf

Author Contributions
M.O.K.
and A.C. contributed equally to this work.

This research was supported
in part by National Institutes
of Health Grants AI098132 and CA115465 (R.L.G.) and Grant DMR-1008189
from the National Science Foundation Materials World Network (A.R.).
M.O.K. was supported by National Science Foundation Graduate Research
Fellowship DGE-0833366. The DNA sequencing facility was supported
by National Cancer Institute CCSG CA23168 to the Purdue University
Center for Cancer Research.

The authors
declare no competing financial interests.

