γ-Secretase is a 19-transmembrane domain (TMD), intramembrane
aspartyl protease comprised of presenilin (PS1 or PS2 isoform) as
the catalytic component, along with nicastrin
(Nct), anterior pharynx defective-1 (Aph1αL, Aph1αS, or
Aph1β isoform), and presenilin enhancer-2 (Pen-2). All four
components are necessary and sufficient for γ-activity.− The γ-secretase complex is responsible
for the second and final step in regulated intramembrane proteolysis
(RIP) of a large and increasing number
of substrates, the most studied of which are the β-amyloid precursor
protein (APP) and Notch. A further complexity
of γ-secretase function is the fact that cleavage of the membrane-anchored
C99 stub of APP (as a model γ-substrate) occurs at multiple
sequential peptide bonds, starting with ε-cleavage to release
the APP intracellular domain (AICD) from the membrane and leave a
49- or 48-residue amyloid β-protein (Aβ) peptide., Sequential cleavages of Aβ48/49 every three or
four residues moving N-terminally (i.e., every helical turn
of the TMD) occur first at the so-called ζ-site to produce Aβ45/46, then at the γ-site to produce Aβ42/43, and finally at the γ′-site to produce Aβ38/40 peptides. Aβ42 is generally considered the most pathogenic (i.e., self-aggregating)
Aβ species, with an elevated Aβ42/Aβ40 ratio used as a marker of pathogenicity, although recently, Aβ43 has also been
shown to be pathogenically relevant in vivo. The sequential C-terminal trimming of the initial
ε-cleavage products Aβ48 and Aβ49 by γ-secretase is termed processivity.

Biochemical studies have previously shown that the
Pen-2 subunit
is the final component added to γ-secretase, whereupon the PS holoprotein undergoes autoproteolysis, in a hydrophobic domain within the cytosolic loop between TMD 6
and 7 to form stable N-terminal and C-terminal fragments (NTF and
CTF, respectively) that stay associated in the membrane as heterodimers. The essential nature of Pen-2 was illustrated in vivo using Pen-2 knockout mice, the embryonic lethal phenotype of which was very similar to that
of a PS1/PS2 double knockout or a Notch1 knockout. Pen-2 is very highly
conserved, being invariably 101 residues long with 70% identity and
87% similarity among all vertebrates and retaining 56% similarity
between Homo sapiens and Arabidopsis thaliana (Figure a,b). Glycosylation studies were
utilized
to demonstrate that the topology of Pen-2 comprises lumenal N- and
C-termini, two TMDs, and a cytosolic loop region. The first of these two TMDs was previously reported to
be important for interaction with TMD 4 of PS1, and was more recently localized to a water-accessible pore. The cytosolic loop region of Pen-2 is apparently
accessible from the lumenal side of membranes via a hydrophilic cavity
and may interact with PS1-CTF.

Sequence conservation
of Pen-2. (a) Multiple-sequence alignment
of forms of Pen-2 from various model organisms. The black bar denotes
the predicted transmembrane domains. Sequence conservation between Animalia or Vertebrata is shown with asterisks
for identical residues, colons for highly similar residues and periods
for similar residues. (b) Details of sequence identity and similarity.
(c) Cartoon of Pen-2 within the lipid membrane. (d) Human Pen-2 sequence
including the N-terminal FLAG tag with residues mutated to alanine
or other residues colored gray. Putative transmembrane domains are
underlined.

In addition to facilitating
PS endoproteolysis, Pen-2 can play
other roles. The C-terminal region may be important for γ-secretase
complex stability. An endoplasmic retention
signal sequence in TMD1 may be critical for trafficking. Pen-2 is required for γ-secretase complex
maturation in a manner independent of PS1 endoproteolysis as shown
by a lack of Nct glycosylation in PS1ΔExon9 cells. The N-terminal region may affect substrate
processivity. Adding to the complexity
of this protein’s function are two recent reports, one showing
that purified PS1 holoprotein can undergo endoproteolysis upon addition
of purified Pen-2 alone without a need for Aph1 or Nct and the second using Pen-2 knockdown to propose
that PS1 can undergo endoproteolysis without Pen-2. Because of these multiple putative functions and little
knowledge of the mechanisms by which this subunit acts upon γ-secretase,
we have used a Pen-2 knockout cell line to conduct an extensive mutagenesis screen to investigate Pen-2
cell localization, Pen-2 stability, γ-secretase activity, and
γ-secretase maturation.

Experimental Procedures
DNA Constructs
All Pen-2 mutants were generated using the QuikChange Lightning
Site-Directed Mutagenesis kit (Agilent Technologies) with primers
designed by PrimerX (http://www.bioinformatics.org/primerx) and purchased from Life Technologies. The FLAG-Pen-2 template in
pcDNA3.1(+)Hygromycin was used as described previously. C99 substrate came from a cDNA comprising the
human APP signal sequence followed by the 99 C-terminal residues of
human APP in pCAG (gift of T. Young-Pearse at the Center for Neurologic
Diseases).

Cell Lines and Transfection
Pen-2
knockout mouse embryonic fibroblasts
were a kind gift of B. De Strooper (KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium). Cells
were transfected using the 4D-Nucleofector X unit and P3 Primary Cell
4D-Nucleofector X kit (Lonza), recovered in RPMI medium with 10% FBS
for 15 min, and then plated in 60 mm dishes with 4 mL of DMEM
and 10% FBS. Six hours after the cells had been plated, media were
replaced with
fresh DMEM and 10% FBS. Conditioned media were harvested after 18
h and stored at −80 °C. Cells were lysed in 1% CHAPSO,
50 mM HEPES (pH 7.2), 150
mM NaCl, and complete protease inhibitors (Roche). For each experiment,
a set of several Pen-2 mutants was paired with wild-type Pen-2, and
the same cell suspension was aliquoted and transiently transfected
with each.

Western Blotting, Enzyme-Linked Immunosorbent
Assays (ELISAs),
and Antibodies
Western blot analyses were performed by electrophoreses
of cell lysates on 4 to 12% Bis/Tris polyacrylamide gels, and the
samples were transferred to
polyvinylidene difluoride membranes and probed with the antibodies
anti-human
nicastrin (1:1000; BD Transduction Laboratories), anti-PS1-NTF (B19,
kind gift of B. De Strooper), anti-PS1-CTF (1:2000; Abcam 76083),
anti-Pen-2 (1:5000; Abcam 154830), anti-GAPDH (Novus Biologicals 221),
anti-calnexin
(1:2000; Abcam 22595), or anti-Aβ (Calbiochem 6E10). All Western
blots were scanned on an Odyssey Infrared Imaging System (Li-Cor),
and densitometry analysis used Odyssey software. Aβ40 and Aβ42 from conditioned media were measured by
triplex ELISA (Aβ capture by antibody 4G8) read on a Sector
Imager 2400 (Mesoscale Discovery).

Cell Surface Biotinylation
Surface proteins were labeled using
sulfo-NHS-SS-biotin (Thermo Scientific 21331) following the manufacturer’s
protocol. In brief, cells were grown to confluence and then washed
gently four times with ice-cold PBS before the addition of 0.5 mg/mL
sulfo-NHS-SS-biotin in PBS and incubation with shaking at room temperature
for 30 min. Cross-linking was quenched by addition of Tris buffer
(pH 8) to a final concentration
of 50 mM and shaking for 10 min. Cells were washed four times with
ice-cold PBS, then detached by being scraped in 25 mM EDTA in PBS
buffer (pH 8), and pelleted at 16000g for 3 min at
4 °C. Cell pellets were lysed in 1% CHAPSO, 50 mM HEPES (pH 7.2),
150 mM NaCl, and protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche) on ice for 1
h. Lysates were clarified by centrifugation at 21000g for 5 min and protein concentrations determined by the BCA assay
(Thermo Scientific). Equal protein amounts were pulled down by mixing
with streptavidin agarose in 0.2% CHAPSO and0.08% digitonin in TBS
at 4 °C overnight. Unbound materials were removed, and resins
were washed three times with ice-cold 0.1% digitonin in TBS before
elution with Laemmli sample buffer and heating to 65 °C for 5
min. Eluates and protein-normalized start lysates were subjected to
4
to 12% Bis/Tris sodium dodecyl sulfate–polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis
(SDS–PAGE) for Western blotting.

Pen-2 Stability Assay
To measure Pen-2 and γ-secretase complex stability,
fresh medium was added, and then cells were treated with a final concentration
of 10 μM MG132 or an equivalent volume of DMSO vehicle as a
negative control
at 37 °C in 5% CO2 for 8 h. Cells were harvested and
lysed as in the cell surface biotinylation experiments, and then equal
protein amounts were resolved via SDS–PAGE for Western blotting.
β-Catenin was used as a positive control to demonstrate proteasomal
inhibition.

Immunoprecipitation (IP)
Activity Assay
IP activity assays were performed by
immobilizing γ-secretase using anti-nicastrin (Sigma N1660)
bound to protein A agarose at 4 °C for 1.5 h,
followed by three washes with 0.25% CHAPSO, 50 mM HEPES buffer (pH
7.2), and 150 mM NaCl. Resin was resuspended in 50 μL of 1 mg/mL
phosphatidylcholine, 0.25 mg/mL phosphatidylethanolamine, 0.25% CHAPSO
[in 50 mM HEPES buffer (pH
7.2) and 150 mM NaCl], and 1 μM C100-FLAG substrate and incubated at
37 °C for 3 h. Bound samples were eluted with Laemmli sample
buffer for analysis by SDS–PAGE and Western blotting, including
resolution of various Aβ species on bicine/urea gels., Quantification of bicine/urea Western blots was performed using
ImageJ.

Microsome Preparation
Microsomes were prepared as described
previously with the addition of 10 μM
pepstatin A or vehicle (ethanol) at all stages of preparation.

Statistics
Statistical analysis of transient transfection Western
blot densitometry and ELISA data were performed by the Harvard NeuroDiscovery
Center’s Biostatistics Consultation core. We fit mixed-effects
models for the log of the ratio of Aβ40 from mutant
Pen-2 to Aβ40 from wild-type Pen-2. This method included
fixed effects for mutant Pen-2 and random effects for a date within
a given mutant (to adjust for multiple samples for some mutants on
some dates) and for a set within a date (to adjust for a particular
wild-type sample). We apply a Bonferroni correction for the multiple
testing due to the 39 mutants and use a p value threshold
of 0.05/39 = 0.001. Each mutant was tested on at least three independent
occasions (n = 1–3 on each day) grouped with
different mutants
and compared to an internal wild-type control (n =
3–9). Statistical analysis of stable cell line
experiments was performed using a one-way analysis of variance with
Bonferonni correction to account for multiple comparisons with the
wild-type control using GraphPad Prism. Cell surface biotinylation
experimental data are the means of four independent experiments each
with an n value of 1–3 (total n = 5–7).

Results
Given the remarkable sequence
conservation of the Pen-2 subunit
of γ-secretase and its reported requirement for the maturation
and catalytic activity of the complex, specific changes in the sequence
may lead to alteration of specific functions. To test this hypothesis,
key residues were mutated within Pen-2 (Figure d), and these mutant constructs were then
expressed transiently to attempt to rescue a Pen-2 knockout mouse
embryonic fibroblast (Pen-2 KO) line. Effects of these mutants on complex maturation were analyzed by
Western blot of cell lysates and densitometry. Proteolytic activities
of the Pen-2 mutant-containing γ-complexes were examined by
cotransfection of the transfected Pen-2 KO cells with human wild-type
APP and subsequent ELISA analysis of Aβ.

Residues were
chosen for mutation on the basis of a high degree
of sequence conservation, the type of amino acid, and the location
within the sequence. For example, the N-terminally clustered charged
residues (E9, E10, and K11) were individually mutated to alanine.
C15 was mutated to alanine and also to the more conservative serine
to remove the thiol but minimally alter the polarity and size of the
side chain. Conserved aromatic amino acids (particularly tryptophan
and tyrosine) have affinity for the lipid polar headgroups and so
can be largely found at the lipid–water interface important
in defining the TMD boundaries. Therefore,
the conserved amino acids Y18, Y19, W36, F37,
F38, and Y56 were each mutated to alanine to potentially disrupt the
anchoring of TMDs to the lipid bilayer. Finally, P27 is located in
the center of TMD1, and it would be predicted to induce a 30°
bend in the helix. Mutating this residue
to alanine would remove this helix break and might potentially cause
significant alterations in the incorporation and function of Pen-2
within γ-secretase.

The Substrate Concentration Is Critical upon
Cotransfection
of Pen-2 KO MEFs with C99 and Pen-2
Pen-2 KO MEFs could be rescued with an N-terminally FLAG-tagged
wild-type (wt)
Pen-2 (F-Pen-2), leading to complex maturation as shown by PS1 endoproteolysis
(to NTF and CTF) and Nct maturation (further glycosylation) (Figure a). It should be noted that the addition
of the FLAG tag retards migration of Pen-2 relative to the endogenous
Pen-2 seen in MEFs from wt littermates (Figure a, left lane).

Validation of the Pen-2 KO MEF cell line. (a) Western
blot comparing
various components of γ-secretase in Pen-2 KO MEF cells with
and without rescue using F-Pen-2, and MEF cells from wild-type littermates.
(b) Western blot of Pen-2 KO cells rescued with 1.5 μg of F-Pen-2
and cotransfected with increasing quantities of C99 DNA. CHO S20 cells,
overexpressing all four γ-secretase components, treated with
DAPT act as a control for C99 accumulation. (c) Secretion of Aβ
from cells measured by an ELISA and normalized to the total cell lysate.
(d) Ratio of Aβ42/40 based on ELISA data. (e) Western
blot of Pen-2 KO cells rescued with increasing quantities of F-Pen-2
DNA and cotransfected with 0.5 μg of C99 DNA. (f) Densitometry
of F-Pen-2 expression levels. (g) Densitometry of PS1-CTF levels.
(h) Levels of PS1-CTF per unit of F-Pen-2. Levels of Aβ40 per
(i) milligram of cell lysate and (j) unit of PS1-CTF. Error bars show
the standard error from three replicates. *P &lt;
0.05. **P &lt; 0.01. ***P &lt; 0.001.

Before examining the effects of
Pen-2 mutations
on complex assembly, maturation, and activity, we sought to identify
the factors needed for rescue of the Pen-2 KO cells and detection
of substrate cleavage activity. With regard to γ-secretase activity,
the level of secretion of Aβ from Pen-2 KO cells rescued with
wt F-Pen-2 was tested. Because of a very low level of endogenous expression
of mouse APP in the cells, it was not possible to detect any Aβ
in conditioned media (data not shown). However, transfection of C99
with the APP signal sequence gave robust Aβ40 and
Aβ42 secretion upon rescue with wt F-Pen-2. As a
negative control, cells were also transfected with C99 in the absence
of Pen-2 rescue and gave undetectable levels of Aβ by an ELISA
(data not shown).

To determine whether variability of substrate
or active γ-secretase
complexes could be tolerated for our analysis, Pen-2 KO cells were
first transfected with a standard amount (1.5 μg) of wt F-Pen-2
DNA and increasing amounts of C99 DNA. Equal expression
levels of the γ-secretase components were seen regardless of
the level of co-expressed C99 substrate (Figure b; because of cytotoxicity, the final two
lanes have smaller amounts of total protein loaded). Normalization
of Aβ in the conditioned media to total cellular protein revealed
a stepwise increase in Aβ40 and Aβ42 production with an increasing level of C99 DNA (Figure c). Aβ42/40 ratios were
consistently ∼0.11–0.12 across all amounts of C99 DNA
transfected (Figure d), a value that is squarely
in the physiological
range. In the reverse experiment, Pen-2 KO MEFs were then transfected
with equal (0.5 μg) amounts of C99 DNA and increasing amounts
of wt F-Pen-2 DNA (Figure e), which revealed
a stepwise increase in
expression levels of F-Pen-2 (Figure f) and,
as expected, of PS1-CTF (Figure g) as a measure
of complex maturation. Figure h shows the
ratio of PS1-CTF per unit of
F-Pen-2, which is unchanging as the level of F-Pen-2 DNA increases.
This relative uniformity is very important for the setup of all of
our experiments (below), as it is likely that different
mutants of Pen-2 may express to different degrees. Finally, we again
see the expected stepwise increase in the level of Aβ secretion
with an increase in the level of wt F-Pen-2 DNA (Figure i), but when normalized to PS1-CTF (i.e.,
Aβ per mature γ-secretase complex) levels of substrate
cleavage do not vary (Figure j). Together,
these experimental validation
data inform us that it is essential for C99 expression levels to be
equal between samples within a set of transfections, while a variable
level of Pen-2 expression will not affect the analysis when normalizing
to PS1-CTF.

To account for experiment-to-experiment variation
in the expression
levels of our different Pen-2 mutants (Figure b), internal controls were included to allow
proper normalization. Each set of mutant F-Pen-2 transfections being
performed on a given day also included one to three simultaneous wt
F-Pen-2 control transfections.
Values calculated within that experimental set were first normalized
to total protein in the cell lysate and then expressed as a percentage
of the mean wt F-Pen-2 value. Each data point shown is the mean of
at least three independent experiments of one to three replicates,
each normalized to their
respective wt F-Pen-2 controls. To avoid data artifacts, the groupings
of specific mutants transfected in a given experiment were varied
between days.

Pen-2 mutants rescue PS1 endoproteolysis to varying degrees.
(a)
Band intensity of PS1-CTF per unit of F-Pen-2 normalized to internal
controls of wild-type human F-Pen-2. Colors denote the values above
and below the wild-type value. (b) Band intensity of F-Pen-2 mutants
normalized to internal controls of wild-type human F-Pen-2. Colors
denote the values above and below the wild-type value. The schematic
below each graph aligns the regions of Pen-2 being mutated. Error
bars show the standard error from 3–10 independent experiments.
*P &lt; 0.05. **P &lt; 0.01. ***P &lt; 0.001.

Pen-2 Mutants Rescue γ-Secretase Complex Maturation to
Varying Degrees
Unexpectedly, all of the Pen-2 mutants screened
were able
to at least partially rescue PS1 endoproteolysis. In the N-terminal
region, E4R, E9A, L12A, L14A, R16A, and K17A all gave increases in
the PS1-CTF:Pen-2 ratio relative to wt Pen-2 (Figure a). However, this may be misleading, as total
Pen-2 levels (i.e., γ-secretase-incorporated plus free) of those
mutants were all below that of the wild type (Figure b), suggesting that rather than increasing
the level of endoproteolysis, they reduce the stability of Pen-2,
thus raising the relative ratio of PS1-CTF to Pen-2. In other words,
transfection with these mutants leads to a degradation of unincorporated
Pen-2 quicker than that with the wild type. In the case of C15S, a
similar reduction in the total level of Pen-2 did not lead to an increase
but rather a decrease in the level of PS1 endoproteolysis (Figure a), suggesting that this mutation is inefficient
at supporting complex maturation. Most mutations within TMD1 led to
a reduction in the total level of Pen-2, with W30A in particular at
a level &lt;20% of that of the wild type (Figure b). This is likely due to its decreased level
of incorporation into γ-secretase, as shown by a reduced level
of PS1 endoproteolysis (Figure a). Mutations
within the loop region generally
reduced Pen-2 levels, with the exception of I53A, which had highly
variable but somewhat elevated levels (Figure b). Of all mutants we tested, I53A caused
the largest decrease in the level of PS1 endoproteolysis per Pen-2
unit, suggesting this site is particularly important in PS1 endoproteolysis
(Figure a) because of either a weakened ability
to
allow endoproteolysis or a reduced affinity for γ-secretase.
This question is addressed using stable cell lines, covered later
in this study (Figures –). Mutations
in TMD2 almost all gave a large increase in total Pen-2 levels (Figure b) and in some cases a reduction in the level
of PS1 endoproteolysis per Pen-2 (Figure a),
suggesting an increase in the stability
of unincorporated Pen-2. The same effect is found in the C-terminal
region F94A mutation, while mutation of D90 to remove (&gt;A) or reverse
(&gt;R) this negative charge substantially reduced the total level
of
Pen-2 (Figure b) and increased PS1-CTF:Pen-2
ratios (Figure a).

Pen-2 Mutants Have Varying
Effects on γ-Secretase Cleavage
of the Substrate
Via measurement of Aβ in media conditioned
by Pen-2
KO cells cotransfected with C99 and mutant F-Pen-2 and normalization
to PS1-CTF level (i.e., amount of Aβ produced per mature γ-secretase
complex), the effect of mutations on substrate cleavage by γ-secretase
can be determined. Surprisingly, several of the mutant Pen-2-containing
γ-secretase complexes actually cleaved more substrate than wild-type
Pen-2 complexes, while more than one-third caused a reduction in cleavage.
Within the N-terminal region, the largest effects on γ-secretase
cleavage activity were found with loss of the polar N8 residue, which
increased Aβ40 to nearly 300% and Aβ42 to 180% of that of wt, and the L14A mutation, which increased Aβ40 to ∼160% and Aβ42 to &gt;200% of
that
of wt (Figure a,b). The C15A mutation reduced
both Aβ40 and Aβ42 to approximately
50%; however,
the C15S mutation produced no change (Figure a,b). Mutation of either of the N-terminal
positively charged (lysine) residues (K11 and K17) to alanine caused
an increase in Aβ40 (Figure a) and in the case of K17 also increased
Aβ42 (Figure b). All mutations
within the top (N-terminal)
half of TMD1 led to reduced Aβ40 and Aβ42 secretion, with the greatest effect from the bulky hydrophobic
residues F25 and L26 (30–50% of that of wt) and a less pronounced
effect in the cases of the
two lipid–water interface aromatic residues Y18 and Y19 (70%
of that of wt) (Figure a,b). Mutations in
the lower (C-terminal)
half of TMD1 had the opposite effect and elevated Aβ production,
with the exception of the aromatic hydrogen bonding-capable W36, mutation
of which lowered Aβ production. Interestingly, loss of the immediately
adjacent aromatic hydrophobic F37 caused &gt;2-fold increases in the
production of both Aβ40 and Aβ42 (Figure a,b). Substantially enhanced cleavage
was
also caused by mutation of either the positively charged N33 or aromatic
hydrophobic W30 to alanine (Figure a,b). Within
the loop region, mutations I53A,
V57A, and in particular K54A reduced Aβ40 secretion
(Figure a). However, Aβ42 was very
significantly increased in the case of I53A, while again the other
mutants reduced cleavage (Figure b). Mutation
of residues in TMD2 had relatively
modest effects, with G63A/Y67A causing a slight decrease in both Aβ40 and Aβ42 and F78A causing a slight increase
(Figure a,b). In the C-terminal region, a
loss of
the negatively charged D90 caused both Aβ40 and Aβ42 to increase to approximately 160% of that of wt, while reversing
the charge to a positive arginine reduced secretion of both Aβ
species to approximately half (Figure a,b).
Finally, a loss of the hydrophobic
F94 led to a reduction in Aβ production to 40% of that of wt
(Figure a,b).

γ-Secretase activity levels per
mature
complex. (a) Aβ40 or (b) Aβ42 concentrations
in conditioned
media per unit of PS1-CTF normalized to internal controls of wt human
F-Pen-2. Colors denote the values above and below the wild-type value.
The schematic below each graph aligns the regions of Pen-2 being mutated.
Error bars show the standard error from 3–10 independent experiments.
*P &lt; 0.05. **P &lt; 0.01. ***P &lt; 0.001.

Effects on Aβ42/40 Ratios
Of all the
mutations tested, only a few had any effect on Aβ42/40 ratios, and those were relatively subtle. The one exception to this
was with mutation of the hydrophobic I53, which caused a slight decrease
in Aβ40 and a &gt;4-fold increase in Aβ42, thus leading to a doubling of the Aβ42/40 ratio (Figure ). Other mutants causing a
decrease in the
ratio of Aβ species were mostly clustered in the lower half
of TMD1 (i.e., including and right after the helix-breaking P27) but
also occurred
at the N-terminal region (E4R and N8A), upper TMD2 (S73A and W74A),
and C-terminal D90A (Figure ). The only other
sites of mutation leading
to elevated Aβ42/40 were two leucine residues (L14A
and L26A) and a serine (S60A) (Figure ).

Effect
of Pen-2 mutations on Aβ42/40 ratios. The
Aβ42/40 ratio in conditioned media normalized to
internal controls of wt human F-Pen-2. Colors denote the values above
and below the wild-type value. The schematic below each graph aligns
the regions of Pen-2 being mutated. Error bars show the standard error
from 3–10 independent experiments. *P &lt;
0.05. **P &lt; 0.01. ***P &lt; 0.001.

Establishing Stable Cell
Lines for Selected Mutants
To further test the effect of
some of the most interesting
mutants of Pen-2, stable cell lines were established by stable transfection
of Pen-2 KO MEF cells with wild-type, N8A, P27A, N33A, or I53A FLAG-Pen-2,
with isolation of monoclonal cell lines. These lines were then screened
for Pen-2 expression, and where possible, equally expressing lines
were selected (Figure a,c). Levels of PS1-CTF
generation per Pen-2 (Figure d) were similar
to those observed in the
transient transfections for N8A having little effect and P27A some
reduction, while I53A decreased endoproteolysis but not as significantly.
N33A caused a modest decrease in the PS1-CTF:Pen-2 ratio in the transient
transfection experiments, but the stable line displayed elevated endoproteolysis
(Figure d). However, upon IP via the FLAG
tag of
Pen-2, N8A, P27A, and N33A all displayed unaltered levels of γ-secretase
maturation relative to that of wt Pen-2, but I53A showed &lt;40% wt levels of PS1-CTF associated with Pen-2, suggesting an impaired
complex stability (Figure b,e). Differences
between transient transfections
and stable cell lines data observed are likely due to the different
mechanisms of expression in those two systems. The stable line has
a more continuous but weaker expression, allowing an equilibrium of
γ-complex incorporation and cell localization to be reached,
while transient transfection by electroporation leads to an immediate
high expression that may not be fully processed by cell machinery
before the point of cell lysis. This is particularly apparent in the
case of I53A, which in the transient system had an apparent expression
level approximately equal to that of wt (Figure b), while in the stable line, the value was
&lt;40% of wt (Figure c), in turn associating
with 30% (Figure a) or 80% (Figure d) of wt PS1-CTF:Pen-2 levels. This temporary
saturation of protein degradation machinery may also account for the
discrepancy in the Aβ42/40 ratio between transient
and stable transfections with I53A Pen-2. In the transient system,
I53A Pen-2 complexes may be able to initiate substrate cleavage but
dissociate before full processing. N33A also showed a disparity between
the transient and stable transfections for γ-secretase endoproteolysis,
with the stable line having nearly 140% of the wt level in mature
complexes per Pen-2 (Figure d) and the transient
70% (Figure a), but both with equal expression
levels (Figures b and c). This may be due to the
N33A complexes in the stable line having increased cell surface localization,
which may be expected to elevate levels of the mature complex.

Stable cell
lines of select Pen-2 mutants. Western blot of (a)
total cell lysate (input) and (b) FLAG IP (M2 IP) of exogenous F-Pen-2
from monoclonal cell lines expressing wt, N8A, P27A, N33A, or I53A
F-Pen-2. (c) Densitometric analysis of Pen-2 expression levels in
each cell line normalized to internal controls of wild-type human
F-Pen-2. (d) Band intensity of PS1-CTF per unit of F-Pen-2 normalized
to internal controls of wild-type human F-Pen-2. (e) Band intensity
of PS1-CTF per unit of F-Pen-2 immunoprecipitated via FLAG tag normalized
to internal controls of wild-type human F-Pen-2. Error bars show the
standard error from three independent experiments *P &lt; 0.05. **P &lt; 0.01. ***P &lt; 0.001.

Asn33 Is Involved in Pen-2
Localization within the Cell
To examine the effect of certain
mutations on the transport
of Pen-2 and γ-secretase to the cell surface, where they are
known to be active, we used the non-membrane permeable sulfo-NHS-SS-biotin
to specifically label plasma membrane
proteins via primary amines (i.e., lysine). The biotinylated proteins
could then be specifically isolated
from a total cell lysate using streptavidin agarose and then released
by cleavage of the biotin–amine cross-link with β-mercaptoethanol.
However, Pen-2 contains only two extracellular/lumenal
lysine residues (one of which forms the upper boundary of TMD1 and
may not be fully accessible for cross-linking), so isolation of Pen-2
in NP40/RIPA buffer was very limited. This
difficulty was overcome by lysing the cells in 1% CHAPSO/HEPES buffer
and then pulling them down and washing them in 0.1% digitonin/HEPES
buffer. Both of these detergents, in contrast with NP40, keep γ-secretase
intact, allowing streptavidin pull-down via all biotinylated lysines
in the intact γ-secretase complex. Digitonin is used for the
binding and washing steps, as it removes weakly or nonspecifically
interacting proteins. In these experiments, wild-type Pen-2 and
its mutants could all be found at the cell surface in association
with γ-secretase (Figure a). Surprisingly,
PS1 holoprotein in the nonrescued Pen-2 KO line could also be biotinylated
(data not shown), thus
requiring confirmation that the biotinylation reagent had not passed
the cell membrane by probing for the cytosolic protein GAPDH (Figure a). As a secondary control protein, the ER-associated
transmembrane protein calnexin was also probed for; a small amount
could be detected in the biotinylated/streptavidin pull-down sample
(17
±
0.5-fold lower than the input lysate calnexin level),
suggesting that up to 6% of our biotinylated sample could be from
inside the cell (Figure a). This small amount
of biotinylated calnexin
could mean that the biotinylated PS1 holoprotein observed is not at
the cell surface, rather in the endoplasmic reticulum within the cell.
Measuring the ratio of cell surface mutant Pen-2 to that found in
the lysate input and then normalizing to the ratio for wild-type Pen-2
revealed that among the four mutants we studied in stable cell lines,
only N33A showed a significant increase in the proportion of cell
surface Pen-2 to total cellular Pen-2 (Figure b; P &lt; 0.05). Interestingly, this was not accompanied
by an increase in PS1-CTF/Pen-2 (Figure c),
as might be expected if more cell surface
N33A Pen-2 is in mature γ-secretase.

Effect of Pen-2 mutation
on cell localization. (a) Western blot
of 10 μg of total cell lysate (Input) and 90 μg of cell
surface proteins pulled down with streptavidin agarose (Bound) for
Pen-2 KO MEF cells rescued with mutants of Pen-2 and labeled with
non-membrane permeable biotin. (b) Quantification of Pen-2 mutant
levels at the cell surface compared to that of wild-type Pen-2. (c)
Level of PS1-CTF per Pen-2 at the cell surface compared to that of
wild-type Pen-2. Error bars show the standard error from three independent
experiments. *P &lt; 0.05. **P &lt;
0.01. ***P &lt; 0.001.

Ile53Ala and to a Lesser Extent Asn33Ala Reduce the Stability
of Pen-2
During the process of generating stable cell lines
for
some Pen-2 mutants, we noted that all clones of I53A had Pen-2 expression
markedly lower than that of wild-type lines. Two possible reasons
for this observation are (1) I53A Pen-2 is poorly expressed and (2)
I53A Pen-2 has reduced
affinity for PS1 and is targeted to the proteasome for degradation.
We tested the second explanation by inhibiting the proteasome via
treatment with MG132 (Figure a). β-Catenin,
known to be degraded
rapidly by the proteasome, served as a positive control. We found
that wild-type Pen-2 and its four mutants rose to &gt;200% of untreated
levels after MG132 treatment, with N33A and I53A increasing significantly
more than wild type to 365 and almost 1000%, respectively (P &lt; 0.001) (Figure b). PS1-CTF
levels increased correspondingly for wild-type and P27A, while N8A
had an even greater elevation (P &lt; 0.05), resulting
in a small but significant increase in the PS1-CTF:Pen-2 ratio (P &lt; 0.01). MG132 treatment of the N33A line did not significantly
increase PS1-CTF, and there was therefore a slight decrease in its
PS1-CTF:Pen-2 ratio (P &lt; 0.01). MG132 treatment
of the I53A line caused PS1-CTF to increase by 400%, but because of
the accompanying very large increase in Pen-2 levels, there was a
very significant reduction in the PS1-CTF:Pen-2 ratio to 50% of that
observed in wild-type cells treated with MG132 (P &lt; 0.001). These data show that the I53A mutation does not affect
expression
of Pen-2 but greatly reduces its stability because of enhanced proteasomal
degradation. This MG132 treatment of the I53A line did not fully rescue
the endoproteolysis of PS1, suggesting that this mutation may be affecting
Pen-2 by reducing incorporation into and maturation and/or stability
of γ-secretase.

Effect of Pen-2 mutations on stability. (a) Western blot
of total
cell lysates for Pen-2 KO MEF cells rescued with mutants of Pen-2
and treated with 10 μM MG132 or vehicle for 8 h. (b) Quantification
of PS1-CTF and Pen-2 mutant levels and the amount of PS1-CTF per Pen-2
after MG132 treatment compared to that of a vehicle-treated sample.
Bar colors denote wild-type and the four mutants tested. Error bars
show the standard error from three replicates. *P &lt; 0.05. **P &lt; 0.01. ***P &lt; 0.001.

Mutating Pen-2 Does Not
Affect γ-Secretase Processivity
Given the striking
increase in the Aβ42/40 ratio upon transient transfection
of the I53A mutant into cells (Figure ), an in vitro γ-secretase
activity assay was used to cleave recombinant C100-FLAG, as is commonly
used in cell-free γ-secretase assays., Lysates of our stable cell lines were immunoprecipitated with anti-Nct
antibodies, and on-bead activity assays were performed. γ-Secretase
IP’ed from wt Pen-2 and all four mutant lines was able to cleave
the C100-FLAG substrate, generating AICD-FLAG (Figure a); however, three
mutants (P27A, N33A, and I53A) showed reduced activity upon normalization
for Pen-2 levels (Figure c). The resultant
Aβ peptides were
then separated by bicine/urea polyacrylamide electrophoresis and detected
by Western blotting (Figure b) and quantified
by densitometry (Figure d). None of the mutants
showed a significant
difference from wt in the profile of Aβ peptides generated,
suggesting that Pen-2 has no direct role in processivity.

Effect of Pen-2
mutations on γ-secretase processivity. (a)
Western blot of total cell lysate (Input) and IP activity assay (Activity)
for Pen-2 KO MEF cells rescued with mutants of Pen-2. (b) Bicine/urea
Western blot of IP activity assay supernatants. (c) Activity per mature
γ-secretase complex calculated by densitometry of AICD-F/PS1-CTF.
(d) Quantification of Aβ40, Aβ(42+43), and Aβ45+ displayed as a percentage of total Aβ
in lane. Error bars show the standard error from two independent experiments.
*P &lt; 0.05. **P &lt; 0.01. ***P &lt; 0.001.

PS1 Endoproteolysis Is Possible in the Absence of Pen-2
Over the course of the MG132 treatment experiments, we
often noted what appeared to be background levels of PS1-CTF (Figure a) and PS1-NTF (not shown) in the Pen-2 KO
MEFs. Treatment of Pen-2 KO cells with 10 μM MG132 and harvesting
at various time intervals revealed that PS1-CTFs
accumulated over time (Figure a), albeit
only to ∼8% of wild-type
MEF levels at the last time point [9 h (Figure b)]. To confirm that this observation is
directly due to autoproteolysis of PS1 by the aspartic acid dyad,
microsomes of Pen-2 KO cells were prepared in the presence of the
aspartyl protease inhibitor pepstatin A (a known inhibitor of PS1
autoproteolysis) or vehicle at all stages.
In the absence of pepstatin A, accumulation of PS1-CTF and PS1-NTF
was observed, with a trace amount visible in the presence of inhibitor
(Figure c). This endoproteolytic event occurred
during the first step of cell lysis by homogenization but is not observed
upon
chemical lysis (data not shown). This result would suggest that the
buffer condition (pH 6 MES buffer) and the membranes being in a vesicular
form (no detergent) permit endoproteolysis, and protease inhibitors
prevent degradation of the subsequent tripartite complex. Using immunoprecipitation
of tripartite complexes via antibodies to Nct or PS1-CTF, it was possible
to enrich the PS1 heterodimer from MG132-treated cell lysates and
Pen-2 KO microsomes, but there was no detectable on-bead activity
that could be measured by an AICD-FLAG Western blot or an Aβ40 ELISA (data not shown).

PS1 can undergo endoproteolysis in the
absence of Pen-2. (a) Western
blot and (b) quantification showing a time course of Pen-2 KO MEF
cell treatment with 10 μM MG132 or vehicle. (c) Western blot
of microsomes prepared from Pen-2 KO MEF cells in the absence or presence
of 10 μM pepstatin A. The left two lanes contained lysates of
Pen-2 KO rescued with F-Pen-2 or without rescue.

Discussion
Using a Pen-2 knockout mouse embryonic fibroblast
cell line rescued with Pen-2 constructs
containing single
missense mutations, we show that Pen-2 is intimately linked with both
γ-secretase maturation and activity. Different regions and even
individual amino acids within Pen-2 appear to have specific and important
functions (summarized in Figure ).

Effect of
mutation of different regions of Pen-2. Cartoon summarizing
the effect of mutation of regions of the Pen-2 subunit on γ-secretase
PS1 endoproteolysis, substrate cleavage, complex stability, and cell
localization.

As the presenilin subunit
of γ-secretase contains the catalytic
aspartic acid residues and is the only subunit known to have familial
Alzheimer’s disease mutations, many studies have focused on
this component. For example, using cysteine scanning approaches,− regions on several PS1 transmembrane domains have
been identified to form part of a water-accessible pore, which is
presumably the locus in which substrate hydrolysis occurs. It has
even been proposed that PS1 can cleave the substrate in the absence
of the three other γ-secretase components, albeit at extremely low levels.

Considerable information
is also available about nicastrin, partly
because as the only γ-subunit with a large ectodomain, it may
play a role in the recognition of the lumenal end of a substrate or
its access to the complex. The E333 residue of Nct has been reported
to be required for γ-complex maturation and possibly even activity. On the
other hand, some studies have suggested that Nct may be dispensable
for γ-secretase activity.,

The other two
components of γ-secretase have been rather
less studied, with Aph1 suggested to act as a scaffold and thereby
regulate assembly and play a role in
substrate docking, and the Pen-2 subunit
being necessary for PS endoproteolysis and subsequent stabilization
of the mature, active complex.,

Because of the
high level of sequence identity of Pen-2 between
different species and its invariable length of 101 amino acids, we
systematically mutated numerous residues within different regions
of the protein and examined the effect on γ-secretase maturation
and activity. Surprisingly, none of the mutants tested completely
abrogated either complex maturation (i.e., PS endoproteolysis) or
activity. This result is in agreement with a scanning cysteine mutagenesis
study. This lack of complete loss of
function in the two studies may relate to mutating only single residues
rather than clusters. For example, mutation of D90YLSF to pentaalanine
prevented the association of Pen-2 with other components of γ-secretase
and hence PS1 endoproteolysis. Similarly,
mutation of four nonadjacent residues near the C-terminus to alanine
caused complex maturation
to be completely halted. However, when
we tested a cluster mutation of N8EE&gt;AAA, PS1 endoproteolysis appeared
unaffected while Aβ production
per γ-secretase complex was elevated approximately 3-fold above
that of wild-type Pen-2 (data not shown). These results indicate that
different regions of Pen-2 have different roles in γ-secretase
function.

With the exceptions of E10A, K11A, and W36A mutations,
mutation
of most residues in the N-terminal region and in TMD1 reduced Pen-2
expression. Altering the amino acid sequence in this region could
change the initial fold and entry of TMD1 into the membrane, which
in turn may cause the protein to be targeted to the proteasome for
degradation. In the case of W30A, where a dramatic (20% of the wt
level) loss of expression was seen, the loss of a bulky hydrophobic
residue in the center of the transmembrane domain appears to be detrimental.
Interestingly, the K11A mutant has approximately 170% of wt expression
levels, which could mean this is a normal ubiquitination site (despite
being on the lumenal side of the membrane). Bergman et al. reported that
mutation of the sole cytosolic lysine residue, K54, to R did not prevent
ubiquitination of Pen-2. These authors also assessed a Pen-2 with
all three lysines mutated to arginine, but the protein could not be
expressed. Here, we found that K54A and K17A mutations had little
effect on Pen-2 expression. This result would leave K11 as a candidate
for the ubiquitination target, although we cannot exclude ubiquitination
of non-lysine sites such as serine/threonine., In this regard,
we obtained 170% of wt Pen-2 levels with the S60A mutant. Similar
increases in Pen-2 levels were also found with most mutations in TMD2,
suggesting a previously unrecognized role of TMD2 in the stability
of Pen-2.

Mutation of several residues in the N-terminal region,
especially
N8A and L14A, also caused an elevation in substrate cleavage. This
could be due to loss of an interaction with a lumenal region of PS1,
thus altering active site conformation, or the fact that these residues
normally block the entry of the substrate into the active site.

In addition to their reducing Pen-2 levels, almost all mutants
in TMD1 (from Y19 to N33) produced a decrease in PS1-CTF per Pen-2
to 50–70% of the wt value. This agrees with a prior report
that the upper two-thirds of TMD1 is necessary for PS1 endoproteolysis. Two independent reports used domain swapping
of TMDs within
PS1 to narrow the Pen-2 binding site to a W203NF motif in the center
of PS1 TMD4., Mutations in the upper half of
Pen-2 TMD1 may be partly deficient in their ability to initiate endoproteolysis
because of a change in the conformation of the active site in PS1.
Following the same line of reasoning, without exception all mutants
tested in TMD1 above P27 caused a reduction in Aβ generated
per mature γ-secretase complex to 55–70% of wt levels.

Mutation of most residues from P27 to the end of TMD1 elevated
substrate cleavage, producing 140–230% of the wt level of Aβ40 and Aβ42 and in some cases
a modest decrease in the Aβ42/40 ratio. These substitutions
on Pen-2 all replace a large side chain
with the small methyl group of alanine, perhaps allowing PS1 to expand
into a more open conformation previously shown to lead to a relative
decrease in Aβ42 and
an increase in substrate access to the active site. The exception
in this region was the W36A mutant, which led to a 50% level in both
Aβ species, possibly due to a change in the anchoring of the
bottom of TMD1 with the lipid–water interface and thereby allowing
F37/38 to form part of the transmembrane
domain. Mutation of F37 to alanine had the opposite effect, raising
Aβ secretion to &gt;200% compared to the wt value.

Our
mutations in TMD2 mostly decreased the PS1-CTF:Pen-2 ratio,
primarily because of increases in Pen-2. This may represent excess
free Pen-2 resulting from deficient degradation of the mutants, perhaps
due to their altered cellular localization. In this regard, N33 in
TMD1 of Pen-2 was found to be targeted by the ER retention protein
Rer1, and a report that the WNF motif
in PS1 TMD4 is also a Rer1 binding site led to the proposal of a masking of ER retention signals upon binding
of Pen-2 to PS1 concealed both their Rer1 binding sites, allowing
γ-secretase to move to the Golgi apparatus. Our cell surface
labeling
experiments indeed confirm that N33 is involved in preventing Pen-2
from moving to the plasma membrane. However, we saw an equal increase
in PS1-CTF at the cell surface of the N33A Pen-2 cells, implying proper
localization of the mature complex rather than mislocalization of
free Pen-2, thus arguing against the masking hypothesis. A possible
explanation for this discrepancy could be that as we detected trace
amounts of the ER-associated protein calnexin, we may have inadvertently
also labeled some PS1-CTF within the cell, thus masking a potential
slightly
lower level of PS1-CTF at the cell surface, which would then argue
for N33A Pen-2 shifting to the plasma membrane independently of the
rest of the γ-secretase complex. Mutation of residues in the
lower half of TMD2 may decrease Aβ production by altering the
initial fold of this TMD, thus changing the alignment of the rest
of the TMD. No other mutations we made in TMD2 affected substrate
cleavage, and given its somewhat lower level of sequence conservation,
this domain may simply be required to position the C-terminal domain
relative to the rest of Pen-2.

As with TMD2, mutations in the
C-terminus led to changes in PS1-CTF/Pen-2
that seemed to correlate with Pen-2 expression levels. This appears
to be at odds with a report that point mutations to alanine within
the C-terminus had no effect on Pen-2 expression or PS1 endoproteolysis,
although simultaneous mutation of all four fully conserved residues
(D90, F94, P97, and G99) decreased the stability of the γ-complex. This apparent discrepancy may relate to their
use of stable Pen-2 shRNA expression, so that some endogenous Pen-2
and corresponding low-level PS1 endoproteolysis remain (vs full knockout
of Pen-2 here). Another difference is that the study
by Prokop et al. used
stable cell lines for each mutant, while we used transient transfections.
Although a previous report found that
mutation of some residues
within the D90YLSF motif of Pen-2 to alanine decreased Aβ production
during Pen-2 knockdown rescue, we found the opposite effect with D90A,
a 70% increase in Aβ. This difference is likely to be due to
our calculating Aβ production per mature γ-secretase complex,
while the study by Hasegawa et al. showed raw Aβ per milligram
of protein values despite a level of PS1-NTF clearly lower than that
with wild-type Pen-2. Interestingly, when D90 is changed conservatively
to E, a near-wild-type level of PS1 endoproteolysis occurs but Aβ
generation is still reduced, albeit less than with the D90A mutant.
We also found that reversing the charge (D90R) halved γ-activity.
Mutation of the highly conserved F94 to alanine caused a significant
decrease in Aβ production.

Finally, we found two sites
of particular interest in the cytosolic
loop region. K54A had no effect on expression or endoproteolysis,
as previously shown by Bammens et al., but did cause
reductions to 40 and 50% of wt levels for Aβ40 and
Aβ42, respectively. When stably expressed, the adjacent
I53A mutation
showed a reduction in stability but was still able to partially support
endoproteolysis, which could be further rescued by inhibition of the
proteasome. However, the increase in endoproteolysis was substantially
smaller than would be expected if corresponding directly to Pen-2
levels, indicating that the I53A Pen-2 γ-complexes have reduced
stability. In addition to the reduced complex stability, each intact
complex also displayed a 50% level of substrate cleavage in
vitro. Together, these novel data indicate that this isoleucine
residue is very important for the overall stability and function of
γ-secretase. This finding leads us to hypothesize that the cytosolic
loop region of Pen-2 may be directly and critically interacting with
PS1. Given the location of this region and the previous reports of
Pen-2 TMD1 to PS1 TMD4, and TMD2 binding to PS1-CTF, a possible candidate for Pen-2 I53 binding is
to the conserved hydrophobic domain VII (HDVII) of the large loop
region of PS1. The short Pen-2 loop region could then bring the large
PS1 cytosolic loop closer to the catalytic core, allowing subsequent
autoproteolysis.

During the proteasome inhibition experiments,
we observed a faint
signal for PS1-NTF/CTF in plain Pen-2 KO cell lysates. This curious
observation was also reported by Mao et al., although they
used Pen-2 siRNA, which may leave trace levels of Pen-2. Thus, our
experiments in Pen-2 knockout cells now confirm the report by Mao
et
al. We find that endoproteolysis appears to be facilitated under
mildly acidic conditions that coincide with the pH found in the Golgi
network, the initial
site of γ-secretase complex maturation and the first site of detectable APP cleavage. It is still possible that this cleavage is occurring due
to another protease, but given that it can be inhibited by pepstatin
A, this would specifically necessitate an aspartyl protease capable
of cleaving at or very close to the endoproteolytic site of γ-secretase,
which would seem to be an unlikely combination. Ahn et al. previously
reported that PS1 ΔE9 is able to cleave the substrate in the
absence of any
other γ-secretase subunits. Using
both Pen-2 KO microsomes and Pen-2 KO MG132-treated lysate IPs, we
detected no substrate cleavage measured by an AICD-FLAG Western blot
or an Aβ40 ELISA. By comparing PS1-CTF band intensity
for wt Pen-2 (Figure a) and MG132-treated
Pen-2 KO (data not shown)
IP activity assays, we would expect a 5–10% level of cleavage.
This would equate to Aβ40 production
in the range of 50–200
pg/mL, which is within the detection limits of our ELISA.
We therefore suggest that PS1 heterodimer–Nct–Aph1 tripartite
complexes are either inactive or only partially active. Pen-2 binding
to PS1 may act to stabilize these complexes, allowing time for autoproteolysis
and activation to occur. The relatively less stable PS1 heterodimer
can then be held together by interactions of Pen-2 TMD1 with PS1 TMD4,
Pen-2 loop with PS1 HDVII, and Pen-2 TMD2 with PS1-CTF.

In summary,
we use systematic mutagenesis to provide evidence that
the mechanism by which Pen-2 functions in the context of γ-secretase
is multivariate, with different regions and even individual residues
having apparently different roles. We also observed apparent PS1 endoproteolysis
in the complete absence of Pen-2. An improved understanding of these
mechanisms may require detailed structural information about the nature
of the Pen-2–PS1 interaction.

The authors declare no competing
financial interest.

Acknowledgments
We thank Bart De Strooper for providing the Pen-2 knockout
MEF cell line.

Abbreviations
ADAlzheimer’s disease

APPβ-amyloid precursor
protein

Aβamyloid β-peptide

AICDAPP intracellular
domain

CHAPSO3-[(3-cholamidopropyl)dimethylammonio]-2-hydroxy-1-propanesulfonic
acid

MEFmouse embryonic
fibroblast

PSpresenilin

TMDtransmembrane domain.

