Shortly after this article describing the crystal structure of
ValA from Streptomyces hygroscopicus was accepted
for publication, we were able to determine the structure of the related
enzyme desmethyl-4-deoxygadusol synthase from Anabaena variabilis (AvDDGS) at a higher (∼1.7 Å) resolution
(work still in progress). In light of the new structure,
we are now able to satisfactorily interpret what we had described
as a difficult to fit β-hairpin turn at residues 32 and 33 of
ValA that collided with its symmetry mate across the crystallographic
2-fold axis. Rather than these residues
forming a β-hairpin to match the chain topology seen in dehydroquionate
synthase structures, a domain-swapped arrangement exists in which
the residues N-terminal to position 33 continue in a linear direction,
making an extended β-strand that participates in the core β-sheet
in the other subunit of the dimer. We have updated the Protein Data
Bank deposition to reflect this altered topology and provide here
an updated version of our original Figure 3 that
provides a corrected overview of the topology of ValA.
Further details of this new topology will be reported in a future
publication of the AvDDGS structure.

Overall structure and
topology of ValA. (a) Ribbon diagrams of
the two chains of the ValA dimer are colored in purple and green tones,
with the N-terminal NAD+-binding domains in light hues
and the C-terminal metal-binding domains in dark hues. The extended
β-strands of each subunit involved in the domain-swapped arrangement
are visible in the back of the dimer. Dashed lines indicate internal
unmodeled backbone segments. The NAD+ and the Zn2+ with its coordinating ligands are shown (colored as in Figure 1).
Secondary structural elements in each domain of one monomer are labeled.
(b) Topology diagram showing α-helices (cylinders), β-stands
(arrows), 310-helices (triangular prisms), and π-helices
(wider cylinder) with their respective first and last residues given.
The minimal length α- and 310-helices (five and three
residues, respectively) are left out of the secondary structure family
nomenclature. The domains are colored light and dark purple as indicated,
and helices (H) and strands (β) common to the SPCs are named
sequentially within each domain. The domain-swapped β-strand
containing residues 27–32 from the other subunit of the dimer,
but contributing to the purple domain, is colored light green. The
crystallographic 2-fold rotation axis (indicated as a black vertical
ellipse) relates this β-strand to the residues extending from
residue 32 of the purple domain to be part of the β-sheet of
the other subunit. We retain the β1 and β2 names for the
two parts of the long N-teminal β-strand because they participate
in different β-sheets and to maintain in this report a consensus
secondary structure nomenclature relevant to the sugar phosphate cyclase
superfamily. Dashed lines denote unmodeled backbone segments. The
three Zn2+-binding residues (red asterisks) and the glycine-rich
turn and acidic residue (green asterisks) that are important for NAD+ binding are
indicated.

