Dimethylated aminosugars such
as d-desosamine and d-mycaminose are found on a
variety of natural products, including erythromycin, azithromycin,
spiramycin, and tylosin. Studies suggest that these unusual carbohydrates
play key roles in the biological activities of the compounds to which
they are attached. In bacteria, the first
step for the production of these methylated sugars is the attachment
of a nucleoside monophosphate to glucose 1-phosphate. This is followed by a series of enzymatic transformations,
including dehydrations, isomerizations, and aminations. In all the
pathways, the final step involves the dimethylation of the dTDP-linked
sugar by an N,N-dimethyltransferase
using S-adenosylmethionine (SAM) as the methyl donor.
The first model of an N,N-dimethyltransferase
to be reported was that of DesVI from Streptomyces venezuelae. It is involved in the production of d-desosamine. Whereas the DesVI structure provided an initial
glimpse into the three-dimensional architecture of a sugar N,N-dimethyltransferase, details of its
active site geometry were limited because of the lack of a bound dTDP-sugar
substrate. Several years later the structure of TylM1 from Streptomyces fradiae was determined in the presence of S-adenosylhomocysteine (SAH) and its natural substrate,
dTDP-3-amino-3,6-dideoxyglucose (Scheme ).

Reaction Catalyzed by TylM1
A model of TylM1 with bound SAM and dTDP-phenol
was also reported.
Taken together, these two structures provided a snapshot of the Michaelis
complex as shown in Figure . As can be seen,
the SAM and dTDP-3-amino-3,6-dideoxyglucose ligands are aligned for
a direct in-line displacement reaction. Interestingly, the active
site is devoid of catalytic bases near the sugar C-3′ amino
group, suggesting that the proton on the nitrogen is transferred directly
to one of the water molecules lining the active site cleft.

Model of the
Michaelis complex in stereo. The C-3′ amino
group is positioned to attack the methyl group of SAM as indicated
by the dashed line.

We were curious about
the manner in which a dimethylated dTDP-sugar
binds in the active site of TylM1 and, more importantly, whether we
could produce a new dimethylated sugar using dTDP-3-amino-3,6-dideoxygalactose
as a substrate.

The first structure determined for this investigation
was that
of TylM1 in complex with SAH and dTDP-mycaminose [the dimethylated
sugar (Scheme )]. The model was refined to
a nominal resolution of 1.6 Å with an Roverall of 18.2% and an Rfree of
21.6% (Tables S1 and S2 of the ).

The observed electron density corresponding to dTDP-mycaminose
is shown in Figure . Within experimental error,
the structures of TylM1 with either bound dTDP-substrate or dTDP-product
are virtually identical (225 α-carbons superimpose with a root-mean-square
deviation of 0.32 Å). Only a water molecule is expelled from
the active site to accommodate one of the methyl substituents on the
C-3′ amino group.

Electron density for dTDP-mycaminose. The map,
contoured at 4σ,
was calculated with coefficients of the form Fo – Fc, where Fo was the native structure factor amplitude and Fc was the calculated structure factor amplitude.
Coordinates for the dTDP-mycaminose ligand were never included in
the map calculation. All figures were prepared with PyMOL.

A close-up view of the dTDP-mycaminose binding pocket is
displayed
in Figure . The sugar C-2′ hydroxyl
lies within hydrogen bonding distance of the guanidinium group of
Arg 241, whereas the C-4′ hydroxyl participates in hydrogen
bonding interactions with the side chain of Tyr 14 and a water molecule.
One of the methyl substituents on the sugar C-3′ nitrogen lies
within 3.6 Å of the sulfur of SAH and the side chain of Phe 118.
The other methyl group projects toward a rather open pocket bounded
by His 123 and Ile 212.

Binding pocket for dTDP-mycaminose. Potential
hydrogen bonding
interactions are indicated by the dashed lines.

Given that the protein region surrounding the C-4′
hydroxyl
group of dTDP-3-amino-3,6-dideoxyglucose is quite open (Figure ), we reasoned that TylM1 could also function as
an N,N-dimethyltransferase on dTDP-3-amino-3,6-dideoxygalactose.
These two substrates differ only in the stereochemistry about C-4′.
Accordingly, we first investigated the kinetic properties of the two
substrates (details of the assay can be found in the ). For dTDP-3-amino-3,6-dideoxyglucose,
the Km and kcat values were determined to be 0.079 ± 0.015 mM and 0.75 ±
0.09 s–1, respectively. Analysis by mass spectroscopy
in negative ion mode gave the expected mass of 574 for an N,N-dimethylated product.

Using dTDP-3-amino-3,6-dideoxygalactose
as the substrate, the Km and kcat values
were determined to be 1.54 ± 0.08 mM and 0.61 ± 0.07 s–1, respectively. Importantly, mass spectroscopic data
yielded only a peak at 560, which is consistent for a monomethylated
rather than a dimethylated dTDP-sugar product (namely dTDP-3-N-methylamino-3,6-dideoxygalactose). Indeed, under all experimental
conditions employed, there was never any evidence for the production
of the dimethylated dTDP-sugar product. To the best of our knowledge,
this represents the first report of the enzymatic production of dTDP-3-N-methylamino-3,6-dideoxygalactose, which is not observed
in nature.

To further explore the manner in which this unusual
monomethylated
sugar binds to TylM1, the second structure determined in this investigation
was that of the enzyme in complex with SAH and dTDP-3-N-methylamino-3,6-dideoxygalactose. The structure was determined to
a nominal resolution of 2.2 Å (Roverall = 21.9%; Rfree = 27.7%). Electron density
corresponding to the bound dTDP-sugar is displayed in Figure .

Electron density for dTDP-3-N-methylamino-3,6-dideoxygalactose.
The map was contoured at 4σ and calculated as described in the
legend of Figure .

The α-carbons for the two models, with bound dTDP-mycaminose
or dTDP-3-N-methylamino-3,6-dideoxygalactose, superimpose
with a root-mean-square deviation of 0.32 Å. Within experimental
error, there is no difference in the active site geometry upon the
binding of either dTDP-linked sugar.

On the basis of the kinetic
parameters determined in vitro, TylM1 functions more
efficiently on dTDP-3-amino-3,6-dideoxyglucose
versus dTDP-3-amino-3,6-dideoxygalactose. The parameter affected is
the Km. Assuming that the dTDP-sugar
products bind similarly to TylM1 as the dTDP-sugar substrates, a superposition
of the two structures determined in this investigation suggests a
possible explanation. As shown in Figure ,
and with the knowledge that Oη of Tyr 14 is sp2-hybridized, the geometry for the hydrogen bond in the TylM1/dTDP-mycaminose
complex is more optimal in terms of distance and angle. Specifically,
in the TylM1/dTDP-mycaminose complex, the distance is 2.6 Å and
the angle is 117°, whereas in the TylM1/dTDP-3-N-methylamino-3,6-dideoxygalactose model, the distance is 3.0 Å
and the angle is 154°. Furthermore, because of the change in
configuration about the C-4′ hydroxyl group in dTDP-3-N-methylamino-3,6-dideoxygalactose, steric hindrance occurs
between it and Cδ1 of Ile 212 (3.2 Å). This
does not occur when dTDP-mycaminose is bound in the active site region.

Comparison
of the binding of dTDP-mycaminose and dTDP-3-N-methylamino-3,6-dideoxygalactose.
Only the region immediately
surrounding the pyranosyl moiety of the dTDP-sugars is shown. The
model of dTDP-mycaminose and the associated protein side chains are
shown in wheat. The model of dTDP-3-N-methylamino-3,6-dideoxygalactose
and the associated protein side chains are displayed in teal.

One question that arises from
this investigation is why dTDP-3-amino-3,6-dideoxygalactose
can be only monomethylated under all the experimental conditions employed.
The answer lies not in the protein region surrounding the dTDP-sugar
but rather in the sugar itself. Placing a second methyl group on the
C-3′ amino moiety would create an unacceptable steric clash
between it and the C-4′ hydroxyl of dTDP-3-N-methylamino-3,6-dideoxygalactose as indicated by the green dashed
line in Figure .

In summary, we have
shown the manner in which a sugar N,N-methyltransferase can accommodate a dimethylated
product within its active site pocket. More importantly, however,
this investigation demonstrates that TylM1 can be utilized for the
production of a novel monomethylated sugar. Indeed, the biosynthesis
of rare sugars via enzymatic routes has attracted significant research
attention over the past several years, in part because of the key
biological roles they often play in anticancer, antibacterial, antifungal,
and antiviral agents. Others have been
found, for example, to function as insecticides or as food sweeteners., By the judicious use of various dTDP-linked sugars, it should be
possible to produce additional novel carbohydrates. This work is in
progress.

Supporting Information Available
Detailed experimental procedures
and Tables S1–S3. This material is available free of charge
via the Internet at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bi500098a_si_001.pdf

Accession Codes
Coordinates have
been deposited in the Protein Data Bank as entries 4OQD and 4OQE.

This research
was supported in part by National Institutes of Health Grant DK47814
to H.M.H.

The authors
declare no competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
A portion of the research described
in this paper was performed
at the Argonne National Laboratory, Structural Biology Center at the
Advanced Photon Source (U.S. Department of Energy, Office of Biological
and Environmental Research, under Contract DE-AC02-06CH11357). We
gratefully acknowledge Dr. Norma E. C. Duke for assistance during
the X-ray data collection at Argonne. We thank Professor Grover Waldrop
for helpful discussions.

