The relative importance and roles of hydrogen bonding and hydrophobic interactions in protein folding and stability is, arguably, one of the most contentious issues in protein folding (). Because organic osmolytes affect hydrogen-bonding and hydrophobic interactions differentially (−), these physiologically important small molecules can be exploited to better understand the thermodynamics of protein folding/unfolding and stability. Here, we illustrate how knowledge of the energetic effects of osmolytes on the structure of the denatured state ensemble (DSE) provides insight into the driving forces for solvent-mediated protein folding.Abbreviations: DSE, denatured state ensemble; TMAO, trimethylamine N-oxide.



Numerous organisms use small organic osmolytes to offset protein denaturing conditions brought on by the environment (,). Given their important positions in biology, these molecules add new dimensions and viewpoints to studies of protein folding (−,−). The broad scope of osmolyte effects on protein folding ranges from the denaturing action of the physiologically important osmolyte, urea, to the exceptional ability of the protecting osmolytes, sarcosine and trimethylamine N-oxide (TMAO), in forcing proteins to fold (−). Understanding the impact of solvent components on proteins involves quantifying the changes they cause in the structure and dynamics of both native and denatured ensembles and identifying the underlying forces responsible. The native state structure is not noticeably perturbed by osmolytes, but the denatured state ensemble (DSE) exhibits plasticity evident in the changes in the DSE hydrodynamic radius (Rh) as a function of osmolyte type and concentration (). In fact, an array of solvent effects on the contraction/expansion of the DSE has been described and sometimes associated with varying degrees of secondary and/or tertiary structure accretion (−). Notably, Uversky and Fink find strong correlation between the hydrodynamic volume of precursors of the native state and their degree of secondary structure, a correlation we extend to species that populate cosolvent-induced contraction of the DSE ().

Owing to its dynamical and transient nature during folding, one of the effects most difficult to study involves contraction of the DSE to the point of collapse. This effect is observed in proteins that exhibit folding kinetics for which an initial rapid collapse of the DSE is followed by a rate-determining step leading to the native protein. Many of the mechanistic issues in folding kinetics involve limited subpopulations within the DSE such as those that promote nucleation and/or a coalescence of nonpolar side chains. The thermodynamics of native to denatured transitions, on the other hand, is inclusive in that it must account for the total population and thermodynamic character of the DSE and of the native state. Given that the DSE is the state most affected by osmolytes such as urea, sarcosine, and TMAO, it is desirable to dissect the overall energetics of osmolyte−DSE interaction and accompanying structural changes.

Urea, sarcosine, and TMAO are known to cause substantial changes in Rh and secondary structure in the DSE of proteins (,). Here, we take advantage of the fact that the high degree of thermal energy in thermally denatured protein favors the denatured state to the extent that substantial amounts of either the denaturing osmolyte, urea, or the protecting osmolyte, sarcosine, can be present without populating the native state significantly. This increases the experimentally accessible range for observing osmolyte-induced accretion of structure and corresponding contraction of the denatured state Rh in the absence of the native state. The protein we use, Nank 4−7*, 15 kDa, is a truncated version of the ankyrin domain of the Drosophila notch receptor (), comprising four tandem ankyrin repeats. Nank4−7* is marginally stable at pH 7 in 200 mM NaCl, with a melting temperature of 34 °C (,), and at 55 °C in the presence and absence of osmolytes, the protein populates the denatured state to &gt;99.5% under experimental conditions adopted in this study.

We use transfer free energies to assess how urea, sarcosine, and TMAO affect protein stability and the denatured ensemble (,,). Adopting the basic approach of Nozaki and Tanford, we previously redetermined and extended their measurements by including activity coefficient data for glycine in water and 1 M urea to obtain corrected side chain transfer free energies (,,). Contrary to Nozaki and Tanford’s earlier conclusions, our published data show that urea does not denature proteins by favorable interactions with nonpolar side chains; rather it is through its favorable interactions with the peptide backbone that urea is such a good denaturant (,,−). In the present work we show that increased backbone−backbone interactions are coordinated with secondary structure accretion and contraction of the DSE that occurs upon dilution from a comparatively good solvent (urea) to the successively poorer solvents, water, sarcosine, or TMAO solution. That is, backbone−backbone interactions (intrachain hydrogen bonding) progressively increase as solvent quality is shifted from good to poor. In marked contrast, the strength of hydrophobic interactions remains relatively unchanged during this dilution process. These results permit separation of the relative roles of hydrogen-bonding and hydrophobic interactions in the DSE.

Materials and Methods
Chemicals
NaCl was from Fisher Scientific; Na2HPO4 and NaH2PO4·H2O were obtained from Mallinckrodt. Ultapure urea was purchased from USB, sarcosine from Fluka, glycine-betaine from Sigma, and TMAO was synthesized and purified as described previously (). Prior to use, all sarcosine solutions were treated with activated carbon (Aldrich) and filtered through 0.22 μm sterile filters (Millipore Millex GP), and their molar concentrations were determined refractometrically. The buffer used for all final experiments was 10 mM sodium phosphate, pH 7, and 200 mM NaCl.

Protein Expression and Purification
The C-terminal His6-tagged Nank4−7* construct used in this study contains four tandem ankyrin repeat sequences and was expressed and purified as in refs () and ().

Circular Dichroism
Temperature scans from 5 to 75 °C were performed in a Jasco J-720 spectropolarimeter at 228 nm in two different ways. In one set of experiments continuous temperature scans were performed with a temperature slope of 1 °C/min. In another set, after jumping to a desired temperature (increments of 3−5 °C) the sample was equilibrated for 30 s, and a time course was measured for 4 min at lower temperatures (from 45 to 50 °C depending on the osmolyte concentration) and 90 s at higher temperatures to prevent aggregation, which in the slower, continuous scans was detectable at the highest temperatures in 1 M sarcosine (cf. denatured state baselines in Figure ). Because of the strong absorbance of concentrated sarcosine and TMAO solutions in the range of ≤220 nm the ellipticity was recorded at 228 nm, where the signal is dominated by the contribution of α-helical and β-structures. Nank4−7* was present at 0.16 mg/mL, and a capped 1 mm cuvette was used.

Temperature scans of Nank4−7* monitored by CD. Direct thermal scans and discrete points at 228 nm were taken to illustrate reproducibility. Thermal scans of Nank 4−7* are shown in the absence (recorded black line and open squares) and presence of sarcosine (recorded red lines) at 0.3 M (open circles), 0.6 M (open triangles), and 1 M concentrations (open inverted triangles). Also shown are thermal scans in urea (recorded blue lines) at 2 M (gray circles), 4 M (gray triangles), and 6 M (gray inverted triangles). All solutions contained 10 mM sodium phosphate buffer, pH 7.0, and 200 mM NaCl. Three conditions of interest at 55 °C, as explained in the text, are shown: (A) the extrapolated value for the native state baseline, (B) the thermally denatured state in the presence of 1 M sarcosine, and (C) the thermally denatured state in the presence of 6 M urea.

Dynamic Light Scattering
Dynamic light scattering (DLS) experiments were performed at 55 °C with the protein at 0.32 mg/mL in the presence of 0, 2, and 4 M urea and at 15 °C in the absence of urea. All measurements were done in a DynaPro 99-D-50 MSTC 800 dynamic light scattering instrument from Protein Solutions. The refractive indices for the several samples at the proper temperature were obtained in a Milton Roy tabletop refractometer (Abbe 3L). The viscosities at the various temperatures for the solutions were obtained according to Perl et al. (), and the hydrodynamic radii (Rh) obtained from DLS are all corrected for viscosity at the reported temperature.

Calculation of Transfer Free Energies
ΔGtr,N is calculated from crystallographic coordinates of segments 4−7 of notch ankyrin protein in the manner described previously (). Briefly, the Nank4−7* surface is interrogated with a probe the size of a water molecule to obtain the total solvent surface areas for each type of side chain and backbone. For the side chains, the areas are divided by the surface area of the fully exposed side chain to determine the number of each type of side chain exposed; the total backbone surface area exposed is divided by a fully exposed glycine backbone for the number of exposed backbone units. The numbers of backbone units and each side chain type are multiplied by their corresponding transfer free energy, and the sum of the contributions represent ΔGtr,N.

Results
Reversible Thermal Denaturation of Nank4−7* at Different Urea and Sarcosine Concentrations
For optimal signal-to-noise ratio, CD of Nank4−7* was measured at 228 nm, a wavelength for which β-sheet, β-turns, and α-helices all give negative ellipticity while unordered structures are either positive or near zero (). Temperature scans monitoring the mean residue ellipticity [Θ]228 were performed in two ways, resulting in different effective heating rates (Figure ) as explained in . The two sets of experiments show good agreement, reproducibility, and excellent reversibility. Only in the slow scan at 1 M sarcosine is evidence of protein aggregation indicated by the irregular and nonlinear behavior above 65 °C, whereas such irregularities are not seen in the temperature-jump experiments, which successfully minimize the exposure time of denatured protein at high temperatures. Urea concentration ≥2 M denatures this protein at all temperatures shown (blue lines in Figure ). In contrast, sarcosine stabilizes the protein against temperature denaturation, increasing the transition midpoint temperature Tm (red lines in Figure ) relative to the protein in buffer alone (black line in Figure ). The denatured state [Θ]228 at temperatures ≥55 °C becomes progressively more negative on successive transfer from high urea concentration to buffer and to 1 M sarcosine. For urea-denatured protein, the decrease in [Θ]228 with increasing temperature is presumably due to conversion of polyproline II structure that populates the denatured ensemble at low temperature to β structure that becomes dominant at high temperature (,).

The CD and Volume of Nank4−7* Species Are Inversely Correlated
In considering the specific effects of urea concentration on denatured Nank4−7*, dynamic light scattering (DLS) experiments were performed on thermally denatured Nank4−7* at 55 °C in 0, 2, and 4 M urea solutions, and Rh of the DSE was determined at each condition. Rh for thermally denatured Nank4−7* is 29.5 ± 1.0 Å in dilute buffer and 31.8 ± 1.6 Å in 2 M and 33.4 ± 1.3 Å in 4 M urea solutions, demonstrating expansion of the DSE at 55 °C as a function of urea concentration. Unfortunately, sarcosine and other protecting osmolytes give an excessively noisy DLS signal even in the absence of protein, thus preventing determination of Rh in solutions of protecting osmolytes. Rh of the protein in the presence of protecting osmolytes may be estimated from the relationship between DSE size and its CD signal. Figure  illustrates that the inverse of the relative hydrodynamic volume of the thermally denatured Nank4−7* species at 55 °C in the absence and presence of 2 and 4 M urea is proportional to the measured CD at 228 nm. Uversky and Fink reported such proportionality behavior at a different wavelength for intermediate states of a variety of proteins (). The proportionality is observed to hold for the denatured species and native Nank4−7* as defined byHere, [θ]228⊗ and (Rh⊗)3 represent the ellipticity and hydrodynamic volume of Nank4−7* in buffer at 55 °C as a reference state, and (Rh)3 and [θ]228 are the hydrodynamic volumes and corresponding ellipticities of native Nank4−7* along with thermally denatured Nank4−7* species in the absence and presence of 2 and 4 M urea concentrations. Given that DSE dimensions in the presence of sarcosine and urea are part of the same continuum of effects (), Figure  and eq  were used to obtain Rh values of 34.0, 28.6, 28, and 26.8 Å, respectively, for the DSE in 6 M urea and 0.3, 0.6, and 1.0 M sarcosine solutions at 55 °C.

Relationship between hydrodynamic volume and CD. The hydrodynamic volume (degree of compactness) of Nank4−7* species thermally denatured at 55 °C (Rh⊗)3 relative to the volume of thermally denatured Nank4−7* species in 0, 2, and 4 M urea (Rh)3. The ratio of these two parameters is plotted as a function of the corresponding θ228 for the species of interest relative to θ228⊗ (the ellipticity of thermally denatured Nank4−7* in 0 M urea). The linear fit is defined by eq  in the text. From left to right, symbols are for 4, 2, and 0 M urea for thermally denatured (55 °C) Nank4−7* with native Nank4−7* (θ228 and Rh determined at 15 °C) at the top right of the plot. The arrows indicate values of Rh extracted from the graph using the respective θ228 values recorded for 0.3, 0.6, and 1.0 M sarcosine.

Contraction of Thermally Denatured Nank4−7* in Poor Solvents
With knowledge of Rh for thermally denatured DSE at 55 °C in the presence and absence of various concentrations of urea and sarcosine, we can determine the degree to which the various solvents alter the denatured state dimensions in comparison with corresponding proteins exhibiting classical random coil behavior. Figure A is a composite log−log plot of Rg and Rh vs protein chain length of data from Kohn et al. and Uversky (,) which shows that Rg and Rh are indistinguishable for denatured states in the molecular weight range of Nank4−7*, as was also suggested previously (,). Figure B is an expansion of Figure A and gives the order of decreasing hydrodynamic radii of Nank4−7* species in solutions containing 4, 2, and 0 M urea and 0.3, 0.6, and 1.0 M sarcosine. The dashed lines are the 95% confidence interval for the fit of the combined Rg and Rh data. The order of decreasing Rh parallels the increasingly poorer solvent quality exhibited by these solvents. Figure B shows that, for all urea concentrations, Rh of Nank4−7* is below the random coil average and thermally denatured protein is on the border of the 95% confidence line. The combined information in Figures  and  illustrates that a substantial degree of structure in the DSE can be accreted while still within the 95% confidence interval of accepted random coil values, a result consistent with computational projections (). In sarcosine solutions the Rh values fall outside the 95% confidence interval, and in 1 M sarcosine contraction of the thermally denatured Nank4−7* attains its most compact form without formation of a significant native state population.

Full range of dimensional changes in Nank4−7* relative to literature values. (A) Rh and/or Rg as a function of the number of amino acids (N) in the protein. The solid line is a fit through all of the data with the 95% confidence limits (heavy dashed lines). The dot-dashed line is a fit through the Rg data from Kohn et al. () and the light dotted line a fit through the Rh data from Uversky (). The open square in the plot represents the region expanded for panel B. (B) Rh values for Nank4−7* are reported in the context of a plot of Rh() and Rg() values as a function of protein chain length. Rh values reported for Nank4−7* species in 0.3, 0.6, and 1 M sarcosine solutions were calculated from their measured θ228 values using eq . Key: filled circle, 4 M urea (33.4 Å); filled triangle, 2 M urea (31.8 Å); open triangle, thermally denatured state (29.5 Å); filled star, 0.3 M sarcosine (28.6 Å); cross, 0.6 M sarcosine (28.0 Å); filled diamond, 1 M sarcosine (26.6 Å); open star, native Nank4−7*.

Sarcosine and TMAO Are More Effective in Inducing Secondary Structure Than Urea Is at Eliminating It
Figure  shows how [Θ]228 for thermally denatured Nank4−7* changes as a function of osmolyte concentration at 61 °C. A temperature higher than 55 °C was used so that higher osmolyte concentration could be employed while still not populating the native state. Clearly, urea is not as effective in reducing secondary structure in thermally denatured Nank4−7* as sarcosine and TMAO are at inducing such structure. It is known that TMAO is frequently more effective in folding proteins than urea is in unfolding them (,), and this is attributed largely to the fact that urea’s interaction free energy with the peptide backbone is opposite in sign and much smaller in magnitude than that of TMAO and sarcosine (,). It should be noted in Figure  that sarcosine and TMAO are equally effective at inducing secondary structure into thermally denatured Nank4−7*.

Molar ellipticity for the Nank 4−7* denatured state at 61 °C in 10 mM sodium phosphate, pH 7.0, and 200 mM NaCl as a function of cosolvent concentration. Molar ellipticity at 228 nm is given as a function of urea and several protecting osmolyte concentrations including urea (open squares), sarcosine (circles), and TMAO (triangles). Nank 4−7* in the absence of the osmolytes is represented as a closed square.

Structural Energetics of a DSE under Folding Conditions
Figures 1−4 provide evidence of significant effects of urea, sarcosine, and TMAO on secondary structure content of thermally denatured Nank4−7* that is coordinated in a well-defined manner with the hydrodynamic volume. The experiments explore how the structure of a DSE responds to changes in solvent quality induced by physiologically important osmolytes at a temperature in which the denatured state is &gt;99% populated. The same types of tendencies exhibited at high temperature also occur at temperatures in which folding/unfolding occurs, and this lower temperature range, that is of interest in protein folding, is the focus of the remainder of the  section.

Folding Cooperativity of Nank 4−7* in Urea and Sarcosine Solutions Is Dominated by Backbone Contributions
The m-value, an experimental thermodynamic quantity determined by use of the linear extrapolation method, measures the cooperativity of protein folding/unfolding induced by an osmolyte (). It is evaluated as the slope of the linear plot of protein stability vs osmolyte concentration, and it represents the water to 1 M osmolyte transfer free energy contributed by those side chain and backbone groups that become newly exposed upon denaturation by urea or newly buried on being forced to fold by protecting osmolytes (,,). Using transfer free energies and the Tanford transfer model, we recently demonstrated the ability to predict m-values of proteins successfully (,). The method accounts for transfer free energies of the native (ΔGtr,N) and denatured states (ΔGtr,D) by summing individual side chain and backbone contributions (Δgtr) (,,). The free energy difference (ΔGtr,D − ΔGtr,N = m-value) is then used to quantify residue-level free energy contributions of those groups that contribute to the m-value (,,). For Nank 4−7*, Table  lists the collective free energy contributions of side chains and of backbone upon transfer of the native and denatured states from water to 1 M urea or sarcosine. The model used for the denatured state is a self-avoiding random coil (,,). Determined in this way, m-values of opposite sign are obtained for denaturants and stabilizers, respectively, and the calculated and experimentally determined m-values are found to be in good agreement (Table ).

Nank4−7* Transfer Free Energies and m-Values
 	ΔGtr,D	ΔGtr,N	ΔΔGtr	m-value (kcal mol−1 M−1)	
osmolyte	sc	bb	sc	bb	sc	bb	predicted	exptl	
urea	0.87	−3.05	0.55	−1.09	0.32	−1.96	−1.64	−1.9 ± 0.1	
sarcosine	−0.26	4.07	−0.44	1.45	0.18	2.62	2.8	2.8 ± 0.2	
TMAO	−2.60	7.04	−1.34	2.50	−1.26	4.54	3.28	nd	
Transfer free energies (kcal/mol) for the denatured (D) and native (N) states from water to 1 M concentrations of either sarcosine or urea. For illustration, the transfer free energies for N or D states are dissected into contributions from side chains (sc) and backbone (bb). The m-value for sarcosine or urea (ΔΔGtr) is given by ΔGtr,D − ΔGtr,N as described in Auton and Bolen (). Sarcosine and urea experimental m-values for Nank4−7* were taken from Holthauzen and Bolen ().

It is clear from Table  that the side chains collectively contribute very little (0.18 and 0.32 kcal/mol) to the sarcosine and urea effects on protein stability; the major contribution comes from the backbone (2.62 and −1.96 kcal/mol). With urea, the large favorable backbone transfer promotes denaturation and overcomes a small resistance to unfolding (positive sign) collectively from the side chains; conversely, with sarcosine the large unfavorable interaction with backbone promotes folding while side chains collectively contribute little.

Urea Is a Good Solvent for the Peptide Backbone but Not for Side Chains
For transfer of Nank4−7* DSE from water to 1 M urea, Figure A gives a residue-level accounting of the contributions to the denatured state transfer free energy. The abscissa gives the surface area of the groups exposed in Nank4−7* DSE using a self-avoiding random coil as a model (). The ordinate is the group free energy contribution per square ångstrom, with the corresponding areas representing the free energy contribution to ΔGtr,D of that type of group. The algebraic sum of all contributions equals ΔGtr,D. It is clear from Figure A that the favorable interaction of peptide units with urea dominates the DSE transfer free energy and that the collective contribution of side chains is small and unfavorable (see Table ). It is also clear from Table  that nonpolar groups contribute both favorably and unfavorably to the transfer, with the sum being favorable in this case, amounting to ∼10% of the total denatured state transfer free energy. This means that the strength of hydrophobic interactions in this protein is relatively unchanged on transfer from water to urea solution.

Side chain and backbone contributions to ΔGtr,D of Nank4−7* DSE from water to 1 M urea (A), sarcosine (B), and TMAO (C) solution. Side chain and backbone transfer free energy contributions (Δgtr) divided by the corresponding surface areas exposed in the DSE are plotted as a function of those solvent-exposed surface areas. Backbone contributions are represented by the color dark green, whereas basic, acidic, polar, and nonpolar side chains are in blue, red, green, and yellow, respectively, and standard letters identify the side chains. The area under each bar is proportional to the transfer free energy contribution of that AA side chain to ΔGtr,D. The denatured state model used is a self-avoiding random coil with side chain and backbone surface areas evaluated as described previously (). Numerical values for side chains and backbone contributions are given in Table .

Side Chain and Backbone Contributions to ΔGtr,D
 	ΔGtr,D(cal/mol)	
osmolyte	nonpolar	polar	acidic	basic	∑sc	bb	total	
urea	−210	206	765	114	875	−3053	2178	
sarcosine	799	−449	−244	−370	−264	4071	3807	
TMAO	−520	−75	−1308	−753	−2598	7046	4448	
While the m-value gives the free energy dependence of folding/unfolding on osmolyte type and concentration, the transfer free energy of the denatured state (ΔGtr,D) provides the driving force responsible for the physical and spectral changes the DSE undergoes in response to osmolyte type and concentration as shown in Figures −. The breakdown of ΔGtr,D in Table  shows that transfer of the DSE from water to 1 M urea is favorable (0.87 − 3.05 = −2.18 kcal/mol). For the sake of illustration, DSE transfer to 6 M urea, as in the case of Nank4−7*, is highly favorable (CureaΔGtr,D = −13.1 kcal/mol), and this net favorable transfer free energy is composed of a −18 kcal/mol contribution from the favorable interaction of 6 M urea with the DSE peptide backbone and a (0.32 × 6 = 1.92 kcal/mol) unfavorable interaction of the urea with those groups destined to be buried on folding, along with 3.3 kcal/mol unfavorable urea interaction with the solvent-exposed side chains of the native protein. Based on these transfer free energies, it can be concluded that 6 M urea is a good solvent for the peptide backbone but not for the side chains. The magnitude of the favorable interaction of urea with peptide backbone is sufficient to drive DSE structural and spectral changes as shown in Figures , , and B.

TMAO and Sarcosine Are Poor Solvents for the Peptide Backbone with Side Chains Contributing Differentially but Marginally Overall to the DSE Transfer Free Energy
Figure  shows residue-level free energy contributions upon transfer of the denatured state from water to 1 M sarcosine (Figure B) and from water to 1 M TMAO (Figure C), and with both protecting osmolytes the unfavorable interaction with peptide backbone dominates the DSE transfer free energy. Clearly, sarcosine and TMAO are poor solvents for the peptide backbone. It is interesting to note that for transfer to sarcosine the side chains collectively contribute very little to the DSE transfer free energy (as reflected in Table ). This is because the unfavorable interaction with the hydrophobic class of side chains is offset by the favorable interaction between sarcosine and the polar and charged side chain classes of residues. In contrast to sarcosine, the hydrophobic side chains collectively interact favorably with TMAO as do the polar and charged side chains, leading to an overall favorable TMAO interaction with side chains that is opposed by a very large unfavorable and dominant TMAO interaction with backbone. Whereas both TMAO and sarcosine have the same general effects on the dimensions and structural accretion of the Nank4−7* DSE (see ref () and Figure ), the differences in their interactions with side chains (Figure  and Table ) serve to illustrate important distinctions between TMAO and sarcosine.

Nank4−7* DSE transfer free energy from 6 M urea (DSE6Murea) to water (DSEw). The left side shows the net transfer free energy change. The right side represents group contributions to the net free energy from transfer of the backbone to water (DSEbb,w), along with transfer of those side chains destined for burial on protein folding (DSEsc,B,w) and side chains that are solvent exposed in the native state (DSEsc,N,w).

Discussion
Osmolytes Induce Large Changes in the Hydrodynamic Volume and Secondary Structure of Thermally Denatured Nank4−7*
Transfer of (55 °C) thermally denatured Nank4−7* in 6 M urea to progressively poorer solvents, water and then sarcosine or TMAO solutions, causes large reduction in Rh of the DSE with concomitant accretion of secondary structure. Specifically, the DSE contracts (Figures  and B) such that in 1 M sarcosine its volume ratio is about twice that of native Nank4−7*, a highly compact ensemble approximating the relative size expected of a premolten globule state (). Moreover, the magnitude of structure accretion (C to B in Figure ) accompanying this contraction is itself substantial, amounting to ∼30% of the total CD change possible on going from the protein denatured in 6 M urea to the fully folded state (C to A in Figure ) at this temperature.

What kind of structure is accumulated upon Nank4−7* contraction? While the ellipticities of unstructured polypeptide structures at Θ228 are positive or close to zero, β-sheet, β-turns, and α-helices are all negative at this wavelength (). Intrachain hydrogen bonding defines backbone−backbone interactions, and the low contact order α-helix and β-hairpin structures are likely to be populated because they are particularly effective at reducing exposure of the peptide backbone to sarcosine or TMAO, thus mitigating the positive free energy of the DSE upon transfer of the peptide backbone to these poor solvents. Relative to water, osmolytes like sarcosine and TMAO increase helical content in peptides that have helix-forming propensity (). Nank4−7* has ample α-helix and β-hairpin propensities, given that the native protein is 46% helical and contains several β-hairpins (). Indeed, the type of interactions responsible for decreasing Rh (through intrachain hydrogen bonds) is also the one responsible for secondary structure, resulting in the accretion of secondary structure and contraction of the denatured ensemble being interrelated processes (Figure ).

These results illustrate that under the equilibrium conditions presented the DSE can accommodate dimensional and structure accretion changes from a random coil to a premolten globule without substantively populating the native state. Such behavior provides strong support for the hierarchical model of protein folding under equilibrium conditions, and the high population of the DSE species enables investigations of the nature of accreted structure in the DSE and the extent to which it is native-like.

There is ample evidence that structural and dimensional changes we observed with the DSE at high temperature also occur around room temperature, where most protein folding studies have been performed. The osmolyte urea is known to expand, and osmolytes like TMAO and sarcosine contract the Rh of the DSE at 25 °C () and at 55 °C shown here. Contraction and structure accretion are interrelated by (Rh)−3 being directly proportional to [Θ] as shown by Uversky and Fink in the range of room temperature and at 55 °C shown here. What is missing is the relationship between the free energy of the DSE and the DSE’s structural and dimensional changes as solvent quality is changed. Such information is available at 25 °C from transfer free energy measurements (), thus allowing a structural energetic interpretation of the solvent-induced DSE contraction and structural accretion frequently observed at room temperature.

Structural Energetics of Osmolyte-Mediated Changes in the DSE of Nank4−7*
The sign of the transfer free energy for a denatured protein provides the basis for concepts such as solvophilicity, solvophobicity, and solvent quality (,,). The sign and magnitude of the transfer free energy for the entire denatured state (ΔGtr,D), obtained by summing the transfer free energy contributions of all its constituent groups, determine the overall solvent quality experienced by the polymer chain (,,). Key to discussions of hydrophobic interactions and hydrogen bonding are the striking parallels in how these forces are mediated by water and protecting osmolytes and in how they effect protein folding and changes in the DSE. On the basis of the positive free energy of transfer (Δgtr) of nonpolar groups from a nonpolar solvent to water, water is said to be a poor solvent for nonpolar groups (−). Upon transfer to water the hydrodynamic radius of a DSE that contains nonpolar residues contracts in a process referred to as hydrophobic collapse (). The DSE collapses because monomer−monomer contacts (nonpolar side chain−nonpolar side chain, i.e., hydrophobic interactions) are more favorable than monomer−solvent contacts (,−).

As with hydrophobic collapse, protecting osmolyte solvents such as sarcosine and TMAO solutions also are quite effective at causing contraction of the DSE, but a different part of the protein structure is responsible, namely, the peptide backbone (). Δgtr of the peptide backbone from water to either TMAO or sarcosine solution is positive and depends monotonically on osmolyte concentration, thus classifying sarcosine and TMAO as poor solvents for the peptide backbone (,,−). Upon transfer of the denatured state from water to sarcosine or TMAO solution, monomer−monomer contacts (backbone−backbone, i.e., intrachain hydrogen-bonding interactions) of the DSE are more favorable than backbone−sarcosine/TMAO contacts, thus causing DSE contraction and accretion of secondary structure (,) in what is known as the osmophobic effect (). In both instances, the impetus for DSE contraction is the respective positive free energy of transfer, with nonpolar interactions favored over the interactions between the nonpolar group and water in the case of hydrophobic collapse and with intrachain hydrogen-bonding interactions favored over the interactions between peptide backbone units and sarcosine or TMAO solution in the case of osmophobic collapse. In essence, both hydrophobic interactions and hydrogen bonding owe their magnitudes to solvent quality.

DSE Contraction and Secondary Structure Accretion Are Driven by the Free Energy Increase on DSE Transfer to Successively Poorer Solvents, Water and Sarcosine
To understand how the driving force for DSE structural and spectral changes arises from denatured state transfer free energies (ΔGtr,D), it is useful to focus on the details of free energy contributions to the transfer. Table  shows that Nank4−7* DSE transfer from 1 M urea to water at 25 °C, ΔGtr,D, is 2.18 kcal mol−1 M−1, and the net transfer from 6 M urea to water is 6-fold larger, 13.1 kcal/mol (Figure A). The DSE will respond to this large unfavorable free energy in ways to reduce contact between thte peptide backbone and water. Depending on conditions this may include transition to the native state, DSE aggregation, or DSE contraction ().

Figure B shows how this large net unfavorable free energy upon transfer of the DSE from 6 M urea to water is parsed into backbone and side chain contributions. First, (6 × 3.0 ≅ 18.3 kcal/mol) in free energy change occurs on transfer to the DSE peptide backbone, showing that in comparison to 6 M urea water is a poor solvent for the peptide backbone. Thus, a strong relative increase in intrachain hydrogen bonding occurs on DSE transfer as urea−backbone interactions decline to zero, and this drives contraction of Rh and accretion of structure. At the same time, the side chains collectively favor transfer to water (6 × (−0.875) ≅ −5.3 kcal/mol), tending to cause some Rh expansion of the DSE, but this is overridden by the +18.3 kcal/mol effect on the backbone (see Table  and Figure A). As a class, the DSE’s nonpolar groups favor the transfer to water (6 × (−0.21) ≅ −1.26 kcal/mol) (Table ), but as also shown by others the effect is quite small (), particularly in comparison with transfer of the peptide backbone.

In summary, we emphasize that the strength of hydrophobic interactions is not altered substantively by the presence of urea. Indeed, small clusters of hydrophobic groups have been observed in the DSEs, even in high urea concentration. By contrast, urea significantly affects hydrogen-bonding interactions in the DSE. Urea interacts favorably with the peptide backbone through direct H-bonding (), which causes disruption of hydrogen-bonded secondary structure and expansion of the polymer chain. Denaturation occurs at urea concentrations in which the favorable urea−backbone interactions that promote the DSE exceed the strength of those intramolecular interactions that maintain the integrity of the native state. Thermodynamically, these processes are reversed on dilution of urea-denatured protein to native conditions.

Hydrophobic Interactions in Osmolyte Solutions
For decades hydrophobic interactions have been considered the driving force for DSE contraction on transfer from urea solution to water (,). However, from a polymer science perspective Figures  and  show that the free energy of intrachain hydrogen-bonding interactions changes considerably more than hydrophobic interactions upon DSE transfer from urea to water. This is not to say that hydrophobic interactions play no role in the DSE contraction and ultimate transition to the native state. Indeed, hydrophobic interactions remain strong even in 8 M urea solution. Our view is that while hydrophobic interaction free energy remains approximately the same in urea and in water, the reduction in DSE Rh resulting from the increased intrachain hydrogen bonding upon diluting the urea ultimately increases the local concentration of hydrophobic side chains. This leads to increased nonpolar group proximity, and hydrophobic interactions increasingly engage. With further urea dilution the reduced urea−backbone interactions continue to decline until they are unable to rival the strength of all the intramolecular interactions involved in maintaining the integrity of the native state, and at this point the native state populates to a measurable degree.

The free energy effects of sarcosine and TMAO on Nank4−7* DSE structure and dimensions provide interesting contrasts to that of urea. First, the large unfavorable interaction between these osmolytes and the peptide backbone (see Figure B,C) is responsible for the large positive ΔGtr,D which is ameliorated by reducing contact of the backbone with solvent through contraction of the Rh concomitant with accretion of secondary structure. Table  shows that for both protecting osmolytes the side chains collectively oppose the large unfavorable interaction of osmolyte with backbone. However, a major important difference between the two protecting osmolytes can be found in how the nonpolar groups respond to the transfer. Panels B and C of Figure  show that the nonpolar groups interact unfavorably with sarcosine while interacting favorably with TMAO. That is, in TMAO solution secondary structure accretion, DSE contraction, and protein folding are driven by the unfavorable interaction with the peptide backbone, and these processes are opposed to a small extent by hydrophobic interactions. In the presence of sarcosine, DSE contraction, structure accretion, and protein folding again are driven by the unfavorable interaction with the peptide backbone, but in this case hydrophobic interactions favor contraction and folding. These differences between osmolytes can potentially be used in further differentiation of hydrophobic and osmophobic effects within DSEs ().

Intrinsically disordered proteins provide an opportunity to examine further the roles of hydrophobic groups and backbone in contracting the DSE and folding the protein. These proteins are disordered in aqueous solution and are significantly depleted in bulky nonpolar and aromatic side chains (), and those whose sequence contains folding information can be forced to fold if solvent quality is made poor enough. Addition of TMAO or sarcosine to examples of such intrinsically disordered proteins causes contraction of the DSE and cooperative folding to species that have structure and function (,−). For a DSE the size of Nank4−7*, Table  provides data from which it can be shown that a 6 M TMAO solution raises the backbone free energy by 42 kcal/mol and that whatever nonpolar groups are present should oppose folding to a modest degree. TMAO solution is clearly a much poorer solvent for the backbone than water, and the large unfavorable free energy of the peptide backbone is reduced through contraction/secondary structure accretion of the DSE and particularly from burial of the backbone through folding. The fact that such proteins have low hydrophobicity indices emphasizes the key role of hydrogen bonding and backbone burial in TMAO-induced folding of IDPs.

Acknowledgments
Early in this work, Doug Barrick was most helpful in discussions and providing the expression system for Nank4−7*, which we gratefully acknowledge. We also thank Matthew Auton for preparing some figures and George Rose for contributions in discussions throughout the work and in editing the manuscript.

