Nox enzymes
comprise a family
of oxygen- and NADPH-dependent oxidoreductases that produce superoxide
and/or hydrogen peroxide in a variety of cell types and tissues, often
in response to hormones, growth factors, or immune mediators.− The classical NADPH oxidase, the Nox2 system, is strongly expressed
in phagocytic cells such as neutrophils and macrophages in which the
enzyme generates high levels of ROS as a major mechanism of antimicrobial
host defense. Nox2, the catalytic subunit, is membrane-associated
and binds to a second membrane protein, p22phox. The latter provides a proline-rich domain (PRD) that serves
as a docking site for the “organizer” subunit p47phox, which in
turn binds to the activating subunit p67phox., The small GTPase Rac also participates in
activation by binding to p67phox. Upon exposure of phagocytes to microbes or inflammatory
mediators that act upon cell surface receptors, these components along
with p40phox assemble at the membrane, triggered in part by phosphorylation of
p47phox and GTP binding to Rac, resulting
in activation of Nox2.

Nox1 and Nox3 but not Nox4 are regulated
in a manner analogous
to that of Nox2 involving regulatory subunits that are homologous
to p47phox and p67phox.− Like Nox2, Nox1 is acutely activated by receptor-linked agonists
(see, e.g., refs () and ()) and mediates
various cellular responses, for example, in vascular smooth muscle
and epithelial cells. Acute regulation
of Nox3 is less well documented. While Nox1–Nox4 all require
p22phox,, p22phox functions in a different manner for Nox4 for
which the p22phox PRD docking domain is
not required for binding to regulatory subunits but is needed for
stability, perhaps conformational integrity, and/or maturation/localization.− Rather, Nox4 activity does not require regulatory
subunits. Activation of Nox1–Nox3 but not Nox4 also requires
the small GTPase Rac1.,, Similarly, Nox5, Duox1, and Duox2 are all acutely activated by receptor-linked
stimuli that elevate cellular calcium levels via their calcium-binding
domains.−

Nox4 is expressed at its highest levels in
the kidney, but is also widely expressed
in many other cell types and hence may
have a cellular function that is
more general than those of some other Nox enzymes whose tissue distributions
are more restricted. For example, Nox3 is expressed almost exclusively
in the inner ear where it functions in the development of otoliths. The activity of Nox4 can be modestly stimulated
by a DNA polymerase-interacting protein POLDIP2, which was first suggested to regulate Nox1 and Nox4 on
the basis of its binding in a yeast two-hybrid screen to p22phox; however, the biological significance of this
interaction is unclear, and Nox4 is not generally considered to be
acutely regulated by subunit interactions. Rather, the most striking
difference between Nox4 and other Nox/Duox enzymes is that Nox4 is
constitutively active, in the absence of regulatory
subunits or calcium-elevating stimuli. This has led to the concept
that Nox4-dependent ROS generation is regulated primarily by its expression
level., This study explores the hypothesis that
in addition to expression levels, the activity of Nox4 can be acutely
regulated not by subunits or calcium but by tissue pO2 and
that its output of ROS serves as a signal that reports cellular oxygen
levels.

The identity of the reactive oxygen product of Nox4
has been a
matter of debate. Recent studies reported that the major product from
Nox4 is H2O2, although
other studies (e.g., refs (), (), and ()) have detected superoxide.
While some of the discrepancies may have resulted from the use of
nonspecific assay reagents in detecting ROS,− some groups
have suggested that the failure to detect superoxide results from
membrane compartmentalization of Nox4-generated superoxide. While
many Nox/Duox enzymes are localized at least in part at the cell surface
where they can release their reactive oxygen product into the extracellular
milieu, Nox4 is localized within the cell where it is reportedly localized
to internal membranes such as the endoplasmic reticulum, nuclear membrane,
and mitochondria.,− While the exact subcellular location of Nox4 is controversial,
association with any of these internal membranes is expected to direct
reactive oxygen products into the membrane-enclosed cavity. Because
superoxide is charged and unable to pass through lipid membranes while
hydrogen peroxide is neutral and can readily traverse membranes and/or
aquaporin channels, external probes should not detect the superoxide
and would detect only hydrogen peroxide. According to this scenario,
the cryptic superoxide dismutes within a membrane-limited cavity to
form hydrogen peroxide, which escapes and is detected by ROS probes.
To identify the ROS product of Nox4 in the absence of confounding
membrane compartments, we have used a detergent-solubilized, partially
purified preparation of Nox4.

Materials and Methods
Materials
Full-length
cDNA encoding human Nox4 (amino
acid residues 1–578) and N-terminally His6-tagged
Nox4 were cloned into pcDNA 3.1 and pCIG vectors, respectively (Invitrogen).
cDNA encoding N- or C-terminal His6-tagged full-length
p22phox was cloned into pCIR (Invitrogen).
The rabbit polyclonal antibody against a C-terminal synthetic peptide
within the segment of amino acid residues 500–578 of human
Nox4 was from Novus Biologicals, Inc.; mouse monoclonal antibody 2366
to His6 was from Cell Signaling Technologies, and mouse
monoclonal antibody 44.1 against human p22phox was from Santa Cruz Biotechnology. Rabbit polyclonal antibodies
to human lamin A (ab8980), calreticulin (ab4-100), and cadherin (ab6529-200)
were obtained from Abcam. Goat anti-rabbit IgG and anti-mouse secondary
antibodies linked to horseradish peroxidase were from Bio-Rad and
Promega, respectively. Ni-NTA agarose was purchased from Qiagen, and
amylose agarose and Factor Xa protease were from New England Biolabs.
Protease inhibitor cocktail (EDTA-free) and Amplex Red were from Roche
and Invitrogen, respectively. FAD, NADPH, diphenyleneiodonium (DPI),
phenylmethanesulfonyl fluoride (PMSF), protein A-agarose Fast Flow
[50% (v/v)], 3,3′-diaminobenzidine, and nuclei EZ lysis buffer
were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich (St. Louis, MO). Percoll was from
GE Healthcare Bio-Science AB. HEK293 cells stably transfected with
Nox4 were the kind gift of R. P. Brandes (Goethe University, Frankfurt
am Main, Germany). Micromat Gas tanks containing various oxygen/nitrogen
mixtures were from Matheson Tri-Gas (Hilliard, OH).

Transient Transfection
of Nox4
HEK293 cells were seeded
at a density of 1 × 106 cells/plate (10 cm diameter)
and grown for 24 h to 40–50% confluence in Dulbecco’s
modified Eagle’s medium with 10% fetal serum, 100 units/mL
penicillin, and 0.1 mg/mL streptomycin. Cells were transfected 48
h prior to use with mammalian expression vectors encoding Nox4, His6-Nox4, His6-Nox4(P437H), His6-p22phox, or empty vector, using FuGENE6 (Roche
Molecular Biochemicals).

Subcellular Fractionation by Differential
Centrifugation
Stable or transiently transfected HEK293 cells
(typically ∼1.5
× 108 cells) cultured in ∼25 tissue culture
plates (10 cm) were harvested, washed twice in PBS, suspended in nuclei
EZ lysis buffer (pH 7.4) (Sigma-Aldrich) containing protease inhibitor
cocktail (Complete Mini, Roche Diagnostics) with 0.2 mM PMSF, and
disrupted using a glass homogenizer with a loose fitting pestle (3
min at 4 °C). The homogenate was centrifuged at 800g for 5 min in a Beckman TL-100 rotor at 4 °C to collect a nucleus-enriched
fraction (NEF), and the supernatant was centrifuged at 10000g in a Beckman TL-100 rotor for 30 min to obtain the low-speed
pellet (LSP). The supernatant (Sn) was centrifuged at 105000g for 60 min to yield the high-speed pellet (HSP) and the
high-speed supernatant (HSS).

Partial Purification of
His6-Nox4
From 25
to 30 mg of total lysate protein, the combined NEF and LSP were resuspended
by homogenization on ice in buffer B [25 mM Hepes (pH 7.4) with 130
mM NaCl, 0.1 mM MgCl2, 10% glycerol, 1 μg/mL protease
inhibitor cocktail, 0.5 mM PMSF, 20 μM FAD, 1% Nonidet P-40,
and 0.2% deoxycholate] and then stirred gently for 30 min at 4 °C.
The extract was centrifuged at 105000g for 60 min
at 4 °C in a Beckman TL-100 rotor, and the supernatant was applied
to a Ni-NTA affinity column (10 mm × 15 mm) equilibrated with
buffer B. The column was washed with 15 mL each of buffer B and then
buffer B containing 10 mM imidazole. His6-Nox4 was eluted
with buffer B containing 100 mM imidazole, and 0.2 mL fractions were
collected. Fractions showing NADPH-dependent Amplex Red oxidizing
activity were pooled, concentrated by Amicon Ultra-4 filtration, and
dializyed with two buffer changes against 250 mL of buffer B for 24
h at 4 °C to remove imidazole. The final material was characterized
as described in  (Table  and Figure 4 of the ).

Partial Purification
of His6-Nox4 Using Ni2+-Bead Affinity Chromatography


 	 	 	 	specific
activity [nmol of H2O2 min–1 (mg of protein)−1]	 	 	 	
sample	total protein (mg)	heme (pmol/mg)	total heme (nmol)	without
DPI	with DPI	purification (x-fold)	total activity (nmol of H2O2/min)	yield (%)	
cell lysate	26	16	0.42	0.35	0.07	1	9.1	100.0	
NEF/LSP	6.7	25	0.17	1.1	0.18	3.1	7.2	79	
His6-Nox4	0.027	480	0.013	94	10	270	2.5	28	
NADPH-dependent hydrogen peroxide
generating activity was measured by Amplex Red oxidation and heme
content by oxidized-minus-reduced difference spectroscopy as detailed
in . Samples are those
indicated in Figures 2 and 3 of the .

Isolation
of Human Neutrophils
Normal human neutrophils
were obtained from peripheral blood of normal healthy donors after
obtaining informed consent as described previously and suspended in 0.9% saline at a density of 1–2
× 108 cells/mL. Human neutrophils were washed by centrifugation
and resuspended in PBS (pH 7.4) containing 10 mM glucose.

Preparation
of Plasma Membrane and Cytosolic Fractions from
Human Neutrophils
After disruption of cells by sonication
(3 × 5 s) on ice, cytosolic and plasma membrane-enriched fractions
were separated by centrifugation at 105000g in a
Beckman TL-100 rotor for 30 min at 3 °C using a Percoll density
gradient as described previously to obtain
a plasma membrane-enriched fraction and a cytosolic fraction.

Measurement
of Superoxide
Cytochrome c (final concentration
of 100 μM) was added to a 0.8 mL cuvette
containing 4.2 × 105 neutrophils in PBS (pH 7.4),
and cells were activated at 25 °C with 0.12 μM PMA in the
absence and presence of superoxide dismutase (300 units/mL). As described
previously, the rate of cytochrome c reduction was monitored for 10 min by the increase in
absorption at 550 nm, monitored using an Ultraspec 3000 spectrophotometer
(Pharmacia Biotech) and quantified using an extinction coefficient
of 19.5 mM–1 cm–1 correcting for
the low rate of cytochrome c reduction in the presence
of SOD. Cytochrome c reduction by 2.1 × 106 Nox4-transfected cells was monitored using the same method,
without activation by PMA. Neutrophil cell-free cytochrome c reductase activity was assayed in 0.8 mL of a reaction
mixture consisting of PBS (pH 7.4), 20 μM GTPγS, 20 μM
FAD, 100 μM NADPH, 100 μM cytochrome c, and 5 mM MgCl2, without or with 300 units/mL SOD, using
25 μg of protein of plasma membrane fraction with 0.2 mg of
protein cytosol. The Nox2 system was activated by the addition of
arachidonate (final concentration of 200 μM). Cytochrome c reduction by lysates or cell fractions from Nox4-expressing
HEK293 cells in PBS (pH 7.4) containing 10 mM glucose was measured
by the same method, except that the final cytochrome c concentration was 40 μM and GTPγS was omitted.

In some experiments, superoxide was also measured using dihydroethidium,
according to ref () and using the same conditions that were used for cytochrome c reductase measurements.

Measurement of Hydrogen
Peroxide
For intact cells,
100 μM Amplex Red final and 0.6 unit/mL HRP were included in
place of cytochrome c, and the reaction was initiated
by the addition of cells or fractions containing Nox4. The linear
increase in the absorption of resorufin produced by oxidation of Amplex
Red was measured at 572 nm. For experiments
monitoring fluorescence, respective excitation and emission wavelengths
of 572 and 583 nm, respectively, were used for cuvette measurements
or fixed excitation and emission ranges of 540 ± 40 and 620 ±
40 nm, respectively, for microplate measurements. Reactions were monitored
at 25 °C for 10 min using a Synergy 2 Multi-Model Microplate
Reader and Gen 5, version 2.00 (Bio Tek), or, in oxygen dependence
experiments, using a Pharmacia Biotec Ultraspec 3000 or a Hitachi
F-4500 fluorescence spectrophotometer. For cell lysates, a final protein
concentration of 0.25 mg/mL was added to a reaction mixture containing
20 μM FAD, 50 μM glucose 6-phosphate, and 50 μM
NADP+. Endogenous glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PDH)
was sufficient to support the NADPH oxidase reaction in lysates. For
the isolated NEF/LSP cell fractions and for partially purified His6-Nox4, the same protocol was used, except that the indicated
concentrations of enzyme or protein were added, and commercial G6PDH
(0.25 unit/mL) was included. For cell-free measurements of Amplex
Red oxidation, there is a well-documented interference by reduced pyridine nucleotides. However, we have found
that the inclusion of an NADPH-regenerating system consisting of glucose
6-phosphate and G6PDH, along with NADP+, markedly decreased
the background rate. The remaining low residual rate of enzyme-independent
Amplex Red oxidation was then subtracted to obtain corrected rates.
The concentration of Amplex Red oxidized was calculated using an extinction
coefficient at 572 nm of 54 mM–1 cm–1, or when fluorescence was measured
using a standard curve generated from the addition of known amounts
of hydrogen peroxide.

In some experiments, hydrogen peroxide
was quantified using an Apollo 4000 Free Radical Analyzer (World Precision
Instruments), equipped with a hydrogen peroxide electrode. The electrode
system was used according to the manufacturer’s instructions
and allowed omission of HRP from assay mixtures.

Regulation
of the Oxygen Concentration
The gas equilibration
system consisted of a tightly capped 1.5 mL cuvette with a gas delivery
needle and a gas exit needle that also served as a delivery port for
addition of reagents. All experiments were conducted at 25 °C
in a total volume of 0.8 mL. The mixture was equilibrated by gentle
bubbling (approximately one bubble per second) with the indicated
percent of oxygen/nitrogen gas mixtures, with continuous gentle stirring
for 10 min using a magnetic stirrer. Concentrated stocks of activators
(either PMA or arachidonate) were pre-equilibrated by being continuously
bubbled with N2 gas, and cells or cell fractions were activated
by injecting 10 μL of activator through the gas exit needle
with a 20 μL Hamilton syringe. Absorption, fluorescence, or
luminescence measurements were taken as described above.

Immunoprecipitation
and Western Blot Analysis
HEK293
cells were incubated in lysis buffer containing 1% Nonidet P-40 and
10% glycerol as described previously. The mixture was gently mixed by rotation for 1 h at 4 °C with
antibody (30 μg) against Nox4 with 25 μL of protein A-agarose
Fast Flow beads (50% slurry). The beads were washed three times with
lysis buffer, and bound proteins were eluted into 30 μL of Laemmli
sample buffer (Bio-Rad). Proteins were separated via sodium dodecyl
sulfate–polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (4 to 15% gel) and
transferred to an Immobilon PVDF membrane (Millipore). Proteins were
visualized by being incubated with primary antibodies overnight at
4 °C with gentle shaking and then with horseradish peroxidase-linked
secondary antibody (1:3000 dilution, 2 h). Bands were visualized by
chemiluminescence after the addition of Super Signal West Pico Chemiluminescent
Substrate (Thermo Scientific), according to the manufacturer’s
instructions.

Spectrophotometric Determination of Heme
Solubilized
cell lysate, combined NEF/LSP fractions, or partially purified proteins
in buffer B were centrifuged at 105000g for 30 min
at 4 °C to remove any particulate matter. Reduced-minus-oxidized
difference spectra were recorded at 5 min intervals after the addition
of a few crystals of sodium dithionite until a stable spectrum was
achieved. The concentration of heme was determined from the difference
spectrum near the Soret peak using a difference extinction coefficient
at 426 minus 410 nm of 200 mM–1 cm–1.

Results and Discussion
Reactive
Oxygen Product of Nox4
Consistent with earlier
publications, Figure A demonstrates that in
intact HEK293 cells stably expressing Nox4, the major product is H2O2 and very little superoxide is seen. In addition
to the use of the Amplex Red method, this result was confirmed using
a hydrogen peroxide electrode system. The electrode system reported
approximately the same static concentrations of H2O2 as did Amplex Red when cells were removed but detected a
rate of hydrogen peroxide formation in the presence of cells that
was approximately 2/3 of that of the Amplex
Red method. This was presumably due to the “trapping”
effect of HRP in the Amplex Red assay, which allows detection of all
of the released H2O2, whereas the electrode
measures a rate of H2O2 that is decreased because
of the competing metabolism by cellular catalase and peroxidases.
This is in contrast to the case for neutrophils (Figure B), which express Nox2 but not other isoforms and show superoxide
as the major product, with a smaller amount of H2O2, formed presumably as a dismutation product of superoxide.
Superoxide detection reagents used in some earlier studies can be
subject to certain artifacts such as nonselectivity for ROS/RNS and
redox cycling that can artifactually generate superoxide,− and this has raised questions about the identity of the ROS product(s)
generated by Nox4. Our superoxide measurements were taken using SOD-inhibited
cytochrome c reduction, which, while less sensitive
than methods based on fluorescence or luminescence, is considered
to be a specific and reliable “gold standard”. Likewise,
Amplex Red under controlled conditions is thought to reliably and
quantitatively measure H2O2., Thus, these data confirm an earlier report that H2O2 is the major Nox4 product elaborated
by intact cells.

Hydrogen peroxide and superoxide generation by Nox4. (A)
Hydrogen
peroxide (gray bars) and superoxide (black bars) were measured in
intact Nox4-expressing HEK293 cells as described in . The reaction was initiated by adding
5.25 × 105 cells to 0.8 mL of PBS (pH 7.4) containing
0.65 unit of HRP and 100 μM Amplex Red to monitor H2O2 generating activity. Superoxide generation was quantified
as superoxide dismutase (SOD)-inhibited cytochrome c reduction, conducted in 0.8 mL of PBS (pH 7.4) containing 40 μM
cytochrome c with and without added SOD (final concentration
of 300 units/mL). (B) Hydrogen peroxide (gray bars) and superoxide
(black bars) were measured in isolated human neutrophils as described
for panel A, using 4.2 × 105 cells in 0.8 mL of PBS,
and initiating the reaction with 0.12 μM PMA. (C) Western blots
of partially purified His6-Nox4 and His6-Nox4(P437H)
were stained with antibody to His6 or p22phox. The heme content of each preparation, determined by reduced-minus-oxidized
difference absorption spectroscopy, is shown below the Western blot.
(D) Hydrogen peroxide was quantified by Amplex Red oxidation in lysates,
the combined NEF/LSP fraction, or the partially purified Nox4 from
cells transfected with either His6-Nox4 (black bars) or
His6-Nox4(P437H) (gray bars), as described in . (E) Superoxide generation
was measured by SOD-inhibited cytochrome c reduction
in lysates, the combined NEF/LSP fraction, or the partially purified
Nox4 from cells transfected with either His6-Nox4 (black
bars) or His6-Nox4(P437H) (gray bars). Error bars represent
the mean ± SEM of three determinations using fractions from one
transfection, and the experiment shown was repeated three times.

Similar results were seen in broken
cell preparations of Nox4-expressing
and control cells (Figure 1 of the ), except that a higher background of cytochrome c reduction was seen that was only slightly inhibited by
SOD. This is likely due to the presence of endogenous cytochrome c reductases such as P450 reductase for which cytochrome c reduction is not mediated by superoxide. In these preparations,
there was no detectable difference in cytochrome c reduction in Nox4-expressing versus control cells. In contrast,
H2O2 was readily detected in Nox4-expressing
but not control cells, with the H2O2 identity
validated by inhibition by catalase but not SOD (Figure 1 of the ). Because of the very
limited amounts of material available and the large volume needed
for measurements using the H2O2 electrode system,
it was not feasible to use the electrode system for measurements in
broken cell or purified preparations.

It can be argued that
because of its transmembrane topology with
its NADPH-binding site located on the cytosolic side of the membrane
and the oxygen-reducing heme (heme B) located near the membrane-enclosed
lumen, Nox4 might release superoxide into the interior of a membrane
compartment where it is trapped due to its charge and therefore inaccessible
to membrane-impermeant probes. There, it would be expected to undergo
spontaneous and/or SOD-catalyzed dismutation to form H2O2. The latter might then diffuse through the membrane
where it is detected by an extracellular probe. Measurements made
in both cell lysates and isolated membrane-containing cell fractions
are also subject to the same theoretical concerns.

We therefore
measured superoxide and hydrogen peroxide in a detergent-solubilized,
partially purified preparation of Nox4 in which compartmentalization
is not a concern. Details of the purification methods are provided
in the  and are summarized
in Table . Briefly, cells and lysates from
His6-Nox4-transfected cells were first verified to generate
H2O2 at a rate nearly the same as the rate of
cells and lysates from cells transfected with wild-type Nox4, and
H2O2 generation was verified to be largely inhibited
by the general flavoprotein dehydrogenase inhibitor diphenyleneiodonium
(DPI) (Figure 2 of the ). The NADPH-binding site mutant His6-Nox4(P437H), which
is inactive, was used as a negative control and showed levels of H2O2 generation nearly the same as those of nontransfected
cells. Cells were fractionated by centrifugation and density methods
into a nucleus-enriched fraction (NEF), a low-speed pellet (LSP),
a high-speed pellet (HSP), and a high-speed supernatant (HSS), as
shown in Figure 3 of the . Anti-His6, anti-Nox4, and anti-p22phox immunoreactivity was seen primarily in the NEF and LSP fractions,
which also showed the highest level of DPI-inhibited H2O2 production. These two fractions also stained for the
nuclear marker Lamin A. While the colocalization of overexpressed
Nox4 with nuclear markers does not definitively imply the nuclear
localization of Nox4 in a natively expressing cell, it is interesting
to note that Nox4 has been reported in several studies to be associated
with nuclei;, nevertheless, other studies have
reported localizations in other subcellular locations, including the
endoplamic reticulum, plasma membrane, and mitochondria.,,− NEF and LSP
fractions were combined and used as a source for further purification
using detergent solubilization followed by affinity chromatography
on Ni2+-agarose, as shown in Figure 4 of the . The overall purification
scheme is summarized in Table . The specific
activity of the final preparation was enriched 270-fold over that
of the starting material with an activity yield of 28%, based on DPI-inhibited
H2O2 generation. Heme enrichment was not used
as an indicator of purification, because other endogenous heme proteins
(e.g., cytochrome P450) may have been present in the less pure fractions.
The final material showed a prominent band at 67 kDa (the predicted
size of His6-Nox4) that was immunoreactive for both His6 and Nox4 (Figure 4B of the ). In addition, the preparation contained p22phox and heme (Figure 4 of the  and Figure C).

In Figure , the generation
of superoxide
(panel E) and the generation of hydrogen peroxide (panel D) were compared
in lysates, the combined NER/LSP fractions, and the partially purified
Nox4. Material isolated from cells transfected with the enzymatically
inactive Nox4(P437H) was used to control for the possibility of artifactual
co-isolation of other non-Nox4 ROS-generating activities. Approximately
80% of the product from the isolated Nox4 was detected as H2O2, whereas ∼20% was detected as superoxide. The
finding of both products may account for apparent discrepancies in
the literature concerning the identity of the reactive oxygen species
produced by Nox4, because both species are formed. Alternatively,
a small superoxide signal may have been artifactually amplified through
the use of redox cycling, superoxide-generating ROS detection probes
in some studies. On the basis of the enzyme concentration calculated
from the heme content (assuming two hemes per Nox4 enzyme), ROS product
formation corresponds to turnover numbers of 90 min–1 for superoxide and 360 min–1 for hydrogen peroxide.
Because H2O2 requires the two-electron reduction
of oxygen whereas formation of superoxide requires only a single electron,
this means that approximately 90% of the electron flux passing through
the enzyme is directed toward the formation of H2O2 and ∼10% goes to form superoxide. Thus, isolated,
detergent-solubilized His6-Nox4 forms primarily H2O2, with a small amount of released superoxide. This is
consistent with the idea that superoxide is an intermediate in the
formation of H2O2 by Nox4 and that occasionally
this intermediate is released and can be detected. Because the oxygen-reducing
heme group is an obligate one-electron donor, a superoxide intermediate
is mechanistically plausible, whereas the direct formation of H2O2 without a superoxide intermediate is mechanistically
implausible. It should be pointed out that the measured rate of turnover
of Nox4 is only 10–20% of that of Nox2. While this value is
still quite respectable (e.g., some P450 enzymes show rates below
10 min–1), we speculate that the rate of Nox2 that
is much higher than that of Nox4 may represent an evolutionary adaptation
to allow production of cytotoxic levels of H2O2 for microbial killing, compared with the lower concentrations of
H2O2 that are likely to be needed for signal
transduction.

Oxygen Dependence of Nox4
Herein,
we explore the hypothesis
that Nox4 activity is regulated not only by its expression level but
also by oxygen availability and that it therefore functions as an
oxygen sensor. For an enzyme to function as an oxygen sensor, it must
fulfill two criteria. First, a sine qua non of an
oxygen-sensing enzyme is an unusually high Km for oxygen that allows it to respond to physiological ranges
of oxygen concentrations, which in tissues can range from 2–5%
to around 20% in the lung, with intermediate concentrations in the
circulatory system. Second, its enzymatic
activity must be linked to an effect or signal that can be translated
into a cellular response. While Nox4 has been speculated to function
in this manner,,, the first of these criteria has not been previously evaluated. At
least two oxygen-dependent enzymes, the HIF1-α prolyl hydroxylase
PHD and the HIF1-α asparagine hydroxylase FIH-1, fit this paradigm
and function as bona fide oxygen sensors, linked
to the HIF1-α-dependent transcriptional response to hypoxia., In both cases, the enzymes have high Km values for oxygen (10–20% O2 for PHD and ∼8%
O2 for FIH-1) that render the enzyme activity proportional
to physiological ranges of tissue pO2 values. Because hydroxylation
by PHD targets HIF1-α for degradation and that by FIH-1 is inhibitory,
the net effect of lowering pO2 is to activate HIF1-α-dependent
transcription. In contrast, oxygen-dependent enzymes (collagen prolyl
hydroxylase, P450 enzymes, and cytochrome c oxidase)
that participate in cellular functions unrelated to oxygen sensing
show low Km values for O2 (ranging
from 0.2 to 3%), allowing them to function even at low to moderately
low pO2 values. While an enzyme with a low Km for oxygen will be nearly saturated at tissue levels
of oxygen, a high Km for oxygen allows
oxygen-sensing enzymes to respond in a nearly linear manner with respect
to oxygen concentration. For example, if the oxygen concentration
were to increase from 3 to 12%, Nox4 activity would increase ∼300%.
In contrast, an enzyme with an oxygen Km of 2% would increase its activity only ∼25%. Thus, while
a low Km allows an enzyme to function
nearly optimally at tissue pO2 values, it cannot respond
dynamically to changes in pO2; in contrast, a high Km enzyme operating at a subsaturating pO2 will change its activity dynamically with changes in pO2.

The oxygen dependence for Nox2- versus Nox4-dependent
ROS generation is compared in Figure . Nox2-dependent
superoxide generation in either intact human neutrophils or a cell-free
system shows a Km for oxygen of 3.1 or
2.3%, respectively, corresponding to the range of Km values seen in enzymes that participate in metabolic
or cellular housekeeping functions. Because inflamed or infected tissues
are often moderately hypoxic, this would allow the Nox2 system to
continue to function at a significant rate under these conditions.
On the other hand, Nox4 in both intact cells and lysates shows an
oxygen Km value for H2O2 generation of 16–20%, corresponding to the Km range seen for other known oxygen-sensing
enzymes. Under our assay conditions, the rate of Nox4-dependent H2O2 generation at both 21 and 1% oxygen was approximately
linear for up to 3 h and was inhibited by DPI (data not shown). Because
tissue oxygen concentrations are often on the order of 2–3%,
this means that Nox4 will generate H2O2 approximately
in direct proportion to oxygen at concentrations below ∼10%,
making it a sensitive reporter of tissue oxygenation.

Oxygen concentration
dependence for Nox2- and Nox4-dependent ROS
generation. (A) Production of superoxide by intact human neutrophils
was measured using superoxide dismutase-inhibited cytochrome c reduction as described in . Human neutrophils (4.2 × 105) were
suspended in 0.8 mL of PBS containing 100 μM cytochrome c and equilibrated with N2/O2 gas
mixtures containing the indicated O2 percentage. Neutrophils
were activated with a final PMA concentration of 0.12 μM, added
in 10 μL from a 10 μM stock that had been pre-equilibrated
with 100% N2, and the rate of cytochrome c reduction was measured. Cytochrome c reduction
in the absence of PMA was negligible. (B) Superoxide production was
quantified in a cell-free system from human neutrophils as detailed
in . After equilibration
with the indicated gas mixtures at 25 °C, 8 μL of a 20
mM archidonate stock that had been pre-equilibrated with 100% N2 was injected to give a final concentration of 200 μM,
and the rate of cytochrome c reduction was measured.
(C) H2O2 production by HEK293 cells stably expressing
Nox4, measured using Amplex Red fluorescence as described in . (D) H2O2 production was monitored as described for panel C in lysates from
Nox4-expressing HEK293 cells supplemented with FAD, NADP+, and glucose 6-phosphate. Data points and error bars show the mean
± SEM of three determinations from single experiments, and the
experiments shown are representative of two or three. The solid lines
in all panels show theoretical nonlinear least-squares fits of the
data to the Michaelis–Menten equation, and the averaged Km values are shown in each panel.

Mechanism of H2O2 Generation
Two mechanisms are possible for the generation of H2O2 by Nox4. Because the FAD domain does not conduct this
reaction
directly, both possible mechanisms require
single electron transfers from heme to oxygen. According to a “superoxide
dismutase” mechanism that was previously suggested, two superoxide molecules are formed in sequence
and retained at the active site, and their sequestered dismutation
before release from the enzyme results in H2O2 formation. Such a mechanism is shown in Figure  (bottom), along with its rate equation. The oxygen dependence
for such a mechanism involves two oxygen binding events and predicts
a sigmoidal oxygen dependence, as shown by the dashed line in Figure . According to an internal superoxide reduction
mechanism (Figure , top mechanism and rate
equation), a single oxygen binds and is reduced in two sequential
electron transfer steps from the heme, using a retained superoxide
intermediate. Because there is a single oxygen binding event, such
a mechanism predicts a simple hyperbolic Michaelis–Menten curve
as shown by the solid black line in the top panel of Figure . Data replotted from Figure  show an excellent fit to the theoretical line predicted by a mechanism
involving a single oxygen binding event for each H2O2 formed (i.e., a mechanism in which sequential electrons are
introduced into the oxygen from the heme), while they do not conform
to the internal superoxide dismutation mechanism that would require
two distinct oxygen binding events for each H2O2 formed. Therefore, while either mechanism could account for a small
production of superoxide (depending on the relative rate of dissociation
compared with those of subsequent steps), kinetics are consistent
only with a mechanism involving a single bound superoxide intermediate
(termed a “sequential one-electron reduction mechanism”
in Figure ). Because such a mechanism has
certain features in common with a superoxide reductase enzymatic activity,
we also investigated the effects of azide and cyanide on H2O2 and superoxide generation in Nox4-expressing cells.
A bacterial superoxide reductase shows inhibition of the production
of H2O2 by these agents, with accumulation of superoxide. The H2O2 electrode system was used for hydrogen peroxide detection,
because these agents inhibit the HRP that is needed in the Amplex
Red assay. For superoxide, the DHE assay was used to allow for high
sensitivity. While it was not possible to use cyanide using the electrode
system because of signal instability, 0.6 mM sodium azide produced
70% inhibition of Nox4-dependent H2O2 generation
but did not cause any increase in superoxide production, suggesting
that azide inhibits the overall Nox4 enzyme activity rather than a
superoxide reduction step per se. Likewise, 1 mM KCN failed to increase
superoxide generation in Nox4-expressing cells compared with that
in control cells. Inhibition of Nox4 by azide is of interest in that
Nox2 is not inhibited by azide or cyanide. Thus, azide inhibition
may point to differentiating features of the oxygen-binding heme site
in Nox2 versus Nox4.

Analysis of the kinetic models for H2O2 generation.
Data from Figure D are replotted, normalized
to the percentage of Vmax. The solid line
was calculated from the kinetic rate equation corresponding to a “sequential
one-electron reduction mechanism” (top equation and scheme),
while the dashed line is that calculated from the equation corresponding
to an “internal superoxide dismutation mechanism” (bottom
equation and scheme). The former mechanism involves binding of a single
oxygen, which is then reduced sequentially by heme B in two one-electron
reduction steps. Depending on the rate of dissociation of superoxide
compared with that of a second electron transfer step, the enzyme
will release either superoxide or hydrogen peroxide. If the second
electron transfer is more rapid than dissociation of the superoxide,
then the primary product will be H2O2. The internal
superoxide dismutation mechanism involves two discrete oxygen binding
steps, each producing a superoxide at the active site. Both superoxide
molecules are retained at the active site (indicated by the dashed
box), and dismutation then results in the release of H2O2.

These data allow us to
suggest a role for a critical histidine
(His-222) residue for H2O2 generation. Mutation of this histidine, which is localized
in an extracellular loop adjacent to heme B, converts Nox4 from a
predominantly H2O2-generating enzyme to a predominant
superoxide generator. We confirmed the switch to predominantly superoxide
generation upon mutation of His-222 in intact cells (data not shown).
On the basis of thermodynamic considerations, transfer of a second
electron to the negatively charged O2–• itself is energetically unfavorable, but donation of a histidyl
proton to the O2–• intermediate
(bound at the heme B site) to form the neutral HO2• should greatly facilitate transfer of a second electron,
which (along with a solvent proton) forms H2O2. Mutation of this proton-donating histidine (which is absent in
superoxide-generating Nox isoforms) should then favor release of superoxide
rather than H2O2. We are currently investigating
such a mechanism.

Summary
Nox4 and Oxygen Sensing
Nox4 was proposed to participate
in oxygen sensing on the basis of its localization in kidney, which
secretes the hormone erythropoietin in response to hypoxia. Although the HIF-1α system that regulates
erythropoietin secretion had been proposed in earlier studies to respond
to oxygen radicals, the oxygen-regulated enzymes prolyl hydroxylase
and FIH-1 were subsequently discovered to be major regulators of the
HIF-1α system and Nox4 is not currently thought to be involved.,, More recent studies have shown that responses of some ion channels
to hypoxia require Nox4. The potassium channel TASK-1 is inhibited
at 21% oxygen in Nox4-expressing cells (but not in Nox4-RNAi cells),
and this inhibition is relieved by hypoxia. Likewise, the activity of the smooth muscle ryanodine receptor Ca2+ release channel (RyR1) was oxygen-dependent and required
Nox4, and the channel activity correlated with the oxidation of specific
cysteine thiols in RyR1. While these
studies provide data consistent with an oxygen sensor role, the Km of Nox4 for oxygen was not previously determined,
and it was therefore not clear to us whether Nox4 was itself functioning
as the oxygen sensor or was permissive in the response. These studies
provide this missing information and show that Nox4 activity is responsive
to physiological ranges of oxygen tension. This may be relevant in
normal physiology, for example, in skeletal muscle, wherein oxygen levels can dramatically and rapidly change
with exercise. In addition, pathological ischemic conditions may also
modulate Nox4 activity.

For an enzyme to function as an oxygen
sensor, its enzymatic activity must be linked to a signal or an effector
system that can mediate a downstream metabolic or cellular response.
H2O2 has long been implicated as a cellular
signal and has been linked to a variety of cellular responses, including
regulation of transcription, enzymatic activity, and ion channels.− In most signaling studies related to Nox enzymes, the cellular response
is triggered by a receptor-linked hormone or growth factor that activates
one of the Nox isoforms, rather than by oxygen concentration per se.
Thus, the finding that Nox4 shows an unusually high Km for oxygen and that it generates mostly hydrogen peroxide
means that Nox4, rather than responding to external signals via intermediate
signaling mechanisms such as changes in cellular calcium or phosphorylation
of regulatory subunits, responds directly and acutely to oxygen tension
with the output of the signal molecule H2O2.

The role of Nox4 in oxygen sensing appears to be complex because
oxygen levels can also regulate the expression of Nox4 itself. For
example, the Nrf2 system transcriptionally induces antioxidant- and
drug-metabolizing enzymes in response to oxidants and electrophilic
compounds, as part of a pathway to adapt to cellular
stresses. It is interesting that among the protein products induced
by Nrf2 in response to hyperoxia is Nox4 itself, which may suggest
that the induction of a Nox4-catalyzed H2O2 signal
is part of a cellular adaptation response to oxidative stress. In
this context, adaptation to cellular stresses has previously been
suggested as a general function for the Nox family of proteins. Nox4 is also induced under hypoxic conditions
in pulmonary artery smooth muscle cells via a HIF-1α pathway, suggesting that its regulation by oxygen may
be complex and tissue-dependent. Nox4 is also induced by other stresses
such as cardiac load-induced stress and
by inflammatory mediators via the NF-κB pathways and in the former system has been shown to exert
a beneficial effect, in contrast to the detrimental effect of Nox2
induction. Thus, Nox4-derived H2O2 may participate in signaling by both acute mechanisms
dictated by the Km of Nox4 for oxygen
and by slower mechanisms involving the induction of Nox4 protein.

Regardless of the stimulus, induction of Nox4 would be expected
to increase the magnitude of the response of Nox4 to oxygen concentration,
further enhancing Nox4-dependent H2O2 signaling
with its consequent transcriptional induction of stress-adaptive proteins.
We suggest that Nox4 is likely to participate in physiological processes,
including adaptation to altitude and regulation of the delivery of
oxygen to tissues, and that aberrant expression of Nox4 will lead
to pathological processes, for example, related to the aberrant responses
of tumors to hypoxia, hypoxia-induced
pulmonary hypertension, and a growing
list of diseases in which Nox4 has been implicated.,

In summary, Nox4 has been described as being unique among
the Nox
family of enzymes in that it is constitutively active without the
need for external signals or regulatory proteins. Rather, these studies
indicate that its activity is regulated acutely by oxygen tension.
Its widespread distribution, including in cells of the vascular system,
suggests important physiological roles for Nox4 in the rapid response
to changes in oxygen tension in the circulatory system and in tissues.
In this context, the primary output of the signaling molecule H2O2 with minimal production of superoxide may allow
for signaling with a level of production of toxic oxygen radicals
lower than what would be possible with a superoxide-generating Nox
isoform.

Supporting Information Available
Four figures
documenting the
subcellular fractionation and characterization of Nox4-containing
fractions and the partial purification of a membrane-free preparation
of Nox4. This material is available free of charge via the Internet
at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bi500331y_si_001.pdf

Author Present Address
† Y.N.:
Visiting Professor, Department of Biomedical Sciences, College
of Life and Health Sciences, Chubu University, 1200 Matsumoto-cho,
Kasugai, Aichi 487-8501, Japan. E-mail: ynisi4@isc.chubu.ac.jp.

The authors declare
no
competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
We thank Dr. Hisamitsu
Ogawa (Department of Biology, Fujita
Health University School of Medicine, Toyoake, Aichi, Japan) for the
gift of wild-type and mutant His6-tagged Nox4 cDNA and
Dr. Ralf Brandes (Center of Physiology, Goethe-University, Frankfurt,
Germany) for providing the Nox4 stably expressing HEK293 cell line.
We also thank Dr. Yerun Zhu and McCoy James (Department of Pathology
and Experimental Medicine, Emory University Medical School) for technical
assistance.

Abbreviations
ROSreactive oxygen species

RNSreactive nitrogen species

NoxNADPH oxidase

PRDproline-rich domain

NEFnucleus-enriched
fraction

LSPlow-speed
pellet

Snsupernatant

HSPhigh-speed pellet

DPIdiphenyleneiodonium

PMSFphenylmethanesulfonyl
fluoride

FADflavin
adenine dinucleotide

G6PDHglucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase

NADPHnicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate
(reduced form)

NADP+nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate (oxidized
form)

PHDHIF1-α
prolyl hydroxylase

FIH-1HIF1-α asparagine hydroxylase

SEMstandard error of the mean.

