It is important to begin this
discussion of signaling in three dimensions (“3D”) by
defining what constitutes 3D as compared to a 2D environment. “2D”
most frequently refers to a monolayer culture of cells plated on polystyrene
or glass surfaces. On these conventional 2D substrates, the cell interacts
with a basal extracellular “matrix” and with neighboring
cells via lateral cell–cell junctions. Because of equal exposure
to the bulk culture medium, a uniform nutrient distribution is assumed.
The term 3D was initially used to contrast a 3D culture from a monolayer
culture. In one definition, a 3D culture consists of a cell embedded
within and surrounded by an extracellular matrix, such that the cell
is able to encounter its extracellular microenvironment within a 3D
volume of space. Another definition suggests
3D refers to the specific topological features and 3D organization
of the extracellular matrix., One common feature of
these systems is the exposure of the cell to matrix and/or cell–cell
interactions in all directions. Regardless, early studies using these
various 3D culture systems demonstrated dramatic differences in cell
behavior and signaling between cells grown in 2D versus 3D. Cells
in 3D respond differently to exogenous growth factors and are highly
resistant to apoptosis., Consistently, gene expression
in a variety of cells types, including glomerular, endothelial, and
melanoma cells, is altered in a 3D culture.− Moreover, cell–matrix
adhesions in 3D can be composed of proteins different from those in
2D, resulting in altered metabolic activity and nuclear architecture.,, These observations suggest that
cells can undergo a profound and systematic rewiring when they undergo
the transition from a 2D to a 3D context. However, while these experimental
observations emphasize how cellular context can profoundly modify
a plethora of cellular behaviors, the precise mechanism by which dimensionality
induces these changes is unclear. Indeed, 3D can mean different things
at different biological scales. Within a cell, 3D is felt through
changes in cell shape and volume, in the organization of the cytoskeleton,
and in the distribution of signaling components throughout the cell.
At the cellular level, 3D means that the cell is exposed to stimuli
on all sides, whether from the ECM or neighboring cells. On a multicellular
level, 3D manifests in the structural organization of units like lobules,
ducts, and vessels. These factors all influence the manner in which
signaling takes place in distinct ways, as shown in overview in Figure . In the following review, we discuss how signaling
is influenced by dimensionality at each of these scales and highlight
novel tools for the further elucidation of these relationships.

Comparison
of 2D vs 3D. The environment in which the cell is cultured
differs dramatically between 2D and 3D.

Signaling in 3D within the Cell: Intracellular
Localization
Conventionally, signaling events within the
cell are modeled as
concentration-dependent biochemical reactions. This paradigm assumes
that signaling molecules are freely diffusing and uniformly distributed
in the cytoplasm and has resulted in a “whole-cell”
perspective on signaling, where the cell is considered the reaction
vessel in which given concentrations of signaling molecules react
with each other. Conversely, a large body of evidence has arisen to
suggest that the localization of a specific signaling molecule within
a cell greatly impacts the magnitude and the effect of the resultant
signaling event., Signaling molecules can be constrained
in space by barriers to free diffusion, scaffolded into multiprotein
complexes, or tethered to 2D membranes. Each of these situations significantly
alters the diffusivity of signaling molecules, which in turn changes
the frequency, speed, and duration of biochemical reactions.

Barriers to
Diffusion: Scaffolding Proteins
Scaffolding
proteins can nucleate large, multiprotein complexes that accelerate
reaction kinetics. By bringing multiple components of a signaling
cascade together, these proteins alter the reaction kinetics governing
a specific signaling cascade. β-arrestin, for example, can bind
several components of the MAPK pathway, including RAF, MEK, and ERK., By clustering these proteins, β-arrestin eliminates RAF–MEK
binding as a rate-limiting step. Following MEK sequestration by β-arrestin,
MEK phosphorylation by RAF occurs at a constant rate. Physiologically, β-arrestin enhances ERK activation
downstream of growth factor receptor signaling by prolonging the RAF–MEK–ERK
interaction time in the cytoplasm.,

Similarly,
paxillin serves as a scaffold for proteins at sites of integrin-mediated
cell–matrix adhesions. These adhesion complexes connect the
cytoskeleton to proteins within the extracellular matrix (ECM) and
are critical sites for the transduction of mechanical inputs to intracellular
signaling. Notably, activated paxillin
increases the frequency of interaction between protein kinases such
as focal adhesion kinase and Src, which can control downstream Rac
activity and increase cell motility., Thus, paxillin
mediates mechanotransduction by connecting adhesion proteins with
signaling pathways governing motility and proliferation.

Scaffolds
can also serve to reduce the extent of signaling in specific
pathways. LKB-1 interacting protein 1 (LIP-1) is a scaffolding protein
that sequesters the transcription factor Smad4 from binding to TGFβ
or BMP promoter sequences, thereby acting as a tumor suppressor. Depending on availability, scaffolding proteins
may serve either enhancing or inhibitory functions. An elegant example
of this may be found in the MAPK pathway. The kinase suppressor of
Ras-1 (KSR1) can scaffold members of the MAPK cascade., Titrating KSR1 concentration reveals its cooperative role in the
pathway until a certain threshold is reached, after which the concentration
of scaffolding protein exceeds that of “signaling-competent
complexes” and KSR1 sequesters individual proteins from interacting
with others in the cascade. In general
there is no doubt scaffolding proteins influence signal transduction
kinetics by altering the interaction dynamics of signaling components.

Barriers to Diffusion: The Cytoskeleton
When cells
are in a 3D environment, the cytoskeleton is usually nonuniform in
shape and composition. For example, cells in collagen matrices often
exhibit actin cytoskeleton alignment with fibers within the ECM., Changes in cytoskeletal organization, in turn, influence intracellular
signaling by acting as barriers to diffusion. The cytoskeleton can
be a passive barrier, where an increased level of cross-linking represents
more obstacles to free diffusion. Computational molecular models have
predicted that components of the MAPK, protein kinase A (PKA), and
PI3K–Akt–mTOR pathways have reduced rates of diffusion
because of increased levels of molecular crowding. Alternatively, cytoskeletal proteins can act as scaffolds
to promote or inhibit interaction of signaling molecules. Nanoclustering
of epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) at the cell periphery can
be due to high actin activity at these sites. Altered clustering and diffusion of receptor tyrosine kinases has
been proposed as a molecular mechanism employed by cells in 3D environments
to resist drug therapies, such as resistance to HER2 targeting agents
in breast cancer via increased HER2 dimerization in 3D., Thus, external stimuli leading to changes in actin density can alter
the spatiotemporal behavior of intracellular signaling.

Altered Dimensionality:
Membrane Sequestration
In some
cases, transition from 3D diffusion in the cytoplasm to 2D diffusion
in a membrane can enhance cellular signaling. An example of this is
given by the BCL-2 family of proteins, which mediate caspase-driven
apoptosis by regulating the release of cytochrome c from mitochondria. Bax, a BCL-2 protein
typically found freely diffusing in the cytoplasm, activates mitochondrial
membrane permeabilization via oligomerization. When cytokine activation
of apoptosis occurs, Bax is recruited to the mitochondrial membrane
surface via upstream signaling events. When Bax is in the cytoplasm, diffusing in a 3D environment, the
probability that it will oligomerize with itself is quite low to negligible.
However, once it is limited to 2D diffusion in the mitochondrial membrane,
the likelihood of interaction with other Bax proteins also anchored
in the membrane greatly increases. This
leads to Bax oligomerization, release of cytochrome c, and progression of apoptotic signaling.

Novel Tools for Characterization
of Spatial Control of Signaling
As can be seen, the spatial
organization of signaling molecules
can greatly impact the dynamics of intracellular signaling. Moreover,
there are many mechanisms by which molecular localization of these
proteins can be affected. Traditional biochemical assays like Western
blots and enzyme-linked immunosorbent assays (ELISA) lack the subcellular
resolution to capture this information (Table A). Electron microscopy has long been used to characterize the molecular
organization of the cytoskeleton, membranes, and organelles in 2D
and 3D, including changes in epithelial cell structure after hormone
stimulation or altered mechanical properties of the ECM (Table B).− However, 3D samples must be fixed, dehydrated, and
sectioned, prohibiting studies of spatial or temporal dynamics of
cells in a 3D environment. Light microscopy, on the other hand, is
highly conducive to characterizing how protein localization influences
cellular signaling. To empirically determine the diffusion coefficients
and dissociation constants of signaling molecules, fluorescence recovery
after photobleaching (FRAP) can be used. FRAP involves tagging a protein
of interest with a fluorescent molecule, taking an image of the basal
fluorescence level, photobleaching a specific area of interest with
high-intensity laser illumination, and then quantifying the recovery
of fluorescence intensity as unbleached molecules switch places in
the area of interest with the bleached molecules (Table D). FRAP is a technique that can be used to measure the ensemble
change in protein behavior at a region of interest and has been used
to great advantage to determine the binding kinetics of transcription
factors and the mobility of receptors in the plasma membrane (Table D).,

Quantitative
Techniques for Determining
Reaction Kinetics
To study protein–protein interactions, techniques
like Förster
resonance energy transfer (FRET) and fluorescence lifetime imaging
microscopy (FLIM) can be used. FRET imaging involves using the energy
transfer between fluorophores as a proxy for the distance between
fluorescently tagged molecules; it is sensitive within the 5–10
nm range and is often used as an indication of protein–protein
binding (Table E). FRET has been used to study
receptor–ligand binding at the membrane as well as protein
conformation., Grashoff et al. demonstrated
the use of an intramolecular FRET probe that allowed detection of
vinculin stretching under cytoskeletal tension. FLIM, on the other hand, takes advantage of the sensitivity
of a fluorescent molecule’s exponential rate of decay of its
fluorescence (lifetime) to its environment to characterize protein–protein
interactions. Unlike FRET and FRAP, which require genetically encoded
probes or fluorescent antibodies, FLIM can use the inherent fluorescence
of specific molecules such as NADPH and is a promising technique for
analysis of unmodified and untagged human cancer cells in the future
(Table F).

Summary
The impact of the 3D subcellular distribution
of signaling molecules on intracellular signaling is not often discussed
despite the fact that localization can profoundly affect cell and
tissue behavior and fate. Nonetheless, as new technologies that allow
us to peer into the cell emerge, the need to understand the role of
protein localization in signaling cannot be ignored.

The Cell in 3D: Cell–Matrix Interactions
As
we zoom out to examine the cell, we must consider its natural
context. Within the body, cells interact in 3D with the extracellular
matrix (ECM) and neighboring cells. Through these interactions, cells
gather information about their surroundings, which is integrated to
determine cell behavior and fate. In addition, a cell’s 3D
environment affects the organization of intracellular components and
thus the context in which signaling occurs. This section will feature
how intracellular signaling is dependent on the context of cell shape,
barriers to intracellular diffusion, and protein localization.

Adhesions and
Junctions: Gathering Information from the Environment
The
adhesion of a cell to its external environment can dictate
cell shape, growth, proliferation, and apoptosis signaling., Cells attach to neighboring cells and to ECM molecules, including
secreted proteins (i.e., collagens and laminins), proteoglycans (heparin
and chondroitin sulfate), and glycosaminoglycans (hyaluronic acid).
Cells attach to these extracellular molecules via a plethora of adhesion
receptors, including integrins, cadherins, selectins, discoidin receptors,
and syndecans.− These adhesion receptors bridge the connection between
the extracellular environment and the intracellular cytoskeletal and
signaling machinery.

Engagement of the ECM in all three dimensions,
compared to only at the basal side of cells as in a conventional culture,
significantly influences cell behavior. Depending on whether cells
are cultured in 3D or 2D, a cell’s response to a given signal
can be significantly altered.,, Mammary epithelial cells with intact cell–cell junctions
in 3D hydrogels are more resistant to apoptosis-inducing factors like
tumor necrosis factor α (TNF-α) than cells in 2D or cells
in 3D lacking cell–cell junctions (Figure A). This resistance highlights
the importance of cell–cell interactions in 3D and implies
a connection between adhesion-dependent signaling and intracellular
signaling directing cell fate. Culture
in 2D versus 3D also alters cell spreading and traction force. When fibroblasts are plated onto closely spaced
small pillars (5 μm), cells form adhesions on the top and side
of the pillars, simulating a 3D environment. Under these conditions, fibroblasts pull with high levels of force
on the external environment (Figure B). Conversely, if the cells are on pillars with
an increased surface area (15 μm) that are widely spaced, simulating
a 2D environment, cells do not form adhesions on the sides of the
pillars and the extent of traction on the external environment is
decreased (Figure B).

Changes
in cell shape and 3D organization modulate intracellular
signaling. (A) Transitions from nonmalignant S1s to malignant T4-2
epithelial cells show a reversal in cell polarity and 3D organization. (B) Cells on closely spaced pillars behave as
though on a 2D environment, whereas those on widely spaced pillars
exhibit 3D-like behaviors. (C) Actin
organization in cells on pillar-based 2D substrates vs. inside 3D
microwell scaffolds.

The dimensionality, rigidity, and topology of the external
environment
have been implicated as regulating factors in cytoskeleton assembly
and metabolism. Through the use of polymeric
hydrogels, researchers can control rigidity by altering the cross-linker:monomer
ratio in the gel solution. When fibroblasts were seeded in 3D silicone
microwells of varying stiffness, they exhibited a range of novel behaviors
compared to the behavior of those in 2D environments. In soft 3D environments,
fibroblasts downregulate actin filament assembly and upregulate mitochondrial
activity, in contrast to the activities in compliant 2D, stiff 2D,
or stiff 3D environments (Figure C).

An Altered Extracellular Context Leads to
Cytoskeletal and Membrane
Reorganization
Many of the affected cell behaviors associated
with 3D culture have been attributed to altered cell shape. Altered
cell shape leads to reorganization of the cytoskeleton as well as
changes to membrane tension, curvature, and composition, changing
the context in which intracellular signaling takes place.

Cell
shape directly influences the organization of the cytoskeleton, which
can have profound effects on intracellular signaling. In mesenchymal
stem cells (MSC), cell spreading leads to RhoA activation of Rho-activated
kinase (ROCK), myosin light chain kinase phosphorylation, elevated
myosin contractility, increased traction forces to the external environment,
and differentiation to an osteoblast phenotype. Conversely, if MSCs are rounded or express a dominant negative
RhoA, these cells differentiate into an adipocyte phenotype.,

Cell shape, in combination with ECM stiffness, governs membrane
properties like curvature and tension., These characteristics
of the plasma membrane, in turn, determine membrane composition, membrane
protein distribution, and intracellular trafficking rates., Several families of proteins, including the FERM (4.1 protein, Ezrin,
Radixin, and Moesin) and BAR (Bin/amphiphysin/Rvs) domain proteins,
have molecular motifs that are sensitive to membrane curvature. Proteins
containing these domains, which include the ARF (adenosine-ribosylation
factor) family,, small GTPases like Rac,, and guanine exchange factors, can assemble
multiprotein complexes and preferentially target these complexes toward
a curved membrane, thereby affecting protein localization and signaling.
Similarly, membrane tension is a key regulator of endo- and exocytosis., Increased membrane tension decreases the probability of vesicular
budding and favors exocytic merging of vesicles with the plasma membrane. This affects the overall balance of vesicular
trafficking within the cell, which can influence such diverse signaling
pathways as growth factor receptor signaling, reactive oxygen species
production, and phagocytosis.

The composition and organization
of the plasma membrane are different
between 2D and 3D, including cholesterol and sphingomyelin content
and organization. This membrane reorganization
can alter the distribution of lipids and lipid rafts in the membrane., These differences can then affect lipid-dependent signaling, such
as signaling through the PI3K–Akt–mTOR pathway, which
regulates cell metabolism, migration, and apoptosis. The PI3K–Akt–mROR pathway is initiated by
the recruitment of phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K) to the membrane
and the generation of lipid rafts with phosphatidylinositol 3,4,5-trisphosphates
[PtdIns(3,4,5)P3] and is attenuated by phosphatase and
tensin homologue (PTEN). PI3K and PTEN
are usually sequestered in distinct lipid groups in the membrane that
display limited diffusion and mixing between lipid rafts. This lipid raft-induced segregation of PI3K
and PTEN is exacerbated in spread cells, in which an increased number
of adhesions leads to lipid raft formation in the plasma membrane
via microtubules and Arf6 recycling. When
cells are rounded via cytoskeletal disruption or via micropatterned
surfaces, lipid raft formation is decreased, the level of PI3K and
PTEN interactions is increased, and PI3K signaling is attenuated., When cells are spread and PtdIns(3,4,5)P3 lipid rafts
are present, downstream Akt activity leads to differences in BCL-2-mediated
apoptosis and cell migration.,

When cells transit
from a rounded to spread morphology, the Rnd
family of proteins is targeted to lipid rafts via the KERPA (Lys-Glu-Arg-Pro-Ala)
sequence at their N-termini. Rnd proteins
recruit p190RhoGAP to lipid rafts at the plasma membrane, leading
to increases in Rho activity that are mediated by filamin cross-linking
of actin., This behavior can be ablated through inhibition
of actin polymerization, filamin-dependent actin cross-linking, and
cell spreading.

The pattern of
cell–ECM and cell–cell adhesions can
dictate the landscape in which other signaling molecules may interact
on the cell membrane. Ephrin signaling, for example, is sensitive
to the spatial organization of ephrin receptors on the cell membrane. Salaita et al. restricted ephrin receptor diffusion
in the membrane and showed obstacles to receptor oligomerization dramatically
influence intracellular signaling. Specifically, limiting ephrinA1
movement led to changes in cytoskeletal organization and metalloprotease
secretion in cancer cells. As many membrane-bound
proteins act by forming protein complexes, the organization of adhesions
on the cell membrane can greatly influence the dynamics of these signaling
events.

Adhesions and Junctions: Mediating the Response of the Cell
to Dynamic Input
In addition to transducing static information
about its environment, adhesion molecules can mediate dynamic cellular
responses to external input. In 3D environments like the lumen of
a blood vessel, signaling at endothelial cell–cell and cell–ECM
junctions regulates vessel integrity and the extravasation of leukocytes
from the vasculature. Upon application of fluid shear stress in vitro, endothelial cells in culture undergo filamentous
actin and focal adhesion remodeling in the direction of flow in a
VE-cadherin-dependent manner (Figure B)., Downstream, this results in Rho GTPase activation, which works in
conjunction with vascular endothelial growth factor receptor 2 (VEGFR2)
to activate p38 MAPK pathway activity., Thus, endothelial
cells sense dynamic changes in the environment and feed this information
into existing intracellular signaling to influence cell behavior.

Tools
for studying cell and matrix mechanical interactions in 3D.
(A) Peptide gels with consistent pore sizes but variable stiffnesses. (B) Microfluidic chambers allow application
of flow, chemical gradients, and mechanical forces., (C) In hydrogels, different materials lead to differential cell
behavior. (D) Example of cellular organization
on collagen gels with different stiffnesses.

The need to process information
about the extracellular environment
is even more relevant for migrating cells. The transit of leukocytes
from the vasculature to the subendothelial matrix, for example, relies
upon mechanically activated adhesion receptors gathering information
about the vascular endothelium upon which leukocytes travel. Endothelial
presentation of selectins may be recognized by white blood cells flowing
through the blood. Ligation of P-selectin with P-selectin glycoprotein
ligand-1 (PSGL-1) on the surface of a rapidly moving leukocyte can
result in strengthening of the P-selectin–PSGL-1 catch bond
(force induced non-covalent bond), leading to leukocyte deceleration., While P-selectin and PSGL-1 bonds are transient on the scale of
∼0.5 s, they allow stronger, longer-lasting integrin–ECM
bonds to form., These cell–ECM adhesions
then lead to leukocyte polarization, accumulation of the membrane
lipid PtdIns(3,4,5)P3, activation of Rac1 and Akt, cytoskeletal
remodeling, and transmigration through the endothelium.,

Novel Tools for Studying Signaling in 3D Matrices
To
study cell adhesion in 3D environments, many techniques have been
developed to encapsulate cells in hydrogels, hydrated polymer networks
that behave as viscoelastic solids (Table ). Commonly used polymers in hydrogels include naturally derived
materials (including collagen, a proteoglycan such as hyaluronic acid,
fibrin gels, and cellulose) and synthetic polymers such as polyethylene
glycol (PEG), poly(vinyl alcohol) (PVA), poly-lactic-glycolic-acid
(PLGA), and engineered peptide-based biomaterials. Peptide hydrogels
are a useful system for studying cell signaling in 3D as they allow
tuning of individual environmental parameters, including matrix elasticity,
cell adhesion binding sites, and degradation. Examples of different peptides used include elastin and silklike
polypeptides, or novel repetitive peptide sequences that form fibrils
in ionic environments like KFE ((acetyl)-FKFEFKFE-CONH2., Via modification of these gels with RGD
(Arg-Gly-Asp) sequences for integrin binding and changing the concentration
of peptide, KFE gels can be fabricated to allow tuning of cell binding,
matrix compliance, and pore size (Figure A). When these gels are optimized, they allow formation
of cell–ECM and cell–cell connections that promote endothelial
tube formation, facilitating the study of 3D endothelial cell signaling
in an in vitro system that more accurately resembles
a capillary bed than a 2D culture does (Figure A).

Summary of 3D Culture
Systems
The 3D microenvironment
can be specifically controlled in vitro by embedding
cells in a hydrogel with a specific
molecular composition and concentration. Individual cells can be placed
in self-assembling peptide gels, cross-linked collagen matrices, or
reconstituted basement membrane hydrogels such as Matrigel (Figure C). Breast cancer cells
such as MDA-MB-231, for example, alter their morphology and adhesion
in response to altered ECM properties, while MCF10a cells form stable
spheroids in compliant but not stiff collagen matrices., Furthermore, cell behavior can be influenced by controlling ECM
properties like stiffness, which, in the case of collagen gels, can
be modulated by increasing the collagen concentration or via inhibition
of lysyl oxidase-mediated collagen cross-linking (Figure D).,

Summary
The effect
of altered cell–matrix and
cell–cell interactions on intracellular signaling is undeniable.
The cell is continuously gathering information about its surroundings
and incorporating this information into its decision-making circuits.
Culturing cells in 2D versus 3D, or one ECM component versus another,
results in altered signaling at the cellular and subcellular level.
As such, researchers need to be particularly aware of their phenomena
of interest and how cellular context can introduce confounding factors
into their studies.

3D Signaling at the Multicellular
Level
Cells in the body exist in a three-dimensional environment.
They
interact on all sides with other cells, the extracellular matrix,
and interstitial fluid. These interactions provide inputs that the
cell integrates to determine its behavior and fate. At the tissue
level, two major factors influence cell behavior: local gradients
in signaling molecules and multicellular structures. The following
section highlights molecular gradients in development and ductlike
multicellular structures.

Molecular Gradients in Multicellular Structures
Sources
and sinks for signaling molecules, combined with interstitial pressure,
serve to establish molecular gradients that can differentially influence
cells within a tissue based on their location. These gradients are
established through a combination of cell secretion, protein diffusion,
proteoglycan-mediated stabilization, and endocytic depletion in neighboring
cells.− Some source, or collection of cells secreting the
morphogen, acts as the focal point from which diffusion distributes
the morphogen. Proteoglycans in the extracellular matrix, like glycosaminoglycans
(GAGs), sequester and maintain local supplies of the morphogen. Finally, depletion of the morphogen from interstitial
fluid occurs via receptor binding, endocytosis, and degradation.,

Many examples of molecular gradients can be found in development.
In the early Drosophila embryo, before nuclei are
separated by cell membranes, a Bicoid (Bcd) gradient governs the expression
of gap genes., These genes dictate the anteroposterior
patterning of the embryo and, if mutated, can lead to a loss of continuous
segments in the developed organism., At later stages
of development, Decapentaplegic (Dpp) and Wingless (Wg) gradients
in the wing imaginal disc have been linked to proper segmentation
and wing development., In the imaginal disc, the Dpp
gradient arises through a combination of changes to Dpp secretion,
diffusion, stabilization, and depletion. Dpp is captured at the surface
of a cell via low-affinity interactions with heparin sulfate proteoglycans,
decreasing the rate of diffusion of Dpp. The improved availability
of Dpp leads to an increased number of interactions with its receptor,
resulting in amplified intracellular signaling.,

Similarly, gradients of the vertebrate Dpp homologue, bone
morphogenetic
protein (BMP), are vital for dorsal–ventral patterning., High local BMP levels specify ventral tissues, while low BMP signaling
levels lead to development of dorsal tissues. Sonic hedgehog (Shh), transforming growth factor-β (TGFβ),
and fibroblast growth factor gradients have similar effects on developing
cells., In all these cases, progenitors have concentration-dependent
responses to morphogens. In chicks, for example, the duration of the
responses of neural cells to Shh is directly proportional to its local
concentration. This Shh response controls
the expression of important transcription factors, which in turn direct
differentiation into specific neuronal subtypes.

While simple model organisms like Drosophila
melanogaster and Caenorhabditis elegans make
possible investigation
of the effects of these morphogen gradients, translation and extension
of this work into more complex specimens are major challenges. The
deterministic pattern of development in C. elegans and the small number of cells in the developed organism, for example,
facilitate reliable lineage tracing, where transfection of specific
cells with genetic markers allows identification of their progeny. This can be combined with secondary markers
that indicate the relative expression of genes responsible for driving
different cell fates. The resilience
of D. melanogaster permits the use of simple knockout
systems to identify the role of genes like Dpp and Wg. These and other
methods have led to enormous strides in understanding the processes
governing development. However, the same techniques are difficult
to apply in more complex systems. Many
knockouts are embryonic lethal in mammals, precluding analysis of
their effects on development. Further, many of these model organisms
are transparent and thus particularly amenable to imaging approaches.
Most tissues in mammals are not transparent and preclude the use of
common visualization techniques. The
increased genomic complexity of higher-order organisms makes systematic
screening an often untenable challenge. These factors have hampered
researchers’ investigation and left an important facet of biological
function largely unexplored. While hints of the role of molecular
gradients have arisen in studies of human embryonic development, little
is known about their importance in normal tissue function. Given the
fact that many of the same mechanisms that apply to morphogen gradients
apply in normal tissues, however, it is probable that gradients play
an equally important role in signaling in tissues.

Transport Phenomena
in Tissues
A key indication that
molecular gradients exist in tissues is the myriad convective transport
phenomena known to be at play. These transport processes generate
interstitial flow that can induce local gradients of signaling factors.
A major driver of convective flow is interstitial pressure. Interstitial
pressure results from differences in hydrostatic and osmotic pressure
among the vasculature, interstitium, and lymphatics. Positive pressure gradients from blood vessels, combined
with leaky capillaries, drive fluid and soluble factors into the tissue.
Negative pressure gradients between the tissue and lymphatic system
are maintained by active drainage into lymphatic capillaries. Tissue stretching and compression due to regular
movement can also cause transient interstitial flow. These patterns
are altered in tumors, where leaky vasculature and increased interstitial
pressure inhibit leakage from capillaries into the interstitium. This
altered transport can contribute to oxygen deprivation within the
tumor, creating hypoxic conditions that activate HIF-1 (hypoxia-inducible
factor 1), a transcription factor implicated in the control of metabolism,
invasion, and apoptosis. HIF-1 upregulation,
in turn, has been strongly implicated in tumor aggression and therapeutic
resistance.,

In addition to pressure
differences, ciliary movement in the lung and intestines can also
drive interstitial flow. These small convective flows have been demonstrated
to govern normal branching morphogenesis in the embryonic lung by
directing points at which splitting should occur. Interstitial flow has been demonstrated to allow generation
of pericellular gradients, where directional flow around a cell secreting
some signaling factor leads to an asymmetrical distribution of that
factor around the cell, thereby facilitating generation of an autologous
chemotactic gradient. On a larger scale,
immune cells use molecular gradients established by interstitial flow
to home to the lymphatic system. While these chemotactic behaviors
are well-documented, there is no doubt that nonmotile cells are similarly
affected by gradients established by interstitial flow. Gradients
of extracellular signaling factors within a multicellular structure
are, therefore, relevant aspects to include if we are to gain a full
picture of the dynamic nature of signaling in vivo.

Cell Organization and Signaling in Multicellular Tissues
Cellular localization is an important aspect of signaling at the
multicellular level, affecting the cell’s exposure to other
cells, the ECM, and soluble signaling molecules within the interstitial
fluid. In contrast to a monolayer culture, where all cells have essentially
the same relationship with one another and the nutrient source, multicellular
structures can dramatically alter the environment in which a cell
receives signals. In human breast ducts, for example, luminal and
myoepithelial cells encounter dramatically different environments.
Whereas the inner luminal epithelial cells are exposed to the hollow
duct and lined with myoepithelial cells, the myoepithelial cells are
sandwiched between the luminal epithelial cells and the basal lamina.
Thus, myoepithelial cells are subject to more ECM signals than the
luminal epithelial cells. This complexity is not captured in conventional
2D culture of these cells, which could lead to artifactual observations
that do not translate to in vivo behavior. For example,
culturing transformed mammary epithelial cells in a 3D matrix can
suppress proliferation and reestablish cell polarity, while oral squamous
cell carcinoma cells exhibited higher angiogenic potentials under
3D conditions.,

Similarly, the importance
of paracrine signaling from neighboring cell types has been highlighted
by the necessity for feeder cultures of stem cells. Since the early
1950s, maintenance of the undifferentiated state of embryonic stem
cells in vitro has been achieved via coculture with
fibroblasts., Recently, this has been substituted
with a culture of conditioned media containing fibroblast-secreted
factors like BMPs and leukemia inhibitory factor (LIF) or a 3D culture
of stem cells.− As cells are rarely in isolation in the
body, there is no doubt that many other such mechanisms of cell control
have been lost in the transition to an in vitro culture.

A functional example of the importance of multicellular structures
may be found in the brain, where neuron–glia networks cooperate
to transduce signals.− Neurotransmitters secreted by neurons can
initiate signaling in glial cells, which then secrete neuromodulatory
factors that act on neurons within the synapse, including glutamate
and thrombospondin.,− Glial cell morphology allows them to contact multiple neuronal cell
bodies and extend into thousands of synapses, making them uniquely
positioned to act as an integrator and modulator of neuronal activity. As such, the specific positional relationships
among neurons and glial cells within a 3D network can be key to how
that network responds to and propagates stimuli.

In addition,
multicellular structures often optimize the access
of cells to nutrients. In particular, hepatocytes are known for their
sensitivity to in vitro culture. Compared to the
dense populations found in vivo, hepatocytes lose
viability or transdifferentiate at high densities when cultured in
a monolayer.− This can be partially addressed by culturing
them in a microfluidic device with a geometry that maximizes the access
of cells to a central fluidics chamber that mimics the hepatic artery. This enhanced proximity to nutrients via an
altered organization allowed a high-density hepatocyte culture closer
to in vivo conditions.

Cells do not signal in isolation within the body. They are
parts
of multicellular structures exposed to gradients of signaling molecules
and physical forces. Their positions within a highly organized structure
dictate their exposure to a specific set of signaling inputs, which
may differ from those of neighboring cells. This organization and
coordination permits these cells to work as a unit to perform a biological
function. Accordingly, a full understanding of cell signaling requires
studying the cell as part of a larger unit.

Novel Techniques for Studying
Multicellular Structures in 3D
Many of the conditions that
may govern signaling in 3D have eluded
researchers because of inadequacies in culture methods. Recent recognition
of the importance of the context in which signaling occurs, including
molecular gradients, cell–ECM interactions, and multicellular
organization, has led to the development of novel culture techniques
that seek to recapitulate 3D conditions seen in vivo (Table ).

The most basic of these
is 3D encapsulation culture. This involves embedding cells in a hydrogel
composed of ECM components to better mimic the immersive environment
of the body. This technique has spawned the development of many biomimetic
or biosynthetic materials, including Matrigel, hyaluronic acid, collagen,
and alginate. However, except in cases
of self-organization, this method still fails to recapitulate the
complex organization of cells and the ECM in vivo.

Soft lithography, on the other hand, is proving to be a boon
for
researchers seeking more precise control of their culture conditions
(Figure ). This family of methods adapts approaches
used in manufacturing microelectronic chips to fabricate or replicate
nanometer scale structures and patterns on elastomeric materials like
polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS). These methods
offer unprecedented control over features in a culture system, including
geometry, patterns of ECM protein functionalization, and application
of flow., Soft lithography has been used
to generate features that mimic the layout of a blood vessel or facilitate
a multicell-type culture (Figure C,D)., The open design aspect of soft lithography also allows researchers
to model in vivo multicellular organization, leading
to fabrication of devices that recapitulate the shape and layout of
major organ subunits within the liver and lung (Figure A,B).,, In addition, microfluidic culture permits introduction of flows,
in contrast to conventional static culture. This allows recapitulation
of both vascular flow and interstitial flow, facilitating the establishment
of molecular gradients (Figure B,C)., 3D printing confers even greater control over culture conditions,
allowing layer-by-layer construction of an extracellular matrix and
cells. Biodegradable carbohydrate scaffolds can be used to create
architecturally complex “organs”. Miller et al. used
this method to create 3D cylindrical networks of cells within an ECM
network (Figure C,D).

Methods for mimicking in vivo conditions of a
3D environment. (A) Imposing tissuelike organization through microfabrication.
This example mimics liver ducts in a hepatocyte culture. (B) Flow application allows recapitulation
of regular lung stretching in vitro. (C and D) 3D printing allows construction of
complex matrices and cell seeding. In this case, vascular endothelial
cells were encapsulated to form hollow vessels surrounded by an extracellular
matrix. (C) The top panel is a schematic of the relationship of vascular
endothelial cells (red) with matrix-encapsulated fibroblasts (yellow)
in the interstitium. The bottom panel is a fluorescence image of a
printed vascular system, with endothelial cells (mCherry) and fibroblasts
(EGFP). (D) The top panel is a schematic
contrasting culture systems. With the novel casting system, randomly
encapsulated cells can be combined with regular vascular networks.
The bottom panels shows cross-sectional views of the vascular network
to illustrate both the cleared lumen without cells and the ability
to generate intervessel junctions to study the effect of more complicated
flow patterns on cell behavior.

While these novel microfabrication
approaches are both powerful
and versatile, in many ways, they are still in their infancy. The
elastomeric materials used in soft lithography have a limited range
of mechanical properties that may not reflect in vivo conditions. Further, while proof-of-concept cell studies usually
accompany technical descriptions of these systems, extensive analysis
of intracellular signaling in these culture settings has not been
performed. Finally, application of these systems requires a level
of commitment and investment that may not be feasible for all laboratories.
Nonetheless, the field is rapidly growing and has exciting potential.

Summary
Studying multicellular structures in
vitro has only recently become a reality. While there remain
many unsolved mysteries within the cell that would not benefit from
the introduction of multicellular context, the application of these
novel approaches could be vital to researchers interested in translational
and clinically relevant results. As single-cell level studies cannot
capture the emergent properties of an organized tissue, researchers
should test their hypotheses in higher-order systems to gain a more
thorough understanding of functions within the human body and to design
therapeutics in an informed manner.

Conclusion
As researchers’ understanding of cellular behavior in 3D
progresses, studying signaling in the appropriate context has become
essential. From intracellular localization of signaling molecules
to molecular gradients at the tissue level, it is apparent that signaling
is influenced by a myriad of factors and is a process far more complex
than the simple interaction of reactants to form an end product. This
recognition has spurred the invention of new technologies to facilitate
investigation of signaling in 3D contexts. At the cellular level,
novel superresolution imaging tools allow unprecedented characterization
of protein localization and interaction dynamics. Bioengineered materials
serve as in vitro mimics of complex tissue ECM, helping
to elucidate the role of cell–matrix interactions in governing
intra- and intercellular signaling. Finally, microfabrication and
3D printing permit recapitulation of multicellular structures, bringing
multiple cell types together in physiologically relevant ways and
revealing emergent properties at the tissue level. Results from the
application of these tools have demonstrated that cell behavior can
change dramatically based on the conditions under which they are studied.
As such, it is not surprising that the biomedical field has encountered
unprecedented failure rates in translating hard-earned discoveries
into clinical progress. Therefore, it has never been more urgent for
both basic science and translational research to be conducted in the
appropriate context. With the adoption of new methods, findings from
the laboratory will become more transferable to improve human health.

Author Contributions
M.G.R.
and
G.O. contributed equally to this work.

The work was
supported by a Department of Defense National Defense Science and
Engineering Graduate Fellowship to M.G.R., the National Science Foundation
Graduate Research Fellowship Program to G.O., and a BCRP Scholar Expansion
Award BC122990 and National Institutes of Health/National Cencer Institute
Grants PSOC U54CA143836-01, R01 CA138818-01A1, RO1 CA085492-11A1,
U01 ES019458-01, TMEN U54CA163155-01, and U01 CA151925-01 to V.M.W.

The
authors declare no
competing financial interest.

