Anthrax toxin
is a tripartite
system consisting of two catalytic moieties, lethal factor (LF) and
edema factor (EF),, and a receptor binding/pore forming
moiety, protective antigen (PA; MW = 83 kDa).− These three individually nontoxic
proteins combine to elicit many of the disease manifestations caused
by Bacillus anthracis. After release from the bacteria,
PA binds to its cellular receptors− and is cleaved by cell-surface furin to a 63 kDa form (PA63)., PA63 self-assembles to form a
heptameric,, or octameric
prepore, which then binds the enzymatic
LF and EF moieties, yielding a series of complexes at the cell surface.− These complexes are endocytosed,, and exposure
to acidic conditions of the endosomal compartment causes the PA prepore
to undergo a conformational change to the pore state.,, The pore, inserted into the endosomal
membrane, translocates the LF and EF moieties to the cytoplasm,− where they modify their respective intracellular targets to the
benefit of the bacterium.

The anthrax toxin system has been
studied extensively to learn
how a proteinaceous toxin pore is able to translocate a protein across
a phospholipid bilayer. Certain heterologous proteins may be potentiated
to undergo PA-dependent translocation by fusion with the PA binding N-terminal domain of LF (LFn, residues 1–263)
or the corresponding domain of EF. Thus, for example, fusing LFn to
the N-terminus allows heterologous proteins and peptides (e.g., the
catalytic domain of Pseudomonas exotoxin A, diphtheria toxin, ricin or shiga toxin, and the cytotoxic T lymphocyte epitope from Listeria
monocytogenes()) to be delivered
to the cytosol via PA. The ability of LFn to potentiate proteins for
PA-dependent translocation stems from its ability to bind to the mouth
of the PA pore and orient its disordered, highly charged leader into
the lumen of the pore. N- to C-terminal
translocation occurs in vitro in planar bilayers
in the presence of a transmembrane pH gradient corresponding to that
between the acidic lumen of the endosome and the neutral cytosol, and a charge state-dependent Brownian ratchet
mechanism has been proposed.

In
cellular assays of PA-dependent translocation, we have often
used DTA, the catalytic domain of diphtheria toxin, as a heterologous
effector protein, as its delivery to the cytosol may be readily detected
by measuring the inhibition of protein synthesis. Many years ago,
we observed that DTA with a hexa-His tag at the N-terminus undergoes
significant PA-dependent entry into cells, and we then showed that
short N-terminal tracts of Lys or Arg, as well as His, also fostered
translocation of DTA via the PA pore. Consistent with this finding, it has been reported that an N-terminal
His6 tag can promote PA-dependent entry of an active domain
of the C2 toxin and epidermal cell differentiation inhibitor of Staphylococcus aureus. In the
study presented here, we fused tracts of up to 15 Lys residues to
the N- or C-terminus of DTA and examined their ability to promote
translocation of DTA into cells. These studies, together with experiments
performed in parallel in planar bilayers, suggest that the PA pore
is able to translocate appropriately tagged proteins across membranes
in both N to C and C to N direction, although translocation is less
efficient in the C to N direction.

Materials and Methods
Cell Culture
CHO-K1 and A431 cells were grown in Ham’s
F-12 and DMEM media, respectively, each supplemented with 10% FBS,
100 units/mL penicillin, 100 μg/mL streptomycin, and 2 mM glutamine.
Cells were maintained as monolayers and grown at 37 °C and 5%
CO2 in a humidified incubator.

Cloning and Mutagenesis
DTA C186S was amplified via
polymerase chain reaction using Taq polymerase and cloned into the
pET-Sumo vector (Invitrogen, Grand Island, NY) using the “T”
overhangs so that an in-frame fusion construct of sumo protein with
DTA is generated. This was then used as the DNA template for addition
of lysines in all other constructs, which was done using the QuikChange
site-directed mutagenesis kit (Stratagene, Santa Clara, CA). The N-terminal
lysine constructs had a serine residue added in front of the lysines
to allow for efficient cutting by sumo protease. Site-directed mutagenesis
was used to introduce a cysteine in the K12-DTA and DTA-K12 moieties
to generate the C-K12-DTA (with a serine residue before the cysteine
for optimal cleavage by sumo protease) and DTA-K12-C constructs.

Protein Synthesis
DTA C186S (and its Lys-tagged variants)
were transformed in Escherichia coli BL21(DE3) cells
(Invitrogen). The proteins were overexpressed using isopropyl β-d-1-thiogalactopyranoside (1 mM), and the proteins were purified
using Ni-charged metal affinity chromatography. The proteins were
then subjected to another round of purification by separating them
on a High Performance Q column (GE). Sumo protease was then used to
cleave the sumo-DTA construct. Finally, the His6-sumo protease
and His6-sumo protein were separated from DTA by Ni-charged
metal affinity chromatography.

Biotin Labeling
Site-directed mutagenesis was used
to generate cysteine mutants C-K12-DTA and DTA-K12-C. As mentioned
above, the N-terminal construct has a serine preceding the cysteine
in C-K12-DTA to allow efficient sumo protein cleavage. These proteins
were labeled using EZ link Biotin-HPDP (pyridyldisulfide-biotin, Thermo
Scientific, Rockford, IL) as the labeling agent following the manufacturer’s
protocol. Briefly, DTA constructs were mixed with a 10-fold excess
of Biotin HPDP (dissolved in DMF), and the reaction was allowed to
proceed for 2 h at room temperature. Unbound HPDP biotin was separated
from protein using a desalting column. The labeled protein was further
separated from any unlabeled protein by purifying biotin-labeled protein
using a monomeric avidin column. Addition of biotin was confirmed
by matrix-assisted laser desorption ionization time-of-flight (MALDI-TOF)
analysis of biotinylated constructs.

Planar Lipid Bilayer Experiments
Planar phospholipid
bilayer experiments were performed in a Warner Instruments Planar
Lipid Bilayer Workstation (BC 525D, Warner Instruments, Hamden, CT).
Planar bilayers were formed by painting a 35 mM solution of 1,2-diphytanoyl-sn-glycero-3-phosphocholine (DPhPC) in n-decane (Avanti Polar Lipids, Alabaster, AL) on a 200 μm aperture
of a Delrin cup in a Lucite chamber. One milliliter of buffer containing
100 mM KCl, 1 mM ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA), 10 mM sodium
oxalate, 10 mM potassium phosphate, and 10 mM 2-(N-morpholino)ethanesulfonic acid (MES) (pH 5.5) was added to the cup
(trans) and the chamber (cis), and
both compartments were stirred continuously.

Upon formation
of a bilayer membrane, up to 5 μg of PA prepore (25 pM) was
added to the cis compartment held at 20 mV with respect
to the trans compartment. After incorporation of
PA pores as monitored by conductance across the membrane, the cis compartment was perfused to remove any free PA. Once
the current had stabilized, 1 μg of a DTA construct (except
where mentioned) was added to the cis compartment,
and interaction with PA channels was monitored by the decrease in
conductance.

Protein Synthesis Inhibition Assay
CHO-K1 cells were
plated in a 96-well plate at a density of 10000 cells/well approximately
16 h before the start of an experiment. DTA toxin constructs diluted
to various concentrations in Ham’s F-12 medium and PA83 (20 nM) supplemented with 10% FBS were added to the plates. The
plates were then incubated at 37 °C for 24 h, after which toxin-containing
medium was removed and replaced with l-leucine-deficient
F-12 medium supplemented with l-[4,5-3H]leucine.
The plates were incubated for an additional 1 h at 37 °C and
washed with ice-cold PBS. Liquid scintillation cocktail was added,
and radioactivity incorporated by the cells was measured. The results
were normalized and expressed as a fraction of the radioactivity incorporated
into the CHO-K1 cells that were not treated with toxin.

Results
PA-Dependent
Translocation of DTA Containing Fused N- or C-Terminal
Lys Tracts
DTA constructs with tracts of 6, 9, 12, or 15
Lys residues fused to the N- or C-terminus were tested for translocation
into CHO K1 cells in the presence or absence of PA (Figure ). In the presence of PA, N-terminal tracts of 9
or 12 Lys residues (K9-DTA or K12-DTA, respectively) were effective
potentiators of DTA translocation, with half-maximal inhibition of
protein synthesis occurring at concentrations of ∼20 pM (Figure A). Consistent with our earlier findings, LFn-DTA
was ∼10-fold more potent than the most active of these poly-Lys-tagged
constructs. In the absence of PA, constructs containing 9, 12, or
15 N-terminal Lys residues blocked protein synthesis, but only at
∼10000-fold higher concentrations (≥0.1 μM) than
in the presence (Figure B). Untagged DTA showed
cytotoxicity at concentrations approaching 1 μM in the presence
of PA and was inactive at the highest concentration tested (1 μM)
in the absence of PA.

PA-mediated translocation of DTA constructs as measured
by protein
synthesis inhibition in CHO K1 cells. (A and B) Cytotoxicity of N-terminal
lysine fusions in the presence and absence of PA, respectively. (C
and D) Cytotoxicity of C-terminal lysine fusions in the presence and
absence of PA, respectively. Solid lines show data with PA (20 nM)
and dashed lines data without PA.

Lys tracts fused to the C-terminus of DTA were less active
in potentiating
PA-dependent delivery than those of a corresponding length fused to
the N-terminus (Figure C,D). In the presence
of PA, C-terminal tracts of 9, 12, and 15 Lys residues (DTA-K9, DTA-K12,
and DTA-K15, respectively) all showed about the same level of activity,
with half-maximal inhibition in the low nanomolar range. In the absence
of PA, these adducts were also active, but only at 10- to 100-fold
higher concentrations, with DTA-K15 being the most potent and DTA-K9
the least.

K12-DTA and DTA-K12 were chosen for further studies
because each
had the highest PA-dependent cytotoxicity (among the N- and C-terminal
tags, respectively) for CHO-K1 cells, and they efficiently occluded
PA channels in planar bilayers, as shown below. ADP ribosylation activities
of K12-DTA, DTA-K12, and untagged DTA were measured in vitro and found to show little variation.

Comparative Inhibition
of LFn-Mediated and Poly-Lys-Mediated
Translocation
A key determinant of LFn-DTA translocation
by PA is the Phe clamp, a structure formed by the F427 side chains
within the lumen of the PA pore.,, We tested K12-DTA and DTA-K12 for cytotoxicity in
the presence of PA variants containing the F427H or F427S mutation,
each of which blocks translocation of LFn-DTA without affecting pore
formation. Both mutations completely blocked LFn-DTA translocation,
as expected, but we found an unanticipated difference between F427H
and F427S in inhibiting translocation of the K12-tagged DTA constructs
(Figure ). Whereas F427H completely blocked
translocation of K12-DTA and DTA-K12, F427S inhibited their translocation
≤10-fold. These results support the notion that translocation
promoted by Lys tracts occurs via the pore lumen but also indicate
differences in the mechanisms by which F427H and F427S inhibit translocation.

Effect
of PA Phe clamp mutations, F427H and F427S, on the cytotoxicity
of LFn-DTA and K12-DTA constructs in CHO-K1 cells.

Free LFn (1 μM) was a strong competitive
inhibitor of the
PA-dependent cytotoxic activity of LFn-DTA, but not of K12-DTA, consistent
with earlier findings. We found a similar
lack of an effect of LFn on DTA-K12.

Interaction of Lys-Tagged
DTA with PA Pores in Planar Bilayers
Binding of LFn to PA
pores in planar bilayers results in pore occlusion,
as measured by ion conductance., We monitored occlusion
of pores in DPhPC bilayers for 60 s following addition of various
constructs (final concentration of 1 μg/mL) to the cis compartment (Figure ). Free LFn blocked
conductance rapidly (within 10 s) and almost completely (99%), whereas
occlusion by Lys-tagged DTA constructs was slower and strongly dependent
on the number of Lys residues in the tag. The greater the number of
Lys residues, the more rapid and more complete the occlusion (at 60
s). N-Terminally tagged constructs were more effective than the corresponding
C-terminally tagged ones. Constructs with K9 tracts caused weak occlusion,
and constructs with K6 caused almost none.

Kinetics of occlusion
of PA pores in planar bilayers by LFn, DTA,
and Lys-tagged DTA constructs. Up to 5 μg of PA63 prepore was
added to the cis compartment. After insertion of
PA pores, 1 μg of a DTA construct was added to the cis compartment and the fraction of PA channels occluded in the presence
of cis 20 mV after 60 s was calculated.

Translocation of Lys-Tagged Constructs across
Planar Bilayers
To probe the translocation of Lys-tagged
constructs across planar
bilayers, we appended a Cys residue to the N-terminus of K12-DTA and
to the C-terminus of DTA-K12 and labeled both constructs with a Cys-reactive
biotinylation reagent. The resulting biotin-C-K12-DTA and DTA-K12-C-biotin
constructs occluded PA channels with efficiencies comparable to those
of the corresponding K12-DTA and DTA-K12 constructs. Addition of streptavidin
to the cis compartment strongly hindered occlusion
by both of the biotinylated constructs (Figure A,B) but had no effect on occlusion by DTA constructs lacking the
biotin label. Thus, the Lys tract initiated blockage of the PA pore
irrespective of the terminus of DTA to which it was fused, and binding
of a bulky protein at the terminus adjacent to the Lys tract prevented
the blockage.

Experiments with biotinylated constructs. The PA63 prepore
was
added to the cis compartment. Upon insertion of PA
pores, the DTA construct was added to the cis compartment
and occlusion of PA channels in the presence of cis 20 mV was monitored. (A and B) Interaction of biotin-C-K12-DTA (0.5
μg) and DTA-K12-C-biotin (1 μg) constructs, respectively,
with PA pores incorporated into planar bilayers in the presence of
a 5-fold (A) or 2.5-fold (B) molar excess of tetrameric streptavidin
added to the cis compartment. (C and D) Interaction
of biotin-C-K12-DTA and DTA-K12-C-biotin constructs, respectively,
with PA pores incorporated into planar bilayers in the presence of
a molar excess of tetrameric streptavidin added to the trans compartment.

To explore the possibility
that the positively charged K12 tracts
fused to DTA translocated through the PA pore under an applied voltage
of 20 mV, we added K12-DTA and DTA-K12-C-biotin constructs to the cis compartment and streptavidin to the trans compartment to bind to any biotin-tagged termini of biotin-C that
became accessible (Figure C,D). Biotin-C-K12-DTA
and DTA-K12-C-biotin constructs were allowed to occlude PA channels;
streptavidin was added to the trans compartment,
and the applied transmembrane potential was repeatedly cycled between
20 and −20 mV, allowing repeated blocking and unblocking of
PA pores by the DTA constructs. This led to the biotin-C-K12-DTA and
DTA-K12-C-biotin constructs causing ∼50 and ∼20%, respectively,
of the PA pores to be permanently blocked. Streptavidin alone had
no effect on the occlusion capabilities of DTA constructs in the absence
of biotin.

Discussion
The N-terminal domain
of LF recognizes the prepore and pore formed
by PA63 and initiates protein translocation by a well-described sequence
of events.,, LFn binds
at the junction of adjacent PA63 subunits, with each subunit making
unique contacts with the ligand., LFn partially
unfolds in the process of binding, such that the first α-helix
and β-strand become separated from the bulk of the domain and
occupy an amphipathic cleft, termed the α-clamp, between two
PA subunits. The residual, folded portion
of LFn makes multiple additional contacts with the prepore or pore.
The highly charged and disordered N-terminal leader sequence of LFn
is thereby positioned within the lumen of the pore, and several residues
at the extreme N-terminus have been shown by an electron paramagnetic
resonance study to come into contact with the Phe clamp, a structure whose integrity is essential for
translocation. These interactions poise LFn bound to the pore to undergo
translocation from the N- to C-terminus by a charge state-dependent Brownian ratchet mechanism, driven primarily
by the transmembrane proton gradient. This translocation mechanism is based largely on data from planar
bilayer studies; other results suggest that accessory proteinaceous
factors facilitate translocation in vivo.

We discovered several years ago that simply
fusing a stretch of
basic amino acids to the N-terminus of DTA can functionally replace
LFn by potentiating PA-dependent entry of the protein into cells. In the study presented here, we compared the
PA-dependent cytotoxicity values of DTA constructs with various numbers
of Lys residues fused to the N- or C-terminus. A tract of 9 or 12
N-terminal Lys residues gave cytotoxicity values within 1 order of
magnitude of that of LFn-DTA, while the levels of cytotoxicity were
much lower with 6 or 15 Lys residues. PA-dependent cytotoxicity was
also seen with Lys tracts fused to the C-terminus (tracts of 9, 12,
and 15 Lys residues proved to be approximately equally effective),
but the maximal cytotoxicity levels observed were 10–100-fold
lower than that of the most active N-terminal poly-Lys tracts and
thus 100–1000-fold lower than that of LFn-DTA.

What is
the mechanism of translocation through the pore mediated
by a polycationic tract of amino acids, and how does it compare with
that mediated by LFn? Free LFn competitively inhibits the cytotoxicity
of LFn-DTA, but not of poly-Lys-DTA, suggesting that little overlap
exists between the binding sites. However, like LFn, the poly-Lys-tagged
DTA constructs blocked ion conductance by PA pores in planar bilayers,
and streptavidin bound to a biotinyl group placed at the beginning
of an N-terminal 12K tag or the end of a C-terminal K12 sterically
hindered pore occlusion. These results strongly suggest that the Lys
tag at either terminus physically enters the pore and interacts directly
with the Phe clamp and/or with the nearby acidic residues.

Our
understanding of the mechanism of translocation of protein
through the PA pore mediated by a polylysine tract centers around
a model in which the Lys tag, regardless of the terminus to which
it is appended, is drawn by electrostatic attraction into the negatively
charged, cation-selective pore. The stereospecific binding of LFn
to PA places its N-terminus in the lumen, thereby initiating an exclusively
N to C translocation. In contrast, because simple electrostatic charge
attracts the Lys tag into the PA pore, the direction of translocation
of a Lys-tagged protein is flexible and is determined by the location
of the tag. Interaction of the positively charged tag with the phenyl
side chains of F427, via cation−π interactions, and/or
with nearby acidic residues, could foster Brownian motion-dependent
contact of upstream acidic residues, which are essential for the ratcheting
process, with the Phe clamp. Such contact would promote charge state-dependent
Brownian ratcheting through the pore. According to this model, there
would be no necessity that the Lys-tagged polypeptide interact with
the α-clamp or any other site at the mouth of the pore to initiate
the translocation process in the N to C or C to N direction.

The efficiency of the translocation process initiated by a polycationic
tract would be expected to have a complex dependence on the length
of the tract. Up to a point, increasing the positive charge would
increase the level of electrostatic attraction and thus accelerate
entry of the substrate protein into the pore and strengthen the interaction
with the Phe clamp region. Indeed, we found that increasing the number
of Lys residues brought about a corresponding increase in the rate
and steady state extent of occlusion of PA channels in planar bilayers.
However, beyond a certain threshold, strengthening the electrostatic
interaction with the pore would hinder transit through the lumen.
Consistent with this notion, we found that an optimal range existed
for the number of Lys residues in the N-terminal tag, with cytotoxic
activity declining with numbers above or below that range.

The
fact that Lys tracts on the C-terminus of DTA enhanced its
PA-dependent cytotoxicity, although weakly, suggests that cargo proteins
may be translocated through the PA pore in the C to N direction as
well as in the N to C direction. In its simplest form, the charge
state-dependent Brownian ratchet model of translocation would not
dictate the direction of translocation, as it does not assume specific
contacts with the pore that might serve as the basis of a directional
bias. Supporting the hypothesis of C to N translocation, experiments
in planar bilayers showed that binding of streptavidin to a biotinyl
group at the extreme C-terminus of DTA-K12 in the cis compartment blocked pore occlusion by the Lys tag. Further, the
C-terminal biotinyl group became transiently exposed to streptavidin
added to the trans compartment under conditions that
promote translocation. The fact that exposure to trans streptavidin was less efficient with the K12-biotinyl tag at the
C-terminus than a biotinyl-K12 tag at the N-terminus correlates with
the lower cytotoxicity of C-terminally tagged DTA. The C-terminally
tagged DTA variants tested were also significantly less effective
at occluding PA pores in planar bilayers than their N-terminally tagged
counterparts, suggesting that the C-terminal tags may be conformationally
constrained and less accessible for penetration into the pore.

In the course of our studies, we encountered the unexpected result
that, whereas the F427S mutation in PA completely blocked the cytotoxicity
of LFn-DTA, this mutation caused &lt;10-fold inhibition of the cytotoxicity
of K12-DTA. This result is consistent with the proposed model in which
the Lys tag is electrostatically attracted by the cation-selective
PA pore. It is likely that a partial positive charge on histidines
in PA F427H would repel the strong positively charged Lys tract, blocking
translocation. However, in the case of PA F427S, the lack of charge
on serine would allow translocation of Lys-tagged DTA protein across
the PA pore, albeit less efficiently because of the loss of cation−π
interactions with the phenyl side chains of F427. In comparison, interaction
with the Phe clamp is critical for LFn-mediated translocation, and
both PA F427H and PA F427S mutants are unable to translocate LFn-DTA.
We suggest that translocation of K12-DTA in vivo may
be driven to a greater degree by ΔΨ than by the ΔpH-driven
Brownian ratchet.

Author Present Address
† O.S.: Division of Infectious Diseases, Boston Children’s
Hospital, 300 Longwood Ave., Boston, MA 02115.

This research
was supported by National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases
Grant AI022021 to R.J.C. The NERCE Biomolecule Production Core was
supported by National Institutes of Health Grant AI057159.

The authors declare no
competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
We thank Robin Ross,
Ben Seiler, Erica Gardner, and Lauren
Perry from the NERCE Biomolecule Production Core for helping with
the production of proteins used in this study. We also thank Bradley
Pentelute and Tatiana Berger (Massachusetts Institute of Technology)
for assistance with MALDI-TOF, Matthew Pettengill (Boston Children’s
Hospital) for help with ImageJ, and Laura D. Jennnings-Antipov, Deepa
Patel, and Adva Mechaly for generously providing some of the PA constructs
used in this study. We also thank Andrew McCluskey, Bradley Pentelute,
Deepa Patel, and Gerald Marchisky for helpful discussions and for
their critical review of the manuscript.

