Reversible
phosphorylation of
proteins provides a major mechanism by which cells control the transfer
of information. Kinases and phosphatases act in dynamic opposition
to switch signaling pathways on or off and to control the duration,
magnitude, and localization of responses to signals. Members of the
PHLPP family of phosphatases oppose oncogenic and proliferative pathways
by directly dephosphorylating at least four kinases: the pro-survival
kinases Akt, protein kinase C (PKC), S6 kinase, and pro-apoptotic
kinase Mst1., In the case of Akt, PKC, and S6
kinase, PHLPP dephosphorylates a conserved regulatory site termed
the hydrophobic motif, thus inactivating the kinases and inducing
apoptosis.− In the case of Mst1, PHLPP dephosphorylates an inhibitory
site to activate Mst1 and promotes apoptosis.

The PHLPP family consists of three isozymes encoded by two
genes:
PHLPP1α, PHLPP1β, and PHLPP2. All isozymes share the same
domain structure of an N-terminal PH domain followed by a leucine-rich
repeat segment, a phosphatase domain, and a C-terminal PDZ-binding
motif., The phosphatase domains are 68% identical
and group into a subfamily of the PP2C family of phosphatases., The PP2Cs are the principal members of the PPM (protein phosphatase
manganese/magnesium-dependent) family of serine/threonine phosphatases,
which also includes pyruvate dehydrogenase phosphatase. Similar to the members of the PPP family (phosphoprotein
phosphatase family that includes PP1, PP2A, PP2B, etc.), PPM family
members require a divalent cation for activity with a preference for
Mn2+ or Mg2+. The main biochemical difference
from other phosphatase families, however, is that the PPM proteins
are not inhibited by okadaic acid or other natural products such as
microcystin LR or cyclosporin A. Sequence alignments in the eukaryotic
PP2C family reveal the conservation of 11 motifs and 4 aspartic acids
that coordinate the metal ions. Phosphatases
of the PP2C family have been shown to regulate stress in plants and
bacteria., In mammals, PP2Cs regulate the stress response
as well, by dephosphorylating key components of the stress-induced
cascade. PP2C enzymes are attracting
an increasing amount of attention as their role in cancer emerges. Notably, the phosphatase Wip1 (PP2Cδ/PPM1D) is normally induced by the p53 tumor suppressor
after DNA damage following ionizing radiation or exposure to UV light.
This protein is overexpressed, and the corresponding gene is amplified
in different types of human cancers, including breast cancer and neuroblastoma.
Furthermore, Ppm1d deletion delays or limits tumorigenesis
in different mouse cancer models, defining WIP1 as an oncoprotein.
Conversely, PHLPP has recently been shown to be a tumor suppressor
in a mouse model. In humans, PHLPP is
frequently lost or reduced, at the gene or protein level, in diverse
cancers, including colon− and breast, cancers and glioblastoma., Dysregulation of PHLPP
correlates not only with cancer but also with diseases such as obesity,
where PHLPP1 is upregulated. It also
plays a regulatory role in the heart via its negative regulation of
Akt. Given the broad role of PHLPP in
a wide spectrum of diseases, understanding its catalytic mechanisms
is essential to its development as a therapeutic target.

This
contribution provides a biochemical and structural characterization
of the intrinsic catalytic activity of PHLPP. Using isolated PP2C
domains purified from bacteria, insect cells, or mammalian cells,
as well as full-length proteins from mammalian expression, we determine
the metal-dependent, pH-dependent activation. We examine the effects
of various factors on activity, such as reducing potential or lipophilic
compounds. We also describe inactivating mutations in the catalytic
domain.

Experimental Procedures
BL21(DE3)pLysS competent cells
were purchased from EMD4Biosciences.
EGF was purchased from Upstate. The monoclonal antibody against HA
(Covance) and the polyclonal antibody against PHLPP2 (Bethyl) were
used to assess expression. A monoclonal anti-HA antibody (Roche) and
protein A/G Ultralink resin (Pierce) were used for immunoprecipitation.
Palmitoleic and linoleic acids were obtained from Acros, and stearic
acid was from AlfaAesar, oleic acid from Sigma, arachidonic acid from
Biomol, and elaidic acid from MP. Ammonium molybdate (Fisher) and
malachite green oxalate (Acros) were obtained at the highest grade
possible. Protein phosphatase peptide substrate (RRAPTVA)
and protein tyrosine phosphatase peptide substrate (ENDPYINASL) were obtained from Enzo, and HFPQFPSYSAS was ordered
from Anaspec. COS7 cells are maintained in DMEM (Cellgro) supplemented
with 5% FBS (Hydroclone) and 1% penicillin/streptomycin at 37 °C
in 5% CO2.

Purification of the GST-Tagged Phosphatase
Domain of PHLPP1
and PHLPP2
The GST-tagged fusion protein of the phosphatase
domain of human PHLPP1 (Pro 627–Pro 990, PHLPP1α numbering)
or PHLPP2 (Gly 745–Asn 1102) was expressed in competent BL21(DE3)pLysS
cells and purified according to the method previously described. Purification yielded 15 ± 1 or 14 ±
1 mg/(L of culture), respectively. Purity was assessed on a sodium
dodecyl sulfate (SDS) gel and was &gt;90%. The protein was then either
kept in a desalting buffer [20 mM Tris and 100 mM NaCl (pH 7.0)] or
dialyzed against 1 L of 20 mM Tris-HCl, 2 mM MnCl2, or
EDTA (pH 7.0). The enzymes were stored at 4 °C.

Purification
of the His-Tagged Phosphatase Domain of PHLPP2
His-tagged
PHLPP2 PP2C was expressed and purified from baculovirus-infected
Sf21 cells. Sf21 cells were maintained in Hink’s TNM-FH medium
(Cellgro), supplemented with 10% FBS and 1% penicillin/streptomycin,
and incubated for 4 days with a baculovirus encoding His-PHLPP2 PP2C.
Purification was conducted using the IMAC purification kit on Profinia
(Bio-Rad), yielding 87 ± 5 μg of purified protein/L of
culture medium. Purity was assessed by Coomassie staining of SDS gels
and was &gt;90%.

Purification of the HA-Tagged Phosphatase
Domain and the Full-Length
Protein of PHLPP
The isolated phosphatase domains of human
PHLPP1 and full-length PHLPP1α, PHLPP1β, and PHLPP2 were
overexpressed in COS7 cells as HA-tagged fusion proteins using FuGENE
6 transfection reagent (Promega). Cells were treated with 10 ng of
EGF/mL of DMEM for 15 min prior to lysis and immunoprecipitated as
previously described.

Plasmid Constructs
Mutant constructs were generated
by site-directed mutagenesis of pcDNA3-HA-PHLPP2 using the QuikChange protocol (Agilent Technologies).

Enzymatic Activity Assay
The enzymatic reaction was
conducted at room temperature in a reaction mixture containing the
appropriate pH buffer at 100 mM (see Table 1 of the ), 0.02 mg/mL BSA, 4 mM DTT, and 100
mM NaCl, at the pH values noted in the legends. Divalent cations or
inhibitors were added as noted. In the case of the isolated PP2C domain
purified from bacteria or insect cells, an exact volume of a solution
of a known concentration of protein was added to the reaction mixture.
When enzymes purified from mammalian cells were used, the A/G beads
supporting the proteins were added to the reaction mixture. The relative
amount of protein in the assay was determined by Western blot. To
determine the kinetic parameters kcat and KM, all data were fit to a Michaelis–Menten
model, using nonlinear regression.

p-Nitrophenyl
Phosphate (pNPP) Assay
This assay was previously described. Briefly, each well contained 125 μL of
reaction mix (see above),
1 μM enzyme, and various concentrations of PNPP. Optical density
was recorded over time at 405 nm. Absorbance was then plotted over
time, and the slope was calculated.

Malachite Green Assay
The malachite green assay used
in this paper was a slightly modified version of the protocol described
previously. A fresh solution of reagent
was prepared from 3 volumes of a 34 mM solution of ammonium molybdate
in 4 M hydrochloric acid mixed with 1 volume of 518 μM malachite
green in water. Tween 20 was added to a final concentration of 1%
(v/v). The reaction was stopped by addition of 65 μL of the
reagent to 65 μL of reaction mixture. The reagent was added
to the reaction mixture at different time points, and the color was
allowed to develop for 15 min. Absorbance was recorded at 650 nm.
A calibration curve was obtained each time. The measured OD was converted
to the amount of inorganic phosphate released, and data were plotted
versus time. The initial slope (picomoles per second), measured between
0 and 25% conversion, was divided by the amount of protein (picomoles)
to determine the velocity (inverse seconds).

Inhibitors
The
following compounds from NCI Diversity
Set I were tested: NSC 170008, 7-acetyl-6-ethyl-3,5,8-trihydroxy-9,10-dioxoanthracene-1,2-dicarboxylic
acid; NSC 73101, 1,2,3,4,7,7-hexachloro-6-(9H-fluoren-2-ylcarbamoyl)bicyclo[2.2.1]hept-2-ene-5-carboxylic
acid; NSC 11241, C.I. Basic Red 6; NSC 270127, N-(2-benzoyl-4-chlorophenyl)-2-chloroacetamide

Results
Kinetic Data
The isolated phosphatase domains of PHLPP1
and PHLPP2 were expressed in bacteria as N-terminally tagged GST fusion
proteins, purified by GST affinity chromatography, and their kinetic
parameters were examined. The GST tag had no effect on the enzymatic
activity of either construct (data not shown) and thus was not removed
for the analyses presented. Using pNPP as a substrate, we determined
the KM and kcat for purified PHLPP1 and PHLPP2 phosphatase domains (Figure a). The kinetic profiles of both isozymes were nearly
identical: maximal turnover rates, reflected by the kcat values, were (1.8 ± 0.3) × 10–3 s–1 for PHLPP1 and (1.8 ± 0.1) × 10–3 s–1 for PHLPP2. Substrate binding
energetics for pNPP were also very similar as reflected by KM values of 2.1 ± 0.2 and 1.80 ± 0.08
mM for PHLPP1 and PHLPP2, respectively.

PHLPP activity is highly
dependent on the substrate. (a) PHLPP1
and PHLPP2 have similar phosphatase activities in vitro. The saturating kinetics of the phosphatase domains of PHLPP1 (empty
diamonds) and PHLPP2 (gray squares) with increasing concentrations
of the substrate pNPP is shown. The rates were determined by measuring
the production of pNP at 405 nm in Tricine buffer (pH 7.5). The data
are fit to the Michaelis–Menten equation. The graph shows mean
values ± SEM for three separate experiments. (b) Activities of
the phosphatase domain of PHLPP2 isolated from bacteria or insect
cells are comparable on peptidic substrates. The saturating kinetics
of the phosphatase domains of PHLPP2 isolated from Sf21 cells (black
circles) or Escherichia coli BL21(DE3)pLysS (gray
squares) with increasing concentrations of the substrate peptide is
shown. The rates were determined by measuring the liberation of free
phosphate by the malachite green assay in a Tricine buffer (pH 7.5).
The data are fit to the Michaelis–Menten equation. The graph
shows mean values ± SEM for three separate experiments.

We next compared the kinetic parameters
of isolated phosphatase
domains expressed in bacteria, baculovirus, and mammalian cells (Table ). The GST-tagged PP2C domain of PHLPP2 was purified
from Sf21 cells after infection by baculovirus; the HA-tagged PP2C
domain of PHLPP1 was expressed in COS7 cells and immunoprecipitated
using a HA antibody. The KM for pNPP for
the PHLPP2 phosphatase domain purified from insect cells (1.3 ±
0.2 mM) or immunoprecipitated from mammalian cells (1.5 ± 0.5
mM) was comparable to that for bacterially expressed PHLPP2. In contrast,
the kcat was 200-fold higher for the protein
isolated from insect cells (0.37 ± 0.08 s–1) than for the protein purified from bacteria [(1.8 ± 0.1) ×
10–3 s–1]. Because the concentration
of phosphatase was not measured for mammalian phosphatase, kcat was not determined. These data reveal that
the affinity of PHLPP for pNPP is similar regardless of the source
of the protein; however, the catalytic activity is 2 orders of magnitude
higher for phosphatase purified from insect cells (which better mimic
the milieu of mammalian cells) than bacteria.

Kinetic
Parameters
substrate	expression
system	isoform	domain	kcat (s–1)	KM (M)	kcat/KM (s–1 M–1)	
pNPP	bacteria	PHLPP1	PP2C	(1.8 ± 0.3) × 10–3	(2.1 ± 0.2) × 10–3	0.9 ± 0.2	
 	bacteria	PHLPP2	PP2C	(1.8 ± 0.1) × 10–3	(1.80 ± 0.08) × 10–3	1.0 ± 0.1	
 	insect	PHLPP2	PP2C	(370 ± 80) × 10–3	(1.3 ± 0.2) × 10–3	285 ± 9	
 	mammal	PHLPP1	PP2C	not determined	(1.5 ± 0.5) × 10–3	–	
 	mammal	PHLPP1	full-length	not determined	(1.5 ± 0.5) × 10–3	–	
RRAPTVA	bacteria	PHLPP2	PP2C	0.15 ± 0.04	(64 ± 3) × 10–6	(2.3 ± 0.7) × 103	
 	insect	PHLPP2	PP2C	1.1 ± 0.3	(63 ± 3) × 10–6	(18 ± 5) × 103	
HFPQFPSYSAS	bacteria	PHLPP2	PP2C	1.1 ± 0.2	(139 ± 1) × 10–6	(8 ± 2) × 103	
 	insect	PHLPP2	PP2C	0.9 ± 0.2	(40.5 ± 0.3) × 10–6	(22 ± 5) × 103	
PHLPP1
and PHLPP2 phosphatase
domains and full-length proteins were obtained as fusion proteins
using different expression systems: bacteria [BL21(DE3)pLysS cells],
insect cells (Sf21), or mammalian cells (COS7). kcat and KM were determined
using either pNPP or peptides as a substrate. Dephosphorylation of
pNPP was measured by recording the OD at 405 nm, and dephosphorylation
of peptides was assessed using the malachite green assay. Reactions
occurred in Tricine buffer (pH 7.5). All data were fit to the Michaelis–Menten
equation. Data are means ± SEM.

Phosphopeptides were also subjected to PHLPP dephosphorylation
(Figure b). Two sequences were used: a threonine-phosphorylated
peptide (RRAPTVA) that is a standard substrate for PP2C and a serine-phosphorylated peptide (HFPQFpSYSAS), corresponding to the sequence of the hydrophobic motif
of Akt, a physiologically relevant substrate of PHLPP. Both peptides
were significantly better substrates for PHLPP than the synthetic
substrate pNPP. First, they were dephosphorylated more rapidly than
pNPP as reflected by considerably higher kcat values, a difference most notable for the bacterially expressed
enzyme where kcat was more than 600-fold
higher for the hydrophobic motif peptide (1.1 ± 0.2 s–1) than for pNPP [(1.8 ± 0.1) × 10−3 s–1]. Second, the KM values
were &gt;1 order of magnitude lower. Taken together, the efficiency
of
the reaction, evaluated by the kcat/KM ratio, was enhanced by 2 to ∼4 orders
of magnitude depending on the enzyme source [Table ; kcat/KM ratio of (8 ± 2) × 103 for the hydrophobic
motif peptide compared to a value of 1.0 ± 0.1 using bacterially
expressed PHLPP2]. The most notable feature was that the catalytic
rate of the bacterially expressed phosphatase domain was comparable
to that of insect cell-expressed phosphatase when peptides were used
as substrates. Thus, the phosphatase domain of PHLPP effectively dephosphorylates
phosphopeptides.

pH Profiles
The pH dependence for
the dephosphorylation
of pNPP by the bacterially expressed phosphatase domains of PHLPP1
and PHLPP2 was examined in the absence of added Mn2+. Both
enzymes had detectable catalytic activity between pH 5 and 9 (Figure a). kcat and kcat/KM were then
determined for various pH values between 5.5 and 8.5. The profiles
of activity of the two isozymes were very similar. The plot of kcat versus pH reveals two peaks of activity
at pH 6.0 and 7.8 (Figure b). As a general
trend, PHLPP1 activity decreased up to 5-fold under basic conditions
(pH &gt;8). The data could be fit to a model in which one residue is deprotonated. With this model, the ionization
pH for PHLPP1 is 7.1 ± 0.2 and its pH-independent kcat value is (2.2 ± 0.5) × 10–3 s–1. With the same model, the kcat for PHLPP2 does not seem to depend on the pH, at least
in this pH range.

Effect of pH on the kinetic parameters. (a) Activity of
PHLPP1
(empty diamonds) and PHLPP2 (gray squares) phosphatase domains was
evaluated at different pH values. Reactions occurred at 10 mM pNPP
and 100 mM pH-appropriate buffer (see Table 1 of the ). Graphs show means ± SEM for
at least three separate experiments. (b) kcat and (c) kcat/KM for PHLPP1 and PHLPP2 phosphatase domains evaluated at different
pH values. Saturating kinetics were determined with increasing concentrations
of the substrate pNPP (typically 1–15 mM) in 100 mM buffer,
and data were fit to a Michaelis–Menten equation. pH data in
panel c are fit to the equation v = C/(1+ H/Ka + H/Kb). Graphs show means ±
SEM.

The kcat/KM versus pH plot (Figure c), however, confirms
the existence of two important ionizations for catalysis set at pH
7.84 ± 0.05 and 8.28 ± 0.05 for PHLPP1 and pH 7.84 ±
0.07 and 8.2 ± 0.1 for PHLPP2. The pH-independent kcat/KM for PHLPP1 [(2.940
± 0.001) × 10–2 M–1 s–1] is comparable to the value for PHLPP2 [(2.017 ±
0.008) × 10–2 M–1 s–1], stressing once again the strong similarity between the two isoforms.

Metal Requirement
Next we examined the effect of different
metallic divalent cations on the enzymatic activity of PHLPP. EDTA,
Mg2+, Ca2+, Cu2+, or Ni2+ was added at increasing concentrations to the reaction mixture,
and the initial rate of dephosphorylation was determined at a saturating
substrate concentration, using the phosphatase domain of PHLPP2 purified
from bacteria (Figure a–c). In every
case, the enzyme was active without addition of a metallic ion. This
activity was insensitive to EDTA, even at a concentration of 100 mM.
Mg2+ did not enhance activity; rather, modest inhibition
was observed at concentrations of &gt;10 mM. Ca2+, Cu2+, and Ni2+ inhibited the phosphatase, with half-maximal
inhibition observed in the presence of approximately 40, 10, and 8
mM divalent cation, respectively. Zn2+ was the strongest
inhibitor with complete inhibition observed in the presence of 1 mM
ZnCl2 (data not shown).

Influence of the cation on PHLPP activity.
Relative activity of
PHLPP2 phosphatase domains at 10 mM pNPP with increasing concentrations
of (a) EDTA (red) or MgCl2 (yellow), (b) CaCl2, or (c) CuSO4 (blue) or NiSO4 (orange). The
activity is given as a percentage of the activity of the protein in
the absence of additive. (d) Relative activity of PHLPP2 phosphatase
domains isolated from insect cells (black circles) or bacteria (gray
squares) and full-length PHLPP1 immunoprecipitated from mammalian
cells (white triangles) or the PHLPP1 phosphatase domain from bacteria
(white diamonds) at 10 mM pNPP with increasing concentrations of MnCl2. k values for PHLPP1 (e) and PHLPP2 (f)
phosphatase domains purified from BL21(DE3)pLysS cells were evaluated
at 10 mM pNPP, at different pH values in the absence (empty symbols)
or presence (black symbols) of 10 mM MnCl2. Graphs represent
means ± SEM for three separate experiments.

The influence of Mn2+ on activity was more complex
than
expected (Figure d). According to the literature,
Mn2+ is an activator of the PP2C family, to various degrees depending on the substrate., We indeed found that addition of MnCl2 to the reaction
mixture at pH 7.5 increased PHLPP activity when the proteins were
purified from insect or mammalian cells. A 7-fold increase was observed
with the phosphatase domain of PHLPP2 purified from Sf21 cells, and
a more modest 2-fold increase occurred in the case of PHLPP1 overexpressed
in COS7 cells. However, when bacterial preparations were used as the
enzyme, addition of MnCl2 to the reaction mixture at pH
7.5 resulted in a decrease in activity, by 70% in the case of PHLPP1
and 50% for PHLPP2. To understand this apparently conflicting result,
we examined the dependence of this effect on the pH of the reaction
mixture. MnCl2 was added to a final concentration of 1–20
mM to a reaction mixture buffered at various pH values, between pH
6 and 8.5 (Figure e,f). The data show that
Mn2+ acts as an inhibitor in both cases, below pH 8.0.
Addition of 10 mM MnCl2 to a reaction mixture resulted
in an average 60% inhibition at these pH values. However, at pH 8.2
and 8.5, PHLPP1 showed a maximal 8-fold boost in activity (Figure e), and a 4-fold increase was observed for PHLPP2
(Figure f). Thus, Mn2+ is inhibitory
below pH 8 and activating above pH 8.

Influence of Other Parameters
Varying the ionic strength
of the reaction mixture (set by varying the concentration of sodium
chloride in the reaction mixture from 1 to 500 mM) had no effect on
the dephosphorylation rate of either PHLPP1 or PHLPP2 (data not shown).
The chemical nature of the buffer also did not have any significant
impact on the activity (Table 1 of the ). However, the concentration of DTT in the solution
plays a role in the enzymatic reaction (Figure a). Addition of 0.4–8 mM DTT to the reaction mixture significantly
enhanced PHLPP1 activity with a maximal 3-fold increase at low DTT
concentrations (&lt;3 mM). On the other hand, DTT had a negligible
effect on PHLPP2 activity at concentrations of &lt;10 mM. More interestingly,
DTT variation revealed the first small but significant difference
between PHLPP2 and PHLPP1 activities, PHLPP2 being ∼2-fold
more active than PHLPP1 in the absence of DTT.

Activation of PHLPP by
DTT and selected lipophilic compounds. (a)
Effect of DTT on PHLPP1 and PHLPP2 activity. k values
for PHLPP1 (white bars) and PHLPP2 (gray bars) were determined at
10 mM pNPP, in the absence of Mn2+ for different concentrations
of DTT. (b) Effect of different lipophilic compounds on PHLPP2 phosphatase
activity. Reactions were conducted in Tricine (pH 7.5) at 10 mM pNPP
and 1 mM MnCl2 in the presence of 100 μM lipophilic
compounds. (c) Relative activity of the PHLPP2 phosphatase domain
with increasing concentrations of oleic (circles) and arachidonic
(triangles) acid. Reactions were conducted in Tricine (pH 7.5) at
10 mM pNPP and 5 mM MnCl2. Graphs show means ± SEM
for three separate experiments. *P &lt; 0.01, and
**P &lt; 0.001 (Student’s t test).

It has been reported that PP2Cα
and PP2Cβ are activated
by fatty acids.− Specifically, fatty acids enhance the affinity for
Mn2+, such that they increase the activity recorded at
subsaturating concentrations of Mn2+. We thus tested the
effects of various fatty acids on the kinetic parameters of PHLPP,
using the phosphatase domain of PHLPP2 purified from insect cells
as an example. Fatty acids (100 μM) of various lengths (16–20
carbons), saturated state (zero to four double bonds), and configuration
(cis vs trans double bond) were
tested in the presence of 1 mM MnCl2 (Figure b). We found that only oleic acid (18:1 cis) and arachidonic acid (20:4) were able to increase PHLPP2 activity,
by 30 and 50%, respectively. Palmitoleic acid was slightly inhibitory
under these conditions. The effects of oleic and arachidonic acids
were studied in more detail and revealed that activation of PHLPP
started between 30 and 100 μM and increased with the concentration
of the compound (Figure c). It should be noted
that elaidic acid (18:1 trans), the isomer of oleic
acid, did not change the PHLPP activity at any concentration tested
(data not shown). These results are in good agreement with previous
studies showing the importance of the configuration of the double
bond. We also verified that the effects
of fatty acids were linked to the presence of Mn2+. Indeed,
addition of any fatty acid in solutions containing no supplementary
Mn2+ had no effect on the activity of the protein (data
not shown).

Thermal Stability of the Domain
The thermal stability
of the isolated phosphatase domain, purified from Escherichia
coli, was evaluated. First, we used circular dichroism (CD)
to compare global structural states of PHLPP1 and PHLPP2 (Figure a). Little difference was observed in the CD spectra
of the two proteins. The phosphatase domain of PHLPP2 was then submitted
to increasing temperatures, and effects on protein structure were
assessed using CD (Figure b). Changes in the
slope of residue ellipticity versus temperature were interpreted as
structural variations, in this case, unfolding of the protein. The
PP2C domain of PHLPP2 had a temperature of denaturation of 50 °C
in the reaction buffer. The same temperature of denaturation could
be obtained using fluorescence polarization as a readout. PHLPP1 and
PHLPP2 could then be compared, with PHLPP1 being unfolded at a slightly
higher temperature (58 °C). We then measured the enzymatic activity
of the PHLPP1 or PHLPP2 phosphatase domain using a fluorescent substrate,
difluoromethyl umbeliferryl phosphate (DiFMUP). The dephosphorylation
rate increased with an increase in temperature, up to a plateau, and
then the enzyme slowly lost activity as heat denatured it (Figure c). The optimal temperature for activity was between
40 and 50 °C for PHLPP2, with PHLPP1 being more stable (Figure c). We then evaluated the importance of the metallic
cations on thermal stability. To this end, we assessed the temperature
of denaturation of the enzyme after dialysis against 5 mM EDTA. These
conditions have been shown to efficiently remove the Mn2+ ions from the catalytic pocket of PP2Cα. We observed a transition in fluorescence at 37 °C,
around 10 °C lower than that for the untreated protein. We then
incubated the apoprotein in buffer containing 5 mM Mn2+, Mg2+, or Ca2+ for 48 h and determined the
temperature of denaturation (Figure d). We
first verified the Tm we found for Mn2+ was identical to that determined for proteins that had always
been stored in the presence of Mn2+. All three metal ions
increased thermal stability relative to that of the apoenzyme, in
the following order: Mg2+ &gt; Ca2+ &gt; Mn2+. This increase was also observed when using the activity
assay as
a measure of thermal sensitivity (Figure e).
These data indicate that both phosphatase domains are relatively stable
proteins, with the phosphatase domain of PHLPP1 being slightly more
stable than that of PHLPP2.

Structural stability of the isolated phosphatase
domain of PHLPP.
(a) Circular dichroism (CD) spectra for PHLPP1 (■) and PHLPP2
(△) phosphatase domains, isolated from bacteria. (b) The phosphatase
domain of PHLPP2 was subjected to increasing temperatures, and variations
of the mean residue ellipticity at 222 nm (by CD) were recorded. (c)
Activity of the phosphatase domain of PHLPP1 (empty diamonds) or PHLPP2
(gray squares) was measured by fluorescence at different temperatures
using DiFMUP as the substrate. (d) Phosphatase domain PHLPP2 treated
with EDTA (black squares) and subsequently incubated with MnCl2 (orange squares), MgCl2 (yellow squares), or CaCl2 (pink squares) was subjected to increasing temperatures,
and fluorescence emission at 330 nm was recorded. (e) Activity of
PHLPP2 incubated with MnCl2 (orange squares), MgCl2 (yellow squares), or CaCl2 (pink squares) was
measured by fluorescence at different temperatures using DiFMUP as
the substrate.

Distinct Inhibitor Sensitivity
of the PHLPP Phosphatase Domain
We next compared the inhibitor
sensitivity of the PHLPP2 PP2C domain
to that of PP2Cα using compounds we previously identified in
a biochemical and virtual screen for PHLPP inhibitors. Compounds NSC 27157 and NSC 170008 were selective
for the PHLPP2 PP2C domain, whereas compounds NSC 73101 and NSC 11241
were selective for PP2Cα (Figure ).
This selectivity underscores the unique architecture of the PHLPP
PP2C domain compared to that of PP2Cα.

Unique inhibitor sensitivity
of the PHLPP PP2C domain. Relative
activity of the PHLPP2 PP2C domain (gray squares) and PP2Cα
(white circles) in the presence of different molecules (NCS 270156,
NCS 170008, NCS 73101, and NCS 11241). Compounds NCS 270156 and NCS
170008 were selective for PHLPP2 compared to PP2Cα, whereas
NCS 73101 inhibits PP2Cα preferentially. Reactions were conducted
in Tricine (pH 7.5) at 10 mM pNPP at various inhibitor concentrations.
Graphs show means ± SEM for three separate experiments.

Mutational Analysis of
PHLPP2
We have previously reported
the construction of a homology model for PHLPP2 based on the crystal structure of PP2Cα (Figure b). We use this
model to predict residues essential for catalysis. As noted above,
PP2Cs share 11 conserved sequence motifs, with key conserved aspartic
acids in motifs 1, 2, 8, and 11 (Figure c). We identified Asp 806 and Asp 1024 as corresponding
to the catalytic Asp in the conserved 55DGxxG (PP2Cα
numbering) of motif 2 (Figure c, green) and
conserved Gxx282DN (PP2Cα numbering) of motif 11
(Figure c, cyan); these were mutated to Asn
(D806N and D1024N). No Asp corresponding to that in the consensus
Rxxx38D of motif 1 (Figure c, orange)
was present; rather, the corresponding position was occupied by Trp
784. This and the preceding Phe 783 were mutated to Ala and Val, respectively,
to test their role in maintaining the packing of the domain (F783V
and W784A). The aspartic acid in the consensus 239DG in
motif 8 (Figure c, yellow) was also not found
in PHLPP2; rather, a lysine (Lys 985) aligned with this residue. This
was mutated to leucine (K985L). In the homology model, we noticed
that a glutamate (Glu 989) is positioned one helix turn from Lys 985,
suggesting it could be the relevant acidic residue in motif 8; this
was mutated to Gln (E989Q). Lastly, a previous sequence alignment
identified Asp 820 as a conserved aspartic acid as the surrounding
motif was conserved (motif 2, F/YDG conserved in most mammalian PP2Cs)
. However, our homology model locates Asp 820 on the surface of the
domain, away from the catalytic site. The D820N mutation was therefore
introduced to assess if this residue indeed played a role in catalysis.
We also mutated a third bulky aromatic, Phe 808 (F808V), as it could
play a role in a π-stacking with Phe 782 and Tyr 784. The mutations
were introduced into HA-tagged, full-length PHLPP2. The mutants were
expressed in COS7 cells and partially purified by immunoprecipitation.
Activity was assessed by both pNPP and malachite green assays (Figure a). Mutation of Asp 806 or Asp 1024 significantly
impaired activity, confirming their equivalence to the conserved Asp
in motifs 2 and 11. Interestingly, mutation of Glu 989 in motif 8
also impaired activity, suggesting its functional equivalence to the
Asp in motif 8. Mutation of either Phe 783 or Phe 808, but not Trp
784, inhibited the enzyme, consistent with important structural roles
for the two Phe residues. Mutation of Asp 820 did not alter activity,
validating its positioning away from the catalytic pocket. Mutation
of Lys 985 also had no effect on activity.

Mutational analysis of
PHLPP2. (a) Relative activity of point mutants
of PHLPP2 using a peptide as the substrate. Point mutants of full-length
PHLPP2 were overexpressed as HA-tagged fusion proteins in COS7 cells
and immunoprecipitated. They were used to dephosphorylate the threonine-phosphorylated
peptide RRAPTVA in Tricine (pH 7.5) in the presence of
5 mM MnCl2. Release of inorganic phosphate was monitored
by the malachite green assay, and the speed of dephosphorylation was
divided by the relative amount of protein, as determined by Western
blotting. Activity is given relative to that of wild-type PHLPP2.
The graph shows means ± SEM of three separate experiments. (b)
Position of the mutated residues in the homology model of PHLPP2. (c) Sequence alignment of subdomains 1, 2, 8,
and 11 of the PP2C family showing conserved RXXXD, DGXXG, DG, and
GXXDN (colored orange, green, yellow, and cyan, respectively). Mn2+-coordinating acidic residues are colored red. Below is a
schematic of PP2Cα (left) showing four asparates that coordinate
the two bound Mn2+ ions (magenta spheres) and a homology model of PHLPP2 showing equivalent acidic residues and structurally important Phe
residues.

Discussion
PHLPP Phosphatase
Activity
PHLPP has the hallmarks
of a PP2C. The phosphatase domain of PHLPP can be purified from various
cells and demonstrates in every case the capacity to dephosphorylate
synthetic and natural substrates. Consistent with a known property
of PP2C enzymes, activity is insensitive to okadaic acid. Sequence
alignment predicts that the phosphatase domains of PHLPP1 and PHLPP2
constitute a discrete subfamily of PP2C. Some distinctions indeed
appear upon comparison to other members of the family. When the PP2C
domains of PHLPP1 and PHLPP2 are expressed in bacteria, the enzyme
is active and dephosphorylates pNPP with a kcat of 1.8 × 10–3 s–1 and a kcat/Km of ∼1 M–1 s–1. PP2Cα,
which is a standard in the PP2C family, can also be purified from E. coli and hydrolyzes pNPP with a kcat of 1.02 s–1 and a kcat/Km of 859 M–1 s–1. PP2Cα
is therefore almost 3 orders of magnitude more active and efficient
at dephosphorylating this substrate. Purification from Sf21 cells
increases the activity of the PHLPP phosphatase domain, but this enzyme
is still 3-fold less active and less efficient than PP2Cα. However,
when a phosphopeptide is used as the substrate, PHLPP as a phosphatase
is almost as good as PP2Cα, even when purified from bacteria.
PP2Cα dephosphorylates the PP2C preferred substrate peptide
(RRAPTVA) with a kcat of 5.2
s–1 and a kcat/KM of 48 × 103 M–1 s–1 according to one study and 16.5 s–1 and 109 × 103 M–1 s–1 according to another. PHLPP from bacteria is therefore only 2–4-fold
less active than PP2Cα when peptides are used as substrates.
The proteins purified from insect cells are slightly more active than
the bacterially expressed ones. The Km values are lower for all peptides than for pNPP, indicating a better
recognition of peptides as substrates, as expected. The change in kcat, however, was more pronounced than anticipated.
Indeed, in the case of PP2Cα, dephosphorylation occurred with
an only 5–15-fold increase when using RRAPTVA as
a substrate compared to pNPP, and kcat values were even decreased when other peptide sequences were used. The same reduction in kcat between pNPP and peptides was observed with PrpZ, a Salmonella enterica PP2C, for example. pNPP is supposed to mimic phosphorylated tyrosine residues,
but the data obtained with PHLPP indicate it is a weak mimetic as
a phosphotyrosine peptide was dephosphorylated as effectively as the
Ser/Thr phosphopeptides (data not shown).

The major difference
between PHLPP and other members of the PP2C family lies in their metal
requirement. PP2C family members require either Mn2+ or
Mg2+ for their activity. Mn2+ is most commonly
preferred, but Mg2+ is often able to activate the enzymes
and, in some instances, is the most efficient cofactor. We showed
that PHLPP was active even in the absence of a cofactor and that we
observed a residual activity in the presence of EDTA. In a majority
of cases, PP2C family members had no in vitro activity
in the absence of Mn2+ or Mg2+, on any substrate.
A few exceptions exist. PP1MH is inactive toward pNPP and phosphopeptides
without Mn2+ but was able to dephosphorylate casein in
the absence of an additional metallic cation. Conversely, PP2Cβ has a small basal activity toward phosphopeptides
but none toward casein. Nevertheless,
this feature is an oddity in the family. In the case of PHLPP, the
metal ions appear to play both a structural role and a catalytic role.
On one hand, EDTA treatment causes a structural rearrangement, as
observed by fluorescence (Figure d and ), resulting in a conformation of the enzyme
with a reduced thermal stability but unchanged catalytic activity.
On the other hand, mutation of either key aspartic acid in the catalytic
site (D806 or D1024) reduces PHLPP activity by 50%, suggesting that
metal ions are involved in the catalytic process. These metals may
be incorporated during protein expression (in a Mn2+-rich
environment) and are likely to be tightly bound. Additional ions may
be more loosely associated with the protein and play a structural
role. Varying the nature of these ions affects the thermal stability
of the recombinant enzyme (Figures d and e) but not its activity. PHLPP activity can be only
enhanced by the addition of Mn2+. This is always the case
for proteins expressed in insect cells or mammalian cells. In the
case of bacterially expressed proteins, the influence of Mn2+ is more complex, being mainly inhibitory. However, this trend is
overturned above pH 8.0 when these enzymes start to act like their
counterparts purified in other systems. Activation by Mn2+ is enhanced by fatty acids as described previously,− although the amplitude of the effect was attenuated.

Proteins
expressed in E. coli showed some differences
compared to proteins expressed in other systems. The most dramatic
feature was their weak activity, as determined by the kcat, using pNPP as a substrate. However, this did not
hold true for other substrates as shown in Table . We also found that those recombinant proteins were a good
model for the metal requirement for PHLPP activity. Bacteria may lack
the proper enzymes for post-translational modification or the proper
chaperones for correct folding to ensure that the enzymes adopt conformations
for maximal catalytic activity. We know that bacterially expressed
protein displayed the odd characteristic of gaining activity upon
being stored at 4 °C, consistent with slow structural rearrangements.
Nonetheless, bacteria are still the preferred source of recombinant
proteins as this system gives the highest yield of PHLPP. Care should
be taken when analyzing results using bacterially expressed proteins,
and comparison with proteins from mammalian cells should be undertaken
to assess the physiological relevance of the results.

Mutational
Analysis of PHLPP2
The archetypal mammalian
PP2C is characterized by a central, buried β-sandwich composed
by two antiparallel β-sheets, flanked by two antiparallel α-helices.
Its catalytic core is composed of two Mn2+ ions coordinated
by four invariant Asp residues and a nonconserved Glu. Mutational analysis of PP2Cα or PP2Cβ also
identifies two important positively charged residues, an Arg and a
His, the first one positioning the phosphate group correctly and the
second one acting as a general acid for catalysis (Figure c). Using point mutations, we were able to identify
three residues that are important for catalysis that are likely to
coordinate metals: Asp 806 (corresponding to Asp 60 in PP2Cα),
Asp 1024 (Asp 282 in PP2Cα), and Glu 989 (Asp 239 in PP2Cα).
The exact alignment for residue 238 in PP2Cα is actually Lys
985. Mutation of Lys 985 to a neutral residue such as Leu has no effect,
as shown, nor do mutations of this residue to an acidic residue such
as Asp or Glu (data not shown). Glu 989 is predicted to be located
one helix turn away compared to PP2Cα; therefore, we predict
the distance between the two metallic centers to be significantly
increased. We could not identify a homologue for Asp 38 (in motif
1) in PHLPP2, but this residue is not essential for catalysis. Mutation of Glu 37 or Asp 38 in PP2Cα
does not result in a dramatic decrease in activity; indeed, the D38Q
mutant is more active than wild-type PP2Cα. Asp 38 in PP2Cα
is located at the beginning of the β3 sheet and coordinates
the same Mn2+ as Asp 60, which is at the end of the β4
sheet(Figure c). It is possible that this metallic complex adds stability to the
structure. If so, this feature could be recapitulated in PHLPP2 by
a putative π-stacking between Phe 783 (at the beginning of the
β3 sheet) and Phe 808 (at the end of the β4 sheet) (Figure b,c). Supporting this hypothesis is the fact that
mutation of either residue leads to almost complete inhibition of
the PHLPP2 activity, even though the mutants are normally expressed.

The catalytic site we describe is missing elements compared to
the canonical PP2C catalytic site,(Figure c). One possibility is that our homology model is
inaccurate and the actual folding of the protein is providing additional
coordination points for the metal that we missed. Still, this homology
model performed well for determination of inhibitors and provided
us with mechanistic details about inhibition. Another possibility is that not all residues are required for catalytic
activity, contrary to previous reports. Different approaches can be developed by proteins to stabilize their
structure or position or activate substrates. The low activity of
the PP2C domain of PHLPP isolated from bacteria, when compared to
other PP2Cs, could indicate that the active site of PHLPP is indeed
different from the rest of the PPM family, making it less efficient
or more specific toward substrates. Only resolution of the crystal
structure of the phosphatase domain of PHLPP can definitively reveal
the exact architecture of the active site.

In conclusion, we
purified the catalytic domains of PHLPP1 and
PHLPP2 from three different cell expression systems: bacteria, insect
cells, and mammalian cells. These proteins dephosphorylate synthetic
and peptidic substrates with kinetics that depend on both the substrate
and the expression systems. We determined that PHLPP1 and PHLPP2 have
almost similar in vitro activities and respond comparably
to the presence of metallic ions. We also showed that metallic ions
affect the structural stability of the domain. Finally, we probed
for residues predicted to be important for catalysis in PHLPP2 by
site-directed mutagenesis. We identified three residues that are likely
involved in metal coordination and two that could be important for
structural integrity. This work is only the beginning of the biochemical
characterization of PHLPP, and many questions remain. One step is
the identification of the residues involved in the active site of
PHLPP1. Even though PHLPP1 and PHLPP2 are 58% identical in their PP2C
domain amino acid sequences and present comparable kinetic profiles in vitro when using isolated domains purified from bacteria,
differences are expected as, for example, the two critical Phe we
identified in PHLPP2 have no equivalent in the PHLPP1 sequence. Another
essential step is to understand the interactions between the domains
and how this affects the activity of the phosphatase, the final goal
being to ascertain how PHLPP
phosphatase activity is regulated in the cell.

Supporting Information Available
Buffers used at various pH
values (Table 1) and fluorescence of the tryptophan for the phosphatase
domain of PHLPP2 recorded as a function of time following treatment
with 100 mM EDTA. This material is available free of charge via the
Internet at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bi500428j_si_001.pdf

bi500428j_si_002.pdf

Author Present Address
† E.S.:
The University of Queensland, Institute for Molecular Bioscience,
St. Lucia, Queensland 4072, Australia.

This work
was
supported by National Institutes of Health Grant GM067946 (A.C.N.).

The authors
declare no
competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
We thank Yann Gambin for help with the structural
data collection
and analyses, Bill Sinko and Corina Antal for help with sequence alignment
and modeling, and David Brautigan and Jack Dixon for helpful advice
on phosphatase assays.

Abbreviations
PHLPPPH domain leucine-rich repeat
protein phosphatase

pNPPp-nitrophenyl phosphate

PKCprotein kinase C

SEMstandard error of the mean.

