Translocator
Protein 18 kDa
(TSPO) was originally discovered as a secondary binding site for the
widely prescribed antianxiety drugs, benzodiazepines, in the mitochondria
of rat kidney. For this reason, it became
known as the peripheral-type benzodiazepine receptor (PBR). In 2006,
it was renamed Translocator Protein 18 kDa (TSPO) to better represent the emerging understanding of a family
of highly conserved integral membrane proteins (Figure ) found from Archaea to plants and humans, with a broad spectrum
of functions, including steroid and porphyrin transport and regulation
of apoptosis, inflammation, metastatic cancer, and cardiovascular
diseases.,

Sequence alignment of TSPO proteins. Shown in
the alignment are
TSPO proteins from Rhodobacter sphaeroides 2.4.1
(AAF24291), Rhodobacter capsulatus (Z11165), human
(CAB55884), mouse (NP_033905), rat (NP_036647), bovine (DAA29060), zebrafish (NP_001006032), Arabidopsis thaliana (AAL16286), Schizosaccharomyces pombe (CAA22182.2), Bacillus subtilis (YP_004204918.1), Archaeoglobus fulgidus (NP_070304.1), Pseudomonas fluorescens (YP_348542.1), Drosophila melanogaster (AAF51482),
and Eubacterium siraeum DSM 15702 (EDS01113.1). Conserved amino acids are colored from deep red to yellow. The
secondary structure is predicted on the basis of the sequence of RsTSPO by the server Toppred. Transmembrane helices are labeled on top of the sequences. The cholesterol
recognition/interaction amino acid consensus (CRAC) is highlighted
in a magenta rectangular box with the three critical amino acids labeled
with cyan triangles. The proposed drug/porphyrin binding loop (loop
1) is highlighted in a purple rectangular box. The red star denotes
the position of the human A147T polymorphism. The alignment was made
using the CLUSTALW server, and the image was created in Aline.

In mammalian cells, TSPO is primarily located in the outer
mitochondrial
membrane and concentrated at the outer–inner membrane contact
sites. It is expressed in all organs examined
so far and at particularly high levels in steroid hormone-producing
tissues, such as adrenal glands and kidney. Knockout of TSPO is developmentally
lethal in the mouse. The major function
of TSPO has been proposed to be transporting small molecules, including
cholesterol and heme biosynthesis intermediates, into or out of mitochondria
to be further metabolized.− In addition, TSPO has been found to be strongly expressed
in areas of brain injury and inflammation, and in aggressive cancers,, as well as brains of
Alzheimer and Huntington disease patients. In these situations, TSPO has been proposed to be involved in the
regulation of the mitochondrial permeability transition pore (MPTP),, thus exerting its effects on cellular homeostasis (see reviews in Current Molecular Medicine(,)). TSPO ligands,
including benzodiazepines and more specific compounds represented
by the diagnostic ligand PK11195, have been shown to attenuate cancer
cell proliferation, to have neuroprotective
effects, and to inhibit the MPTP. The interaction of TSPO with ligands continues
to be a strong research focus aimed at the development of drugs targeting
TSPO for imaging and treatment of diverse disease states.

Mitochondria
play important roles in the normal function of cells
and also in regulating cell death through apoptosis and/or necrosis., The initiation of apoptosis is usually preceded by a loss of the
mitochondrial membrane potential (ΔΨm), which
is proposed to be regulated by the MPTP, a multiprotein complex whose structural components are still not
established. Together with other proteins, TSPO has been implicated
as a regulator of the MPTP, having been isolated originally in a complex
with the voltage-dependent anion channel (VDAC) and the adenine nucleotide
translocator (ANT). Both VDAC and ANT
are candidate components of the MPTP,, but other
possibilities remain. Various TSPO ligands
have been shown to regulate apoptosis; however, it is currently still unclear how MPTP or apoptosis is
regulated by TSPO.

In the purple non-sulfur bacteria that are
proposed to be ancestors
of mitochondria, TSPO was discovered
in the carotenoid gene cluster as CrtK, first in Rhodobacter capsulatus(,) and subsequently in Rhodobacter sphaeroides (RsTSPO). Initially designated
as the tryptophan-rich sensory protein (TspO), the bacterial protein
was recognized as being homologous to the mitochondrial PBR., In Rhodobacter, it is located in the outer membrane
and involved in regulating photosynthetic gene expression in response
to oxygen and light conditions., Similar to its mammalian
ortholog, RsTSPO is proposed to be involved in the
transport of small molecules such as porphyrin intermediates of the
heme and chlorophyll biosynthesis–degradation pathways.,RsTSPO shares considerable sequence homology with
human TSPO (HsTSPO) (Figure ), and rat TSPO has been shown to substitute for RsTSPO in R. sphaeroides, suggesting a functional
link. Along with an overall significant
level of sequence identity (30%), RsTSPO shares noteworthy
sequence similarity with HsTSPO in the first extramembrane
loop (loop 1) that is proposed to participate in porphyrin and drug binding, as well as in the cholesterol binding site located at the cholesterol
recognition/interaction amino acid consensus (CRAC) sequence at the
C-terminus, including the end of transmembrane helix V.

Although R. sphaeroides does not make cholesterol,
it does produce a related class of steroid-like molecules, hopanoids, which may account for why the proposed critical
residues for cholesterol binding are well-conserved between mammalian
TSPO and RsTSPO. However, the sequences before and
after the CRAC region vary. A recent paper reported that the human
A147T single polymorphism immediately preceding the CRAC sequence
in helix V resulted in reduction in affinity for a PK11195 analogue
used for PET imaging of 2 orders of magnitude. This finding highlights the adjacent variable region (residues
144–146 in the human sequence) that could play a role in differences
in ligand binding between Rhodobacter and human TSPO.
In addition, loop 1, implicated in drug and porphyrin binding by mutations
in both Rhodobacter() and
mammalian TSPO, is highly variable in
the initial one-third, while the rest is conserved. Differences in
this region may also play a role in the significantly higher affinity
of PK11195 reported for human and for
rat TSPO expressed in R. sphaeroides compared to
the endogenous RsTSPO. In addition, the W38C mutation in this loop 1 region was observed
to influence the dimerization and stability of RsTSPO, suggesting a complex role in protein structure. With respect to cholesterol binding, information
about the binding behavior of RsTSPO is still not
available, and the possibility of direct or allosteric competition
among PK11195, cholesterol, and porphyrin has been suggested but not established.

Discrepancies and
controversies remain in the literature regarding
the binding of TSPO ligands and the physiological significance of
their interactions.,, For instance, TSPO ligands have been reported to have pro-apoptotic
effects in cancer cells but to be anti-apoptotic
in cardiac tissue after ischemia and reperfusion injury.,, A major difficulty comes from
the interpretation of binding data measured in complex systems such
as total membranes or whole cells from different tissues where other
proteins may affect the interaction. To clarify some of these issues,
we have expressed and purified to homogeneity wild-type RsTSPO and the reported dimer-stabilizing mutant W38C. We describe studies of their oligomerization state as well
as their binding to ligands, including cholesterol, porphyrin, the
diagnostic drug PK11195, and a series of compounds with reported apoptosis-influencing
properties. Using a sensitive tryptophan fluorescence quenching assay,
our results show that these ligands have direct interactions with RsTSPO at micromolar affinity. We provide an atomic-level
model of the RsTSPO dimer, based on a 10 Å resolution
cryo-electron microscopy (cryo-EM) density map and using EM-Fold, and discuss
the relationship between ligand interactions in the context of the
dimer model. Some novel ligands characterized in this study provide
candidates for the optimization of crystallization of TSPO.

Materials
and Methods
Materials
Chemicals were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich
(St. Louis, MO). Dodecyl maltoside (DDM), decyl maltoside (DM), and n-dodecylphosphocholine (Fos-Choline-12) (Anagrade) were
purchased from Anatrace (Maumee, OH). The RsTSPO
expression plasmid was a gift from S. Kaplan from the University of
Texas (Austin, TX), and codon-optimized HsTSPO was
synthesized by DNA 2.0. Pfu Turbo polymerase was purchased from Agilent
technologies (Santa Clara, CA). Restriction enzymes and T4 ligase
were purchased from New England Biolabs (Ipswich, MA).

Cloning
The coding sequence of RsTSPO
was subcloned into the pUC12 vector for mutagenesis. The W38C mutant
of RsTSPO was made by QuikChange mutagenesis (Stratagene).
Fusion protein constructs were made by the splicing-by-overlapping-extension
method. Primers used in the polymerase
chain reaction are listed in Table T1 of the . Constructs were confirmed by sequencing and ligated
into the pRK415 expression vector with KpnI and HindIII restriction
sites or the pJ411 (DNA 2.0 ) expression vector with NdeI and EcoRI
restriction sites. The human TSPO gene was codon optimized for Escherichia coli expression and purchased from DNA 2.0 in
the pJ411 vector. Expression vectors containing the desired TSPO coding
sequence were confirmed by sequencing and introduced into E. coli expression strain BL21 λDE3.

Protein Expression
and Purification
The transformed
bacteria were cultured at 30 °C in 100 mL of LB medium containing
the appropriate antibiotics overnight. Fifteen milliliters of the
overnight culture was then transferred into 1 L of autoinduction medium
(ZYM-5025) containing glycerol, glucose,
lactose, and the appropriate antibiotics. Cultures were grown at 30
°C for RsTSPO, RsTSPOW38C,
and fusion proteins, and the temperature was decreased to 12 °C
for HsTSPO to reduce the level of inclusion bodies
and GroEL. Cells were harvested when the OD600 exceeded
4.0. Harvested cells were resuspended in lysis buffer [50 mM KH2PO4 (pH 6.5) and 1 mM EDTA] supplemented with Roche
protease inhibitor cocktail and lysed via two passes at 20000 psi
through a French press homogenizer. Broken cells were centrifuged
at 200g for 5 min, 10000g for 30
min, and 150000g for 90 min at 4 °C to isolate
the membranes. Isolated membranes were resuspended with buffer A [50
mM Tris-HCl (pH 8), 150 mM NaCl, and 10% glycerol], quick frozen with
liquid nitrogen, and stored at −70 °C before being purified.

Membranes were thawed on ice, resuspended to a total protein concentration
of 10 mg/mL in buffer A, solubilized via addition of 1% DDM, 1 mM
PMSF, and Roche protease inhibitor cocktail (no EDTA), and stirred
at 4 °C for 1 h. Solubilized membranes were centrifuged at 150000g for 30 min to remove the unsolubilized fraction. The supernatant
was loaded on a 10 mL Ni-NTA (Qiagen ) gravity column pre-equilibrated
with buffer A. After being extensively washed with buffer A supplemented
with 0.2% DM and 50 mM imidazole, fractions containing the desired
protein were eluted using buffer A supplemented with 0.2% DM and 300
mM imidazole over 2 column volumes. Fractions containing the desired
protein were pooled, concentrated with a 50 kDa cutoff Amicon Filter
(Millipore ), washed once with buffer A supplemented with 0.2% DM,
and diluted to 10 mL. Trypsin was added at a rate of 0.2 mg/mg of RsTSPO10ht, and the protein solution was incubated at 4
°C overnight. Trypsin-treated RsTSPO10ht was
concentrated to 250 μL with a 30 kDa cutoff Amicon filter and
loaded onto a Superose 12 300/10 gel filtration column (GE Life Sciences)
pre-equilibrated with buffer B [50 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.0), 150 mM NaCl,
0.2% DM, and 2 mM β-mercaptoethanol (βME)] and run at
0.3 mL/min. The homogeneous peak fractions of RsTSPO
were pooled, and the concentration of the protein was determined by
the UV absorbance at 280 nm. The purity of the protein was estimated
via sodium dodecyl sulfate–polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis
(SDS–PAGE) stained with Coomassie blue. The average yield of
wild-type RsTSPO was 5 mg/L of culture. RsTSPO was also solublized and purified in Fos-Choline-12 (2 and 0.2%)
using the same buffer conditions but without the SEC step. This version
of the protein was used for comparative binding experiments (Figure ).

Codon-optimized HsTSPO
was expressed at good levels
in E. coli and was purified in the same way as RsTSPO. However, the E. coli chaperone
protein GroEL was found to be copurified with HsTSPO
as a persistent contaminant. As shown in Figure S1 of the , a reasonably pure HsTSPO monomer with a trace of dimer was present in the
sample, but with a significant amount of GroEL copurified (Figure
S1 of the ). The
fortuitous absence of tryptophan in GroEL, combined with the unusually
high tryptophan content of TSPO (13 of 169 amino acids), made it possible
to conduct some ligand binding studies with the human protein based
on fluorescence quenching, but not to characterize its oligomeric
state.

Light Scattering Measurements of the Oligomeric State of Purified RsTSPO
A static light scattering method combined
with UV absorption and refractive index measurement was used to investigate
the oligomeric state of purified RsTSPO. Four microliters of a 30 mg/mL purified RsTSPO sample was loaded on a Superdex 200 300/10 column
coupled with the triple detector array (Malvern ) and run in buffer
B at a rate of 0.3 mL/min at 4 °C. Purified ovalbumin and pure
DM were run in the same buffer under the same conditions. Data were
analyzed in OmniSEC to calculate the molecular mass of the protein–detergent
complex and the fraction of protein by comparing the light scattering,
which represents the size of the protein–detergent complex,
and the amount of proteins in the complex as measured by UV280 (ε = 71960 M–1 cm–1).

Tryptophan Fluorescence Quenching Binding Assay
A tryptophan
fluorescence quenching assay was used to study the binding properties
of TSPO by utilizing the intrinsic tryptophan fluorescence. For RsTSPO and RsTSPOW38C, 2.5 μM purified protein was titrated with increasing
amounts of ligand in the desired concentration range at room temperature.
Each titration point was monitored by a spectral scan from 290 to
400 nm (excitation at 285 nm) on a PTI QuantaMaster spectrofluorimeter.
Control experiments were performed to evaluate the absorption and
emission of ligands as well as buffers and solvents. Because of the
slight shift of the tryptophan fluorescence peak during the experiment
caused by differential quenching of buried tryptophans versus solvent-exposed
tryptophans, the area under each emission spectrum was integrated
to account for all tryptophans and a percentage quenching ratio for
each concentration was calculated. The binding curve was obtained
by plotting the percentage quenching (%Quen) versus the total ligand
concentration ([Lt]) in Origin. Equation  was derived on the basis of a single binding site per monomer
assumption, taking into consideration ligand depletion. [Lt] is the total ligand concentration plotted on the binding curves.
The calculation of Kd is corrected by
eq  for ligand depletion, which occurs at low
ligand concentrations because of the relatively high protein:ligand
ratio.where %Quen represents the calculated percentage
quenching at each concentration, Fmax is
the maximal amplitude of fluorescence quenching, which equals the
difference between the initial and final fluorescence signals divided
by the initial fluorescence, [Lt] is the total ligand concentration,
[Pt] is the total concentration of purified RsTSPO protein (fixed at 2.5 μM in the experiment and during
the fitting procedure), and Kd is the
apparent dissociation constant. Offs (offset) allows a fit unconstrained
to go through zero, while f is a parameter to account
for the effective fraction of protein involved in binding. Offs and f help to optimize the fitting by accounting for binding
modes involving different numbers of sites. For partially purified HsTSPO with a total protein concentration at 2.5 μM,
the binding curve was obtained the same way as for RsTSPO, but the apparent dissociation constant (Kapp) was estimated as the concentration of the half-maximal
quenching, because it is assumed that nonspecific binding to contaminating
GroEL may give a Kapp that is larger than
the actual value. These HsTSPO experiments were conducted
with a mutant, C153E, that removed the possible complication of the
extra cysteine in the human protein and that showed no difference
in terms of expression, purification, or reported function. All ligands
are dissolved in DMSO as a stock solution and diluted with DMSO or
buffer for measurement except for cholesterol and PpIX, which were
dissolved in pure ethanol and 0.15 M NaCl, respectively. Control quenching
curves with solvent alone were determined. One representative binding
curve is shown in each figure, while the Kd is reported as the average of three replicate measurements fitted
with eq .

Modeling of the RsTSPO Dimer
The experimental
EM density map from the EM database (EMDB entry 1698) was processed
in Chimera to match published helix placement
in a RsTSPO dimer density. Final models were generated
using a modified protocol from Lindert et al. Twenty thousand decoys were generated using a simultaneously combined
BCL::EM-Fold and the membrane protein protocol in BCL::MP-fold. Briefly, the transmembrane helices were first
assembled into the density rods as a monomer. The models were evaluated
by their agreement with the density map as well as a knowledge-based
potential. The models were then clustered combining all models with
the same arrangement of transmembrane helices (topology). The 150
top-scoring topologies were then symmetrized and subjected to another
round of EM-fold refinement against the density map. The full-atom
models were generated using Rosetta;, of the 150
refined topological folds from the previous step, 75 top-scoring folds
were used to generate 2000 all-atom models per fold. Then, within
each topology, the models were clustered with respect to loop conformation.
For the 20 top-scoring loop conformations from each of the 75 topologies,
three rounds of iterative loop modeling, side chain repacking, and
relaxation were conducted using the density map as a restraint in
Rosetta., Twenty-five models were created in each
iteration, and the top-scoring models were moved forward to the next
iteration. The final models were ranked by the Rosetta full-atom energy
score.− All figures were generated in Pymol version 1.3.
The simulation did not test topologies that include domain swaps.

Results
RsTSPO Forms a Dimer in Vitro
RsTSPO was successfully purified to homogeneity
by nickel affinity followed by size exclusion chromatography (SEC)
(Figures  and A).
The molecular mass of purified RsTSPO with a 10-histidine
tag was determined to be 19371.76 ± 1.77 Da (17910.26 Da for
untagged RsTSPO) by mass spectrometry, correlating
well with the calculated molecular mass from the amino acid sequence
(19347.58 Da). The SEC running profile in 0.2% DM showed a peak that
suggested a dimer form based on elution profile and molecular mass
standards. To obtain a more accurate estimate of the size of RsTSPO, we characterized the purified RsTSPO in solution by using a combination of light scattering, UV,
and refractive index measurements. A representative run of the UV280, refractive index, and light scattering measurements is
shown in Figure A, and a representative SDS–PAGE
gel is shown in Figure B. The molecular mass
of the RsTSPO–detergent complex was determined
to be ∼100 kDa from the scattering peak, with a protein fraction
of ∼36% from comparison of scattering and 280 nm absorption;
therefore, the molecular mass of the RsTSPO protein
in the complex was calculated to be 37 kDa, indicating a dimer of RsTSPO (given a monomer of 18 kDa) within the protein–detergent
complex (Table ). Purified ovalbumin and pure
DM were also characterized under the same conditions. Ovalbumin showed
a calculated molecular mass of ∼44 kDa as a monomer, and DM
showed a micelle size of ∼37 kDa; both agreed very well with
literature values and are consistent with the equivalent of approximately
two micelles of DM in the dimer–detergent complex.

Purification
and determination of the molecular mass of RsTSPO.
(A) One representative trace of purified RsTSPO on
the triple detector array (Malvern). The peak
of RsTSPO is labeled with a star, and the molecular
mass was calculated as described and expressed on the Y axis. (B) SDS–PAGE for the purification of RsTSPO. The lane of SEC-purified RsTSPO is labeled
with a star corresponding to the light scattering profile. The trypsin
cutting mix represents the sample before SEC, while a purified RsTSPO10ht sample was used as the control.

Investigation of the oligomeric state of purified RsTSPO by SEC. (A) SEC profile of wild-type RsTSPO, RsTSPOW38C, and wild-type RsTSPO in the
presence of 350 μM PpIX on a prepacked Superose 12 300/10 column.
(B) SEC profile of RsTSPOW38C in the presence and
absence of βME on a homemade Superose 12 column.

Molecular Mass Calculation from Static
Light Scattering Measurements
sample	Mwcomplex	fprotein	Mwprotein	monomer Mwcal	Nmonomer	
RsTSPO	 	 	 	 	 	
first	98430	0.347	34155	17976	1.9	
second	104029	0.365	37971	17976	2.1	
third	97328	0.372	36206	17976	2.0	
fourth	111620	0.362	40406	17976	2.2	
average	102852	0.3615	37181	17976	2.1	
ovalbumin standard	42757	0.982	41987	44287	0.95	
DM standard	37243	0	NA	NA	NA	
Molecular mass of the protein–detergent
complex.

Fraction of
protein in the protein–detergent
complex.

Molecular mass
of the protein
without detergent.

Molecular
mass calculated from
sequence.

Number of protein
monomers in
the protein–detergent complex.

The question of whether ligands influence the oligomeric
state
was investigated by incubating the RsTSPO with the
ligand PpIX prior to SEC. The SEC trace in the presence of PpIX showed
the same size as that of the protein without ligand (Figure A). Since Yeliseev and Kaplan reported the W38C
mutant stabilizes a dimer form in R. sphaeroides, a further question was whether a disulfide bond
was involved in dimer formation, either through the W38C mutant or
through the naturally existing cysteine, C15, in the first transmembrane
helix. There was in fact no apparent change in the amount or stability
of the dimer form in the W38C mutant and no effect of addition of
βME, as evidenced by the lack of a difference in the elution
profile from SEC (Figure A,B). Therefore,
a disulfide bond is unlikely to be important in dimer formation.

These observations and the lack of a detectable monomer form in
SEC suggest that the dimer organization of RsTSPO
in the DM micelle is a very strong association, but through interactions
other than disulfide bonds and independent of ligand binding. The
persistence of a small fraction of dimer even in the SDS gels run
under strongly denaturing conditions also attests to the stability
of the dimer.

We further explored the structure of the dimer in vivo by expressing in E. coli a dimer
created by a gene
fusion of two monomers. Three fusion proteins of RsTSPO and HsTSPO were constructed by making a direct
connection between the C- and N-termini, resulting in a dimer with
an antiparallel configuration (Figure S2A of the ) as suggested to occur in the case
of EmrE, a possible alternative to the
parallel configuration supported by the cryo-EM and our modeling studies
of TSPO (see below). E. coli cells carrying the gene
fusion constructs were characterized by Western blotting with antibodies
against the histidine tag at the C-terminus of the fusion proteins.
Our results show that the full-length fusion proteins with RsTSPO at the C-terminus and human or Rhodobacter at the N-terminus (Hs–RsTSPO and Rs–RsTSPO) were expressed (Figure S2B of the ) and inserted into the
membrane without formation of a significant amount of inclusion bodies,
implying a folded structure. In contrast, the dimer with the HsTSPO portion at the C-terminus (Rs–HsTSPO) was not detected, suggesting that this version of the fusion
protein may not be correctly folded or inserted into the membrane.

Although these results tell us little about the significance or
existence of an antiparallel dimer of TSPO, the observation that expression
and insertion of the dimer depends on whether the Rs or Hs protein is at the C-terminus does suggest
that membrane insertion of TSPO involves a C-terminal mechanism that
may require additional machinery in the case of the mammalian protein,
consistent with other evidence.−

Overall, our studies are
consistent with the dimer being the major
structural unit of RsTSPO as also implied by the
cryo-EM studies of the purified RsTSPO and our modeling
analysis, which indicate a parallel dimer. The possibility of an antiparallel dimer and other homo- or hetero-oligomeric
forms in the native membrane remains to be explored.

Tryptophan
Fluorescence Quenching Assay as a Sensitive Measure
of Kd
We tested the validity
of the tryptophan fluorescence quenching assay by measuring the binding
of the known ligand, protoporphyrin IX (PpIX), to purified RsTSPO (Figure A). We determined
a Kd for PpIX of 0.3 μM, lower than
that reported by Korkhov et al. (8.6
μM), possibly indicating the sensitivity of binding behavior
to a variety of assay conditions (see ). The nonligand porphyrin precursor δ-aminolevulinic acid
(ALA) and the solvent DMSO were also measured and showed only a small
quenching of the tryptophan fluorescence compared to that of PpIX,
as did the steroid ursodeoxycholate (see below). A similar low micromolar Kapp for PpIX (2.4 μM) was also obtained
with HsTSPO (Figure A), a
result within the range of previous reports of PpIX binding affinity
for mammalian TSPO., [The presence of the contaminating
protein GroEL, which has no tryptophan and does not contribute to
the fluorescence (see ), may, however, give a somewhat higher binding constant for HsTSPO because of ligand depletion.]

Binding of PpIX, ALA,
and ursodeoxycholate to RsTSPO and binding of PK11195
and PpIX to HsTSPO.
(A) Binding of PpIX, ALA, and ursodeoxycholate to purified RsTSPO and PpIX to partially purified HsTSPO measured with the tryptophan fluorescence quenching assay. (B)
Binding of PK11195 to partially purified HsTSPO.

We also tested the sensitivity
of the assay by measuring the binding
of HsTSPO to the diagnostic ligand PK11195 with expected
binding affinity in the nanomolar range. Our measurements show two Kapp values of ∼0.2 and 5 nM for PK11195
(Figure B), which agree with previous reports, and two different nanomolar binding affinities
for PK11195 in both mouse liver and a
human Leydig cell line. The results demonstrate
the ability of the assay to characterize high-affinity binding.

Effect of Detergent Conditions on the Binding Assay
It was
also important to find detergent conditions that maintained
a stable protein and were compatible with the assay. The nanomolar
binding affinity of PK11195 for HsTSPO (Figure B) was measured in 0.2% DM. However, a previous
report suggested that binding of PK11195 with mouse TSPO in the detergent
SDS resulted in a complete loss of affinity, emphasizing the importance
of detergent conditions. We tested the
binding of PK11195 with RsTSPO in two different concentrations
of DM, as well as in the common detergent used in NMR, Fos-Choline-12
(Figure ). In 0.1% DM, the binding affinity
of purified RsTSPO for PK11195 (10 μM) was
slightly increased compared to that of 0.2% DM (7 μM), while
Fos-Choline-12 lowered the affinity to ∼120 μM. Therefore,
for standard assay conditions for a comparison of ligands, 0.2% DM
was selected to keep purified RsTSPO stable while
exhibiting good affinity for PK11195 [0.1% DM is just below the critical
micelle concentration (CMC) of DM and has a tendency to allow protein
precipitation over time].

Binding curves of PK11195 with RsTSPO under different
detergent conditions as described in .

RsTSPO
Binds PK11195 and Cholesterol with Micromolar
Affinity
In a pioneering study in 1997, Yeliseev and colleagues reported that rat TSPO overexpressed
in R. sphaeroides 2.4.1 displayed an affinity for
PK11195 ranging from 4 to 12 nM, while wild-type RsTSPO showed no binding affinity above background. However, in our
studies with purified RsTSPO, the binding affinity
of PK11195 was found to be 10 ± 1 μM, suggesting a binding
site in RsTSPO with lower but significant affinity
compared to those of the mammalian proteins (Figure  and Table ). In addition, the RsTSPO form containing a W38C mutation located in the middle
of loop 1 where both PpIX and PK11195 are proposed to bind, decreased the binding affinity of PK11195 by 3-fold. These results
indicate that loop 1 contributes to PK11195 binding. Binding of PpIX
to RsTSPO was also influenced by the W38C mutation
(Figure  and Table ), showing a 6-fold decrease in affinity (from 2 to 0.3 μM),
consistent with both binding sites involving W38C in the conserved
region of loop 1. Although it is suggested PK11195 and PpIX bind in
the same general area (loop 1) in both RsTSPO and HsTSPO, it should be noted that loop 1 is predicted to be
flexible and shorter in RsTSPO than in HsTSPO, and the corresponding residue of W38 in HsTSPO is S41. These differences would be expected to impact the affinity
and specificity of ligand binding.

Binding of PpIX, PK11195, and cholesterol
to purified RsTSPO (WT) and RsTSPOW38C
(W38C). All binding curves
were obtained and plotted as described in . The inset shows a close-up of the 0–20
μM region to better show the binding curve of the PpIX.

Structures and Kd Values of Ligands to Wild-Type RsTSPO and
Its W38C Mutant
Kapp was estimated from half-maximal quenching.

Kd was
obtained from fitting three independent titrations with eq , and the standard error is reported.

Because cholesterol does not naturally
occur in Rhodobacter, no data have been reported
for its binding to RsTSPO. However, Rhodobacter is one of the closest
ancestors of mitochondria and in fact
has structural and functional analogues of cholesterol, hopanoids, in the membrane where RsTSPO
is located. In addition, the TSPO sequence alignment (Figure ) shows a remarkably high degree of similarity at
the proposed cholesterol binding site [CRAC, -L/V-(X)1–5-Y-(X)1–5-R/K-], across many
species. In particular, two of the three proposed critical residues
in the CRAC sequence (Leu and Arg) are identical between RsTSPO and HsTSPO while the other is a conservative
substitution of phenylalanine for tyrosine. Therefore, we expected
that RsTSPO might also bind cholesterol. Because
of the low solubility of cholesterol in aqueous solution, we were
unable to determine an accurate Kd, but
we estimate from the binding curve Kapp values of ∼80 μM for wild-type RsTSPO
and ∼200 μM for the W38C mutant (Figure ), significantly lower than the affinity reported for mammalian
TSPO, possibly because of the variable
region immediately preceding the CRAC sequence in helix V (residues
144–147), including the site of a human polymorphism., In contrast, the steroid derivative ursodeoxycholate showed no detectable
affinity for RsTSPO (Figure A), suggesting that the binding of cholesterol, albeit weak, is not
just due to nonspecific interactions.

Competition Binding Assay
of PpIX, PK11195, and Cholesterol
Loop 1 in the N-terminal
region has been proposed to be where drugs
and porphyrin bind,, while the cholesterol CRAC site
is located in the C-terminal region of TSPO. However, the small size of TSPO and the fact that it may function
as a dimer or higher-order oligomer introduce the possibility that
these two sites are very close to each other and interacting. Nevertheless,
in the case of PpIX and PK11195, we observe some difference in spectroscopic
properties in the binding assay. The tryptophan fluorescence of Rs- and HsTSPO shows a broad spectrum from
290 to 400 nm with a peak around 340 nm. PpIX quenches the tryptophan
fluorescence evenly at all wavelengths and shows a maximal quenching
close to 100% (Figure A,B). This indicates
that the local environment of almost all tryptophans that contribute
to the total tryptophan fluorescence for RsTSPO is
influenced by the binding of PpIX. In contrast, PK11195 quenches the
fluorescence of RsTSPO from 290 to 335 nm completely
but not in the region of 330–340 nm (Figure C). This behavior suggests that PK11195 is interacting with
a slightly different subset of the tryptophans compared to PpIX, implying
some differences in their binding sites in the case of RsTSPO.

Tryptophan fluorescence quenching behavior of PpIX and PK11195.
Tryptophan fluorescence spectra of (A) RsTSPO when
binding with PpIX in 0.2% DM, (B) HsTSPO when binding
with PpIX in 0.2% DM, and (C) RsTSPO when binding
with PK11195 in 0.2% Fos-Choline-12 (PK11195 titration experiments
conducted in 0.2% DM show the same spectral behavior as the experiment
shown, which was conducted in 0.2% Fos-Choline-12).

To further investigate possible overlap between
the binding sites,
competition binding assays were performed with PpIX, PK11195, and
cholesterol (Figure ). Purified RsTSPO was preincubated with either 50 μM cholesterol, 20 μM
PK11195, or both on ice before the binding experiment.

Competition binding studies
with PpIX, PK11195, and cholesterol
binding to RsTSPO. Experiments were conducted as
described in . (A) Competition
between PpIX and cholesterol (preincubated at 50 μM cholesterol)
and PK11195 (preincubated at 20 μM PK11195) as well as PK11195
with cholesterol (preincubated with both). (B) Competition between
PK11195 and cholesterol (preincubated at 50 μM cholesterol).

The binding behavior of PpIX was
somewhat affected by the presence
of cholesterol, giving an increase in the Kd of 2–3-fold, suggesting some influence of cholesterol on
the PpIX binding site. Interestingly, the presence of PK11195 caused
a similar change in the binding of PpIX, an ∼3-fold increase
in Kd, and PK11195 and cholesterol together
had a greater effect (an ∼4-fold increase in Kd). This behavior (Figure ) suggests
that PK11195 and PpIX binding sites are interacting and that cholesterol
is also altering the PpIX binding in manner that is somewhat additive
with PK11195, consistent with partial overlap or allosteric effects
of ligand binding at different sites.

Compounds Affecting Apoptosis
Bind to RsTSPO
with Micromolar Affinity
Besides the TSPO ligands PK11195,
benzodiazepines, and PpIX, which all have been reported to either
induce or prevent apoptosis, other compounds
have been reported to affect apoptosis in human cell lines, but their
targets are not well-defined. In R. sphaeroides,
TSPO is reported to facilitate the transport of intermediates of heme
and carotenoid biosynthesis–breakdown pathways through the
outer membrane.,, Interestingly, in mammals, the porphyrin breakdown product bilirubin
and some carotenoid homologues (retinoids) have also been reported
to induce apoptosis through the mitochondrial pathway.− These and other compounds reported to have effects on MPTP and apoptosis,
including curcumin and gossypol, were selected to test for their binding affinity
for RsTSPO. Binding studies with both the wild type
and the W38C mutant show that several of these compounds bind to purified RsTSPO at low micromolar affinity similar to that of PpIX
(Figure  and Table ), which is suggestive that some of these apoptosis-inducing
agents could function through direct interaction with TSPO.

Models
of the RsTSPO Dimer
The structural
model of the RsTSPO dimer was constructed using EM-Fold
and Rosetta guided by the 10 Å cryo-EM density map of RsTSPO. The two top-scoring
models are displayed in Figure . The next
five top-scoring topologies are provided in Figure S3 of the  for comparison. At 10
Å resolution in the cryo-EM experiment, the connectivity between
transmembrane helices was not resolved. The objective of the modeling
study was to complete the model and use the Rosetta energy function
to identify the global energy minimum, thereby adding atomic detail
not visible in the experimental data. The seven topologies shown are
energetically significantly more favorable than all alternative topologies
(Figure S4 of the ). The two top-scoring topologies have a significant energy gap of
28 to the top-scoring model of an alternative topology. Therefore,
we consider these two topologies as being most likely for RsTSPO.

Binding curves of compounds affecting apoptosis: curcumin,
retinoic
acid, gossypol, and bilirubin.

Top two models of a RsTSPO dimer. (A) Side view,
(B) top view, and (C) bottom view of model 1. (D) Side view, (E) top
view, and (F) bottom view of model 2. Electron density from the EM
structure was contoured at 1.5σ. Each monomer is colored with
rainbow colors from blue (N-terminus) to red (C-terminus).

Some common features are observed in the two top-scoring
models,
although the two RsTSPO monomers are placed in opposite
orientations within the EM density and have a different dimer interface
(Figure ). Both models place helix I and
helix V close to each other, consistent with previous mutagenesis
data. In addition, helix I and helix
II are on the same face, providing the possibility of helices I and
II playing a role in substrate binding and transport together (see  for details). The main differences are
as follows. (1) Model 1 placed helix V in the dimer interface, while
the dimer interface in model 2 is composed of helices I–III.
(2) Model 1 has a relatively shorter loop 1, and a portion of predicted
loop 1 forms a short helix that contributes to part of the transmembrane
region, as compared to that in model 2. However, ligand binding at
loop 1 is very likely to change the structure of this flexible region.
Considering that TSPO has been reported to form higher-order oligomers, we fit the dimer into the larger density of
the RsTSPO helical crystal (Figure S5 of the ) and found an additional
(though less strong) dimer interface mediated by helices I and II
in model 1, as well as an additional dimer interface mediated by helices
I and V in model 2. We have focused our binding analysis on model
2, which portrays helices I and II as being at the dimer interface
while helix V is at the outside, leaving open the possibility of helix
V interacting with another monomer, as suggested in Figure S3 of the , or a partner protein
for cholesterol translocation, as suggested by Papadopoulos et al.

Discussion
The ability of TSPO to
bind to various ligands has been extensively
investigated over the past 30 years, providing important information
that has led to our current understanding of the function of TSPO.
However, previous studies show significant variation in the binding
properties of TSPO when measured in different cell lines, tissues,
or purified forms. It has also been suggested that TSPO functions in vivo as an oligomer, but
details of the oligomerization and conditions that foster it are difficult
to establish. To address these and other issues, we purified the homologue
of human TSPO from R. sphaeroides and characterized
the oligomeric state and binding behavior in a well-defined system.
The bacterial protein RsTSPO is important in itself,
given its role in photosynthetic gene regulation and membrane transport
in bacteria. The conserved aspects of sequence, along with some differences
in ligand binding between the mammalian and R. sphaeroides proteins, provide opportunities to identify the potential determinants
for the ligand interactions. In this study, we confirm that RsTSPO forms a dimer in vitro and present
models with atomic detail for the dimer form. Using one of these models,
options for PpIX, PK11195, and cholesterol interaction sites are proposed.
The binding behavior of other physiologically important ligands provides
some new hints about the mechanism of potential regulation of MPTP
by TSPO.

Evidence Relating to the Role of the Dimer
In this
work, we characterized the minimal structural unit of purified RsTSPO as a dimer. It is reasonable to postulate that the
minimal functional unit of RsTSPO is also a dimer,
considering several lines of evidence.

Because TSPO was first
discovered and is best known as a receptor, the drug binding properties
and the physiological effects of drug-related ligands were initially
extensively investigated. However, evidence has been obtained in both
mammalian and Rhodobacter systems that TSPO also
transports molecules, including both cholesterol and the metabolites
of heme and photosynthesis pathways.,, It is reasonable to propose a monomer form of TSPO
functions as a receptor, but given the small size of the protein,
it is more difficult to postulate a mechanism for a monomer to transport
either cholesterol or the heme/carotenoid metabolic intermediates.
Yeliseev and Kaplan proposed that RsTSPO forms a
dimer in vivo, and this dimer was stabilized by the
W38C mutation. Porphyrin has been reported
to induce dimerization, although in our
hands the already dimeric state of RsTSPO was not
influenced by the addition of PpIX. In our studies, no monomer form
was ever observed under nondenaturing conditions during chromatography
with or without βME, while a trace of dimer remained even under
the strong denaturing conditions of urea/SDS–PAGE. In addition,
the W38C mutant behaved very much like the wild type in terms of the
dimer state, suggesting that RsTSPO naturally forms
a dimer by strong associations other than disulfide bonding. Similarly,
the E. coli drug transporter EmrE forms a dimer in the purified state that is not influenced
by ligand binding. Biochemical and NMR data also show that EmrE can
transport the substrate as a dimer in vivo() and in vitro, while structural studies show a ligand at the dimer interface.
In fact, a significant number of transporters function as dimers and/or
show 2-fold symmetry with substrate binding at the dimer or domain
interface in the crystal structures,, suggesting
a common mechanism for substrate transport that could also apply to
TSPO.

In view of the case of EmrE, which shows that a membrane
protein
can be inserted with dual topology, and
given the apparently successful expression of our forced antiparallel
dimers, we considered the possibility that TSPO might also function
as an antiparallel structure to create a “5 + 5 inverted repeat”
topology as reported in several cases., Studies (reviewed
by Bowie) suggest that rearrangement
of the orientation of helices is possible as well as necessary in
several cases for both large and small membrane proteins. However,
the best cryo-EM and modeling evidence available so far indicates
a parallel dimer, as modeled in this paper.

Taken together,
our data as well as other studies indicate that RsTSPO functions as a dimer, which is likely to be important
for transporting substrates across the membrane. On the other hand,
current models regarding the effect of drugs generally agree with
the 1:1 drug:monomer ratio, suggesting that TSPO could perform receptor
and transporter functions in different oligomer and hetero-oligomer
states.

Effect of Detergent on the Structure and Binding of RsTSPO
Detergents play a critical role in the study
of membrane proteins, allowing their characterization in a purified
state. However, these artificial lipid-mimicking molecules may influence
the binding of hydrophobic ligands, as observed in the case of a steroid
binding site in cytochrome c oxidase where a systematic
analysis of detergent effects led to a clearer understanding of competitive
behavior between ligands and detergents and a more precise definition
of the binding domain.,

In this study, we also
observed the influence of detergent upon the binding of ligands to
purified RsTSPO (Figure ),
while Lacapere et al. had previously
reported that recombinant mouse TSPO lost its binding to PK11195 when
purified with SDS as the detergent but regained its binding ability
when reconstituted into liposomes. In their hands, the binding of
cholesterol was less influenced than the binding of PK11195 by SDS.
In our studies, when a nonionic detergent DM is used, a higher-affinity
PK11195 binding site appears to be maintained, as compared to the
outcome using the charged detergents Fos-Choline-12 and SDS. Our observations
are consistent with the model in which the PK11195 binding site involves
flexible extramembrane loop 1 and the membrane interface where detergent/lipid
headgroups may have an impact, while cholesterol bound at the more
deeply buried CRAC site on helix V may be less impacted by the detergent.

Using the TSPO Dimer Model To Predict the Binding Sites for
PpIX, Cholesterol, and PK11195
Although we have demonstrated
binding of both PK11195 and cholesterol to purified RsTSPO, it is still a question of what structural features result in
an affinity for both ligands that is several orders of magnitudes
lower than that in mammalian TSPO. To attempt to obtain new insight
into possible ligand interactions, we generated models of RsTSPO in the dimer form (Figure ). The top-ranked candidate structures were compared, and one (model
2) was used to facilitate an interpretation of the binding of PpIX,
cholesterol, and PK11195 to RsTSPO.

Our preliminary
competition binding studies (Figure ) give
evidence of some level of interaction among all three binding sites.
The effects of PK11195 and cholesterol on the affinity of RsTSPO for PpIX are almost additive, while the binding of
PK11195 itself is less influenced by cholesterol. These results are
consistent with PK11195 and PpIX interacting at somewhat different
positions on extramembrane loop 1, and cholesterol acting at helix
V of the C-terminus, with some allosteric influence on both.

We propose that PpIX, as one of the potential endogenous transport
substrates of TSPO, binds initially at loop 1, en route to transport
via the dimer interface, as illustrated in Figure . Previous in vivo studies, in particular
mutation of residues W30, K36, W38, and W39 in RsTSPO, as well as our data show that
loop 1 plays a critical role in the binding and export of porphyrins.
However, loop 1 is not likely to be the only contributor to the binding
of PpIX. The observation that the tryptophan fluorescence was completely
quenched by PpIX but not by PK11195 and other ligands binding (Figure ) suggests that PpIX either interacts with a rather
large area or induces a global conformational change, each of which
is possible if PpIX is binding and being transported through the dimer
interface. Initial PpIX binding at loop 1 is consistent with our observation
that the W38C mutant reduced the affinity of PpIX for RsTSPO by ∼6-fold, while aromatic residues on transmembrane
helix II, including highly conserved W44 and W50, also appear to play
an important role in PpIX binding and transport, as evidenced by the
lower porphyrin export activity in phenylalanine mutants of both residues. Our model (Figure )
is consistent with helix II being a major part of the dimer interface
where W44 and W50 are in the region of potentially close interaction
with PpIX.

Proposed model of binding sites of PpIX, PK11195, and
cholesterol
on RsTSPO. Structures of PK11195 and PpIX were generated
with ChemDraw 3D, and that of cholesterol was taken from a published
structure (PDB entry 3D4S). Note that the computational model of RsTSPO (model
2) is
generated on the basis of EM density observed in a sample without
ligand. Therefore, these models may represent a closed conformation,
as indicated by close association of the monomers. Ligands are manually
placed into the model of RsTSPO on one monomer, for
the sake of illustration of proposed locations. Helices are labeled
with Roman numerals: W38 (green sticks), PK11195 (orange sticks),
PpIX (dark purple sticks), and cholesterol (yellow sticks). Highly
conserved residues in the CRAC site are colored light yellow and labeled
according to the Rhodobacter sequence. Corresponding
residues in the human sequence are shown in parentheses. Human polymorphism
residue A139 (Rs number) is colored dark blue, while
the preceding Ala-Thr-Ala sequence is colored cyan. The sequence in
loop 1, before W38, that is proposed to play a role in PK11195 binding
is colored light orange and corresponds to the ligand. The proposed
PpIX binding sequence on loop 1 (including W44) is colored light purple,
and residue W50 on helix II is colored pink. A loading and transport
route for PpIX is indicated by a magenta dotted line, illustrating
the potential role of the dimer in transport, which would require
flexibility of the external loops.

Although PK11195 was also proposed to bind to TSPO at loop
1 and
has been reported to compete with PpIX binding, the tryptophan quenching behavior suggests that PK11195
and PpIX do not bind in precisely the same location (Figure ). As mentioned above, the last two-thirds of the
loop 1 is highly conserved across all species, with conserved residues
that play critical roles for PpIX binding, while the sequence in the
first one-third is not. Thus, the much lower binding affinity of PK11195
for RsTSPO compared to that for HsTSPO could be due in part to differences in the early part of loop
1. However, some overlap between PK11195 and PpIX binding is suggested
by competition studies and the fact that the Kd values of both PK11195 and PpIX were markedly reduced by
the W38C mutant. On the basis of these independent lines of evidence,
here we propose that PK11195 interacts mainly on the first half of
loop 1 within the monomer, extending to residue W38 (S41 in human),
and also harnesses some of the structural features of the helix I–membrane
interface and the second half of loop 1 that binds the hydrophobic
porphyrins. This interpretation is consistent with the observation
that RsTSPO binds both PK11195 and PpIX with micromolar
affinity (Figure ), while HsTSPO has nanomolar affinity for PK11195 but has an affinity for PpIX
similar to that of RsTSPO (Figure ). Nevertheless, given the flexible
nature of the loop, a high-resolution structure with ligand bound
will be essential to understanding the details of the binding mechanisms.

In this study, we show that cholesterol does bind to purified RsTSPO but only with low affinity in the high micromolar
range. We note that helix V and the C-terminus, where the CRAC sequence
is located, are perhaps the most conserved regions in the whole protein.
However, the region right before the CRAC is much less conserved and
shows some interesting features (Figures  and ). In the human and mouse TSPO proteins, for which
nanomolar affinities have been reported, a relatively hydrophobic
Leu-Ala-Phe sequence (residues 144–146) precedes the CRAC,
whereas in the R. sphaeroides sequence, these residues
are replaced by an Ala-Thr-Ala sequence (residues 136–138),
a much more hydrophilic combination. In fact, the spontaneous human
A147T polymorphism, located right after the Leu-Ala-Phe sequence,
has been reported to reduce the level of pregnenolone production and binding of an imaging ligand by 2 orders
of magnitude. Our model of RsTSPO (Figure ) would allow the long hydrophobic
tail of cholesterol to extend to the location of the Ala-Thr-Ala sequence,
while the ring structure is interacting mainly with the CRAC site.
The more hydrophobic character of the human helix V sequence may create
a deeper binding site or reposition helix V to favor binding interactions
for the hydrophobic rings.

Another interesting question is whether
this region of helix V
and cholesterol binding also affects other ligands. Besides our observations,
extensive investigation of the binding of the original benzodiazepine
ligand Ro5-4864 has led to the conclusion that the C-terminal region
of TSPO, in particular residues 144–156 of helix V, which include
both the CRAC site and the sequence preceding, plays a role in its
binding, although the involvement of
loop 1 is also observed. The new PET ligand PBR28, a PK11195-related
compound, shows a markedly reduced affinity for the HsTSPO polymorphism, A147T. The same mutation
in bacterial TSPO was recently reported to disrupt the binding of
PpIX. Altogether, helix V and the cholesterol
binding region do appear to influence both PpIX and drug ligands.
Our two top models (Figure  and Figure S3
of the ) show that
helix V and helix I are in the proximity of each other within the
dimer as well as the higher-order oligomer, providing the possibility
of direct interaction between binding sites.

From these considerations,
a tentative model (Figure ) for the ligand
binding sites of TSPO is proposed,
suggesting that TSPO may perform its dual functions as a transporter
and a receptor by binding the substrate PpIX at the dimer interface
for transporting, while binding PK11195 and other ligands more superficially
on loop 1. Cholesterol is proposed to bind at the CRAC site located
on helix V, and we cite evidence that the four residues immediately
preceding the CRAC site are also important for the binding of cholesterol
and other ligands. In model 1, these residues and the cholesterol
binding site are located at the dimer interface, suggesting testable
differences between the two models.

TSPO as a Mediator of the
Regulation of MPTP and Apoptosis
Although numerous studies
have implicated TSPO as a regulator of
MPTP and apoptosis, the mechanism of the regulation is still unclear.
In fact, Gonzalez-Polo et al. reported
that the diagnostic TSPO ligand PK11195 shows apoptosis-inducing effects
that are independent of TSPO. Another important regulator of MPTP
and apoptosis is the B-cell lymphoma 2 (Bcl-2) family of proteins
(see the review by Youle and Strasser), which can be either anti-apoptotic, such as Bcl-2 and Bcl-XL,
or pro-apoptotic, as in the case of Bax, Bak, and Bid. Bcl-2 family
proteins are expressed in the cytosol and recruited during the process
of apoptosis to the MPTP on the outer mitochondrial membrane, where
TSPO is also localized. The fact that both TSPO and Bcl-2 family proteins
regulate apoptosis and the fact that the TSPO ligand PK11195 can reverse
the cytoprotective effect of Bcl-2 suggest
a possible interaction of TSPO and Bcl-2 in the regulation of MPTP.

In this study, we report binding of a number of apoptosis-inducing
compounds to purified RsTSPO with low micromolar
affinity, including PK11195, retinoic acid, curcumin, and bilirubin.
This is consistent with a direct interaction of TSPO with these ligands
and supports a role for TSPO during apoptosis. In addition, the binding
of a known Bcl-2 inhibitor, gossypol, to purified RsTSPO at low micromolar affinity suggests a relationship between TSPO
and Bcl-2 family proteins.

Conclusions
This
study characterizes the oligomeric state of purified TSPO
from R. sphaeroides as a dimer and reports the binding
properties of a variety of ligands. New atomic-resolution models of
its dimer form are presented and used to predict TSPO’s interaction
with various ligands. Several novel ligands are reported, with implications
for the role of TSPO in apoptosis and for facilitation of the crystallization
of TSPO.

Supporting Information Available
Primer sequences used
in this paper
(Table T1), the SDS gel of purified HsTSPO (Figure
S1), the construction and expression of the dimer fusion proteins
(Figure S2), the top 3–7 scoring models of RsTSPO (Figure S3), the comparison of the Rosetta energy functions
of the top 20 models generated in this study (Figure S4), and the
additional dimer interface of the top two models in the larger oligomer
crystal (Figure S5). This material is available free of charge via
the Internet at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bi400431t_si_001.pdf

The authors
declare no
competing financial interest.

Notes
The
coordinates of the top models reported
in this paper are available upon request from J.M. (jens.meiler@vanderbilt.edu).

Acknowledgments
We thank Dr. Robert Stroud
and Dr. Rebecca Robbins at the
University of California San Francisco Membrane Protein Expression
Center (National Institutes of Health Grant GM 094625 to rms) for
support on purification and on the light scattering experiment; Dr.
Robert Larkin and Dr. David Kramer for use of the PTI instrument;
Dr. Denis Proshlyakov for discussions about data analysis; Qinghui
Yuan for generating the RsTSPOW38C mutant during
lab rotation; Dr. Vladimir Korkhov and Dr. Christopher Tate for sharing
the cryo-electron microscopy density map and the initial coordinates
for the helices; and Dr. Carrie Hiser, Dr. Jian Liu, and Lance Valls
for technical support. We also thank Dr. Samuel Kaplan for constructs
of RsTSPO and Dr. John Lee (University of Minnesota)
for initial collaboration on RsTSPO expression.

Abbreviations
TSPOTranslocator Protein 18 kDa

PBRperipheral-type benzodiazepine
receptor

MPTPmitochondrial
permeability transition pore

VDACvoltage-dependent anion channel

ANTadenine nucleotide translocator

RsTSPOTSPO
from R. sphaeroides

HsTSPOTSPO from human

CRACcholesterol recognition/interaction
amino acid consensus

DDMdodecyl maltoside (lauryl maltoside)

DMdecyl maltoside

SDSsodium dodecyl sulfate

PpIXprotoporphyrin IX

Fos-Choline-12n-dodecylphosphocholine

WTwild-type

Bcl-2B-cell lymphoma 2

βMEβ-mercaptoethanol

PDBProtein Data Bank.

