There is
an increasing need
for the development of antibiotics against new physiological targets
to combat the emergence of bacteria resistant to current front-line
drugs. TMC207 (Bedaquiline), a potent and specific inhibitor of mycobacterial
ATP synthase, is a new antibiotic that is approved for use in the
treatment of multi-drug resistant (MDR) tuberculosis (TB). This success has validated the oxidative phosphorylation
system (OxPhos) of Mycobacterium tuberculosis (Mtb)
as a potential target for the development of new antibiotics. The
OxPhos pathway is composed of the respiratory chain (electron transport
chain), which produces the proton motive force that drives ATP synthase.
In mycobacteria, electrons are introduced into the electron transport
chain primarily via type II NADH-quinone (Q) oxidoreductase (Mtb NDH-2),
a membrane-bound enzyme composed of a single polypeptide chain of
45 kDa and a single FAD cofactor that mediates electron transfer.
NDH-2 catalyzes the oxidation of NADH to NAD+ with concomitant
reduction of menaquinone to menaquinol. There is no NDH-2 counterpart in vertebrate mitochondria, which
utilize a much larger, complex oxidoreductase, type I NADH-quinone
oxidoreductase (Complex I or NDH-1), to initiate electron transport.
Thus, Mtb NDH-2 is an attractive target for the development of selective
antimycobacterial agents, and a detailed understanding of NDH-2 kinetics
will be valuable to guide the development process.

Steady-state
kinetic studies from our laboratory showed that Mtb
NDH-2 catalyzes the transfer electrons from NADH to quinone by a ping-pong
mechanism. Similar studies of NDH-2 counterparts
in Saccharomyces cerevisiae (Ndi1), and Yarrowia lipolytica() also concluded
that electron transfer occurs by a ping-pong mechanism. More recently,
however, a mechanism proceeding through a ternary complex has been
proposed for Ndi1. This mechanism was based on the appearance of a
broad spectral peak at 740 nm characteristic of a charge transfer
complex between NAD+ and FADH2 that underwent
an increase in intensity upon addition of electron acceptors, and quinol inhibition kinetics suggesting separate
binding sites for NADH and quinone. It
was suggested that the ping-pong kinetics seen previously might be
an artifact of enzyme solubilization by detergents and/or activity
measurements using small, soluble quinone substrates that can interact
at the NADH-binding site.

Recently,
two independent laboratories have published atomic-resolution
structures of Ndi1., Both structures revealed globally
similar protein folds but different modes of interaction of the FAD
with quinone substrates. In the structure published by Iwata et al., sites for NAD+ and quinone substrates
appeared to overlap on the same face of the isoalloxazine ring of
the FAD cofactor, suggesting that donation of electrons from NADH
and abstraction of electrons by quinone occur on the same face of
FAD. The suggestion of overlapping substrate-binding sites is difficult
to reconcile with the formation of a ternary complex but is consistent
with a classical (one-site) ping-pong mechanism (Scheme ; see ). In
the structure published by Feng et al., NADH and quinone substrates were observed to bind at sites located
on opposite faces of the isoalloxazine ring of the FAD cofactor. Structures
containing bound substrates showed the nicotinamide ring of the NADH
substrate bound proximal to the re face of the isoalloxazine
ring, whereas the sites for the two quinone ligands were adjacent
to the si face of the flavin. Independent binding
sites for the electron donor and acceptor would favor a nonclassical
(two-site) ping-pong mechanism (Scheme ).

In this study, we characterized the kinetics of various quinone
substrates and reaction products on the NADH-Q reductase activity
of Mtb NDH-2 in both soluble and membrane environments and defined
the kinetics of NADH-thio-NAD+ transhydrogenase activity
catalyzed by Mtb NDH-2. By comparing the kinetic properties of the
two activities, we showed that Mtb NDH-2 catalyzes the transhydrogenase
reaction through a one-site ping-pong mechanism and the physiologically
relevant NADH-Q reductase reaction through a two-site ping-pong mechanism.
Furthermore, the data revealed the existence of two quinone-binding
sites with widely different preferences for oxidized and reduced quinones.
The two-site ping-pong mechanism and two quinone sites elucidated
in this kinetic study are more consistent with the Ndi1 crystal structure
of Feng et al. than with that of Iwata
et al.

Experimental Procedures
Materials
NADH, NAD+, quinone substrates
(UQ0, UQ1, UQ2, and menadione), HEPES
buffer, and cosolvents glycerol and DMSO were from Sigma-Aldrich (St.
Louis, MO). Thio-NAD+ was from Cell Sciences (Canton, MA),
and Big CHAP was from Affimetrix (Santa Clara, CA). The TALON metal
affinity column was from Clontech (Mountain View, CA), and the Superose
6 column was from GE Healthcare Life Sciences (Pittsburgh, PA).

Recombinant Mtb NDH-2
NDH-2 was purified according
to the method of Yano et al., with the
following modifications. Mtb NDH-2 was overexpressed in Mycobacterium
smegmatis mc2 4157 with a T7-based expression
vector (pYUB derivative).M.
smegmatis was aerobically grown in an autoinduction medium in the presence of 20 μg/mL kanamycin
and 50 μg/mL hygromycin at 37 °C for 3 days, and the cells
were harvested by centrifugation at 5000g for 10
min. Membrane fractions were prepared according to the method of Yano
et al. and were detergent-solubilized
in buffer containing 2% (w/v) Big CHAP. The solubilized membrane fraction
was passed over an immobilized metal affinity column and the bound
NDH-2 was eluted with an imidazole solution containing 0.25% Big CHAP
and was concentrated by ultrafiltration. The concentrated material
was further purified by size exclusion chromatography on a Superose
6 HPLC column equilibrated with a solution of 50 mM HEPES/K+ (pH 7.0), 300 mM KCl, 2 mM MgCl2, 0.25% Big CHAP, and
20% (v/v) glycerol. NDH-2 fractions were combined and concentrated
by ultrafiltration to 2–3 mg/mL. The final preparation was
stored in liquid nitrogen until it was used.

NADH-Quinone (Q) Reductase
and NADH-tNAD+ Transhydrogenase
Activity Assays
Activity measurements were typically performed
at room temperature in 0.5 or 1.0 cm cuvettes using a Beckman 640
spectrophotometer. NADH oxidation was measured by absorbance at 340
nm; tNAD+ reduction was measured at 398 nm. Absorbance
measurements were taken at 1.0–3.0 s intervals, and initial
activities were determined from linear-least-squares fitting of progress
curves over 0.5–3.0 min periods where &lt;10% of the substrates
were consumed. The reaction mixture in NADH-Q reductase assays consisted
of 0.1 M HEPES/Na+ (pH 7.0) (NADH-Q buffer), substrates,
and 2–5 nM enzyme, and in transhydrogenase assays, it consisted
of 50 mM HEPES/K+ (pH 7.0), 2 mM MgCl2 (transhydrogenase
buffer), substrates, and 10–50 nM NDH-2. Unless otherwise indicated,
reactions were initiated by addition of purified recombinant NDH-2
or membrane preparations from cells overexpressing NDH-2. The dilution
of the purified enzyme or membrane to start reactions was &gt;100-fold.
This dilution virtually removed any influence of the detergent on
purified enzyme activity or substrate solubility. In studies with
less soluble substrates (UQ1, UQ2, and menadione),
10% (v/v) DMSO was included in the assay buffer. Removal of detergent
and addition of DMSO did not result in a loss of activity during the
assay period, which were usually followed until NADH consumption was
complete (10–20 min).

To obtain kcat or turnover numbers (TN), the change in absorbance was
converted into NADH consumed using an extinction coefficient of 6.22
cm–1 mM–1 for NADH (ε340) or 11.9 mM–1 cm–1 for
tNADH (ε398) and divided
by NDH-2 concentration. The stock concentration of purified NDH-2
was determined by FAD measurement. The amount of membrane-bound NDH-2
was estimated assuming it had the same specific activity as purified
NDH-2. Under assay conditions of 0.3 mM NADH, 2.0 mM UQ0, and HEPES buffer (pH 7.0), 1.0 nM NDH-2 produced a change in Abs340 of 0.1 min–1.

Assays in the Presence
of Reaction Products
Most studies
that included reaction products were assayed as just described except
for the addition of NAD+ or quinols. NAD+ stock
solutions were made in water or 50 mM HEPES-KOH buffer (pH 7.0) containing
2 mM MgCl2. Ubiquinols (Q0H2, Q1H2, and Q2H2) were prepared
from commercially available ubiquinone substrates by reduction with
sodium borohydride. Briefly, quinones were dissolved in 50 mM HCl/DMSO
at 20–100 mM and reduced with a stoichiometric excess of sodium
borohydride at room temperature, followed by the addition of 12 N
HCl to quench unreacted sodium borohydride. The quinol solution was
neutralized with HEPES buffer and confirmed by the loss of visible
absorption. Studies to determine the effect of NAD+ on
NADH-Q reductase activity were performed in a TECAN M-1000 plate reader
by monitoring the change in absorbance at 340 nm. Assays contained
50 mM HEPES (pH 7.0) with 10% glycerol and were initiated with NADH.
Initial velocities were determined by linear regression of progress
curves.

Kinetic Mechanisms, Equations, and Data Analysis
Kinetic
studies were analyzed as described by Cook and Cleland. Scheme  depicts a classical
(one-site) mechanism, and Scheme  depicts
a nonclassical (two-site) ping-pong mechanism. Both mechanisms proceed through two half-reactions: (1)
transfer of a hydride from NADH to FAD in the oxidized enzyme (Eox), producing a reduced, modified enzyme (Ered)
and the product NAD+, and (2) transfer of electrons from
FADH2 in the reduced enzyme to quinone, generating the
quinol product and regenerating the oxidized enzyme. Arrows denoting
the progress of the chemical reactions point in one direction because
both the overall reaction and each half-reaction are highly exergonic
and thus effectively irreversible. In accord with the crystal structures
discussed in the introductory section, in the one-site ping-pong mechanism
both NADH oxidation and quinone reduction occur on the same face of
the isoalloxazine ring. Consequently, the binding of each substrate
is mutually exclusive because of the overlap between binding sites.
This overlap permits competitive inhibition between substrates as
well as between each reaction product with the substrate from the
other half-reaction. In the case of the two-site mechanism, oxidation
of NADH and reduction of quinone occur on different faces of the isoalloxazine
ring, permitting separate binding sites for each substrate denoted
by E1 and E2 in Scheme . The curved arrow
connecting the two sites is intended to convey the delivery of an
electron to one face of the isoalloxazine ring and the transfer of
an electron from the other face. In this mechanism, competitive inhibition
can occur between only the substrate and product of the same half-reaction.

The steady-state rate equation describing ping-pong kinetics
is
the same for both classical and nonclassical mechanisms (eq ). A ternary complex mechanism differs from a ping-pong
mechanism in that both substrates have to bind before products are
generated or released. As a result, there is no modified enzyme formed
(Ered in Schemes  and ). The rate equation for a ternary complex mechanism
is the same as eq  except that the factor KiaNADHKMQ is added to the denominator, where KiaNADH is the dissociation constant for the
binding of NADH to the enzyme.

Cook and Cleland point out that
a
ping-pong mechanism can be distinguished from ordered or random mechanisms
proceeding through a ternary complex in studies where initial velocities
are measured as a function of the concentration of both substrates
varied at a constant ratio. In the case of a ping-pong mechanism,
a double-reciprocal plot of data will be linear as depicted by eq , where [Q] = α[NADH], but in the case of a
ternary complex mechanism, it will be parabolic because of the added
factor in the denominator, as described by eq .

To determine the kinetic parameters for Mtb
NDH-2 catalysis, a
series of velocity (v) versus substrate concentration
curves were obtained with one substrate varied (NADH or Q) and the
other held constant. The resulting plots, determined at two or three
different concentrations of the nonvaried substrate, were globally
fit using eq , which is a rearranged version
of eq . The constant term, KMNADH/Vmax, and
the apparent Vmax are the fitted parameters;
the apparent Vmax is the factor multiplying
[NADH] in the denominator. Vmax for the
reaction was estimated from a secondary plot of 1/Vmax apparent versus 1/[Q]. KM for NADH was estimated using Vmax and the constant KMNADH/Vmax obtained from the global fit. KM for Q was determined using Vmax and the slope of the secondary plot. The rate equation with Q as
the varied substrate and NADH as the fixed substrate has the same
form as eq , except the positions in the equation
for NADH and Q are reversed. To account for the apparent competitive
inhibition between substrates in the transhydrogenase reaction when
tNAD+ was the varied substrate and NADH was the fixed substrate, KMNADH in the apparent Vmax term was modified by the factor 1 + [tNAD+]/KsitNAD+. Global
fitting was by nonlinear least-squares regression analysis using Igor
Pro (Wavemetrics).

Reaction irreversibility precludes reversible product inhibition;
therefore, inhibition kinetics by NAD+ were assumed to
be due to the formation of dead end complexes competing with substrate
binding. Inhibition was initially analyzed using the Michaelis–Menten
rate equation to determine the type of inhibition. Depending on the
outcome of these analyses, the data were then fit to eq  to determine relevant Ki values
modifying the KM of each substrate where
[S]V and [S]C are the concentrations of the
variable and constant substrates, respectively, and the modifying
inhibition factors β1 and β2 are
1 + [NAD+]/Ki′ and 1
+ [NAD+]/Ki″, respectively.
To obtain values for inhibition constants Ki′ and Ki″, fits used KM, Vmax, and Ksi values obtained from other analyses.

Quinol inhibition
of the transhydrogenase and NADH-Q reactions
did not appear to be competitive and therefore was evaluated using
a relationship assuming binding to a single discrete site as described
by eq , where FA is fractional activity and f is the fraction of activity remaining at an infinite quinol
concentration.

Results
Kinetics
of NADH-Q Reductase Activity
To examine the
validity of the proposed ping-pong mechanism for Mtb NDH-2, we evaluated
its kinetic properties with a series of quinone substrates (UQ0, UQ1, UQ2, and menadione) using both
detergent-solubilized and membrane-bound enzyme preparations. The
latter membrane preparations were isolated from bacteria in which
recombinant Mtb NDH-2 was overexpressed. These membranes contained
50–100-fold more NDH-2 activity than wild-type membranes based
on NADH reductase activity in the presence of exogenous UQ0.

As pointed out by Cook and Cleland, an ordered or random sequential mechanism can be distinguished from
a ping-pong mechanism (classical or non-classical) by the dependence
of activity on the concentration of both substrates varied together
at a fixed ratio (eq , ). In Figure A, the NADH-Q
reductase activity of purified Mtb NDH-2 and Mtb NDH-2 overexpressed
membranes was measured at varying concentrations of NADH and UQ0 set to a fixed concentration ratio of [UQ0] =
6.25[NADH]. As discussed in , the linearity of the double-reciprocal plots for both soluble and
membrane-bound NDH-2 preparations strongly supports a ping-pong mechanism.

Kinetic
analysis of NADH-UQ0 reduction by membrane-bound
and purified (soluble) Mtb NDH-2. (A) Double-reciprocal plots of the
initial velocity vs substrate concentration where both substrates
were varied while maintaining a constant ratio of [UQ0]
= 6.25[NADH]. The line through the data is the fit of soluble Mtb
data to eq . Error bars show the range from
duplicate experiments. (B) Analysis of NADH-UQ0 kinetics
with soluble NDH-2. Initial velocities were determined with NADH as
the varied substrate and three different concentrations of UQ0 as the fixed substrate. Lines through the data were determined
by global fitting of the three data sets to eq . Insets represent secondary plots used to determine Vmax for the reaction and KM values. (C) Plots are similar to those in panel B but were obtained
using membranes isolated from M. smegmatis overexpressing
recombinant Mtb NDH-2.

KM values for NADH and UQ0 were determined from velocity versus substrate concentration
data,
as shown in panels B and C of Figure . Initial
velocities were determined as a function of the concentration of a
varied substrate, NADH, at three fixed concentrations of the second
substrate, UQ0. The data were globally fit using eq  to obtain the constant parameter KMNADH/Vmax, which
is characteristic of a ping–pong mechanism, and the apparent Vmax at each of the constant substrate concentrations.
Soluble and membrane-bound enzyme data were fit well by eq  (solid lines through data). Insets are secondary
plots used to obtain KM and kcat values as described in . The kinetic parameters are listed in Table  along with values obtained with UQ0 as
the varied substrate. The KM value for
NADH with soluble NDH-2 (average of 0.13 mM) is somewhat lower than
the KM for membrane-bound NDH-2 (average
of 0.28 mM). The KM for UQ0 varied between 0.23 and 0.64 mM with both free and membrane-bound
enzymes. The kcat for the NADH-UQ0 reductase reaction ranged between 330 and 580 s–1. These results indicate that detergent solubilization of NDH-2 from
the membrane does not significantly alter electron transfer kinetics.

Kinetic Parameters for NADH Oxidation
Catalyzed by NDH-2 from Soluble and Overexpressed Membrane Preparations
with Various Electron Acceptors
 	[NADH] varied	[quinone]
varied	ratio plot	
 NDH-2 Overexpressed Membranes with UQ0	
KMNADH (mM)	0.24 ± 0.07	0.32 ± 0.15	–	
KMUQ0 (mM)	0.64 ± 0.20	0.23 ± 0.10	–	
kcat (s–1)	580.0 ± 170	570.0 ± 200	330 ± 15	
Soluble NDH-2 with UQ0	
KMNADH (mM)	0.14 ± 0.02	0.12 ± 0.2	–	
KMUQ0 (mM)	0.58 ± 0.11	0.35 ± 0.5	–	
kcat (s–1)	480.0 ± 60	425.0 ± 35	390 ± 70	
Soluble NDH-2 with UQ1	
KMNADH (mM)	nd	nd	0.13	
KMUQ1 (mM)	nd	nd	0.050 ± 0.02	
kcat (s–1)	nd	nd	500.0 ± 50	
Soluble NDH-2 with UQ2	
KMNADH (mM)	0.12 ± 0.2	nd	0.12	
KMUQ2 (mM)	&lt;0.02	nd	0.051 ± 0.05	
kcat (s–1)	640.0 ± 40	nd	1150.0 ± 350	
Soluble NDH-2 with Menadione	
KMNADH (mM)	nd	0.23 ± 0.01	0.23	
KMmenadione (mM)	nd	0.10 ± 0.01	0.04 ± 0.02	
kcat (s–1)	nd	423.0 ± 70	400.0 ± 25	
Kinetic constants
determined
by global fitting using eq  in .

Errors are standard errors from
fits or propagation errors calculated from fitted values when division
of errors was necessary.

Not determined.

The KM value is the average for NADH with UQ0 and UQ2.

KM calculated
according to eq  assuming KM for NADH where KMUQ1 = α(slope × Vmax – KMNADH).

To provide additional support for
a ping-pong mechanism and to
evaluate whether apparent ping-pong kinetic behavior might be an artifact
of the use of the soluble quinone substrate UQ0, the NADH-Q
reductase reaction was assayed with quinone substrates having one
or two isoprenoid units at position 5 of the benzoquinone ring (UQ1 and UQ2), and with menadione, which shares the
same naphthoquinone headgroup as the physiological substrate in Mtb
membranes, menaquinone-9. Because all of these quinones are less soluble
than UQ0 in water, 10% DMSO was included in the assay buffer
to increase the solubility of each analogue and ensure a broader concentration
range for kinetic measurements. Addition of DMSO reduced NADH-UQ0 activity by approximately 10%.

Soluble NDH-2 reduced
UQ1, UQ2, and menadione
more efficiently than UQ0. At a constant substrate concentration
ratio, double-reciprocal plots of NADH-Q reductase activity versus
NADH were linear for the three quinone analogues, indicating the general
applicability of the ping-pong mechanism (Figure A). Kinetic parameters for UQ2 and menadione were
determined from velocity versus substrate concentration plots using
eq . The KM value
for UQ1 was estimated from the plots in Figure A as described in the footnotes of Table . While KM values for
NADH were relatively constant with all quinones (∼0.15 mM),
the KM values for quinones decreased approximately
10-fold relative to those for UQ0 with each added isoprenoid
unit. A double-reciprocal plot for UQ2 in Figure B shows the virtual overlap of velocity versus NADH
concentration plots at UQ2 concentrations ranging from
0.02 to 0.2 mM, indicating that NDH-2 was saturated with UQ2 at all concentrations analyzed and that the KM for UQ2 is &lt;0.02 mM.

Kinetics for reduction
of various quinones by soluble NDH-2. Assays
were conducted in NADH-Q buffer containing 10% (v/v) DMSO. (A) Double-reciprocal
plots of velocity vs substrate concentration data obtained with NADH
and quinone concentrations maintained at a constant ratio. Ratios
were [UQ1] and [UQ2] = 0.28[NADH] and [menadione]
= 0.68[NADH]. To minimize spontaneous reoxidation, the assay with
menadione was performed under anaerobic conditions by addition to
the assay of an oxygen scavenging reaction mixture consisting of 0.2
μg/mL glucose oxidase and 1.0 mM glucose. (B) Double-reciprocal
plots describing UQ2 reduction kinetics by soluble NDH-2.

Unlike KM values for quinones, kcat values
were similar in all cases, including
when menadione was the electron acceptor. Naphthoquinone has a lower
midpoint redox potential than benzoquinone (−70 to −110
mV vs 70–110 mV), demonstrating that kcat values were not simply a function of the midpoint redox
potential of each quinone. This observation indicates that the transfer
of an electron from FADH2 to quinone substrates does not
contribute appreciably to the rate-limiting step of the reaction and
that the transfer of a hydride from NADH to FAD may be the rate-limiting
in the NADH-Q reductase reaction. It should be noted that all quinone
substrates exhibited exclusively two-electron reduction reactions,
as determined by the stoichiometry of NADH consumption relative to
quinone concentration under assay conditions where NADH was in excess.

The decreased KM values for quinones
with longer isoprenoid side chains indicate that hydrophobicity is
an important determinant of quinone binding affinity, and that the
quinone-binding site can accommodate at least two isoprenoid units.
Importantly, we did not observe any evidence of substrate inhibition
of NADH oxidation by any of the quinone substrates examined, including
UQ2 for which the KM is at
least 10-fold lower than that of NADH (see Figure B). The absence of detectable substrate inhibition is consistent
with a nonclassical ping-pong mechanism (Scheme ).

Characterization of NADH-tNAD+ Transhydrogenase Activity
Product inhibition studies are routinely employed to distinguish
between classical and nonclassical ping-pong kinetic mechanisms. However,
in the case of NADH-Q reduction, product inhibition is not feasible
because the highly exergonic nature of both half-reactions renders
each effectively irreversible. Under these conditions, products (NAD+ and QH2) can function only as dead-end inhibitors.
To discriminate between classical and nonclassical ping-pong mechanisms,
we turned to a comparison of the NADH-Q oxidoreductase and transhydrogenase
activities of NDH-2. As a member of the flavoprotein disulfide reductase
family, Mtb NDH-2 is capable of catalyzing the transfer of a hydride
from NADH via FAD to various NAD+ analogues in
vitro.() The midpoint redox potential
for the tNAD+/tNADH couple (Em,7 = −270 mV) is slightly higher than that for the NAD+/NADH couple (Em,7 = −320 mV),
making tNAD+ reduction favorable. Given that the electron
acceptor for the transhydrogenase reaction [thio-NAD+ (tNAD+)] resembles NADH, we predicted that the transhydrogenase
reaction should proceed through a classical (one-site) ping-pong mechanism,
with both the donor and the acceptor interacting with NDH-2 at the
NADH site. Markedly different properties of the transhydrogenase and
NADH-Q reductase activities of NDH-2 toward substrates and reaction
products acting as dead-end inhibitors might therefore provide evidence
for discriminating between classical and nonclassical ping-pong mechanisms.

Characterization of the NDH-2 kinetics using tNAD+ as
the electron acceptor is shown in Figure .
Assays monitored tNAD+ reduction by an increase in absorbance
at 398 nm, a wavelength at which tNADH exhibits significant absorbance
and NADH has virtually no absorbance. Shown in Figure A is a double-reciprocal plot of velocity versus substrate
data obtained at a fixed concentration ratio of NADH = tNAD+. The kcat value obtained from the y-intercept was 0.275 s–1, which is ∼1000-fold
lower than the kcat observed with quinone
acceptors. The linear relationship observed is consistent with a ping-pong
mechanism. The dependence of velocity on tNAD+ concentration
with NADH fixed at two different concentrations is shown in Figure B. The curve at high NADH concentrations reached
a plateau indicative of saturation, whereas the curve at the lower
NADH concentration trended downward at the higher tNAD+ concentrations. The downward curvature is indicative of competition
between the two substrates, which is consistent with a one-site ping-pong
mechanism.

NADH-tNAD+ transhydrogenase reaction catalyzed by soluble
Mtb NDH-2. Initial velocity data converted to turnover numbers (TNs)
as described in . (A)
Double-reciprocal plots of velocity vs substrate concentration data
where substrates were maintained at a fixed ratio of [NADH] = [tNAD+]. The reaction mixture contained 40 nM NDH-2. (B) Initial
velocity vs substrate concentration plots to obtain kinetics of the
transhydrogenase reaction. The reaction mixture contained 48 nM NDH-2,
varying concentrations of tNAD+, and 200 μM NADH
(○) or 25 μM NADH (●). Solid lines through the
data were produced from global fits to eq  modified
with a term to account for substrate inhibition.

To obtain the KM values for the
reaction,
the data were fit to eq  with an added term
to account for substrate inhibition of NADH by tNAD+ (see ). The Vmax term in eq  was assigned the kcat value determined from the intercept in Figure A (0.25 s–1), reducing the fitted
parameters to three values. KM values
for NADH and tNAD+ were 0.01 and 0.02 mM, respectively,
and the substrate inhibition constant (KsitNAD+) for tNAD+ was 0.90 mM (values
listed in Table ). The kcat for the transhydrogenase reaction is roughly 2000-fold
lower than that observed for NADH-Q reductase activity (∼500
s–1), suggesting that the rate-determining step
may have changed from the first to the second half-reaction, i.e.,
transfer of a hydride from FADH2 to tNAD+ instead
of transfer of a hydride from NADH to FAD. A change in the rate-determining
step would be consistent with the marked decrease in the KM for NADH (see the ). The presence of substrate inhibition alters eq , making it no longer linear. Curvature was not evident in
the double-reciprocal plot of Figure A because
the magnitude of Ksi was 50-fold higher
than the KM for NADH, thereby minimizing
its influence on the reaction velocities in this analysis.

Kinetic Parameters Determined for
the NADH-tNAD+ Transhydrogenase Reaction Catalyzed by Mtb
NDH-2 and Inhibition Constants Produced by Addition of NAD+ to Each Reaction Mixture
 	NADH-UQ0 reductase reaction	NADH-tNAD+ transhydrogenase reaction	
KMNADH (mM)	0.13–0.15	0.01 ± 0.001	
KMtNAD+ (mM)	–	0.02 ± 0.003	
KitNAD+ (mM)	1.0 ± 0.13	–	
KsitNAD+ (mM)	–	0.90 ± 0.35	
Ki′NAD+ (mM)	0.54, 1.37	1.4 ± 0.34	
Ki″NAD+ (mM)	–	0.03–0.05	
Reaction steps represented by
constants are noted on Schemes 3–5 in Figures  and . Values were obtained from global
fits using eq  or  as
described in . Analyses
of NAD+ inhibitory activity were performed with each substrate
varied (see Figure ); hence, two values are
reported for these constants.

Data taken from Table .

Fitted parameters obtained from
a global fit of data in Figure B to a modified
eq , assuming the kcat value (0.25 s–1) for the transhydrogenase reaction
determined from data in Figure A.

Value obtained from progress curves
in Figure .

Fitted parameter obtained from data
in panels C and D of Figure .

Fitted parameters obtained from
data in panels A and B of Figure .

Kinetics of NAD+ inhibition for NADH-tNAD+ transhydrogenase and NADH-UQ0 reductase activities.
Data
are presented in double-reciprocal plot form. Lines through data were
generated using kinetic and inhibition constants from global fits
of the original velocity vs substrate data with assumptions as described
in the text. (A) Inhibition of transhydrogenase activity by NAD+ with NADH as the varied substrate. Reaction mixtures contained
25 nM NDH-2 and 1.0 mM tNAD+ as the fixed substrate with
0.0 mM NAD+ (○), 1.0 mM NAD+ (●),
or 2.0 mM NAD+ (△). Fitting of data to obtain Ki values assumed noncompetitive inhibition.
(B) Inhibition of transhydrogenase activity by NAD+ with
tNAD+ as the varied substrate. Reaction mixtures contained
25 nM NDH-2 and 0.2 mM NADH with 0.0 mM NAD+ (○),
0.2 mM NAD+ (●), or 1.0 mM NAD+ (△).
Data were fit assuming competitive inhibition. (C) NAD+ inhibition of NADH-UQ0 activity with NADH as the variable
substrate and UQ0 at a fixed concentration. Reaction mixtures
contained 5.0 nM NDH-2 and 2.0 mM UQ0 with 0.0 mM NAD+ (○), 0.5 mM NAD+ (●), or 1.5 mM
NAD+ (△). Data were fit globally assuming uncompetitive
inhibition. (D) Inhibition of NAD+ on NADH-UQ0 reductase activity with UQ0 as a variable substrate and
NADH at a fixed concentration. Reaction mixtures contained 5.0 nM
NDH-2, buffer, and 0.125 mM NADH with 0.0 mM NAD+ (○),
0.5 mM NAD+ (●), or 1.5 mM NAD+ (△).
Data were fit assuming competitive inhibition.

Effect of tNAD+ and UQ0 on NADH-UQ0 oxidoreductase activity with NADH the varied substrate. The reaction
mixture contained 5.0 nM NDH-2, 0.2 mM NADH, and 2.0 mM UQ0 in the absence (○) or presence (●) of 1.0 mM tNAD+. Data were fit globally using eq  assuming
competitive inhibition.

NAD+ Inhibition of Mtb NDH-2 Transhydrogenase and
NADH-Q Reductase Activities
The kinetics of NAD+ inhibition of transhydrogenase and NADH-UQ0 reductase
activities are characterized in Figure . In
panels A and B of Figure , inhibition of transhydrogenase
activity was measured with NADH and tNAD+ as the varied
substrates, respectively. Data shown are presented in double-reciprocal
form with velocities converted to turnover numbers (TNs); velocity
versus substrate concentration plots were used in global fits to obtain
inhibition constants. Hyperbolic plots of this data are presented
in the . With NADH
as the varied substrate, a marked decrease in apparent kcat values was evident, whereas a decrease in KM was seen with tNAD+ as the varied
substrate. Given the structural similarity of NAD+ with
each substrate, the inhibition constants fitted using eq  were assumed to modify the KM of each substrate. KM values of each
substrate and the Ksi value for substrate
inhibition were assumed from the studies in Figure  (listed in Table ), so that the only
fitted constants in eq  were inhibition constants
for NAD+. The inhibition kinetics with NADH (Figure A) as the varied substrate were best described by
noncompetitive (mixed) inhibition, with a weak effect on the KM for NADH (Ki′NAD+ = 1.4 ± 0.34 mM) and a much stronger effect
on kcat (Ki″NAD+ = 0.03–0.05 mM). With tNAD+ as the varied substrate (Figure B),
the inhibition was best described as being competitive with a strong
effect on the KM for tNAD+ (Ki″NAD+ = 0.03 mM).
The results are fully consistent with a classical (one-site) ping-pong
mechanism (Scheme 3 in Figure ), wherein NAD+ is a competitive inhibitor of both the electron donor and
acceptor. Substrate inhibition between tNAD+ and NADH is
added in Scheme 3. The kinetics in Figure B appear to be competitive rather than noncompetitive as expected
because the relatively high NADH concentrations used in the study
minimized NAD+/NADH competition, virtually eliminating
an effect on the apparent kcat.

A parallel study with UQ0 replacing tNAD+ as
the electron acceptor is shown in panels C and D of Figure . The NAD+ inhibition pattern observed
is markedly different from that describing the transhydrogenase reaction.
Fitting of the data using either the Michaelis–Menten rate
law or eq  with the appropriate substitutions
found competitive inhibition by NAD+ when NADH was the
varied substrate (Figure C) and uncompetitive
inhibition when UQ0 was the varied substrate (Figure D). This inhibition pattern indicates that the only
kinetic constant affected by NAD+ was the KM for NADH. The inhibition constant (Ki′NAD+) obtained in both
studies using eq  varied between 0.5 and 1.3
mM. Both values (average of 0.9 mM) are comparable to the corresponding
constant for NAD+ competitive inhibition of NADH in the
transhydrogenase reaction (Table ).

The singular effect of NAD+ on the KM for NADH in the NADH-Q reductase reaction could be consistent
with either a one-site or a two-site ping-pong mechanism. However,
to be consistent with the one-site mechanism, NAD+ would
have to be a very poor competitive inhibitor of UQ0 so
that inhibition would go undetected in our measurements. This does
not appear to be the case because NAD+ was a relatively
strong inhibitor of tNAD+ exhibiting a Ki of 0.03–0.05 mM, which is approximately 10-fold
lower than the KM of UQ0. Therefore,
the absence of competition between NAD+ and UQ0 for the reduced enzyme strongly supports a two-site ping-pong mechanism
(Scheme 4 in Figure ) where NAD+ and UQ0 interact at discrete, independent sites.

NDH-2
Kinetics When Electron Acceptors UQ0 and tNAD+ Are Present in the Same Reaction Mixture
Kinetic
studies with electron acceptors, tNAD+ and UQ0, in the same reaction mixture were performed to determine if there
was any competition between the two acceptors. NADH consumption monitored
in the presence of UQ0 alone or with both UQ0 and tNAD+ as electron acceptors is shown in Figure . The UQ0 concentration in both data
sets was 4-fold higher than its KM value,
and the tNAD+ concentration in the data set with the electron
acceptor mixture was 100-fold higher than its KM value. The concentration of tNAD+ was at enzyme
saturation levels to maximize the potential effect of its low KM on the reaction (KM values differ by &gt;30-fold), and the concentration of UQ0 was somewhat greater than its KM to
distinguish its higher rate of reduction from that of tNAD+ (kcat values differ by &gt;103-fold). The curve with UQ0 alone reflects the high activity
observed with this electron acceptor. A similar study with tNAD+ alone at a concentration of 100KM would have a maximal turnover number of &lt;1, which was therefore
not graphed. When both electron acceptors were present in the reaction
mixture, the activity was reduced only slightly and in a manner consistent
with competitive inhibition as determined using the Michaelis–Menten
rate equation or eq  to fit the data (Scheme
4).

These findings are best explained by Scheme 5, which shows
the transhydrogenase reaction proceeding by a one-site ping-pong mechanism
and the NADH-UQ0 reductase reaction proceeding in parallel
through a two-site ping-pong mechanism. Because electron acceptors
tNAD+ and UQ0 bind to different sites in the
two-site mechanism, they are not competitive with each other for interaction
with the reduced form of the enzyme. If they were, tNAD+ would have prevented UQ0 from binding given its concentration
was at virtual saturation (100KM). Instead,
the reaction rate appeared mostly to reflect the difference in rate
constants governing abstraction of electrons by each acceptor from
reduced FAD. Because the half-reaction for UQ0 reduction
is much more efficient than that for tNAD+ reduction, the
electron flux likely proceeds exclusively through UQ0 and
the two-site pathway (the dashed line in Scheme 5 signifies the absence
of electron flux in the tNAD+ half-reaction). The rapid
rate of UQ0 reduction maintains the enzyme predominately
in the oxidized form, a form to which tNAD+ binds weakly
as a competitive inhibitor of NADH (KitNAD+ in Table ). Via
substitution of the appropriate values into eq , a Ki value in the range of 1.0 mM was
obtained for the competitive inhibition, which is similar to that
obtained for substrate inhibition in Figure .

This kinetic study was repeated monitoring tNADH production
instead
of NADH oxidation. In accord with the interpretation mentioned above,
the presence of UQ0 in the assay inhibited tNAD+ reduction. These studies further demonstrate that tNAD+ and UQ0 do not bind to the same site and that the transhydrogenase
reaction proceeds through a one-site ping-pong mechanism, whereas
NADH-UQ0 reductase activity proceeds through a two-site
ping-pong mechanism.

Effects of Quinols on Mtb NDH-2 Catalyzing
Transhydrogenase
and NADH-UQ Reductase Activities
To further substantiate
the two-site ping-pong mechanism and explore the properties of the
quinone-binding site, inhibition of NDH-2 transhydrogenase and NADH-Q
reductase activities by quinol products was evaluated. Because of
the irreversible reaction, quinols, like NAD+, can act
as only dead end inhibitors. Given the above evidence establishing
different binding sites for NADH/tNAD+ and UQ0, we were surprised to find that reduced forms of UQ0,
UQ1, and UQ2 inhibited the transhydrogenase
reaction (Figure A). The inhibition was not
complete and was observed despite virtually saturating concentrations
of NADH and tNAD+ being used. The maximal level of inhibition
of transhydrogenase activity was ∼60% for all three quinols.
Apparent Ki values roughly estimated by
fitting the data in Figure A to a model assuming
a single discrete binding site (eq , ) were ∼0.4 mM for
UQ0H2, 0.08 mM for UQ1H2, and 0.003 mM for UQ2H2. The decrease in Ki values with an increasing isoprenoid chain
length mirrors KM values for the parent
quinone substrates in the NADH-Q reductase reaction (Table ). In the presence of 0.05 mM UQ2H2, which should be near saturating according to the Ki reported above, the KM values for NADH and tNAD+ were unaffected while kcat decreased by 60% (data not shown), further
indicating that the inhibitory effects of quinol ligands on the transhydrogenase
reaction are not mediated by binding to the NADH/tNAD+ substrate-binding
site.

Effect of quinols on NDH-2 transhydrogenase and NADH-Q reductase
activities. (A) Effect of quinols on the transhydrogenase activity
of soluble NDH-2. Reaction mixtures contained 20 nM NDH-2, transhyrogenase
buffer, 0.2 mM NADH, 0.2 mM tNAD+, and varying concentrations
of UQ0H2 (○), UQ1H2 (●), or UQ2H2 (△). Fractional
activities were plotted as a function of quinone concentration, and
plots were fit with eq . (B) Effects of UQH2 on the NADH-Q reductase activity of soluble NDH-2. Reaction
mixtures contained 0.3 mM NADH, 0.025–0.05 mM UQ, 1–5
nM NDH-2, and varying concentrations of UQH2. Activities
relative to those of control reaction mixtures that contained no reduced
quinone were plotted as a function of UQH2 concentration.
Activation was fit with a modification of eq . (C) Kinetic studies characterizing UQ1H2 activation
of membrane-bound NADH-UQ0 reductase activity. Reaction
mixtures contained 0.1 μL of recombinant membrane, NADH-Q buffer,
and 0.3 M NADH in the absence (○) or presence (●) of
0.1 M Q1H2. Data were fit to the Michaelis–Menten
rate equation (—) to obtain kinetic constant values.

The effects of quinols on NADH-Q
reductase activity also showed
incomplete inhibition, except for the activation of UQ0 activity by UQ1H2 (Figure B). To maximize the possibility of demonstrating competitive
inhibition by quinol products, NADH-Q activity was measured at subsaturating
concentrations of substrate quinones. Modest, partial inhibition was
again observed for most combinations of quinone and quinol ligands,
plateauing in the range of 35–40% inhibition. Estimates of
inhibition constants were made as described above. UQ2H2 exhibited relatively strong inhibition of activity when UQ0 and UQ1 (Ki = 0.003–0.006
mM) were the electron acceptors. UQ1H2 also
inhibited activity when UQ1 was the electron acceptor,
but ∼10-fold more weakly than UQ2H2 (Ki ≈ 0.070 mM). In contrast to the general
inhibitory activity of most quinols, UQ1H2 activated
NADH oxidase activity 2-fold when UQ0 was the electron
acceptor. Although the inhibition constants mirror the KM values observed with quinone substrates, the observation
that quinol binding is not competitive with either NADH or quinone
substrates suggests that quinol inhibition results from binding to
a unique site that affects both NADH-Q and transhydrogenase activities.

To demonstrate that activation and inhibition were not artifacts
of enzyme solubilization and purification, parallel experiments were
repeated with membrane-bound recombinant NDH-2 under conditions similar
to those described in the legend of Figure . Consistent with the results obtained with soluble NDH-2, addition
of 1.0 mM UQ1H2 to an assay containing 0.05
mM UQ1 as an electron acceptor resulted in 30 ± 10%
inhibition, whereas the same quinol added to an assay containing UQ0 as an electron acceptor produced an up to 5-fold increase
in activity (data not shown). The dependence of NADH-UQ0 activation on UQ1H2 concentration was hyperbolic,
indicative of a discrete site with a binding constant of 0.070 mM.
Kinetic analysis of UQ1H2 activation of NADH-UQ0 reductase activity is shown in Figure C. The data indicate that activation results from a 5–6-fold
decrease in the apparent KM value for
UQ0 (from 0.35 ± 0.007 to 0.06 ± 0.02 mM; Vmax values under both conditions were 0.12 ±
0.01 A340 min–1 nM–1). Because the KM for
UQ0 is composed of rate constants for association and dissociation
of the substrate as well as the chemical steps for both half-reactions
(see the ), the precise
mechanism through which quinol binding decreases the KM of UQ0 is unclear. Nevertheless, in the case
of UQ1H2 activation of UQ0, the quinol
appears to function as an allosteric activator. The incomplete inhibition
of NDH-2 transhydrogenase and quinone reductase activities and apparent
allosteric activation of NADH-UQ0 reduction by UQ1H2 provide unequivocal evidence of the existence of at
least two binding sites with different affinities for quinone and
quinol ligands on Mtb NDH-2.

Discussion
Comparison
of the kinetics for Mtb NDH-2 catalysis of the NADH-Q
and transhydrogenase reactions allowed us to conclude that the NADH-Q
reductase activity follows a nonclassical, two-site ping-pong kinetic
mechanism as has been reported for a number of other oxidoreductase
systems.− The establishment of this two-site mechanism differs
from the previously reported ternary complex mechanism proposed for
the yeast NDH-2 analogue, Ndi1, and supports the recent Ndi1 crystal
structure of Feng et al., showing separate
binding sites for NADH and quinone on opposite faces of the isoalloxazine
ring of the FAD cofactor. In addition, studies with quinol products
revealed a second quinone-binding site more suited to binding quinol
than quinone. Occupation of this second site produced either partial
inhibition or activation depending on the specific quinone/quinol
pair. It is unclear if these two sites reflect the two sites found
in the Ndi1 crystal structure of Feng et al., both of which were predicted to play a role in catalysis.

Discrimination between a one-site and a two-site ping-pong mechanism
was based on considerable evidence. (1) Kinetic studies with UQ2 as the electron acceptor found no evidence of competition
with NADH, even though its KM was at least
10-fold lower than that for NADH (Figure B).
The absence of substrate competition under these conditions is consistent
with independent electron donor- and acceptor-binding sites. In contrast,
the transhydrogenase reaction, which was predicted to follow a one-site
ping-pong mechanism, displayed substrate inhibition between NADH and
tNAD+; KM values for NADH and
tNAD+ were approximately equal in this reaction (Figure B). (2) NAD+ was a potent competitive
inhibitor of tNAD+ in the transhydrogenase reaction, consistent
with overlap in donor- and acceptor-binding sites. In contrast, NAD+ inhibited NADH-UQ0 activity only weakly, despite
UQ0 having a KM 30-fold higher
than that of tNAD+ (Figure C,D).
The lack of appreciable competition between NAD+ and UQ0 strongly indicates that donor and acceptor substrates bind
to different sites, consistent with a two-site ping-pong mechanism.
(3) Finally, in a reaction mixture containing both UQ0 and
tNAD+, initial NADH oxidation rates reflected the high kcat of the NADH-UQ0 reductase reaction
instead of the low kcat of the transhydrogenase
reaction (Figure ). On the basis of a KM for tNAD+ 30-fold lower than that
for UQ0, the concentration of tNAD+ in the reaction
mixture should have prevented UQ0 from binding to reduced
NDH-2 if both electron acceptors were interacting at the same site.

The relatively low Ki of NAD+ for reduced NDH-2 compared to the KM of NADH (differing by 3-fold) for the oxidized NDH-2 might appear
to be counterproductive to overall reaction efficiency, especially
in the bacterium where the steady-state NAD+/NADH ratio
usually favors NAD+. However, as discussed above, in the
two-site ping-pong mechanism, quinone and NAD+ are not
competitive for the reduced enzyme, and therefore, NAD+ will not impede the reduction of quinone. Furthermore, quinone reduction
is fast compared to FAD reduction by NADH, the likely rate-determining
step (Table ). The greater efficiency of quinone
reduction will maintain the enzyme largely in the oxidized state to
which NAD+ binds weakly (Ki ∼5–7-fold greater than KM for NADH). Our kinetic data also suggest a potential protective
role for the tight binding of NAD+ to reduced NDH-2. Tight
binding of NAD+ may limit the reactivity of reduced FAD
toward soluble oxidants such as molecular oxygen, thereby suppressing
the formation of toxic reactive oxygen species. Physiologically, a
two-site ping-pong mechanism is ideal for catalyzing the transfer
of electrons from a charged, cytoplasmic electron donor (NADH) to
a hydrophobic electron acceptor that is buried in a membrane (menaquinone).

Recently, Yang et al. proposed a ternary
complex mechanism for Ndi1. Their data were heavily based on the appearance
of a broad 740 nm spectral peak characteristic of a charge transfer
complex. The peak was barely detectable upon addition of NADH but
intensified upon addition of an electron acceptor. The need for both
substrates to maximize the 740 nm signal was interpreted to indicate
that the charge transfer complex was a ternary complex between the
enzyme and both substrates and that the oxidation–reduction
process was concerted and proceeded through this ternary complex.
In support of a ternary complex, Yang et al. report inhibition kinetics with a quinol consistent with separate
binding sites for quinone and NADH. Although this group initially
reported a ping-pong mechanism for Ndi1, they recently attributed
this result to an artifact resulting from enzyme solubilization and/or
the use of small, soluble quinone substrates capable of entering the
NADH substrate site. There is, however,
an alternative explanation for their data. First, as shown here, the
presence of independent binding sites is consistent with a two-site
ping-pong mechanism. Second, the kinetics of the 740 nm peak intensification
appeared to be too slow (∼5 min with O2 or UQ6) to be consistent with steady-state kinetics. We suggest
that the slow intensification may be related to the accumulation of
NAD+ during the reaction, especially if the interaction
of NAD+ with the reduced form of Ndi1 is as strong as described
for NDH-2 in this study. Broad absorption peaks at 740 nm between
reduced flavoprotein (FADH2, acting as the charge donor)
and NAD+ (acting as the charge acceptor) have been described
for flavoproteins exhibiting ping-pong kinetics, e.g., glutathione
reductase and lipoyl dehydrogenase.

When Ndi1 was crystallized in the presence of UQ4, electron
density for 2 equiv of quinone ligands (designated UQI and
UQII) was observed on the si face of the
FAD isoalloxazine ring, which opens to the face of Ndi1 that associates
with the membrane. The authors further
supported this observation through an EPR study, in which two distinct
semiquinone species were observed. This structural evidence is consistent
with studies of Ndi1, indicating weak and strong quinone-binding sites. On the basis of their structural and EPR studies,
Feng et al. proposed a model whereby 2
equiv of quinone participates in the transfer of an electron from
FADH2.

In our studies, addition of quinols (UQ1H2 and UQ2H2) to the NADH-Q
and transhydrogenase
reaction mixtures produced partial inhibition (maxima of 30 and 60
μM, respectively) in most cases. Thus, they were not competitive
inhibitors of NADH, tNAD+, or quinones and therefore not
interacting at the substrate-binding site(s). The order of inhibitor
effectiveness for the various quinols was the same for the transhydrogenase
and NADH-Q reactions, consistent with a single quinol-binding site
capable of affecting both reactions. Perhaps the best evidence for
a unique quinol site is the observation that UQ0 reduction
was activated in the presence of UQ1H2 (Figure B). Activation resulted from a 5.5-fold reduction
in the KM for UQ0 (Figure C), suggesting an allosteric interaction with NDH-2.
A binding constant of 0.07 mM was measured for the activation, which
is similar to that observed for Q1H2 inhibition
of transhydrogenase and NADH-Q reactions. Thus, we believe that both
inhibition and activation of NDH-2 reductase activity are mediated
through a single quinol-binding site. How this site affects the transhydrogenase
reaction remains to be determined. Feng et al. do not provide information about quinol inhibition for Ndi1 activity,
making it difficult to compare their structural results with our kinetic
results. However, Yang et al. report competitive
inhibition of Ndi1 catalytic activity by Q1H2. This would suggest the Mtb quinol-binding site described in our
study is not reflective of either of two quinone sites described in
the crystal structure of Feng et al.

This study establishes that Mtb NDH-2 catalyzes quinone reduction
through a two-site ping-pong mechanism, which is distinct from the
sequential, ternary complex mechanism proposed for yeast homologue
Ndil. Our studies also provide evidence
of a binding site that favors quinols over quinones. In other studies,
we showed that a drug, trifluoperazine, inhibits NDH-2 in a noncompetitive manner, and the drug clofazimine
is a substrate of NDH-2, its reduction leading to ROS production. The identification of a unique binding site
that favors quinols and can influence activity might help explain
the relatively selective interaction of mycobacteria with these drugs
and aid in the design of inhibitory agents that target enzyme regulation.
Work to fully understand the function and utility of the quinol/quinone-binding
sites is underway.

Supporting Information Available
Kinetics of NAD+ inhibition for NADH-tNAD+ transhydrogenase and NADH-UQ0 reductase activities
that are the same as those depicted
in Figure  except that data are presented
as s–v plots and the data
were globally fit using the same parameters used in Figure  (Figure S1), microscopic steps for the NADH-Q reductase
and transhydrogenase reactions (Scheme S1), and kinetic parameters
for the NADH-Q reductase and transhydrogenase reactions depicted in
Scheme S1 (Table S1). This material is available free of charge via
the Internet at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bi4013897_si_001.pdf

Author Contributions
T.Y., M.R.,
K.K.A., N.M.S., and C.P.S. performed the experiments, and T.Y., N.M.S.,
H.R., and C.P.S. wrote the manuscript. All authors have given approval
to the final version of the manuscript.

This work supported
by National Institutes of Health Grant R01 AI068942 (to H.R.) and
the Global Alliance for TB Drug Development.

The authors declare no
competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
We thank Daniel Gentry,
Andrew Ramsey, Trevor Selwood, and
Jennifer Yano for helpful discussions.

Abbreviations
MtbM. tuberculosis

NDH-2type II
NADH-quinone oxidoreductase

Complex
I or NDH-1type I NADH-quinone oxidoreductase

MDRmulti-drug resistant

Ndi1S. cerevisiae NADH dehydrogenase

NAD+nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide, oxidized form

NADHnicotinamide adenine
dinucleotide, reduced form

FADflavin adenine dinucleotide, oxidized form

FADH2flavin adenine dinucleotide,
reduced form

TNturnover number

UQubiquinone, oxidized form

UQH2ubiquinone, reduced form

tNAD+thio-NAD+, oxidized form

tNADHthio-NAD+, reduced form

DMSOdimethyl sulfoxide.

