The green
fluorescent protein
(GFP) and its variants have found broad application in molecular and
cellular biology for fluorescence imaging and chemical sensing. This
widespread use is owed in large part to the richness and tunability
of the photophysics and photochemistry of the autocatalytically formed
chromophore. Proton transfer is an important
player in this respect and is central to the use of fluorescent proteins
(FPs) as pH indicators, and as reversibly photoswitchable
dyes utilized in super-resolution microscopy. A better understanding of the factors influencing the rates and
pathways of proton transfer in FPs in both the ground and excited
states can aid in rationally developing increasingly robust probes
and, more generally, offer insight into proton transfer in biology.
In the following, we introduce a 13C NMR probe into the
chromophore whose chemical shift is highly sensitive to the protonation
state of the chromophore and to the dynamics of ground-state proton
transfer.

The GFP chromophore is comprised of a 4-hydroxybenzylidene
imidazolinone
structure formed from a self-catalyzed cyclization, dehydration, and
oxidation of residues Ser65, Tyr66, and Gly67. The chromophore is
located within the central α-helix and surrounded by 11 β-strands
that form the compact β-barrel fold (Figures  and A). Many mutations that affect
the absorbance and fluorescence spectra, the quantum yield, and the
isomerization efficiency via direct and indirect interactions with
the chromophore have been identified. The most dramatic examples of
these effects involve those mutations that perturb the chromophore
ionization state.

Ribbon structure of Superfolder GFP (Protein Data Bank
entry 2B3P()). The central helix and β-strands 7 and
10 are colored
green, orange, and red, respectively. Important residues are labeled
and displayed as black sticks. Circular permutation sites are indicated
by colored rectangles and the residue numbers between which the new
termini were located. For all circular permutants, the native N- and
C-termini are linked by the sequence GGTGGS. Image created with PyMOL
(Schrödinger, LLC).

(A) Protonated and deprotonated states of the GFP chromophore result
in two visible absorbance bands that can be titrated by pH. The carbon
atom that originates from [13Cζ]-l-Tyr66 and has the 13C label is highlighted with a red
asterisk. (B) UV–vis absorbance pH titration of ih:GFP S65T showing the electronic absorbance bands for the A and B
states. These spectra are representative of all variants presented.
(C) Fractions of the population in the B state vs pH for a selection
of mutants and circular permutants. The titrations demonstrate behavior
characteristic of coupled sites with apparent negative cooperativity
and some values not converging to 100% B state in the high-pH limit. ih:GFP S65S and s7:GFP S65S are classified
as intPT, while all others are classified as extPT.

The GFP chromophore is
known to exist in a protonation–deprotonation
equilibrium at the phenoxy position, which manifests itself as two
electronic absorbance bands in the visible: a neutral form (A state)
at ∼395 nm and an anionic form (B state) at ∼470 nm.
Interestingly, the ratio of the A and B states in wild-type GFP (wtGFP)
is largely independent of solution pH over a wide range (∼6–12).
Upon excitation of the A state, wtGFP exhibits fluorescence emission
with an anomalously large apparent Stokes shift. Early work in our
lab established the origin of this behavior in an excited-state proton
transfer (ESPT), and subsequent structural
and spectroscopic experiments by others revealed the internal proton
transfer network through which this proton is shuttled., In contrast to wtGFP, most of the commonly used variants (EGFP,
YFP, Superfolder, etc.) interrupt this ESPT pathway and the A-state
excitations result in neither ESPT nor direct A* emission. Moreover,
in these variants, the ratio of the A to B states can be titrated
by the solution pH. The titration curves
resulting from many FP variants, however, do not exhibit simple single-site
behavior and can show features such as negative cooperativity and
spectra with mixed states in the limits of high or low pH. These nonideal
situations have been attributed to electrostatic coupling between
the chromophore and additional ionizable sites in its proximity. A
two-site thermodynamic model has been shown to give satisfactory agreement
across the range of titratable FPs and can even account for the pH
insensitivity of the wild-type protein.,

The
kinetics of proton transfer in FPs has been a subject of extensive
study. The PT is important for many FP applications, and the unique
chromophore provides a convenient optical handle by which to follow
PT within proteins in a more generic sense. Ultrafast pump–probe
experiments have elucidated the details of ESPT in wtGFP and have provided information about the mechanism
of reversible photoswitching in photoactivatable FPs such as Dronpa., Ground-state proton transfer has also been investigated using techniques
of fluorescence correlation spectroscopy (FCS),− pump–dump–probe
transient absorption, nanosecond pH-jump
kinetics,− and stopped-flow fluorescence., Many
of these data have been interpreted through the single-site titration
model and have led to a relatively wide range of estimates for the
protonation and deprotonation rate constants. For example, the microscopic
deprotonation constant for the widely used EGFP variant has been variously
reported to have values as low as 45 s–1 and as high as 4500 s–1.

The chromophore is cradled within a compact
β-barrel in which
it is physically isolated from the solution as evidenced by the inefficacy
of external fluorescence quenchers. A
recurring theme then, in previous publications, has been to rationalize
the communication of the solution pH to the chromophore via gross
protein dynamics, specific residue-mediated proton transfers, or some
combination of the two., Strand 7 and, in particular,
residue His148 have received attention as a likely “gatekeeper”
of PT., Crystal structures show that His148 is directly
hydrogen-bonded to the ionizable phenoxy of the chromophore; consistent with this, NMR studies have revealed
strand 7 to be particularly dynamic from H/D exchange experiments
relative to the other β-strands.

NMR has long been used as a powerful tool to assess residue-specific
pH titrations within complex biomolecules.− In this study,
we have focused on direct 13C NMR spectroscopy of the GFP
chromophore as a method possessing high resolution, chemical specificity,
sensitivity to the chemical exchange time scale, and independence
from, but potential correlation with, the optical properties. Recent
work in our lab and others has utilized direct carbon detection of
tyrosine isotopically labeled at position ζ [adjacent to the
hydroxyl group (see the asterisks in Figure A)] to study the thermodynamic properties and qualitative kinetics
of PT.,, After the
GFP chromophore maturation process, 13Cζ of Tyr66 is located directly adjacent to the ionizable site and
provides a convenient and nonperturbative spectator with which to
follow PT. We utilize this approach to look at the widely used Superfolder
GFP, a particularly stable and fast-folding
GFP variant, and some select circular permutants (Figure ) to analyze the interplay between structural rigidity
and PT from this new nonoptical observable. Moreover, we combine the
information from NMR with absorbance and fluorescence pH titrations
and FCS measurements to offer a more complete picture of the underlying
mechanism.

Materials and Methods
Protein Expression and Purification
All circular permutant
genes were designed by us and then synthetically prepared by Genscript.
The genes were inserted into the pET-15b vector along with hexahistidine
tags and were cloned into BL21(DE3) Escherichia coli (Invitrogen). The point mutations and insertion mutations were performed
with the Stratagene QuikChange mutagenesis kit according to the manufacturer’s
protocol.

The proteins were expressed from cells grown in minimal
M9 salts medium supplemented with each of the common l-amino
acids (Sigma) at 25 mg/L with the exception of tyrosine, which was
replaced with [13Cζ]-l-tyrosine
(Cambridge Isotopes, 95–99% 13C). The cells were
grown at 37 °C until the OD600 reached 0.4–0.6
before being induced with 0.25 g/L isopropyl β-d-1-thiogalactopyranoside.
The cells were harvested 4 h after induction and lysed. The supernatant
was purified by nickel affinity with Ni-NTA agarose resin (Qiagen)
and further with anion exchange chromatography (HiTrap Q HP column,
GE Healthcare). The purity of all the proteins was verified via electrospray
ionization mass spectrometry.

Absorbance and Fluorescence
pH Titrations
The pH titrations
were performed using a master buffer consisting of 20 mM phosphate,
30 mM citrate, and 150 mM NaCl, each adjusted to the desired pH with
additions of a HCl or NaOH solution. The proteins were exchanged with
these buffers and the absorbance spectra collected at approximately
2 μM with a PerkinElmer Lambda 25 UV–vis spectrometer.
The fluorescence spectra were collected at protein concentrations
of 0.1–0.2 μM in right angle detection mode on a PerkinElmer
LS 55 fluorescence spectrometer.

One-Dimensional (1D) 13C NMR Measurements
The protein was concentrated
to ∼2 mM using 10 kDa molecular
mass cutoff spin filters (Amicon), made to 7% D2O for locking,
and loaded into a 5 mm Shigemi low-volume NMR tube. 1D 13C NMR spectra were all recorded with 1H decoupling on
a Varian Inova 300 MHz spectrometer unless otherwise noted. The T1 relaxation time was measured for the chromophore 13Cζ resonance using standard inversion recovery
techniques. The best duty cycle in the 1D spectra was achieved empirically
using a 50° pulse and a delay time of 4.0 s. All experiments
were performed with the temperature control set to 25 °C. The
typical samples for NMR contained 40 mM buffer (HEPES for high-pH
samples and MES for lower-pH samples) and 40 mM NaCl. Phosphate and
citrate buffers and higher salt concentrations were also used for
a limited set of spectra and found to give identical results for a
given pH.

Saturation Transfer
The protein ih:GFP S65T at pH 6.70 was irradiated on the A-state basis resonance
of 162 ppm (Figure C) with a soft pulse for
400 ms. The free induction decay was collected following a subsequent
π/2 hard pulse. The same procedure was repeated off-resonance
at the same frequency difference between the A- and B-state resonances
but to the opposite direction downfield (see section S.6 of the  for additional information).

(A) 1D 13C NMR spectra of intPT Superfolder
circular permutants with different B-state fractions at pH 8.0. ih:GFP S65T at pH 8.0 is also included as a pure B-state
reference. All of these proteins result in a single NMR peak for the
chromophore 13Cζ peak, albeit at very
different chemical shifts [the other eight labeled Tyr residues clustered
around 155 ppm are used for normalization (see section S.4 and Figure
S1 of the )]. (B)
Chemical shifts of the peaks plotted vs the fraction in the B state
deduced from the absorbance spectrum (see Figure B and section S.2 of the ). The near linearity of the points is indicative of fast exchange
between protonated and deprotonated forms. Extrapolation of the fit
gives 177.2 ppm as the B-state basis and 162.0 ppm as the A-state
basis chemical shift. (C) 1D 13C NMR pH titration of ih:GFP S65T. The peak at 177.2 ppm decreases in intensity
with a lower pH accompanied by the emergence of a broad peak near
162 ppm. (D) Integrated intensities of the B-state magnetization from
the selective inversion experiment with ih:GFP S65T
at pH 6.70 as a function of mixing time with error bars representing
one standard deviation from triplicate measurements. The apparent
chemical exchange rate constant is 99 s–1 at pH
6.70, which leads to a predicted deprotonation rate constant of 74
s–1. The inset is the B-state peak at increasing
mixing times.

Chemical Exchange Rate
from NMR Inversion Transfer
For the slow chemical exchange
proteins, we employed the selective
inversion transfer method of Robinson et al. with the pulse sequence [(π/2)x(13C)−τ1–(π/2)x(13C)−τmix–(π/2)x(13C)],
where τ1 is the time required for the exchanging
states to precess to antiphase (440 μs in these experiments)
and τmix is the variable time in which the chemical
exchange is allowed to proceed (0–40 ms). This experiment was
repeated in triplicate for ih:GFP S65T at pH 6.70.

Fluorescence Correlation Spectroscopy
Protein samples
were exchanged into buffers with 20 mM citric acid, 20 mM sodium phosphate,
10 mM glycine, and 150 mM NaCl all adjusted to the appropriate pH
by additions of 1 M NaOH. The FCS measurements were taken with protein
concentrations in the range of 0.2–5.0 nM and all performed
at room temperature. The sample was excited with a 488 nm argon ion
laser (Innova 70, Coherent) focused to a near-diffraction-limited
spot. The fluorescence was filtered from the excitation beam with
a dichroic mirror (z488rdc, Chroma) together with two emission filters
(HQ535/70, Chroma) and passed through a 75 μm confocal pinhole
and detected with an avalanche photodiode (SPCM-AQR-14 PerkinElmer).
The typical irradiance was 10 kW/cm2; however, some trajectories
were also recorded with an irradiance of 2.5 kW/cm2 to
determine the effect of the light intensity. The dimensions of the
fluorescence detection volume were experimentally measured by scanning
a piezo stage over a sub-diffraction-limited fluorescent bead (100
nm in diameter) and confirmed by measurements on small dyes (Atto
488) with known diffusion coefficients (D = 400 μm2/s). This detection volume was
determined to conform closely to a Gaussian profile in all three dimensions
with a typical size of r0= 0.4 μm and z0= 1.6 μm. ACFs were calculated by an efficient photon-by-photon
algorithm.

Results
The proteins
we investigated can be broadly grouped into two categories
according to the residue at position 65. In wtGFP, Ser65 has an important
role in stabilizing a hydrogen bond network through which ESPT occurs.
When the protein is excited at the A-state band (∼395 nm) or
B-state band (∼470 nm), both give rise to fluorescence that
peaked at ∼505 nm. Furthermore, the ratio between the A and
B states, based on their characteristic absorption bands, is relatively
constant over a wide pH range. Superfolder GFP with Ser65 also displays
these two features, including ESPT occurring in a matter of picoseconds
as measured by ultrafast fluorescence upconversion (data not shown).
In contrast, the original Superfolder GFP has Thr65. This mutation causes the chromophore to exist primarily
in the deprotonated form at neutral pH and leads to seemingly single-site
titration behavior with an apparent pKa of ∼5.7 (see Figure B,C). The A state
that grows in at low pH is nonfluorescent because of efficient nonradiative
decay of A*, and it is incapable of ESPT because of the disruption
of the proton transfer wire by Thr65. We focus on these two classes
of proteins because the Ser65 group exemplifies internal proton transfer
(intPT) along a well-characterized proton transfer
pathway, while the Thr65 group is in clear chemical communication
with the solution via external proton transfer (extPT).

All circular permutants of Superfolder GFP bearing the
Ser65 reversion
presented herein show the characteristics diagnostic of internal proton
transfer. More specifically, all have A:B ratios that are largely
independent of pH, and both steady-state and time-resolved fluorescence
spectroscopy reveal ESPT with the same kinetics and isotope effect
that were observed in wtGFP, strong evidence of functional and structural
similarity. Interestingly, the circular permutants that we have made
differ in their A:B ratios. This unanticipated fact, discovered in
the course of studies of split GFPs,, has provided
a convenient way to span the range of protonation states while maintaining
internal PT. Throughout the text, the naming convention for the circular
permutants is to give the N-terminal structural element (s1–s11 for the strands and ih for the interior helix)
followed by a colon and GFP; e.g., s7:GFP is the
protein with native termini fused and the seventh β-strand at
the new N-terminus (see section S.1 of the  for all protein sequences). In the construct s7+:GFP, the plus sign is used to distinguish a circular
permutation site that includes a larger portion of strand 7. The locations
of all circular permutants used are indicated in Figure .

The absorbance spectra as a function of the pH in
the S65T extPT circular permutants were consistent
with previous
measurements of S65T GFPs in that they displayed A:B peak ratio changes
and clean isosbestic points,, e.g., ih:GFP S65T in Figure B, a clear indication
of exactly two optical states. The fraction of the population in the
B state at all pH values was calculated using extinction coefficients
for the A and B basis states derived from absorbance and fluorescence
titrations (as described in section S.2 of the ).

The GFP constructs used in
these experiments all have nine tyrosines,
including Tyr66, which goes on to form the hydroxybenzyl portion of
the chromophore (Figure A). The 1D 13C NMR spectra of the all of the proteins showed a cluster of eight
peaks near 155 ppm corresponding to protonated tyrosine (Figure S1
of the ). As seen
in Figure A, the chemical shift of 13Cζ of the chromophore is shifted downfield away
from the tyrosine cluster as a consequence of the chemical transformation
involved in maturation that extends the conjugation. The very different
chemical shifts for different circular permutants reflect the variations
in chromophore ionization equilibria. Previous work on a model chromophore
found the protonated 13Cζ resonance at
160 ppm, while a recent NMR study of
photoswitching in the fluorescent protein Dronpa revealed a deprotonated
chromophore 13Cζ chemical shift of 177
ppm in the cis isomer. These prior assignments provide additional confidence that we are
indeed observing the chromophore resonance. The somewhat structured
broad peak centered at ∼172 ppm is due to the ∼240 backbone
carbonyl carbon resonances at natural abundance and is also present
in unlabeled protein samples (Figure S3 of the ). The location and width of the unique
chromophore peak depend sensitively on the A:B ratio as deduced from
the absorption spectra (Figure B) as well
as the dynamical properties of the proton transfer discussed below.
These characteristics varied markedly between proteins with intPT versus extPT and among different
circular permutants.

Internal Proton Transfer
All of
the intGFPs measured gave a single peak from the
chromophore 13Cζ (Figure A). However,
the location of this peak changed from protein to protein as a function
of the A- and B-state occupancies (Figure A,B). Also included in Figure A is the titratable ih:GFP S65T in the limit of high pH to provide the fully
deprotonated basis at a chemical shift of 177.1 ppm. s7:GFP S65S is ∼95% protonated and appears at 163.6 ppm, and
linear extrapolation predicts a protonated basis of 162.0 ppm. This
represents a chemical shift dispersion of &gt;15 ppm, highlighting
the
sensitivity of this probe to the chromophore protonation state. Figure B shows that there is good linear agreement between
the fraction in the B state calculated from UV–vis absorbance
measurements and the 13C NMR chemical shifts. This single-peak
behavior is indicative of fast exchange on the NMR time scale in which
only one peak is observed at a population-weighted chemical shift
value. For reference, the data in Figure A
were collected with a 300 MHz NMR spectrometer, which makes the inverse
of the frequency difference between the basis states approximately
1 ms. Systems undergoing much faster chemical exchange will appear
as a single peak, while those exchanging much slower would result
in two peaks.

External Proton Transfer
The protein ih:GFP S65T was selected as the model for external proton
transfer.
It exhibits fluorescence properties identical to those of the unpermuted
protein and has simple single-site titration behavior with an apparent
pKa of 5.9 (see Figure B,C, dark green). 1D 13C NMR spectra were collected
over a range of pH values. In contrast to the intPT samples, in which the chemical shift was proportional to the ionization
equilibrium, these spectra showed a single peak at the deprotonated
basis frequency that did not shift but rather underwent a decrease
in intensity with lower pH (Figure C). At
the lowest pH values, another much broader peak begins to appear around
162 ppm, at the location predicted from the linear extrapolation for
the protonated form of the chromophore from Figure B. This behavior suggests that the system is undergoing slow
chemical exchange on the NMR time scale.

To verify in the ih:GFP S65T sample that the broad putative A-state peak
at 162 ppm was in fact in chemical exchange with the peak at 177 ppm
(Figure C), we performed saturation transfer
experiments in which a soft 400 ms saturating pulse was applied at
162 ppm and another with the pulse at an equivalent distance upfield
at 195 ppm. If, over the duration of the saturation pulse, chemical
exchange were occurring between states with chemical shift bases of
177 and 162 ppm, then the intensity of the peak at 177 ppm should
decrease because the population transiently converts its chemical
shift to the frequency of irradiation. Indeed, only the on-resonance
pulse caused the B-state peak to disappear, while the off-resonance
pulse had no effect (Figure S6 of the ). The slight changes occurring within the carbonyl
band with pH are likely due to local perturbations due to additional
ionizable groups throughout the protein (for additional details, see
section S.6 of the ).

To push beyond the more qualitative line shape and population
connectivity
analysis, we turned to time-resolved NMR. The kinetics of proton transfer
were measured using the selective inversion transfer experiment introduced
by Robinson et al. In particular, we
investigated the ih:GFP S65T protein as it was our
best model system for slow exchange. In brief, this technique prepares
the spin system in such a way that the magnetization vectors caused
by the respective populations of the A and B states are antiphase
and parallel to the permanent magnetic field. During a subsequent
mixing time prior to the acquisition pulse, the populations undergo
chemical exchange and interconvert, thereby lowering the magnitude
of the net magnetization vectors due to each state. This effect is
manifested as a decrease in the magnitude of the well-resolved B-state
peak as the mixing time delay grows larger (Figure D).

The experiments were performed
in triplicate at pH 6.70 where an
appreciable A-state population exists and at pH 8.00 as a control
for ∼100% B state (see Figure D and
Figure S7 of the ). The chemical exchange mixing times were varied from 0 to 40 ms.
The pH 6.70 data revealed a decay constant of 99 s–1 (a lifetime of 10.1 ms). Bootstrap analysis was performed in which
sets of data were randomly selected from the triplicate measurements
and gave a range of 58–113 s–1 in the 90%
confidence interval. In combination with
the fraction deprotonated obtained from UV–vis spectroscopy,
this yielded a predicted unimolecular deprotonation constant of 74
s–1. The same experiment at pH 8.00 for chemical
exchange mixing times of 0 and 40 ms revealed no decrease in intensity.
This result is consistent with expectations because the titration
shows that the fraction of deprotonated chromophore is &gt;99%. Additional
data were taken at pH 6.30 and show a faster decay rate and with a
larger net change in the B-state peak size with increasing time. A
global model using a deprotonation rate constant of 74 s–1 and deprotonated fractions (pB) from
UV–vis absorbance gave close quantitative agreement in the
relative B-state magnetization magnitudes at all chemical exchange
mixing times (Figure S7 of the ) (for details on equations and fitting, see section S.7 of the ).

As shown in Figure , another extPT protein, s7:GFP S65T, had a distinctly different
pH response. For this construct, the chromophore contributed only
a single peak. Furthermore, the chemical shift of the peak was sensitive
to the pH and shifts in accordance with the titration population changes
(Figure A). As with the intPT proteins, this behavior indicates that the system is also undergoing
fast exchange on the NMR time scale. Interestingly, when the strand
7 circular permutation site is relocated six residues closer to the
N-terminus, a construct we name s7+:GFP S65T (see
Figure ), the NMR spectra are remarkably different.
Unlike the nonextended s7:GFP S65T that shows a single
peak, this species has two clear peaks, one at the deprotonated basis
of 177 ppm that undergoes a decrease in intensity as the pH is lowered
and another further upfield whose chemical shift is sensitive to pH
(see Figure B). The fact that the chromophore
spectrum has features simultaneously exhibiting characteristics of
both fast and slow exchange (cf. panels A and C of Figure , respectively) strongly suggests that a simple
single-site model is inadequate to account for the proton transfer
dynamics. The same saturation transfer procedure described above was
employed for s7+:GFP S65T at pH 7.0 and likewise
revealed population connectivity between the two peaks (see Figure
S6 of the ). This
provides clear evidence that we are indeed observing interconverting
protonation states.

(A) 1D 13C NMR pH titration of s7:GFP
S65T. The single peak with a chemical shift that changes as the pH
increases indicates fast exchange. (B) 1D 13C NMR pH titration
of s7+:GFP S65T. The peak at 177 ppm with a changing
intensity is characteristic of slow exchange; however, another peak
first appearing as a broad feature near 169 ppm at pH 8.0 and moving
toward ∼165 ppm at pH 6.6 suggests a multisite model with fast
exchanging components.

Fluorescence Correlation Spectroscopy (FCS) Measurements
FCS monitors stochastic fluorescence trajectories from a small illuminated
volume and via autocorrelation analysis reveals information about
the diffusional and internal dynamics of an ensemble of fluorophores.
Like NMR, it is an equilibrium fluctuation technique. We performed
FCS on all of the proteins, and as prior investigators have done,
we attribute the decays in the autocorrelation function to three primary
sources: (1) diffusion out of the focal volume, (2) light intensity-dependent
dark states (e.g., triplet states), and (3) pH-dependent protonation–deprotonation
chemical exchange. Autocorrelation functions (ACFs) were obtained
for each protein over a range of pH values to determine the apparent
chemical exchange rates (see section S.3 of the ).

The results for all extPT proteins were very much in line with those of similar
experiments performed on GFP S65T, EGFP, Superfolder GFP, and others.− The ACF decay became markedly faster at lower pH, indicating faster
chemical exchange for higher proton concentrations (Figure ). Specifically, ih:GFP S65T (Figure A) had an apparent deprotonation rate constant of
3100 s–1 (see section S.3 of the ). This is a 42-fold increase over the
rate measured by dynamic NMR (74 s–1) that should,
in principle, be reporting on the same chemical states.

FCS ACFs for
a selection of extPT proteins and
a range of pH values. The dashed black line is ih:GFP S65T at pH 8.0 and is included as a reference for the typical
monomer ACF in the absence of protonation–deprotonation flickering.
The dimer in panel B is included for a more direct comparison with
the NMR results for ih:GFP S65T (see section S.5.a
of the ). (C) s7:GFP S65T is notable for its heterogeneous ACF decay with
components occurring significantly faster than the other species.

The wide discrepancy between these
results induced us to further
explore potential artifacts from which either technique may suffer.
The two most significant differences between the experimental conditions
are the concentration (∼500 pM for FCS and 1–2 mM for
NMR) and the visible light illumination (∼10 kW/cm2 for FCS and 0 W/cm2 for NMR). The concentration-dependent
oligomerization of FPs has long been appreciated and raised the possibility
that the slow dynamics observed via NMR were a result of occlusion
of the proton entry point due to protein dimerization. Furthermore,
under the intense illumination in the FCS focal volume, there could
be some light-driven dynamics. We performed a series of control experiments
to test these possibilities. Briefly, the concentration issue was
addressed both by creating a covalent dimer for FCS measurements and
by performing NMR at low concentrations with a dimerization-suppressing
mutant. The light effect was likewise approached from both angles
by changing the illumination intensity in the FCS experiments as well
as measuring NMR spectra with in situ laser illumination
via an optical fiber inserted into the bore of the magnetic in a manner
similar to that described by Mizuno et al. In summary, it was found that neither of these factors can account
for the large rate differences (see section S.5 of the  for details).

Discussion
The photophysical behavior of fluorescent proteins is quite diverse
and exhibits a hierarchy of time scales (from picoseconds to minutes)
and sensitivity to a range of external factors, including light intensity,
ionic strength, and pH. Whereas a majority of studies concerning chromophore
dynamics have used optical observables, we have complemented the optical
techniques of absorption, fluorescence, and FCS with site-specific
NMR spectroscopy to probe ground-state proton transfer. The results
that we obtained indicate that the dynamics of dark PT are inconsistent
with a single-site titration and imply kinetic and thermodynamic coupling
between multiple sites. Protein variants differing by mutation or
circular permutation were shown to diverge widely in their dynamic
characteristics, many of which appeared to disagree internally. However,
as described below within a two-site titration model, these divergent
features can be reproduced in a comparatively parsimonious way.

Before we undertake the construction of a semiquantitative two-site
model, it is important to highlight again precisely what needs to
be modeled and which discrepancies need to be resolved. First, from
a thermodynamic perspective, the model must account for the abnormal
pH titration behaviors of negative cooperativity and apparent mixed-state
asymptotes (Figure C). Second, the model should
be able to unify the apparent slow proton exchange observed by NMR
in certain proteins with the much faster chemical exchange indicated
by FCS (compare, for example, Figure C,D with
Figure A). Lastly, a successful model should
be able to account for the presence of multiple chromophore NMR peaks
in a single variant displaying contradictory dynamic signatures, that
is, peaks simultaneously showing slow and fast exchange behaviors
upon pH titration (see Figure B). An important
assumption implicit in this treatment is that the same general kinetic
form underlies all of the variants studied here. We take the sequence
and functional similarities of the protein variants as justification
for the use of this assumption as well as the resulting model’s
concise form and relative success.

Kinetic Model of Proton Transfer
Because neither concentration
nor illumination differences were able to reconcile the large discrepancy
between the NMR and FCS for the proton transfer reaction, we must
consider alternative models that accommodate both sets of observables.
As mentioned above, a two-site model has been successfully applied
to explain the noncanonical UV–vis pH titration results and
to address the kinetic results of certain pH-jump experiments. We utilize such a model to critically analyze
the varied phenomenology of the protein variants presented here and
assess whether this framework can encompass all our observations (this
two-site model is summarized in Figure ).

Two-site
model for proton transfer. The protonated chromophore
forms are colored blue and the deprotonated forms green. The second
site is shown as a black “X”. The microscopic site pKa values are given for each transition and include
the site coupling energy (W) where necessary. For
both NMR and FCS, only chemical exchange linked to the chromophore
ionization via transitions between A states (blue) and B states (green)
can be observed.

The essence of the two-site
model is that the behavior of the chromophore
is connected to a second group, labeled “X” in Figure , whose ionization state influences the dynamical
properties of proton transfer. The thermodynamics of this system can
be conveniently and completely represented by the apparent pKa of the chromophore, the apparent pKa of the secondary site, and a coupling energy W between these two sites. Specifically, this means that
the pKa of the chromophore (pKA′B) is related to its pKa in the presence of the ionized second site (pKAB′) as pKAB′ = pKA′B – W. The meaning of W can be rationalized as arising,
in part, from the electrostatic energetic penalty of forming an anion
in the proximity of another. Like the pKa, W is dimensionless but proportional to the standard
free energy by the factor 2.303RT, where R is the ideal gas constant and T is the
absolute temperature.

The UV–vis pH titration is completely
specified by the thermodynamic
parameters because it reports on only equilibrium concentrations.
The FCS ACFs and NMR spectra, in contrast, are influenced by the system
dynamics and require chemical exchange rates for prediction. Our convention
is to define the kinetics of each reaction by the chemical exchange
rate at a pH equal to its pKa. We chose
to utilize the kinetic master equation formalism and treat all reactions
as pseudounimolecular. This assumption is well justified for the experiments
described herein because they are all equilibrium fluctuation measurements
and therefore subject to constant pH. The calculations of predicted
equilibrium pH titrations, FCS ACFs, and 1D 13C NMR spectra
were performed numerically in Matlab (for additional details, see
section S.8 of the ).

Manual Modeling
The scheme in Figure  formally has ten parameters, of which eight are independent.
Some of these parameters may be surmised, or at least bounded, by
a careful consideration of experimental data. We found it to be convenient
and intuitive to separate the parameters into two sets: those defining
only the thermodynamics and those defining only the kinetics. The
equilibrium UV–vis pH titration data are determined solely
by the thermodynamic terms. Specifically, the thermodynamic parameters
are the microscopic pKa values of the
chromophore (pKA′B) and site “X”
(pKA′A), provided that the other
site is in its neutral form, and the energetic coupling between the
sites upon ionization (W). These three parameters
together fully define the equilibrium state and thus completely specify
the pH titrations. Within this convention, the kinetics are independently
described for each microscopic step by the apparent rate constant
at a pH equal to the pKa where the forward
and reverse pseudounimolecular rate constants are equal. The single
exception is the apparent internal proton transfer rate (kAB) that is pH-independent. Collectively, all of these
parameters allow the calculation of the microscopic protonation and
deprotonation rate constants necessary for constructing the kinetic
master equation (see section S.8 of the  for details).

The FCS measurements are sensitive
to chromophore protonation–deprotonation transitions occurring
on time scales shorter than those that can be resolved by NMR and
have an observation window extending out to the diffusional lifetime
(∼0.5 ms in our geometry). The 1D NMR spectra are very rich
in information because they offer clear limiting behavior for slow
(&gt;∼5 ms) and fast (&lt;∼200 μs) chemical exchange
as well as unique line shapes for intermediate exchange regimes. Furthermore,
dynamic NMR experiments (as in Figure D) allow
the acquisition of quantitative rate information about slow processes.
Taken together, these collections of independent observables allow
us to triangulate sensible parameter sets from which to build probable
kinetic models. Again, the focus of this modeling is not to determine
the most accurate values for every parameter of every variant but
rather to assess the ability of the underlying scheme to encompass
the range of observed behaviors and highlight the subtle differences
among protein variants that cause them to occupy different regions
of the parameter space.

Simulated spectra do indeed show that
the diverse behavior among
the proteins studied can be reproduced within different regions of
the two-site model parameter space. The UV–vis, FCS, and NMR
data from pH titrations of ih:GFP S65T, s7:GFP S65T, and s7+:GFP S65T exemplify these variations,
and the simulated data are presented in Figure , with kinetic parameters listed in Table .

Simulated pH titrations, FCS ACFs, and 1D 13C NMR spectra
for all measured extPT proteins. In some cases, the
B species (green) is partially obscured in the pH titrations. The
NMR spectra are all normalized such that the integrated peak area
is always unity.

parameter	ih:GFP S65T (monomer)	ih:GFP S65T (dimer)	s7:GFP S65T	s7+:GFP S65T	
pKA′B	5.2	5.2	6.4	6.4	
pKA′A	5.6	4.4	6.6	6.3	
W	0.1	1.0	4.0	0.0	
kA′B (s–1)	10000	100	50000	200	
kA′A (s–1)	10000	1000	5000	20000	
kAB (s–1)	8000	2000	500000	100000	
kAB′ (s–1)	200	100	500	50	
kBB′ (s–1)	200	1000	500	50	
The two-site model is capable of
replicating the full range of
effects incompatible with the single-site framework. The contradictory
chemical exchange time scales observed by FCS and NMR, particularly
for ih:GFP S65T, can be reconciled under a two-site
model and highlight the possibly misleading nature of either one taken
separately because of their intrinsic sensitivity to chemical exchange
processes on differing time scales. The simulations also reveal that
phenomena in the NMR pH titrations such as disappearing peaks (e.g.,
Figure C and Figure S4B of the ) and peaks simultaneously
showing both fast and slow exchange characteristics (e.g., Figure B) are natural consequences of certain parameter
sets. Interestingly, we recently observed a similar case of tyrosine 13C NMR peaks vanishing during pH titration in a study of hydrogen
bond networks in the keto-steroid isomerase active site. Additionally, the UV–vis deviations from
single-site titrations were neatly resolved through the influence
of the site coupling parameter W. Small values of W result in stretched isotherms characteristic of negative
cooperativity, while large values of W lead to strong
internal buffering and titrations with mixed-state plateaus. In the
following, we shift our attention toward the possible mechanistic
implications of our observations when viewed through the lens of a
two-state model.

Mechanistic Implications
The abnormal
pH titration
behaviors and heterogeneous kinetics of proton transfer in the GFP
family have been noticed by others., Specifically,
Scharnagl et al. were the first to offer the explanation of electrostatic
coupling between ionizable sites on the basis of simulations, which was later empirically elaborated across
many variants by Beltram and co-workers. Further work with pH-jump studies revealed multistep kinetics that
has been commonly interpreted as involving a PT to the protein surface
followed by migration to the interior gated by conformational fluctuations,
often implicating His148.,−, Our results are broadly consistent
with this multisite ionization framework, and we find that the scheme
in Figure  has good qualitative applicability
across the mutants and circular permutants we investigated.

A handful of previous NMR studies on FPs may provide clues about
the presence and nature of the long-lived species we report herein.
Holak and co-workers have observed slow structural exchange processes
occurring on millisecond time scales in two different contexts. In
the first, they measured 19F NMR of fluoro-substituted
tryptophan in CFP and observed two well-resolved chromophore fluorine
peaks that were fit to a two-state chemical exchange model with a
lifetime of 1.2–1.4 ms. In the
other, they observed twinning in a number of 1H–15N HSQC peaks induced by the H148G mutation (on s7) in GFPuv, indicating two conformers in slow exchange. These results highlight the unique structural
role of strand 7 and its participation in slow dynamics.

Our
experiments have indicated that the location of the circular
permutation site with respect to s7 has a dramatic
effect on the observed ground-state proton transfer dynamics even
while leaving sensitive photophysical properties such as quantum yield
and ESPT largely unchanged (data not shown). In particular, CP at
position 146 (s7:GFP S65T) significantly increases
the rate of proton transfer as evidenced by the characteristic fast
exchange NMR spectra obtained from pH titrations (Figure A). Relocation of the CP
by six residues upstream to position 140 (s7+:GFP
S65T) completely alters the exchange dynamics on both long and short
time scales and restores a long-lived B state (Figure B). We hypothesize that the CP at 146, just two residues upstream
of His148 that is hydrogen bonded to the chromophore phenoxy, allows
for greater flexibility and “fraying” of β-strand
7, thus accelerating the proton transfer processes.

Figure  details a kinetic model in which
only one additional ionizable site, “X”, is strongly
coupled to the chromophore. In reality, there are probably many sites
collectively modifying the chromophore proton affinity. UV–vis
absorbance pH titration curves, however, suggest that only a single
site is responsible for most of the thermodynamic coupling. Several
investigators, have speculated that Glu222 is
playing this role because of both its proximity to the chromophore
and its position as the terminal proton acceptor for ESPT. Moreover,
the isosteric E222Q mutation results in pH titrations that are fit
well by a simple single-site model (Figure S9 of the ). Thus, as further mechanistic speculation,
we will provisionally assume that “X” is Glu222.

The two most important thermodynamic parameters dictating the character
of the titrations are the difference between the intrinsic pKa values (pKA′A – pKA′B), which determines
the internal proton transfer equilibrium, and the coupling (W), which determines the degree of internal buffering. A
property shared by the intPT proteins is a very high W. This factor causes them to have a very flat response
to pH changes (dashed curves in Figure C).
Furthermore, the high value for W can be rationalized
by recognizing that these proteins have a direct hydrogen bond network
extending from the chromophore phenoxy to Glu222 over which ESPT occurs., A direct consequence of this large coupling, W,
is a broad plateau in the pH titration within which only intramolecular
proton transfer occurs, making the fractional protonation of the chromophore
solely determined by the difference in intrinsic pKa values (cf. ih:GFP S65S in Figure C and Figure S8 of the ). Fortuitously, the circularly permuted intPT proteins differed in this internal PT equilibrium
and allowed for the collection of NMR data in panels A and B of Figure  and thus the calculation of the basis spectra.

The extPT proteins, in contrast, generally had
much smaller values for W, which were manifested
as titrations showing shallower slopes characteristic of negative
cooperativity. All of these proteins had the S65T mutation, which
has been shown in structures to disrupt the hydrogen bond network
linking the chromophore and Glu222 and,
according to our interpretation, should lead to a weakening of the
coupling. The magnitude of the decrease in W with
S65T suggests that the majority of the coupling effect is mediated
by specific hydrogen bonding rather than simply the through-space
electrostatic repulsion that would be approximately the same for Ser65
or Thr65. It should be noted that the model still predicts efficient
intramolecular GSPT between the chromophore and Glu222 despite the
breakdown of ESPT. Interestingly, the one extPT protein
predicted to have a large W, s7:GFP
S65T, is also the only one having appreciable fluorescence emission
upon A-state excitation (data not shown). Further bolstering the case
for Glu222 as the principal coupled ionizable site is the fact that
upon mutation to glutamine (E222Q) the thermodynamic signature of
any coupling is eliminated (see section S.9 of the  for details).

The kinetic behavior
of the intPT proteins is
quite simple from the NMR perspective. As described above, the two-site
model predicts that the only chemical exchange should be intramolecular
proton transfer between A and B (see Figure S8 of the ). The fact that a single
population-weighted peak is observed in all intPT
cases (see Figure A,B) implies that the internal
proton shuttling between the chromophore and Glu222 is occurring rapidly.
Early on, it was thought that the ground-state interconversion between
the A state and B state was quite slow (hours). Later, the work of Kennis et al. demonstrated a nanosecond
scale ground-state return of the proton following ESPT (i.e., from
the so-called “I state” to the A state); however, this does not directly report on the
A- to B-state conversion time scale. Our findings clearly indicate
on the basis of fast exchange on the NMR time scale that the A- to
B-state exchange rate lies in the microsecond range or faster.

A recurrent theme from the global fit parameters for the extPT proteins was the prominence of the doubly deprotonated
state (B′ in Figure ) in the slowest
transition mode of the two-site exchange network. More specifically,
the slowest mode of equilibrium chemical flux through the transition
network was typically between B′ and a cluster comprised of
B, A, and A′. This fact is manifested in the NMR spectra of
most of the extPT proteins by the chemical shift
invariance of the 177 ppm peak. The kinetics of chemical exchange
within the cluster {B, A, A′} are more variable and lead to
qualitatively different outcomes. The pH-independent intramolecular
PT connecting A and B is, by and large, the most rapid projected reaction.
In cases of large W, namely s7:GFP
S65T and the intPT proteins, this mixed-state {A,
B} is identical to the pseudothermodynamic state termed “M”
by Bizzarri et al. In summary, the diverse
NMR results can be largely understood as arising from B′ in
slow exchange with the rapidly interconverting {A, B} that is, in
turn, exchanging with A′ with a variable rate among protein
variants. Below, we briefly consider the consequences of this interpretation
on the proteins simulated in Figure .

For both the dimer and monomer forms of ih:GFP
S65T, the interconversion between {A, B} and A′ falls within
an intermediate exchange regime. This leads to the unusual situation
in which the chromophore peak in the NMR spectrum seems to disappear
almost entirely (see Figure C and Figure S4B
of the ). The simulated
spectra (Figure C,F) suggest that the apparent
loss of intensity is, in fact, due to slow exchange of the well-defined
B′ peak with an extremely broad peak comprised of {A, B} in
exchange with A′ near the coalescence point. As the pH is further
lowered, the signal reconsolidates toward a pure A′ state.

The lack of a defined B′ peak in s7:GFP
S65T (Figure A) is caused by a strong site
coupling term (W), which causes the apparent high-pH
limit to be the {A, B}, or “M”, with a negligible population
of B′ (Figure G). Thus, the single
peak with a changing chemical shift is indicative of a fast exchange
process between {A, B} and A′.

The situation for s7+:GFP S65T (Figure B) shares certain
features with the two preceding
cases. Like ih:GFP S65T, it has a well-resolved B′
peak in exchange with some combination of B, A, and A′. The
kinetic behavior of this cluster, however, is more similar to that
of s7:GFP S65T in which the three states are in mutually
fast exchange. Together, these factors lead to the two apparent populations
in the NMR spectra of B′ at the deprotonated basis and {B,
A, A′}, whose composition changes with a decrease in pH. The
saturation transfer experiments described in the  and detailed in section S.6 of the  demonstrate that the two populations
in the s7+:GFP S65T titration (Figure B) are in fact in chemical exchange on a time scale of tens
of milliseconds and thus consistent with the two-site kinetic scheme.

One of the most striking features from the data is the very long
lifetime of the doubly deprotonated state B′. The physical
basis for the slowness of this transition out of B′ is not
clear from our measurements. The prolonged time scale of the proton
transfer is suggestive of an accompanying gross structural change
and could be related to the s7 conformations observed
in previous NMR studies. Krishnamoorthy
and co-workers also suggested that PT is being gated by large conformational
changes on the basis of a significant viscosity dependence to pH-jump
fluorescence kinetics. Our results indicate
that a second ionizable site is playing a large kinetic role and could
potentially be modulating the rate of these conformational fluctuations.
Both the chromophore phenoxy and Glu222 participate in a hydrogen
bond network that extends to s7, and it is possible
that proton transfers are actuating larger structural rearrangements.

The work presented here highlights the array of factors influencing
the GFP chromophore protonation and deprotonation kinetics. Most prominent
among these seems to be the influence of the secondary ionizable site,
Glu222, primarily via its influence on hydrogen bond networks encompassing
the chromophore. Interestingly, subtle and distal changes due to protein
circular permutation can profoundly alter the proton transfer kinetics
while still qualitatively fitting within the coupled two-site framework.
This implies that efforts to approach this problem computationally
would likely require simulation of the complete structure using quantum
mechanics/molecular mechanics methods with a quantum region large
enough to capture the proton transfer chemical reactions. The size
of the protein (238 residues), the time scales of the proton transfers
(up to tens of milliseconds), and the requirement for reactive dynamics
all make this a daunting challenge. The GFP system could serve as
a prototype for these types of advanced calculations whose predictions
may be compared against the rich variety of specific experimental
observables that can be obtained because of the spectral and chemical
uniqueness of the chromophore.

Conclusion
We
have introduced a site-specific 13C NMR probe to
provide a nonoptical observable for proton transfer in GFP. The union
of this technique with the optical methods of UV–vis absorbance
and FCS allowed for a comprehensive view of the multisite nature of
the system. Our data from this approach underscore the potential pitfalls
of relying on single kinetic measurement techniques because of the
bias introduced by their intrinsic observational time scale. The kinetics
of proton transfer in Superfolder GFP are shown to correspond well
to a model with two thermodynamically coupled titratable sites across
a range of mutants and circular permutants. The PT rates are significantly
impacted by both mutational disruptions to internal hydrogen bond
networks and the presumed structural rigidity of β-strand 7
as probed by circular permutation.

Supporting Information Available
Complete sequences for all
protein constructs, concentration- and light-dependent effects on
PT dynamics, NMR saturation transfer for connectivity analysis, fitting
and simulation methods for FCS and NMR, E222Q titrations, and local
His tag effects. This material is available free of charge via the
Internet at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bi500147n_si_001.pdf

The authors
declare no
competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
We
gratefully acknowledge Stephen Lynch at the Stanford NMR
Facility and Corey Liu at the Stanford Magnetic Resonance Laboratory
for technical assistance with the NMR experiments. We also thank Prof.
W. E. Moerner for the use of the FCS instrumentation.

Abbreviations
GFPgreen fluorescent protein

PTproton transfer

GSPTground-state proton
transfer

ESPTexcited-state
proton transfer

NMRnuclear magnetic resonance

FCSfluorescence correlation spectroscopy

ACFautocorrelation function

CPcircular permutation.

In principle, the data are convolved
with the T1 relaxation time; however,
that time [∼5.7 s (data not shown)] was found to be several
orders of magnitude longer than the chemical exchange lifetime.

It is interesting to note that CPs
or insertions into this area of the protein have found many successful
applications in chemical sensing with recognition domains.

