Proline utilization
A (PutA)
proteins are bifunctional enzymes that catalyze the oxidation of l-proline to l-glutamate in Gram-negative bacteria
(Figure A).− PutAs contain spatially
separated proline dehydrogenase (PRODH) and Δ1-pyrroline-5-carboxylate
(P5C) dehydrogenase (P5CDH) active sites that catalyze this four-electron
oxidation process. The PRODH active site catalyzes the oxidation of l-proline to P5C with concomitant reduction of the enzyme-bound
FAD. The P5CDH active site catalyzes the NAD+-dependent
oxidation of l-glutamate-γ-semialdehyde (GSA, the hydrolysis
product of P5C) to l-glutamate. In addition to these enzymatic
activities, some PutAs, known as trifunctional PutAs, also function
as transcriptional regulators of the put regulon.

PutA reactions
and domain architectures. (A) Reactions catalyzed
by PutA. (B) Domain diagrams representing the three types of PutA
domain architectures.

PutAs are large, multidomain proteins, and sequence analysis
suggests
three types of PutA based on domain architecture (Figure B)., Type A PutAs contain just the
catalytic core, which consists of N-terminal PRODH and C-terminal
P5CDH modules separated by ∼50 residues. The 999-residue PutA
from Bradyrhizobium japonicum (BjPutA) is the best-characterized
type A PutA.− Type B PutAs have an additional 100–200-residue
C-terminal domain of unknown function (CTDUF) following the P5CDH
module. The main subject of this study, PutA from Rhodobacter
capsulatus (RcPutA), is a type B PutA. Type C PutAs have
an N-terminal DNA-binding domain in addition to the catalytic core
and CTDUF. These PutAs are transcriptional repressors of the put regulon and are thus trifunctional.− PutA from Escherichia coli PutA (EcPutA) is the archetypal trifunctional
PutA.

The crystal structures of the type A PutAs BjPutA and Geobacter sulfurreducens PutA (GsPutA) revealed the structure
of the PutA catalytic
core (Figure ). The PRODH active site is located
in a distorted (βα)8 barrel. The P5CDH module
adopts the classic aldehyde dehydrogenase (ALDH) superfamily fold,
which consists of three domains: Rossmann NAD+-binding,
catalytic, and oligomerization domains. The two active sites are separated
by a linear distance of 42 Å and connected by a buried tunnel
that serves as a protected conduit for channeling the P5C/GSA intermediate
from the PRODH site to the P5CDH site. The structures also revealed
ancillary domains, denoted arm, α, and linker domains (Figure A), which help maintain the orientations of the
two catalytic domains and form the walls of the substrate-channeling
tunnel. Although the sequences of BjPutA and GsPutA are only 27% identical,
the two structures are very similar [2.0 Å root-mean-square deviation
(rmsd)], implying a high degree of structural conservation of the
catalytic core throughout the PutA family. Thus, the domain architecture,
the spatial disposition of the two active sites, and the intervening
tunnel observed in BjPutA and GsPutA are likely present in all PutAs.

Structure
of BjPutA. (A) Protomer structure emphasizing the arrangement
of domains. The surface represents the substrate-channeling tunnel
calculated using Mole. (B) BjPutA dimer.
The two protomers are colored according to the legend in panel A.
The surfaces represent the substrate-channeling tunnels. (C) Close-up
view of the dimer interface, emphasizing how the dimerization flap
covers the substrate-channeling tunnel. (D) Interactions between the
oligomerization domain (orange) and the GSA anchor loop of the P5CDH
catalytic domain (cyan) in BjPutA. The locations of NAD+ and glutamate were inferred from the structures of BjPutA–NAD+ (PDB entry 3HAZ()) and P5CDH–glutamate (PDB entry 3V9K()) complexes. Residue numbers of RcPutA are listed in parentheses.
The surface represents the substrate-channeling tunnel.

The DNA-binding domain of trifunctional PutA is
also well-characterized.
It can be expressed as an ∼50-residue fragment that retains
DNA binding activity, which has allowed
structural and biophysical analysis. X-ray crystal and solution NMR
structures have shown that the DNA-binding domain adopts the ribbon–helix–helix
fold and revealed the details of protein–DNA interactions.,, Also, domain deletion analysis
of EcPutA showed that the DNA-binding domain mediates dimerization
of type C PutAs.

In contrast to
the catalytic core and DNA-binding domain, less
is known about the CTDUF. Study of the CTDUF is hampered by the fact
that it is not amenable to soluble expression as an isolated fragment
(D. F. Becker and J. J. Tanner, unpublished results). Nevertheless,
a few clues about function have been obtained. Domain deletion analysis
of EcPutA ruled out a role for the CTDUF in dimerization of type C
PutAs. The fact that type A PutAs exhibit
both PRODH and P5CDH activities implies that the CTDUF is not directly
involved in catalysis. Deletion of the CTDUF from EcPutA results in
a loss of P5CDH activity, which suggested that the CTDUF might be
situated near the P5CDH active site. By
process of elimination, we speculated that the CTDUF could play a
role in facilitating substrate channeling by providing tertiary structural
interactions that help prevent escape of the intermediate P5C into
the bulk medium.,

Here, we use small-angle
X-ray scattering (SAXS), steady-state
kinetics, and site-directed mutagenesis to evaluate a homology model
of the CTDUF and elucidate the contributions of this domain to PutA
function. Our results suggest that the CTDUF is homologous to the
dinucleotide-binding domain of ALDHs and consists of a β-hairpin
fused to a noncatalytic Rossmann fold domain. The β-hairpin
facilitates P5CDH activity and substrate channeling by stabilizing
the GSA anchor loop in the P5CDH active site and sealing the substrate-channeling
tunnel from the bulk medium.

Experimental Procedures
Materials
P5C
was synthesized by the method of Williams
and Frank and stored in 1 M HCl at 4
°C. On the day of the experiments, the DL-P5C (50:50) was neutralized
on ice by being titrated with 6 M NaOH. All experiments were conducted
in Nanopure water.

Cloning of the RcPutA Gene
The gene
encoding full-length
RcPutA was amplified via PCR from R. capsulatus SB
1003 genomic DNA (generously provided by J. Cooley) using oligonucleotide
primers with the restriction recognition sites NdeI and XhoI located
at 5′ and 3′ ends (Table S1 of the ). PCR was conducted using 50 μL
volumes containing 5.0 μL of 10× buffer, 2 μL of R. capsulatus genomic DNA, 2.5 μL of each PCR forward
and reverse primer (1 μM), 1 μL of 10 mM dNTPs, and 1
μL of Pfu DNA polymerase (Agilent); distilled water was added
to a final volume of 50 μL. PCR was run under the following
cycling conditions: 95 °C for 5 min, followed by 30 cycles of
95 °C for 1 min, Tm at 56 °C
for 30 s, 72 °C for 6 min, and a final extension of 10 min at
72 °C. PCR products were detected by 1% agarose gel electrophoresis
and extracted using a gel extraction kit (Qiagen). The amplified full-length
RcPutA sequence was digested with NdeI and XhoI and then cloned into
pET-28a. The gene sequence was confirmed by sequencing at the DNA
core of the University of Missouri—Columbia.

Site-Directed
Mutagenesis
Site-directed mutants and
deletion constructs of RcPutA and BjPutA were generated using the
QuikChange II site-directed mutagenesis kit (Agilent) using the primers
listed in Table S1 of the . The mutations were confirmed by DNA sequencing. The mutant enzymes
were purified as described for the wild-type (WT) enzymes, except
where noted.

Protein Expression and Purification
BjPutA and BjPutA
mutant enzymes were expressed and purified using immobilized metal
affinity chromatography (Ni2+-charged His-Trap HP, GE Healthcare)
as described previously. The N-terminal
His tag was removed as described previously. The purified proteins were dialyzed into 50 mM Tris-HCl, 0.5 mM
THP, 5% glycerol, and 0.5 mM EDTA (pH 8.0), quick frozen in liquid
nitrogen, and stored at −80 °C.

RcPutA and RcPutA
mutants were expressed in E. coli BL21(DE3)pLysS
and purified as follows. Starter cultures of 10 mL were grown in LB
medium overnight and used to inoculate 4 L of LB broth supplemented
with 50 μg/mL kanamycin. After the culture had reached an optical
density (OD600) of 0.7, 0.3 mM isopropyl β-d-1-thiogalactopyranoside was added to induce protein expression for
12 h at 18 °C. The cells were collected by centrifugation, resuspended
in 50 mM Tris, 300 mM NaCl, 10 mM imidazole, and 5% glycerol (pH 7.5),
and frozen at −80 °C. The frozen cells were thawed at
4 °C in the presence of protease inhibitors [0.1 mM tosyl phenylalanyl
chloromethyl ketone, 0.05 mM 4-(2-aminoethyl)benzenesulfonyl fluoride,
0.1 μM pepstatin, 0.01 mM leupeptin, and 5 μM E-64] and
broken using sonication. The mixture was centrifuged at 16500 rpm
in an SS34 rotor for 1 h at 4 °C, filtered through a 0.45 μm
filter, and loaded on a HisTrap HP column (5 mL) that had been charged
with NiCl2 and equilibrated in 50 mM Tris, 300 mM NaCl,
10 mM imidazole, and 5% glycerol (pH 7.5). Washing steps were performed
using the loading buffer supplemented with 10 mM imidazole followed
by 30 mM imidazole. The target protein was eluted with 200 mM imidazole
and then dialyzed overnight in the dark at 4 °C into 50 mM Tris,
0.5 mM EDTA, 0.5 mM THP, and 5% glycerol (pH 7.8) in preparation for
further purification using anion exchange chromatography (HiTrap Q).
The protein was bound to the HiTrap Q anion exchange column equilibrated
with a buffer similar to the dialysis buffer and was eluted with a
linear gradient from 0 to 1 M NaCl. The final purified proteins were
supplemented with 0.05 mM FAD and NAD+ and then dialyzed
against 50 mM Tris-HCl, 0.5 mM THP, 5% glycerol, and 0.5 mM EDTA (pH
8.0) at 4 °C overnight. This procedure was modified slightly
for RcPutA mutant RcPutAE1012A. Because of poor expression and low
protein yields for RcPutAE1012A, 12 L of LB broth was used for expression,
0.2% Triton X-100 was included in the sonication buffer, and the ion
exchange step was omitted. The concentrations of the PutA proteins
were determined from the amount of FAD bound to normalize for differences
in FAD content.

Steady-State Assays
All steady-state
assays were performed
at 23 °C. Two PRODH assays were used. First, the PRODH kinetic
constants for wild-type RcPutA were determined using proline and CoQ1 as the substrates as described previously. Second, the PRODH activities of wild-type RcPutA, RcPutA
variants, and BjPutA variants were measured using dichlorophenolindophenol
(DCPIP) as the terminal electron acceptor and phenazine methosulfate
as the mediator (proline/DCPIP oxidoreductase assay) as previously
described.Km and kcat for proline were determined
using PutA (0.085–0.09 μM) and proline (0–300
mM) while fixing the DCPIP concentration at 75 μM. The assays
described above were conducted in 20 mM Tris buffer (pH 8.0, 10% glycerol).
P5CDH activity was measured in 50 mM potassium phosphate (pH 7.5,
600 mM NaCl) as previously described using
PutA enzyme (0.17–0.19 μM) and DL-P5C (0–5.5 mM)
with the NAD+ concentration fixed at 200 μM. The
progress of the reaction was monitored by following NADH formation
at 340 nm (ε340 = 6.2 mM–1 cm–1). Data were collected using a path length of 0.15
cm on a Hi-Tech Scientific SF-61DX2 stopped-flow instrument. Assays
were performed in triplicate, and values for Km and kcat were estimated by fitting
initial velocities to the Michaelis–Menten equation (SigmaPlot
version 12.0).

The PRODH–P5CDH coupled activity, in which
proline is converted to glutamate, was measured as described previously. Briefly, PutA enzyme (0.17–0.19 μM)
was mixed with 200 μM CoQ1, 40 mM proline, and 200
μM NAD+ in 50 mM potassium phosphate (pH 7.5, 600
mM NaCl). The progress of the reaction was followed by NAD+ reduction at 340 nm (ε340 = 6200 M–1 cm–1). The transient time was estimated by fitting
the linear portion of the product concentration progress curve to
a line and extrapolating to the x-axis.

Homology Modeling
Homology models of RcPutA domains
were used in SAXS rigid body modeling. The models were obtained from
the following servers using default settings: the SWISS-MODEL Workspace
server, MODELER via the HHPred server of MPI Bioinformatics
Toolkit, the Phyre2 server, and the I-TASSER server.

All four servers identified BjPutA (PDB entry 3HAZ) as the best template
for modeling the catalytic core (RcPutA residues 1–972). The
level of sequence identity between BjPutA and RcPutA in this region
is 52% (Figure S1 of the ). The four models are very similar; the pairwise rmsds for Cα
atoms span the range of 0.5–0.7 Å. A representative model
of the catalytic core is shown in Figure S2A of the .

The four servers were also used
to calculate models of the CTDUF
(residues 994–1097). All four servers identified BjPutA residues
622–756 as the template (27% identical). This region of BjPutA
corresponds to the oligomerization hairpin and Rossmann dinucleotide-binding
domain (Figure A). The pairwise rmsds of the
four models span the range of 0.7–2.3 Å. A representative
model of the CTDUF is shown in Figure S2B of the .

A model of the conserved C-terminal
motif of RcPutA (residues 1108–1119)
was built using MODELER. The other servers did not produce models
because of the short sequence length. The template structure consisted
of BjPutA residues 978–989. This region of BjPutA corresponds
to a β-strand followed by a turn of α-helix (Figure A). The sequence identity of the modeled region
is 5 of 12 residues (Figure S1 of the ). The model of the RcPutA C-terminal motif is shown
in Figure S2B of the .

Small-Angle X-ray Scattering (SAXS)
Prior to SAXS data
collection, purified RcPutA was subjected to size exclusion chromatography
using a Superdex 200 column. The column buffer consisted of 50 mM
Tris, 5% glycerol, 0.5 mM THP, and 50 mM NaCl (pH 7.8). The fractions
were pooled, concentrated to ∼8.5 mg/mL, and dialyzed at 4
°C for 24 h against 50 mM Tris, 50 mM NaCl, 0.5 mM EDTA, 0.5
mM THP, and 5% glycerol (pH 7.8). The dialysate was reserved for use
as the SAXS reference.

SAXS experiments were performed at SIBYLS
beamline 12.3.1 of the Advanced Light Source through the mail-in program., For each sample, scattering intensities were measured at three nominal
protein concentrations. Data were collected for each protein concentration
at exposure times of 0.5, 1.0, 3.0, and 6.0 s. The scattering curves
collected from the protein samples were corrected for background scattering
using intensity data collected from the reference buffer.

The
SAXS data were analyzed as follows. Composite scattering curves
were generated with PRIMUS by scaling
and merging the background-corrected low-q region
data from the 0.5 or 1.0 s exposure with the high-q region data from the 3.0 s exposure. PRIMUS was also used to perform
Guinier analysis. GNOM was used to calculate pair distribution functions. GASBOR was used
to calculate shape reconstructions. Fifty independent models were
generated with GASBOR using a maximal particle dimension (Dmax) of 107 Å and no symmetry constraints.
DAMAVER was used to average and filter
the GASBOR models. Situs module pdb2vol was used to convert the averaged,
filtered models into volumetric maps. SUPCOMB was used to superimpose dummy atom models. CRYSOL was used to calculate theoretical SAXS curves from
atomic models. The molecular mass in
solution was determined from SAXS data using the volume of correlation
invariant as implemented previously and Porod–Debye analysis.

SAXS Rigid Body Modeling
CORAL (COmplexes
with RAndom
Loops) of the ATSAS package was used
to determine the structural relationship between the catalytic core
and the CTDUF of RcPutA. The default settings of CORAL were used for
all calculations. Three sets of rigid body calculations, denoted as
CORAL set 1, CORAL set 2, and CORAL decoy set, were performed as follows.

For CORAL set 1, the catalytic core model (residues 1–972)
was held fixed, residues 973–993 were modeled as a string of
dummy residues, and the CTDUF model (residues 994–1097) was
treated as a movable, rigid body. Each of the four models of the catalytic
core was combined with each of the four models of the CTDUF for a
total of 16 pairs. For every pair, 10 independent simulated annealing
optimization calculations were performed, each starting from a different
random number seed. Thus, a total of 160 CORAL poses were generated.
The starting configuration for these calculations is shown in Figure
S2C of the .

A second set of calculations (CORAL set 2) was performed in which
the model of the conserved C-terminal motif (residues 1108–1119)
was combined with the CTDUF models using structural similarity to
the oligomerization flap of BjPutA. The resulting composite model
was considered to be a single, movable rigid body in these calculations.
Four such composite models were made by adding the conserved C-terminal
motif model to each of the four CTDUF models. One of these composite
models is shown in Figure S2B of the . These four composite models were paired with the
four catalytic core models, and 30 CORAL calculations were performed
for each pair to generate a total of 480 poses. Two different starting
configurations were used for these calculations to ensure that the
initial arrangement of domains did not bias the results (Figure S2C,D
of the ).

The
CORAL decoy set was generated to validate the results of rigid
body modeling. These calculations were performed using decoy structures
in place of the CTDUF model. Four decoy structures were used: profilin
IB (PDB entry 1ACF, 125 residues), ketosteroid isomerase (PDB entry 3SED, 126 residues),
a VH domain (PDB entry 1T2J, 116 residues), and human bromodomain (PDB entry 3HMF, 118 residues).
These structures are shown in Figure S3 of the . Each decoy domain was paired with
each of the four models of the RcPutA catalytic core, and 20 CORAL
calculations were performed for each pair for a total of 320 decoy
poses.

Multiangle Light Scattering
The molecular mass of RcPutA
in solution was estimated using a multiangle light scattering (MALS)
detector (Wyatt Technology) coupled to a G5000PWXL size exclusion
chromatography column (Tosoh Bioscience, Montgomeryville, PA). The
column buffer consisted of 50 mM Tris-HCl, 50 mM NaCl, 0.5 mM EDTA,
0.5 mM THP, and 5% glycerol (pH 8.0). The flow rate was 0.75 mL/min.
The data were analyzed using ASTRA software (Wyatt Technology).

Results
Kinetic Characterization of RcPutA
The RcPutA gene
was cloned from genomic DNA to create a recombinant expression system.
Recombinant RcPutA is purified as a soluble, yellow protein. Analysis
of the purified protein via sodium dodecyl sulfate–polyacrylamide
gel electrophoresis is consistent with the predicted molecular mass
of 117 kDa. The UV–visible spectrum of RcPutA exhibits maxima
at 380 and 451 nm, consistent with a flavoprotein. The flavin content
is estimated to be 97%.

The PRODH steady-state kinetic parameters
of RcPutA were determined using proline and CoQ1 as substrates.
With proline as the variable substrate at a fixed CoQ1 concentration
of 300 μM, Km is 5.6 ± 0.8
mM and kcat is 1.0 ± 0.1 s–1, which corresponds to a catalytic efficiency of 180 ± 30 M–1 s–1, a value that is similar to
that previously reported for EcPutA (kcat/Km = 124 M–1 s–1). With CoQ1 as the variable substrate at a fixed proline concentration of 200
mM, the kinetic parameters are as follows: Km = 94 ± 19 μM, kcat = 2.0 ± 0.1 s–1, and kcat/Km = 21000 ± 4000 M–1 s–1.

The P5CDH activity of
RcPutA using P5C as the variable substrate
is characterized by a Km of 1530 ±
160 μM and a kcat of 7.3 ±
0.6 s–1. The efficiency of RcPutA (kcat/Km = 4800 ± 1000
M–1 s–1) appears to be nearly
2-fold higher than that of EcPutA (2580 M–1 s–1).

The PRODH–P5CDH
coupled activity of RcPutA was analyzed
by monitoring NADH production from a reaction mixture containing proline,
CoQ1, and NAD+. The PRODH–P5CDH coupled
assay for wild-type RcPutA shows no apparent lag phase in the reaction
progress curve (Figure A), suggesting that
the intermediate L-P5C/GSA is channeled between the PRODH and P5CDH
active sites. For a nonchanneling control,
an equimolar mixture of the monofunctional RcPutA variants R454M and
C791A was assayed. The RcPutA mutants R454M and C791A are devoid of
PRODH and P5CDH activity, respectively. As described previously for
other PutAs, a mixture containing both PutA monofunctional variants
is able to oxidize proline to glutamate, but channeling is not possible., The reaction progress curve with the mixed variants shows a considerable
lag time of ∼8 min before steady-state formation of NADH occurs
(Figure A). This result with RcPutA is a diagnostic
feature of substrate channeling in PutAs and is consistent with results
reported previously for EcPutA and BjPutA and repeated here for BjPutA (Figure B).

Kinetic analysis of the coupled PRODH–P5CDH reaction
of
RcPutA and BjPutA. (A) Steady-state progress curves of the production
of NADH from proline by wild-type RcPutA (black circles), RcPutA1–1116
(red circles), and an equimolar mixture of RcPutA monofunctional variants
R454M and C791A (green circles). (B) Steady-state progress curves
of the production of NADH from proline by wild-type BjPutA (black
circles), BjPutA1–986 (red circles), and an equimolar mixture
of BjPutA monofunctional variants R456M and C792A (green circles).
The dashed lines show the linear extrapolation used to estimate the
lag time for each reaction.

SAXS Analysis and Oligomeric State of RcPutA
The solution
structural properties of RcPutA were studied using SAXS (Figure ). Guinier analysis of data collected at three protein
concentrations yields a radius of gyration (Rg) of 32.3 ± 0.4 Å. Calculations of the pair distribution
function [P(r)] suggest an Rg of 32.4–32.8 Å and a maximal particle
dimension (Dmax) of 100–110 Å.
The P(r) function exhibits a single
maximum (r = 37 Å), which is indicative of a
particle having a single lobe (Figure B).

SAXS analysis
of RcPutA. (A) Scattering curve and Guinier analysis
(inset). The Guinier plot spans the qRg range of 0.364–1.29. (B) Pair distribution function. (C)
Kratky plot and Porod–Debye plot (inset).

The SAXS data suggest that RcPutA is compact and folded.
The Kratky
plot exhibits the classic inverted parabola shape that is characteristic
of a compact protein that lacks unfolded domains (Figure C). Likewise, the Porod–Debye plot has a
distinct plateau, indicating a sharp boundary between the scattering
particle and the solvent, which is a signature of a well-folded protein
(Figure C, inset). These results suggest that
the domains of PutA are folded and in close contact with each other.

The molecular mass (M) of RcPutA in solution was
estimated from the SAXS data using the volume of correlation invariant. The volume of correlation of RcPutA is 670 Å2, which corresponds to an M of 108 kDa. This
value is within 8% of the theoretical M of an RcPutA
monomer of 117 kDa, implying that RcPutA is monomeric in solution.

Porod–Debye analysis was used
to confirm the oligomeric state of RcPutA. The average excluded particle
volume determined from 50 independent shape reconstruction calculations
performed using DAMMIF is 195600 Å3. This value agrees well with the volume of 188931 Å3 from DATPOROD. The density of
a monomeric RcPutA protein having a volume of 189000–196000
would be 1.0 g/mL, which is within the expected range for 0.8–1.6
g/mL proteins. In contrast, the assumption
of higher-order oligomers of RcPutA having volumes of 189000–196000
Å3 implies densities of ≥2.0 g/mL, which is
well outside of the expected range. This analysis is also consistent
with RcPutA forming a monomer in solution.

The oligomeric state
of RcPutA was confirmed via MALS (Figure ).
The data suggest that the purified protein is
monodisperse with an apparent M of 124 ± 2 kDa.
This value is within 6% of the predicted M of an
RcPutA monomer. Thus, SAXS and MALS indicate that RcPutA is primarily
monomeric in solution, which is unprecedented for PutAs.

Determination
of the molecular mass of RcPutA using MALS. The red
curve represents the light scattering response measured at 90°.
The black curve represents the response of the refractive index detector.
The blue curve shows the derived molecular mass.

Shape reconstruction calculations were performed with GASBOR
assuming
a monomer (Figure A). The normalized spatial
discrepancy of the ensemble is 1.02 ± 0.2, and only two of the
50 models were discarded during averaging (2σ cutoff), which
indicates a reliable reconstruction. RcPutA resembles an ellipsoid
with dimensions of 50 Å × 70 Å × 100 Å. The
shape exhibits a distinct curvature when viewed down the 70 Å
axis, which results in a pronounced convex surface (Figure A).

Shape reconstruction of RcPutA. (A) Shape reconstruction
from GASBOR.
The surface represents the averaged and filtered volume from 50 independent
GASBOR calculations. The normalized spatial discrepancy is 1.02 ±
0.2. (B) Superposition of the GASBOR shape with a representative model
from SAXS rigid body modeling [χ = 1.5, and rmsd = 1.0 (which
corresponds to the green curve in Figure A)].
The catalytic core is colored red. The CTDUF with the C-terminal peptide
composite model is colored blue. The spheres represent dummy residues
linking the catalytic core and CTDUF.

Conservation of the β-Hairpin in the RcPutA CTDUF
Remote homology detection predicts that the CTDUF is homologous to
the N-terminal half of ALDHs., In particular, the
CTDUF of RcPutA is 27% identical to residues 622–756 of BjPutA
(Figure ). This region of BjPutA corresponds
to the β-hairpin of the oligomerization domain and the Rossmann
fold NAD+-binding domain (Figure A).

Local sequence alignment of BjPutA residues 622–756 and
the CTDUF of RcPutA. A homology model of the RcPutA CTDUF based on
this alignment from the PHYRE2 server is shown, with identical residues
highlighted in red.

Accordingly, homology
models of the RcPutA CTDUF calculated from
the BjPutA structure using online servers feature a β-hairpin
followed by a four-stranded parallel β-sheet flanked by three
α-helices (Figure ). Although the predicted
β-hairpin is structurally homologous to the oligomerization
β-hairpin of BjPutA and other ALDHs, it is not involved in dimerization
of RcPutA, which is a monomeric protein. The predicted β–α–β
motifs and strand order of the parallel β-sheet (2134) are diagnostic
of the Rossmann dinucleotide-binding fold. The predicted Rossmann domain of the CTDUF is abbreviated in that
it contains fewer than the standard number of six β-strands.

The predicted β-hairpin of RcPutA was tested by mutagenesis
of conserved residues in the β-hairpin of BjPutA and RcPutA.
Site-directed mutations were used to replace three conserved residues
in the dimerization hairpin of BjPutA (BjPutAG638P, BjPutAE639A, and
BjPutAN641A) and the corresponding sites in the predicted hairpin
of RcPutA (RcPutAG1011P, RcPutAE1012A, and RcPutAN1014A) (Figure D). The β-hairpins were also more aggressively
perturbed by deleting the conserved GPTGE sequence at residues 635–639
of BjPutA (BjPutAΔ635–639) and 1008–1012 of RcPutA
(RcPutAΔ1008–1012).

The steady-state kinetic parameters
for the mutants of RcPutA and
BjPutA are listed in Table . In general, the
PRODH activity was not substantially decreased in any of the mutants.
The most significant decrease in PRODH activity was observed for mutants
RcPutA RcPutAN1014A and BjPutAΔ635–639, which had a kcat/Km ∼3.5-fold
lower than that of the wild-type enzyme. Interestingly, some of the
RcPutA mutants showed increased PRODH activity, with the RcPutA mutant
RcPutAG1011P having a 5-fold increased kcat/Km.

Steady-State Kinetic
Parameters for
Wild-Type RcPutA and BjPutA and Their Variants
 	PRODH	P5CDH	
 	kcat (s–1)	Km (mM)	kcat/Km (M–1 s–1)	kcat (s–1)	Km (μM)	kcat/Km (M–1 s–1)	
RcPutA (wild-type)	20.7 ± 0.4	54.3 ± 2.8	383 ± 4	7.3 ± 0.6	1530 ± 160	4800 ± 1000	
RcPutAG1011P	22.4 ± 1.4	10.1 ± 3.2	2200 ± 840	–	–	–	
RcPutAE1012A	19.8 ± 0.7	15.3 ± 2.6	1300 ± 270	–	–	–	
RcPutAN1014A	4.8 ± 0.2	44.5 ± 6.7	110 ± 21	–	–	–	
RcPutAΔ1008–1012	8.9 ± 0.2	17.8 ± 1.8	490 ± 62	–	–	–	
RcPutA1–1116	26.9 ± 0.9	36.2 ± 4.5	740 ± 120	4.7 ± 0.2	1560 ± 86	3010 ± 290	
BjPutA (wild-type)	5.6 ± 0.7	150 ± 11	37 ± 7.4	2.2 ± 0.7	200 ± 6	11000 ± 3830	
BjPutAG638P	6.1 ± 1.6	147 ± 82	42 ± 34	–	–	–	
BjPutAE639A	1.95 ± 0.24	85 ± 29	23 ± 11	–	–	–	
BjPutAN641A	2.5 ± 0.4	100 ± 37	29 ± 15	–	–	–	
BjPutAΔ635–639	0.5 ± 0.1	43 ± 14	11 ± 5	–	–	–	
BjPutA1–986	10.7 ± 1.2	151 ± 38	71 ± 26	4.4 ± 0.1	275 ± 22	16000 ± 1800	
DCPIP assay with proline as the
variable substrate and a fixed DCPIP concentration of 75 μM.

P5C is the variable substrate
with
a fixed NAD+ concentration of 200 μM.

Values were determined previously.,

In contrast to PRODH activity,
the P5CDH activity was eliminated
in all of the hairpin mutants. These results are consistent with the
hairpin being close to the P5CDH active site. In particular, the crystal
structure of BjPutA shows that the hairpin forms electrostatic interactions
that stabilize the loop that binds GSA in the P5CDH active site (Figure D). Disruption of these interactions in BjPutA apparently
abrogates P5CDH activity. The fact that the same phenotype is seen
in the analogous RcPutA variants suggests that the hairpin of RcPutA
likewise helps stabilize the GSA-binding loop, thus validating the
homology model of the RcPutA CTDUF.

SAXS Rigid Body Modeling
of RcPutA: CORAL Set 1
Theoretical
SAXS curves were calculated from models of the catalytic core to provide
a reference for evaluating SAXS rigid body modeling calculations.
The catalytic core represents 85% of RcPutA, and the sequence of the
catalytic core is 52% identical to that of BjPutA (Figure S1 of the ). SAXS curves calculated
from four homology models of the core obtained from different servers
yield χ values of 3.5–4.5. The calculated curve having
the lowest χ is compared to the experimental curve in Figure A (orange curve). Note
that the agreement is very good for q values of &lt;0.08
Å–1, but deviation is observed for the q range of 0.08–0.16 Å–1 (Figure A, inset).

Comparison of the experimental and theoretical
SAXS curves. (A)
Comparison of the experimental SAXS curve with theoretical curves
calculated from the catalytic core model (orange) and three representative
models of RcPutA from rigid body modeling. (B) Rigid body model of
RcPutA that was used to calculate the green curve in panel A (χ
= 1.5, and rmsd = 1.0).

SAXS-constrained rigid body modeling was used to generate
three-dimensional
models of RcPutA. These calculations were performed with CORAL using
homology models of the RcPutA catalytic core [residues 1–972
(Figure S2A of the )] and CTDUF [residues 994–1097 (Figure )]. The catalytic core was held fixed; the CTDUF was allowed to move,
and the intervening peptide (residues 973–993) was modeled
as a string of dummy residues. In the starting configuration, the
catalytic core and CTDUF were far apart, with residue 972 of the core
and residue 994 of the CTDUF separated by 68 Å (Figure S2C of
the ).

The
results of these calculations are shown in Figure A as a scatter plot of the clash penalty versus
χ for 160 independent poses. The clash penalty reports on steric
interference between domains, while χ expresses the agreement
between the experimental scattering curve and the theoretical curve
calculated from the model. Low values of both parameters are desirable.
The scatter plot shows a tight cluster of 78 poses centered at χ
= 1.9 and clash penalty = 1.1. All the poses in this cluster have
χ &lt; 2.15 and penalty &lt; 1.5 and represent 49% of the 160
poses generated.

SAXS rigid body modeling results from CORAL set 1. (A)
Scatter
plot of the clash penalty vs χ for the 160 poses of CORAL set
1 (red circles) and the 320 decoy poses (blue squares). The green
oval encloses the high-confidence cluster of 78 poses, which is separated
from the decoy poses. (B) Scatter plot of rmsd from the BjPutA dimer
interface vs χ. The green circles represent the high-confidence
cluster of poses from panel A. (C) Seventy-eight poses of the high-confidence
cluster. The catalytic core is colored red. The β-hairpin and
abbreviated Rossmann fold of the CTDUF are colored orange and blue,
respectively.

The poses in the cluster
of 78 are structurally similar (Figure C).
All 78 poses feature the CTDUF interacting mainly
with the P5CDH part of the catalytic core. The β-hairpin of
the CTDUF extends into the open region between the two active sites,
and the abbreviated Rossmann fold of the CTDUF packs against the NAD+-binding domain of the catalytic core. This arrangement is
highly reminiscent of the dimer interface of BjPutA (Figure C) but in the context of a monomeric protein.

The structural similarity between the CORAL poses and the BjPutA
dimer interface was quantitated by calculating the rmsd between the
β-hairpin of each CORAL pose and the β-hairpin as positioned
in the BjPutA dimer interface. For this calculation, the BjPutA dimer
was first superimposed onto RcPutA using the residues of the catalytic
core, and then the rmsd for the Cα atoms of the hairpin was
calculated. The scatter plot of rmsd versus χ is shown in Figure B. The poses from the cluster of 78 centered at
χ = 1.9 and clash penalty = 1.1 have a relatively low rmsd compared
to those of the other poses (Figure B), which
is consistent with the idea that the CTDUF in RcPutA mimics the dimer
interface of BjPutA.

SAXS Rigid Body Modeling: Decoy Set
CORAL calculations
were also performed using decoy structures in place of the CTDUF model
to identify the high-confidence regions of target function space.
Four decoy structures were used: profilin IB, ketosteroid isomerase,
a VH domain, and human bromodomain. These structures are suitable
decoys because they have approximately the same number of residues
as the CTDUF model but are functionally unrelated to PutAs. The decoys
exhibit diversity in protein fold and secondary structure content
(Figure S3 of the ). The VH domain is primarily β-strand, whereas the bromodomain
is mostly α-helical. Profilin IB and ketosteroid isomerase have
mixed α/β-folds. Each decoy domain was paired with each
of the four models of the RcPutA catalytic core, and 20 CORAL calculations
were performed for each pair for a total of 320 decoy poses.

The results of the decoy calculations are shown in Figure A. The χ distribution of the decoy poses ranges
from 2.3 to 5.9 with an average of 3.9 ± 0.8, while the clash
penalty is 1.1–10.4 with an average of 4.2 ± 1.8. We suggest
that the decoy results correspond to the low-confidence region of
parameter space where the false positive rate is high. Note that the
aforementioned cluster of 78 poses from CORAL set 1 is well-separated
from the noise region defined by the decoy calculations, suggesting
that these poses are meaningful (Figure A).

SAXS Rigid Body Modeling of RcPutA: CORAL Set 2
The
results from CORAL set 1 motivated a second, more extensive set of
calculations designed to test the idea that the CTDUF mimics the type
A PutA dimer interface (CORAL set 2). The BjPutA dimerization flap
consists of two elements: the β-hairpin and the C-terminal motif
(Figure C). The latter element was incorporated
into the SAXS modeling by first docking a model of the C-terminal
motif to the CTDUF models using the BjPutA oligomerization domain
as the superposition template and then treating the resulting composite
model (Figure S2B of the ) as a rigid body in CORAL.

The CORAL set 2 calculations produced
a high-confidence cluster of 253 poses centered at χ = 1.6 and
penalty = 1.2 that is clearly separated from the decoy region (Figure A). The average χ (1.6) and minimal χ
(1.3) of this cluster are lower than the corresponding values of the
high-confidence cluster from CORAL set 1, which indicates that inclusion
of the C-terminal motif improved the model. All but one of the 253
poses has an rmsd of &lt;10 Å, indicating that they mimic the
BjPutA dimer interface (Figure B), a result
that is confirmed by visual inspection (Figure C). Thus, both sets of rigid body calculations suggest that the CTDUF
packs against the catalytic core in the same way that the oligomerization
domain mediates dimerization in type A PutAs.

SAXS rigid body modeling
results from CORAL set 2. (A) Scatter
plot of the clash penalty vs χ for the 480 poses of CORAL set
2 (red circles) and the 320 decoy poses (blue squares). The green
oval encloses the high-confidence cluster of 253 poses, which is separated
from the decoy poses. (B) Scatter plot of rmsd from the BjPutA dimer
interface vs χ. The green circles represent the high-confidence
cluster of poses from panel A. (C) Two hundred fifty-three poses of
the high-confidence cluster. The catalytic core is colored red, the β-hairpin
orange, the Rossmann fold blue, and the conserved C-terminal motif
green.

Finally, the models in the high-confidence
clusters are in good
agreement with the experimental scattering profile and shape reconstruction.
For example, Figure A shows the curves calculated
from three poses from CORAL set 2 corresponding to the (1) best combination
of a low χ and a low rmsd, (2) the lowest rmsd regardless of
χ, and (3) the lowest χ regardless of rmsd. In all three
cases, the fit to the experimental curve is noticeably better than
that provided by the catalytic core alone. In particular, the rigid
body models significantly improve the fit in the intermediate q region of 0.08–0.16 Å–1 (Figure A, inset). The rigid body models are also consistent
with the shape reconstruction (Figure B).

Function of the C-Terminal Motif in Substrate Channeling
The function of the conserved C-terminal motif was tested by engineering
C-terminal truncations BjPutA1–986 and RcPutA1–1116.
The C-terminal truncations BjPutA1–986 and RcPutA1–1116
exhibit PRODH and P5CDH activity like the respective wild-type PutA
(Table ), indicating that the C-terminal motif
is not critical for the individual activity of the catalytic domains.
Kinetic measurements of the coupled PRODH–P5CDH reaction, however,
indicate a role for the C-terminal motif in substrate channeling.
Reaction progress curves for the coupled PRODH–P5CDH activity
of RcPutA1–1116 (Figure A) and BjPutA1–986
(Figure B) show a lag prior to steady-state
formation of NADH. Linear extrapolation yields estimated transient
times of ∼4.6 and 1.3 min for RcPutA1–1116 and BjPutA1–986,
respectively. Thus, C-terminal truncations disrupt substrate channeling
in both PutAs, with a more significant effect observed in RcPutA.
These results are consistent with the C-terminus forming part of the
lid that seals the substrate-channeling tunnel from the bulk medium
(Figure B).

Discussion
RcPutA
is the first example of a monomeric PutA. This result is
consistent with sequence analysis. For example, an alignment of BjPutA
and RcPutA shows a gap in RcPutA in the region of the dimerization
β-hairpin of BjPutA (Figure S1 of the , cyan box). Accordingly, homology models of the
RcPutA catalytic core lack a β-hairpin protruding from the 640s
loop (Figure S2A of the ). The discovery of a monomeric PutA suggests that the PutA family
is diverse in terms of oligomeric states and quaternary structures.
Elucidating the full extent of this diversity is a subject of current
study in our laboratories.

We used SAXS to determine the tertiary
structural interactions
of a domain that represents only 15% of the protein, which is somewhat
challenging. The challenge can be appreciated by observing that the
SAXS profile calculated from a model lacking the CTDUF shows good
agreement with the experimental curve, particularly for q values of &lt;0.08 Å–1 (Figure A, orange curve). This indicates that methods based solely
on the low-q part of the SAXS data, such as Guinier
analysis, have limited utility in this case. Data in the intermediate q range of 0.08–0.16 Å–1 contain
structural information about the CTDUF, and deviations between the
experimental and calculated profiles in this region drive rigid body
modeling. Because these deviations are rather subtle (Figure A, orange), we developed a rigid body modeling strategy
involving the generation of hundreds of models using both the predicted
domain model and decoy models. We note that target decoy analysis
is used in computational ligand docking but has not been used in SAXS modeling to the best of our knowledge.
The approach we used has two main benefits. First, the decoy calculations
allow delineation of the low- and high-confidence regions of parameter
space. Second, the generation of many rigid body models allows identification
of clusters containing models sharing a common theme. Densely populated
clusters in the high-confidence zone represent valid solutions. We
suggest that this approach has general applicability in SAXS modeling.

Our working model of RcPutA (Figure B)
implies that the CTDUF is a Rossmann dinucleotide-binding domain that
does not bind NAD+. Dinucleotides bind at the C-termini
of the strands of Rossmann domains. The potential NAD+ surface
of the CTDUF is on the perimeter of RcPutA (Figure C), and NAD+ bound to the CTDUF would be 40 Å
from the catalytic Cys, which is incompatible with the known mechanism
of ALDHs in which a hydride is transferred from the hemithioacetal
intermediate to NAD+. Furthermore, homology modeling and
sequence alignments suggest that the Rossmann fold domain in the catalytic
core of RcPutA (residues 510–761 and 955–975) is fully
functional. Thus, we suggest that the CTDUF is a noncatalytic Rossmann
domain.

Noncatalytic Rossmann domains are rare. The γ-subunit
of
ATP synthase contains a Rossmann mononucleotide motif that plays a
structural role. Also, the DNA-processing
protein DprA contains a Rossmann domain that binds single-stranded
DNA., PutA is unique in that it contains both
catalytic and noncatalytic Rossmann domains in the same protein.

Although it is unlikely that the CTDUF binds NAD+, it
nevertheless contributes to P5CDH activity. Mutation of residues in
the CTDUF hairpin or the BjPutA dimerization hairpin abrogates P5CDH
activity. This result is consistent with the crystal structure of
BjPutA, which shows conserved residues of the oligomerization hairpin
forming intermolecular electrostatic interactions with conserved residues
of the loop that anchors GSA in the P5CDH site (Figure D). Our SAXS model implies that analogous intramolecular interactions
are present in RcPutA. We conclude that the CTDUF makes an essential,
albeit indirect, contribution to the P5CDH activity of RcPutA.

The CTDUF likely also plays a role in substrate channeling. The
reaction progress curve for the coupled PRODH–P5CDH activity
of RcPutA does not exhibit a perceptible time lag, whereas the nonchanneling
control displays a lag of 8 min (Figure A).
These results are consistent with a substrate channeling mechanism,
implying that the pathway between the two active sites is protected
from the bulk medium. The SAXS rigid body model suggests that the
hairpin and C-terminal motif form a flap that spans the region between
two active sites, serving as a lid that seals the tunnel from the
bulk medium (Figure B). The model is consistent
with the observation that truncation of the flap in RcPutA1–1116
results in a 5 min lag in the coupled PRODH–P5CDH assay (Figure A). Interestingly, truncation of the C-terminus
in BjPutA1–986 results in just a 1 min lag (Figure B). We suggest that proximity effects due to the oligomeric structure of BjPutA lower
the observed transient time. This effect is not possible for monomeric
RcPutA.

In summary, our results suggest that the CTDUF resembles
the N-terminal
half of ALDH superfamily enzymes and consists of a noncatalytic Rossmann
fold domain connected to a β-hairpin. Furthermore, the hairpin
facilitates P5CDH activity and substrate channeling by stabilizing
the aldehyde substrate-binding loop and sealing the substrate-channeling
tunnel from the bulk medium.

Supporting Information Available
Primers (Table S1), sequence
alignment (Figure S1), homology models used in rigid body modeling
(Figure S2), and decoy set (Figure S3). This material is available
free of charge via the Internet at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bi500693a_si_001.pdf

Research reported
in this publication was supported by National Institute of General
Medical Sciences Grants GM061068, GM065546, and P30GM103335.

The authors declare no
competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
We thank
Prof. Jason Cooley for providing genomic DNA and
Kevin Dyer for collecting the SAXS data through the SIBYLS mail-in
program. We thank Prof. Krishna K. Sharma for the use of the size
exclusion chromatography–multiangle laser light scattering
(SEC–MALS) instrument and Drs. Santhoshkumar Puttur and Ranjan
Singh for help with collection and analysis of the SEC–MALS
data. Part of this work was conducted at the Advanced Light Source
(ALS), a national user facility operated by Lawrence Berkeley National
Laboratory on behalf of the U.S. Department of Energy (DOE), Office
of Basic Energy Sciences, through the Integrated Diffraction Analysis
Technologies (IDAT) program, supported by the DOE Office of Biological
and Environmental Research. Additional support comes from the National
Institutes of Health Project MINOS (R01GM105404).

Abbreviations
PRODHproline dehydrogenase

P5CΔ1-pyrroline-5-carboxylate

P5CDHΔ1-pyrroline-5-carboxylate dehydrogenase

FADflavin adenine dinucleotide

GSAl-glutamate-γ-semialdehyde

PutAproline utilization
A

BjPutAB. japonicum proline utilization A

GsPutAG. sulfurreducens proline utilization A

RcPutAR. capsulatus proline utilization A

EcPutAE. coli proline utilization A

CTDUFC-terminal domain of unknown function

ALDHaldehyde dehydrogenase

rmsdroot-mean-square deviation

PDBProtein Data Bank

SAXSsmall-angle X-ray
scattering

CoQ1ubiquinone-1

WTwild-type

PCRpolymerase chain reaction

THPtris(3-hydroxypropyl)phosphine

TEVPtobacco etch virus protease

DCPIPdichlorophenolindophenol

MALSmultiangle light
scattering

BjPutAG638Psite-directed mutant of BjPutA in which Gly638 is replaced with
Pro

BjPutAE639Asite-directed mutant of BjPutA in which Glu639A is replaced with
Ala

BjPutAN641Asite-directed mutant of BjPutA in which Asn641 is replaced with Ala

BjPutAΔ635–639loop deletion mutant of BjPutA in which residues 635–639
are deleted

BjPutA1–986C-terminal deletion mutant of BjPutA containing residues 1–986

RcPutAG1011Psite-directed
mutant of RcPutA in which Gly1011 is replaced with Pro

RcPutAE1012Asite-directed
mutant of RcPutA in which Glu1012A is replaced with Ala

RcPutAN1014Asite-directed
mutant of RcPutA in which Asn1014 is replaced with Ala

RcPutAΔ1008–1012loop deletion mutant of RcPutA in which residues 1008–1012
are deleted

RcPutA1–1116C-terminal deletion mutant of RcPutA containing residues 1–1116.

