Steroid hormones, acting through
their cognate receptors, are critical regulators of gene expression
during development, differentiation, homeostasis, and endocrine therapies
for numerous inflammatory diseases and lung development in premature
infants.− Typically, steroids enter the cell by passive diffusion
and bind to cognate intracellular receptors to cause activation and
an increased residency of the receptor–steroid complex in the
nucleus, where the complex binds to DNA at biologically active hormone
response elements (HREs) to induce or repress gene transcription.
More than 350 cofactors have been described to modify the maximal
activity (Amax) of steroid-regulated gene
activation., Many of these cofactors have been found
to interact with HRE-bound receptors or other factors at the transcriptional
start site (TSS). Of those cofactors that
have been examined, most also modulate both the concentration of the
agonist steroid required for half-maximal induction, or EC50, and the residual partial agonist activity of antisteroids.− However, despite the dramatic advances over the past two decades,
both the precise molecular action of each DNA-associated cofactor
and where it acts in the overall sequence of events remain mostly
a matter of speculation.

Recently, our attention has been drawn
to factors involved in steps
of steroid-modulated gene activation that are downstream of the TSS.
One particularly attractive, potential control point for many genes
that has emerged over the past few years involves paused RNA polymerase
II.− Paused polymerase is usually located 25–100 bp downstream
of the TSS.,,, Pol II is held at this position by the poorly
defined actions of several proteins, including the heterotetrameric
negative elongation factor (NELF) complex and DRB (5,6-dichloro-1-β-d-ribofuranosylbenzimidazole) sensitivity-inducing factor (DSIF).,,, Release of the paused polymerase is proposed to be a rate-limiting
step and is initiated by signals that allow the polymerase-bound mediator
complex to recruit “super-elongation complexes” (SECs)
containing, among other proteins, eleven-nineteen lysine-rich leukemia
(ELL) and positive transcription elongation factor b (P-TEFb).,, Our interest in paused polymerase,
and associated factors, was heightened by our recent findings that
two NELF complex components, NELF-A and NELF-B, each inhibit GR-regulated
gene expression by acting at two separate sites in the sequence of
steps leading to an increased level of gene expression. One site does
not appear to involve the NELF complex. Of the numerous factors that are associated with the release of
paused polymerase and could participate in the second site of action
of NELF-A and NELF-B, ELL and cyclin-dependent kinase 9 (Cdk9), which
is the catalytic subunit of P-TEFb, were of particular interest to
us.

ELL was first reported to be required for full induction
of heat
shock genes in Drosophila and to be
involved in the regulation of paused polymerases., However, ELL also has other activities, such as transcription elongation
and cotranscriptional RNA processing., ELL was also
reported to display specificity among steroid receptors. Thus, ELL increased the Amax of mineralocorticoid receptor (MR) transactivation and
reduced the EC50 by a factor of ≈10 to cause a left
shift in the position of the dose–response curve. In contrast,
ELL had no effect on androgen or progesterone receptors but decreased
the level of glucocorticoid receptor (GR) transactivation by an undetermined
mechanism while binding to GR. Interestingly, the actions of ELL on
MR and GR are even more divergent because the L214V mutant of ELL
disrupts its activity as a coactivator with MR but not its corepressor
properties with GR.

P-TEFb is thought
to be the critical factor for the escape of paused
polymerase into the productive elongation phase of transcription.−, This occurs following the actions
of the kinase subunit of P-TEFb, Cdk9, which phosphorylates both the
NELF and DSIF complexes, to cause the release of NELF from the paused
polymerase, and the Ser-2 residues of the CTD of pol II, to permit
transcriptional elongation by pol II. Cdk9 has been reported to have
other targets, such as the kinase-independent actions of Cdk9 during
repression of B-Myb transactivation activity () and in transcriptional elongation once the pol II complex is released
from the pause site. Cdk9 has also been
found to bind to estrogen receptor α and to phosphorylate androgen receptors.,

The reports described above suggest that factors well-known
to
be involved in the status of paused RNA polymerase II may have other,
less common activities. A recently developed theory and associated
competition assay,,, would be helpful in continuing our characterization
of the actions of NELF-A and -B. This
competition assay has advantages in that it yields information about
both the kinetically defined mechanism of action and the relative
order of factor action without the knowledge of the precise biochemical
mechanisms involved. Factors that have been previously examined and
could be eliminated as direct functional targets of NELF-A and -B
are (a) GR, which binds to NELF-B but acts upstream of the NELFs,
(b) transcriptional intermediary factor 2 (TIF2), which acts after
the NELFs, and (c) CREB-binding protein (CBP), which exerts its effects
downstream of the NELFs.

The purpose
of this study is to examine whether other potential
interacting factors could reverse the effects of the NELFs. Because
one site of action of the NELFs could still be via the NELF complex,
we considered two factors that are known to be involved in the release
of the paused polymerase (ELL and Cdk9), one of which (Cdk9) phosphorylates
the NELF complex to cause its dissociation.,, Interestingly, we find that both ELL and
Cdk9 are competitive decelerators that
impede GR transactivation. Unexpectedly, Cdk9 does not hinder the
actions of NELF-A and NELF-B but rather cooperates to cause an increased
level of inhibition. Even more surprising is that Cdk9 kinase activity
is not involved in the ability of Cdk9 to attenuate GR transactivation.
These studies thus document new activities of NELFs, ELL, and Cdk9
that impact GR-controlled gene activation in manners that differ from
their better known mechanisms of action in the release of paused RNA
polymerase II.

Experimental Procedures
Unless otherwise
indicated, all cell growth occurred at 37 °C
and all other operations were performed at 0 °C.

Chemicals
Dexamethasone (Dex), 5,6-dichloro-1-β-d-ribofuranosylbenzimidazole
(DRB), and flavopiridol hydrochloride
hydrate were purchased from Sigma (St. Louis, MO). Restriction enzymes
and T4 DNA ligase were from New England Biolabs (Beverly, MA), and
the dual-luciferase reporter assay was from Promega (Madison, WI).

Plasmids
Renilla-TS reporter, rat GR (pSG5-GR), GREtkLUC,
pSG5-TIF2, and GAL/GR525C have been previously described. FR-LUC reporter is from Stratagene (La Jolla,
CA). Human NELF-A (missing the first 11 residues) and chimeric Flag/NELF-B were from R. Li (University of Texas Health
Science Center at San Antonio, San Antonio, TX). Full length wild-type
(wt) NELF-B and mutants of wt NELF-A and -B, in which four amino acids
of the NELF domain in each protein have been changed to alanine, have
been described elsewhere. pCMV-XL6/ELL
(K. Gardner, National Cancer Institute, National Institutes of Health),
Rc/CMV-dnCkd9 (D167N) (X. Grana, Temple University, Philadelphia,
PA), and Flag/K44,48R Cdk9 (AcMtCdk9) (M. Giacca, ICGEB, Trieste,
Italy) were generously provided as gifts.

Antibodies and Western
Blotting
Anti-GR mouse and rabbit
monoclonal antibodies [MA1–510 and PA1–516A, respectively
(Affinity BioReagents)], anti-NELF-B rabbit polyclonal antibody [ab48336
(Abcam)], anti-NELF-A rabbit polyclonal antibody and anti-Cdk9 mouse
monoclonal antibody [sc-23599 and sc-13130, respectively (Santa Cruz)],
anti-β-actin mouse monoclonal antibody [A2228 (Sigma)], and
anti-Flag mouse monoclonal antibody [F3165 (Sigma)] are commercially
available. The rabbit anti-ELL antibody was generously provided by
K. Gardner. Western blots were prepared, probed, and visualized by
ECL detection reagents as described by the manufacturer (Amersham
Biosciences).

Cell Culture, Transient Transfection, and
Reporter Analysis
Monolayer cultures of U2OS, U2OS.rGR, COS-7,
CV-1, and 293 cells
were grown as described previously.,, Briefly, triplicate samples of cells were seeded
into 24-well plates at a density of 20000 cells/well and transiently
transfected the following day with luciferase reporter and DNA plasmids
by using 0.7 μL Lipofectamine (Invitrogen) or Fugene 6 (Roche)
per well according to the manufacturer’s instructions. The
level of total transfected DNA was adjusted to 300 ng/well of a 24-well
plate with pBluescriptII SK+ (Stratagene). The molar amount of plasmids
expressing different protein constructs was kept constant with added
empty plasmid or plasmid expressing human serum albumin. Renilla-TS (10 ng/well of a 24-well plate) was
included as an internal control. After transfection (32 h), cells
were treated with medium containing appropriate hormone dilutions.
The cells were lysed 20 h later and assayed for reporter gene activity
using dual luciferase assay reagents according to the manufacturer’s
instructions (Promega). Luciferase activity was measured by an EG&amp;G
Berthold’s luminometer (Microlumat LB 96P). The data were normalized
to Renilla null luciferase activity and expressed as a percentage
of the maximal response with Dex before being plotted ± the standard
error of the mean, unless otherwise noted.

Two-Factor Competition
Assays
The predictions of the
mechanism and site of action of the factors were accomplished using
a two-factor competition assay.,, This assay is based on a theory of steroid-mediated gene induction
that exploits the property that the dose–response curve for
the amount of gene product as a function of the added steroid precisely
follows a Michaelis–Menten (MM) function (see the ). Mathematically, this
is unexpected for the sequence of complex forming reactions that is
presumed to exist in gene transcription. However, it has been shown
that if the individual reactions in the sequence each possess a MM
input–output relationship, then the dose response of an arbitrarily
long sequence of events will have a MM dose–response curve. Biochemically, this constraint can be satisfied
if the formed complexes are short-lived. A formula for the dose–response
curve can then also be explicitly computed. The action of the factors
in the sequence can be classified in terms of activators and inhibitors
as they are in enzyme kinetics. To avoid confusion with the commonly
used terms coactivator and corepressors, we have adopted the terms
accelerators and decelerators for enzymatic activators and inhibitors,
respectively. It should be noted that
the action of an accelerator or decelerator is with respect to only
the specific reaction in which it acts and does not pertain to its
global effect on the final gene product. The advantage of this classification
system is that the predicted mechanism is not context-dependent. In
the presence of two factors, a distinct formula (parametric statistical
model) can be written down for each combination of factor type and
location with respect to each other and a distinguished step, called
the concentration-limiting step (CLS). The CLS is the step in the
sequence beyond which the concentration of bound factors is negligible
with respect to the free concentrations. Given that the experimental
measurements are taken after the system has reached dynamic equilibrium,
there are no fluxes through the system but the CLS can be considered
the equilibrium analogue of a rate-limiting step. The CLS has been
found to be the invariant site of action of the reporter gene, acting
as an accelerator, and thus is a marker in the reaction scheme of
steroid receptors about which all other factors can be organized.,

The individual parametric models can be compared directly
to the data to make predictions about the actions of the factors.
This task can be simplified because the formulas for the parametric
models all have a fractional linear form and are thus completely specified
by the potency (EC50) and maximal induced activity (Amax). Hence, instead of direct curve fitting,
graphical analyses of the behavior of combinations of EC50 and Amax will give equivalent predictions.
A full description has been published.,, A flowchart is given as Figure S1 of the . Briefly, the effect of
four concentrations of each of two factors (total of 16 combinations)
on the maximal induced activity (Amax)
and EC50 is determined from directly fitting a Michaelis–Menten
curve to the average (n = 3) value of induced luciferase
activity from transiently transfected reporter (GREtkLUC) with EtOH
and three subsaturating concentrations of Dex (192 total samples).
The curve fitting for the dose–response curves is extremely
good for a first-order Hill plot [R2 for
368 randomly selected curves = 0.997 ± 0.004 (standard deviation)].
Graphs of 1/EC50 and Amax/EC50 (and EC50/Amax when
the plot of Amax/EC50 is decreasing)
versus the concentration of one cofactor are constructed at each of
the concentrations of the second factor. In all cases, though, it
is critical to make corrections if Western blots show that expression
of the transiently transfected protein (at constant levels either
of total cellular protein or of an internal standard, such as β-actin)
is nonlinear. This is because the interpretation of the graphs is
predicated on the x-axis being a linear scale. To
determine the linear equivalent of the expressed plasmid, the nonlinear
plot of OD versus the nanograms of transfected plasmid is first fit
to a Michaelis–Menten plot of

The functional equivalent
of the transfected plasmid that gives
a linear OD versus plasmid plot is then obtained from the formula

The x-axis
value of the amount of plasmid in the
various graphs is then this “corrected plasmid” value.
These same Western blots are used to determine the relative amount
of endogenous factor (in units of nanograms of factor plasmid) when
dealing with an accelerator. It is not necessary to quantitate the
relative amount of an endogenous factor that displays decelerator
activity. If an experiment used n concentrations
for each cofactor, then there would be a total of four to six graphs,
each with n separate curves. The shape of the curves
and how they change with the other cofactor are then compared to Table
S1 of the  to determine
the kinetically defined mechanism of action and site of action, relative
to each other and to the CLS. Our Table S1 is an updated version of
Table S1 of ref (). Many of the entries in Table S1 of the  require an estimate of the intersection point of
a set of linear regression fits to the graphs. For a family of lines
of the form y = a + bx, an unbiased estimate of the intersection can be obtained from “a versus b plots”, which are a linear
regression on the graph of a versus b to give a new plot of the form a = y′ + x′b, where y′ is the y-axis value of the intersection
point of the family of lines in the original graph and the negative
value of x′ corresponds to the x-axis value of the intersection point.

Statistical Analysis
Unless otherwise noted, all experiments
were performed in triplicate multiple times. KaleidaGraph version
3.5 (Synergy Software, Reading, PA) was used to determine a least-squares
best fit of the experimental data to the theoretical dose–response
curve, which is given by the equation derived from Michaelis–Menten
kinetics of y = [free steroid]/[free steroid + dissociation
constant (Kd)] (where the concentration
of total steroid is approximately equal to the concentration of free
steroid because only a small portion is bound), to yield a single
EC50 value. The values of n independent
experiments were then analyzed for statistical significance by the
two-tailed Student’s t test using InStat version
2.03 for Macintosh (GraphPad Software, San Diego, CA). The Mann–Whitney
test or the Alternate Welch t test is used when the
difference between the standard deviations of two populations is statistically
significant. The Bayesian Information Criterion was used to determine
the better of two types of fits for a particular graph (e.g., linear
vs quadratic).

Results
Application of the Competition
Assay To Determine the Mechanism
and Site of Cofactor Action
The competition assay was selected
to determine whether any one factor, assayed in combination with NELF-A
or -B, affects the competitive decelerator activity of NELF-A or -B
during GR-regulated transactivation of an exogenous reporter (GREtkLUC)
in transiently transfected U2OS cells. If the selected factor is found
to reverse the actions of the NELF protein by acting at the same site
as the NELF protein, we can propose that the activity of the factor
in question directly counters the step inhibited by NELF. Conversely,
if the factor is found to function before or after the site of NELF
action, then that factor’s actions cannot be the direct target
of NELF even if the factor is able to reverse the inhibitory activity
of NELF.

The competition assay consists of determining the dose–response
curves for dexamethasone (Dex) induction of GR-controlled expression
of luciferase activity from a GREtkLUC reporter under all 16 possible
combinations of four concentrations of each of the two factors being
examined (see Figure S1 of the  for a flowchart). A series of graphs are constructed, as described
in , and then matched
with the possible graphs in Table S1 (see the ). Each graph in Table S1 is associated
with one or more mechanistic descriptions. After the mechanistic descriptions
from all graphs for each factor have been compared, a single consistent
mechanism is identified.,,

NELF-A and -B Act at Two Sites in GR-Regulated Transactivation
The NELF complex, composed of the four subunits NELF-A, -B, -C/D,
and -E, plays a pivotal role in immobilizing RNA polymerase II shortly
after the start of transcription.−, NELF-A and -B are particularly
interesting because each protein has been found to act as a competitive
decelerator of GR transactivation at two sites before or at the CLS. Two forms of NELF-B (full length protein and
a chimera lacking the 30 C-terminal amino acids) were initially examined
to eliminate the functional relevance of the C-terminal sequence.
Subsequently, they were used interchangeably because they had identical
properties with two key components (GR and the reporter gene, GREtkLUC)
in the mechanistically sensitive competition assay. At least one site
of action appears to be independent of polymerase pausing.

The critical feature of two-site action
is upward curving plots of EC50/Amax versus NELF. Panels A and B of Figure  reconfirm the identical behavior of chimeric (Figure A) and full length (Figure B) NELF-B. Plots of EC50/Amax versus NELF-A (Figure C) display the same
upward curvature. The theory of the competition assay says that a
polynomial fit of order “n” to these
plots is diagnostic of a competitive decelerator acting at n sites before or at the CLS (abbreviated as = C at n sites ≤ CLS) (see the  for a theoretical explanation). This was tested
directly for panels B and C of Figure , which
are averaged plots from four and six normalized experiments, respectively.
Bayesian Information Criterion analysis was used to determine the
goodness of fit of linear (data not shown) versus quadratic plots
for the data depicted in panels B and C of Figure . That plot with the lower score is to be preferred. Quadratic
fits gave a much lower score than linear fits for both Figure B (32.7 vs 113.2) and Figure C (104 vs 1863). These results rigorously support the preference
of quadratic versus linear fits, which is also indicated by the higher R2 value of quadratic versus linear fits for
all three graphs of Figure  (data not shown).
Thus, the quadratic fits in Figure  are diagnostic
of each factor acting as a C at 2 sites ≤ CLS. A competitive
decelerator acting at only one site before or at the CLS gives a linear
plot with a positive slope in graphs of EC50/Amax. Conversely, an accelerator gives a decreasing plot
for EC50/Amax, and an increasing
plot for Amax/EC50, versus
factor., Factors acting at two sites are especially
valuable in mechanistic studies because the elimination of just one
site of action has to be selective and cannot result from general
inactivation of the protein or reaction system.

Full length and chimeric
NELF-B and full length NELF-A similarly
influence GR transactivation by acting at two sites. Graphical analyses
of competition assays with four amounts of chimeric NELF-B (A), full
length wild-type NELF-B (B), and NELF-A (C) plasmids each with four
concentrations of GREtkLUC were conducted in U2OS cells and a constant
amount of transfected GR plasmid as described in . Plots of EC50/Amax vs NELF were best fit with quadratic equations.
Similar results were obtained in two additional independent experiments
for chimeric NELF-B. Panels B (wild-type NELF-B) and C (NELF-A) are
averaged data (±standard error of the mean) of four and six experiments,
respectively, after normalization to the LUC activity with the smallest
amount of GREtkLUC reporter and the largest amount of NELF plasmid.

It should be realized that the
actions of NELF-A and -B are additive
and thus may be at different steps. Finally,
we note that the corrections for nonlinear expression of NELF-B in
the previously reported graphs do not
cause the upward curvature because it is still evident in panels A
and B of Figure  with NELF-B plasmid concentrations
that give linear protein expression.

Cdk9 Augments NELF Inhibition
of GR Transactivation
Cdk9 has been shown to cause the release
of paused polymerase, apparently
because of the phosphorylation of DSIF, the NELF complex, and pol
II.−, In view of the activity of both
NELF-A and NELF-B at two sites described above, we used the competition
assay to ask if exogenous Cdk9 can inhibit or reverse the effects
of either NELF protein at either step. Unexpectedly, the competition
assay revealed that Cdk9 further reduced Amax in the absence or presence of exogenous NELF-A (Figure A). This shows that Cdk9 augments, rather than attenuates,
NELF-A inhibitory activity. This response is not due to some net decrease
in the amount of Cdk9 because Western blots establish that the total
amount of Cdk9 protein increases with added Cdk9 plasmid (data not
shown). Western blot analysis further revealed both that Cdk9 expression
is linear up to 18–20 ng of Cdk9 plasmid (so that no correction
is needed for nonlinear expression) and that endogenous Cdk9 in U2OS
cells is equal to 9.0 ± 2.6 ng (standard deviation; n = 2) of the Cdk9 plasmid. This last point is especially significant
because it establishes that the effects of added Cdk9 in Figure  are seen with relatively small increases in total
Cdk9 protein (i.e., ≤122% above endogenous Cdk9)

Cdk9 is a decelerator
that does not reverse the effects of NELF-A
or NELF-B and is not inactivated by chemical inhibitors. (A–G)
Cdk9 augments the inhibitory effects of NELF-A and NELF-B. Competition
assays of Cdk9 with NELF-A (A–E) or NELF-B (F and G) were performed
with the indicated amounts of Cdk9 and NELF plasmids. Graphs of Amax vs NELF-A (A) or NELF-B (F) illustrate the
additive effects of Cdk9 with each NELF. The other graphs were plotted
as in Figure . Similar results were obtained
in five additional independent experiments. (H–K) Chemical
inhibitors of Cdk9 do not block decelerator activity of Cdk9. Assays
were performed as described in the legend of Figure  with the indicated amounts of Cdk9 and DRB (H and I) or flavopiridol
(J and K) and plotted as Amax/EC50 (H, I, and K) or 1/EC50 (J). The amount of GREtkLUC reporter
was 100 ng in all panels except for F and G, which used 30 ng. Similar
results were obtained in two to five additional independent experiments.

The graphs of 1/EC50 versus Cdk9 (Figure B) and Amax/EC50 versus
Cdk9 (Figure C) display the characteristic
nonlinear declining curves, with a decreasing position in the presence
of increasing NELF-A, that define Cdk9 as a competitive decelerator.
The linear graph of EC50/Amax versus Cdk9 (Figure D) further specifies
Cdk9 actions as a C acting at one site ≤ CLS. At the same time,
the quadratic fit for the graph of EC50/Amax versus NELF-A, with higher curve positions with increasing
amounts of NELF-A (Figure E), indicates that
NELF-A continues to act as C at two sites ≤ CLS. Similarly,
Cdk9 is active as C ≤ CLS in competition assays without and
with added NELF-B, as shown by the nonlinear decreasing graphs of Amax (Figure F), 1/EC50 (data not shown), and Amax/EC50 (data not shown) and the increasing plots of EC50/Amax (data not shown) versus Cdk9. In
the presence of added Cdk9, the plots of EC50/Amax versus NELF-B have less curvature (Figure G). This indicates that Cdk9 has a stronger inhibitory
action in the presence of NELF-B, thereby weakening the influence
of NELF-B at one of its two sites of action.

One restriction
is that if Cdk9 acts as a C at the CLS (abbreviated
as = C = CLS), then NELF-A (and NELF-B) must be a C before the CLS
(abbreviated as = C &lt; CLS) and vice versa. This is because two
C’s cannot act at precisely the same step. In either case, however, increased concentrations of Cdk9
do not act as an accelerator to reverse the competitive decelerator
effects of NELF-A or NELF-B. Furthermore, Cdk9 exhibits unequal effects
in the presence of NELF-A and NELF-B by being a stronger decelerator
with added NELF-B.

Classical Inhibitors of Cdk9 Do Not Prevent
the Competitive
Decelerator Activity of Cdk9
To determine the biochemical
mechanism of Cdk9 competitive decelerator action in panels A and F
of Figure , we asked if Cdk9 action in U2OS
cells could be blocked with either of two well-known inhibitors of
Cdk9 kinase activity: 5,6-dichloro-1-β-d-ribofuranosylbenzimidazole
(DRB) and flavopiridol. Interestingly, DRB concentrations of ≤40 μM
have little to no effect on either Amax/EC50 versus DRB (Figure H) or
1/EC50 versus DRB (data not shown), while higher concentrations
(50–150 μM) display the telltale nonlinear decreasing
curves in plots of 1/EC50 (data not shown) and Amax/EC50 versus DRB (Figure I) of a competitive decelerator. Thus, DRB does not prevent, but rather amplifies at high
concentrations, the effects of Cdk9 in this system. This may be due
to the fact that DRB is known to have different targets in these two
concentration ranges: Cdk9 at ∼3 μM DRB and TFIIH at
∼30 μM DRB.−

Flavopiridol is regarded
as a more selective inhibitor of Cdk9 activity with an apparent IC50 of &lt;1 μM. In our system,
flavopiridol weakly decreases the maximal luciferase activity (data
not shown). At the same time, however, our analysis shows that flavopiridol
acts as an accelerator (A) of some step after CLS in the concentration
range of 1–50 nM, as seen by the linear, positive slope plots
of 1/EC50 and Amax/EC50 versus flavopiridol (Figure J,K). This is an example of the well-documented
situation in enzyme kinetics, in which a factor can
decrease Amax and still be what we define
as an accelerator. Further analysis of
the other graphical plots yields the consistent conclusion that flavopiridol
is an accelerator after the CLS and Cdk9 is a competitor before flavopiridol.
This last conclusion indicates that even though flavopiridol has been
shown to bind tightly to, and inactivate, Cdk9, its action in our system occurs after those of Cdk9. Therefore,
flavopiridol’s ability to reduce the effects of Cdk9 cannot
result from inactivating Cdk9 kinase activity and must reflect interactions
with either a different function of Cdk9 or some other unidentified
target. Interestingly, at concentrations of &gt;40 nM, flavopiridol
reverses
its effects to act as a competitive decelerator and augment Cdk9 activity
(data not shown). Collectively, the results with DRB and flavopiridol
suggest that the inhibitory effects of Cdk9 are, unexpectedly, independent
of Cdk9 kinase activity.

Mutant Cdk9 Retains Competitive Decelerator
Activity
Interpretations based on chemical inhibitors can
be misleading because
of frequent side effects. A potentially more selective probe of how
Cdk9 increases NELF-A and -B activities is a point mutation that prevents
Cdk9 kinase activity. HA-tagged D167N Cdk9 is a dominant negative
mutant. We confirmed that this mutant
(dnCdk9) has negligible kinase activity in a whole cell assay of serine
2 phosphorylation of RNA polymerase II by Cdk9 with or without dnCdk9
(data not shown). Surprisingly, in a competition assay with NELF-A,
graphs of Amax versus dnCdk9 (Figure A) suggest that dnCdk9 is just as active as a competitive
decelerator as wt Cdk9 (cf., Figure A). Similar
results were observed with dnCdk9 in competition assays with NELF-B
(data not shown).

Dominant negative kinase-dead Cdk9 has activity identical
to that
of wt Cdk9. (A) dnCdk9 augments the inhibitory effects of NELF-A.
Competition assays with the indicated amounts of dnCdk9 and NELF-A
plasmids were performed and plotted as in Figure . Similar results were obtained in four additional independent
experiments. (B and C) Competition assays were performed as in Figure  with 0, 3, 6, and 10 ng each of wt Cdk9 and dnCdk9
plasmids and a constant amount of GR (0.5 ng) and GREtkLUC (100 ng)
plasmids. After adjustment for the 3-fold higher level of protein
expression of dnCdk9 compared to that of wt Cdk9, plots of Amax/EC50 (A) and EC50/Amax (B) vs the combined amounts of wt and dnCdk9
were constructed as described in the text. Similar results were obtained
in a second independent experiment.

A competition assay of dnCdk9 versus wt Cdk9 was then performed
to determine whether the dnCdk9 would reduce the competitive decelerator
activity of wt Cdk9 in GR induction of the luciferase enzyme from
the GREtkLUC reporter. Again, both dnCdk9 and wt Cdk9 appear to have
identical activities (data not shown). A stringent test of this conclusion
is to see if the activities are additive. Western blot analysis revealed
that wt Cdk9 and dnCdk9 are linearly expressed up to at least 20 ng
of transfected plasmid and that the expression level of dnCdk9 is
∼3-fold higher than that of wt Cdk9 (data not shown). Therefore,
we calculated the total relative amount of expressed Cdk9 as wt Cdk9
+ 3 × dnCdk9 and plotted Amax/EC50 versus the total expressed Cdk9. As shown in Figure B, a single well-behaved nonlinear decreasing plot
is obtained, indicating that the combined wt Cdk9 and dnCdk9 species
are acting as a single, uniformly active competitive decelerator.

To determine where the combined Cdk9 species are acting, the data
were replotted as EC50/Amax versus total expressed Cdk9 (Figure C).
The resulting linear plot is diagnostic of the combined population
of wt Cdk9 and dnCdk9 acting in concert as competitive decelerators
before or at the CLS. Similar results
were observed in 293 cells (data not shown). Therefore, the ability
of wt Cdk9 and dnCdk9 to display identical activities is not limited
to U2OS cells. These data support and extend the conclusion described
above that the competitive decelerator activity of Cdk9 on GR transactivation
is independent of Cdk9 kinase activity.

Mutant Cdk9s Retain the
Ability To Augment NELF-A Actions
While Figure  indicates that dnCdk9 has
wild-type activity with regard to the inhibition of GR transactivation,
it was not evident whether dnCdk9 would also have wild-type activity
with the NELFs when the other types of competition assay plots are
examined. Therefore, we next asked if dnCdk9 could also increase the
decelerator activity of NELF-A. Using amounts of dnCdk9 and NELF-A
that are in the linear range of expression, the behavior with added
dnCdk9 is indistinguishable from that with wt Cdk9 (data not shown).
Most importantly, plots of EC50/Amax versus NELF-A with increasing dnCdk9 retain the same upward
curvature with dnCdk9 (Figure A) that is seen
with wt Cdk9 in Figure E. This shows that
NELF-A still acts as C at two sites before or at the CLS with dnCdk9,
just as is seen with wt Cdk9. Identical experiments were performed
in human 293 cells to determine the generality of this response. Panels
B and C of Figure  show that there is no significant
difference in the activities of wt Cdk9 and dnCdk9 with NELF-A in
293 cells. Thus, the ability of NELF-A to act as a C at two sites
before or at the CLS in competition assays with Cdk9 and the ability
of Cdk9 to act as C before or at the CLS are independent both of the
kinase activity of Cdk9 and of the cells used.

Kinase-defective Cdk9
mutants retain activity of wt Cdk9 with NELF-A
and NELF-B in different cells. Competition assays were performed and
plotted as in Figure  with the indicated amounts
of dnCdk9 and NELF-A plasmids in U2OS cells (A) or 293 cells (B and
C), with AcMtCdk9 and NELF-A plasmids in U2OS cells (D), with NELF-B
in U2OS cells with dnCdk9 (E) or AcMtCdk9 (F), and with NELF-B in
293 cells with wt Cdk9 (G) or dnCdk9 (H). The amount of reporter plasmid
was always 100 ng. The amount of GR plasmid used was 0.5 ng in U2OS
cells and 5 ng in 293 cells. The range of linear expression of wt
Cdk9 (≤40 ng), dnCdk9 (≤20 ng), and NELF-B (≤20
ng) is higher in 293 than in U2OS cells (data not shown). Similar
results were obtained in one to four additional independent experiments
except for that for NELF-B with AcMtCdk9 in U2OS cells (F), which
was performed only once.

To further test this equivalence of wt Cdk9 and dnCdk9, we
examined
another Cdk9 mutant that cannot be acetylated at the position needed
to yield the activated kinase, i.e., K44/48R Cdk9 (or AcMtCdk9). Just as with wt Cdk9 and dnCdk9, the graph of
EC50/Amax versus NELF-A with
increasing AcMtCdk9 displays the same progressively greater upward
curvature as with wt Cdk9 (Figure D), which
is diagnostic of NELF-A again acting as C at two sites ≤ CLS.
Thus, two different kinase-deficient mutants of Cdk9 possess the same
activities in U2OS cells as wt Cdk9 with NELF-A.

Mutant Cdk9s
Retain the Ability To Augment NELF-B Actions
As seen above
in Figure G, NELF-B works
predominantly at one site as a C ≤ CLS in U2OS cells in the
presence of additional wt Cdk9. This contrasts with NELF-A, which
still acts as C at two sites ≤ CLS in the absence or presence
of exogenous Cdk9 (see Figure E). We therefore
asked whether the action of NELF-B at the second site ≤ CLS
might be restored, or the one site of action eliminated, in the presence
of either the dnCdk9 or AcMtCdk9. Interestingly, as determined by
the linear plots of EC50/Amax versus NELF-B with added Cdk9, NELF-B still appears to function
as C at just one site ≤ CLS because of the stronger decelerator
activity of both dnCdk9 (Figure E) and AcMtCdk9
(Figure F) in the presence of NELF-B. These
same graphs, and others not shown, identify the actions of dnCdk9
and AcMtCdk9 as C ≤ CLS. Thus, as for NELF-A, the two kinase-defective
Cdk9 mutants evoke the same increasingly pronounced responses with
NELF-B as seen with wt Cdk9. This is further evidence that the effects
of added Cdk9 are independent of Cdk9 kinase activity.

Actions of
NELF-B Are Cell Line-Dependent but Still Independent
of Cdk9 Kinase Activity
In marked contrast with the nearly
linear plots of EC50/Amax versus
NELF-B with added Cdk9 in U2OS cells (Figure G), the same plots for 293 cells are now curved upward (Figure G). However, this difference may be simply a matter
both of NELF-B protein being expressed ∼9-fold more efficiently
in 293 cells and of using more NELF-B plasmid in 293 cells, thereby
making the curvature more evident. Nevertheless, this upward curvature
in plots of EC50/Amax versus
NELF-B, which is unique for a factor acting as C at two sites ≤
CLS, is retained in dnCdk9 (Figure H). Thus,
once again, the actions of Cdk9 are independent of its kinase activity.

Mutation of the NELF Domain Has Equal Effects on Activity with
wt Cdk9 and dnCdk9
Earlier studies identified a “NELF
domain” that is shared by all four subunits of the NELF complex
and is required for full competitive decelerator activity of both
NELF-A and NELF-B at two sites in competition assays with GR and GREtkLUC. Similarly, the graphs of EC50/Amax that are quadratic and upward curving for
wt NELF-A (Figure E) change to what is generally
best fit by linear plots for the 4mtNELF-A mutant, in which four residues
in the NELF domain of NELF-A have been changed to alanine (Figure A). The linear fits of EC50/Amax mean that the actions of 4mtNELF-A with varying wt
Cdk9 are predominantly that of a C acting at one site before or at
the CLS. Thus, as with varying levels of GR and GREtkLUC, the mutations of the NELF domain have also eliminated
most of the ability of NELF-A to act at one of the two sites before
or at the CLS in the presence of added wt Cdk9. The nonlinear decreasing
graphs of 1/EC50 versus both 4mtNELF-A (Figure B) and wt NELF-A (Figure C) approach a flat plot with large amounts of NELF-A. The underlying
equations of the competition assay specifically ascribe this particular
graphical behavior to a defined relative ordering of two competitive
decelerators that are both initially characterized as acting before
or at the CLS. More specifically, it means that the single site of
action for 4mtNELF-A and the two sites of action with wt NELF-A are
still after wt Cdk9.

Wild-type and mutant NELF-A and -B activities are not
altered by
mutations that destroy Ckd9 kinase activity. Competition assays were
performed with 0.3 or 0.5 ng of GR plasmid and 30 ng of GREtkLUC,
and the results are plotted as in Figure  with
the indicated amounts of wt Cdk9 and 4mtNELF-A (A and B) or wt NELF-A
(C) plasmids or dnCdk9 and 4mtNELF-A (D and E) or wt NELF-A (F) plasmids,
in U2OS cells. Similar results were obtained from five to eight independent
experiments. (G and H) 4mtNELF-B has reduced potency, relative to
that of wt NELF-B, in competition assays with dnCdk9. Competition
assays were performed with 0.5 or 5 ng of GR plasmid and 100 ng of
GREtkLUC, and Amax/EC50 vs
NELF-B was plotted as in Figure  with the
indicated amounts of wt Cdk9 and wt NELF-A (G) or 4mtNELF-A (H) plasmids.
The gray bar with the extending line represents the standard error
of the mean and average amount of plasmid required for half-maximal
reduction of Amax/EC50 from
six experiments. To compensate for the 2.09-fold more efficient expression
of 4mtNELF-B protein, compared to that of wt NELF-B [as determined
by Western blots (not shown)], the x-axis values
of panel H should be multiplied by 2.09. Similar results were obtained
from five additional independent experiments.

The activities of 4mtNELF-A and wt NELF-A with the dnCdk9
mutant
are very similar to those with wt Cdk9. The graph of EC50/Amax versus NELF-A again changes from
a quadratic plot with wt NELF-A (Figure A)
to a linear graph with 4mtNELF-A (Figure D),
indicating that 4mtNELF-A also functions with added dnCdk9 at only
one site as a C before or at the CLS. The graphs of 1/EC50 versus both 4mtNELF-A (Figure E) and wt
NELF-A (Figure F), like those of panels B
and C of Figure  with wt Cdk9, become flatter
with increasing dnCdk9, which places dnCdk9 action before both 4mtNELF-A
and wt NELF-A. We therefore conclude that the loss of Cdk9 kinase
activity in dnCdk9 does not alter the actions of either wt NELF-A
or 4mtNELF-A from what they are with wt Cdk9.

We next compared
the actions of wt NELF-B and 4mtNELF-B with wt
Cdk9 vs dnCdk9. No difference was observed between wt NELF-B and 4mtNELF-B
with wt Cdk9. As with wt NELF-B (Figure G),
the graphs of EC50/Amax versus
4mtNELF-B with increasing wt Cdk9 are fit well by linear plots (data
not shown) that define a C acting at one site before or at the CLS.
The increasingly flat plots of 1/EC50 versus NELF-B again
indicate that Cdk9 is a C acting before NELF-B (data not shown). However,
graphs of Amax/EC50 (Figure G,H) illustrate that wt NELF-B and 4mtNELF-B do
display quantitatively different abilities to reduce Amax/EC50. After correction has been made for
the 2.1-fold more efficient expression of 4mtNELF-B (data not shown),
in which case 4 ng of 4mtNELF-B in Figure H corresponds to 8.4 ng of wt NELF-B plasmid, 4mtNELF-B is seen to
be 1.9 ± 0.5-fold (standard error of the mean; n = 23; P = 0.0003) less potent than wt NELF-B with
different concentrations of dnCdk9. Thus, again with mutants of NELF-A
and -B, the kinetically defined mechanism and site of action are relatively
insensitive to whether Ckd9 possesses kinase activity. These results
argue strongly that Cdk9 has some new, yet undefined, kinase-independent
action in GR-regulated gene induction.

Cdk9 Acts after GR and
before or at the Site of Reporter Action
In an effort to
define further the novel actions of Cdk9 described
above, we performed a competition assay with wt Cdk9 and the reporter
GREtkLUC in U2OS cells. In all of the combinations of factors that
we have examined to date, GREtkLUC always acts as an accelerator (A)
= CLS. Similarly, in competition with
Cdk9, the average slope (0.00192 ± 0.00428, standard deviation; n = 24) in graphs of 1/EC50 versus GREtkLUC (Figure A), with curve position decreasing with added Cdk9,
indicates that GREtkLUC again acts as A = CLS while Cdk9 = C. The
linear plots of EC50/Amax versus
Cdk9, with decreasing position for increasing GREtkLUC (Figure B), are diagnostic of Cdk9 = C at one site ≤
CLS. These graphs, together with the others in the analysis of the
data, uniquely determine that GREtkLUC
= A = CLS and Cdk9 = C ≤ CLS.

Cdk9 is a competitive decelerator acting
after the site of action
of GR and before that of the reporter gene. Competition assays with
the indicated amounts of (A and B) Cdk9 and GREtkLUC reporter, (C)
Cdk9 and GR, and (D) dnCdk9 and GR plasmids were performed in U2OS
cells and the results plotted as in Figure . Similar results were obtained in five additional (for A and B)
and two additional (for C and D) independent experiments.

To further restrict the site of action of Cdk9,
we allowed Cdk9
to compete with GR, which is known to act before the CLS., The defining graph here is 1/EC50 versus GR. It shows
an intersection point that is slightly more negative than that without
added GR, which corresponds to no GR when one subtracts the small
amount of endogenous GR in U2OS cells (Figure C). This behavior, in conjunction with the other graphs (data not
shown), places the site of Cdk9 action as being after GR. Similar results and conclusions were obtained
for GR versus dnCdk9 (Figure D). We therefore
conclude that wt Cdk9 and dnCdk9 both act as C ≤ CLS and after
GR.

Cdk9 Acts before ELL
ELL, like Cdk9, is a component
of the super-elongation complexes, which is associated with the release
of paused polymerases.,, This suggested that ELL might antagonize the inhibitory actions
of Cdk9 in our assay, even though, in different systems (RC.SV3 and
Cos1 cells), ELL was reported to decrease the level of GR transactivation
by an undetermined mechanism. We therefore
tested this hypothesis by allowing ELL to compete with Cdk9. The graphs
of EC50/Amax versus ELL (Figure A) are linear with increasing position as more Cdk9
is transfected. The plots of EC50/Amax versus Cdk9 and EC50/Amax versus ELL are almost identical (data not shown), from
which we can conclude that both ELL and Cdk9 are C at one site ≤
CLS. The graphs of 1/EC50, however, are different, with
that versus ELL being especially informative (Figure B and data not shown). As mentioned above, the mathematics
describing nonlinear decreasing curves that become flat, but continue
to shift to a lower position, at higher levels of Cdk9 uniquely describes
Cdk9 acting before ELL, with both manifesting their actions ≤
CLS. The identical behavior is observed in competition assays of ELL
with dnCdk9 (Figure C,D). Thus, both the mode
and position of action of Cdk9 relative to ELL are preserved regardless
of whether Cdk9 kinase activity is retained.

Competitive decelerator
activity of ELL that is augmented by Cdk9
in a manner independent of Cdk9 kinase activity and reversed by accelerators.
Competition assays with 0.5 or 1 ng of GR plasmid, 100 ng of GREtkLUC,
and the indicated amounts of (A and B) Cdk9 and ELL, (C and D) dnCdk9
and ELL, (E and F) CBP and ELL, and (G and H) TIF2 and ELL plasmids
were performed in U2OS cells and the results plotted as in Figure . Wild-type Cdk9, dnCdk9, and ELL are linearly expressed
with up to 20 ng of transfected plasmid; CBP is linearly expressed
with up to 80 ng of plasmid, so no corrections are needed. TIF2 expression
is corrected as described in the text. Similar results were obtained
in five (A and B), two (C and D), one (E and F), and three (G and
H) additional independent experiments.

ELL Acts before CBP and TIF2
The mechanism of ELL action
was further probed in competition assays with two accelerators: CBP and TIF2. The competition
assays of ELL versus CBP involved eight concentrations of ELL and
two concentrations of CBP, instead of the usual 4 × 4 setup,
because of the relatively small changes in EC50 with added
ELL under these conditions. Two plots were particularly revealing.
The plot of EC50/Amax versus
ELL (Figure E) displays the linear plots with
decreasing slope in the presence of added CBP that is diagnostic of
ELL being a competitive decelerator before or at the CLS with CBP
being an accelerator. The plot of 1/EC50 versus ELL (Figure F) shows decreasing curves that increase in position
with more CBP and for which the shape of the curve does not become
significantly flatter with no added CBP. In conjunction with the results
depicted in Figure E, the interpretation of
Figure F is limited to ELL being a competitive
decelerator before or at the CLS while CBP is an accelerator after
the CLS. All of the other graphs (not shown) are compatible with this
conclusion.

We next examined the competition of ELL with the
accelerator TIF2.,,, A critical graph is EC50/Amax versus ELL (Figure G), which shows the linear plots with decreasing slopes that are
diagnostic of ELL acting as C ≤ CLS and TIF2 = A. The behavior
of ELL is confirmed, and that of TIF2 specified, by the linear plot
of Amax/EC50 versus TIF2 (Figure H). The average intersection point of all of the
lines is x = −20.8 ± 7.3 ng of TIF2 plasmid
and y = −10.7 ± 6.6 (standard deviation; n = 4). This point is very close to y =
0, in view of the range of y values for the various
points, and much more negative than x = −1.17,
which corresponds to the point at which the level of endogenous TIF2
[determined from Western blots to be equivalent to 1.17 ± 0.31
ng (standard deviation; n = 3) of TIF2 plasmid] would
be equal to zero. These characteristics of Figure H define TIF2 = A &gt; CLS and ELL = C ≤ CLS. The other
graphs (data not shown) are entirely consistent with this interpretation.

Discussion
This report describes the use of a recently developed
competition
assay,,, to uncover novel activities in GR-regulated gene
induction of two cofactors known to participate in the early stages
of gene transcription: Cdk9 and ELL. Cdk9 is widely considered to
release pol II from the paused state, caused in part by the NELF and
DSIF complexes, by phosphorylating the CTD of RNA pol II and the NELF
and DSIF complexes., ELL is a constituent of the super-elongation
complexes that assist in the release of paused polymerases.,, Thus, additional Cdk9 and ELL
were predicted to facilitate GR transactivation and antagonize the
effects of NELF. Unexpectedly, both Cdk9 and ELL are found to be competitive
decelerators of GR transactivation activity and do not interfere with
the inhibitory activity of NELF-A and NELF-B. Exhaustive analysis
of the kinetically defined activity, and site of action, of ELL and
especially Cdk9 yields the internally consistent results that both
factors are competitive decelerators acting at one site, with Cdk9
acting before ELL, which acts before or at the CLS. Cdk9 actions in
these assays appear to be atypical because they are independent of
Cdk9 kinase activity, as shown by equivalent effects by two Cdk9 mutants
(dnCdk9 and AcMtCdk9) with little or no kinase activity and the inability
to be directly antagonized by two classical inhibitors of Cdk9 kinase
activity: DRB and flavopiridol. Low concentrations (≤40 μM)
of DRB that are reported to inactivate Cdk9 kinase activity− were essentially inactive. Flavopiridol inactivates Cdk9 kinase
activity by forming an essentially irreversible complex with Cdk9. Flavopiridol can reverse the effects of Cdk9
in our system but does so downstream of Cdk9, in which case it cannot
be exerting the observed effects via a covalent complex with Cdk9.
Therefore, it is not known if the ability of flavopiridol to counter
the effects of Cdk9 reflects the different activity of Cdk9 in our
system, which flavopiridol is preventing at a downstream site, or
an activity of flavopiridol that is unrelated to Cdk9. Finally, the
same responses to wt and mutant Cdk9s are seen in two different cell
lines in the presence of a variety of other factors. We therefore
conclude that these new activities of Cdk9 are not restricted to a
unique cell line or combination of cofactors.

The analysis of
competition assays of Cdk9, ELL, and several other
factors establishes the following ordered sequence of where each factor
acts during the overall reaction sequence: GR &lt; Cdk9 &lt; ELL,
NELF-A, and NELF-B ≤ GREtkLUC &lt; TIF2 and CBP. This ability
to order the site of factor action is unique and provides the beginnings
of a previously unavailable logical framework for manipulating GR
transaction outcomes under physiologically relevant conditions. Particularly
attractive in the clinical setting is the prospect that modifying
steps far downstream of GR and reporter action will have fewer side
effects. This is because there would be fewer branch points from a
far downstream step, and a reduced number of subsequent steps, that
could further influence the final outcome. Such a reduction of side
effects is the holy grail of steroid endocrinologists and would greatly increase the number of clinical applications
of glucocorticoid therapies.

Complete validation of the conclusions
described above, and our
approach in general, will require knowledge of all of the steps in
steroid-regulated gene expression followed by careful examination
of how a specific factor alters the rate or frequency of the affected
step. While such confirmation is theoretically possible, the required
knowledge of each reaction step does not currently exist. In the meantime,
the internally consistent mechanistic conclusions that are accumulating
for various factors under different experimental conditions,,,,, provide a
less rigorous cross-check on the legitimacy of the competition assay
and its underlying theory.

We have recently presented evidence
that NELF-A and NELF-B each
act at two sites to repress GR transactivation. We concluded that
at least one action of each protein is independent of the NELF complex
and depends upon the integrity of a “NELF domain” for
full activity at both sites. However,
the second site of action of NELF-A and/or -B could proceed via the
NELF complex. In this case, we would expect Cdk9 to inhibit some of
the activity of one or both NELF proteins. Instead, we find that Cdk9
increases the inhibitory activity of both NELF-A and -B (Figure A,F). This argues that neither site of action of
NELF-A or -B involves the NELF complex. Because Cdk9 and ELL augment
these new, NELF complex-independent activities of NELF-A and -B, we
conclude that the effects of Cdk9 and ELL presented here are also
independent of the NELF complex. In fact, polymerase pausing has not
been observed under the conditions used here for a reporter that is
without chromatin structure and introns− and does not require
synchronized expression during development and differentiation. Thus, these conditions would facilitate the
observation of new activities with Cdk9 and ELL.

The activities
that we see result from relatively low levels of
overexpression that do not appear to saturate the system. The amounts
of Cdk9 plasmid used typically cause a no more than 2.2-fold increase
in total cellular Cdk9 protein after 48 h with wt Cdk9 plasmid and
no more than 3-fold with dnCdk9 plasmid (data not shown). The average
fold increase for the other factors was only 8.5 ± 4.5 (standard
deviation; n = 6 factors). This does not include
NELF-B because the commercially available antibody did not recognize
the endogenous protein. We cannot eliminate the possibility that endogenous
factor levels are already maximal and any added factor results in
squelching. For example, HEXIM1 both forms a complex with 7SK small
nuclear RNA and P-TEFb and binds by itself to GR to inhibit GR transactivation. Elevated levels of Cdk9, and maybe even dnCdk9,
could sequester free HEXIM1, but this should cause an increase in
the level of GR transactivation, in contrast to the observed decrease
in panels A and F of Figure  and panel A of
Figure . Furthermore, the fact that well-behaved
plots for each factor are obtained over the entire range of concentrations,
including very low levels of transfected factor plasmid, is consistent
with the added factors simply increasing the strength of the response
of the endogenous factor. Cdk9, as part of P-TEFb, is known to bind
ligand-bound estrogen receptor α and is required for estrogen
receptor α-dependent transcriptional elongation of the Myb proto-oncogene. This behavior is diametrically opposed to what
we see for the effect of Cdk9 on GR transactivation. Ckd9 has also
been observed to enhance androgen receptor transactivation by phosphorylating
the receptor protein., A similar mechanism cannot be
operative in our experiments with GR because Cdk9 is inhibitory and
two kinase-defective Cdk9 mutants are still active. Thus, the activities
of Cdk9 with GR appear to be unique and are clearly independent of
the kinase activity associated with most of the actions of Cdk9.

Cdk9 is best known for its kinase activity. However, other activities
of Cdk9 have been reported. Cdk9 represses B-Myb transactivation activity
in a manner that is independent of Cdk9 kinase activity. This response
appeared to be due to a direct interaction of Cdk9 alone with the
carboxyl terminus of the B-Myb protein. The authors speculated that
similar binding could negatively regulate other transcription factors. If such a mechanism is operative in our system,
it could explain why the Cdk9 inhibitors DRB and flavopiridol do not
have the expected effects. Alternatively, the inactivity of DRB and
flavopiridol may be attributed to the intronless reporter gene, GREtkLUC,
used in our study. CDK9 inhibitors drastically affect the elongation
of transcription of the β-actin gene but have little effect
on the transcription of short intronless genes, such as the U2 snRNA
genes. Finally, although Cdk9 is present
in the P-TEFb complex that travels with elongating pol II, its CTD
kinase activity is no longer required once the pol II complex is released
from the pause site. It will be interesting
to see whether future studies identify the new activity of Cdk9 of
our study as being the same or different from any of the previously
reported mechanisms.

Reports that ELL, in addition to its role
in the super-elongation
complex, has different effects on various steroid receptors argue
against a common role in gene transcription. ELL induces an increase
in mineralocorticoid basal activity in a manner that requires the
N-terminal AF-1b domain, but not AF-1a or ligand binding domain, of
mineralocorticoid receptors. This response is receptor specific, though,
because ELL has no effect on androgen receptor or progesterone receptor
activity and decreased the level of GR transactivation while binding
to GR. Also, the N-terminus of ELL is
thought to have inhibitor activity for pol II. Therefore, excess ELL could form premature complexes with
pol II prior to entering the preinitiation complex, which could disrupt
assembly.

It is important to realize that the results from the
competition
assays do not include any information about the binding site or biochemical
activity of the factor. Only the site of biological activity is identified,
and this need not be the same as the binding site. One alternative
would be that the factor initiates a sequence of “side”
reactions that produces a “product” that participates
in the main transcription sequence. This is allowable in the theory
behind the competition assay as long as the dose response between
the factor and product of the side reaction has a Hill plot coefficient n equal to 1. For example, cofactors that cause acetylation
or methylation of nucleosomal histones are thought to be influential
in gene transcription. However, it is highly probable that the act
of acetylation or methylation is not the “action”, as
defined by our model, of these cofactors
that alters gene transactivation. Instead, the ability of the modified
histones to interact with or recruit other proteins is thought to
be the first of several additional biochemical steps (not yet defined),
of which one is where the cofactor actually “expresses”
its activity in a currently unknown manner. In this respect, the site
of cofactor action will be several steps downstream from the site
of cofactor binding, and the cofactor may act in either a “cis” or “trans” mode.

It should be noted that the positioning of GR, TIF2, and CBP relative
to GREtkLUC, which acts at the CLS, is the same as seen previously
under different conditions.,, This observation thus again raises the useful mechanistic hypothesis
that the sites of action of numerous cofactors in GR-regulated gene
induction may be constant under a variety of conditions.,,

In summary, our competition
assay has unveiled new activities of
Cdk9 and ELL. This is possible because of two features of the assay.
First, it involves transiently transfected reporter genes, the responses
of which are easier to interpret because of their usually more robust
and reproducible responses. While the utility of exogenous reporters
has been questioned because of the lack of chromosomal structure, this does not appear to a major issue for GR-regulated
gene induction. From 80 to 95% of endogenous GR-regulated genes already
have an open chromatin conformation,− and the kinetically
defined actions of several transcription factors are found to be the
same in GR induction of exogenous and endogenous genes.,, Second, virtually all studies
of cofactor action look only at the total activity, or Amax. When one includes the EC50, dramatically
more and usually novel information becomes available.,, We suspect that incorporating
both Amax and EC50 into studies
of steroid hormone action, not to mention gene transcription in general,
will reveal a wealth of new, physiologically relevant information
such as that included in this study.

Supporting Information Available
A brief summary of the theory
behind the competition assay and its application, a flowchart of the
steps of the competition assay, and an update of the original table that is used to analyze the various graphs.
This material is available free of charge via the Internet at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bi5000178_si_001.pdf

Author Present Address
§ R.Z.:
Department of Pathology, Shanghai Medical College, Fudan
University, Shanghai, China.

Author Present Address
∥ M.P.:
Cancer Biology, NB40, Cleveland Clinic, Lerner Research Institute,
9500 Euclid Ave., Cleveland, OH 44195.

Author Present Address
⊥ S.P.A.:
Western Australian Institute for Medical Research (WAIMR),
University of Western Australia, B Block, QEII Medical Centre, Hospital
Avenue, Nedlands, Perth, Western Australia 6009, Australia.

The authors declare no
competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
We thank Kevin Gardner [National Cancer Institute (NCI)],
Xavier Grana (Temple University), Mauro Giacca (ICGEB), and Rong Li
(University of Texas Health Science Center at San Antonio) for generously
providing research samples and Dinah Singer (NCI), Hans Luecke (National
Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases), and Kevin
Gardner for critical comments.

Abbreviations
Aaccelerator

Ccompetitive decelerator

CLSconcentrating limiting
step

CBPCREB-binding
protein

Cdk9cyclin-dependent
kinase 9

Dexdexamethasone

DRB5,6-dichloro-1-β-d-ribofuranosylbenzimidazole

GRglucocorticoid receptor

DSIFDRB sensitivity-inducing factor

HREhormone response elements

ELLeleven-nineteen
lysine-rich leukemia

MRmineralocorticoid receptor

NELFnegative elongation factor

P-TEFbpositive transcription elongation
factor b

SECssuper-elongation
complexes

TIF2transcriptional
intermediary factor 2

TSStranscriptional start site.

