Genomic DNA is under constant
attack from endogenous and exogenous DNA damaging agents, with most
damage occurring in the form of DNA base lesions. While approximately 10000 of these lesions occur daily,, most do not go on to harm the cell because they are repaired by
endogenous pathways. One of the most prevalent DNA repair pathways
is known as base excision repair (BER), which is initiated when a
DNA glycosylase hydrolyzes the N-glycosidic bond
of a lesion base. In humans, the abasic site produced by a monofunctional
glycosylase is repaired by the subsequent action of AP endonuclease
I, DNA polymerase β, and DNA ligase I or III.,

Human alkyladenine DNA glycosylase (AAG) is one of the monofunctional
glycosylase enzymes responsible for initiating BER. AAG catalyzes
the removal of a diverse group of purine lesions, including those
caused by damage from alkylation (3-methyladenine, 3-methylguanine,
and 7-methylguanine) and reactive oxygen and nitrogen species (hypoxanthine,
1,N6-ethenoadenine (εA), and 1,N2-ethenoguanine)., Removal of
these lesions is paramount as they can cause cytotoxicity and mutagenesis. To access lesion bases, AAG, like most glycosylases,
uses the canonical nucleotide flipping mechanism wherein the nucleoside
with the damaged base is flipped out of the double helix and into
the active site while a protein residue intercalates the DNA, effectively
substituting for the flipped base. This nucleotide flipping has been
observed in the crystal structure of a catalytically active N-terminal
truncation mutant of AAG (denoted Δ79AAG) in which the protein
is bound to DNA containing substrate εA. This structure shows that Tyr162 of AAG intercalates DNA while the
lesion fits snugly into the binding pocket. This tight interaction
observed structurally is supported by the nanomolar affinity of AAG
for its substrates in vitro.− Interestingly, AAG also binds
with high affinity to DNA containing lesions that it cannot excise,
such as inhibitor 3,N4-ethenocytosine
(εC).,, Structural
studies show that εC is also flipped out of the DNA into the
active site of AAG and that an extra hydrogen bond between AAG and
εC accounts for the 2-fold higher affinity for the inhibitor
versus the substrate DNA. Finally, AAG
can also bind with high affinity to DNA with a base loop structure,
shielding it from repair and leading to frameshift mutations. These highly specific interactions (outlined
in Scheme ) between AAG and DNA are even more
intriguing when one considers the massive search that must be undertaken
by DNA glycosylases to find damaged DNA bases in the human genome.

DNA Adducts to Which AAG Binds with High Affinity, Lesions (A) εC
and (B) εA and (C) One-Base Loop Structures
Given the ∼1010 nucleotides
in the human genome
and the ∼104 lesions per cell per day,, there are approximately 1 million normal bases for every lesion
present in DNA. Even for an abundant protein like AAG (∼2 ×
105 molecules per nucleus),
each enzyme would have to inspect tens of thousands of normal bases
before finding one lesion to excise. Such a task would be seemingly
impossible if it involved a strict three-dimensional search, where
proteins float through the cell in a stochastic hunt for a scarce
number of lesions. To limit the search space, Berg et al. and Schurr have
proposed that DNA binding proteins could nonspecifically bind and
track along DNA in a one-dimensional search. Recently, protein “sliding”
on DNA was observed directly in single-molecule fluorescence studies
for a number of enzymes, including several glycosylases.− Such a nonspecific search has been indirectly observed for AAG using
kinetic assays in which the ability of the enzyme to excise two lesions
contained in one piece of duplex DNA was examined., Kinetic data are also available that indicate AAG is able to search
both strands of substrate DNA and avoid obstacles using a “hopping”
mechanism. While the ability to slide
or hop along DNA requires a lower-affinity and nonspecific complex
between protein and DNA, base excision requires high-affinity and
specific interactions. Thus, one would expect AAG, and related enzymes,
to have differential modes of DNA binding. Evidence in support of
this idea is available for other glycosylase systems, including crystal
structures of a functional homologue of AAG from Escherichia
coli (AlkA),, as well as a crystal structure and single-molecule data for human 8-oxoguanine DNA glycosylase (reviewed in ref ()).

In the structural
studies presented here, we have captured two
novel states of AAG. One structure shows AAG making only nonspecific
contacts with DNA, depicting a “lower-affinity” or “searching”
protein–DNA complex. The other shows a higher-affinity complex
in which AAG is bound to two pieces of single-stranded DNA each containing
an εC lesion (ssεC) in an arrangement that resembles a
single-base loop structure. By comparing these structures to each
other and to previously determined structures of AAG bound with high
affinity to double-stranded DNA (dsDNA),,, we can investigate the molecular basis for the differential
affinities of this DNA repair protein for DNA and explore the recognition
events involved in identifying DNA lesions.

Materials and Methods
AAG Plasmid Construction and Protein Preparation
The
Δ79AAG plasmid was constructed as described previously. Briefly, 84 residues at the N-terminus of the
protein were truncated in this construct, and four extra residues
from a PreScission Protease cleavage site (GE Healthcare) (Gly80,
Pro81, His82, and Met83) were left behind after histidine tag cleavage.
Therefore, Thr84 begins the wild-type AAG sequence, but four residues
precede Thr84 such that Gly80 is now the N-terminus. We refer to this
truncated protein construct as Δ79AAG. It should be noted that
the AAG protein from previous structural studies was also termed Δ79AAG., However, in those studies, all residues contained in the construct
are of the wild-type sequence. The expression and purification of
the Δ79AAG protein were performed as described previously.

Crystallization of Δ79AAG with Single-Stranded εC
DNA
An equimolar ratio of Δ79AAG and 13-mer single-stranded
εC-containing DNA (ssεC) (5′-GAC ATG εCTT GCC T-3′) were mixed to yield a protein–DNA
complex concentration of 0.3 mM in the complex buffer [20 mM HEPES-NaOH
(pH 7.5), 100 mM NaCl, 0.1 mM EDTA, 5% (v/v) glycerol, and 1 mM DTT].
The complex was incubated on ice for 15 min and used for crystallization.
Crystals were obtained by the hanging drop vapor diffusion method
upon mixing 1 μL of the protein–DNA complex and 1 μL
of reservoir solution [100 mM BIS-TRIS (pH 5.5), 200 mM cesium chloride,
and 20% polyethylene glycol (PEG) 3350] over 0.5 mL of reservoir solution.
Crystals appeared after incubation for 14 days at 22 °C. These
crystals were cryoprotected with precipitation solution supplemented
with 10% glycerol and flash-frozen in liquid nitrogen prior to the
collection of data.

Data Collection and Structure Determination
X-ray diffraction
data were collected at the Advanced Light Source (Berkeley, CA) on
beamline 12.3.1 at 100 K to 2.0 Å resolution and processed using
Denzo/Scalepack (Table S1 of the ). The structure, with
two molecules in the asymmetric unit, was determined by molecular
replacement in PHASER using the coordinates
from the Δ79AAG–pyr:T complex structure
(PDB entry 1BNK()). Refinement was conducted in CNS and Refmac 5.4,, using topology
and parameter files for the εC lesion generated by XPLO2D. Additional rounds of refinement using TLS parameters
and noncrystallographic symmetry restraints were very effective in
improving the quality of the fit. Model building was performed using
Coot, and figures were prepared using
PyMOL. The final model converged to an R factor of 21.9 (Rfree = 26.5)
(Table S1 of the ) and was evaluated using PROCHECK and
composite omit maps. As we observed in our previously determined structure
using this protein construct, the positively
charged N-termini of both molecules of Δ79AAG in the asymmetric
unit occupy what was initially identified as a sodium ion site by
Ellenberger and co-workers. Although this
coordination of the N-terminus is common to our Δ79AAG structures,
the packing of the molecules in this study allowed AAG to crystallize
in a novel space group (P43). The following
residues of the total sequence of residues 80–298 lack electron
density and are therefore not included in the model: 201–208,
265, 266, and 294–298 in chain A (pseudoduplex structure) and
131–141, 199–206, 253, 254, 263–273, and 290–298
in chain B (lower-affinity AAG). Because of a lack of interpretable
electron density for the side chains of some residues in the structure
(L200, L209, and E250 in chain A and P144, I161, M164, and R212 in
chain B), these residues were modeled as alanines. Nucleotides G1′
and C11′–T13′ of the strand containing the nucleotide-flipped
εC lesion and T9–T13 of the pseudocomplement strand are
disordered.

Results
The structure of Δ79AAG in the presence
of stoichiometric
amounts of single-stranded εC-containing DNA (ssεC) was
determined to 2.0 Å resolution by molecular replacement using
the previously determined structure of Δ79AAG bound to pyrrolidine-containing
DNA (abbreviated Δ79AAG–pyr:T) (PDB
entry 1BNK()) as a search model. The final structure, with
two molecules of Δ79AAG in the asymmetric unit, has been refined
to an R factor of 21.9 (Rfree = 26.5) (Table S1 of the ). Instead of observing two Δ79AAG molecules each bound to
one ssεC DNA, we obtained two different and unique structures
of this protein. During crystallization, the ssεC oligonucleotides
formed a self-complementary pseudoduplex, which is specifically recognized
by a single molecule of Δ79AAG in the asymmetric unit (Figure A,B, orange). We will refer to this interaction
as the pseudoduplex structure. Although the other molecule of Δ79AAG
in the asymmetric unit is also interacting with an εC-containing
DNA strand, it makes only nonspecific contacts with the phosphodiester
backbone and leaves the εC lesion untouched (Figure B and Figure S1 of the ). This nonspecific protein–DNA interaction
will be termed the lower-affinity structure (Figure A,B, green). The 13-mer pseudoduplex piece of DNA that we
observe crystallographically is highly unlikely to persist in solution,
which precludes traditional binding measurements. We have studied
the binding of Δ79AAG to 13-mer ssεC oligonucleotides
by gel shift assays as previously described and found no measurable affinity (Figure S2 of the ). These same assays have shown high-affinity
Δ79AAG binding (Kd = 21 ± 3
nM) for preannealed 13-mer doubled-stranded εC oligonucleotides,
and this highly specific interaction is depicted by a crystal structure
with the same dsDNA. With these data in
mind, the molecules of Δ79AAG shown in Figure  must have affinities for their 13-mer oligonucleotides that
fall in the range from immeasurably weak, as observed for true single-stranded
DNA, to high (Kd = 10–23 nM), as
measured for preannealed dsDNA. Considering
the green molecule (Figure ) has only a few
nonspecific contacts with the DNA whereas the orange molecule has
many specific contacts and closely resembles the high-affinity structures
determined previously with dsDNA,,, these structures appear to represent lower- and higher-affinity
states, respectively, and will be referred to as such.

Structures of Δ79AAG
bound to εC DNA. (A) Δ79AAG
crystallized in the presence of ssεC DNA has two Δ79AAG
molecules in the asymmetric unit: one that makes few contacts with
DNA and represents a lower-affinity complex (green) and one that makes
multiple contacts with DNA and represents a higher-affinity complex
(orange). The two strands of ssεC DNA, which form a pseudoduplex,
are shown as sticks with cyan carbons. Panel I displays Tyr162 (orange
sticks) intercalating DNA while the εC lesion is flipped into
the active site. Panel II depicts the lower-affinity interaction between
Δ79AAG and DNA where Tyr162 (green sticks) stacks with nucleotide
A2′. Atoms are colored as follows: red for oxygen, blue for
nitrogen, and orange for phosphorus. A blue star denotes the location
of the empty active site of lower-affinity AAG. (B) Schematic illustration
of the interactions between the two strands of ssεC DNA and
amino acid side chains (three-letter code) and main chains (mc) of
the Δ79AAG molecules. Amino acid labels from the lower- and
higher-affinity (pseudoduplex-bound) Δ79AAG molecules are colored
green and orange, respectively. Hydrogen bonds are indicated by solid
lines and van der Waals interactions by dashed lines. DNA bases are
shown as rectangles containing one-letter codes and numbers that signify
their respective positions in the oligonucleotide (5′ to 3′).
All DNA bases contained in the nucleotide-flipped εC lesion
strand are denoted with a prime. Disordered nucleotides are shown
in dashed lines. (C) Nucleotide interactions near the lesion in Δ79AAG−εC:G
dsDNA (PDB entry 3QI5) (yellow carbons). Relevant distances shown by dashed lines are
given in angstroms. (D) Nucleotide interactions near the lesion in
the pseudoduplex Δ79AAG structure (cyan carbons). (E) van der
Waals interactions with G19 in the Δ79AAG−εC:G
structure. (F) van der Waals interactions with A2 in the pseudoduplex
Δ79AAG structure.

Δ79AAG Pseudoduplex Structure
In the pseudoduplex
structure, the canonical nucleotide flipping mechanism of DNA glycosylases
can be observed with Tyr162 inserted into the DNA duplex while the
lesion nucleoside (εC7′) from one ssεC strand is
flipped into the enzyme active site (Figure A, panel I). Interestingly, the interactions of the active site with
the εC lesion for this pseudoduplex structure are identical
to those of Δ79AAG with dsDNA (abbreviated Δ79AAG−εC:G)
(PDB entry 3QI5()), and both structures share a high degree
of overall similarity with a root-mean-square deviation (rmsd) between
α-carbons of 0.43 Å (Figure S3 of the ). This pseudoduplex structure is also
very similar to the structure of Δ79AAG with substrate lesion
εA in dsDNA (abbreviated Δ79AAG−εA:T) (PDB
entry 1F4R()), with an rmsd for α-carbons of 0.93 Å.

Although nucleotide flipping is observed in the pseudoduplex structure,
the interactions surrounding the intercalated residue (Tyr162) are
not identical to those previously observed in the structure of AAG
with εC-containing dsDNA. In the Δ79AAG−εC:G
structure, a potential steric clash of Tyr162 with G19 (base opposite
εC) is prevented by a shifting of G19 out of the minor groove,
leaving it without a base pairing partner (Figure C,E). In contrast, A2 of the pseudoduplex
structure avoids a steric clash with a sideways motion that allows
for hydrogen bonding to T8′ of the opposite strand (Figure D,F). This sideways motion also changes the orientation
of the neighboring base G1, such that it now hydrogen bonds to T9′
(Figure D). Although Met164 contacts the “opposite
bases” (G19 and A2) in both structures, the orientation of
the interaction is also different (Figure E,F).

Δ79AAG Lower-Affinity Structure
The lower-affinity
structure of Δ79AAG shows only nonspecific interactions (Figure A,B, green), with hydrogen bonding contacts to the
phosphodiester backbone by the side chains of Arg182, Arg197, and
Arg207 and the main chain amides of Ser219 and Lys220 (Figures B and A). Interestingly,
the protein residue that normally intercalates substrate DNA, Tyr162,
is contacting the pseudoduplex by stacking with nucleotide A2′
(Figure A, panel II, and Figure B). While this Tyr162 adopts a similar orientation as found
for intercalated Tyr162 residues from the higher-affinity complex
structures (e.g., panel A vs panel B of Figure ), it has higher B factors, indicating increased
conformational flexibility (see Figure S4B of the ). In addition to stacking with Tyr162,
A2′ hydrogen bonds with T8, leaving εC7 orphaned in terms
of base pairing (Figure C). This εC7
lesion also has no interaction with protein residues (Figure S1 of
the ).

Tyr162 contacts in lower-affinity
Δ79AAG. (A) Hydrogen bonding
contacts (dashed lines, distances in angstroms) for lower-affinity
Δ79AAG (green) with pseudoduplex DNA (cyan carbons), and non-carbon
atoms colored as in Figure . (B) van der Waals
radii for the protein and DNA are shown in gray spheres with all other
representations and colors as in panel A. (C) Same depiction as panel
B with the orientation changed slightly to show relevant distances
(in angstroms) as depicted by dashed lines and to draw attention to
the rotation of εC7 out of the pseudoduplex.

Comparison of the lower-affinity Δ79AAG structure
with the
high-affinity Δ79AAG−εA:T structure. (A) Δ79AAG
(purple cartoon) bound to an εA lesion (stick form with cyan
carbons) with active site residue His136 and intercalating Tyr162
represented in stick form with purple and yellow carbons, respectively
(PDB entry 1F4R()). Oxygen atoms are colored red and nitrogen
atoms blue. Regions that become disordered in the absence of a bound
DNA adduct are circled and labeled 1–3. (B) Lower-affinity
AAG (green) with Tyr162 (yellow). Loops 1–3 and other atoms
are colored as in panel A. (C) Binding pocket for the εA lesion
shown with van der Waals surfaces for protein residues (gray spheres)
and εA lesion (cyan sphere). (D) Disrupted binding pocket in
lower-affinity AAG with van der Waals surfaces colored as in panel
B. (E) Electrostatic representation of Δ79AAG−εA:T
calculated in the absence of DNA where blue surfaces are more positive,
red surfaces more negative, and white surfaces near neutral. The position
of Tyr162 is denoted with a yellow star. (F) Electrostatic representation
of lower-affinity AAG with colors and symbols as in panel E. (G) Same
depiction as panel E but with substrate DNA modeled (orange cartoon).
(H) Same electrostatic depiction as panel F aligned and superimposed
with a cartoon model (purple) of Δ79AAG−εA:T. Disordered
regions that affect electrostatic potential are circled and represent
the same loops as in panels A and B.

Overall, the structure of lower-affinity Δ79AAG
is similar
to other structures of this protein, including the pseudoduplex structure
described above (rmsd for α-carbons of 1.27 Å), the structure
of the Δ79AAG−εC:G complex (rmsd for α-carbons
of 1.26 Å), and the structure of
Δ79AAG−εA:T (rmsd for α-carbons of 1.18 Å). While these rmsds are low, the lower-affinity
structure has three distinct disordered regions compared to the Δ79AAG−εA:T
structure (Figure A,B). Because there are
no lattice contacts in this area (Figure S1 of the ), we can attribute the disorder to
the absence of a bound nucleotide in the active site of lower-affinity
AAG. The residues that lack electron density in the low-affinity complex,
and are thus considered disordered, include Glu131–Arg141 (loop
1), Gly263–Lys273 (loop 2), and C-terminal residues after Asp289
(loop 3) (Figure A,B). Loop 1 contains crucial
active site residues, including Ala134–His136, which form a
snug pocket for lesion bases (Figure C). This
binding pocket is only partially formed in the absence of a bound
nucleotide (Figure D). Disordered loops 2
and 3 are not involved in forming the active site but contribute to
the electrostatic potential of the protein (Figure E–H).

Electrostatic surfaces for Δ79AAG−εA:T
(after
removing the DNA) and for lower-affinity Δ79AAG are considerably
different (Figure E,F) [all electrostatic
depictions were calculated using the Adaptive Poisson–Boltzmann
Solver (APBS) software plug-in for PyMOL]. The Δ79AAG−εA:T complex
shows a continuous, and richly positive, DNA-binding surface as would
be expected for a protein that contacts DNA with high affinity (Figure E,G). In contrast, the DNA-binding surface for the
lower-affinity structure is more neutral with disordered loops 1–3
disrupting positive patches observed in the Δ79AAG−εA:T
high-affinity complex (Figure E–H).
Other regions of the protein show little difference in the ordered
electrostatic surface, such as the area near the intercalating residue
Tyr162 (marked with a star in Figures  and ). Also, both structures display a positively charged
electrostatic surface that circles the protein molecule from the top
of Δ79AAG to the bottom (see the middle panels of Figure A,B), as well as a negative electrostatic region
located opposite the DNA binding surface (Figure ).

Proposal for how AAG can recognize DNA with two different affinities.
The electrostatic representations from panels E and F of Figure  are displayed in panels A and B for Δ79AAG−εA:T
and lower-affinity Δ79AAG, respectively, with the same coloring
and symbols as in Figure . The orientations
of the molecules start as in Figure  and are
then rotated 120° counterclockwise (in two 60° steps) along
the vertical axis such that the continuous positive surface can be
visualized. (C) Cartoon depiction of the search on DNA by AAG, where
blue and red represent positively and negatively charged surfaces,
respectively. Relevant steps are labeled, and a lesion base is denoted
as a green line. The AAG catalysis complex is a darker shade of blue
to represent the more ordered positive surface visualized crystallographically
(panel A vs panel B above).

Discussion
DNA glycosylases are charged with the formidable
task of locating
and repairing potentially harmful DNA lesions while avoiding the million-fold
excess of normal, healthy DNA bases. The difficulty of this searching
process can be partially overcome by the formation of a weak complex
between protein and DNA, effectively creating a nonspecific, one-dimensional
search. However, to maintain fidelity and genomic integrity, the enzyme
must also be able to form a stronger, highly specific complex for
lesion recognition and excision. Therefore, the ability to adopt both
low- and high-affinity conformations appears to be advantageous. Here,
we have trapped a human DNA glycosylase, AAG, in both lower- and higher-affinity
complexes with DNA (Figure ), providing two
snapshots of this enzyme that relate to this search process.

Interestingly, AAG has been shown to bind with high affinity to
DNA damage that it can repair (such as εA lesions) as well as
to damage that it cannot repair (such as εC lesions and one-base
loops).−, Crystallographic studies
have provided molecular insight into how AAG recognizes both εA
and εC lesions within dsDNA,, but no structure
of AAG bound to a one-base loop or in a low-affinity complex with
DNA has been determined. The pseudoduplex structure that we present
here appears to be the best representation available of how AAG could
bind to such a DNA loop structure. In a one-base loop, one nucleoside
is “looped out” of the DNA, and the base opposite the
looped out base hydrogen bonds with an adjacent base instead (Scheme C). This arrangement of bases resembles what we
observe in the pseudoduplex structure and represents a major departure
from the hydrogen bonding pattern of nucleotides observed in other
AAG–DNA complexes (e.g., Figure C).
The looped out base is nicely accommodated in the AAG active site
with interactions identical to those observed previously for an εC
lesion (Figure S3B of the ). In addition, the close resemblance
of the pseudoduplex structure to previously determined structures
of Δ79AAG bound to dsDNA,, is consistent with the idea that this structure represents a high-affinity
complex between AAG and DNA. This observation is in agreement with
the high-affinity binding observed between AAG and a one-base loop
structure in vitro. A physiological rationale
for why AAG binds to DNA damage that it cannot repair remains to be
determined: while tight binding of AAG to lesions it can repair such
as εA can be beneficial to the cell, tight binding of AAG to base loop structures shields them from repair,
increasing mutation rates. As the physiological
significance of this behavior of AAG is elucidated, our work suggests
a molecular basis for the recognition of base loops by this human
DNA repair protein.

Excitingly, our crystallization conditions
have also yielded the
first nonspecific or lower-affinity depiction of AAG, providing insight
into a conformation of the protein likely responsible for inspecting
DNA for damage. Although the top side of the active site, including
the position of the putative catalytic water, agrees well with high-affinity
lesion-bound structures (Figure S3B of the ), the residues comprising the active site floor
are disordered (Figure ). This observation
of a partially ordered active site suggests an order of events for
the binding of AAG to DNA in which a lesion base is first identified
by a more dynamic state of the protein and is later recognized with
high affinity as the active site pocket closes around the nucleotide-flipped
lesion. Our structural studies are consistent with fluorescence-based
kinetic assays, which have provided evidence of a two-state lesion
recognition process for AAG, where the active site experiences changes
in environment prior to nucleotide flipping., This initial state observed kinetically has been likened to the
initial recognition complexes suggested for other glycosylases.,

With the lesion flipped into the active site, an intercalating
residue (Tyr162 for AAG) maintains the double-helical DNA structure.
An interesting point of discussion in the DNA repair literature is
whether intercalating residues play an active or passive role in lesion
recognition, in other words, whether the intercalating residue directly
interrogates base pairs (active) or the success of the search relies
on the intercalating residue filling the gap left behind by a flipped
lesion (passive). Two recent structural studies on the glycosylases
MutM and the functional homologue of AAG from E. coli, AlkA, have provided conflicting answers to this question. In both
studies, the glycosylases were linked to undamaged DNA in a stable
complex using disulfide cross-links,, and the position
of the intercalating residue was evaluated. For MutM, the intercalating
residue (Phe114) is fully inserted into the DNA duplex, buckling the
bases with which it interacts, as the protein simultaneously bends
the DNA, suggestive of an active interrogation mode. In contrast, the structures of AlkA with undamaged DNA
show snapshots of a glycosylase in a more passive interrogation mode,
with the intercalating residue (Leu125) situated completely outside
of a double helix, which maintains all base stacking interactions
and remains mostly linear. In our lower-affinity
structure, the intercalating residue of AAG, Tyr162, has increased
flexibility but still maintains the same average position for its
side chain as is found in the higher-affinity structures (e.g., panels
A vs panel B of Figure ). Tyr162 is also still
involved in a stacking interaction with a nucleotide (A2′)
even when intercalation is not possible (Figure ). This observation suggests that Tyr162 is capable of forming both
lower- and higher-affinity interactions with DNA, possibly playing
roles both in a lower-affinity searching process and in a higher-affinity
“recognition” process. Consistent with an ability to
form different types of interactions, the Tyr162 loop is flexible,
displaying B factors approximately 2-fold higher
than average for this crystal structure (Figure S4 of the ).

Just as residues
in the active site of AAG are disordered in the
absence of a tightly bound DNA lesion, residues that contribute to
the positive electrostatic surface are also disordered (loops 2 and
3 in Figure  and Figure S1 of the ). The highly positively
charged and complementary surface of AAG that binds DNA with high
affinity (Figure E,G) is disrupted in the
low-affinity structure (Figure F,H). Loops
2 and 3 are not preordered, ready to bind with high affinity to a
DNA lesion. Instead, they are highly mobile, suggesting that they
could play an active role in interrogating DNA.

In terms of
interrogating DNA, there is strong evidence that the
searching process of DNA binding proteins is not a strictly linear
scan of DNA. A single-molecule study of eight different DNA binding
proteins, including three glycosylases, found that the movements of
these proteins along DNA were better described by a rotation-coupled
sliding mechanism. Such movement would
orient the enzyme so that its binding surface always faces the axis
of the DNA double helix. In essence, these proteins circle the DNA
while diffusing along it. The electrostatic potential surface calculated
for AAG is consistent with this rotation-coupled search mechanism.
In both higher- and lower-affinity AAG complexes, a positive electrostatic
surface is found to wrap around the protein (Figure A,B). This surface could be used to “roll” or
“rock” back and forth along the negatively charged DNA
backbone, while the presence of a negatively charged electrostatic
cap on the opposite face of AAG (red in Figure ) would maintain the correct orientation for lesion recognition.
Hopping, another DNA search method, has been established for AAG through
the use of kinetic assays. Hopping, or
short-range dissociation–association events, allows AAG to
search both DNA strands simultaneously and avoid obstacles, such as
a DNA-encasing endonuclease like EcoRI, that may
be present along the search path. Rotation-coupled
sliding and hopping are not mutually exclusive, and we consider both
in the proposed search mechanism for AAG that is outlined in Figure C.

In the initial search, we propose that
AAG closely resembles the
lower-affinity structure, interacting with DNA nonspecifically through
its positive electrostatic surface. Incorrect orientation of AAG would
be avoided because of the negative electrostatic patch opposite the
active site (Figure B). The positive surface
that wraps around AAG would promote a rotation-coupled sliding search
of the DNA, while still allowing for the hopping events described
above. As a lesion is recognized, disordered regions of AAG, including
the active site pocket, become more ordered (Figure ). After nucleotide flipping, AAG adopts a higher-affinity
conformation such as the pseudoduplex structure (Figure A, orange) or dsDNA structures published previously.,, Here, previously disordered loops
are completely ordered to display the full potential of a continuous
electrostatic surface for binding DNA; Tyr162 is fully inserted into
the DNA, and a base lesion is bound tightly in the AAG active site.
This lesion recognition complex would interact very strongly with
the DNA, halting the search by AAG. In cases where the lesion is a
substrate, base excision would follow. After the release of the base–lesion
contact, the active site and other loops of AAG would become partially
disordered, decreasing the extent of order of the DNA binding surface,
ultimately leaving AAG in its lower-affinity, nonspecific searching
state once again. In cases where the lesion cannot be repaired, AAG
would remain fixed in its higher-affinity state, providing a rationale
for the abortive AAG−εC complexes observed in vivo.

The two novel structures of human AAG
presented here help provide
a molecular understanding of this intriguing DNA repair protein, both
in terms of understanding how AAG can recognize different types of
DNA damage, such as base lesions and one-base loops, and in terms
of how it may search the genome for DNA damage. With recent literature
describing an enhanced ability of AAG both to repair base lesions and to identify DNA damage that it cannot repair,,, this study provides important
insight into the molecular basis of AAG interactions.

Supporting Information Available
Crystallographic data collection
and refinement statistics (Table S1), additional figures of the crystal
structure (Figures S1, S3, and S4), and raw gel mobility shift assay
data (Figure S2). This material is available free of charge via the
Internet at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bi201484k_si_001.pdf

Abbreviations
AAGhuman
alkyladenine DNA glycosylase

BERbase excision repair

εA1,N6-ethenoadenine

Δ79AAGN-terminal truncation
mutant of AAG

εC3,N4-ethenocytosine

AlkAE. coli alkyladenine
DNA
glycosylase

ssεCsingle-stranded 3,N4-ethenocytosine-containing
DNA

dsDNAdouble-stranded
DNA

HEPES4-(2-hydroxyethyl)-1-piperazineethanesulfonic
acid

EDTAethylenediaminetetraacetic
acid

DTTdithiothreitol

BIS-TRIS2,2-bis(hydroxymethyl)-2,2′,2″-nitrilotriethanol

PEGpolyethylene glycol

Δ79AAG–pyr:TΔ79AAG bound to pyrrolidine-containing dsDNA

PDBProtein Data Bank

Kddissociation constant

Δ79AAG−εC:GΔ79AAG bound to
3,N4-ethenocytosine-containing dsDNA

rmsdroot-mean-square
deviation

Δ79AAG−εA:TΔ79AAG bound to 1,N6-ethenoadenine-containing
dsDNA

APBSAdaptive
Poisson–Boltzmann Solver

EcoRIrestriction endonuclease, type
II from E. coli.

