We recently provided evidence− based on nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) R1ρ relaxation dispersion (RD)− and single-atom
substitution experiments that G·C and A·T Watson–Crick
(WC) base pairs (bps) transiently form Hoogsteen (HG) bps with populations of ∼0.4 and 0.7% and
lifetimes of 1.7 and 0.3 ms at pH ∼5.4 (Figure A). HG bps form through a 180° rotation of the purine
base around the glycosidic bond from an anti to a syn conformation (Figure A). By
modifying the structural and chemical presentation of DNA and modulating
nucleobase accessibility, HG bps can play unique roles (reviewed in
ref ()) in DNA–protein
recognition,− DNA damage induction and repair,, and replication.,

We provided evidence of
transient HG bps based on analysis of R1ρ RD experiments, which quantify the
degree of line broadening due to chemical exchange with a transient
low-population species. A two-state analysis
of the RD data measured on a variety of G·C and A·T Watson–Crick
bps in canonical duplex DNA was consistent with the existence of a
transient species that features downfield-shifted purine base C8 and
sugar C1′ chemical shifts. These chemical shifts are a hallmark
of syn purine, where the base flips 180° about
the glycosidic bond. Such a syn purine can be paired
with pyrimidine via HG pairing. By using chemical modification, including
N1-methyladenine (N1-Me-A) and N1-methylguanine (N1-Me-G), which are
naturally occurring damaged forms of purine bases, we successfully
trapped HG bps in duplex DNA and showed that they have the characteristic
downfield-shifted carbon chemical shifts. As further support for the assignment of HG bps for the observed
transient state, we subsequently showed that the single-atom substitution,
7-deazaguanine and 7-deazaadenine, which specifically knocks out an
HG H-bond between guanine N7 and cytosine N3 (N7···H–+N3) without affecting WC H-bonds, destabilizes the transient
state, such that it can no longer be detected by NMR RD.

Here, we sought to shift the WC–HG
equilibrium in the other
direction, toward the HG state. In G·C bps, a transition toward
HG bps preserves the O6···H–N4 H-bond present
in WC pairing but leads to the loss of the N1–H···N3
and N2–H···O2 H-bonds, which are replaced with
a single N7···H–+N3 H-bond that further
requires protonation of cytosine N3 (Figure ). Therefore, one would expect that, in inosine, the loss of the
exocyclic amino group at position C2 of guanine would lead to the
loss of a WC H-bond without affecting HG pairing and, consequently,
lead to an increase in the population of the transient state observed
using NMR RD.

To examine the impact that replacement of guanine
in the CA step
with inosine would have on the WC–HG equilibrium, we prepared
an A6-DNA duplex (A6-DNAI10) (Figure A), in which G10 was replaced with I10. We previously
reported detailed NMR characterization of transient HG bps in A6-DNA as well as variants that bear chemical modifications
and mutations at the same position.− Because of difficulties
in preparing isotopically 13C/15N-labeled oligonucleotides
with a modified inosine base that are required for obtaining high-quality
off-resonance RD data, the strand complementary to the inosine-containing
strand was 13C- and 15N-labeled. The two-dimensional 13C–1H heteronuclear single-quantum coherence
NMR spectra of this selectively labeled strand were in very good agreement
with spectra of A6-DNA indicating formation of a WC-like
I·C bp that does not impact neighboring bps (Figure S1 of the ). Because I10 could not
be isotopically enriched and the unlabeled strand concentration was
not high enough (∼0.5 mM), making it difficult to measure reliable R1ρ RD data at natural abundance, the complementary
labeled C15 residue was used to probe chemical exchange at the I·C
bp. In particular, formation of a G·C+ HG bp is accompanied
by a significant downfield shift of the C-C6 chemical shift due to
protonation of C-N3, and this can be used to probe the WC–HG
equilibrium. Here, replacement of G10
with I10 resulted in a measurable downfield chemical shift change
toward the transient HG state as well as significant line broadening
at C15-C6, consistent with increased WC–HG exchange at the
I·C bp.

WC–HG equilibrium in canonical G·C and inosine-substituted
I·C base pairs. Shown are the relative populations (pA and pB) and transient state
lifetimes (τB) obtained from 13C NMR RD
at 26 °C and pH 5.4.

To quantify transient HG bp formation, we collected on- and
off-resonance 13C RD dispersion on C15-C6 in A6-DNAI10. We observed substantially larger RD for C-C6
in the I·C bp
than for C-C6 or G-C8 in the G·C bp under similar conditions
(Figure B). A
two-state analysis of the RD data allowed for determination of all
chemical exchange parameters, including the transient state chemical
shift [ΔωAB(C6) = ωB(C6) –
ωA(C6)], population (pB), and lifetime (τB = 1/k2) (Figure S2 and Table 2 of the ). The transient state chemical shift for C15-C6 is ∼2.3 ppm
downfield-shifted relative to the GS, consistent with formation of
a HG bp, and is in excellent agreement with the downfield shift (∼2.3
ppm) obtained when the G10·C15 bp in A6-DNA is changed
to a HG bp using guanine N1-methylation.

The magnitude of the C15-C6 downfield chemical shift is similar
to that previously seen in C-C6 (∼2.2 ppm) or G-C8 (∼3.7
ppm) in transient G·C HG bps and
cannot explain the RD observed in the I·C bp being much larger
than that in the G·C bp. Rather, the larger RD arises primarily
from a substantial 17-fold increase in the population of HG bps in
I·C (pB ∼ 11.8%) as compared
to G·C (pB ∼ 0.7%). This is
in accord with our expectations based on the loss of WC H-bonds without
significantly affecting HG H-bonds. In particular, the relative stability
of the WC bp is decreased by ∼1.8 kcal/mol in I·C compared
to that in G·C. This is consistent with previous studies showing
an ∼2 kcal/mol loss of B-DNA stability from a single G·C
to I·C substitution, and could be explained
by the loss of a single N–H···O bond or replacement
of the N–H···O bond with a weaker C–H···O
bond. The increase in the HG population
is accompanied by an increase in chemical exchange rate kex (kex = k1 + k2 increases ∼6-fold
from ∼600 s–1 in G·C to 3500 s–1 in I·C), which corresponds to an ∼100-fold increase
in the forward rate constant k1 and a
much smaller ∼5-fold increase in the reverse rate constant k2. This translates into a simultaneous decrease
in the free energy difference between WC and HG states (ΔGWC-HG) and the free energy required to
reach the transition state (ΔG⧧WC-HG), which is in turn consistent with selective
destabilization of WC due to the inosine substitution. We recently
reported a similar trend based on ϕ value analysis of WC-to-HG
transitions measured across diverse DNA sequence and position contexts,
where k1 increased in sequences with more
abundant HG bps and k2 exhibited a much
weaker sequence dependence. These results
implied that the variations in the relative energetic stabilities
of HG bps are dominated by variations in the stabilities of WC bps,
as demonstrated by a direct correlation between ΔGWC-HG and ΔG⧧WC-HG. Importantly,
the observed correlation of sequence-dependent ΔG values for WC bps extrapolates to the ΔG values
for the modified I·C bp (Figure C) and
strongly supports our earlier proposal that WC bp stabilities, unlike
HG bp stabilities, are highly sequence-dependent.

The 5-fold
increase in k2 could arise
from destabilization of the HG bp, possibly because of the loss of
H-bonding with solvent, or, alternatively, stabilization
of the TS due to removal of the bulky amine group and more facile
rotation of the purine base within the helix. While the structure
of the TS remains unknown, most crystal structures of HG bps display
H-bonds between G-NH2 and the backbone phosphate or water
molecules. The loss of the NH2 group in inosine could contribute
to the small (&lt;1 kcal/mol) decrease in the stability of the transient
HG I·C+ versus G·C+ state.

As
a control, we conducted on-resonance 13C R1ρ RD experiments at natural abundance
on inosine C8 in an I·T bp, which should not be capable of stably
forming HG bps. This is because only one H-bond can form in the I·T
HG bp without additional tautomerization and/or protonation. Indeed,
we observed no evidence of chemical exchange at I-C8 (Figure B), supporting the idea that the observed transient
state results from specific pairing of inosine with an appropriate
HG pairing partner.

The results presented here provide additional
evidence in support
of transient HG bps in a canonical duplex and also show that HG bps
can exist in much greater abundance in I·C bps. Inosine is a
rare form of mutagenic damage that is recognized and excised by conserved
repair enzymes such as DNA glycosylases and endonuclease V. It is conceivable that the HG-type bps participate
more broadly in damage recognition and repair, as could be the case
for G·G, A·A, and A·C mispairs where the partially
exposed HG face of the syn-purine is specifically
recognized by the DNA mismatch repair enzyme MutS or for the common oxidative damage 8-oxoguanine, which
can form a stable HG-type bp with adenine. HG-type bps involving inosine have already been implicated as the
source of mutagenic substitutions, most frequently from A-T to G-C. For example, syn-inosine has
been observed to form an HG-type bp with protonated adenine at near-neutral
pH, which affords a possible mode of
recognition for I·A+ mispairs. The observation of
more abundant HG bps in I·C also raises the possibility that
other forms of damage and chemical modifications may increase the
abundance of these bps in genomes where they can potentially conduct
unique biological functions.

Increased level of R1ρ RD and
HG bp formation at I·C. (A) A6-DNA highlighting the
A·T or G·C bp substituted with inosine at the purine base.
(B) On-resonance 13C R1ρ RD profiles comparing chemical exchange in G·C, I·C, and
I·T bps (pH 5.2 for G·C C-C6 and pH 5.4 for all others).
Solid lines represent best global fits to eq S1 of the . (C) Correlation between
ΔG⧧WC-HG and ΔGWC-HG for WC bps (data for the I·C bp colored blue). Shown
are the best-fit line and corresponding Pearson coefficient (R) with (---) or without (—) inclusion of the I·C
bp.

Supporting Information Available
Methods, Tables 1 and 2, and
Figures S1 and S2. This material is available free of charge via the
Internet at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bi5011909_si_001.pdf

This study was
supported by National Institutes of Health Grant GM089846 awarded
to H.M.A.-H.

The authors declare no
competing financial interest.

