Natural products
and their derivatives
are vital for human health, as they comprise more than one-third of
all Food and Drug Administration-approved small molecule drugs. Many of these compounds are antibiotics that
are biosynthesized by microbes via nonribosomal peptide synthesis
(NRPS) pathways. NRPS pathways are designed
such that various enzymes act in an assembly line fashion to build
up peptide chains using a broad range of both canonical and derivatized
amino acids. Even with the chemical diversity present in currently
available antibiotics, which is largely generated from the variety
of permutations available in NRPS and similar systems, there exists
a pressing need for new therapeutic candidates to combat drug-resistant
infections. Therefore, finding new molecular
scaffolds with therapeutic benefit, and elucidating the biosynthetic
pathways necessary to construct such compounds, is increasingly important.

Kutznerides make up a recently discovered class of antifungal antimicrobials
produced by the soil actinomycete Kutzneria sp. 744., These natural products are highly decorated, cyclic hexadepsipeptides
(Figure a), which are constructed via NRPS.
The gene cluster encoding this NRPS pathway has been elucidated, and the functions of many of its biosynthetic
components have been demonstrated in vitro.− One of these enzymes, KtzI, was originally annotated as a 47 kDa
flavin-dependent lysine/ornithine N-monooxygenase
(hydroxylase), and this proposed activity
was further investigated biochemically.

Kutzneride
scaffold cryptically incorporates the product of KtzI.
(a) The kutzneride hexadepsipetides are highly decorated natural products
produced by nonribosomal peptide synthesis (NRPS). The piperazic acid
moiety (red) of this scaffold is derived from the l-N5-hydroxyornithine produced by KtzI. (b) KtzI
uses FAD, NADPH, and O2 to catalyze the production of its
hydroxy product from l-ornithine (-OH colored red), which
is further processed and inserted into the kutzneride scaffold by
downstream enzymes.

KtzI was found to use
a noncovalently bound FAD cofactor, reducing
equivalents from NADPH or NADH (albeit less efficiently), and molecular
oxygen to install a hydroxyl group on the side chain nitrogen of l-ornithine (l-Orn), producing l-N5-hydroxyornithine (Figure b).
Binding of substrate analogue l-lysine causes oxidation of
the NADPH cofactor, without subsequent production of hydroxylysine,
effectively uncoupling the reaction. This
specificity for the substrate, and the cofactor and cosubstrate usage,
is similar to that of previously characterized flavin N-hydroxylases.− However, KtzI does differ from these other systems in the fate of
its hydroxylated product.

The hydroxyornithine product of KtzI
is ultimately incorporated
into the kutzneride scaffold as the N–N bond-containing piperazic
acid moiety (Figure ), which has been shown to be crucial for the antibiotic activity
of these molecules. The intramolecular
cyclization necessary to reach this final structure, which is the
creation of a bond between N2 and N5 of hydroxyornithine,
is likely preceded by some further activation of the hydroxylamine,
but no candidate enzymes have yet been established. In any case, the
hydroxylation catalyzed by KtzI is not retained in the final piperazic
acid product and thus is known as a “cryptic” modification.
This use of cryptic N-hydroxylation for antibiotic biosynthesis is
a departure from the previously characterized members of the N-hydroxylase family. All other lysine and ornithine N-hydroxylases investigated to date have their hydroxy modifications
carried on to the final product, where these moieties are used as
ligands in iron-scavenging molecules called siderophores.− This divergence in the overall role of the N-hydroxylating protein
has no observable effect on the chemistry involved, however, as these
enzymes all catalyze the creation of a primary hydroxylamine product.

KtzI shares a high level of sequence homology (33% identical) with
the l-Orn N-hydroxylases from Pseudomonas
aeruginosa (PvdA) and Aspergillus fumigatus (SidA) (Figure S1 of the ), which have been characterized in detail both biochemically−,,,− and structurally., In the biochemical
studies, PvdA and SidA were proposed to follow a similar reaction
mechanism as outlined in Figure . Common to
most flavin monooxygenases, the oxidized FAD cofactor is reduced by
hydride transfer from the C4-pro-R position of the NADPH nicotinamide to the N5 position
of the flavin isoalloxazine ring, completing what is known as the
reductive half of the reaction (Figure , 1 → 3). The oxidative half of the reaction
begins when molecular oxygen adds to the reduced flavin species, creating
the highly reactive C4a-(hydro)peroxy intermediate (Figure , 4b and 5). Hydroxylation
occurs through nucleophilic attack by the bound substrate (here the
side chain amine of l-Orn) on the activated flavin–hydroperoxide
intermediate, producing both the hydroxylated product and a hydroxy-FAD
intermediate (Figure , 5 → 6). The oxidized flavin species is regenerated through the
loss of water, and that with the concomitant dissociation of end products
completes the catalytic cycle (Figure , 6 → 1). If the hydroperoxy–flavin
intermediate is not sufficiently protected or used improperly, it
is lost as the toxic byproduct hydrogen peroxide, thus uncoupling
the reductive and oxidative halves of the reaction and wasting the
reducing equivalents provided by NADPH (Figure , “uncoupling”). Even though the N-hydroxylases follow this canonical mechanism, they diverge in other
specifics and create what is effectively a hybrid between two flavin
monooxygenase archetypes known as “cautious” and “bold”
monooxygenases.

Proposed reaction mechanism for l-Orn N-hydroxylases. The flavin and nicotinamide cofactors are
truncated
to their reactive portions, and the schematic abbreviations are as
follows: E, enzyme; FADox, oxidized FAD; FADred, reduced FAD; FAD-OO–(H), (hydro)peroxyflavin; FAD-OH, hydroxyflavin; l-Orn, l-ornithine; l-N5OH-Orn, l-N5-hydroxyornithine.
There is biochemical evidence to suggest that the l-Orn substrate
binds with a protonated side chain amine (4a), but the neutral form is eventually necessary
for catalysis to occur, as it is used to attack the flavin–hydroperoxide
intermediate to generate the hydroxyornithine product (5 → 6).

The “cautious” (or class A) monooxygenases,
which
are typified by the extensively studied p-hydroxybenzoate
hydroxylase (PHBH) (reviewed in refs (−)), have a stringent substrate specificity and also maintain tight
regulation over the reductive half of their reaction cycle (Figure , 1 → 3). In these
enzymes, the rate of FAD reduction is intimately linked to substrate
binding, such that the presence of the hydroxylatable target greatly
enhances the reaction rate, upward of 105-fold for PHBH. This control point significantly decreases the
risk of uncoupling (Figure , “uncoupling”),
as the addition of O2 to reduced flavin, yielding the highly
reactive C4a-hydroxperoxy-flavin (Figure , 4b and 5), can occur only when the substrate
is present to accept its hydroxy modification. On the other hand,
in “bold” (or class B) monooxygenases, such as those
of the Baeyer–Villiger monooxygenase (BVMO) and flavin monooxygenase
(FMO) enzyme families, the reduction of FAD by NADPH occurs just as
well with or without bound substrate, and thus, they must utilize
a completely different tact to protect against uncoupling. In these
systems, the spent NADP+ cofactor remains bound to the
protein throughout the reaction cycle, protecting both the reduced
and the C4a-(hydro)peroxy-flavin species from being quenched (reviewed
in refs () and ()). “Bold”
monooxygenases also tend to have little substrate specificity, illustrated
by the more than 200 known compounds that the mammalian FMOs will
hydroxylate.

The N-monooxygenases, although formally grouped
with the class B monooxygenases, have
been found to carry traits from both classes described above. They
have the narrow substrate specificity of the “cautious”
enzymes but show no sign of substrate-assisted reduction of FAD and
remain bound to NADP+ throughout catalysis,− which are both fundamental characteristics of “bold”
monooxygenases. Structural insight into how catalysis is controlled
by these hybrid monooxygenases has been provided by a series of recent
crystal structures,, which describe how cofactors
and substrate are bound in the active site. In this study, we build
upon this structural knowledge by characterizing the N-hydroxylase KtzI in never-before-seen states of this enzyme class,
including the anaerobically reconstituted, “preturnover”
complex, and a view of the oxidized enzyme that suggests a drastic
conformational change, with a novel flavin movement, takes place.
The relevance of these unexpected conformational changes to catalysis
is discussed.

Materials and Methods
Protein Expression and
Purification
The ktzI gene was cloned into
a pET28a vector (Novagen), and the resulting
N-terminal hexahistidine construct was transformed into BL21(DE3)
cells (Invitrogen) as described previously. For protein overproduction, Luria-Bertani medium (LB) (100 mL supplemented
with 50 μg/mL kanamycin) was inoculated using a glycerol stock
of the expression strain and grown overnight at 30 °C and 200
rpm. Four 1 L cultures of LB containing 50 μg/mL kanamycin were
each inoculated with 20 mL of the overnight culture and incubated
at 25 °C and 200 rpm until the OD600 reached 0.5–0.6,
at which point protein expression was induced by the addition of 100
μM IPTG. The cells were grown for 16 h postinduction at 15 °C
and 200 rpm and harvested by centrifugation (6000g for 10 min). Cells were resuspended in lysis buffer [25 mM Tris-HCl
(pH 8.0) and 500 mM NaCl] and lysed by sonication. The lysate was
clarified by centrifugation (75000g for 35 min) and
incubated with 5 mL of Ni-NTA slurry that had been pre-equilibrated
in lysis buffer. This mixture was agitated at 4 °C for 1 h before
being loaded into a column for purification. The resin was washed
with lysis buffer supplemented with 0 mM (60 mL), 5 mM (60 mL), and
25 mM (60 mL) imidazole. KtzI was eluted with lysis buffer containing
200 mM (10 mL) and 500 mM (5 mL) imidazole, and the resulting eluate
was concentrated to ∼1 mL in a 10K molecular weight cutoff
(MWCO) filter (Millipore) by centrifugation (4500g for 10 min intervals). The concentrated sample was dialyzed against
protein storage buffer [20 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.0), 80 mM NaCl, and 10%
(v/v) glycerol] in a 10K MWCO dialysis cassette (Thermo Scientific)
over a period of 16 h with three buffer exchanges. The dialyzed protein
solution (∼20 mg/mL by UV absorption at 280 nm; εcalc = 48485 M–1 cm–1)
was flash-frozen in liquid nitrogen in 15 μL aliquots and stored
at −80 °C. The final KtzI protein construct has 21 non-native
amino acids (including the hexahistidine tag) at its N-terminus, followed
by the wild-type sequence beginning with a valine residue at position
3 (Val3) (Figure S1 of the ).

Reconstitution of KtzI for Crystallization
KtzI (10
mg/mL or ∼212 μM) was reconstituted with FAD (212 μM)
and NADPH (4.24 mM) for all crystallization trials. To obtain substrate-bound
structures, l-ornithine (31.8 mM) was added to this mixture.
FAD, NADPH, and l-ornithine (all from Sigma-Aldrich) were
diluted such that the final buffer composition of the reconstituted
sample prior to crystallization included 20 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.0),
80 mM NaCl, and 5% (v/v) glycerol. For anaerobic reconstitution, frozen
tubes of KtzI protein and aliquots of FAD, NADPH, and l-ornithine
powder were degassed and brought into an anaerobic chamber [95% argon
and 5% hydrogen (COY Laboratory Products, Inc.)] prior to dilution
with anaerobic buffer. All solutions for anaerobic manipulations had
argon bubbled through them to remove oxygen. The final reconstituted
samples were incubated in a cold block (∼4 °C) for 1 h
before crystallization. Under anaerobic conditions, the characteristic
color change from oxidized (FADox, yellow) to reduced (FADred, colorless)
flavin could be observed in the sample, indicating hydride transfer
from NADPH to FAD had occurred.

Crystallization of KtzI
Initial crystallization conditions
were found using the Phoenix Liquid Handling System (Art Robbins Instruments)
to mix 150 nL of reconstituted protein with 150 nL of precipitant
in a 96-well, sitting-drop INTELLI-PLATE (Art Robbins Instruments)
format. Crystals of reconstituted KtzI were optimized using the hanging-drop
vapor diffusion method at room temperature by mixing 1 μL of
reconstituted protein [containing 212 μM N-His6-tagged
protein, 212 μM FAD, 4.24 mM NADPH, (31.8 mM l-ornithine
for substrate-bound structures), 20 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.0), 80 mM NaCl,
and 5% (v/v) glycerol] with 1 μL of precipitant over a reservoir
of 0.5 mL of precipitant. KtzI crystallized with two precipitants:
one of which afforded substrate binding [0.4–0.7 M (aerobic)
or 0.9–1.15 M (anaerobic) KSCN, 22–25% PEG 3350, and
0.1 M Bis-tris propane (pH 8.5)] and the other precluding substrate
binding because of a competing bromide ion [0.9–1.2 M (aerobic)
or 1.2–1.4 M (anaerobic) NaBr, 22–25% PEG 3350, and
0.1 M Bis-tris propane (pH 7.5)]. Data-quality crystals grew as colorless
[anaerobic (Figure S2a of the )] or yellow [aerobic (Figure S2b,c of the )] rods after 4–7 days with approximate dimensions
of 70 μm × 70 μm × 200 μm. Crystals were
cryoprotected with crystallization precipitant supplemented with 10–20%
(v/v) glycerol (and with 31.8 mM l-Orn to ensure full substrate
occupancy in the KtzI–FADred–NADP+–l-Orn structure) before being flash-frozen in liquid nitrogen
prior to data collection.

Re-reduction of Oxidized KtzI Crystals
To prepare re-reduced
crystals, KtzI was first reconstituted with FAD and NADPH and crystallized
aerobically under conditions that included NaBr as described above.
After the formation of data-quality crystals, the crystallization
tray was degassed and left under light vacuum overnight. The next
day, the tray was degassed again and brought into the anaerobic chamber.
Aliquots of NADPH and sodium dithionite powder were degassed, brought
into the anaerobic chamber, and mixed with anaerobic crystallization
precipitant to final concentrations of 50 and 25 mM, respectively.

The reduction of oxidized crystals was achieved by the addition
of 4 μL of either the NADPH or sodium dithionite solution directly
to the crystallization drop. Reduction was monitored visually as a
color change from yellow to colorless. Both reductants were capable
of eliciting this oxidation state change, but on very different time
scales: 30 min for 50 mM NADPH and &lt;10 s for 25 mM sodium dithionite.
After reduction was complete, 4 μL of precipitant supplemented
with 10% (v/v) glycerol was added to the drop for cryoprotection and
crystals were looped and flash-frozen in liquid nitrogen. Soaking
the crystals for 30 min in the 50 mM NADPH solution degraded them
such that usable data could not be collected. Attempts to perform
this same re-reduction protocol on crystals derived from KSCN-containing
conditions proved to be unsuccessful, as evidenced by a complete lack
of change in crystal color even during long incubation periods (5–10
min) with either reductant, culminating in the crystals dissolving
into solution.

Reoxidation of Reduced KtzI Crystals
To prepare reoxidized
crystals, KtzI was reconstituted with FAD, NADPH, and l-ornithine
and crystallized anaerobically under conditions that included KSCN
as described above. Once data-quality crystals formed, the crystallization
tray was removed from the anaerobic chamber, and the change in oxidation
state could be observed visually as crystals turned from colorless
to yellow over a period of ∼1 h. The crystals were allowed
to further equilibrate for ∼1 day before being cryoprotected
and frozen in liquid nitrogen. Various attempts to partially oxidize
these reduced crystals, in an effort to capture the C4a-hydroperoxy
(or some other) intermediate state, were unsuccessful and resulted
in either the reduced or oxidized equilibrium state described herein.

Data Collection, Structure Determination, and Structural Analysis
X-ray diffraction data were collected at the Advanced Photon Source
(Argonne, IL) on beamline 24 ID-C and processed in space group P212121 using HKL2000 (Tables S1–S6 of the ). The initial structure of KtzI (reconstituted
with FAD and NADPH anaerobically and crystallized under conditions
that included NaBr) was determined by molecular replacement (MR) in
PHASER with a CHAINSAW constructed search model using the protein coordinates
of the N-hydroxylase from P. aeruginosa, PvdA (PDB entry 3S5W()), aligned with the sequence of KtzI.
This hybrid model was created such that any conserved residues between
PvdA and KtzI were retained, while all other residues were truncated
to their last common atom according to the protein sequence of KtzI.
Solvent content analysis suggested that four molecules of KtzI would
occupy the asymmetric unit, and after using MR to search for four
copies of the hybrid model, a homotetrameric assembly with extensive
protein–protein interfaces was identified. All subsequent structures
of KtzI, which adopted the same crystal packing, were determined by
either MR or rigid body refinement in Refmac using the initial refined model’s protein coordinates. For
rigid body refinements, the selection of reflections for the calculation
of Rfree was made identical in each model.
Each KtzI structure has been abbreviated to signify what is bound
to the protein, and the predicted oxidation states of the cofactors.
The abbreviations used for these bound entities are as follows: FADred
(reduced FAD), FADox (oxidized FAD), FADox-red (re-reduced FAD), FADred-ox
(reoxidized FAD), NADP+ (oxidized NADP), l-Orn
(l-ornithine), and Br (bromide ion that occupies the l-Orn binding pocket).

Files for describing ligand geometries
were obtained in COOT, which uses the
REFMAC5 monomer library, and included
FDA (FADred), FAD (FADox), NAP (NADP), and ORN (l-ornithine).
The restraints for these ligands were constructed using eLBOW, and
those for FAD/FDA were further modified in REEL from the PHENIX suite to allow
the flavin isoalloxazine ring to adopt its bent or “butterfly”
conformation. This change was made such that the ring could fit the
nonplanar electron density observed in our structures (Figure S3 of
the ). The modification
of the flavin restraints involved dividing the isoalloxazine into
two planes, or “wings”, such that the dimethylbenzene
and pyrimidine portions were restrained on separate planes, with each
of these planes including the N5 and N10 positions
of the central pyrazine ring. The pyrazine ring, however, was not
restrained to be planar, which allows bending of the outer “wings”
of the isoalloxazine about the central N5–N10 axis (Figure S3 of the ). Ligand fitting and model building were conducted in COOT with
subsequent refinement in PHENIX, which included rounds of positional,
real-space, B factor, and simulated annealing refinement.
The use of noncrystallographic symmetry restraints between protomers
and the optimization of target weights for geometry and B factor restraints greatly improved model quality and refinement
statistics. Model building and refinement were continued iteratively
until satisfactory statistics were achieved (Tables S1–S6 of
the ). Water molecules,
ions, and any bound substrate were added at the late stages of refinement
after the protein portion was deemed to fit satisfactorily. Each KtzI
protein structure begins at Pro10 of the wild-type sequence (Figure
S1 of the ) and ends
at residue 423 or 424 (of 424), as residues N- or C-terminal to these
positions, respectively, lack electron density and are therefore not
included in the final model (Table S7 of the ). Residues that lacked clear electron density for
their amino acid side chain are modeled as alanines (Table S7 of the ). Simulated annealing
composite omit maps calculated in PHENIX were used to verify all final
models, and each model was inspected and altered to satisfy qualifications
set forth by the PDB Validation server.

For structures crystallized
under conditions that included NaBr,
all ionlike densities were filled exclusively with bromide ions due
to (1) the high concentration of bromide used in crystallization (&gt;1.0
M NaBr) compared to the concentrations of other likely ions (e.g.,
∼0.08 M Cl–) and (2) the fact that all of
these ionlike densities disappeared when KSCN was substituted for
NaBr in the crystallization precipitant. It is common for halide ions,
like bromide, to compete with water molecules for hydrogen bonding
sites, as well as to occupy the solvent shell in and around the protein,
and these ions are frequently not at full occupancy. To determine the most representative B factor/occupancy combination for the bromide ions, the B factor of each was set to the average B factor
of the late-stage refined model, while the occupancies were set to
0.8, 0.5, and 0.3 in three separate trials. These models were then
subjected to 20 rounds of iterative B factor and
occupancy refinement in PHENIX and found to all converge to the same
values, which are those denoted in the final PDB files.

All
software installation support was provided by SBGrid. Sequence alignments were completed using Clustal
Omega. Structural figures and movies
were prepared using PyMOL and Chimera [Chimera is developed by the Resource for Biocomputing,
Visualization, and Informatics at the University of California, San
Francisco (supported by National Institute of General Medical Sciences
Grant P41-GM103311)]. Protein surface area calculations were conducted
using the ‘Protein interfaces, surfaces and assemblies’
service PISA at the European Bioinformatics Institute (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/pdbe/prot_int/pistart.html). All root-mean-square deviation (rmsd)
calculations were conducted for Cα atoms only using the Protein
structure comparison service Fold at the European Bioinformatics Institute
(http://www.ebi.ac.uk/msd-srv/ssm), with a comprehensive list of rmsd comparisons available
in Table S8 of the .

Results
The l-ornithine (l-Orn) N-hydroxylase
from Kutzneria sp. 744, KtzI, was structurally characterized
by X-ray crystallography, yielding a total of six different snapshots
of the enzyme under various conditions (Table ). The initial structure of KtzI was obtained by reconstituting the
purified protein with FAD and NADPH in an anaerobic environment, followed
by crystallization under conditions that included NaBr. This structure,
and all other structures herein, is abbreviated to signify the molecules
to which KtzI is bound and the presumed redox state of its cofactors.
Thus, the initial structure of this enzyme is denoted KtzI–FADred–NADP+–Br, as it binds reduced FAD as evidenced by its colorless
appearance (Figure S2a of the ), oxidized NADP+ due to the hydride transfer necessary
to create the FADred species, and a bromide ion in the substrate binding
pocket. This structure was determined to 2.4 Å resolution by
molecular replacement using the protein coordinates from the functional
homologue of KtzI from P. aeruginosa, PvdA (PDB entry 3S5W()). Two additional structures under conditions that included
NaBr were obtained when the enzyme was reconstituted with FAD and
NADPH aerobically and then either kept aerobic throughout (KtzI–FADox–Br,
2.1 Å) or re-reduced after crystal growth with sodium dithionite
under anaerobic conditions (KtzI–FADox-red–NADP+–Br, 2.6 Å). The oxidized flavin cofactor (FADox,
yellow) is readily visible in the KtzI–FADox–Br crystals
(Figure S2b of the ), confirming the assignment of its redox state. The transition from
FADox (yellow) to FADred (colorless) (abbreviated FADox-red) was readily
apparent in the dithionite-reduced crystals. It is possible this “re-reduced”
structure has NADPH instead of NADP+ bound to the enzyme,
because of the chemical reduction by dithionite; however, this cofactor
was found to bind in an identical manner to that of its anaerobically
reconstituted counterpart, KtzI–FADred–NADP+–Br (as detailed below), and thus, we have named it consistently
for the sake of simplicity. It was determined empirically that the
condition that included NaBr occluded substrate binding due to a competing
bromide ion, and thus, an alternative crystallization precipitant
was pursued.

Summary of KtzI Structures
structure	resolution
(Å)	Figures	FAD position	enzyme state	PDB entry	
KtzI–FADred–NADP+–l-Orn	2.23	b,e and S7a	in	reduced preturnover with
substrate	4TLX	
KtzI–FADred–NADP+–Br	2.39	S5a and S7b	in	reduced preturnover	4TM1	
KtzI–FADox–Br	2.09	c,f,
S6a, and S7d	out	oxidized chemically competent	4TM3	
KtzI–FADox–NADP+–l-Orn	2.41	d,g and S7e	out	oxidized dead end	4TLZ	
KtzI–FADox-red–NADP+–Br	2.63	S5d and S7c	out to in	re-reduced from KtzI–FADox–Br	4TM4	
KtzI–FADred-ox–NADP+–l-Orn	2.74	S6b and S7f	in to out	reoxidized from KtzI–FADred–NADP+–l-Orn	4TM0	
The reconstituted
enzyme was found to crystallize using a replacement
salt in the precipitant (KSCN), which afforded substrate binding,
and three additional structures. Two structures were determined in
which KtzI was reconstituted with FAD, NADPH, and l-Orn under
anaerobic conditions and then either kept anaerobic (KtzI–FADred–NADP+–l-Orn, 2.2 Å) or allowed to equilibrate
with atmospheric oxygen, thus reoxidizing the originally reduced crystals
(KtzI–FADred-ox–NADP+–l-Orn,
2.7 Å). The change from colorless [FADred (Figure S2a of the )] to yellow [FADox (Figure
S2c of the )] (abbreviated
FADred-ox) was used to inform the assignment of the flavin cofactor’s
redox state. One final structure was determined by following the same
reconstitution protocol described above, but under aerobic conditions
throughout (KtzI–FADox–NADP+–l-Orn, 2.4 Å), providing off-yellow crystals (Figure S2c of the ). These oxidized structures
are proposed to bind NADP+ because of this cofactor binding
in a conformation that would not (and does not) provide reduction
of FAD (detailed below). The protein coordinates from the initial
refined model of KtzI (KtzI–FADred–NADP+–Br)
were used as a search model in MR or for rigid body refinement to
determine all subsequent structures. Data processing and refinement
statistics can be found in Tables S1–S6 of the .

Quaternary Structure
Even though KtzI was crystallized
under a wide variety of conditions, it was found to adopt the same
homotetrameric assembly in each (Figure a).
Extensive interfaces exist between each of the protomers such that
∼25% of the available surface area is buried by these interactions.
These interfaces are conserved in the structures of the KtzI homologues
PvdA and SidA, and the same tetramer is generated in these structures by crystal
symmetry (Figure S4a of the ). The buried surface areas are not quite as extensive for PvdA (17%
buried) and SidA (16% buried), largely because of a looser association
at one of the interfaces (Figure S4b of the ). Although the secondary structure at this interface
is similar in all three homologues, the sequence conservation in this
region is relatively poor between KtzI and PvdA/SidA [residues 230–235,
260–270, and 325–330 (KtzI numbering) in Figure S1 of
the ], and the arrangement
of residues in KtzI causes a helix to rearrange, yielding a clamping
effect (Figure S4b of the ). In particular, the aforementioned helix (residues 260–270
in KtzI) moves ∼4–6 Å closer to its adjacent protomer,
which allows a cross-protomer hydrogen bond from Tyr270 to the 2′-phosphate
of the NADP cofactor (Figure S4b of the ). Given that this helix movement is exclusive to
KtzI, the monomeric units of SidA and PvdA are more related structurally
to one another (rmsd of ∼1.1 Å) than to our enzyme (rmsd
of ∼1.4 Å), despite the fact that overall sequence conservation
between the proteins is not markedly different (37% identical between
SidA and PvdA vs 33% between SidA/PvdA and KtzI). Indeed, the sequence
and structural conservation between all three proteins is apparent
in the active site.

Structure of KtzI in reduced and oxidized states. (a)
Overall structure
of the KtzI tetramer colored by protomer (pale cyan, pale green, wheat,
and pale blue) and represented in ribbons overlaid with a semitransparent
surface. (b) Active site of KtzI–FADred–NADP+–l-Orn with FADred, NADP+, and l-Orn (sticks colored gray, marine blue, green, and cyan, respectively)
and relevant protein residues displayed. All other atoms are colored
as follows: red for oxygen, blue for nitrogen, and orange for phosphorus.
Hydrogen bonds are represented as black dashed lines, and a red dashed
line shows the distance between the reactive portions of FAD (C4a)
and l-Orn (N5) during hydroxylation (all lengths
denoted in angstroms, with arrows used to indicate which distance
is associated with each line, if necessary). (c) Active site of KtzI–FADox–Br
(aligned by the pale cyan protomer in panel b) showing a large change
in conformation from that of its reduced counterpart. FADox and the
same active site residues as in panel b are shown as sticks with carbons
colored yellow and salmon, respectively. (d) The active site of KtzI–FADox–NADP+–l-Orn is an amalgamation of panels b and
c, with NADP+, l-Orn, and active site residues
similar to those shown in panel b, and the FAD conformation similar
to that in panel c. Active site protein residues are colored dark
pink, with all other colors and representations as in panels b and
c. (e) One side of the active site of KtzI–FADred–NADP+–l-Orn (shown in surface representation) is
capped by NADP+ (colored as in panel b) and a protein loop
containing Asn275, Tyr276, and Ser277 (the “Tyr loop”,
magenta). All other representations and colors are like those in panel
b. (f) The surface of the active site shown in panel e changes drastically
because of conformational changes and the exit of NADP+. All colors and representations are like those in panel e except
the carbons of FADox are colored yellow. (g) The surface represenation
of panel d is once again a combination of panels e and f, following
the same color scheme. Overlaying the FADred (gray carbons) and FADox
(yellow carbons) equilibrium states for both KtzI (h) and p-hydroxybenzoate hydroxylase (PHBH) (i) displays the difference
between these two proposed conformational changes. The differences
in both the angle (degrees) between the isoalloxazine and ribityl
tail and the distances (angstroms) from N5 to N5 of the isoalloxazine are denoted. Stereoviews for all KtzI structures
are shown in Figure S7 of the .

Active Site of Reduced
KtzI
The fully liganded, anaerobic
complex of KtzI, KtzI–FADred–NADP+–l-Orn depicts this enzyme in its reduced, “preturnover”
state (Figure , 4a, and Figure b,e). The FAD and NADP cofactors are bound in an
elongated conformation with the nicotinamide of NADP+ stacking
on the re-face of the flavin isoalloxazine ring.
The nicotinamide cofactor is not in a position to reduce the flavin,
as its reactive C4 atom is pointed away from the site of reduction
(N5 of the isoalloxazine ring). Instead, the carbonyl oxygen
of the nicotinamide is oriented toward this N5 position
by a conserved glutamate residue [Glu212 in KtzI (Figure S1 of the )], allowing the carbonyl
oxygen to hydrogen bond with the reduced N5-H group of
FADred (Figure b). The flavin isoalloxazine
ring is sandwiched between His51 and NADP+ and is found
to adopt its bent or butterfly conformation (Figure b and Figure S3 of the ). There is evidence from structural and computational, studies that this bend signals
the fully reduced state of the cofactor, which would be appropriate
in this NADPH-reduced, anaerobic context. However, we find bent isoalloxazine
rings in all the structures presented herein, including those from
formally oxidized species in which the flavin is surrounded by a completely
different protein environment (described in detail below), and thus
believe it is unlikely that this phenomenon is chemically or environmentally
induced alone. It has been established for the flavin-containing reductase
NrdI that interaction with the photoelectrons produced during X-ray
exposure can reduce the flavin isoalloxazine ring, generating the
bent conformation of the cofactor, and
we propose that this is likely to be a contributing factor in our
structures, especially those from oxidized preparations.

The
amino acid substrate l-Orn is specifically recognized in
the active site by hydrogen bonds to its carboxy and amino moieties,
as well as to its side chain amine (N5), by conserved lysine,
serine, and asparagine residues [Lys67, Asn245, Asn275, and Ser406
in KtzI (Figure b and Figure S1 of the )]. The carbonyl of Asn275
further hydrogen bonds with the 3′-OH of the nicotinamide ribose
of NADP+ (Figure b). The positioning
of l-Orn is such that the site of hydroxylation (N5) is aligned with the C4a position of the isoalloxazine
at a distance (5.9 Å) that would be amenable for catalysis after
the addition of oxygen and subsequent creation of the reactive C4a-hydroperoxy
intermediate (Figure b, red dashed line).
This highly reactive center must be protected from bulk solvent, and
this role is filled on one side of the active site by the NADP+ cofactor and a protein loop containing Asn275, Tyr276, and
Ser277 [“Tyr loop” (Figure e)]
and on the other by a neighboring protomer (Figure b and Figure S4c of the , colored wheat). Removal of these contacts on either side would
result in an open active site (Figure e and
Figure S4c,d of the ).

The reduced, preturnover state of KtzI was also crystallized
in
which the substrate, l-Orn, is replaced with a bromide ion
from the precipitant solution (&gt;1.0 M NaBr), and this structure
is
denoted as KtzI–FADred–NADP+–Br (Figure
S5a of the ). Even
when the compound is reconstituted with a high concentration of l-Orn (31.8 mM), the bromide ion remained bound in the active
site, likely because of its vast excess (∼1 M vs 31.8 mM).
Bromides were also found to occupy other sites on the protein (Table
S2 of the ). However,
these ions have no real effect on the protein fold (rmsd of 0.3 Å
vs KtzI–FADred–NADP+–l-Orn)
or on the arrangement of cofactors and crucial active site residues
(Figure S5a of the  vs Figure b).

Active Site of Oxidized
KtzI
To obtain a snapshot of
E–FADox, KtzI was reconstituted aerobically with FAD and NADPH
and then crystallized under conditions that included NaBr (denoted
KtzI–FADox–Br). The resulting structure is most different
from the other KtzI structures with an rmsd of ∼0.6 Å.
This divergence is concentrated in the active site where a drastic
structural rearrangement has taken place. In this state, NADP+ has vacated the active site, Arg104 has swung in to hydrogen
bond with Glu212, the isoalloxazine ring of FAD has “flapped”
completely across the active site, and the Tyr loop has inserted into
the active site interior, where Tyr276 stacks with the new conformation
of the flavin ring (Figure c,f). The absence
of bound NADP(H) is quite surprising as a large excess (20-fold vs
protein) of NADPH was used during reconstitution. The conformational
change from FADred to FADox in KtzI shifts the isoalloxazine ring
6.5 Å (N5–N5) and rotates the angle
between the flavin ring and its ribityl tail by ∼137°
(Figure h), which is quite different from
the change observed for the prototypic class A flavin hydroxylase, p-hydroxybenzoate hydroxylase (PHBH) (Figure i). The insertion of the Tyr loop into the active site moves
the Cα atom of Tyr276 4.0 Å, such that this residue is
now sandwiching the isoalloxazine ring with the help of His51, which
has rotated slightly to remain parallel with the flavin cofactor (Figure c). The absence of NADP+ and l-Orn has caused other conserved residues (Asn245, Asn275, Ser277,
and Ser406) to adopt new conformations with their side chains pointed
away from the active site (Figure c,f). These
drastic rearrangements greatly alter the effective surface of the
protein active site, such that the isoalloxazine moiety is now open
to solvent (Figure f). Aside from this active
site reorganization, the rest of the protein topology remains largely
the same (rmsd of ∼0.6 Å), with most residues adopting
identical conformations. KtzI was also reconstituted aerobically with
FAD, NADPH, and l-Orn and crystallized under conditions that
included KSCN, which yielded yet another independent snapshot of this
state of the enzyme.

Following the same aerobic reconstitution
that produced the KtzI–FADox–Br structure, but with
the addition of l-Orn and the use of KSCN in place of NaBr,
an amalgamation of the fully liganded, anaerobic complex (KtzI–FADred–NADP+–l-Orn) and KtzI–FADox–Br was
produced. This structure, denoted as KtzI–FADox–NADP+–l-Orn (Figure d,g),
is similar to the fully liganded, anaerobic complex, in that it has
FAD, NADP+, and l-Orn bound to the protein and
the active site residues adopt the same conformation as in the preturnover
complex (Figure d vs Figure b). However, the bound flavin adopts the “flapped”
FADox conformation observed in KtzI–FADox–Br (Figure d vs Figure c). This arrangement
appears as if the flavin of the fully liganded anaerobic structure
was simply replaced with that of the “flapped”, oxidized
conformation, such that the NADP+ moiety now stacks with
the si-face of the isoalloxazine ring (Figure d,g).

Both snapshots of the oxidized KtzI
enzyme suggest a novel conformational
change for a protein-bound flavin molecule; however, they are also
quite different from one another (Figure c
vs Figure d). This dissimilarity was quite
surprising as the method employed to attain these structures was identical
aside from the salt used in the precipitant (NaBr vs KSCN), the resulting
absence or presence of a substrate, and a relatively modest change
in pH (7.5 vs 8.5). This unanticipated discrepancy, combined with
the lack of precedence for either depiction, concerned us that some
crystallization artifact may have trapped nonrelevant or dead-end
states. In an effort to understand the chemical relevancy of these
respective states, manipulations were employed to observe whether
the supposed conformational changes could be recapitulated in the
protein crystal.

In Crystallo Conformational
Changes
In an effort to establish the chemical relevancy
of the exposed or
“out” position of the FAD observed in the KtzI–FADox–Br
structure, crystals were grown as usual and then subjected to chemical
reduction by NADPH and sodium dithionite under anaerobic conditions.
The crystals showed a definitive color change from yellow (oxidized)
to colorless (reduced) when either reductant was used, but structural
characterization could be conducted on only the sodium dithionite-reduced
crystals. This limitation was due to the fact that a longer incubation
period (30 min) was required to fully reduce crystals with NADPH as
compared to sodium dithionite (&lt;10 s), and this longer time frame
left the crystal too deteriorated for useful data collection.

Amazingly, soaking the oxidized, KtzI–FADox–Br crystals
with sodium dithionite under anaerobic conditions provided a structure,
denoted as KtzI–FADox-red–NADP+–Br,
which is identical (rmsd of 0.15 Å) to that of its anaerobically
reconstituted counterpart (KtzI–FADred–NADP+–Br) (Figure S5d vs Figure S5a of the ). This finding means that the conformational
changes necessary to turn KtzI–FADox–Br into its reduced
and NADP-bound species, that is the “flapping” of its
isoalloxazine ring across the active site with concomitant evacuation
of the Tyr loop and rebinding of the NADP+ cofactor, could
all occur in the crystal.

In KtzI–FADox–NADP+–l-Orn,
the “flapped”, FADox conformation is observed such that
the isoalloxazine faces the protein exterior, but NADP+, l-Orn, and all active site residues appear as in the fully
liganded anaerobic complex, creating the effect of an NADP+ cofactor slipping behind the “flapped” flavin conformation
(Figure d,g). Attempts to reduce these crystals,
even upon long incubations with NADPH or dithionite, proved futile
as no change in color was observed. However, we examined whether the
opposite chemical transformation could occur in the crystal, that
is from the fully reduced, anaerobic species (Figure b) to its oxidized counterpart (Figure d), through the addition of oxygen.

Crystals of the KtzI–FADred–NADP+–l-Orn complex were grown anaerobically and
then equilibrated
aerobically, allowing the flavin cofactor to oxidize. This reoxidized
structure (denoted KtzI–FADred-ox–NADP+–l-Orn) is identical (rmsd of 0.13 Å) to that of the aerobically
grown, KtzI–FADox–NADP+–l-Orn state (Figure S6b of the  vs Figure d). Excitingly, this observation
means that upon addition of oxygen to the fully liganded, anaerobic
complex (Figure b), the FAD isoalloxazine
was able to travel across the active site from its FADred state to
arrive at the FADox position observed in the aerobically reconstituted
KtzI structures (Figure d,g,h), all while
contained in the crystal lattice. Clashing of the FAD and NADP cofactors
would likely occur in any FADred to FADox conformational change in
KtzI, and thus, the nicotinamide cofactor would be expected to depart
during this reoxidation process, signaling that more dynamic changes
take place between the equilibrium states than we have observed crystallographically.

Discussion
The flavin-dependent N-hydroxylases
make up a
class of enzymes that have been studied almost exclusively in the
context of their role in generating iron-chelating siderophores.− Here we investigate the l-Orn-specific N-monooxygenase from Kutzneria sp. 744, KtzI, which
instead provides a building block for the biosynthesis of a new class
of antifungal antimicrobials called kutznerides (Figure a). Regardless of their
cellular function, N-hydroxylases all catalyze the
same reaction, using FAD, NAD(P)H, and molecular oxygen to attach
a hydroxyl group on the primary amino side chain of their substrate
(Figure b). Further, the l-Orn N-hydroxylases from P. aeruginosa (PvdA)
and A. fumigatus (SidA), which have sequences highly
homologous with that of KtzI (Figure S1 of the ), have been observed to follow a common
kinetic mechanism− (Figure ). Preliminary structural
interpretation of this kinetic mechanism has been made possible by
recent crystal structures of PvdA and
SidA. In this work, we have used KtzI
to add to the structural reaction coordinate and provide analogous
as well as novel depictions of this enzyme class.

The anaerobically
reduced KtzI–FADred–NADP+–l-Orn structure (Figure b,e) and an accompanying
depiction in which a bromide ion from crystallization
has displaced the substrate [KtzI–FADred–NADP+–Br (Figure S5a of the )] are very similar to the aerobically reduced depictions of PvdA (Figure S5b of the ) and SidA (Figure
S5c of the ). This
similarity indicates that reconstituting the enzyme in the absence
of oxygen, as was done for KtzI, can be approximated by chemical reduction
of the aerobic state, and thus, these structures can all be taken
together as independent validations of the preturnover state of enzymes
in this family. In this state, NADPH has already transferred its hydride
to the FAD moiety (Figure , 2 → 3), such that FADred, NADP+, and
the l-Orn substrate (or competing bromide ion) are bound
in the active site. This redox assignment can be confirmed by the
bleached appearance of these crystals (Figure S2a of the ), and the fact that the
reactive C4 position of the nicotinamide moiety is pointed away from
the site of reduction [N5 of FAD (Figure b)] and thus is not positioned for hydride transfer. A conserved
glutamate residue [Glu212 in KtzI (Figure S1 of the )] instead poses the nicotinamide such
that its carbonyl oxygen can hydrogen bond with the newly formed N5-H group of reduced flavin (Figure b). The bound NADP+ also makes up a large portion of the
protein surface (Figure e), effectively sealing
the active site with its presence. Therefore, in addition to its role
in flavin reduction, this cofactor acts to shield the FADred and FAD-OO(H)
intermediates (Figure , 3–5) from bulk solvent, protecting these species from being quenched.
Indeed, there is kinetic evidence from PvdA and SidA, that NADP+ remains
bound throughout the reaction cycle to perform this role. This protective
function is further exemplified by the observation that chemical reduction
of SidA, followed by exposure to oxygen in the absence of NADP+, resulted in immediate uncoupling through H2O2 production (Figure , uncoupling), whereas the reactive C4a-(hydro)peroxy
intermediate is stabilized (in the absence of its hydroxylatable target)
by NADP+ on the order of minutes in both SidA, and PvdA. There is evidence from kinetic
isotope effects and computational studies to suggest the 2′-OH
of the ribose of NADP+ may be directly responsible for
stabilizing the flavin–peroxide intermediate and, further,
may act as the proton donor for creation of the C4a-hydroperoxy derivative. When all these studies are taken together, it
is readily apparent that the nicotinamide cofactor is crucial to the
entirety of the reaction cycle, well beyond its initial task of reducing
the flavin moiety, and this multifaceted involvement is, indeed, a
hallmark of the class B monooxygenase family.

The N-hydroxylase protein scaffold acts as
an
additional barrier to species that could quench reactive flavin intermediates.
On one side of the active site, the Tyr loop (Tyr276 in KtzI, Tyr285
in PvdA, and Tyr324 in SidA) appears to play a protective role, and
on the other, the tetrameric interface blocks solvent access. As was
mentioned for the structure of PvdA, if
one considers only the monomeric unit of an N-hydroxylase,
it is difficult to explain the stabilization of the flavin–hydroperoxide
intermediate in the absence of l-Orn, because in its absence,
the active site is open to solvent (Figure S4d of the ). This concern is alleviated,
however, by thinking of the protein in terms of the tetrameric assembly
observed crystallographically (Figure S4a of the ). The interfaces of this tetramer are
quite extensive in all three homologues, burying 16–25% of
the available surface area, and one of these interfaces guards the
active site with its interaction (Figure b
and Figure S4c of the , wheat-colored protomer). A tetramer is also consistent with gel
filtration chromatography data collected on SidA and PvdA,, alluding to the relevance of this species in solution. Therefore,
it can be reasoned that the N-hydroxylase tetramer
is formed for the protection of reactive intermediates and thus is
vital for catalysis. These enzymes, like those of the “cautious”
monooxygenase family, also manage catalytic specificity for their l-Orn substrate, and this task is accomplished using a highly
organized active site.

l-Orn is secured in the binding
pocket by hydrogen bonds
made from conserved residues to all of its polar groups (Figure b and Figure S1 of the ). As was shown in crystal structures of SidA, however,
this site is also able to accommodate l-Lys and l-Arg in a highly similar binding mode. There is some evidence that SidA can hydroxylate l-Lys
to a certain degree, but studies have
mostly found l-Orn N-hydroxylases to be
highly specific for l-Orn;,,,, it is thus somewhat surprising to find nonsubstrates binding in
the active site. This discordance seems to indicate that although
different l-amino acids can bind similarly to l-Orn,
hydroxylation is controlled by the angle and proximity of the amine
group to the flavin-hydroperoxide intermediate, such that l-Orn represents the only species in prime position for catalysis.
The inability of the l-Orn N-monooxygenases
to hydroxyate l-lys effectively, with the large amount of
uncoupling observed in the presence of this amino acid, indicates
that the extra methlyene unit of this molecule extends its amine side
chain too far into the active site for hydroxylation to occur but
resembles l-Orn enough to trigger oxidative uncoupling (Figure , uncoupling). Further insight into the oxidative
half of the reaction is provided by our aerobic structures of KtzI.

In contrast to the reduced preturnover states, for which KtzI (Figure b and Figure S5a of the ), PvdA (Figure S5b of the ), and SidA (Figure S5c of the ) all show very similar structures,
the oxidized structures of KtzI show an unprecedented flavin conformation,
which we term the FADox(out) conformation. This “out”
conformation shifts the isoalloxazine moiety completely across the
active site, such that it is now open to solvent (Figure f,g). In KtzI–FADox–Br, the new flavin
conformation is accompanied by the dissociation of NADP+, and the movement of conserved active site residues, including insertion
of the Tyr loop (Asn275, Tyr276, and Ser277), and swinging of Arg104
such that it takes the place of NADP+ by hydrogen bonding
with Glu212 (Figure c vs Figure b). In KtzI–FADox–NADP+–l-Orn, the “flapped” flavin resides in an active
site that is largely unchanged compared to the preturnover complex,
with NADP+, l-Orn, and protein residues all adopting
similar conformations (Figure d vs Figure b). In contrast to both of the KtzI–FADox
structures, the structure of the FADox state of SidA shows FAD in
the “in” position with substrate bound and no NADP+ [Figure , A (right)]. Interestingly, the hydrogen bond switch from Glu212-NADP+ (Figure b) to Glu212-Arg104 (Figure c) observed in KtzI was also observed in the crystal
structures of reduced versus oxidized states of SidA [Figure S5c of
the  vs Figure , A (right)].

Structurally based proposal for the l-Orn N-hydroxylase mechanism. (A) l-Orn N-hydroxylases
with an oxidized flavin likely exist in a dynamic equilibrium between
the FADox(out) conformation observed in KtzI–FADox–Br
(with or without the Tyr loop insertion) and the FADox(in) conformation
of SidA–FADox–l-Orn (protein carbons colored
gold, PDB entry 4B69()). (B) Anaerobic reduction of KtzI–FADox–Br
crystals recapitulated its anaerobically reconstituted counterpart,
KtzI–FADred–NADP+–Br (protein carbons
colored teal). (C) Binding of l-Orn, as displayed for KtzI–FADred–NADP+–l-Orn, causes minimal deviations within the
active site of the reduced enzyme. A close-up of the active site (inset)
with van der Waals radii displayed for substrate l-Orn (gray
spheres) and NADP+ (atom-colored spheres) shows the fit
of these two molecules. After oxygen addition and hydroperoxy-flavin
generation, hydroxylation to the l-N5OH-Orn product would occur (1). If this newly hydroxylated
product (orange carbons) maintains the same positioning as the substrate,
a steric clash between the van der Waals radii of the newly added N5-OH group (gray spheres) and the bound NADP
cofactor would occur, which could lead to a destabilization of NADP+ binding (2). (C) This destabilization could explain the poorly
resolved nicotinamide portion of NADP+ found in the l-N5OH-Orn-bound structure of PvdA
(PDB entry 3S5W()). After catalysis, the resting state
enzyme would need to be reproduced through dissociation of the hydroxyornithine
product, spent NADP+ cofactor, and water (3). We have shown
that a conformational change takes place in crystallo after the addition of oxygen to the fully liganded reduced state
in panel C, in a background of excess NADP(H), yielding the KtzI–FADox–NADP+–l-Orn state shown in panel E. Crystals of
this oxidized state are unable to be reduced by NADPH or dithionite,
and thus, it appears to be a dead-end, inhibited conformation. Binding
of NADP+ to the FADox(out) state in panel A could cause
a state similar to what we observe in panel E, which could be blocked
by insertion of the Tyr loop. Dotted line arrows are shown for steps
without direct experimental evidence. Colors for protein, cofactors,
and ligands not described above are the same as those in Figure . Bromide ions were removed from the KtzI structures
for the sake of clarity.

Given the novelty of this “out” FAD conformation
in KtzI, it was important to establish the chemical competence of
this flavin position, and we found that the FADox(out) state observed
in the KtzI–FADox–Br structure is, in fact, chemically
competent. Specifically, KtzI–FADox–Br crystals subjected
to anaerobic reduction by NADPH (50 mM) and sodium dithionite (25
mM) visibly changed from yellow (Figure S2b of the ) to colorless (Figure S2a of the ), and the conformation
of the active site returned to its reduced preturnover state in crystallo (Figure S5d vs Figure S5a of the ; rmsd = 0.15 Å).
Sodium dithionite could be acting as a conduit for NADPH reduction
of FADox, as its low reduction potential allows it to reduce the leftover
NADP+ in the crystallization drop (which then goes on to
reduce FADox) or it could be reducing the FADox directly. In any case,
the recapitulation of the reduced, preturnover state from this oxidized
state using chemical means provides compelling evidence of the chemical
competence of this transformation. Regrettably, structural data contain
no information about reaction rates, so catalytic relevance can be
only inferred, and not directly measured.

In contrast to facile
reduction of KtzI–FADox–Br
crystals, KtzI–FADox–NADP+–l-Orn crystals could not be reduced. No change in color was observed
upon addition of NADPH or sodium dithionite, and no structural changes
were observed in characterized crystals (data not shown). This result
suggests that when FAD movement is blocked by the binding of excess
NADP+ and l-Orn, FAD reduction does not occur.
Because the amounts of NADP+ and l-Orn used in
these crystallization studies are above physiological concentrations,
this inhibition observed in crystallo is unlikely
to be relevant in vivo. Thus, our crystallographic
studies show that when the FAD is free to flap, movement from “out”
to “in” accompanies flavin reduction in the crystal.

Further support for motions being involved in KtzI catalysis comes
from the in crystallo reoxidation of the fully liganded,
anaerobic state. KtzI–FADred–NADP+–l-Orn crystals (Figure b,e) equilibrated
in atmospheric oxygen generated the KtzI–FADred-ox–NADP+–l-Orn structure, which fully recapitulates
the structure of its aerobically reconstituted counterpart (Figure
S6b of the  vs Figure d; rmsd = 0.13 Å). Impressively, the enzyme
used to obtain the KtzI–FADred-ox–NADP+–l-Orn structure underwent multiple transformations, from aerobic
solution to anaerobic reduction by NADPH to anaerobic crystallization
to air oxidation of the crystal. The snapshot we see is the end product
of these motions. Indeed, via comparison of the structures before
(Figure b) and after (Figure S6b of the ) oxygen exposure, it becomes
apparent that any movement of the flavin moiety to get from the FADred
to FADox(out) conformation would be sterically occluded by the bound
NADP+. In other words, intermediate states must exist in
which NADP+ dissociates, the flavin moves, and NADP+ reassociates. Further, the l-Orn bound in this structure
is certainly not the same as the l-Orn bound initially, which
would be expected to have been hydroxylated upon exposure of the fully
loaded, preturnover enzyme to O2 but instead represents
another molecule that has rebound sometime during the reoxidation
process. These rebinding events are likely driven by the excess amounts
of both NADP(H) and l-Orn left in the crystallization drop,
which remain present during reoxidation of the crystals. Whether these
conformational changes between equilibrium states occur multiple times
cannot be discerned from our studies; however, our data show that
they must occur at least once. It is interesting that movement of
FADox(out) to FADred(in) cannot occur in the presence of bound NADP+ and l-Orn (KtzI–FADox–NADP+–l-Orn crystals cannot be reduced), but movement
from FADred(in) to FADox(out) can occur (the KtzI–FADred-ox–NADP+–l-Orn result). These results raise the very
important question of the mechanistic role of this conformational
change of FAD.

A conformational change in a flavin-dependent
hydroxylase is not
a new observation. Indeed, “cautious” monooxygenases
control faithful coupling of NADPH reduction to substrate hydroxylation
by movements of their flavin moiety (reviewed in refs () and ()). As mentioned previously,
“cautious” (or class A) monooxygenases get their name
from the fact that in these enzymes, NADPH will reduce FAD only when
substrate is bound, thus limiting oxidative uncoupling (Figure , uncoupling). The structural basis for this phenomenon
was first proposed for p-hydroxybenzoate hydroxylase
(PHBH), where substrate-coupled reduction
is controlled by a planar, hingelike movement of the FAD isoalloxazine
ring from the protein interior (“in”) to the protein
exterior (“out”) upon substrate binding (Figure i), which allows NADPH access to reduce FADox. Once
reduction occurs, the flavin moves from this “out” position
back “in” to protect its reduced N5-H group
from solvent. Although this precedence exists for “cautious”
enzymes, KtzI is the first class B monooxygenase proposed to use flavin
conformational changes during catalysis, and these movements are even
more drastic than those of the class A systems (Figure h vs Figure i).

We know the
conformational changes observed for KtzI are not correlated
in the same way as “cautious” enzymes, as l-Orn N-hydroxylases, like “bold” monooxygenases,
can just as easily be reduced in the absence of substrate. Further,
oxidized SidA and PvdA crystals (whose structures resemble those seen
for the reduced KtzI states) were reduced in crystallo without any indication of a conformational change,, so the flavin does not necessarily need to start in an “out”
position for reduction to occur. To formulate the mechanistic implications
of these conformational changes, it is pertinent to consider another
trait N-hydroxylases share with “bold”
monooxygenases; that is, NADP+ remains bound throughout
the reaction cycle and, thus, dissociates only after hydroxylation
occurs. This observation means that there must be some signal for
NADP+ to dissociate, such that another round of catalysis
can occur. By combining our snapshots of KtzI with those of PvdA and
SidA, we believe a structural reaction coordinate for N-hydroxylase enzymes (summarized in Figure  and Movie 1 of the ) can be built that utilizes conformational changes to control catalysis,
which may provide further insight into the “bold” monooxygenase
family in general.

l-Orn N-hydroxylases
in their resting,
oxidized flavin state seem to exist in an equilibrium between the
FADox(out) conformation observed in KtzI–FADox–Br (with
or without insertion of the conserved Tyr loop), and the FADox(in)
conformation of SidA–FADox–l-Orn (Figure , A). NADPH then reduces FADox, but the exact orientation
of NADPH to FAD that is responsible for reduction has not been captured
in any of the KtzI, SidA, or PvdA structures; only the postreduction
conformation of NADP+ is observed. A so-called “sliding
mechanism” for NADPH reduction has been suggested for the Baeyer–Villiger
monooxygenase (BVMO) class of “bold” monooxygenases,
in which the nicotinamide adopts different conformations during and
after reduction. This proposal is largely based on the observation
of varied binding modes of this cofactor in crystal structures,, and the indication from kinetic studies that the reduction process
happens in two phases, one of which is consistent with an equilibration
step for NADPH in the binding pocket. The sliding mechanism has also been proposed for SidA, as biphasic reduction kinetics have been observed
for both PvdA and SidA,, and there is evidence from a mutant of SidA (Ser257Ala) that destabilizing
a hydrogen bonding interaction to the pyrophosphate of NADP+ actually increases the reduction rate, suggesting that a more dynamic
nicotinamide ring is favorable for this step. Although our data do not provide further information about this
sliding mechanism directly, the FADox(out) conformation we observe,
and have shown to at least be chemically competent, adds an extra
layer to consider when thinking about the reduction step. Indeed,
the FADox(out) conformation may contribute to the complicated kinetics
of reduction observed for these enzymes.

After NADP+ binding and FAD reduction, conserved residues
have been observed to rearrange in both KtzI (Figure , A → B) and SidA [Figure ,
A (right) vs Figure S5c of the ], such that Arg104 (Arg144) swings out of the NADP+ binding
pocket, allowing Glu212 (Glu260) to hydrogen bond to the carboxamide
of NADP+, orienting this cofactor to protect the N5-H group of FADred. Binding of l-Orn to the preturnover,
anaerobic state (Figure , B → C) causes
only minor rearrangements of substrate-binding residues (Lys67, Asn245,
and Ser406), as our structures with bromide or substrate bound in
this site are very similar (rmsd = 0.3 Å), and those of SidA
without substrate bound look largely similar. The addition of molecular oxygen to this preturnover state, regardless
of whether the substrate is bound, creates the reactive hydroperoxy-flavin.
This transformation is also unlikely to cause any structural deviations,
as the binding affinity for l-Orn has been shown to be similar
in the reduced versus hydroperoxide-flavin forms of SidA, and NADP+ remains bound to both states,− suggesting a similar active site architecture. Once the hydroxyl
group is picked up by l-Orn, however, the enzyme must be
recycled to its resting state in some way.

The hydroxylation
step immediately precedes the departure of NADP+ in biochemical
studies,,, and the structural
transmission of this signal may
be exemplified by the post-turnover structure of PvdA [PvdA–FADox–NADP+–l-N5OH-Orn (Figure , D)]. In this structure, aerobic reconstitution
of PvdA with FAD, NADPH, and l-Orn (turnover conditions),
followed by crystallization, trapped the product complex in the crystal.
The electron density for the nicotinamide of NADP+ is disordered
in this state, such that this cofactor could not be modeled effectively,
indicating this moiety is dynamic in the product-bound state. We propose that the act of taking l-Orn [Figure , C (inset)] to l-N5OH-Orn (Figure , 1
“hydroxylation”) causes a steric clash with NADP+, which propagates to destabilize this cofactor (Figure , 2 “destabilization”). The destabilization
of NADP+ was not enough, however, to actually dissociate
this spent cofactor, as it remains bound in the PvdA structure (Figure , D). The lack of a clear departure signal allows
us to propose that for NADP+ to leave, the flavin conformational
change from the FADox(in) to FADox(out) state that we observe for
KtzI is used to eject the oxidized nicotinamide cofactor in the last
step of catalysis (Figure , 3 “ejection”).
During an interpolation between these two conformations, NADP+ and FAD would clash directly, and thus, FAD could act as
a steric battering ram to eject NADP+ from the active site.
This would not be the first time that a flavin has been proposed to
act in a steric capacity, as we recently proposed from structural
and biochemical studies of the FAD-dependent hydroxylase StaC, that
this class A enzyme uses the “in” movement of its flavin
moiety to sterically induce decarboxylation of its substrate molecule. As mentioned above, NADP+ ejection
has been linked to the last step in the catalytic cycle of both PvdA and SidA, by kinetic studies,
and the difficulty in deconvoluting the spectra for this oxidative
process in SidA hints that something
more complex than mere dissociation of NADP+ may occur.
Therefore, with all the evidence presented for KtzI, a case has been
made for the “flapping” of the flavin moiety to be an
integral part of the catalytic cycle.

In addition to revealing
on-pathway states, crystallography has
also shown us off-pathway conformations. The flavin moiety in the
FADox(out)–NADP+ bound conformation (Figure , E) could not be reduced by sodium dithionite or
NADPH, indicating that the binding of NADP+ behind the
FADox(out) conformation inhibits this reduction step (Figure , E → C). Indeed, reduction of the flavin,
without subsequent movement inside the protein, would only be transient
in nature as it is completely solvent-exposed (Figure g), which leaves it unprotected from uncoupling upon exposure
to oxygen. This observation allows us to propose that NADP+ is inhibiting reduction by blocking the conformational change from
FADox(out) to the “in” position of FADred (Figure , E → C). Further, insertion of the Tyr loop,
as seen for KtzI–FADox–Br [Figure , A (left)], could function to disfavor rebinding of NADP+, guarding against this dead-end, inhibited state under physiological
conditions. We could also reach this dead-end, FADox(out)–NADP+ bound state (Figure , E) by exposure
of the preturnover, anaerobic state to oxygen (Figure , C → E), demonstrating that the “in”
to “out” movement of FAD necessary to eject NADP+ is chemically accessible in crystallo. Taken
together (Figure ), structures of KtzI, SidA,
and PvdA have painted a portrait of the reaction coordinate of l-Orn N-hydroxylases. A visual synopsis is
shown in Movie 1 of the .

In summary, we have observed drastic differences in the active
site of a flavin-dependent N-hydroxylase through
a series of crystallographic snapshots. On the basis of these snapshots,
we propose that KtzI, and other N-hydroxylases, will
use a “flapping” flavin to help eject spent NADP+ from their active sites following turnover, providing a molecular
explanation for how these enzymes reset for the next round of catalysis.
Considering that the mechanism for NADP+ ejection has been
enigmatic for all class B monooxygenases, it is tempting to speculate
that flavin conformational changes could also be involved. Before
this work, mobile flavins were only associated with PHBH-like “cautious”
enzymes, whereas now we find flavin movement in an enzyme that is
best defined as a “bold” monoxygenase. Although the
trigger for flavin movement appears different in these two distinct
enzyme classes, in both cases, the flavin movement appears to be associated
with a strategy for preventing uncoupling of the reductive and oxidative
half-reactions. We hope that our structural observations will provide
a new lens for further biochemical examination of these interesting
flavoenzymes.

Supporting Information Available
Crystallographic data collection
and refinement statistics (Tables S1–S6), a list of ordered
residues in crystal structures (Table S7), rmsd comparisons for all
structures (Table S8), a sequence alignment of the structurally characterized l-Orn N-hydroxylases (Figure S1), representative
crystals of KtzI (Figure S2), additional figures of crystal structures
(Figures S3–S7), and a movie summarizing our proposal for the
conformational dynamics accessible during catalysis (Movie 1). This
material is available free of charge via the Internet at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bi500655q_si_001.pdf

bi500655q_si_002.wmv

Accession Codes
The atomic coordinates
have been deposited in the Protein Data Bank as entries 4TLX, 4TLZ, 4TM0, 4TM1, 4TM3, and 4TM4.

Author Present Address
⊥ J.R.H.:
Department of Chemistry, University of Utah, 315 S. 1400
E., Salt Lake City, UT 84112-0850.

This work was
supported, in part, by National Institutes of Health Grants GM083464
(to J.R.H.) and GM020011 (to C.T.W.). C.L.D. is an investigator of
The Howard Hughes Medical Institute. This work is based upon research
conducted at the Advanced Photon Source on the Northeastern Collaborative
Access Team beamlines, which are supported by Award RR-15301 from
the National Center for Research Resources. Use of the Advanced Photon
Source, an Office of Science User Facility operated for the U.S. Department
of Energy (DOE) Office of Science by Argonne National Laboratory,
was supported by the U.S. DOE under Contract DE-AC02-06CH11357. Financial
support comes principally from the Offices of Biological and Environmental
Research and of Basic Energy Sciences of the U.S. DOE, the National
Center for Research Resources (P41RR012408), and the National Institute
of General Medical Sciences (P41GM103473).

The authors declare no
competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
We thank Yimin Zhao for
assisting with crystallization experiments.

Abbreviations
NRPSnonribosomal peptide synthesis

l-Ornl-ornithine

KtzIl-Orn N-hydroxylase from Kutzneria sp. 744

PvdAl-Orn N-hydroxylase from P. aeruginosa

SidAl-Orn N-hydroxylase from A. fumigatus

PHBHp-hydroxybenzoate hydroxylase

BVMOBaeyer–Villiger monooxygenase

FMOflavin monooxygenase

PEGpolyethylene glycol

PDBProtein Data Bank

MRmolecular replacement

FADredreduced FAD

FADoxoxidized FAD

FADox-redre-reduced
FAD

FADred-oxreoxidized
FAD

rmsdroot-mean-square
deviation.

