Bacterial multicomponent monooxygenases
(BMMs) comprise a family of enzymes capable of hydroxylating and epoxidizing
hydrocarbon substrates at carboxylate-rich diiron active sites. Bacteria
containing BMMs help to regulate the global carbon cycle and are used for bioremediation of environments
contaminated with hydrocarbons and halogenated pollutants., All BMMs require a hydrocarbon substrate, molecular oxygen, protons,
and electrons acquired through NAD(P)H. Each BMM requires either three or four components that must reversibly
bind one another throughout catalysis. Dynamic interactions among
these protein components orchestrate substrate delivery to their diiron
centers and subsequent catalytic turnover.− Toluene/o-xylene
monooxygenase (ToMO) is a four-component, arene-oxidizing BMM composed
of an NADH-oxidoreductase (ToMOF), a Rieske-type ferredoxin (ToMOC),
a cofactorless regulatory protein (ToMOD), and the catalytic hydroxylase
protein (ToMOH). Three component BMMs, like soluble methane monooxygenase
(sMMO), lack the Rieske-type ferredoxin.

The diiron active sites
in the 200–250 kDa hydroxylase components
of BMMs are buried ∼12 Å from the protein surface within
a four-helix bundle. The extensive protein
architectures of these hydroxylase components protect intermediates
formed during dioxygen activation from undesired side reactions, but
they also provide a barrier to direct substrate access. This potential
problem is addressed by channels and interconnected cavities that
traverse the hydroxylase. These cavities and channels provide access
of dioxygen, and hydrocarbons, to the diiron active sites, as revealed by X-ray crystallographic
studies of four BMMs: ToMO, toluene-4-monooxygenase (T4MO), soluble
methane monooxygenase (sMMO), and phenol hydroxylase (PH). A conserved
pore comprising the shortest distance from the diiron site to the
solvent-exposed surface has been discovered within all crystallographically
characterized BMMs but has not yet been functionally investigated.
This pore is lined by three hydrophilic residues: a threonine, an
asparagine, and either a glutamate or glutamine (Figure ).−

Conformationally flexible pore of T4MO. Binding of the
regulatory
protein to the hydroxylase of T4MO elicits structural changes within
the pore. The unbound, oxidized hydroxylase (PDB: 3DHG) and the complex
between the regulatory protein and the oxidized hydroxylase (PDB: 3DHH) are shown in panels
A and B, respectively. The regulatory protein in panel B is depicted
as a blue surface. The hydroxylase is colored in gray, cut away to
highlight the pore and diiron active site. The active site, drawn
as sticks, is colored by atom type: carbon (gray), oxygen (red), nitrogen
(blue), and iron (orange). Carbon atoms of the pore appear in green
and yellow to emphasize the conformational changes. Hydrogen bonds
(varying between 2.7 and 2.9 Å) between the pore residues, active
site ligands, and water molecule HOH5 are indicated by dashed black
lines. Water molecules near or within the pore are shown as red spheres.

X-ray crystallographic studies
revealed that the pore is hydrophilic and flexible, and can accommodate
an ordered water molecule, designated HOH5,, when the regulatory protein is bound to the hydroxylase. These structural
results strongly suggest a role for the conformationally flexible,
surface-exposed pore in the catalytic function of these enzymes. Proposals
for this function include mediating proton transfer (PT), or proton-coupled electron transfer (PCET) and providing a pathway for water or hydroxylated products to exit
the active site.

In the present
study, we evaluate reactivity changes following
site-directed mutagenesis of residues within the pore of ToMOH from Pseudomonas sp. OX1, the hydroxylase of a canonical
four-component BMM that displays moderate regiospecificity during
aromatic hydroxylation. Steady-state
and pre-steady-state studies demonstrate that residues N202 and Q228
of ToMOH are critical for efficient turnover, water egress from the
active site, protection of intermediates formed during oxygen activation,
and binding of the electron transfer protein, ToMOC, to the hydroxylase.
We propose that these activities are achieved through movement of
residues N202 and Q228 during catalysis.

Materials and Methods
Materials
and General Methods
Wild-type (WT) vectors
were kindly provided by Prof. Alberto Di Donato, Naples, Italy. Chromatography
was conducted in a cold room maintained at 4 °C. Catechol 2,3-dioxygenase
(C23O) was used in coupled activity assays as previously described. Protein images and cartoon representations of
mutants were rendered using PyMOL X11/Hybrid. Tris, Bis-Tris, and phosphate salts were purchased from CalBioChem,
Santa Cruz Biochemical, and BDH, respectively. NADH was obtained from
Roche. Phenol and sodium dithionite were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich.

Expression and Purification of ToMO Components
Expression
and purification methods for ToMOH, ToMOD, and ToMOC were modified
from previously reported procedures, as detailed in the ., ToMOF was expressed and purified as previously described. Details for the preparation of mutants N202A,
Q228A, and Q228E are included in the .

NADH Consumption Assays
A 350 μL
solution comprising
0.15 μM WT or mutant hydroxylase, 6 μM ToMOD, 6 μM
ToMOC, 60 nM ToMOF, and 0–1500 μM phenol was prepared
in 0.1 M Tris, pH 7.3. The protein mixture was allowed to stand at
room temperature for 1 h. The reaction was initiated by addition of
NADH (ε340 = 6220 M–1 cm–1) to a final concentration of 200 μM. The absorbance change
at 340 nm, corresponding to NADH consumption, was monitored at 25
°C using a Hewlett-Packard diode array spectrophotometer scanning
every 3 s. Initial velocities were obtained by fitting five time points
to a linear function. A minimum of three replicates was performed
for each condition to obtain standard deviations.

Catechol Formation
Assays
The rate of catechol formation
was determined by a coupled assay. Reactions
were prepared as described for the NADH consumption assay except that
excess C23O was added to convert catechol to 2-hydroxymuconic semialdehyde
(ε410 = 12 620 M–1 cm–1). The initial rate of 2-hydroxymuconic semialdehyde
was recorded as a function of absorbance at 410 nm over time. For
experiments carried out in deuterated buffer, we use D2O purchased from Icon Isotopes, 99.8% isotope enriched. Before performing
pH readings of D2O-containing buffers, the pH meter probe
was soaked in this solvent. The pD value of each D2O buffer
was calculated by adding 0.4 to the pH meter readings. To vary the
viscosity of the reaction buffer, 0–1.25 m sucrose was added to the buffer. To examine the effect of ToMOC
concentration, the rate of turnover with respect to ToMOC concentration
was determined using 1–12 μM ToMOC in the steady-state
assays.

Steady-State Data Analysis
Initial velocities were
plotted against phenol concentration, and the resulting curves were
fitted in OriginLabs 9.0 to either the Michaelis–Menten equation
or a modified Michaelis–Menten equation accounting for substrate
inhibition. Double reciprocal plots were
used to calculate the enzymatic efficiencies, kcat/Km, for each hydroxylase. Graphical
representations of the data analysis are shown in . The kinetic solvent isotope effects (KSIEs) were
derived by dividing kcat or kcat/Km obtained in H2O by those obtained in D2O. Coupling efficiencies were
calculated and defined as the rate of product formation divided by
the rate of NADH consumption. In assays with varying concentrations
of ToMOC, the initial rates were plotted as a function of ToMOC concentration.
These plots were fit to the Michaelis–Menten equation with
ToMOC as the substrate to determine the kcat and kcat/Km with respect to ToMOC.

Discontinuous Catechol Formation Assays
To determine
the pH profile of WT ToMOH and mutant Q228A, a discontinuous catechol
formation assay was used, monitoring the initial rate of catechol
formation as a function of pH (). A 300 μL solution of 0.15 μM ToMOH WT or Q228A, 6
μM ToMOD, 6 μM ToMOC, 60 nM ToMOF, and 200–500
μM phenol was prepared in 0.1 M Bis-Tris propane, pH 5.75–7.50.
The protein mixture was allowed to stand at room temperature for 1
h. The reaction was initiated by addition of NADH to a final concentration
of 200 μM. In 10–30 s increments, aliquots of 50 μL
were removed from the reaction and quenched in 50 μL of 0.4
M trichloroacetic acid, with the acidified mixture being vigorously
pipetted. Five time points were obtained for each condition. The quenched
mixture was centrifuged (2000g), and the supernatant
was diluted 4-fold into buffer containing 500 mM Tris and 50 mM MOPS
at pH 7.3. C23O (5 U) was added to each of the diluted solutions.
The absorbance at 374 nm was graphed as a function of the quenching
time (2-hydroxymuconic semialdehyde, ε374 = 33 000 M–1 cm–1). Linear fits were obtained for each time-course.
The kcat and relative coupling efficiency
values were plotted as a function of pH and fit to eqs  and  for WT ToMOH and mutant Q228A,
respectively.

The coupling efficiency as a function
of pH was determined by dividing the rate of catechol formation obtained
from the discontinuous assay by the rate of NADH consumption. Because
one method is continuous and the other is discontinuous, the coupling
efficiencies were normalized to the value at pH 7.25, the pH closest
to that used in other steady-state experiments reported here.

Electron
Transfer (ET) from ToMOCred to Hydroxylase
Variants
ET from reduced ToMOC (ToMOCred) to the
oxidized hydroxylase variants was monitored by stopped-flow UV–visible
spectroscopy configured with a single-wavelength photomultiplier and
a tungsten lamp. All stopped-flow data reported were obtained by using
a Hi-Tech Scientific (Salisbury, UK) SF-61 DX2 stopped-flow spectrophotometer.
Absorbance changes at 458 and 565 nm were monitored, corresponding
to the greatest change of extinction coefficient upon oxidation or
reduction, ∼4000 and 2000 M–1 cm–1, respectively. Anaerobic preparation of protein samples and the
stopped-flow instrument are detailed in the .

The reaction temperatures were maintained
at 13 °C with a circulating water bath. The final protein concentrations
were 10 μM ToMOCred and 100 μM of the oxidized
hydroxylase variant. All data presented are the result of an average
of three or more individual mixes of the ET complex. In OriginLabs
9.0 and Kinetic Studio, the data were fit to a single exponential
function, eq , where C is
the initial absorbance, A is the overall absorbance
change, k is the rate constant, and t is time.

Results
General Steady-State
Kinetics
Table  and  summarize
the results of phenol conversion to catechol for WT ToMOH as well
as mutants N202A, Q228A, and Q228E.

Kinetic Parameters
of Hydroxylase
Variants
 	WT	N202A	Q228A	Q228E	
kcat, phenol (s–1)	4.1(1)	0.59(3)	0.42(6)	0.058(3)	
kcat/Km, phenol (mM–1 s–1)	220(8)	62.7(9)	16(1)	0.72(5)	
KSIE(kcat, phenol)	2.0(1)	1.9(2)	12(1)	0.19(1)	
KSIE(kcat/Km, phenol)	0.48(9)	0.24(9)	7(2)	0.018(2)	
coupling efficiency	0.98(4)	0.57(3)	0.53(1)	0.39(7)	
kcat, ToMOC (s–1)	9.8(4)	7.8(3)	4.7(7)	0.8(2)	
kcat/Km, ToMOC (μM–1 s–1)	1.04(1)	0.412(8)	0.203(4)	0.019(1)	
electron transfer kobs (s–1)	44(2)	21.4(4)	40(10)	6(1)	
Compared to that of WT ToMOH,
the kcat and kcat/Km values were significantly diminished
for the mutant proteins. N202A
and Q228A retained 15 and 10% of the WT ToMOH kcat, respectively. ToMOH mutant Q228E exhibited the lowest kcat, only 1.5% that of the WT protein. The most
deleterious mutations with respect to catalytic efficiency were Q228A
and Q228E, which dropped to 7 and 0.3% of the WT values, respectively.
The N202A mutant retained 28% of the catalytic efficiency of WT ToMOH.

WT ToMOH and mutant N202A each displayed similar KSIE(kcat) values. Mutant Q228A exhibited a much larger KSIE(kcat), suggesting that a proton-transfer or viscosity-dependent
event is rate-limiting. Conversely, mutant Q228E had a strong inverse
KSIE(kcat). Inverse KSIE(kcat/Km) values were observed
with varying magnitudes for all hydroxylase mutants except that of
Q228A.

The rate of hydroxylation versus the rate of NADH consumption
(coupling
efficiency) for WT ToMOH was near unity. Coupling efficiencies for
mutants N202A and Q228A decreased to 50%. ToMOH mutant Q228E exhibited
the lowest coupling efficiency, 39%. During the course of these experiments,
it was noted that decreasing the reaction temperature led to higher
coupling efficiencies for mutant Q228A. The source of this increased
coupling efficiency may arise from a decreased rate of water flux
to the active site as discussed below, but this effect was not further
explored (data not shown).

Steady-State Viscosity Dependence
A plot of kcat as a function of viscosity
is shown in Figures  and  for each hydroxylase
mutant. Within the viscosity range assayed, the activity did not change
significantly for WT ToMOH or mutants N202A and Q228E. With increasing
viscosity, the kcat for mutant Q228A decreased
dramatically, such that the activity was lowered by more than a factor
of 2 at a sucrose molality of 1 or η/ηrel of
∼3.3.

Viscosity dependence of kcat with respect
to phenol, normalized to the viscosity of the buffered solution for
WT ToMOH (black, open circles), N202A (red squares), Q228A (blue diamonds),
and Q228E (green triangles). Turnover was monitored by the catechol
formation assay. The reactions were buffered in 0.1 M Tris buffer,
pH 7.3, at 25 °C with sucrose as the viscogen. The solution viscosity
at each sucrose molality assayed was determined on the basis of previous
reports at 25 °C. Non-normalized
data are shown in .

Effect of ToMOC on Steady-State Parameters
For WT ToMOH
and each mutant enzyme system described here, the steady-state parameters
as a function of ToMOC concentration are shown in Table  and . The enzymatic efficiencies
with respect to ToMOC were significantly reduced for all mutants compared
to that of WT ToMOH. The errors associated with the steady-state parameters
for mutant Q228E are higher than those for other mutants. Even at
25 μM ToMOC, the curve did not begin to saturate for ToMOC variation
experiments with mutant Q228E. It was not possible to use higher concentrations
of ToMOC owing to interference of the absorbance features of ToMOC
with that of NADH and the catechol degradation product, 2-hydroxymuconic
semialdehyde.

Steady-State pH Profiles
Figures  and  depict the steady-state
pH dependence
of both WT ToMOH and mutant Q228A. Concentrations of phenol were varied
in these experiments to determine both kcat and kcat/Km for catechol formation. Although an approximate kcat could be obtained, determination of kcat/Km was not successful
owing to high errors at low concentrations of phenol. The pKa values derived from fits according to the  are indicated in the top panel
of Figure . WT ToMOH exhibits two pKa values within the assayed region, resulting
in a bell-shaped curve. The pKa1 of mutant
Q228A shifts to a higher value, and the pKa2 is either not apparent during catalysis or has moved outside of
the accessible pH window.

Steady-state pH profiles
of WT ToMOH (black, open circles) and
mutant Q228A (blue triangles). The reactions were buffered in 0.1
M Bis-Tris propane, pH 5.75–7.5, at 25 °C. Reactions were
assayed by both the discontinuous catechol formation and NADH consumption
methods. (Top) Maximum rate of product formation as a function of
pH with fits according to eqs  and . (Bottom) Coupling efficiency relative to coupling
at pH 7.25 of WT ToMOH and mutant Q228A. The dotted red line indicates
full coupling efficiency relative to the coupling efficiency at pH
7.25. The non-normalized data are shown in .

The coupling efficiency as a function
of pH is shown in the lower
panel of Figure . Within error, the WT ToMOH
coupling efficiency is near unity for all pH values observed. The
coupling efficiency for mutant Q228A decreases significantly with
decreasing pH.

Pre-Steady-State ET Kinetics of Hydroxylase
Variants
The ET kinetics of each mutant were measured by
stopped-flow UV–visible
spectroscopy (Table , lower panel and ). All of the data obtained
fit well to a single exponential function based on the quality of
the residuals, the adjusted R-squared value, and the error in the
fitted parameters. The residuals for the single exponential fit did
not oscillate, indicating that a single kinetic event sufficiently
described the data. The rate constants for the observed kinetics were
similar for WT ToMOH and mutant Q228A. The rate constant decreased
by a factor of 2 upon mutation of N202 to alanine and by approximately
8-fold for mutant Q228E.

Discussion
The function of pore
residues has generated much speculation since
an early Xe-pressurized crystal structure analysis of the hydroxylase
of sMMO (sMMOH). Similar to that of other
BMM hydroxylases, the pore of ToMOH is surrounded by a dynamic hydrogen-bonding
network that includes active site water molecules, the shifting carboxylate
E231 ligated to the diiron active site, and amino acids T201, N202,
and Q228 (Figure )., The role of the conserved threonine residue, T201, has been a subject
of extensive investigation.,− The roles of residues N202 and Q228, however, have received far
less attention in the literature. To investigate the roles of residues
N202 and Q228, we used site-directed mutagenesis and comparative kinetic
analysis between WT ToMOH and three hydroxylase mutants, N202A, Q228A,
and Q228E. Alanine mutations were selected to definitively disrupt
the hydrogen-bonding network surrounding the pore. Mutant Q228E was
prepared to mimic the pore of sMMOH, which contains a glutamate instead
of a glutamine at this key position ().

Experimental Design
ToMO is capable of hydroxylating
a wide variety of arene substrates, including toluene, o-xylene, benzene, halogenated aromatics, and phenol. Hydroxylation of phenol by ToMO yields only one product,
catechol, whereas hydroxylation of toluene
leads to a distribution of products, o-, m-, and p-cresol. Owing to its solubility and ease of characterization, phenol was
used as the substrate in the steady-state reactions described here.

With respect to turnover, there are two competing processes, as
illustrated in Scheme , namely, substrate
hydroxylation by ToMOHperoxo and loss of H2O2 from ToMOHperoxo. In this work, we examined the efficiency of hydroxylation versus
uncoupled activity (H2O2 formation).

Hydroxylation
(Blue) And Loss of Hydrogen Peroxide (Green)
Two important factors contributing to coupling efficiencies
are
the concentrations of a hydrocarbon substrate and the function of
the regulatory protein, ToMOD. At subsaturating concentrations of
either a hydrocarbon substrate or the regulatory protein, the coupling
efficiency decreases for many BMMs.,, These two factors were kept in mind when designing
and interpreting the experiments.

N202 and Q228 Are Critical
for Hydroxylation and Coupling Efficiency
For all three mutants,
both the rate of product formation and the
coupling efficiency were deleteriously affected. To determine whether
a lower affinity for ToMOD was the source of low coupling efficiency,
we investigated directly the binding of ToMOH with fluorescein-labeled
ToMOD (ToMOD-Fl, see  protocols and Figure S10 for details). Mutants N202A and Q228A each
retained similar affinities for ToMOD-Fl as that of WT ToMOH. In contrast,
mutant Q228E exhibits a diminished binding strength for ToMOD-Fl.
Because WT ToMOH and mutants N202A and Q228A maintain a similar ToMOD-Fl
binding affinity, the loss of coupling efficiency in these mutants
cannot be attributed to a decreased binding affinity for the regulatory
protein. Therefore, residues N202 and Q228 must participate in aromatic
hydroxylation by ToMOHperoxo (Scheme , blue) or downregulate hydrogen peroxide release (Scheme , green). This attenuation of activity clearly demonstrates
that both N202 and Q228 are critical for efficient hydroxylation.

Residue Q228 Mediates Proton Flux to the Active Site
Identification
of HOH5 within the pore of the cognate hydroxylase
of T4MO by X-ray crystallography suggests
that solvent-mediated PT may occur through the pore. If solvent-derived
protons are responsible for a rate-limiting PT step, the observed
kinetics will be diffusion-limited and highly sensitive to protium/deuterium
solvent exchange. To examine the sensitivity
of mutants N202A, Q228A, and Q228E to these variables, product formation
assays were conducted monitoring KSIEs, viscosity dependence, and
pH dependence.

Of the mutants examined here, only Q228A exhibited
a steady-state viscosity dependence and isotope effects greater than
two (Figure ). Because the viscosity of deuterated
water is greater than that of protiated water, viscosity-dependent
kinetics can also result in KSIE values greater than 1. At the viscosity
of deuterated water (nrel, 1.23 mPa S), the kcat of WT
and the three mutants varied from 88 to 108% of the kcat in non-sucrose-containing buffer. Thus, viscosity
can contribute only a maximum KSIE effect of 1.14 for all mutants.
The observed KSIE(kcat) and KSIE(kcat/Km) values for
mutant Q228A are much larger, however, 12 and 7, respectively. Thus,
the rate-limiting reaction of mutant Q228A is sensitive to both viscosity
and hydrogen–deuterium exchange.

To further examine the
proton dependence of mutant Q228A, pH profile
studies for catechol formation were carried out with either WT ToMOH
or mutant Q228A. The pH profile of WT ToMOH displays a bell-shape
(Figure ), indicating that two prototropic
groups are critical for catalysis. The pKa1 and pKa2 values of WT enzyme are 6.1
and 7.1, respectively. The functional groups responsible for these
pKa values are unknown but may include
a histidine side chain (pKa ∼ 6.1),
an iron-aqua species (pKa &lt;15, but
widely variable), or a diiron-peroxo
species (pKa ∼ 7.2). The coupling efficiency of WT ToMOH did not
vary significantly over the pH range investigated (Figure ). Conversely, the pH profile of mutant Q228A is
alkaline-shifted (pKa ∼ 6.52) from
that of WT (pKa ∼ 6.1) and did
not exhibit a bell-shape within the accessible pH range. At the lower
end of the pH range, mutant Q228A displayed significant uncoupling
in parallel with the diminished kcat values
for conversion of phenol to catechol (Figure ).

Because the kinetic properties of the Q228A mutant respond
to protium–deuterium
substitution, the pH of the buffer, and solvent viscosity, we conclude
that unregulated solvent-derived proton transfer occurs when the carboxamide
side chain is removed in mutant Q228A. We propose that movement of
the Q228 side chain attenuates proton flux from solvent, preventing
the quenching of oxygenated intermediates in the ToMOH reaction cycle.
Figure  (bottom panel) illustrates in cartoon
form a model that would result in the observed kinetics. Loss of the
carboxamide side chain in mutant Q228A may lead to the entry of water
molecules into the pore. An unregulated flux of water molecules into
the pore exposes the diiron center to more solvent, including H3O+, allowing for deactivation of oxygenated intermediates.
In such a model, binding of ToMOD to mutant Q228A would not protect
the diiron center from solvent access. This structural model would
explain the sensitivity of mutant Q228A to protium–deuterium
substitution, an increase in proton concentration, viscosity, and
the diminish efficacy of ToMOD as a coupling protein. An alternative
explanation for the observed kinetics is a change from classical PT
in WT ToMOH to proton tunneling in mutant Q228A., This possibility is highly disfavored owing to the relatively slow
rate of turnover for steady-state reactivity.

Model for explaining
the behavior of mutant Q228A during steady-state
turnover. The X-ray crystal structure of the reduced hydroxylase–regulatory
protein complex of WT T4MO is depicted in the top panel. PyMOL was
used to generate representations of the water network for mutant Q228A
(bottom panel). The placement of these water molecules was selected
to optimize the hydrogen-bonding distances between the water molecules
and was supported by a previously reported X-ray crystallographic
study. In all representations, the hydroxylase
is shown as a gray surface and the regulatory protein as a dark blue
surface. The side chains of residues T201, N202, Q228X, and E231 are
all drawn as sticks color coded according to atoms: carbon (teal),
oxygen (red), nitrogen (blue), and iron (orange). Iron atoms and water
molecules are shown as orange and red spheres, respectively.

For N202A, there is no significant
KSIE or viscosity dependence
during steady-state turnover, presumably because Q228 is sufficient
to completely block the pore. Unfortunately, no direct evidence regarding
proton transfer in WT ToMOH could be obtained through the studies
presented here.

Residue Q228 Regulates Water Dissociation
from the Diiron Active
Site
Hydroxylation of substrates by BMMs involves the production
of an alcohol or epoxide product and a water molecule. In addition,
substrate binding and a shifting glutamate
residue require expulsion of iron-bound
water molecules from the active site by diffusion through the protein
surface. Water flux through the interior of proteins typically proceeds
through defined routes, frequently through hydrophilic channels. The BMM pore is the only conserved, hydrophilic
channel extending from the diiron center to the solvent-exposed surface.,,, Water egress cannot be directly monitored to determine whether the
pore controls the flux, but indirect evidence is provided by the results
of KSIE measurements.

Inverse solvent isotope effects in enzymology
have been reported for cysteine protonation/deprotonation during catalysis, and water dissociation from metal ions.− Because there
are no cysteine residues in proximity to the active site of ToMOH,
the observed inverse isotope effects are assigned to release of water
from the diiron active site during turnover. In particular, by protium–deuterium
substitution, we observe inverse isotope effects for the KSIE(kcat) of mutant Q228E and the KSIE(kcat/Km) of WT ToMOH and mutants
N202A and Q228E.

For mononuclear cobalt, iron, and zinc, the number
of aqua or hydroxo ligands dissociating from a metal center can be
calculated from the magnitude of the KSIE and fractionation factors
(Φ, equilibrium distributions of the two isotopes). Fractionation
factors for mononuclear centers have been previously reported. However,
those factors for dimetallic centers are unreported to our knowledge.
If each iron within the diiron active site is treated as a separate
mononuclear center, surprising agreement is achieved between the experimental
and predicted values (see the ). From these data we conclude that water dissociation is rate-limiting
for steady state turnover in mutant Q228E.

The KSIE(kcat/Km) values for
mutants N202A and Q228E and for WT ToMOH are
also less than 1, indicating that water dissociation from iron also
contributes to rate constants comprising the KSIE(kcat/Km) values for these hydroxylase
variants. For single-substrate enzymes, the kcat/Km incorporates rate constants
for steps prior to the first irreversible one in the reaction pathway.
In multisubstrate enzymes like ToMO, however, the order of substrate
addition can change the composition of rate constants contributing
to kcat/Km (Schemes S2 and S3 in the ). Because of this complexity, changes in KSIE(kcat/Km) cannot be interpreted
in terms of specific mechanistic changes or specific rate constants.

Binding of ToMOC to ToMOH Is Mediated by Pore Residues
 We
studied whether mutation of pore residues might effect a change
in the reduction step of the catalytic cycle (Scheme ). Mutants N202A and Q228E exhibited a decrease in rate constant
for ET compared to WT ToMOH. The rate of interprotein electron transfer
from ToMOCred to WT ToMOH is limited by the rate of protein
association and cannot be saturated even at very high concentrations
of ToMOH. Steady-state experiments demonstrate that the kcat and kcat/Km values with respect to ToMOC are lower than those of
WT ToMOH for all N202 and Q228 mutants. Taken together, these results
show that N202 and Q228 are important for the function of ToMOC, most
probably facilitating protein binding between the hydroxylase and
the Rieske protein. If we consider dynamic interactions of the BMM
hydroxylases, the regulatory proteins are known to bind over the pore
in all X-ray crystallographically characterized BMM hydroxylase–regulatory
protein complexes.− Thus, if ToMOC were also to bind at the pore, ToMOD
and ToMOC must compete for an overlapping binding site on the surface
of ToMOH.

Comparison of Putative Functions of the Pore in ToMOH and sMMOH
Mutation of Q228 to the analogous residue in sMMO, a glutamate,
resulted in almost complete loss of steady-state activity and coupling
efficiency. The most obvious conclusion is that the negative charge
introduced significantly impacts the requisite conformational flexibility
of this pore residue. However, the structurally analogous glutamate
residue of sMMO, E240, undergoes a conformational rearrangement upon
docking of the regulatory protein and hydroxylase despite its negative
charge. A comparison of crystal structures
for ToMOH, T4moH, sMMOH, and the hydroxylase–regulatory
protein complexes for T4MO and sMMO revealed no amino acids surrounding the pore
that would selectively stabilize a negatively charged versus a neutral
species. The X-ray crystallographic study of mutant Q228E from T4MO
offers a possible explanation. In this
investigation, the glutamine residue is able to stabilize HOH5, but
mutation to glutamate results in loss of this water molecule. If HOH5 and Q228 are involved in water release
from the diiron active site, then mutant Q228E might exhibit low activity
and coupling efficiency because its charge might retard the rate of
water egress either by slowing the rate of conformational change or
eliminating an essential hydrogen-bonding partner. The question of
how sMMOH functions with a glutamate at this key position remains
unanswered. Unlike in ToMOH and T4moH, sMMOH must release methanol
during each catalytic cycle. It is possible that the pore of sMMOH
is optimized for release of both water and methanol, whereas in other
BMMs, the pore may be more specifically optimized for water release
during catalytic turnover.

Conclusions
The
role of a conserved pore near the diiron active site in BMMs,
which opens and closes during catalysis,, has been a subject of much speculation, largely on the basis of
static X-ray crystal structure information. Here, we unveil the role
of pore residue Q228 through kinetic studies during catalysis. Through
investigations of steady-state turnover, coupling efficiency, pH dependence,
viscosity effect, and solvent kinetic isotope experiments, we determine
that Q228 is critical for mediating water flux and attenuating PT,
preventing adventitious attack on activated intermediates formed by
the reaction of dioxygen with the reduced diiron(II) form of the hydroxylase.
We postulate that it is the movement of this fluxional glutamine residue,
opening and closing the pore, which conveys the observed functionality.
Residue N202 of the pore is also critical for catalysis but is more
important for protein–protein interaction, possibly stabilizing
the conformations of Q228. Finally, we present evidence that the pore
is near the binding interface of ToMOH:ToMOC, strongly supporting
a competitive binding model for the ToMOC and ToMOD components on
the surface of ToMOH. The present work provides the first kinetic
evidence regarding the function of a highly conserved pore in BMMs.

Supporting Information Available
Protein
preparation details;
proposed model for water dissociation from the diiron active site
of Q228E; sequence alignment of alpha subunits of the hydroxylase
proteins within BMMs; graphical descriptions of the NADH consumption,
catechol formation, and quenched-activity assays; contributions to
catalysis and the concentrations necessary to reach optimal catalytic
activity of the component proteins used in the ToMO reactivity studies;
reactions of each of the hydroxylase isoforms studied in H2O and D2O by the catechol formation assay; non-normalized
data of the hydroxylase isoforms in varying concentrations of sucrose;
reactions of each of the hydroxylase isoforms studied with varying
concentration of ToMOC by the catechol formation assay; results from
the quenched-activity and NADH assays; change in the extinction coefficient
of ToMOC upon reduction with phosphate buffered dithionite; change
of absorbance at 458 nm upon mixing ToMOCred with an oxidized
hydroxylase isoform; size-exclusion chromatograms for binding between
ToMOD-Fl and hydroxylase variants; hypothetical diagram depicting
catalytic turnover of A of a bisubstrate reaction; and mathematical
representation of the bisubstrate system. This material is available
free of charge via the Internet at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bi500387y_si_001.pdf

This work was
funded by the National Institute of General Medical Sciences under
grant 2R01-GM032113. A.D.L. thanks the National Institutes of Health
for partial support under Interdepartmental Biotechnology Training
Grant T32 GM008334.

The authors declare no
competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
We thank Dr. Woon Ju Song,
Kanchana Ravichandran, and Weixue
Wang for helpful discussions.

Abbreviations Used
BMMbacterial multicomponent monooxygenase

NAD(P)Hreduced nicotinamide
adenine dinucleotide (also NADH) or reduced nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide
phosphate

PTproton
transfer

ETelectron
transfer

ToMOtoluene/o-xylene monooxygenase

ToMOHhydroxylase component of ToMO

ToMODcofactorless regulatory component
of ToMO

ToMOD-Flfluorescein-labeled ToMOD

ToMOCRieske-type ferredoxin of ToMO

ToMOFNADH-oxidoreductase of ToMO

sMMOsoluble methane monooxygenase

sMMOHhydroxylase component
of sMMO

WTwild
type

C23Ocatechol-2,3-dioxygenase

T4MOtoluene-4-monooxygenase

T4moHhydroxylase component
of T4MO

T4moDcofactorless
regulatory component of T4MO

ToMOD-Flfluorescein-labeled ToMOD

Tristris(hydroxymethyl)-aminomethane

Bis-Tris propanebis(tris(hydroxymethyl)methylamino)propane

ToMOCredreduced ToMOC

ToMOCoxoxidized ToMOC

KSIEkinetic solvent isotope effect

