Cyclic AMP-dependent
protein
kinase A (PKA) is a ubiquitous signaling enzyme that catalyzes the
transfer of the phosphoryl group from ATP to the serine or threonine
residues of their protein substrates. First crystallized in 1991,, it served as a prototype for the kinase family. The catalytic subunit
of PKA (PKA-C) is a 350-residue protein consisting of a conserved
bilobal core flanked by an N-terminal helical segment, known as the
A-helix, and a 50-residue C-terminal tail that wraps around the kinase
(Figure A). The
small lobe of the kinase is rich in β-strands with only two
short helical segments, while the large lobe is mostly helical. The
active site cleft is positioned at the interface of the two lobes
and harbors the nucleotide binding site. A glycine-rich loop acts
as a lid, protecting the nucleotide’s phosphates that protrude
from the binding cleft toward the substrate from hydrolysis. A short
helix (C-helix) positioned by the activation loop contributes to the
organization of the active site. The peptide-positioning loop registers
the substrate with respect to the nucleotide, aligning the P site
toward the γ-phosphate, with two Mg2+ ions participating
in the active site organization for phosphoryl transfer. While the
catalytic regions of PKA-C are responsible for the chemistry at the
active site, signaling involves the core of the protein, with two hydrophobic spines (C- and R-spines)
that define active and inactive states of the enzyme. The C-spine
is assembled upon nucleotide binding, while the R-spine is assembled
upon phosphorylation of the activation loop., Structural
studies of other protein kinases suggest that the spines are responsible
for both allosteric signaling and regulation.,

During the catalytic cycle, the kinase is thought to undergo
significant
structural rearrangements. High-resolution crystal structures revealed
at least three main conformational states: apo, intermediate (nucleotide-bound),
and closed (ternary complex). Nuclear
magnetic resonance (NMR) relaxation experiments have shown that the
conformational dynamics of the enzyme drive the structural transitions
from the open to closed conformation and play a key role in substrate
recognition and turnover., The nucleotide acts
as an allosteric effector, completing the catalytic spines,, and shifting the kinase toward
a structurally and dynamically committed state. Reaching the committed state may require the rearrangement
of the internal forces that stabilize each conformational state, such
as hydrophobic, electrostatic, van der Waals, and hydrogen bonding
interactions. Although to a lesser extent, hydrogen bonds are thought
to play an important role in protein stability and in fine-tuning
their tertiary structure.

In this
paper, we studied the changes in the kinase hydrogen bond
strengths across the three major conformational states. To obtain
residue-specific information about the hydrogen bond strengths, we
measured the hydrogen/deuterium (H/D) fractionation factors (φ)
using solution NMR spectroscopy., The φ
values report on the preference of each amide site for exchanging
deuterium over protium from a mixed H2O/D2O
solution. Initially developed to probe hydrogen bond strengths in
dicarboxylic acids, φ values have
been widely utilized to investigate low-barrier hydrogen bonds in
enzymes and to evaluate the contribution
of hydrogen bonds to protein stability., Recently,
Cao and Bowie revisited the issue of hydrogen/deuterium fractionation,
providing a revised energetic scale for the φ values and underscoring
the importance of analyzing φ values to determine the changes
in hydrogen bond strength for ligand binding to proteins.

Generally, a φ value of unity indicates
an equal distribution
of deuterium and protium between protein and bulk solvent. The amide
sites involved in strong hydrogen bonds prefer protium over deuterium
with φ values of &lt;1, whereas amides involved in weak hydrogen
bonds have φ values of &gt;1. In
proteins,
amide hydrogens have φ values ranging from 0.3 to 2.0, with
the latter measured for very weak hydrogen bonds. We measured the φ values for the backbone amides
of PKA-C in three different forms: apo, ADP-bound (binary complex),
and ADP/PKI peptide-bound (ternary complex). Our results show that
the overall φ values decrease as the kinase binds ADP and a
pseudosubstrate peptide (PKI5–24), indicating that
the strength of hydrogen bonds gradually increases from the free to
the ternary forms. Importantly, the changes in hydrogen bond strengths
are not localized to the binding site but are pervasive throughout
the entire protein. Whereas the strengths of the majority of the hydrogen
bonds increase, several other hydrogen bonds away from the ligand
binding sites become weaker, suggesting a redistribution of the protein
free energy. From this study, φ measurements emerge as an important
complement to other NMR parameters such as chemical shifts,− H/D protection factors,, residual dipolar couplings,, and nuclear spin relaxation measurements− to characterize protein conformational dynamics and
to identify long-range allosteric changes upon ligand binding or mutations.

Experimental
Procedures
NMR Sample Preparation
Uniformly 15N-labeled
PKA-C was expressed in Escherichia coli bacteria
and purified as reported previously. A
single protein stock solution was used for each set of experiments
for each form of the kinase. Each NMR sample contained ∼200
μM PKA, 20 mM KH2PO4, 90 mM KCl, 10 mM
MgCl2, 10 mM MEGA-8 (octanoyl N-methylglucamide),
5% glycerol, 20 mM dithiothreitol (DTT), and 1 mM NaN3.
The pH of the buffer solutions in both protonated and deuterated water
was adjusted to 6.5 (without correction for the isotope effect). For
the nucleotide-bound form, PKA-C was saturated with 12 mM ADP, while
for the ternary complex, the enzyme was saturated with 12 mM ADP and
a peptide (350 μM) corresponding to the recognition sequence
of the protein kinase inhibitor (PKI5–24) and 60
mM MgCl2 was used. The samples containing varying concentrations
of D2O (5, 20, 40, and 60% by volume for the apo and ternary
forms; 5, 20, 40, 50, and 60% by volume for the binary form) were
prepared by mixing buffer solutions of protonated and deuterated water.
A maximal D2O concentration of 60% was chosen to minimize
errors caused by the increase in T1 values
at high deuteration levels.

Determination of H/D Fractionation Factors
The H/D
equilibrium fractionation factor (φ) is defined as the equilibrium
constant of the following reaction:where
NH represents the weak acid and B the
weak base.

To determine the fractionation factors, a series
of 1H–15N TROSY-HSQC spectra were acquired using the CLEAN-TROSY version of
the original pulse sequence and recorded
for all of the forms of the kinase for all of the D2O concentrations.
The spectra were acquired on an 850 MHz Bruker spectrometer equipped
with a triple-resonance probe at 27 °C with either 128 scans
(for the binary and ternary forms) or 64 scans (for the apo form)
and 60 increments and a recycle delay of 1.5 s. The spectra were processed
using NMRPipe. The peak intensities were
determined using Sparky with assignments
previously determined for PKA-C. Fractionation
factors are obtained by the linear least-squares analysis ofwhere I is the peak intensity, x is the mole fraction of water, and C is
the normalization parameter, which is the inverse peak intensity at
100% H2O. Note that for high D2O concentrations,
it is advisable to use nonlinear fitting as linear fitting amplifies
the errors.

Results
H/D Fractionation
Factors and Structural Transitions of PKA-C
Fractionation
factors (φ) were measured by incubating PKA-C
in aqueous solutions with D2O concentrations ranging from
5 to 60%. Under these conditions, the intensities of the amide resonances
in the 1H–15N TROSY-HSQC spectrum decrease
according to their relative propensity to incorporate deuterium (Figure B), reflecting the strength of the hydrogen bonds
in which they are involved., To ensure that the
exchange reached equilibrium, we incubated the samples and kept them
at 25 °C for 24 h prior to acquiring the 1H–15N TROSY-HSQC spectra (Figure S1 of the ). Indeed,
we found that the amide resonance intensities were unchanged after
a 7 day incubation period (Figure S2 of the ). To calculate the φ values, we fit the trend
of the amide peak intensities as a function of the mole ratio of D2O. To mimic the three major conformational states of PKA-C,
we performed our experiments on the apo, ADP-bound, and ADP/PKI5–24-bound kinase. ADP was used in place of the common
ATP mimic, ATPγN, because of the very slow hydrolysis on the
time scale of weeks that was observed with ATPγN. The 1H–15N TROSY-HSQC
spectra of PKA-C saturated with either ADP or ATPγN are almost
superimposable (Figure S1 of the ), indicating that the average conformations of the kinase are very
similar. As for the binary complexes, the spectra of the ternary complexes
formed with either ADP/PKI5–24 or ATPγN/PKI5–24 bound are similar. Only small chemical shift perturbations
are observed near the active site, reflecting the effect of the γ-phosphate
group (Figure S3A,B of the ). When ligand binds, PKA-C undergoes linear chemical shift changes
between the apo and closed forms of the enzyme,,, indicating that ligand binding shifts a
preexisting conformational equilibrium from the open and closed state
in the fast exchange regime on the chemical shift time scale. To estimate the average conformational state
of the kinase free and bound undergoing fast exchange equilibrium,
we used CONCISE (Coordinated Chemical Shifts Behavior). As reported in Figure S3C of the , the probability densities of the complexes with
ADP and ATPγN are essentially overlapped. A small but significant
difference is observed for the probability densities for the ternary
complexes, which reflect the differences in the observed chemical
shifts (Figure S3A of the ). Nonetheless, the average positions of the distributions on the
average principal component (PC) score indicate that these complexes
recapitulate both the intermediate and the closed states (Figure S3C
of the ).

When
ADP is bound, the enzyme’s resonances undergo significant line
broadening originating from conformational dynamics on the microsecond
to millisecond time scale similar to those experienced with ATPγN
or ATP (Figure S4 of the )., Therefore, several resonances in the intermediate
states are not available for analysis. Overall, 211, 201, and 243
resonances for the apo, binary, and ternary forms of PKA-C, respectively,
were available for the calculations of the φ values (Figure
S5 of the ). Of the
calculated φ values, we eliminated those exceeding the value
of 2.0, which are affected by rapid exchange and T1 values as well as those
residues showing poor correlation coefficients (R2 &lt; 0.70). Note that in a few instances we measured
φ values slightly lower than 0.20. Although included in the
plots, those residues are considered to be not exchanging with the
solvent on the time scale we analyzed. These observations are in agreement
with previous work by Taylor and co-workers, who found similar nonexchanging
residues in the hydrophobic core of PKA-C using deuterium exchange
mass spectrometry (DXMS). The overall
mean fractionation factor values for the apo, binary, and ternary
complexes were 1.06 ± 0.52, 1.04 ± 0.52, and 0.96 ±
0.55, respectively.

Although the overall strength of the hydrogen
bonds increases in
agreement with the thermostability of the protein, there is variability in the φ values across the enzyme,
reflecting local changes in hydrogen bond strength upon ligand binding
(Figure ). In fact, the plots describing the
number of occurrences versus φ values for all three forms of
PKA-C show broad distributions of φ values (Figure ). This contrasts with the tight bell-shaped distribution
of φ in staphylococcal nuclease that was centered at 0.85. The variability of φ is apparent in all
of the structural motifs for all of the states (Table ). In the apo state, high φ values (⟨φ⟩
&gt; 1.2) were measured for the N-terminus (αA and β1)
and
C-terminal tail, while the helices in the large lobe, namely along
αE and αF, display very low φ values [⟨φ⟩
&lt; 0.5 (Table )]. These results, in qualitative
agreement with the DXMS experiments, suggest that these hydrogen bonds
make a significant contribution to the stability of the large lobe. Unlike previous fractionation studies,,− there is no correlation between φ values and
secondary structure in PKA-C. For instance, W30 and I228, both located
in α-helices, exhibit rather different hydrogen bond strengths
(Figure ). We also observed that most residues
with φ values of ≫2 (Figure S6A of the ) are located in the solvent-exposed,
unstructured regions of the enzyme undergoing significant motions.,,, Because of exchange broadening on the microsecond to millisecond
time scale upon ADP binding, we were unable to measure φ in
the active site, including the Gly-rich, DFG, activation, and peptide-positioning
loops. However, we observed several changes in φ values radiating
away from the nucleotide binding pocket to more peripheral domains
of the enzyme (Figures  and  and S7 of the ). In the small lobe, these changes
include β-strands 1, 4, and 5 (⟨Δφbinary-apo⟩ = −0.27), the αA−β linker (⟨Δφbinary-apo⟩ = −0.23), and αA (⟨Δφbinary-apo⟩ = −0.16) (Figure ). Interestingly, the loops connecting helices αE,
αF, and αH in the large lobe display φ values lower
than those of loops in the apo state [⟨Δφbinary-apo⟩ = −0.25]. Previous research has shown that the nucleotide
in PKA-C functions as an allosteric effector., These results suggest that nucleotide binding may affect short-
and long-range intermolecular forces by altering in part the hydrogen
bonding network.

Determination of fractionation factors. (A) Structural
motifs mapped
onto the ternary complex of PKA-C (Protein Data Bank entry 1ATP). (B) Representative
portions of the 1H–15N TROSY-HSQC spectra
for apo PKA-C at various D2O concentrations, highlighting
W30 and I228 located in helical domains of the kinase. (C) Linear
least-squares fit of the inverse of intensities for W30 and I228 vs
(1 – x)/x, where x is the mole fraction of H2O.

Representative least-squares fitting of residues showing
different
types of changes in hydrogen bond strengths upon binding nucleotide
and pseudosubstrate.

Distribution of amide fractionation factors in three major states
of PKA-C. Histogram of the occurrences vs fractionation factor values
(top). Mapping of the fractionation factors on the PKA-C structure
(bottom, Protein Data Bank entry 1ATP). The amide groups are represented as
spheres and color-coded according to the spectrum bar (blue for strong
hydrogen bonds and high φ values and red for weak hydrogen bonds
and low φ values).

Differences in the fractionation factor between apo and binary
complexes (left) and between binary and ternary complexes (right)
of PKA-C mapped onto the PKA-C structure.

Average φ
and Δφ Values for the Various Structural
Motifs of PKA-C in the Different Conformational States
 	⟨φ⟩	⟨Δφ⟩	
motif	apo	binary	ternary	φbinary – φapo	φternary – φbinary	
A-helix	1.30 ± 0.27	1.12 ± 0.34	0.98 ± 0.23	–0.16 ± 0.37	–0.08 ± 0.21	
αA−β
linker	1.52 ± 0.16	1.32 ± 0.39	1.26 ± 0.25	–0.23 ± 0.24	–0.13 ± 0.20	
hinge (residues 120–127)	1.03 ± 0.48	1.33 ± 0.65	1.23 ± 0.47	–0.03 ± 0.06	0.35 ± 0.30	
E-helix	0.49 ± 0.13	0.41 ± 0.09	0.51 ± 0.57	–0.03 ± 0.07	–0.16 ± 0.23	
F-helix	0.40 ± 0.12	0.56 ± 0.27	0.51 ± 0.33	0.12 ± 0.34	–0.19 ± 0.32	
G-helix	1.39 ± 0.28	1.15 ± 0.46	1.31 ± 0.40	0.14 ± 0.002	–0.08 ± 0.84	
H-helix	0.86 ± 0.60	1.36 ± 0.57	1.00 ± 0.88	0.06 ± 0.05	–0.10 ± 0.49	
C-terminal tail	 	 	 	 	 	
residues 298–314	1.44 ± 0.63	1.10 ± 0.55	1.03 ± 0.59	–0.34 ± 0.22	–0.11 ± 0.33	
residues 315–345	1.51 ± 0.39	1.65 ± 0.27	1.32 ± 0.37	0.28 ± 0.08	–0.25 ± 0.47	
residues 346–350	1.18 ± 0.48	1.19 ± 0.18	1.07 ± 0.35	–0.18 ± 0.34	–0.13 ± 0.38	
Binding of PKI5–24 increases the
compactness
of the enzyme as it adopts a closed, solvent-protected conformation, with 54 of 231 resonances displaying φ
values around 0.3 (Figure ), including residues
in β-strands 2 and 3, the C-helix, the αC−β4
loop, hinge, αD, αE, the segment from the P+1 loop to
the F-helix, αF, αH, and the αH−αI
loop. Most of these residues are buried in the interior of the kinase
(Figure S6B of the ). Overall, we observed a decrease in the average φ values
(⟨Δφternary-binary⟩ =
−0.10 ± 0.38), particularly for residues localized in
the large lobe and C-terminal tail (Figure ), except for a few residues in helix αA (⟨Δφternary-binary⟩ = −0.08 ± 0.21) and
the small lobe (⟨Δφternary-binary⟩ = −0.09 ± 0.24) (Figure ). In contrast, the hinge region shows a positive change in ⟨Δφ⟩
[0.35 ± 0.30 (Figure  and Table )], which may result from a reorientation of the
hinge region that allows the active site cleft to close. Additionally,
PKI5–24 binding increases the hydrogen bond strength
in the inner core of the kinase for helices αE, αF, and
αH (Table ) as well as for several residues
in the C-terminal tail (Figure ), consistent
with the crystallographic data.,, Specifically, the acidic patch (residues 330–334) has been
hypothesized to recruit the basic substrate into the active site cleft,
where Y330 is poised to interact with the substrate’s P-3 arginine
residue., Substrate binding primarily strengthens
the hydrogen bonds in the large lobe of the enzyme, and also those
in the C-terminal tail, recruited to assemble the active site for
catalysis.

To account for the changes in catalytically important
motifs (i.e.,
Gly-rich, DFG loop, peptide-positioning loops, etc.), we considered
only the φ values for the apo and ternary forms (Figure ). The majority of the catalytic motifs experienced
strengthening of hydrogen bonds, including the Gly-rich loop (⟨Δφternary-apo⟩ = −0.61 ± 0.28), αC
(⟨Δφternary-apo⟩ = −0.43
± 0.27), and the peptide-positioning loop (⟨Δφternary-apo⟩ = −0.39 ± 0.24). In
contrast, the only reporter of the DFG loop (Phe185) shows a higher
φ value for the ternary complex (Δφternary-apo = 0.50). Its propensity to incorporate deuterium could result from
the increased number of conformational fluctuations caused by nucleotide
binding. Taken together, these results show that nucleotide and pseudosubstrate
binding assemble the active site, strengthening the hydrogen bonds
in the active site and coordinating catalysis in PKA-C.

Difference
in fractionation factors between apo and ternary complexes
for the residues that were exchange-broadened upon ADP binding.

Discussion
In
recent years, PKA-C has emerged as a model system for understanding
both kinase function and intramolecular allosteric signaling., The transitions of PKA-C between different states involve both conformational
and dynamic (protein flexibility) changes that propagate from the
ligand binding sites to remote parts of the molecule., Therefore, a complete understanding of this allosteric signaling
necessitates the analysis of intra- and intermolecular interactions
that hold the protein together. Among
those, hydrogen bonds play a key role in allosteric regulation, and recent reports have demonstrated their importance
in enzymatic catalysis and inhibition., DXMS techniques
have been used to analyze hydrogen bond networks of proteins to identify
domains that might be involved in allosteric transitions., Unlike DXMS, NMR spectroscopy monitors H/D exchange in a site-specific
manner, making it possible to track hydrogen bonds throughout the
protein at the atomic level. On the other hand, the NMR H/D exchange
technique reports on the kinetic protection factors, monitoring the
decay of the amide signals versus time., However, this
technique, with a few exceptions for selected systems,− usually requires the lyophilization of the protein under examination.
In contrast, the equilibrium φ measurements can be accomplished
by incubating the proteins in H2O/D2O solutions
without lyophilization and report directly on the strength of the
hydrogen bonds. These measurements are taken under equilibrium conditions,
which prevent the freezing–drying procedures required for the
H/D protection factor measurements. This is crucial for PKA-C, an
enzyme that is partially or completely inactivated upon lyophilization.
Previous studies using H/D fractionation factors focused on the enzyme’s
active sites, and did not fully exploit the
potential of this approach for identifying local and long-range changes
in the hydrogen bond network and allosteric communication. In fact,
only marginal changes were detected for the φ values upon binding
of ligand to the proteins analyzed.,,, These proteins, however,
possess relatively rigid and compact structures with uniform φ
values. In contrast, the structure of PKA-C is highly dynamic, undergoing
substantial conformational changes upon ligand binding., As a result, the φ values we measured for PKA-C have a distribution
much broader than the distribution of those measured for staphylococcal
nuclease, ubiquitin, histidine-containing proteins, and immunoglobulin G binding domain of protein G. As PKA-C undergoes the transition from the open to closed
conformation upon binding the nucleotide and the pseudosubstrate inhibitor,
the average φ values decrease, suggesting that the intramolecular
hydrogen bonds become stronger. Globally, these results correlate
well with X-ray crystallography, NMR spectroscopy, fluorescence studies,, and thermodynamic as well as DXMS analysis, that show PKA-C’s structure becoming more compact and thermostable
in the closed conformation. Structurally, nucleotide binding allosterically
couples the two lobes of the kinase, causing positive binding cooperativity
between the nucleotide and the pseudosubstrate., Binding of the pseudosubstrate further stabilizes the complex, as
is also evident in the increased strengths of hydrogen bonds in the
large lobe as measured by the fractionation factors. Overall, nucleotide
binding affects the strength of hydrogen bonds in the small and large
lobes, while pseudosubstrate binding affects mostly the residues in
the large lobe. This is consistent with the view that the nucleotide
is an allosteric effector, organizing the active site, while the large
lobe provides a docking surface for the substrate to bind., These detailed effects of nucleotide binding went undetected in
the previous DXMS measurements because
of either a lack of data points or intrinsic limitations of the technique.
Recent community map analysis of molecular dynamics simulations predicted that the motions of the different secondary
structural elements of the small lobe are highly correlated. β1,
β4, β5, and the αA−β linker were attributed
to community A (responsible for nucleotide binding), while the A-helix,
a portion of the αA−β linker, and the αC−β4
linker were ascribed to community C (Figure S8 of the ), a central hub that controls
the functions of the other communities. The increase in the strength of the hydrogen bond networks in the
small lobe upon nucleotide binding supports the communication between
these communities that may act in concert for the enzyme’s
closure. Moreover, the φ values
show that, from the apo to the ternary complex, the hydrogen bonds
in the αC helix become stronger, indicating that perhaps strengthening
these interactions is essential for proper organization of the active
site. From the X-ray structure, the side chains in each turn of helix
αC interact with the different domains of the enzyme (Figure
S9 of the ). Specifically,
Arg93 forms a cation−π interaction with the aromatic
side chains of Trp30 and Phe26 of helix αA. Glu91 forms a conserved
dyad with Lys72 of β-strand 3, while His87 forms an ion pair
with the phosphate group of Thr197 in the closed conformation. The H/D fractionation factors also show an extensive
rigidification of the hydrophobic core in the enzyme upon ligand binding
as previously highlighted by DXMS studies, with helices αE,
αF, and αH involved in the intramolecular communication
are more resistant to deuterium exchange.

Nucleotide binding also increases the hydrogen bond strengths
of
residues in the region that caps the bottom of the large lobe. The
allosteric coupling between the catalytic loop and the large lobe
was also observed using DXMS experiments. In particular, the interactions between conserved residues Glu208
of the APE motif and Arg280 are evident in our data, where these residues
show lower φ values upon binding of PKI to the binary form of
the enzyme. This ion pair connects the P+1 loop and the loop between
helices G and H. The C-terminal tail undergoes significant domain
movement when the enzyme undergoes the transition from the open to
closed conformation, as observed in the crystal structure (Figure
S10 of the ). While DXMS data suggest that nucleotide binding
increases the amide protection factors for the entire C-terminal tail, our data show that residues 315–345,
a region that contains the gate controlling the nucleotide access,
display hydrogen bonds weaker than those in the apo form. These weak
hydrogen bonds are consistent with the increased flexibility of the
intermediate state but eventually become stronger upon formation of
the ternary complex, with the interactions between the acidic cluster
and the basic residues of the pseudosubstrate.

Overall, this study demonstrates that the changes
in the allosteric
network of the kinase are manifested through variations in hydrogen
bond strengths. These changes are not unidirectional: while several
hydrogen bonds become stronger upon ligand binding, other interactions
become weaker, underscoring a redistribution of the free energy of
binding occurring throughout the whole enzyme. As NMR methodology
progresses toward understanding the mechanisms of allosteric transmission
at the atomic level, the measurement of equilibrium H/D fractionation
factors emerges as a method complementary to other NMR techniques
for tracing allosteric communications within proteins and enzymes.

Supporting Information Available
Figures S1–S10 and Table
S1. The Supporting Information is available free of charge on the ACS Publications website at
DOI: 10.1021/acs.biochem.5b00387.

Supplementary Material
bi5b00387_si_001.pdf

This work is
supported by National Institutes of Health Grants GM100310 to G.V.
and T32AR007612 to J.K.

The authors
declare no
competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
The NMR spectra were recorded at the Minnesota
NMR Center.
We thank Youlin Xia for assistance with the NMR experiments and Prof.
A. Cembran for assistance with the CONCISE scripts.

