Pellinos
make up one of several
families of E3 ubiquitin ligases that have emerging roles in regulating
diverse pathways in innate and adaptive immune receptor signaling.− There are four mammalian Pellinos: Pellino1, Pellino2, and two splice
variants of Pellino3, Pellino3a and Pellino3b. Sequence analysis and in vitro ubiquitination assays indicate that all mammalian
Pellinos are active RING E3 ubiquitin ligases.− All Pellinos
have been implicated in polyubiquitination events that occur immediately
following the stimulation of Toll-like receptors (TLRs) and the interleukin-1
(IL-1) receptor (IL-1R).− Pellino2 plays a role in IL-1-dependent
K63-linked polyubiquitination of IL-1R-associated kinase 1 (IRAK1), which is required for the subsequent activation
of nuclear factor κB (NF-κB)., Pellino1 and -3 are dispensable for IL-1R-mediated NF-κB activation.
Rather, these Pellinos are critical regulators of TLR3- and/or TLR4-dependent
signaling pathways, although some debate about the precise role of
Pellinos in these pathways remains.,, Upon TLR3/4 stimulation, Pellino1 has been implicated
in the ubiquitination of receptor-interacting serine/threonine protein
kinase 1 (RIP1) and the subsequent activation of NF-κB. However, it has also been reported that the E3
ubiquitin ligase activity of Pellino1 is not required for RIP1 ubiquitination
or NF-κB activation following TLR3 stimulation. This second study implicates Pellino1 E3 ubiquitin ligase
activity in the upregulation of type I interferon expression. Pellino3
has also been implicated in the regulation of the TLR3-mediated induction
of type I interferon expression. However, Pellino3 negatively regulates
this pathway by modulating the ubiquitination of the tumor necrosis
factor receptor-associated factor 6 (TRAF6). Other recent studies have demonstrated that Pellinos are also critical
mediators of immune signaling pathways that are independent of Toll-like
and IL-1 receptors. For example, Pellino3 regulates tumor necrosis
factor α (TNFα)-mediated apoptosis and is critical for
mediating signaling following the stimulation of the another innate
immune receptor, nucleotide-binding oligomerization domain-containing
protein 2 (NOD2)., Pellino1 plays a role in maintaining
proper T-cell receptor (TCR) activation and therefore is also involved
in adaptive immunity.

Clearly,
Pellinos have nonredundant and contrasting roles in regulating
immune receptor signaling. To mediate these various functions, Pellinos
interact with a diverse set of substrates, and these interactions
must be regulated. It is unlikely that this occurs simply by the availability
of a particular Pellino during a specific immune response. Most cells
of the immune system have comparable expression levels of two or more
Pellinos, with the exception of B and T cells that express predominantly
Pellino1. Pellinos must be phosphorylated
to become active E3 ubiquitin ligases,, and for Pellino1,
this activating phosphorylation is mediated by different kinases in
a cell and/or pathway specific manner, suggesting that phosphorylation
can dictate functional specificity. It
also seems reasonable to suggest that there is functional selectivity
at the level of Pellino substrate recognition and that this contributes
to ensuring the fidelity of each Pellino in immune signaling pathways.
Given the extremely high degree of sequence similarity among Pellinos
(&gt;70% identical sequences among the human Pellinos), the molecular
basis for such specific substrate recognition is not immediately apparent.

We have previously shown that the human Pellino2 substrate recognition
domain comprises a noncanonical example of a forkhead-associated (FHA)
domain. The high level of sequence identity
among Pellinos strongly suggests that all Pellinos will contain such
an FHA domain. FHA domains are protein interaction modules that bind
to phosphorylated threonine (pT) in the context of a specific recognition
sequence.− In this study, we investigate the binding of all four mammalian
Pellinos to phosphorylated targets. We identify a high-affinity Pellino2-binding
region in IRAK1 using GST-tagged Pellino pull-downs of mutated and
truncated IRAK1 overexpressed in human embryonic kidney 293T (HEK293T)
cells. We show that all Pellinos bind to a peptide derived from this
region of IRAK1, but with different affinities. Drawing on what is
known about the determinants of FHA domain binding specificities,
we generate a panel of phosphorylated peptides and show that each
Pellino has a distinct pT peptide binding specificity. GST pull-downs
of other Pellino substrates expressed in HEK293T cells corroborate
our finding that Pellinos have different specificities. The observed
specificity correlates with the known physiological roles of each
Pellino and, to some extent, with our observed pT peptide binding
specificities. These results argue that the nonredundant roles of
Pellinos in immune receptor signaling are in part due to their different
substrate specificities.

Experimental Procedures
Expression Vectors
All proteins are human homologues
except for mouse Pellino1, which differs by only one amino acid from
the human homologue (S146 is asparagine in human). The cDNA for RIP1
(Open Biosystems) was inserted into pcDNA4/HisMaxC (Invitrogen). IRAK1
and TRAF6 in pcDNA4/HisMaxC were generous gifts from L. Jensen (Temple
University, Philadelphia, PA). Expression plasmids for GST-Pellinos
and His6-Pellinos were previously described. The appropriate coding regions for truncated
IRAK1 and Pellinos were inserted into pcDNA4/HisMaxC and into a pET21-derived
HTUA vector (generously provided by G. Van Duyne, University of Pennsylvania,
Philadelphia, PA), respectively. The QuikChange site-directed mutagenesis
strategy (Stratagene) was used for creating alterations in pcDNA4/HisMaxC-IRAK1-197
and in GST-Pellinos.

Protein Purification
GST- and His6-Pellinos
were expressed in Escherichia coli BL21(DE3) pLys
cells and purified essentially as described previously, with the following modifications. Glutathione
agarose beads were incubated with GST-Pellinos, washed three times
in 50 mM sodium phosphate and 300 mM NaCl (pH 7.4), and resuspended
in 20 mM sodium phosphate and 150 mM NaCl (pH 7.4) (PBS). To remove
the His6 tag, His6-Pellinos with TEV protease (∼100 μg for every 5 mg of His6-Pellino) were dialyzed against 10 mM HEPES, 300 mM NaCl,
and 5 mM β-mercaptoethanol (βME) (pH 7.0). Dialysis was
performed overnight at 4 °C for Pellino1 and -2 and at 22 °C
for Pellino3a and -3b. Digested, untagged Pellinos were purified by
cation exchange chromatography (Source S, GE Healthcare) at pH 6 (Pellino1,
-2, and -3b) or pH 5.5 (Pellino3a), followed by size exclusion chromatography
(Superose 12, GE Healthcare) in 10 mM HEPES, 150 mM NaCl, and 5 mM
βME (pH 7.0).

GST Pull-Down Assays
The culturing
of HEK293T cells
and the GST pull-down assays of Xpress-tagged IRAK1, IRAK1 truncation
variants, TRAF6, and RIP1 were performed as described previously. For dephosphorylation of IRAK1–197, HEK293T
cells overexpressing Xpress-IRAK1–197 were lysed in 50 mM HEPES
(pH 7.5), 100 mM NaCl, 10 mM MgCl2, 5 mM βME, and
0.1% IGEPAL (octylphenoxypolyethoxyethanol, Sigma) supplemented with
protease inhibitor cocktail (Sigma) and incubated for 1 h at 37 °C
with or without calf intestinal alkaline phosphatase [CIP, 10 units/100
μL of lysate (New England Biolabs)]. CIP treatment was stopped
with 5 mM EDTA and 1 mM sodium vanadate or PhosSTOP (Roche). Western
blots were probed with α-Xpress (Invitrogen) or α-phosphothreonine
(Invitrogen or Cell Signaling) antibodies, and detection used horseradish
peroxidase conjugated to α-mouse and α-rabbit (GE Healthcare)
antibodies, or IRDye680RD-α-rabbit and IRDye800CW-α-mouse
(Li-COR Biosciences) antibodies.

Fluorescence Polarization
Peptide Binding Assays
C-Terminally
amidated peptides were purchased from Bio Basic Inc., AnaSpec, or
the Keck Biotechnology Resource Laboratory (Yale University, New Haven,
CT). These peptides were N-terminally labeled with fluorescein 5-isothiocyanate
(FITC) or 5,6-carboxyfluorescein (5,6-FAM) by the manufacturer, or
in house by using amine-reactive FITC (Invitrogen) in 0.1 M sodium
bicarbonate (pH 9.0). Binding reaction mixtures (100 μL) contained
50 nM fluorescein-labeled peptide and increasing concentrations of
Pellinos (0–190 μM) in PBS. Fluorescence polarization
for each sample was measured at 25 °C using a Beacon 2000 system
(Panvera), use of which was generously provided by G. Van Duyne. Data
were fit to a simple binding isotherm using Prism (GraphPad Software).
Polarization values were normalized to the value without added Pellino.
For binding experiments with low-affinity peptides, the highest protein
concentrations did not reach saturation. In curve fitting for these
data, Bmax was constrained to the Bmax values obtained from the fit to data for
the same Pellino binding to the wild-type IRAK1 pT141 peptide. All
binding experiments were performed at least three times.

Results
The Pellino
FHA Domain pT Peptide-Binding Pocket Is Essential
for Interaction with IRAK1
The binding pocket for the phosphothreonine
moiety of a phosphorylated FHA substrate is highly conserved in Pellino2. We
previously showed that substitution of alanine at highly conserved
R106 in the predicted pT-binding pocket of the Pellino2 FHA domain
abolished the interaction of Pellino2 with phosphorylated IRAK1 (pIRAK1)
in a GST pull-down assay (Figure A). This qualitative binding assay takes advantage
of the fact that IRAK1 is highly phosphorylated when transiently overexpressed
in HEK293 cells. GST-Pellino can pull down this phosphorylated IRAK1
from HEK293T cell lysates. Using this assay, we now show that substitution
of alanine at the analogous, highly conserved arginine in the pT-binding
pocket in Pellino1 (R104A) and Pellino3b (R131A) also ablates binding
of pIRAK1 to GST-Pellino (Figure B). These
data confirm that the pT-binding pocket is critical for interaction
of Pellino1, -2, and -3b with pIRAK1.

The Pellino FHA domain phosphothreonine
(pT)-binding pocket is
essential for interaction with phosphorylated IRAK1 (pIRAK1). (A)
Cartoon representation of the Pellino2 FHA domain structure (PDB entry 3EGA) looking onto the
face of the pT-binding pocket (circled). The canonical FHA domain
and the FHA wing are colored green and blue, respectively. Amino acids
that are strongly implicated in binding to the phosphorylated peptides
and proteins are shown as sticks and colored magenta. Highlighted
in white on the molecular surface are amino acids that are not conserved
among the four Pellinos (see also Figure S1 of the ). Dashed lines represent two disordered
loops located near the pT-binding pocket: amino acids 28–37
(β1/β2) and 120–129 (β4/β5). The 24-amino
acid insertion in Pellino3a would be located at the start of the disordered
β1/β2 loop. (B) Substitution of alanine at a key arginine
in the FHA domain pT-binding pocket of Pellino1 (R104A), Pellino2
(R106A), and Pellino3b (R131A) ablates pIRAK1 interaction in a GST
pull-down assay. The indicated wild-type (WT) or mutated GST fusions
of Pellinos were incubated with HEK293T lysates that contained overexpressed,
phosphorylated Xpress-tagged IRAK1. Following washing, bound proteins
were eluted by denaturation, analyzed by sodium dodecyl sulfate–polyacrylamide
gel electrophoresis, and visualized by Western blotting with an α-Xpress
antibody to detect total IRAK1 and Coomassie blue staining to detect
the GST fusion proteins. “In” indicates 4% of total
lysate used for each pull-down assay. Positions of molecular mass
markers are shown. (C) Sequence alignment of the β1/β2
region of the four Pellinos used in this study (mouse Pellino1 and
human Pellino2, -3a, and -3b). The sequence for the 24-amino acid
glutamate-rich insert unique to Pellino3a is shown. This Pellino3a
insert is highly conserved across species. Structural information
for the Pellino2 FHA domain (PDB entry 3EGA) is shown above the sequences. Arrows
indicate the location of β-strands 1 and 2, and the dashed lines
indicate regions of disorder in the crystal structure. Dots above
the sequences indicate every 10th amino acids in Pellino3a, starting
at amino acid 30. (D) GST pull-down assays exactly as described for
panel B show that Pellino3a and a Pellino3a variant with a truncation
in the glutamate-rich insert (Δ60–67) do not interact
with pIRAK1. Substitution of alanine for every glutamate in the Pellino3a
insertion (E54–66A) confers pIRAK1 binding to Pellino3a.

We also previously showed that
Pellino3a does not associate with
pIRAK1 in this GST pull-down assay. Pellino3a
differs from Pellino3b only in the presence of a glutamate-rich 24-amino
acid insertion (Figure C). This insertion
is highly conserved among mammals, suggesting that it is important
for the substrate specificity and/or function of Pellino3a. This insertion
is predicted to lie adjacent to the FHA domain pT peptide-binding
site (Figure A) and may occlude the binding
site or compete for substrate binding as a phospho-mimetic motif.
A Pellino3a variant lacking the seven central amino acids of the inset
(Pellino3a Δ60–67) is unable to bind pIRAK1 (Figure D), whereas a Pellino3a variant with alanine substituted
for all six glutamates in the insertion (Pellino3a E54–66A)
gains the ability to interact with pIRAK1 almost to the extent observed
for Pellino3b (Figure D). These observations
argue against simple occlusion of the pT peptide-binding site. Rather,
we suggest that the glutamates in the Pellino3a insertion mimic phosphorylated
residues, bind to the pT peptide-binding pocket, and block pIRAK1
binding. These experiments affirm that the Pellino pT peptide-binding
pocket is critical for mediating interaction with pIRAK1 and suggest
that local sequence differences between Pellinos may be responsible
for the different substrate specificities implied by functional studies.

Identification of an IRAK1-Derived Pellino-Binding Domain
We next sought to identify a specific Pellino-binding domain in
IRAK1. We chose to use Pellino2 for this analysis as there is strong
evidence that IRAK1 is a physiologically relevant substrate for Pellino2. We performed an IRAK1 truncation analysis to
identify regions of IRAK1 that can interact with Pellino2. IRAK1 truncation
variants (Figure A) were transiently overexpressed
in HEK293T cells and qualitatively tested for their ability to associate
with GST-Pellino2 (Figure B). None of the
IRAK1 truncation variants that contain the kinase domain (ΔDD,
KDL, and KD) interacts with GST-Pellino2 above the relatively high
background levels observed with GST alone (Figure B). Consistent with this, these kinase domain-containing IRAK1
fragments are not robustly phosphorylated, as assessed by α-pT
immunoblots (Figure B, middle panel).

Pellino2 interacts
with IRAK1–197 in a phosphorylation-dependent
manner. (A) Schematic representations of IRAK1 and truncation variants
indicating the amino acids of full length (FL) IRAK1 that are included
in each variant generated. Abbreviations: DD, death domain; PST, proline-,
serine-, and threonine-rich domain; KD, kinase domain; Ct, C-terminal
domain. (B) GST-Pellino2 pull-down analysis of the indicated IRAK1
variants expressed in HEK293T cells, essentially as described in the
legend of Figure B. For each IRAK1 variant,
three samples were analyzed: 4% of the HEK293T cell lysate (In) and
samples from GST alone and GST-Pellino2 pull-down assays. Total Xpress-tagged
protein was detected with an α-Xpress antibody (top), the extent
of phosphorylation detected with the α-phosphothreonine (α-pT)
antibody (middle), and equal loading of GST and GST-Pellino2 verified
with Coomassie staining (bottom). Only IRAK1 FL and IRAK1–197
show robust interaction with Pellino2. IRAK1–197 migrates as
several discrete bands, the range of which is indicated by a vertical
line. The faster-migrating species are not observed on the α-pT
blot and presumed to represent unphosphorylated IRAK1–197.
The expected position of each IRAK1 variant is shown, as are positions
of molecular weight markers. For the sake of clarity, the position
of IRAK1 KD is indicated with a less than sign on the left blots,
because this species runs at the same position as phosphorylated IRAK1–197.
An asterisk after the protein name indicates that this species is
detected on the α-pT blot. (C) Pellino2–IRAK1–197
interaction is ablated when IRAK1–197 is treated with CIP or
when the Pellino2 FHA domain pT peptide-binding pocket contains an
alanine substitution at a key arginine (Pellino2 R106A). GST pull-down
assays were performed as described for panel B. For the sake of clarity,
the α-Xpress blot (top panel) was cropped below the 28 kDa molecular
mass marker to cut off a strong nonspecific band seen in the CIP-treated
samples. The uncropped blot is shown in Figure S2 of the .

By contrast, we observe robust, phosphorylation-dependent
interaction
of GST-Pellino2 with a fragment containing only the first 197 amino
acids of IRAK1 (IRAK1–197). This fragment contains a death
domain (DD) followed by a proline-, serine-, and threonine-rich (PST)
domain. Substitution of alanine at several serine and threonine sites
in the PST domain impairs IRAK1 ubiquitination and function. Further, multiple serines and threonines in
the PST domain of IRAK1 have been shown to be phosphorylated in cells. At least three species of IRAK1–197 are
observed in the HEK293T lysates (In) with the α-Xpress antibody.
Only the slowest-migrating form of IRAK1–197 contains significant
phosphothreonine (Figure B, middle panel)
and is highly enriched in the GST-Pellino2 pull-down fraction (Figure B, top panel). Enzymatic dephosphorylation of IRAK1–197
results in undetectable levels of pT in this sample and abolishes
interaction with GST-Pellino2 (Figure C).
In addition, the Pellino2 pT-binding pocket variant R106A does not
interact with IRAK1–197 (Figure C).
IRAK1–197 lacks the IRAK1 kinase domain and must be phosphorylated
by kinases endogenous to HEK293T cells. We presume that the same endogenous
kinases that can phosphorylate the kinase-dead IRAK1 variant (IRAK1
K239A) in IRAK1-null HEK293 cells (I1a cells) also phosphorylate IRAK1–197. A shorter truncation variant
that lacks the PST domain and comprises only the IRAK1 DD is not phosphorylated
in HEK293T cells and shows no binding to GST-Pellino2 (Figure B). This suggests that the Pellino2-binding region
may lie within the PST domain or that this domain is required for
appropriate phosphorylation of IRAK1–197.

Next, we sought
to identify which threonines in IRAK1–197
are important for interaction with Pellino2. There are nine threonines
in IRAK1–197: five are in the presumed unstructured PST domain
and four in the DD. On the basis of a structure-based sequence alignment
with the IRAK2 DD (PDB entry 3MOP), only three of the four
threonines in the IRAK1 death domain are predicted to be surface-exposed.
We individually mutated to alanine each of the eight presumed surface-exposed
threonines in IRAK1–197, expressed each mutated IRAK1–197
in HEK293T cells, and tested the mutants for interaction with GST-Pellino2
(Figure A and Figure S3A of the ). Six of these IRAK1–197
variants behave like the wild type. However, alanine substitution
at T54 or T141 significantly disrupts GST-Pellino2 interaction (Figure A). In both cases, the IRAK1–197 variants
show significantly reduced levels of phosphorylation (Figure A, middle panel). While the phosphorylated fraction
of IRAK1–197 T54A still associates with Pellino2, no phosphorylated
IRAK1–197 T141A is pulled down with GST-Pellino2. One explanation
for these results is that T54 in the DD is important for the phosphorylation
of IRAK1–197, whereas T141 in the PST domain represents a phosphorylation
site that is directly recognized by Pellino2. T141 is one of several
sites in the PST domain that have been confirmed to be phosphorylated
in full length IRAK1 from cells by mass spectrometry. Substitution of alanine at T141 in the context of full
length IRAK1 does not abolish binding of Pellino2, suggesting that
there are additional phosphorylated sites that can interact with GST-Pellino
in the hyperphosphorylated, overexpressed IRAK1 from HEK293T cells
(Figure S3B of the ).

Pellino2 specifically interacts with a peptide motif around pT141
of IRAK1–197. (A) GST-Pellino2 was used to pull down Xpress-tagged
IRAK1–197 variants with alanine substituted at eight different
threonines (see also Figure S3A of the ), exactly as described in the legend of Figure B. T54A and T141A show reduced interaction with
Pellino2. T152A and five other substitution mutants look like wild-type
IRAK1–197 (Figure S3A of the ). The T54A and T141A variants of IRAK1–197
also show reduced levels of threonine phosphorylation. (B) Binding
of the indicated fluorescein-labeled peptides to increasing concentrations
of the Pellino2 FHA domain (amino acids 15–275 of Pellino2).
Binding is detected by a change in the fluorescence polarization (FP)
of the fluorescein. A representative experiment is shown for each
peptide. The curves indicate the fit to a simple binding isotherm
for the data sets shown. Mean KD values
from at least three independent experiments are listed in Table .

Binding
of IRAK1-Derived Peptides
to the Pellino2 FHA Domain
KD values
for binding of the Pellino2 FHA domain to the indicated peptides were
determined from at least three independent fluorescence polarization
assays (Figure B). Baseline-corrected data
were fit to a simple binding equation.

All peptides include an N-terminal
tyrosine to allow for spectroscopic quantification.

No binding detected.

Pellino2 Specifically Binds to an IRAK1pT141-Derived
Phosphopeptide
Synthetic phosphorylated peptides have been
widely used to study
the binding specificity of FHA domains,,,− so we next asked whether Pellino2
can interact with a peptide comprising amino acids 137–145
of IRAK1 with a phosphothreonine at position 141 (IRAK1pT141). We
tested binding of the more stable Pellino2 truncation variant (Pellino2
FHA domain, residues 15–275) to fluorescently labeled phosphopeptides
in a quantitative fluorescence polarization assay. IRAK1pT141 binds
to the Pellino2 FHA domain with a KD of
0.82 μM (Figure B and Table ), which is comparable to the affinities that have
been reported for other FHA domains binding to peptides containing
their preferred phosphopeptide recognition motif.,,− The affinity for a scrambled
version of pT141 is more than 100-fold weaker, and no binding is detected
for the nonphosphorylated version of this peptide. These data demonstrate
that high-affinity binding to Pellino2 relies not only on a phosphorylated
threonine but also on the local sequence context around this moiety.
In agreement with our IRAK1–197 mutational analysis, phosphothreonine-containing
peptides derived from the sequences around IRAK1 T54 and T152 (IRAK1pT54
and -pT152, respectively) show affinities for the Pellino2 FHA domain
markedly weaker than that measured for IRAK1pT141 (Figure B and Table ). These results
further support the argument that the local sequence context around
the pT is important for optimal Pellino2 binding. In addition, these
peptide binding studies confirm our identification of the region around
T141 as a high-affinity Pellino2-binding site in IRAK1.

Pellinos Have
Different Phosphothreonine Peptide Binding Specificities
To further assess the peptide binding specificity of Pellinos,
we turned to the rich information available about the binding specificity
of FHA domains. The major determinant
of pT peptide recognition for many FHA domains is the amino acid located
three positions C-terminal to the phosphorylated threonine (+3 position). Peptide library screens performed on a diverse
selection of FHA domains have identified four FHA pT recognition motifs
with different amino acids at position +3: pTxxD, pTxxI/L, pTxxY/M,
and pTxxS/A. The motif around T141 in
IRAK1 falls in the last of these four groups with a serine at position
+3. Henceforth, the peptide based on this IRAK1 sequence is termed
pT141+3S. To determine whether pTxxS is the optimal Pellino2 pT recognition
motif, we analyzed binding to the Pellino2 FHA domain of peptides
with aspartate, isoleucine, and tyrosine in place of serine at position
+3 [pT141+3D, pT141+3I, and pT141+3Y, respectively (Table )]. The Pellino2 FHA domain binds most tightly to
pT141+3Y with a KD 4.6-fold stronger than
that for pT141+3S. Aspartic acid at position +3 is the most unfavorable
binding motif with a KD 5-fold weaker
than that of pT141 + 3S, whereas isoleucine at position +3 shows a KD 2.6-fold weaker than that of pT141+3S. These
data indicate that the Pellino2 FHA domain prefers the pTxxY-binding
motif 4.6-, 12-, and 23-fold over the pTxxS, pTxxI, and pTxxD motifs,
respectively (Figure A).

Binding of IRAK1pT141+3 Position Variants
to Pellino FHA Domains
KD values
for the binding of peptides to the FHA domains of Pellino1, -2, -3a,
and -3b were determined as described in the footnotes of Table .

Pellinos have
different phosphothreonine peptide binding specificities.
(A) The KD for the binding of each Pellino
FHA domain to IRAKpT141 (+3S) and to peptides with D, I, or Y substituted
at position +3 were determined and are presented as the fold change
in the KD relative to the binding to the
pT141+3Y peptide (+3Y). Each Pellino binds the +3Y peptide with the
highest affinity (Table ), which is normalized
to 1 as indicated by the dashed line. The fold changes in KD values for binding to the pT141+3D (+3D, white),
pT141+3I (+3I, red), and pT141+3S (+3S, blue) are shown. (B) Fluorescence
polarization binding assay for each Pellino with the pT141+3Y peptide,
exactly as described in the legend of Figure B. A representative experiment is shown for the FHA domain of Pellino1
(red), Pellino2 (green), Pellino3a (black), and Pellino3b (blue).
Curves indicate the fit to a simple binding isotherm for each data
set shown. Mean KD values for at least
three independent experiments are listed in Table .

We next asked whether the observed
Pellino2 peptide binding preference
is also seen for the other Pellinos. We measured binding to the same
panel of fluorescently labeled peptides using Pellino1, -3a, and -3b
truncations that contain only the FHA domain [amino acids 2–287,
40–305, and 2–304, respectively (Table  and Figure )]. All Pellinos bind
to the original IRAK1-derived pT141+3S, which suggests that phosphorylation
of T141 plays a role in association of IRAK1 with all GST-Pellinos.
Pellino3a shows the weakest binding to pT141+3S (KD of 9.8 μM), which is consistent with the lack
of detectable binding between GST-Pellino3a and pIRAK1 (Figure D).

All Pellinos bind most tightly to the
pT141+3Y peptide and substantially
disfavor binding to the pT141+3D motif. Differences in the extent
to which each Pellino favors the pTxxY motif over the pTxxI and pTxxS
motifs arise. As described above, Pellino2 clearly discriminated among
all three, with KD values increasing in
the following order: pTxxY &lt; pTxxS &lt; pTxxI. By contrast, Pellino1
shows minimal discrimination in binding between the peptides with
tyrosine, serine, and isoleucine at position +3 (KD values of 0.77, 1.7, and 1.8 μM, respectively).
Pellino3a and -3b, which differ only by the 24-amino acid insertion
(Figure C), have very similar +3 motif preferences,
although the affinity in each case is ∼2-fold weaker for Pellino3a
than for Pellino3b. Like Pellino1, the Pellino3 isoforms do not discriminate
between serine and isoleucine at position +3. Unlike Pellino1, the
Pellino3 isoforms do show a clear preference for tyrosine at this
location (see Table  for a summary of the
+3 position binding preferences). The observed binding preferences
revealed from this panel of pT peptides suggest that each Pellino
will have a distinct set of preferred substrates.

Pellinos Have
Distinct Specificities for RIP1 and TRAF6
Knockout studies
in mice indicate that Pellino1 and Pellino3 have
nonredundant functions in TLR signaling. These divergent functions
have been attributed to differential polyubiquitination of the substrates
RIP1 and TRAF6 by Pellino1 and -3, respectively., On
the basis of our observation that each Pellino has a different peptide
binding profile, we postulated that Pellino1 selectively targets RIP1
over TRAF6, whereas Pellino3 is selective for TRAF6. We tested this
hypothesis by examining the interaction of GST-Pellinos with these
proteins transiently expressed in HEK293T cells. We find that Pellino1
interacts robustly with RIP1 and IRAK1, but not with TRAF6, consistent
with our prediction (Figure ). Pellino3a,
which fails to interact with either IRAK1 or RIP1 in this GST pull-down
assay, is able to interact with TRAF6. Similar amounts of TRAF6 are
pulled down with Pellino2, -3a, and -3b (Figure C). Finally, we observe that Pellino2 shows weak interaction with
RIP1. The different substrate interaction preferences we observe in
this assay can be attributed solely to differences in the binding
specificity of each Pellino. Because substrate binding is a prerequisite
for substrate ubiquitination, this binding selectivity of Pellinos
is likely responsible, at least in part, for their different cellular
functions.

Pellinos have different specificities for IRAK1, RIP1, and TRAF6.
GST-Pellino pull-down results for (A) Xpress-tagged IRAK1, (B) Xpress-tagged
RIP1, and (C) Xpress-tagged TRAF6 from lysates of HEK293T cells overexpressing
each Xpress-tagged protein. Samples were processed as described in
the legend of Figure . IRAK1 is pulled down
to approximately the same extent by Pellino1, -2, and -3b and not
at all by Pellino3a. RIP1 interacts robustly with only Pellino1 and
-3b. TRAF6 interacts with Pellino2, -3a, and -3b but not with Pellino1.

Pellino3 was recently shown to
interact with RIP1 to regulate TNFα-induced
apoptosis. Although RIP1 does not appear
to be a Pellino3 substrate in this context, both Pellino3 isoforms
associate with RIP1. This result is in
contrast with our pull-down assays that show interaction of RIP1 with
Pellino3a and not with Pellino3b (Figure B).
It is of note that Pellino3a binds pT peptides only ∼2-fold
more weakly than Pellino3b (Table  and Figure B). The discrepancy in Pellino3a–RIP1 interaction
may therefore be due to differences in pull-down assay conditions.

Distribution of FHA-Binding Motifs in Pellino Substrates
We next asked whether it is possible to rationalize the Pellino specificity
differences observed in our simple GST pull-down assay based only
on our peptide binding results and the distribution of pT+3 motifs
in Pellino substrates (Table  and Table S1
of the ), with no
consideration of the in vivo phosphorylation state
of these motifs. Pellino1 binds robustly to IRAK1 and RIP1 but not
to TRAF6. This correlates with a requirement for pTxxY- or pTxxS-binding
motifs, which are found in IRAK1 and RIP1, but not in TRAF6. These
motifs are also found in cRel, another known Pellino1 substrate. Pellino2 interacts more robustly with IRAK1
than with RIP1 and TRAF6. This may reflect the strong preference of
Pellino2 for pTxxY motifs (Figure B), which
are more frequent in IRAK1 than in the other two substrates. It is
hard to rationalize the binding of Pellino3a to TRAF6 and not to IRAK1
and RIP1 based on these very simple considerations. We note that TRAF6
and RIP2 (a recently discovered Pellino3 substrate) both contain pTxxI motifs that are not found in the other
surveyed substrates. However, the peptide binding experiments do not
suggest that Pellino3a shows any significant preference for this motif.

Frequencies of FHA Domain Peptide-Binding
Motifs in Pellino Substrates
 	pTxxD	pTxxI/L	pTxxS/A	pTxxY/M	
IRAK1	–	–/3	1/5	2/–	
RIP1	–	–/4	5/–	1/2	
TRAF6	4	2/2	–/–	–/2	
RIP2	–	2/3	4/–	2/1	
cRel	3	–/5	6/–	1/1	
For motifs with
two possible amino
acids at position +3, the number of motifs with the amino acids analyzed
in this study (I, S, and Y) is listed first, followed by the number
of occurrences of the motif with the other amino acid (L, A, and M).
See also Table S1 of the .

Discussion
We
find that the Pellino2 FHA domain binds to pT141+3Y with a KD of 180 nM, which is comparable to the tightest
known FHA domain–pT peptide interaction, the interaction of
the Rv0020c FHA domain with a highly optimized library screen-derived
peptide (KD of ∼100 nM). The interaction of Pellino2 with the pT141+3Y
peptide has an affinity 3–14-fold higher than those for the
other three Pellinos (Figure B). If this high-affinity
binding is an intrinsic property of Pellino2 compared to the other
members of this family of E3 ligases, this may explain the difficulty
in identifying the true physiologically relevant Pellino2 substrates
on the basis of experiments using overexpression or incomplete knockdown
of this protein. Alternatively, high-affinity binding may be a property
of all Pellino FHA domains, but we have not identified the optimal
binding motif for Pellino1, -3a, or -3b in this study.

On the
basis of our peptide binding analysis, all four Pellinos
show the weakest binding to the IRAK1pT141-derived peptide variant
containing the pTxxD motif, in each case, at least 13 times weaker
than for the pT141+3Y peptide (Table  and
Figure A). This trend against aspartate (a
phospho-mimetic residue) at position +3 could reflect negative selection
of binding sites with a phosphorylated residue in this position. Phosphorylation
of the serine of a pTxxS motif would be expected to reduce the level
of Pellino binding and could represent a regulatory mechanism of Pellino
substrate recognition. There is evidence to suggest that this form
of regulation may occur in the PST domain of IRAK1. IRAK1 is known
to become phosphorylated at a number of serines and threonines in
the PST domain, including T141 and S141, based on mass spectrometry
analyses of IRAK1 from TLR7-stimulated cells. In that study, peptides were identified with either one or both
of these two amino acids phosphorylated. Our pT peptide binding analysis
suggests that phosphorylation of only T141 would promote Pellino binding,
while simultaneous phosphorylation of T141 and S144 would disfavor
Pellino binding. Two other IRAK1-binding partners have been reported
to bind this same region of the IRAK1 PST, the phosphorylation specific
prolyl isomerase Pin1 and the substrate recognition domain of SCF-β-TrCp
E3 ubiquitin ligase (β-TrCp)., The interaction
of these two proteins requires phosphorylation of serines N- or C-terminal
to T141, in contrast to Pellinos, binding of which we propose is disfavored
by additional local phosphorylation. Thus, the IRAK1 phosphorylation
state may dictate which post-translational modifiers can associate
with IRAK1 and, hence, influence the regulation of downstream TLR
signaling events.

Pellino phosphorylation has previously been
shown to enhance the
catalytic activity of Pellinos in vitro(,) (Figure S1 of the ). It is unclear whether phosphorylation affects Pellino substrate
specificity, as has been observed for E3 ubiquitin ligase Nedd4-2,
in which phosphorylation of Nedd4-2 inhibits substrate binding as
part of a regulatory mechanism for maintaining proper epithelial Na+ transport. We speculate that
phosphorylation on surface loops of Pellinos could inhibit substrate
binding in a manner that mirrors the autoinhibition of Pellino3a by
the Pellino3a specific insertion (Figure C,D).
The β4/β5 loop (Figure A and Figure
S1 of the ) represents
a possible site for such regulation. This loop contains several serines
and threonines, is predicted to lie close to the phosphothreonine-binding
site, and is relatively poorly conserved among Pellinos. Interestingly,
S125 and T127 in this loop were identified as sites of phosphorylation
of Pellino1 by IRAK1 and IRAK4, although
in this case Pellino1 phosphorylation was implicated in activation
of the E3 ligase activity. More studies are required to evaluate the
effect of Pellino phosphorylation on substrate binding.

There
are clear links between several Pellinos and the pathogenesis
of specific inflammatory diseases. Pellino1 is a critical mediator
of microglia activation and contributes to the onset of the mouse
model for multiple sclerosis, autoimmune encephalomyelitis (EAE). Pellino3 deficiency enhances the pathogenesis
of experimental murine models of colitis, and this correlates with
the abnormally low Pellino3 expression levels that are consistently
seen in colon samples from Crohn’s disease patients. Our study demonstrating specificity in the binding
of Pellinos to phosphorylated peptides and to intact substrates serves
as encouragement that agents can be developed to specifically target
an individual Pellino for pharmacologic intervention with minimal
off-target effects.

Supporting Information Available
Sequence alignment of the mammalian
Pellinos used in this study (Figure S1), uncropped versions of the
Western blots in Figure  (Figure S2), additional
GST-Pellino2 pull-down assays of IRAK1–197 and full length
IRAK1 mutants (Figure S3), and FHA domain-binding motifs found in
Pellino substrates (Table S1). This material is available free of
charge via the Internet at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bi5005156_si_001.pdf

The authors
declare no
competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
We thank Mark Lemmon,
Michael May, and members of the Ferguson
and Lemmon laboratories for insightful discussion and critical reading
of the manuscript; Chun-Chi Lin for technical assistance; and Nisha
Ninan, Kathryn Sarachan, and the Van Duyne laboratory for assistance
with the fluorescence polarization peptide binding assays.

Abbreviations
5,6-FAM5,6-carboxyfluorescein

CIPcalf intestinal alkaline
phosphatase

DDdeath
domain

FHAforkhead-associated

FITCfluorescein 5-isothiocyanate

HEKhuman embryonic
kidney

IGEPALoctylphenoxypolyethoxyethanol

IL-1interleukin-1

IL-1Rinterleukin-1
receptor

IRAK1interleukin-1
receptor-associated kinase 1

NF-κBnuclear factor κB

NOD2nucleotide-binding oligomerization domain-containing
protein 2

PDBProtein
Data Bank

PSTproline-,
serine-, and threonine-rich domain

pTphosphorylated threonine

RIP1 and -2receptor-interacting serine/threonine
protein kinases 1 and 2, respectively

TCRT-cell receptor

TLRToll-like receptor

TNFαtumor necrosis factor α

TRAF6tumor necrosis
factor receptor-associated factor 6

βMEβ-mercaptoethanol.

