Transposable
elements (TEs)
are genomic units that can move from their original location to a
new place in the genome. They are an important source of genome evolution
and diversity and are useful tools for manipulating genomes., Members of the mariner/Tc1 family of DNA transposons
are particularly useful in this regard, as they move by a simple cut-and-paste
mechanism and are present in a broad range of living organisms from
protozoa and fungi to humans.

To
date, five naturally active eukaryotic mariner/Tc1 family elements have been described: Mos1 from Drosophila
mauritiana, Famar1 from the earwig Forficula auriculata, Mboumar-9
from the ant Messor bouvieri, Minos from the fly Drosophila hydei, and Passport from the plaice Pleuronectes
platessa. In addition, four active mariner/Tc1 elements have been reconstructed from the sequences
of inactive elements, e.g., Sleeping Beauty from the fish Danio rerio, Frog Prince from
the frog Rana pipiens, Himar1 from the horn fly Haematibia irritans, and Hsmar1 from humans (reviewed in ref ()).

mariner/Tc1 transposons
have terminal inverted
repeats (IR) and encode a single protein, transposase, required for
transposition. The transposase has an N-terminal DNA-binding domain,
which recognizes the IR in a sequence-specific manner, and a C-terminal
catalytic domain. A transposase dimer brings the ends together in
a paired-end complex (PEC). After DNA
excision, the transposon integrates at a TA dinucleotide in a new
genomic location. The resulting duplication of the TA target site
either side of the transposon is a signature of mariner/Tc1 transposition.

Sleeping Beauty, Frog Prince, Passport, and
Minos transposases
were shown to be active when expressed from a helper plasmid inside
transfected or, in the case of Minos, microinjected cells,−, and recombinant Mos1, Mboumar-9,
Himar1, and Hsmar1 transposases are able to transpose their elements in vitro.,,, In those experiments, transposases were
purified and refolded from inclusion bodies, or expressed as soluble protein fusions with maltose binding protein
at the N-terminus.,− Previously, we expressed a soluble
mutant of Mos1 transposase, without a tag, in Escherichia
coli. The purified protein has
activity similar to that of refolded Mos1 transposase and was amenable
to structural analysis, providing insight into the mechanism of Mos1
IR DNA recognition and cleavage., Unlike DNA
transposons from other families,, excision of
Mos1 proceeds without formation of a hairpin intermediate. First, the nontransferred strand (NTS) is cleaved
three bases within the IR, and then a second hydrolysis reaction cleaves
the transferred strand (TS) precisely at the junction of the IR and
the flanking DNA.

We have compared
the biochemical activity and biophysical properties
of two closely related active mariner transposases,
Mos1 and Mboumar-9, and tested the cross-reactivity of the enzymes
on each other’s inverted repeats. Like Mos1,, purified Mboumar-9 transposase forms a dimer in the absence of DNA,
but the protein is less thermally stable. Mboumar-9 transposase can
bind to an IR DNA substrate and divalent metal ions, increasing its
thermal stability. Mboumar-9 and Mos1 transposases specifically cleave
their own IR sequence to produce staggered ends but have minimal cross-reactivity
on the other’s IR. Our results suggest that these closely related
enzymes could be used to design chimeric proteins with predictable
DNA recognition properties and enhanced efficiencies as genomic manipulation
tools.

Materials and Methods
Sequence Alignments
The transposase
sequences were
obtained from http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov, and the GenBank
entries are CAH03740 for Mboumar-9 and AAC16614.1 for Mos1. The amino acid sequences were aligned using the T-Coffee
web server (EMBL-EBI). The integration site sequences were aligned
using the WebLogo 2.8.2 server (http://weblogo.berkeley.edu).

Mos1 Cloning, Expression, and Purification
An artificially
synthesized (GeneArt) codon-optimized Mos1 gene of 1035 bp was cloned
into the pET30a expression vector by NdeI and XhoI restriction enzymes
sites. Protein expression was induced in E. coli BL21(DE3)
strain with 0.5 mM IPTG for 24 h at 25 °C with 250 rpm agitation.
Purification was conducted as described previously.

Mboumar-9 Cloning, Expression, and Purification
A codon-optimized
Mboumar-9 gene (1035 bp) was artificially synthesized (GeneArt) and
cloned into the pET30a expression vector by NdeI and XhoI restriction
enzyme sites. Protein expression was induced in E. coli BL21(DE3) strain with 0.5 mM IPTG for 24 h at 18 °C with 250
rpm agitation. Cells were pelleted for 1 h at 8000g and 4 °C. The cell pellet was resuspended to a concentration
of 10% (w/v) in 20 mM PIPES (pH 6.8), 400 mM NaCl, 5 mM MgCl2, 1 mM DTT, 1.3 Kunitz of DNase, 0.25 mg/mL lysozyme, and protease
inhibitor cocktail (Roche) and incubated for 1–2 h (rocking)
at 4 °C. The cell suspension was passed through a 0.8 mm needle
prior to cell disintegration in a cell disruptor. Cell debris was
pelleted for 1 h at 50000g and 4 °C. The supernatant
was filtered through a 5 μm filter followed by a 0.45 μm
filter before being loaded onto a POROS 20HS cation exchange column
(PerSeptive Biosystems). Mboumar-9 transposase was eluted using a
gradient from 400 to 1000 mM NaCl in 20 mM PIPES (pH 6.8) and 1 mM
DTT. Mboumar-9 transposase eluted at 46 mS/cm conductivity, equivalent
to ∼620 mM NaCl. Peak fractions were pooled and concentrated
in a Vivaspin 6 30000 molecular weight cutoff PES (GE Healthcare)
at 4 °C to a volume of &lt;500 μL. Size-exclusion chromatography
was conducted on a Superdex 200 30/100 GL column (GE Healthcare) connected
to an ÄKTA purification system at 4 °C. Mboumar-9 transposase
was eluted [5.7 μM in 50 μL of 20 mM PIPES (pH 6.8), 500
mM NaCl, 5 mM MgCl2, and 1 mM DTT] at a flow rate of 0.5
mL/min. Fractions containing Mboumar-9 were pooled, concentrated,
snap-frozen, and then stored at −80 °C. The protein purity
was estimated using ImageLab (Bio-Rad).

Thermal Denaturation Assay
Mboumar-9 transposase was
in a buffer containing 50 mM PIPES (pH 6.8), 500 mM NaCl, and 1 mM
DTT. Mos1 transposase was in a buffer containing 50 mM PIPES (pH 7.5),
250 mM KCl, and 1 mM DTT. Mboumar-9 and Mos1 IR DNA substrates had
staggered ends mimicking the products of DNA cleavage. These were
prepared by annealing the 32- or 28-nucleotide TS sequences of the
Mboumar-9 or Mos1 IR, respectively (shown in Figure b) with the complementary 29- or 25-nucleotide NTS. The two
strands were cooled from 95 °C to room temperature overnight
in a buffer containing 100 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.0), 10 mM EDTA (pH 8.0),
and 100 mM NaCl. In the reaction mixtures, the final transposase concentration
was 5 μM and, where added, the DNA concentration was 7.5 μM
and the MgCl2 concentration 5 mM. Reaction mixtures were
incubated on ice for 30 min before the fluorescent dye Sypro Orange
(Sigma) was added to a final concentration of 5×. Any aggregates
were removed by centrifugation for 10 min at 13000 rpm. Each experiment
was performed in 45 μL in a 96-well plate and repeated three
times. The temperature was increased in an iQ5 thermo cycler (Bio-Rad)
from 4 to 95 °C, in 1 °C steps with 30 s between steps.
The point of the most rapid change in fluorescence (excitation at
485 nm and emission at 575 nm) corresponds to the melting temperature
(Tm) of the sample.

Mos1 and Mboumar-9 are
closely related active mariner transposases. (a)
Alignment of the amino acid sequences of Mos1
and Mboumar-9 (Mbo9) transposases. Identical residues are shown with
a shaded background. The domain names and amino acid ranges are indicated
above the sequence. (b) Alignment of the Mos1 and Mboumar-9 inverted
repeats, with identical bases boxed. Regions of the Mos1 transposase
that interact with the Mos1 IR in the PEC structure are indicated
above the Mos1 TS.

First- and Second-Strand
Cleavage Assays
First- and
second-strand cleavages were performed in a final volume of 20 μL.
Reaction mixtures contained 25 mM HEPES (pH 7.5), 50 mM CH3COOK, 10% (v/v) glycerol, 0.25 mM EDTA, 1 mM DTT, 10 mM MgCl2, 50 μg/mL BSA, 20% (v/v) DMSO, 15 nM DNA, and transposase
at 50, 100, or 200 nM. Reaction mixtures were incubated for 1 h at
30 °C, and reactions were stopped by the addition of 20 μL
of loading buffer (90% (v/v) formamide and 20 mM EDTA). Samples were
incubated at 95 °C for 5 min and transferred to ice, and 10 μL
of each sample was loaded into each well of an 8% polyacrylamide denaturing
gel containing 7.5 M urea and 1× TTE buffer (89 mM Tris base,
29 mM taurine, and 0.5 mM EDTA).

Substrate sequences for the
first-strand cleavage assay were labeled with IRDye 700 on the 5′
end of the NTS. Mboumar-9 substrates (90 bp) are TS (5′-cacaaaatttaacgtgttttttgatttaAAAAACCGGAAAGGAATTACCGACACACCTGGtagtttctatattcaccgactggagcccgt-3′)
and NTS (3′-gagttttaaattgcacaaaaaactaaatTTTTTGGCCTTTCCTTAATGGCTGTGTGGACCatcaaagatataagtggctgacctcgggca-5′),
where the IR sequence is in uppercase and flanking DNA is in lowercase.
Mos1 substrates (100 bp) are NTS (5′-tttctttttccacaaaatttaacgtgttttttgatttaaaaaAAACGACATTTCATACTTGTACACCTGAtagtttctatattcaccgactggagcccgt-3′)
and TS (3′-aaagaaaaaggtgttttaaattgcacaaaaaactaaatttttTTTGCTGTAAAGTATGAACATGTGGACTatcaaagatataagtggctgacctcgggca-5′).
DNA markers, 28 and 33 nucleotides in length, were used in these experiments
and had the sequence of the Mos1 IR NTS.

Substrates for second-strand
cleavage were labeled with IRDye 700
on the 5′ end of the TS (with the sequences described above)
and mimicked the product of first-strand cleavage. These “prenicked”
substrates were obtained by annealing the labeled TS with two NTS
oligonucleotides. For Mboumar-9, the NTS strands had the sequences
3′-gagttttaaattgcacaaaaaactaaatTTTTTGGCCTTTCCTTAATGGCTGTGTGG-5′
and 3′-ACCatcaaagatataagtggctgacctcgggca-5′.
For Mos1, the NTS oligonucleotides had the sequences 3′-aaagaaaaaggtgttttaaattgcacaaaaaactaaatttttTTTGCTGTAAAGTATGAACATGTGG-5′
and 3′-ACTatcaaagatataagtggctgacctcgggca-5′.
The products were visualized after excitation of the IRDye 700 at
680 nm and detection on a LI-COR Odyssey scanner. The 70-nucleotide
DNA marker used in these experiments had the sequence of the Mos1
IR TS.

In Vitro Transposon Cleavage Assay
Donor transposon plasmid (5.6 kb, 500 ng, 7.24 nM) was incubated
with Mos1 or Mboumar-9 transposase (25, 50, 100, or 200 nM) in a final
volume of 20 μL for 90 min at 30 °C in a buffer containing
25 mM HEPES (pH 7.5), 12.5 μg/mL BSA, 2 mM DTT, 100 mM NaCl,
10% (v/v) glycerol, and 10 mM MnCl2. To stop the reaction,
0.5 μL of 500 mM EDTA was added and the products were analyzed
by agarose gel electrophoresis.

In Vitro Transposition Assay
Transposition
was performed as described previously. The transposon donor plasmid contained a kanamycin resistance cassette
(1.3 kb) flanked by IR sequences within a pEP185.2 plasmid backbone
(4.3 kb), carrying the conditional origin of replication oriR6K. Transposon
donor plasmid (5.6 kb, 500 ng, 7.24 nM) was incubated with pBSKS+
recipient plasmid (3 kb, 300 ng) and 72.4 nM transposase for 1 h at
30 °C in a final volume of 20 μL in buffer containing 25
mM HEPES (pH 7.5), 100 mM NaCl, 10% (v/v) glycerol, 2 mM DTT, 200
μg/mL acetylated BSA, and 10 mM MnCl2 or MgCl2. The buffer and DNA were mixed first, and transposase was
added just before incubation. After 1 h, the reaction was stopped
by addition of 80 μL of buffer containing 50 mM Tris (pH 7.5),
500 μg/mL proteinase K, 10 mM EDTA, and 6.25 μg/mL yeast
tRNA and incubated for 1 h at 37 °C. DNA was phenol extracted
and ethanol precipitated usually overnight. The DNA pellet was gently
resuspended in 10 μL of dH2O at 70 °C. Competent
cells were transfected with 10 μL of DNA and plated out on LB
agar with 50 μg/mL kanamycin, and in dilutions on LB agar with
100 μg/mL carbenicillin to establish the competency of the cells.
The transposition efficiency was calculated as the number of colonies
resistant to kanamycin divided by the competency of the cells. Under
the optimal conditions, approximately 4000 kanamycin resistant colonies
per reaction were observed.

Results
Sequence Comparisons
of Mboumar-9 and Mos1 Transposases and
Inverted Repeats
Sequence comparisons reveal that Mos1 and
Mboumar-9 transposases are the most closely related active mariner transposases described to date, and they share 68%
identical amino acid sequences, (Figure a). However, the transposon terminal inverted repeats are
only 50% identical (Figure b), with the seven
bases near the 3′ end of the TS, recognized by linker and clamp
loop in the Mos1 PEC crystal structure, being the most highly conserved
nucleotides.

Recombinant Mboumar-9 Transposase Is a Dimer
in Solution
Mboumar-9 transposase, containing the same mutation
(T216A) that
rendered the recombinant Mos1 protein soluble, was expressed in E. coli and purified by cation exchange and size-exclusion
chromatography (panels a and b of Figure ,
respectively), as described in . The purity of the resulting protein was estimated to be 91% by
SDS–PAGE (Figure b). We analyzed the
oligomeric state of the DNA-free Mboumar-9 transposase in solution
using analytical size-exclusion chromatography (Figure c). Mboumar-9 transposase eluted at a volume similar to that
of Mos1 transposase from the same column (data not shown). The elution
volume (13.8 mL) corresponds to an approximate globular mass of 98.4
kDa. Because the mass of the Mboumar-9 transposase monomer is 40.7
kDa, we infer that, like Mos1, Mboumar-9
transposase exists as a dimer with an elongated shape in the absence
of DNA.

Purification and DNA binding of Mboumar-9 transposase. (a) SDS–PAGE
of fractions from the cation exchange (CE) purification step. The
input is crude, soluble cell extract; fraction 1 is the flow-through,
and fractions 2 and 3 are from the Mboumar-9 peak. (b) SDS–PAGE
of fractions from the second purification step by size-exclusion chromatography.
The input is the fraction from CE; fractions 1–8 are across
the Mboumar-9 transposase peak. (c) Elution profiles from analytical
size-exclusion chromatography of Mboumar-9 (Mbo9) IR DNA (light gray),
Mboumar-9 transposase (dark gray), and a complex (black). The complex
eluted at 12.9 mL, earlier than the DNA-free transposase (at 13.8
mL) and the IR DNA (at 15.5 mL). (d) Thermal denaturation of Mboumar-9
transposase in the absence or presence of Mg2+ or IR DNA,
and with both. The rate of change of fluorescence, measured in relative
fluorescence units (RFU), is plotted vs temperature. (e) Thermal denaturation
of Mos1 transposase under equivalent conditions.

Mboumar-9 Transposase Forms a Stable Complex with IR DNA
To test if Mboumar-9 transposase could bind IR DNA, we incubated
(10 μM) transposase with the DNA substrate (10 μM) containing
the Mboumar-9 IR sequence that mimics the product of staggered Mboumar-9
excision (see below). While we did not attempt to detect the binding
of the transposase to DNA by an electrophoretic mobility shift assay,
we analyzed complex formation by analytical size-exclusion chromatography.
We observed a peak indicative of a protein–DNA complex eluting
at 12.9 mL (Figure c), earlier than the DNA-free
transposase and the DNA substrate (elution volume of 15.5 mL).

Mboumar-9
Transposase Is Stabilized by IR DNA and Mg2+ Ions
Next we used thermal denaturation assays to analyze
the thermal stability of Mboumar-9 transposase and its complex with
IR DNA. We found that Mboumar-9 transposase was less stable than Mos1
transposase, because the melting temperature (Tm) of Mboumar-9 transposase was 35.0 °C (Figure d) compared to 46.0 °C for Mos1 transposase
(Figure e). mariner transposases
have a characteristic DDD motif involved in binding the divalent metal
ions necessary for DNA cleavage and integration., We
found that both Mboumar-9 and Mos1 transposases were stabilized in
the presence of 5 mM MgCl2; the Tm of Mboumar-9 increased by 2.7 °C (Figure d) and by 4.0 °C for Mos1 (Figure e) under this condition.

Upon addition of IR DNA (in the absence
of Mg2+ ions), the Tm increased
to 37.0 °C for Mboumar-9 and 48.7 °C for Mos1, consistent
with formation of a complex in each case. The thermal stability of
the transposase–DNA complex increased further when 5 mM MgCl2 was added, which we observed by an increase in the Tm to 39.7 °C for Mboumar-9 and 55.0 °C
for Mos1.

In Vitro DNA Cleavage of Mboumar-9 Inverted
Repeats
To assay the first- and second-strand cleavage activity
of Mboumar-9 transposase, we incubated linear, fluorescently labeled
DNA substrates containing the Mboumar-9 IR sequence with increasing
concentrations of Mboumar-9 transposase (as shown schematically in
panels a and b of Figure ). We compared this
with the activity of Mos1 transposase on DNA substrates containing
the Mos1 IR (Figure c,d). The cleavage products
were visualized on 8% polyacrylamide denaturing gels. To establish
if there is any cross-recognition between mariner transposases, we also compared the cleavage activity of Mos1 transposase
on the Mboumar-9 IR substrates and vice versa (Figure ).

In vitro first- and second-strand cleavage by
Mboumar-9 and Mos1 transposases. (a) Schematic for first-strand cleavage
of the Mboumar-9 IR. The star denotes the fluorescent label at the
5′ end of the NTS. Denaturing polyacrylamide gel of reactions
performed with no transposase (lane 2), Mboumar-9 (Mbo9) transposase
(lanes 3–5), or Mos1 transposase (lanes 6–8). Lane 1
contained fluorescently labeled DNA markers of 70, 32, and 28 nucleotides.
(b) Second-strand cleavage of the Mboumar-9 IR, prenicked to bypass
the first-strand cleavage reaction. The denaturing PAGE of reactions,
with lanes as described for panel a except a 33-nucleotide marker,
was used in place of the 32-nucleotide marker. (c) Schematic of first-strand
cleavage of the Mos1 IR and denaturing PAGE of the reaction products.
Lane 1 contained markers as in panel b. Reaction mixtures in lane
2 had no transposase; those in lanes 3–5 contained Mos1 transposase,
and those in lanes 6–8 contained Mboumar-9 transposase. (d)
Second-strand cleavage of Mos1 IR substrate, prenicked at the site
of first-strand cleavage: lanes 1 and 6, DNA markers; lanes 2 and
7, no transposase controls; lanes 3–5, reaction mixtures with
Mos1 transposase; lanes 8–10, reaction mixtures with Mboumar-9
transposase.

First-strand cleavage
of the 90 bp Mboumar-9 IR (labeled at the
5′ end of the NTS) by Mboumar-9 transposase produced three
fluorescent products 33, 29, and ∼51 nucleotides in length
(Figure a). The 33- and 29-nucleotide products
correspond to excision three bases within the IR and one base outside
the IR, respectively. The 51-nucleotide product is most likely due
to cleavage 21 nucleotides within the inverted repeat. Incubation
of this Mboumar-9 IR substrate with Mos1 transposase resulted in nonspecific
cleavage (Figure a).

Second-strand cleavage
reactions were performed using Mboumar-9
DNA substrates with a prenicked NTS (mimicking the product of first-strand
cleavage) and a fluorescent label on the 5′ end of the TS.
Incubation of the Mboumar-9 IR with Mboumar-9 transposase resulted
in one product of 60 nucleotides, corresponding to cleavage precisely
at the junction of the IR and flanking DNA, and a second product of
∼53 nucleotides (Figure b). Incubation
of the Mboumar-9 IR substrate with Mos1 transposase resulted in nonspecific
cleavage of the TS, indicating that Mos1 transposase does not recognize
the Mboumar-9 IR as a substrate for transposition.

We also performed
the reciprocal experiments using DNA substrates
containing the Mos1 IR sequence (Figure c,d).
As observed previously, Mos1 transposase
cleaved the Mos1 NTS to produce two products of 33 and 28 nucleotides.
Mboumar-9 transposase cleaved this substrate nonspecifically, although
one of the minor products was 33 nucleotides in length, corresponding
to cleavage 3 bp inside the Mos1 IR, as observed for cleavage with
Mos1 transposase.

In the second-strand cleavage assay, Mos1
transposase cleaved the
Mos1 TS precisely at the junction of the IR and flanking DNA sequence,
to give a 70-nucleotide product, as observed previously. Mboumar-9 transposase also cleaved the Mos1
TS to produce a major band of ∼62 nucleotides and a minor band
at ∼54 nucleotides, neither of which corresponds to cleavage
allowing normal transposition of Mos1.

Cross-Recognition and Activity
of mariner Transposases
on Plasmid DNA
To test transposase activity on plasmid DNA,
we first assayed excision of a kanamycin gene flanked by either Mboumar-9
or Mos1 inverted repeats, as shown schematically in Figure a. Incubation of the plasmid bearing Mboumar-9 inverted
repeats with Mboumar-9 transposase resulted in excision of the 1.3
kb transposon (Figure b). However, with Mos1
transposase, we observed only the relaxed and linear plasmid, indicating
nonspecific cleavage activity. Similar results were obtained in the
reciprocal experiment: Mos1 transposase excised the 1.3 kb transposon
flanked with Mos1 inverted repeats, whereas Mboumar-9 transposase
cleaved this plasmid nonspecifically (Figure c). Thus, the cleavage activities of the enzymes on both plasmid
DNA and linear DNA substrates are consistent, with no cross-recognition
of inverted repeat sequences evident in either case.

Transposon excision and in vitro transposition.
(a) Schematic of the plasmid-based cleavage assays. The transposon
donor plasmids (5.6 kb) contain a kanamycin resistance gene flanked
by the inverted repeats (black triangles) of either Mos1 or Mboumar-9
(Mbo9). The expected products and their size (in kilobases) are indicated.
(b) Agarose gel of the products of cleavage of the Mboumar-9 plasmid
by Mboumar-9 (lanes 4–7) and Mos1 transposase (lanes 8–11).
(c) Agarose gel of the products of cleavage of the Mos1 plasmid by
Mos1 (lanes 4–7) and Mboumar-9 transposase (lanes 8–11).
The control (lane 2) contained Mboumar-9 plasmid linearized with XbaI
and digested with SacI, which cleaves outside the IRs. (d) Efficiencies
of in vitro transposition reactions performed using
Mboumar-9 or Mos1 transposase and donor plasmids containing either
the Mboumar-9 or Mos1 inverted repeat (IR). Nine repeats were performed
for experiments in which transposase acted on their own repeats, and
cross-reactivity experiments were performed in triplicate.

Next, we tested if Mboumar-9 and Mos1 transposases
could catalyze in vitro transposition of noncognate
sites, using bacterial
donor and target plasmids. Transposition of the kanamycin resistance
gene flanked by Mboumar-9 inverted repeats occurred with Mboumar-9
transposase but not with Mos1 transposase (Figure d). Similarly, when the gene was flanked by Mos1 IRs, we observed
transposition only with Mos1 transposase. Thus, the enzymes catalyze in vitro transposition from their cognate inverted repeat
sequences only.

Target Site Selection Is Random and Depends
Only on the Presence
of TA Dinucleotides
To analyze the transposon insertion sites,
we sequenced a total of 31 insertion sites for Mboumar-9 transposition
and 30 for Mos1 transposition. For reactions performed in the presence
of Mg2+, all the insertions occurred at TA target sites,
the hallmark of transposons of the mariner/Tc1 family
(Figure  and Figure 1 of the ). As observed previously,, the preference for insertion at TA is weakened in the presence of
Mn2+, but this effect is less dramatic for Mboumar-9 than
for Mos1 (Figure b,d).

Sequence logos of Mboumar-9
and Mos1 transposition insertion sites.
Graphical representation of the alignment of in vitro transposition integration sites. The 19 nucleotides of target plasmid
on either side of the central TA dinucleotide were aligned. Results
are from (a) 16 in vitro Mboumar-9 (Mbo9) transposition
reactions performed with Mg2+ and (b) 15 reactions with
Mn2+ and (c) 14 Mos1 transposition reactions with Mg2+ or (d) 16 with Mn2+. This figure was prepared
using the WebLogo server.

Within the target plasmid, 94 TA sites are available
for integration
in nonessential regions of the plasmid (i.e., out with the antibiotic
resistance gene and the origin of replication). We did not observe
any sequence preference around these TA sites for either of the transposons,
consistent with similar experiments on Hsmar1 and Mboumar-9. We found that of the
61 insertion sites sequenced from both transposons, nine common sites
were chosen by the two transposases. This is close to the mean number
of integration events expected by chance, suggesting that the nine
observed common sites were selected randomly by both transposases.

Discussion
We have expressed and purified untagged full-length
Mboumar-9 transposase,
a mariner/Tc1 family DNA transposase closely related
to Mos1 transposase. Like Mos1, the enzyme forms a dimer in solution,
and this was recently established as a prerequisite for autoregulation
in mariner transposition. The enzyme is stabilized by binding of Mg2+ ions, which
are required for the DNA cleavage and integration reactions. Purified
Mboumar-9 transposase forms a stable complex with DNA substrates representing
precleaved Mboumar-9 inverted repeats.

Transposon excision and in vitro transposition
occurred only when the transposase acted on its own IR sequence; we
observed minimal cross-recognition of the transposon ends in cleavage
assays using linear DNA substrates or plasmid substrates. In second-strand
cleavage assays, two aberrant products were observed for cleavage
of the Mos1 TS by Mboumar-9 transposase. Similar results were observed
for Himar1 transposase, which aberrantly cleaved the Mos1 IR in first-strand
cleavage assays. Cleavage of the Mos1
IR by both Mboumar-9 and Himar1 transposases could reflect the lower
specificity of these transposases for the DNA substrate. The inability
of Mos1 transposase to cleave the IR DNA of Mboumar-9 or Himar1 indicates
the higher specificity of this enzyme.

We confirmed previous
observations, that Mos1
shows no target site selection in vitro except for
integration at TA nucleotides. Our work shows that Mboumar-9 transposase
behaves similarly; no integration site specificity was noticed for
Mboumar-9 transposition in vitro. Furthermore, we
noticed the loss of TA specificity for Mboumar-9 transposition in
the presence of Mn2+, as found previously for Mos1.

This study showed that two closely related
and active mariner transposases, Mos1 and Mboumar-9,
have similar biophysical properties.
They also have similar DNA cleavage and integration activities. This
raises the possibility of using these transposases to create chimeric
transposases with designed IR DNA recognition specificity, for example,
by swapping DNA-binding motifs between the two enzymes or by mutating
Mboumar-9 helix–turn–helix motif residues to mimic sequence-specific
interactions observed in the Mos1 PEC crystal structure. These may
also lead to improvement of the efficiencies of mariner transposition systems as genome manipulation tools.

Supporting Information Available
Supplementary Figure 1. This
material is available free of charge via the Internet at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bi401193w_si_001.pdf

The authors declare no
competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
We thank Dr. Sean Colloms (University of Glasgow, Glasgow,
Scotland) for useful discussions and Dr. Alastair Kerr (University
of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, Scotland) for help with the statistical analysis
of transposon insertion sites.

Abbreviations
TEtransposable element

IRinverted repeat

PECpaired-end complex

NTSnontransferred
strand

TStransferred
strand

ntnucleotide

HEPES2-[4-(2-hydroxyethyl)piperazin-1-yl]ethanesulfonic
acid

EDTAethylenediaminetetraacetic
acid

PIPES1,4-piperazinediethanesulfonic
acid

DTTdithiothreitol

Dnasedeoxyribonuclease

tRNAtransfer ribonucleic
acid

PAGEpolyacrylamide
gel electrophoresis

Mbo9Mboumar-9

SDSsodium dodecyl sulfate.

