Bacterial 5′-methylthioadenosine
(MTA) and S-adenosylhomocysteine (SAH) are formed
in reactions of the polyamine pathway and in methyl-transfer reactions
where S-adenosylmethionine is the methyl donor. One
fate of these products is to undergo N-ribosyl bond
hydrolysis from the action of 5′-methylthioadenosine/S-adenosylhomocysteine nucleosidases (MTANs). The product
adenine can be recycled to the adenine nucleotide pool via adenine
phosphoribosyltransferase, whereas 5-methylthioribose can be converted
to methionine for recycling to S-adenosylmethionine. MTA and SAH are product inhibitors of the enzymes
that produce them, and MTAN plays a role in reducing their concentration
and processing them for recycling. A low concentration of MTA and
SAH is achieved in vivo by the catalytic efficiency
of the MTANs, with typical values of approximately 107 M–1 s–1 for kcat/Km. In addition to the role in S-adenosylmethionine-dependent
methyl-transfer reactions and polyamine synthesis, MTANs are also
involved in bacterial quorum sensing (QS), which is an important strategy
for gene-expression regulation in bacterial populations.

In
QS, small molecules called autoinducers (AI) are synthesized
and released as cell-to-cell signaling molecules. AI-1 are acylated homoserine lactones (AHL) that serve
as signaling molecules between bacteria of the same species. A byproduct
of AI-1 synthesis is MTA, which is also a product of the polyamine
synthesis pathway. Through product inhibition, MTA is an inhibitor
of AHL synthase and polyamine synthase. AI-2 is a signaling molecule
for QS and is thought to play a role in bacterial communication between
different species.,S-Ribosylhomocysteine
(SRH) is formed by the action of MTANs on SAH and is the precursor
for AI-2 synthesis. Inhibition of MTAN causes MTA and SAH accumulation
and is proposed to inhibit both AI-1 and AI-2 production (Figure ). In MTAN knockout strains or in the presence of
tight-binding inhibitors of MTAN, production of AI-2 was dramatically
reduced. Recently, MTAN has also been
recognized as essential for QS-independent virulent factors in Neisseria meningitides and Staphylococcus
aureus., In other bacterial species, MTAN
is essential in an alternative menaquinone synthetic pathway involving
futolosine.− Because MTAN is not expressed in humans, it provides
a potential target for antibacterial drug design both in QS signaling
and in atypical menaquinone synthesis.

MTAN in quorum sensing
(top) and menaquinone synthesis (bottom).

The subunit protein fold of MTAN belongs to the same family
as
human purine nucleoside phosphorylase (PNP; 6-oxypurine nucleoside
+ phosphate → 6-oxypurine + α-d-ribose 1-phosphate)., PNP is a trimeric enzyme, and filling one of its three monomer catalytic
sites with a tight-binding transition-state analogue is sufficient
to cause complete inhibition. This result
is interpreted as the three sites acting sequentially, and interruption
of the catalytic site cycling by a tight-binding inhibitor at one
site causes full inhibition. However, in the crystal structure, all
three sites can be saturated with inhibitor to give human PNP as a
symmetrical trimer with the three active sites located at the interfaces
of adjacent subunits. Another member
of this family is human 5′-methylthioadenosine phosphorylase
(MTAP; 5′-methylthioadenosine + phosphate → adenine
+5-methylthio-α-d-ribose 1-phosphate). This trimeric
structure is similar to PNP, but the three catalytic sites are independent
such that filling one of the catalytic sites with a tight-binding
inhibitor leaves the other two fully active. Thus, filling one or
two of the three sites with inhibitor causes 1/3 or 2/3 inhibition of full catalytic activity.

In the structurally related trimeric PNP
and MTAN enzymes, the
patterns of catalytic site cooperativity differ substantially. A similar
analysis has not been reported for the related MTAN dimeric enzyme
family. Here, we establish cooperativity and investigate the possibility
of oligomerization changes by covalent coupling of the subunits. We
find no evidence for subunit dissociation or aggregation. A functional
dimer is consistent with the crystal structures of MTANs. Subunit
interfaces reveal substantial interactions in the apoenzyme and increased
interactions when catalytic site ligands are bound.,, Here, we characterize the interactions of SaMTAN dimer catalytic site interactions using kinetics,
chemical reactivity, and transition-state analogue inhibitors as probes.

Approximately 30 crystal structures of MTANs from several bacterial
and plant species are available in the PDB. All are homodimers with
the active sites near the dimer interfaces.,, In the closed complexes with the catalytic
sites filled, the catalytic site cavities are covered by a loop from
the adjacent monomer. The center of these loops contains a phenylalanine
that is located over the filled active site on the adjacent subunit
(Phe104 in SaMTAN). The loop has been proposed to
isolate the catalytic site from bulk solvent, and this loop also interacts
with the 5′-methylthio group or homocysteine group of reactants.
Finally, it serves as a potential link for cooperative communication
between subunits.

On the basis of kinetic isotope effects and
computational chemistry,
MTAN transition-state structures are ribocationic at C1′ with
a neutral, N7-protonated adenine as the leaving group., MTANs also stabilize a specific water molecule adjacent to C1′
as the incipient nucleophilic group. The
chemical reactivity of ribocations is extremely high, requiring critical
positioning of C1′ and the water molecule to prevent reaction
of the ribocation with nearby protein nucleophiles. The loop is likely
to play a role in stabilizing the reactants in a geometric position
that permits them to reach the transition state with the appropriate
water–ribocation geometry.

Isothermal titration calorimetry
(ITC) studies suggested that dimeric
MTANs from Escherichia coli, Salmonella enterica, and Vibrio cholerae all demonstrate negative cooperativity for inhibitor binding at
the first and second sites. However,
the role of catalytic site cooperativity was not extended to the catalytic
function with normal substrates. In this study, we show that the monomers
of S. aureus MTAN (SaMTAN) have negative cooperativity upon catalytic site filling and
this cooperativity extends to the catalytic function of SaMTAN.

Materials and Methods
Chemicals
MT-DADMe-ImmA was synthesized
as previously
described and generously provided by Dr. Gary B. Evans of the Carbohydrate
Chemistry Team, Ferrier Institute, Victoria University of Wellington,
Lower Hutt, New Zealand. Xanthine oxidase (Grade III) and 5′-deoxy-5′-methylthioadenosine
(MTA) were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich (Saint Louis, MO). 5,5′-Dithiobis-2-nitrobenzoic
acid (DTNB) was purchased from Sigma-Aldrich (Milwaukee, WI). All
other chemicals were purchased at the highest purity commercially
available and used without further purification.

Enzyme Purification
Native and mutant SaMTANs were purified as described
earlier.,, In brief,
a plasmid containing SaMTAN and encoding an N-terminal
His6 tag was transformed into BL21
(DE3) E. coli cells. Bacterial cells
were grown to an OD of 0.6 at 600 nm before induction by with 1 mM
IPTG. Cells were harvested by centrifugation after 20 h of additional
growth at 20 °C. Cells from 6 L of culture were broken by sonication,
and the soluble portion was harvested after centrifugation. The sample
was applied to a 20 mL Ni-NTA column that was pre-equilibrated with
50 mM HEPES (pH 7.6). The column was washed with 200 mL of buffer
containing 50 mM HEPES (pH 7.6) and 60 mM imidazole. SaMTAN was eluted from the Ni-NTA column by gravity flow with 50 mL
of buffer containing 50 mM HEPES (pH 7.6) and 250 mM imidazole. The
protein was concentrated to ∼10 mL and dialyzed against 100
mL of buffer containing 50 mM HEPES (pH 7.2), 100 mM NaCl, and 1%
(w/v) charcoal with three changes. The protein co-purifies with tightly
bound adenine, and the charcoal step is required to remove this adenine.
The protein was further purified using a Superdex 200 (26/60) gel-filtration
column. The purified SaMTAN reaches &gt;95% purity
by
this method, and the protein has no bound adenine. The concentration
of SaMTAN was determined by adsorption at 280 nm,
and the extinction coefficient was determined by the ProtParam program
(corrected using the Pace method).

Kinetic Assays and Inhibitor
Titration
Kinetic assays
for inhibitor interactions were performed at 100 μM MTA in 50
mM HEPES, pH 7.2, and the formation of adenine was monitored by the
absorption decrease at 274 nm. The MTAN catalytic activity was also
detected in continuous assays at 25 °C by monitoring the conversion
of adenine to ATP and detection by firefly luciferase (PerkinElmer)
in 50 μL reaction mixtures using an assay based on published
methods., Differences included addition of PPDK (pyruvate
phosphate dikinase) and APRTase (adenine phosphoribosytransferase)
to 780 and 310 μU per well, respectively. MTAN was added to
a final concentration of 0.02 to 0.3 nM. MTA concentrations ranged
from 0.013 to 4.0 μM. Direct comparisons of catalytic rates
from the 274 nm direct kinetic assay and the luciferase assay gave
relative kcat values of 10.2 and 1.8,
respectively, because of the buffer and coupling reagents used in
the luciferase assay. All kinetic results are normalized to the rates
for the direct kinetic assay.

The concentration of MT-DADMe-ImmA
was determined by the absorption at 275 nm with an extinction coefficient
of 8500 M–1 cm–1. SaMTAN was incubated with MT-DADMe-ImmA for 30 min with an enzyme concentration
of 50 μM prior to activity assay. Assays were initiated by adding
3.5 μL of the enzyme–inhibitor solution to 1 mL assay
solutions. The rate progression curves were linear, indicating no
inhibitor loss from the SaMTAN complex during the
assay. Data were fitted using KaleidaGraph.

Isothermal Titration Calorimetry
Studies
The binding
of MT-DADMe-ImmA (600 μM) to SaMTAN (40 μM)
was measured with a VP-ITC microcalorimeter (MicroCal) at 25 °C.
The inhibitor and enzyme were in the same buffer containing 30 mM
sodium phosphate (pH 7.2) and 100 mM NaCl. Other experimental details
were as described previously. Titration
of MT-DADMe-ImmA into enzyme-free buffer was measured and used as
the control. No significant heat signal was observed. Data were fitted
to the two sets of sites model according to the user’s manual
for the VP-ITC microcalorimeter, where a Kd value of 1.4 nM was fixed for the first site.

Mutagenesis
and Cloning
Covalently linked heterodimer
or covalently linked native dimers of SaMTAN were
generated by PCR amplification of the N-terminal encoding region using
primer pair 1 (forward: TTTCTAGAAGGAGGTAAAACATATG
and reverse: CACCTTCGGATCCACCTCCCTCGGAACCTCCAGCGCCCGAGGCCAATTGGCTAACCAGAGCCTCG)
and PCR amplification of the C-terminal encoding region using primer
pair 2 (forward: TTCCGAGGGAGGTGGATCCGAAGGTGGAACCTCGGGAGCTACAATGATCGGCATTATTGGTGCTAT
and reverse: GGCTCGAGTTATCACAATTGGC). The linear
DNAs from both PCR reactions were mixed and joined by ligation. The
resulting DNA was digested using XbaI and XhoI and incorporated into
expression vector pj214 from DNA2.0.

DTNB Labeling
MT-DADMe-ImmA and F104C/C181S SaMTAN were incubated
for 30 min at stoichiometries of 0,
0.2, 0.5, 0.8, and 1.5 per enzyme subunit (catalytic site), respectively.
Reaction mixtures were equilibrated at 25 °C, and reactions were
initiated by adding 2 mM DTNB in 50 mM HEPES, pH 7.2, to cuvettes
to a final concentration of 300 μM DTNB and 23 μM F104C/C181S SaMTAN. Reactions were monitored continuously in a CARY
300 spectrophotometer with cell changers to follow the absorbance
increase at 412 nm.

Rapid Chemical-Quench Experiments
Rapid chemical-quench
experiments were carried out using an apparatus from KinTek (Model
RQF-3) whose temperature was maintained by circulating ice water (∼
0 °C). The reaction was initiated by rapid mixing of SaMTAN (0.1 mM) and MTA (1 mM). After appropriate delay
times, the SaMTAN reaction was quenched using 5 M
HCl from a third syringe, and product (adenine) formation was quantitated
by UPLC calibrated to a standard curve. Using KaleidaGraph (Synergy
Software), the rapid-burst phase for formation of adenine was fitted
to single exponential (kburst), and the
linear portion of the curve was fitted to a straight line (klinear), yielding values of 52 ± 18 and
1.2 ± 0.2 s–1, respectively.

Solvent Viscosity
Studies
Solvent viscosity effects
were performed using glycerol or sucrose as the viscogens. To achieve
relative viscosity values of 1, 2, 3 and 4, the concentrations of
glycerol were 0, 24, 35, and 42% (w/w), and for sucrose, the concentrations
were 0, 21, 29, and 34% (w/w).

Results and Discussion
Steady-State
Kinetic Analysis of SaMTAN
Kinetic analysis
of SaMTAN saturation with MTA was
unusual in giving a negative cooperativity (Hill plot = 0.9, not shown)
and high apparent affinity (nanomolar) for substrate saturation (Figure ). The high affinity for MTA required use of a sensitive
luciferase assay for adenine quantitation., Substrate saturation curves did not conform to the Michaelis–Menten
equation (v = kcatA/(Km + A))
or to the equation for two catalytic sites acting independently with
distinct kinetic constants (v = (kcat1A/(Km1 + A)) + (kcat2A/(Km2 + A))).
The data conformed to a kinetic mechanism where the first site to
fill is active but when both sites are filled, distinct kinetic parameters
are observed according to the expression first named by W. W. Cleland
as a “2/1” inhibitor function and later adapted to cooperative multiple catalytic sites in the
form v = kcat2((A2 + kcat1Km2A/kcat2))/(A2 + Km2A + Km1Km2)., In this equation, v is the initial reaction rate, A is substrate
concentration, kcat2 is the rate of product
formation from saturated enzyme (EA2), kcat1 is the rate of product formation from the enzyme
with one site filled (EA1), Km2 is the Michaelis constant for the filling the second substrate site,
and Km1 is the Michaelis constant for
filling the first binding site. Least-squares fits of the data to
the 2/1 equation gave kcat2/kcat1 = 4.3, Km1 = 0.1 μM,
and Km2 = 0.9 μM. The rate of product
formation from the EA2 complex (kcat2) is 10.2 s–1, and from the EA1 complex
(kcat1), is 2.4 s–1 (1.8
and 0.42 s–1 in the luciferase assay, Figure , see ). We sought to validate the steady-state kinetic analysis experimentally
by direct physical chemistry measurements, including residual catalytic
site activity as one site is filled with a transition-state analogue.

Catalytic
activity of SaMTAN dimer as a function
of MTA using the coupled assay for detection of adenine. The line
is the best fit to the experimental points for the 2/1 equation described
in the text. There are 21 experimental rate measurements in the fitted
curve, partially obscured by overlap. The wide substrate range is
needed to define the saturation of both catalytic sites. The kinetic
constants from the fit are indicated in the inset.

Titration of SaMTAN with
Tight-Binding Inhibitor
Purified apo-SaMTAN
was titrated with MT-DADMe-ImmA,
a transition-state analogue with a dissociation constant of 1.4 nM
(Figure ). MT-DADMe-ImmA
is a close analogue of the transition state for hydrolysis of MTA
by MTANs with a 5′-methylthioribocationic center and a N7-protonated
adenine leaving group. The enzyme (at a concentration of 50 μM)
was incubated with the inhibitor for &gt;10 min, and samples were
taken
to initiate steady-state assays. The assay mixtures contained relatively
high enzyme concentrations (100–500 nM) to prevent fractional
dissociation of the inhibitor during assays. With a Ki value of 1.4 nM, less than 1% of the MT-DADMe-ImmA is
expected to dissociate from SaMTAN during the 0.5
to 2 min assay time. This assumption was supported by linear initial
reaction rates in a direct recording spectroscopic assay. MTAN catalytic
activity decreased as a linear function of inhibitor concentration
until saturation of the first catalytic site was achieved. With one
site filled, 80% of the total catalytic activity was lost (Figure ). Titration of the second site led to complete
inhibition of catalytic activity at a stoichiometry of 1:1 of inhibitor
to catalytic sites. Although both subunits have high affinity for
the inhibitor relative to enzyme and inhibitor concentrations in the
titration, binding to the second site has lower affinity than to the
first. In the crystal structure, SaMTAN is a symmetric
dimer. Thus, the decreased inhibitor affinity of the second site as
the first catalytic site is filled can be attributed to negative cooperativity
and can be correlated with catalytic site activity. When one site
only is filled with substrate (EA1), catalysis is 1/4.3 of the rate from EA2. When one site is filled with inhibitor, the IEA1 complex gives rise to product at 1/5 of the
rate from EA2. Another test of negative cooperativity is
direct analysis of the thermodynamic parameters for catalytic sites
in ITC titration experiments.

Residual catalytic activity (v/vo) as a function of MT-DADMe-ImmA titration
of SaMTAN. Symbols v and v0 are reaction rates in the presence and absence
of inhibitor,
respectively. Approximately 80% inhibition occurs when the first site
is filled, and complete inhibition occurs as the second site is filled.
The abscissa is the ratio of MT-DADMe-ImmA to SaMTAN
dimer. The line is a linear fit to the experimental points as the
MT-DADMe-ImmA/SaMTAN ratio increases to 1.0.

Site-Specific Thermodynamics of Tight-Binding Inhibitor
Thermodynamic features of the two catalytic sites were resolved by
isothermal titration calorimeter (ITC) experiments for SaMTAN binding to MT-DADMe-ImmA at 25 °C (Figure ). ITC technology has a lower limit of ∼10 nM for Kd values to permit full thermodynamic analysis
by titration. The kinetically determined Ki value is 1.4 nM for MT-DADMe-ImmA binding;
therefore, active-site titration is near-stoichiometric with little
accumulation of free ligand. The ITC data used the kinetically determined Kd value (1.4 nM) as a fixed constant into the
fitting algorithm for binding to the first site of the SaMTAN dimer. The Kd value of the second
site was a variable and was fitted from the titration data to give
a value of 9 nM. Thus, affinity of MT-DADMe-ImmA to the second subunit
decreased 6-fold relative to the first site. Binding of MT-DADMe-ImmA
to the first site yielded a ΔH of −10.1
kcal/mol and a −TΔS of −1.9 kcal/mol (ΔG = −12
kcal/mol), and binding to the second subunit yielded a ΔH of −5.3 kcal/mol and a −TΔS of −5.7 kcal/mol (ΔG = −11.0 kcal/mol). The first catalytic site has
a more favorable enthalpy by 4.8 kcal/mol and less favorable entropic
change by 3.8 kcal/mol than the second site. Enthalpic contributions
are usually attributed to the formation of hydrogen bond or ionic
interactions from the ligand binding, and the contribution of entropy
are attributed to dynamic components, water exclusion, or hydrophobic
differences. Thus, the second-site thermodynamic differences can be
viewed as structural, dynamic, and hydrophobic rearrangements around
the unbound second subunit when the first subunit is occupied. Although
the affinity of SaMTAN for MTA and MT-DADMe-ImmA
are very different, it is significant that the ratio of Km2/Km1 = 9 for substrate interaction
is similar to the Kd2/Kd1 value of 6.4 found for MT-DADMe-ImmA binding. With
these differences in catalytic site reactivity and transition-state
analogue binding, we investigated the chemical reactivity of a probe
placed near the catalytic sites.

Isothermal titration of MT-DADMe-ImmA
to SaMTAN.
The abscissa is the ratio of MT-DADMe-ImmA to SaMTAN
dimer.

Chemical Reactivity of
Catalytic Site Loops
Phe104
is located on a flexible loop in SaMTAN and functions
to cover the entrance of the active site in closed complexes of SaMTAN (Figure ). The Phe104 position
was selected to serve as a reporter of active-site loop accessibility
as the catalytic sites are filled. A mutant of SaMTAN containing a single cysteine (F104C/C186S SaMTAN) was created and gave an enzyme with steady-state kinetic properties
similar to the native enzyme (Table ). The
kinetic rates of Cys reactivity in F104C/C181S SaMTAN were measured with 5,5′-dithiobis-2-nitrobenzoic acid
(DTNB) at 25 °C as a function of MT-DADMe-ImmA titration (Figure ).

DTNB labeling of C181S/F104C SaMTAN.
Top: the
active-site entrance is covered by F104, which was replaced with a
cysteine for DTNB-labeling study. Bottom: Reaction of C181S/F104C SaMTAN complexes with DTNB. The reaction rates are for the
reaction of DTNB with MT-DADMe-ImmA and SaMTAN dimer
complexes at ratios of no inhibitor (magenta), 0.4:2.0 (green), 1.0:2.0
(yellow), 1.6:2.0 (blue), and 2.0:2.0 (black). All traces are corrected
for the background rate of hydrolysis of DTNB.

Kinetic Constants of Native and Engineered
Constructs of SaMTAN
SaMTAN construct	kcat (s–1)	Km (μM)	kcat/Km (M–1 s–1)	
native homodimer	10.2 ± 0.1	0.9 ± 0.3	1.13 × 107	
F104C/C186S homodimer	7.2 ± 0.4	2.9 ± 1.2	2.48 × 106	
native fusion
homodimer	8.3 ± 0.2	1.3 ± 0.1	6.38 × 106	
E173Q + native
fusion heterodimer	2.0 ± 0.2	0.5 ± 0.2	4.0 × 106	
E173Q homodimer	&lt;0.1	not measured	not measured	
With empty catalytic
sites, F104C/C181S SaMTAN
reacted with DTNB to give a single exponential rate constant of 0.095
± 0.001 min–1 (Figure ) and reacted completely in 30 min. The single exponential rate indicated
that the catalytic site loops from both subunits share a common chemical
environment. When MT-DADMe-ImmA filled both sites, F104C/C181S SaMTAN gave no significant reaction with DTNB, indicating
inaccessible C104 loops (Figure ). The crystal
structures of apo and inhibitor-bound E. coli and S. enterica MTANs show that the
catalytic site loops can be open when catalytic sites are empty, but
binding of transition-state analogues caused highly organized catalytic
site loops in inhibited complexes. In S. enterica MTAN, a tyrosine (Tyr107) hydroxyl is in hydrogen bond distance
of 5′ extensions of enzyme-bound inhibitors containing 5′
substituent groups capable of hydrogen bonding. Thus, the reduced labeling rate constant in F104C/C181S SaMTAN by DTNB is due to the altered conformation and reduced
dynamics of the C104 loop opening to expose the reactive cysteine
to solvent and DTNB. When one subunit of the dimer was bound to MT-DADMe-ImmA,
the labeling rate was slowed to 0.021 ± 0.001 min–1, 22% of that for the apo enzyme. Despite the slowed reaction rate,
the extent of Cys reaction is comparable to enzyme without inhibitor
bound. Chemical modification of both catalytic site C104 groups is
described by a single exponential rate. If the inhibitor remained
in one subunit during the Cys labeling experiment, then the C104 loops
for both filled and empty sites would react at different rates. The
same reaction rate for both catalytic site Cys groups is readily explained
by MT-DADMe-ImmA inhibitor release and catalytic site recapture at
equilibrium on the time scale of the DTNB reaction (2 h). This shuffling
of inhibitor between sites supports the equivalent reaction rates
of C104 loops at both catalytic sites. This explanation is consistent
with the observed C104 reaction kinetics and is also consistent with
the nanomolar dissociation constant for MT-DADMe-ImmA. For a near-diffusion
controlled binding on-rate of 107 M–1 s–1 and a dissociation constant of 1.4 nM, the
off-rate is 0.014 s–1, 40 times faster than the
C104 chemical reactivity rate of 0.021 min–1. Thus,
the inhibitor equilibrates between sites on the time scale of a few
minutes, whereas the DTNB reaction occurs on the time scale of 2 hours
for half-saturated enzyme (Figure ).

Pre-Steady-State
Burst Kinetics for SaMTAN
The kcat2 steady-state rate of MTA
hydrolysis by SaMTAN is 10.2 s–1, and we tested if this rate is limited by chemistry and/or site–site
interactions. We hypothesized that adenine product release might limit
steady-state kinetic rates because the enzyme is isolated with tightly
bound adenine (see below). Likewise, the negative cooperativity between
sites questions if both sites can react at the same rate in the presteady
state. Rapid mixing of SaMTAN with near-saturating
MTA followed by chemical quench at 25 °C gave conversion of one
catalytic site equivalent of MTA to adenine (half the sites reactivity)
within the 3 ms time resolution of the experiment. At 0 °C, it
was possible to measure the rapid formation of adenine at one of the
two catalytic sites with an observed rate of 52 ± 18 s–1 followed by a steady-state rate of product formation of 1.2 ±
0.2 s–1 (Figure ). The catalytic
burst for the single-site on-enzyme chemistry is 43 times faster than
the steady-state rate at 0 °C. Assuming a similar temperature
coefficient for steady-state and pre-steady-state rates for extrapolation
to 25 °C, the pre-steady-state burst is estimated to be 442 s–1 followed by the steady state rate of 10.2 s–1. The slow steady-state rate is consistent with slow release of product
from the first catalytic site being required for catalytic function
of the second site. SaMTAN binds adenine tightly
and copurifies with 0.4–0.6 mol tightly bound adenine per enzyme
dimer. This is removed before experiments (see ). We propose that the slow release of adenine from
the first catalytic site is the rate-limiting step in steady-state
catalysis. Because only one site reacts in the rapid-burst phase,
the result demonstrates sequential catalytic site function. Binding
at both sites of MTANs is known to occur from the steady-state kinetic
model and the two-site binding with MT-DADMe-ImmA (Figures  and ) and substrate analogues. However, only one site is active at a time,
and product release from the first site (C104 loop opening), or something
with the same rate constant, is required to permit catalysis at the
second site. The steady-state cycle suggests that adenine release
gives rise to the observed 10.2 s–1 steady-state
rate with the sites acting sequentially. If product release is rate
limiting, then the catalytic rate would be expected to be sensitive
to solvent viscosity.

Rate-limiting step of SaMTAN. Chemical
quench
at 0 °C indicated a single subunit burst of 52 s–1 followed by a steady-state rate of 1.2 s–1 (upper
panel). The kcat for SaMTAN is decreased as a linear function of viscosity in glycerol (η/ηo) (lower panel).

Viscosity Effects Support Adenine Product Release as the Slow
Step
In enzyme systems where rate is governed by diffusion,
including product release, microviscogens like glycerol or sucrose
are expected to alter the diffusion rate and change the kinetic rate
as a linear function of viscosity. The
results support adenine release as a diffusion-controlled rate-limiting
step during steady-state catalysis. Addition of glycerol to increase
the viscosity of assay solutions slowed the kcat for SaMTAN as a linear function of viscosity
in glycerol (Figure ). A similar experiment
used sucrose as a second microviscogen and gave similar results (not
shown).

Chimeric Linked SaMTAN with One Functional
Catalytic Site
Pre-steady-state kinetics of MT-DADMe-ImmA
inhibitor binding at one site and C104 chemical reactivity revealed
aspects of negative cooperativity between subunits. We explored the
properties of a SaMTAN in which one subunit is rendered
catalytically inactive, the second is active, and the subunits are
covalently linked. This approach explores one-site reactivity while
preventing subunit-dissociation effects (Figure ).

Creation of a covalently linked heterodimer. Gray subunit and yellow
subunit are equally active before mutation. After mutation (indicated
as red), the gray subunit is catalytically inactive. In the tertiary
structure model (right), the active site of the gray subunit is in
surface view, and residue 173 and its interacting site are in red.
The linker (L20) is in black.

The inactive monomer contained an E173Q mutation, the dimer
of
which reduced kcat by more than 2 orders
of magnitude (Table ). To ensure active/inactive
subunit stoichiometry and to decrease the possibility of subunit dissociation,
the subunits were covalently linked by a 20 amino acid linker rich
in serine and glycine to maximize linker flexibility (sequence: ASGAGGSEGGGSEGGTSGAT,
named L20). The construct was expressed as a fusion protein with the
E173Q inactive mutant in the N-terminal peptide and the native subunit
in the C-terminal peptide. In the crystal structure of native MTANs,
the distance between the N-terminus of one subunit to the C-terminus
of the second subunit is 50 Å, and the fully extended length
of the linker L20 is 70 Å. As a control, native MTAN monomers
linked by L20 were also expressed and characterized. Its catalytic
activity was similar to native MTAN (Table ). Compared with native cross-linked SaMTAN, heterocross-linked-SaMTAN had a comparable Km value,
but the value of kcat was 24% of the control
enzyme. During catalysis, only the native subunit of the hetero-cross-linked-SaMTAN is active. It lacks the opportunity to alternate
catalytic site action because of the inactive E173Q site. Chimeric SaMTAN does not benefit from the cooperative catalytic interaction
of the neighboring subunit. Fused-dimer native SaMTAN has a kcat of 8.3 s–1, whereas the hetero-cross-linked-SaMTAN has a kcat of 2.0 s–1 for its functional
catalytic site. This is the same value determined for kcat1 in the kinetic analysis (Figure ). Because of limited expression and stability of this construct,
we were unable to complete ITC and pre-steady-state kinetics with
this construct.

Correlation of Structures with Function
Sui et al.
reported the crystal structure of SaMTAN and compared
it to E. coli MTAN, concluding that
the proteins exhibited identical modes of inhibitor binding. A recent structure of S. enterica MTAN, which shares 53% sequence identity with SaMTAN, shows dramatic structural changes of several regions upon the
binding of either substrate or the MT-DADMe-ImmA inhibitor. The crystal structure geometry of empty catalytic
sites (apoenzyme) in EcMTAN and SeMTAN is open and similar if empty or if adenine-only is bound., Thus, the resting enzyme with one adenine bound is in a similar
open catalytic site geometry to apoenzyme, and the empty second subunit
is prepared to bind substrate, to catalyze the reaction, to facilitate
adenine departure from the first substrate, and to proceed with substrate
binding and chemistry at the first subunit while the second subunit
is cleared by the motion of the 104 loop.

In the earlier structure–function
analysis of SaMTAN, Sui et al. reported a kcat of 0.00973
s–1 for the enzyme using MTA as substrate in an
assay oxidizing adenine with xanthine oxidase and coupling the reaction
to the reduction of 2-(4-iodophenyl)-3-(4-nitrophenyl)-5-phenyltetrazolium
chloride to form formazan with detection at 470 nm. As this chemical
rate is 1048-fold slower than we measured for the direct observation
of adenine formation by SaMTAN, this widely used
formazan assay is perhaps not ideal for kinetic investigation of MTANs.
The major findings from the crystal structure of SaMTAN are not affected by this difference, but the catalytic differences need to be considered in evaluating
catalytic efficiency.

Sequential Mechanism for SaMTAN
Kinetic,
binding, thermodynamic, and mutational analysis indicate that both
subunits of SaMTAN can function alone or when its
neighbor is filled. When both are filled, catalysis occurs sequentially,
facilitated by slow product release, presumably by the rate-limiting
104 loop motion to open the catalytic site for adenine release. When
only one catalytic site of SaMTAN is filled with
substrate, the rate is slower. The high affinity of the first site
(0.1 μM) permits the enzyme to scrub the organism of MTA and
SAH but at a reduced turnover rate. At higher substrate concentrations
(above 1 μM), where the second site is also filled, the enzyme
can remove substrates at a substantially higher rate (Figure ). For the first catalytic turnover with saturated
enzyme, only one site reacts at 442 s–1, and catalysis
does not occur at the second site until product release occurs from
the first site, a slow 10.2 s–1 process. Thus, product
release at the first site governs chemistry at the second site.

Catalytic site
chemistry and cooperativity for SaMTAN. Monomers
of the dimer are shown in gray and yellow, where S
represents the MTA substrate, P represents the products, and In represents
the transition-state analogue. In the top reaction sequence, the burst
kinetic rates at 25 °C are shown. The enzyme dimers are symmetric;
thus, the first ligand to bind can bind to either catalytic site,
and in substrate-saturated enzyme, either site can react first, leading
to branched pathways. For simplicity of illustration, these statistical
paths are not shown. Product release of one subunit is necessary before
chemistry can occur at the second subunit.

Conclusions
Structural similarity exists at the level
of tertiary protein folds
between the dimeric MTANs and the mechanistically related purine nucleoside
phosphorylases (PNPs) and methylthioadenosine phosphorylases (MTAPs)., Human PNP and MTAP are trimers with distinct subunit communication.
PNP steady-state kinetics are Michaelis–Menten; however, the
complete inhibition of the trimer with one site filled with tight-binding
inhibitor establishes an obligatory sequential catalytic site function. Human MTAP is a closely related structural trimer
of the human PNP but has catalytic sites acting independently.SaMTAN follows neither of the
catalytic site interaction patterns of its structural relatives. Instead,
dimeric SaMTAN has cooperative sites such that filling
one site gives rise to physical and kinetic properties that are different
at the catalytic sites when both catalytic sites are filled. SaMTAN shows rapid on-enzyme chemistry at 442 s–1 when exposed to saturating substrate. The rapid reaction is unusual
in that it occurs at only one of the two catalytic sites. The second
site forms product at 10.2 s–1, proposed to be the
rate of product release. Thus, chemistry occurs at the saturated second
site only as product is released from the first. This necessarily
results in a sequential reaction sequence that alternates between
the two sites.

Tight substrate binding and slow product release
for dimeric SaMTAN results in an enzyme of high catalytic
efficiency
with catalytic site cooperativity both for substrate binding and catalytic
efficiency. These catalytic site differences are structural, as evidenced
by distinct entropic and enthapic components and similar properties
in chimeric enzyme and enzyme with one site blocked by tight-binding
inhibitors. The kinetic cooperativity described here for SaMTAN may extend to other MTANs, as ultrasensitive kinetic approaches
are required to quantitate these catalytic site properties.

The authors
declare no
competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
This work was supported
by NIH research grant GM041916.

