Ciprofloxacin
and other quinolones
kill bacteria by increasing levels of DNA strand breaks generated
by type II topoisomerases.− Nearly all bacteria encode two type II topoisomerases, gyrase and
topoisomerase IV.,− Both enzymes are comprised of two protomer subunits and have an
A2B2 quaternary structure.,−,,, Gyrase consists of two GyrA subunits (that
contain the active site tyrosine residues that mediate DNA cleavage
and ligation) and two GyrB subunits (that bind ATP, which is required
for overall catalytic activity). Topoisomerase IV consists of two
ParC and two ParE subunits that are homologous to GyrA and GyrB, respectively.−, Gyrase and topoisomerase IV alter
DNA topology by passing an intact double helix through a transient
break that they generate in a separate segment of DNA.−,−, Both type II enzymes are essential for cell survival−,− and are physiological
targets for quinolone antibacterials.,,−

Although quinolones have been in clinical use against both
Gram-positive
and Gram-negative bacteria for several decades, the mechanism by which
they interact with bacterial type II topoisomerases was determined
only recently.− Structural work with Acinetobacter baumannii topoisomerase
IV suggests that the quinolone C3/C4 keto acid chelates a divalent
metal ion, which interacts with the protein through water molecules
that are coordinated by two highly conserved residues: a serine and
an acidic amino acid located four positions downstream. Functional studies demonstrated that the proposed
“water–metal ion bridge” exists and acts as the
primary conduit by which clinically relevant quinolones interact with Bacillus anthracis (Gram-positive) topoisomerase IV (Figure ).− Partial disruption of the bridge, resulting from
mutation of the serine or acidic residue, significantly decreased
the potency (i.e., affinity) of clinically relevant quinolones for
the enzyme but had relatively little effect on drug efficacy (i.e.,
maximal drug-induced cleavage)., Mutation of both amino
acid residues, which completely disrupted bridge function, abrogated
the ability of quinolones to increase topoisomerase IV-mediated DNA
cleavage.

Schematic of the water–metal
ion bridge that mediates quinolone–topoisomerase
IV interaction. For the sake of simplicity, only interactions with
the protein are shown. The residue numbering is that of Escherichia
coli topoisomerase IV. Ciprofloxacin is colored black. Water
molecules are colored blue. Mg2+ is colored orange. The
coordinating serine and glutamic acid residues are colored red and
green, respectively. Blue dashed lines indicate the octahedral coordination
sphere of the divalent metal ion interacting with four water molecules
and the C3/C4 keto acid of the quinolone. The red dashed lines represent
hydrogen bonds between the serine side chain hydroxyl group and two
of the water molecules. The green dashed line represents a hydrogen
bond between the glutamic acid side chain carboxyl group and one of
the water molecules. Adapted from refs () and ().

Quinolone resistance
has risen steadily since the 1990s and is
a threat to the continued clinical use of this drug class.,, Resistance is most often associated
with specific mutations in topoisomerase IV and/or gyrase.−,,, Overwhelmingly, the most commonly mutated
amino acid residues in Gram-positive and Gram-negative quinolone-resistant
strains are the conserved serine (originally described as Ser83 in Escherichia coli GyrA,) and acidic residue
that anchor the water–metal ion bridge.−,,,,− The role of these residues in drug resistance underscores the importance
of the bridge in mediating the clinical effects of quinolones.

Despite the broad-spectrum nature of quinolones, the ability (both
potency and efficacy) of these drugs to enhance DNA cleavage mediated
by topoisomerase IV and gyrase can differ substantially between species.
Furthermore, while mutation of the serine and acidic residue is consistent
across species, the substituted amino acids vary.−,,,,− For example, the most common resistance mutation is Ser →
Phe in B. anthracis topoisomerase IV,− but it is Ser → Ile in the E. coli enzyme.−

The differences in quinolone activity against bacterial type
II
enzymes raise the question of whether the water–metal ion bridge
is utilized or functions in the same manner across species. Therefore,
to address this issue, the interactions of ciprofloxacin and related
drugs (quinazolinediones) with wild-type E. coli topoisomerase
IV and a series of enzymes with mutations in the predicted bridge-anchoring
residues (ParC Ser80 and Glu84) were analyzed. Results provide strong
evidence that the water–metal ion bridge facilitates interaction
between ciprofloxacin and the Gram-negative enzyme and is critical
for quinolone activity. However, this interaction appears to play
different roles in mediating quinolone activity in different species.
Whereas the bridge facilitates the binding of clinically relevant
quinolones to B. anthracis topoisomerase IV, it appears
to properly align the drug in the active site of the E. coli enzyme to promote DNA cleavage.

Experimental Procedures
Enzymes
and Materials
E. coli topoisomerase
IV subunits (wild-type ParC, wild-type ParE, ParCS80L,
ParCS80I, ParCS80F, and ParCE84K)
were expressed and purified as described previously., The ParC mutants were prepared by site-directed mutagenesis using
a QuikChange II XL site-directed mutagenesis kit (Agilent Technologies)
and custom-synthesized primers containing the desired mutations. The
entire coding region was sequenced (Macrogen USA) to ensure the presence
of the desired mutation and the absence of unwanted alterations. In
all assays, topoisomerase IV was used as a 1:1 ParC:ParE mixture.

Negatively supercoiled pBR322 plasmid DNA was prepared from E. coli using a Plasmid Mega Kit (Qiagen) as described by
the manufacturer. Relaxed pBR322 plasmid DNA was generated by treatment
with topoisomerase I for 30 min as described previously, followed by phenol/chloroform/isoamyl alcohol
extraction, ethanol precipitation, and resuspension in 5 mM Tris-HCl
(pH 8.5) and 500 μM ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA).
Histone H1 was obtained from Boehringer Mannheim.

Ciprofloxacin
was obtained from LKT Laboratories, stored at −20
°C as a 40 mM stock solution in 0.1 N NaOH, and diluted 5-fold
with 10 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.9) immediately prior to use. 3-Amino-7-[(3S)-3-(aminomethyl)-1-pyrrolidinyl]-1-cyclopropyl-6-fluoro-8-methyl-2,4(1H,3H)-quinazolinedione (UIJR-1-048) was
synthesized using established methods as previously reported. For the sake of simplicity, this compound will
be referred to as 8-methyl-3′-(AM)P-dione. 3-Amino-7-[(3S)-3-(aminomethyl)-1-pyrrolidinyl]-1-cyclopropyl-6-fluoro-2,4(1H,3H)-quinazolinedione (UIHS-IIa-245) and
7-[(3S)-3-(aminomethyl)-1-pyrrolidinyl]-1-cyclopropyl-6-fluoro-8-methyl-2,4(1H,3H)-quinazolinedione (UILI-2-97) were
synthesized as previously reported. For
the sake of simplicity, these drugs will be referred to as 8-H-3′-(AM)P-dione
and 8-methyl-3′-(AM)P-non-amino-dione, respectively. The quinazolinediones
were stored at 4 °C as 20 mM stock solutions in 100% DMSO. All
other chemicals were analytical reagent grade.

DNA Relaxation
DNA relaxation assays were based on
the protocol of Fortune and Osheroff., Reaction mixtures
(20 μL) contained 10 nM wild-type or mutant E. coli topoisomerase IV and 5 nM negatively supercoiled pBR322 in relaxation
buffer [40 mM HEPES (pH 7.6), 100 mM potassium glutamate, 10 mM Mg(OAc)2, 50 mM NaCl, and 1 mM ATP] and were incubated at 37 °C.
Relaxation was stopped at times ranging from 0 to 30 min by the addition
of 3 μL of 0.77% sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS) and 77.5 mM EDTA.
Samples were mixed with 2 μL of agarose gel loading buffer [60%
sucrose, 10 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.9), 0.5% bromophenol blue, and 0.5%
xylene cyanol FF], heated at 45 °C for 5 min, and subjected to
electrophoresis in 1% agarose gels in 100 mM Tris-borate (pH 8.3)
and 2 mM EDTA. Gels were stained with 0.75 μg/mL ethidium bromide
for 30 min. DNA bands were visualized with medium-range ultraviolet
light and quantified using an Alpha Innotech digital imaging system.
The percent relaxed DNA was determined by the loss of supercoiled
DNA substrate.

Reactions that monitored the effects of ciprofloxacin
on the relaxation activities of wild-type or mutant E. coli topoisomerase IV were incubated for 10 min (wild-type, ParCS80L, and ParCS80F), 20 min (ParCS80I), or 30 min (ParCE84K). The longer times utilized with
the last two mutant enzymes reflect their slower basal rates of DNA
relaxation. The amount of relaxed DNA observed in the absence of drug
was set to 100% to facilitate direct comparisons between the effects
of ciprofloxacin on the catalytic activities of the wild-type and
mutant enzymes.

DNA Catenation
Catenation assays
were based on the
protocol of Fortune and Osheroffas modified
by Aldred et al. Reaction mixtures (20
μL) contained 20 nM wild-type or mutant E. coli topoisomerase IV and 5 nM relaxed pBR322 in relaxation buffer containing
25 mM NaCl (rather than 50 mM) supplemented with 5 μg/mL histone
H1 and were incubated at 37 °C. Catenation was stopped at times
ranging from 0 to 30 min by the addition of 2 μL of 250 mM EDTA
(pH 8.0) followed by 2 μL of 1.25% SDS. Samples were mixed with
2 μL of agarose gel loading buffer, heated at 45 °C for
5 min, and subjected to electrophoresis in 1% agarose gels in 100
mM Tris-borate (pH 8.3) and 2 mM EDTA containing 0.5 μg/mL ethidium
bromide. DNA bands were visualized and quantified as described above.
The percent catenated DNA was determined by the loss of relaxed monomers.

DNA Cleavage
DNA cleavage reactions were carried out
using the procedure of Fortune and Osheroff., Reaction mixtures contained 10 nM wild-type, ParCS80L, ParCS80I, or ParCS80F or 25 nM ParCE84K topoisomerase IV and 10 nM negatively supercoiled pBR322 in a total
of 20 μL of cleavage buffer [40 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.9), 2.5 mM
MgCl2, 50 mM NaCl, and 2.5% (v/v) glycerol]. ParCE84K was used at an increased concentration to account for its lower
basal cleavage activity, so that direct comparisons could be made
with the wild-type and Ser80 mutant enzymes. In some reactions, the
concentration dependence of MgCl2 was examined or the divalent
metal ion was replaced with CaCl2, ZnCl2, CdCl2, MnCl2, or NiCl2. Reaction mixtures
were incubated at 37 °C for 10 min, and enzyme–DNA cleavage
complexes were trapped by the addition of 2 μL of 5% SDS followed
by 2 μL of 250 mM EDTA (pH 8.0). Proteinase K (2 μL of
a 0.8 mg/mL solution) was added, and samples were incubated at 45
°C for 45 min to digest the enzyme. Samples were mixed with 2
μL of agarose gel loading buffer, heated at 45 °C for 5
min, and subjected to electrophoresis in 1% agarose gels in 40 mM
Tris-acetate (pH 8.3) and 2 mM EDTA containing 0.5 μg/mL ethidium
bromide. DNA bands were visualized and quantified as described above.
DNA cleavage was monitored by the conversion of supercoiled plasmid
to linear molecules.

Assays that monitored the DNA cleavage
activities of wild-type and mutant E. coli topoisomerase
IV in the absence of drugs substituted 2.5 mM CaCl2 for
2.5 mM MgCl2 in the cleavage buffer.

For assays that
monitored competition between ciprofloxacin and
8-methyl-3′-(AM)P-dione, the level of DNA cleavage generated
by the corresponding concentration of ciprofloxacin in the absence
of the quinazolinedione was used as a baseline and was subtracted
from the cleavage level seen in the presence of both compounds. Ciprofloxacin
and 8-methyl-3′-(AM)P-dione were added simultaneously to reaction
mixtures.

DNA Religation
DNA religation assays were carried out
using the procedure of Robinson and Osheroff., Reaction mixtures (20 μL) were identical to those described
above for cleavage assays. Initial DNA cleavage/religation equilibria
with wild-type or mutant ParCS80LE. coli topoisomerase IV were established at 37 °C for 10 min. Religation
was initiated by rapidly shifting the temperature from 37 to 75 °C.
Reactions were stopped at times ranging from 0 to 135 s by the addition
of 2 μL of 5% SDS followed by 2 μL of 250 mM EDTA (pH
8.0). Samples were digested with proteinase K and processed as described
above for DNA cleavage assays. Levels of DNA cleavage were set to
100% at time zero, and religation was determined by the loss of the
linear reaction product over time.

Persistence of Topoisomerase
IV–DNA Cleavage Complexes
The persistence of topoisomerase
IV–DNA cleavage complexes
established in the presence of drugs was determined using the procedure
of Gentry et al., Initial reaction mixtures contained
50 nM wild-type or mutant ParCS80LE. coli topoisomerase IV, 50 nM DNA, and 20 μM ciprofloxacin or 8-methyl-3′-(AM)P-dione
in a total of 20 μL of DNA cleavage buffer. Reaction mixtures
were incubated at 37 °C for 10 min and then diluted 20-fold with
DNA cleavage buffer warmed to 37 °C. Samples (20 μL) were
removed at times ranging from 0 to 30 min, and DNA cleavage was stopped
with 2 μL of 5% SDS followed by 2 μL of 250 mM EDTA (pH
8.0). Samples were digested with proteinase K and processed as described
above for DNA cleavage assays. Levels of DNA cleavage were set to
100% at time zero, and the persistence of cleavage complexes was determined
by the loss of the linear reaction product over time.

Results
Enzymatic
Activities of Wild-Type and Mutant Quinolone-Resistant E.
coli Topoisomerase IV
All of the functional
evidence for the existence and role of the water–metal ion
bridge in mediating quinolone activity comes from studies of B. anthracis (a Gram-positive species) topoisomerase IV., As a first step toward determining whether the water–metal
ion bridge is a general mechanism of quinolone–topoisomerase
interaction, we characterized the interactions of drugs with wild-type,
ParCS80L, ParCS80I, ParCS80F, and
ParCE84K topoisomerase IV from E. coli (a Gram-negative species). All of these mutations occur at the amino
acid residues predicted (by sequence alignments) to anchor the water–metal
ion bridge in this species. The S80L, S80I, and E84K mutations have
been identified in clinical isolates of quinolone-resistant E. coli.− The S80L and E84K mutants are resistant to quinolones in
vitro.(,,) However, the purified ParCS80I enzyme (which contains
the most common Ser80 mutation found in clinical isolates−) has not yet been characterized. The S80F mutation parallels the
most common quinolone resistance mutation seen in B. anthracis(−) and provides for direct comparisons with the previously characterized
Gram-positive enzyme.,

Quinolones require the
activity of type II topoisomerases in order to kill cells.− Consequently, topoisomerase IV mutations could cause quinolone resistance
either by altering drug–enzyme interactions or by diminishing
enzyme activity. Therefore, wild-type, ParCS80L, ParCS80I, ParCS80F, and ParCE84KE. coli topoisomerase IV were examined for their abilities
to relax, catenate, and cleave DNA in the absence of drugs (Figure ).

DNA relaxation, catenation, and cleavage activities of
wild-type
and mutant E. coli topoisomerase IV enzymes in the
absence of drugs. The abilities of wild-type (WT, black), ParCS80L (S80L, blue), ParCS80I (S80I, red), ParCS80F (S80F, green), and ParCE84K (E84K, yellow)
topoisomerase IV to relax (left), catenate (middle), and cleave (right)
negatively supercoiled plasmid DNA are shown. The inset (middle) highlights
the catenation activity of the enzymes at early time points. For relaxation
and cleavage, error bars represent the standard deviation of three
or more independent experiments. For catenation, error bars represent
the standard error of the mean of two independent experiments.

ParCS80L and ParCS80F topoisomerase IV relaxed
negatively supercoiled plasmid DNA and catenated relaxed plasmids
at a rate that was nearly identical to that of the wild-type enzyme.
Unexpectedly, ParCS80I relaxed negatively supercoiled plasmid
DNA ∼3-fold slower than did the wild-type enzyme. This mutant
also catenated relaxed plasmids slower than did the wild-type enzyme.
ParCE84K relaxed and catenated DNA at a rate that was even
slower than those of the wild-type enzyme and the Ser80 mutants. This
mutation, as well as the equivalent mutation (E85K) in B.
anthracis topoisomerase IV, has
been shown to display decreased rates of DNA relaxation and decatenation. In the case of the B. anthracis topoisomerase IV E85K mutant enzyme, the decreased catalytic activity
was due to a defect in the DNA strand passage event, which takes place
following DNA cleavage.

The wild-type
and Ser80 mutant E. coli enzymes
all displayed similar abilities to cleave DNA, suggesting that quinolone
resistance conferred by these mutations results from altered drug–enzyme
interactions rather than decreased enzyme activity. In contrast to
results with the B. anthracis E85K mutant enzyme,E. coli ParCE84K topoisomerase IV displayed a DNA cleavage ability that was approximately
half that of the wild-type enzyme. Therefore, this topoisomerase IV
mutation may cause quinolone resistance in E. coli cells by affecting the activity of the enzyme in addition to (or
instead of) altering drug activity.

Effects of Ciprofloxacin
and 8-Methyl-3′-(AM)P-dione
on Wild-Type and Quinolone-Resistant E. coli Topoisomerase
IV
To determine how the ParC Ser80 and Glu84 mutations cause
quinolone resistance, the ability of ciprofloxacin to enhance DNA
cleavage mediated by the wild-type and mutant E. coli enzymes was assessed (Figure , left). The
quinolone displayed little ability to increase the level of DNA cleavage
mediated by ParCS80L, ParCS80I, ParCS80F, and ParCE84K as compared to that of the wild-type enzyme.
In contrast to results with the equivalent B. anthracis enzymes,, the mutant E. coli topoisomerase IV enzymes displayed little to no increase in ciprofloxacin-enhanced
DNA cleavage at high drug concentrations (Figure , right).

Effects of ciprofloxacin and 8-methyl-3′-(AM)P-dione
on
the DNA cleavage activities of wild-type and mutant E. coli topoisomerase IV enzymes. DNA cleavage mediated by wild-type (WT,
black), ParCS80L (S80L, blue), ParCS80I (S80I,
red), ParCS80F (S80F, green), and ParCE84K (E84K,
yellow) topoisomerase IV in the presence of the quinolone (left) or
quinazolinedione (middle) is shown. Drug structures are shown in the
respective panels. The bar graph (right) shows the level of cleavage
induced by the enzymes in the presence of 500 μM ciprofloxacin.
The level of cleavage induced by each enzyme in the absence of drug
is shown for comparison. Error bars represent the standard deviation
of three or more independent experiments. ***p &lt;
0.0001; *p = 0.02.

Some quinazolinediones, including 8-methyl-3′-(AM)P-dione,
have been shown to maintain activity against quinolone-resistant type
II enzymes and function in a manner that is independent of the water–metal
ion bridge.−,,− Therefore, this drug was tested against wild-type and mutant ParCS80L, ParCS80I, ParCS80F, and ParCE84K topoisomerase IV. All of the enzymes maintained high sensitivity
to 8-methyl-3′-(AM)P-dione (Figure , middle). Thus, as reported previously for B. anthracis topoisomerase IV,, mutations in amino acid residues
predicted to anchor the water–metal ion bridge caused resistance
that was quinolone-specific.

Next, experiments were carried
out to determine whether the quinolone
and quinazolinedione increase the concentration of E. coli topoisomerase IV cleavage complexes by inhibiting enzyme-mediated
DNA religation (Figure ). Because ciprofloxacin
was not able to enhance DNA cleavage mediated by ParCS80I, ParCS80F, or ParCE84K topoisomerase IV, only
the wild-type and ParCS80L enzymes were examined. Although
less dramatic than results with the Gram-positive B. anthracis(,) and Staphylococcus aureus(,) topoisomerase IV enzymes, ciprofloxacin and 8-methyl-3′-(AM)P-dione
both slowed the DNA religation rate of the wild-type enzyme ∼4–5-fold.
A similar effect of ciprofloxacin on the religation rate of the wild-type
enzyme has been reported. As expected,
the t1/2 for DNA religation mediated by
ParCS80L in the presence of ciprofloxacin was significantly
decreased, and the rate of religation was nearly indistinguishable
from that observed in the absence of drug. In contrast, the quinazolinedione
slowed the rate of DNA religation mediated by both wild-type and ParCS80LE. coli topoisomerase IV. Consistent
with effects of drugs on DNA cleavage, these results imply that the
ParCS80L resistance mutation impairs quinolone, but not
quinazolinedione, function. Similar results were reported for B. anthracis enzymes containing mutations at the equivalent
serine residue.

Effects of ciprofloxacin
and 8-methyl-3′-(AM)P-dione on
DNA religation mediated by wild-type and ParCS80LE. coli topoisomerase IV. Rates of DNA religation for wild-type
(WT, black) and ParCS80L (S80L, blue) topoisomerase IV
in the absence of drugs (inset, left) or in the presence of ciprofloxacin
(left) or 8-methyl-3′-(AM)P-dione (right) are shown. The data
table (inset, right) lists the t1/2 values
of DNA religation mediated by the enzymes under each condition. In
all assays, drugs were used at a concentration of 20 μM. Levels
of DNA cleavage at time zero were set to 100%, and results were quantified
by monitoring the loss of double-stranded DNA breaks over time. Error
bars represent the standard deviation of three or more independent
experiments.

To further characterize
the effects of drugs on DNA cleavage mediated
by E. coli topoisomerase IV, the persistence of cleavage
complexes was determined (Figure ). Once again,
the only mutant enzyme examined was ParCS80L topoisomerase
IV. DNA cleavage complexes formed with wild-type and mutant E. coli topoisomerase IV were significantly less stable
than those formed with the equivalent B. anthracis enzymes., The t1/2 values for the decay of wild-type E. coli topoisomerase
IV cleavage complexes were ∼4.4 and ∼5.3 min in the
presence of ciprofloxacin and 8-methyl-3′-(AM)P-dione, respectively.
The t1/2 values of wild-type B.
anthracis cleavage complexes in the presence of these drugs
were ∼90 and 280 min, respectively. The t1/2 values of cleavage complexes
formed with ParCS80L topoisomerase IV in the presence of
both ciprofloxacin and 8-methyl-3′-(AM)P-dione decreased severalfold
as compared to that of the wild-type enzyme (Figure , inset). However, a much larger reduction (∼22-fold
vs ∼6-fold) was seen with the quinolone. In contrast, with B. anthracis topoisomerase IV, mutations at the equivalent
serine decreased the stability of quinolone-induced cleavage complexes
but had little effect on the stability of those formed in the presence
of the quinazolinedione.

Effects of ciprofloxacin
and 8-methyl-3′-(AM)P-dione on
the persistence of cleavage complexes formed by wild-type and ParCS80LE. coli topoisomerase IV. The persistence
of ternary enzyme–drug–DNA cleavage complexes formed
with the wild-type (WT, black) and mutant (S80L, blue) enzymes in
the presence of the quinolone or the quinazolinedione is shown (left
and right, respectively). The data table (inset, left) lists the t1/2 values of DNA cleavage complexes formed
with each drug–enzyme combination. Initial DNA cleavage–religation
reactions were allowed to reach equilibrium, and the mixtures were
then diluted 20-fold with DNA cleavage buffer. In all assays, drugs
were used at a concentration of 20 μM. Levels of DNA cleavage
at time zero were set to 100%, and results were quantified by monitoring
the loss of double-stranded DNA breaks over time. Error bars represent
the standard deviation of three or more independent experiments.

Correlation between Quinolone
Affinity and the Inhibition of
DNA Relaxation Catalyzed by Wild-Type and Mutant E. coli Enzymes
Because ciprofloxacin displayed little ability
to enhance DNA cleavage mediated by ParCS80L, ParCS80I, ParCS80F, and ParCE84K topoisomerase
IV even up to 500 μM drug (see Figure ), a competition experiment was carried out to determine whether
quinolone resistance was due to a lack of drug interaction. In this
experiment, the ability of ciprofloxacin (0–200 μM) to
compete out DNA cleavage induced by 10 μM 8-methyl-3′-(AM)P-dione
was determined (Figure , left). With ParCS80I and ParCS80F, ciprofloxacin competed well against
the quinazolinedione, decreasing the level of cleavage by 50% at ∼12
and ∼17 μM quinolone, respectively. Because these IC50 values are similar to the concentration of quinazolinedione
used in the competition assay, it appears that the decreased activity
of ciprofloxacin toward these two E. coli mutant
enzymes does not result from a loss of drug affinity. This finding
is in contrast to previous results with B. anthracis S81F topoisomerase IV. With the B. anthracis enzyme,
a 7.5-fold molar excess of ciprofloxacin reduced the activity of 8-methyl-3′-(AM)P-dione
by &lt;40%, indicating a marked decrease in quinolone binding.

Competition between ciprofloxacin and 8-methyl-3′-(AM)P-dione
and the effects of ciprofloxacin on DNA relaxation. The ability of
0–200 μM ciprofloxacin to compete with 10 μM 8-methyl-3′-(AM)P-dione
for ParCS80L (S80L, blue), ParCS80I (S80I, red),
ParCS80F (S80F, green), and ParCE84K (E84K,
yellow) E. coli topoisomerase IV was determined using
DNA cleavage assays (left). Both drugs were added to reaction mixtures
simultaneously. For ParCS80L, the level of cleavage seen
in the presence of ciprofloxacin alone was used as a baseline and
subtracted from the total observed in the presence of both drugs.
The level of DNA cleavage observed in the presence of only the quinazolinedione
was set to 1.0 to facilitate direct comparisons. The effects of ciprofloxacin
on the relaxation activities of wild-type (WT, black), ParCS80L (S80L, blue), ParCS80I (S80I, red), ParCS80F (S80F, green), and ParCE84K (E84K, yellow) topoisomerase
IV are shown at the right. Wild-type, ParCS80L, and ParCS80F relaxation reactions were stopped at 10 min, ParCS80I reactions at 20 min, and ParCE84K reactions
at 30 min to account for the different baseline DNA relaxation rates
of the different enzymes. The amount of relaxed DNA observed in the
absence of drug (“0” point) was set to 100% to facilitate
direct comparisons. Error bars represent the standard deviation of
three or more independent experiments.

In contrast to the results described above, the ability of
ciprofloxacin
to compete with the quinazolinedione was significantly impaired with
ParCS80L and ParCE84K (Figure , left). IC50 values with these mutant enzymes
were ∼65 and ∼143 μM quinolone, respectively.
These results indicate that the S80L and E84K mutations have a significant
effect on the affinity of ciprofloxacin for the E. coli topoisomerase IV–DNA complex.

Although quinolones are
believed to kill bacterial cells primarily
by increasing levels of DNA strand breaks, they also can impair cellular
functions by inhibiting type II topoisomerases
from carrying out their critical physiological functions. This catalytic
inhibition may contribute to their toxicity toward bacterial cells.− Therefore, the effects of ciprofloxacin on DNA relaxation mediated
by ParCS80L, ParCS80I, ParCS80F,
and ParCE84K topoisomerase IV were compared to those on
DNA relaxation mediated by the wild-type enzyme (Figure , right).

Even though ciprofloxacin did not enhance
DNA cleavage mediated
by ParCS80I and ParCS80F topoisomerase IV (see
Figure ), the drug inhibited DNA relaxation
catalyzed by the mutant enzymes with an IC50 value (∼5
μM) that was the same as that observed with wild-type E. coli topoisomerase IV. The level of inhibition was correspondingly
reduced with ParCS80L and ParCE84K topoisomerase
IV, which displayed lower affinities for ciprofloxacin (as determined
by the competition assays described above). A similar effect of ciprofloxacin
on DNA relaxation catalyzed by the mutant S80L and E84K enzymes has
been reported. These results strongly
suggest that the ability of quinolones to inhibit the overall catalytic
activity of topoisomerase IV reflects drug binding in the DNA cleavage/religation
active site of the enzyme. However, inhibition of DNA relaxation appears
to be unrelated to the ability of quinolones to enhance enzyme-mediated
DNA cleavage.

Role of the Water–Metal Ion Bridge
in Facilitating Quinolone
Activity against E. coli Topoisomerase IV
To determine whether quinolone interactions with E. coli topoisomerase IV are mediated by the water–metal ion bridge,− three experiments were carried out to analyze the metal ion requirements
of ciprofloxacin-induced and 8-methyl-3′-(AM)P-dione-induced
DNA cleavage.

In the first experiment, we examined the metal
ion requirement for quinolone-induced DNA cleavage with wild-type E. coli topoisomerase IV. Thus, a variety of divalent and
trivalent metal ions that support enzyme function were tested for
their ability to support ciprofloxacin activity. Three metal ions
(Ca2+, Zn2+, and Cd2+) that supported
enzyme-mediated DNA cleavage but did not support quinolone activity
against the enzyme were identified (Figure ). As a control, Ca2+, Zn2+, and Cd2+ were tested with 8-methyl-3′-(AM)P-dione, a metal ion-independent
drug.− In contrast to ciprofloxacin, the quinazolinedione
maintained activity against the enzyme, regardless of the metal ion
utilized. These findings suggest that clinically relevant quinolones
such as ciprofloxacin require divalent metal ions to induce DNA cleavage
mediated by E. coli topoisomerase IV.

Effects of alternative
metal ions on drug-induced DNA cleavage
mediated by wild-type E. coli topoisomerase IV. Assays
were carried out with ciprofloxacin (Cipro, blue) or 8-methyl-3′-(AM)P-dione
(Dione, red). The indicated divalent metal ions were substituted for
the Mg2+ used in standard assays. The concentrations of
Cd2+ (600 μM, right) and Zn2+ (400 μM,
middle) that were utilized gave maximal enzyme-mediated DNA cleavage
activity. Ca2+ was utilized at a concentration of 400 μM
to minimize the basal level of cleavage seen in the absence of drug
(left). Error bars represent the standard deviation of three or more
independent experiments.

In the second experiment, we determined whether a mutation
in ParC
Ser80 of E. coli topoisomerase IV altered metal ion
utilization by ciprofloxacin. Only metal ions that could be used at
millimolar concentrations were assessed to ensure that catalytic and
noncatalytic sites were saturated. We found that Ni2+ could
support low-level ciprofloxacin activity against the wild-type enzyme
but not against the ParCS80L mutant (Figure ). A similar result was seen with Mn2+ (not shown).
As described above, 8-methyl-3′-(AM)P-dione was examined as
a control. Ni2+ and Mn2+ supported the activity
of the quinazolinedione against both enzymes (Figure  and not shown). These results indicate that a mutation at
Ser80 restricts the variety of metal ions that ciprofloxacin can utilize
to enhance DNA cleavage, suggesting that the residue plays a role
in anchoring the water–metal ion bridge that coordinates the
quinolone to E. coli topoisomerase IV.

Effects of
Ni2+ on drug-induced DNA cleavage mediated
by wild-type and ParCS80LE. coli topoisomerase
IV. Results are shown for cleavage mediated by the wild-type (WT,
left) and ParCS80L (S80L, right) enzymes in the presence
of ciprofloxacin (blue) or 8-methyl-3′-(AM)P-dione (red). Assays
included 5 mM Ni2+, the concentration that yielded maximal
enzyme activity. Error bars represent the standard deviation of three
or more independent experiments.

In the third experiment, Mg2+ titrations were
carried
out to determine whether mutation of a bridge-anchoring residue alters
the affinity of the coordinating metal ion. DNA cleavage induced by
the quinolone and quinazolinedione displayed a similar requirement
for Mg2+ when wild-type topoisomerase IV was used (Figure ). In contrast, the Mg2+ requirements
for DNA cleavage mediated by ParCS80L were different with
the two drugs. While the metal ion utilization for 8-methyl-3′-(AM)P-dione
closely resembled that seen with the wild-type enzyme, ciprofloxacin
required higher levels of Mg2+ to support DNA cleavage
(Figure ). The requirement for higher Mg2+ concentrations to support quinolone- but not quinazolinedione-induced
DNA cleavage by the mutant enzyme provides further evidence that interactions
between quinolones (but not quinazolinediones) and E. coli topoisomerase IV are coordinated by a metal ion.

Effects of Mg2+ concentration on DNA cleavage mediated
by wild-type and ParCS80L topoisomerase IV from E. coli. Results are shown for ciprofloxacin (Cipro, left)
and 8-methyl-3′-(AM)P-dione (Dione, right) with the wild-type
(WT, black) and ParCS80L (S80L, blue) enzymes. Drugs were
used at a concentration of 20 μM. DNA cleavage for each drug–enzyme
pair was normalized to 100% at 2.5 mM Mg2+ to facilitate
direct comparisons. The data tables (insets) list the concentrations
of Mg2+ required to achieve half-maximal and maximal DNA
cleavage with each drug–enzyme pair. Error bars represent the
standard deviation of three or more independent experiments.

Taken together, the results described
above provide strong evidence
for the existence and use of the water–metal ion bridge to
mediate interactions between ciprofloxacin and E. coli topoisomerase IV. They also suggest that Ser80 plays a critical
role in anchoring the bridge that coordinates the quinolone to the
Gram-negative enzyme and that quinolone resistance that accompanies
mutation of this residue is caused by a disruption or alteration of
the bridge. Similar conclusions have been reported for B.
anthracis topoisomerase IV.,

Contribution
of the N3 and C8 Substituents to Quinazolinedione
Activity against E. coli Topoisomerase IV
A C7 3′-(AM)P substituent on quinazolinediones contributes
significantly to the activity of these drugs against quinolone-resistant
enzymes. Unfortunately, this C7 group also promotes the activity of
quinazolinediones against human topoisomerase IIα. Structure–activity studies were carried
out to identify groups that could promote differential activity against
the bacterial and human type II enzymes. C7 3′-(AM)P-quinazolinediones
that lacked either the N3 amino or C8 methyl substituent displayed
little activity against human topoisomerase IIα but maintained
activity against wild-type and quinolone-resistant B. anthracis topoisomerase IV. To determine whether
these relationships extend to E. coli topoisomerase
IV, the activities of 8-H-3′-(AM)P-dione and 8-methyl-3′-(AM)P-non-amino-dione
were compared to that of 8-methyl-3′-(AM)P-dione against the
wild-type, ParCS80L, and ParCE84K enzymes (Figure , middle, right, and left, respectively; drug structures
are shown in the corresponding panels). Both 8-H-3′-(AM)P-dione
and 8-methyl-3′-(AM)P-non-amino-dione maintained activity against
the wild-type and mutant E. coli enzymes. However,
as seen with the B. anthracis enzymes, removal of the N3 or C8 substituent somewhat
decreased drug activity. Thus, it may be possible to develop broad-spectrum
quinolone-based drugs that can overcome defects in the water–metal
ion bridge.

Effects of N3 and C8 substituents on DNA cleavage mediated
by wild-type
and quinolone-resistant E. coli topoisomerase IV.
8-H-3′-(AM)P-dione and 8-methyl-3′-(AM)P-non-amino-dione
(middle and right, respectively) were tested for the ability to enhance
DNA cleavage mediated by the wild-type (WT, black) and quinolone-resistant
ParCS80L (S80L, blue) and ParCE84K (E84K, yellow)
enzymes. The activity of 8-methyl-3′-(AM)P-dione (left) against
these enzymes is shown for comparison. The structures of the compounds
are shown in their respective panels. Error bars represent the standard
deviation of three or more independent experiments.

Discussion
Although quinolones have
been in clinical use for decades, the
mechanism underlying drug activity and resistance
remained elusive. However, a recent structural study with A. baumannii() topoisomerase
IV and functional studies with B. anthracis topoisomerase
IV, provide strong evidence that clinically
relevant quinolones interact through a critical water–metal
ion bridge and that the most common quinolone resistance mutations
decrease drug activity by disrupting this bridge. To determine whether
the water–metal ion bridge also is utilized by a Gram-negative
species, we examined interactions between quinolones (and related
drugs) and wild-type and mutant E. coli topoisomerase
IV. All of the mutations examined were in the serine and glutamic
acid residues predicted to anchor the bridge to the enzyme. Results
indicate that the water–metal ion bridge is essential for the
actions of quinolones against E. coli topoisomerase
IV. Thus, the bridge represents a common and critical mechanism that
underlies quinolone function with both a Gram-positive species and
a Gram-negative species.

Despite the importance of the bridge,
it appears to play different
roles in mediating quinolone activity against B. anthracis and E. coli topoisomerase IV. The water–metal
ion bridge forms the primary binding contact of clinically relevant
quinolones with the Gram-positive enzyme., Partial disruption of the bridge dramatically decreases the level
of quinolone binding, but near wild-type levels of DNA cleavage can
be generated at high quinolone concentrations. In contrast, partial
disruption of the bridge in E. coli topoisomerase
IV abrogates drug enhancement of DNA cleavage but, in some cases,
has little to no effect on quinolone affinity. This finding implies
that the water–metal ion bridge plays a crucial role in orienting
clinically relevant quinolones in the cleavage complex, allowing them
to optimally stimulate DNA scission. However, other binding contacts
with the enzyme or DNA substrate can mediate drug binding in a manner
that is not optimal for inducing DNA cleavage.

Even though ciprofloxacin
is unable to increase levels of DNA cleavage
mediated by several of the Ser80 and Glu84 mutant E. coli enzymes, the drug still retains the ability to inhibit the overall
catalytic activity of these topoisomerase IV proteins. Inhibition
parallels drug affinity, suggesting that the presence of the drug
in the active site is sufficient to diminish the rate of DNA relaxation.
These findings further indicate that the ability of quinolones to
inhibit topoisomerase IV catalysis is not caused by decreased rates
of DNA religation. Quinolones can kill bacteria by stimulating gyrase-
and topoisomerase IV-mediated DNA cleavage or by robbing cells of
the critical catalytic functions of these enzymes. The fact that clinically
observed resistance mutations in Ser80 can abolish drug-induced DNA
cleavage without affecting the ability of quinolones to inhibit catalytic
activity implies that cleavage enhancement is the dominant, lethal
effect of the drug.

Finally, if quinolone-like drugs that overcome
the most common
forms of resistance are to be developed, they must display activity
against a broad range of gyrase and topoisomerase IV species. Two
quinazolinedione derivatives that retain activity against quinolone-resistant B. anthracis topoisomerase IV but not human topoisomerase
IIα have been described. These
same drugs also retained activity against wild-type and quinolone-resistant E. coli topoisomerase IV. Thus, it may be possible to develop
novel broad-spectrum drugs that are capable of quelling the rising
tide of quinolone resistance.

The authors declare no
competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
We are
grateful to Heidi A. Schwanz and Gangqin Li for the
preparation of 3-amino-7-[(3S)-3-(aminomethyl)-1-pyrrolidinyl]-1-cyclopropyl-6-fluoro-8-methyl-2,4(1H,3H)-quinazolinedione (UIJR-1-048, lot
UILI-2-95), 3-amino-7-[(3S)-3-(aminomethyl)-1-pyrrolidinyl]-1-cyclopropyl-6-fluoro-2,4(1H,3H)-quinazolinedione (UIHS-IIa-245),
and 7-[(3S)-3-(aminomethyl)-1-pyrrolidinyl]-1-cyclopropyl-6-fluoro-8-methyl-2,4(1H,3H)-quinazolinedione (UILI-2-97). We
also thank Rachel E. Ashley and MaryJean Pendleton for critical reading
of the manuscript.

Abbreviations
3′-(AM)P3′-(aminomethyl)pyrrolidinyl

8-methyl-3′-(AM)P-dione3-amino-7-[(3S)-3-(aminomethyl)-1-pyrrolidinyl]-1-cyclopropyl-6-fluoro-8-methyl-2,4(1H,3H)-quinazolinedione

8-H-3′-(AM)P-dione3-amino-7-[(3S)-3-(aminomethyl)-1-pyrrolidinyl]-1-cyclopropyl-6-fluoro-2,4(1H,3H)-quinazolinedione

8-methyl-3′-(AM)P-non-amino-dione7-[(3S)-3-(aminomethyl)-1-pyrrolidinyl]-1-cyclopropyl-6-fluoro-8-methyl-2,4(1H,3H)-quinazolinedione.

