Enzymes with bicovalently linked
flavin cofactors have repeatedly been demonstrated to catalyze challenging
chemical reactions in both eukaryotic and prokaryotic systems.− Today, the number of enzymes known to possess both covalent cysteinylation
and histidinylation of the flavin is increasing, and extensive research
in identifying new members of this class of flavoproteins has been
conducted. However, despite these ongoing studies, the mechanism of
bicovalent tethering of the flavin cofactor and the influence of conserved
amino acid residues on flavin reactivity are not fully understood
and require further investigation. Here we present a mutagenic analysis
of berberine bridge enzyme [BBE, (S)-reticuline oxidase,
EC 1.21.3.3], which addresses the role of His174 in flavin reactivity
and bicovalent cofactor linkage.

BBE is a well-characterized
flavin-dependent oxidase, which catalyzes
the unique oxidative cyclization of the N-methyl
moiety of (S)-reticuline into the berberine bridge
atom of (S)-scoulerine (Scheme )., It was shown before that BBE belongs to
a recently discovered protein family with bicovalent cofactor binding. A structure-based mutagenic analysis led to a
deeper understanding of the role of bicovalent flavinylation for catalysis
and to the proposal of a concerted mechanism for BBE. It was demonstrated that bicovalent flavinylation shifts
the redox potential of the cofactor to a remarkably high value of
132 mV and hence facilitates the oxidative ring closure in (S)-reticuline, yielding (S)-scoulerine
as the product. Replacement of either
residue forming the covalent linkages to the cofactor (Cys166 or His104)
with Ala resulted in a decrease in the midpoint potential of the flavin
and in lower rates of substrate turnover.,

Recent studies of various oxidases revealed
that catalysis requires
stabilization of the transiently formed negative charge at the N1–C2=O
locus of the flavin cofactor., Thus, positively charged
amino acids such as lysine− or arginine are frequently positioned
in the vicinity of the N1 position of the isoalloxazine ring to stabilize
the uptake of the negative charge in the flavin ring system. Moreover,
a histidine residue− or a helix dipole,− can supply the positive charge for stabilization. In BBE, no such
functionality can be found near the N1–C2=O locus, indicating
that stabilization of the negative charge is achieved by a different
mechanism. Although this positive charge is missing in BBE, a tyrosine
and a histidine residue are positioned near the N1–C2=O
locus and can interact directly or via the C2′ hydroxyl group
of the ribityl side chain of the flavin. Interestingly, the respective
histidine residue (His174) is conserved among related bicovalently
flavinylated proteins with oxidase activity, whereas no strict conservation
is found for the corresponding tyrosine residue. Hence, here we addressed
the role of His174 for stabilizing the negative charge during the
course of catalysis.

The mechanism of covalent flavinylation
has been studied for representative
proteins with monocovalently tethered flavins.− In all cases, flavinylation was
reported to occur autocatalytically, and for most investigated proteins,
similar mechanisms for covalent flavin coupling at C8α were
suggested. The proposed mechanism starts
with abstraction of a proton from the C8 methyl group of the flavin
with subsequent stabilization of the negative charge at the N1–C2=O
locus of the isoalloxazine ring. Again,
some examples have shown that this stabilization can be attributed
to a positive amino acid residue such as a lysine in monomeric sarcosine
oxidase or an arginine in p-cresol methylhydroxylase and vanillyl-alcohol
oxidase. Until now, no bicovalently flavinylated
protein has been investigated with regard to mechanistic aspects of
bicovalent flavin attachment. Previous mutagenesis studies showed
that both covalent linkages seem to form independently of each other,
because both histidinylated and cysteinylated single-variant proteins
could be expressed and isolated.,,,, However, amino acid residues involved in the process of covalent
flavin attachment were not addressed. Because of the strong conservation
of the His174 residue situated in the proximity of the N1–C2=O
locus of the isoalloxazine ring system, we wanted to address its role
for bicovalent flavinylation.

Thus, in this study, a BBE variant
in which the conserved histidine
residue His174 was replaced with alanine was created and the influence
of this amino acid residue on spectral and kinetic parameters as well
as on the midpoint potential of the flavin cofactor was determined.
Moreover, the crystal structure of the His174Ala variant protein was
determined to a resolution of 2.65 Å (PDB entry 4EC3). Here we demonstrate
that His174 plays a role in stabilizing the negative charge in the
isoalloxazine ring system during catalysis, because the respective
variant protein features a reduced midpoint potential of the cofactor
and significantly decreased overall enzyme efficiency. Also, covalent
flavinylation seems to be affected by the removal of His174 because
artificially reduced protein reversibly breaks and re-forms 6-S-cysteinylation in an oxygen-dependent manner.

Experimental Procedures
Reagents
All chemicals were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich
and were of the highest quality available. The QuikChange XL kit for
site-directed mutagenesis was from Stratagene, and oligonucleotide
primers were ordered from VBC-Biotech. (S)-Reticuline
was obtained from the natural product collection at the Donald Danforth
Plant Science Center (St. Louis, MO).

Site-Directed Mutagenesis
Mutagenesis was performed
following the instructions of the QuikChange XL kit for site-directed
mutagenesis (Stratagene) using expression vector pPICZα BBE-ER
as described in ref () as a template for the polymerase chain reaction. Replacement of
His174 with Ala was accomplished by using 5′-CGTTGGTACTGGGGGTGCTATTAGTGGT-3′ as the sense primer and the complementary
antisense primer. The underlined nucleotides represent the mutated
codon. Introduction of the desired mutation was verified by plasmid
sequencing.

Transformation, Expression, and Protein Purification
The newly generated expression plasmid pPICZα BBE H174A was
transformed into Pichia pastoris KM71H using electroporation.
Integration of the expression cassettes into the Pichia genome was verified using colony polymerase chain reaction. Applicable
expression strains were identified on a small scale in 300 mL shake
flasks with 50 mL of buffered minimal dextrose medium. Induction was
started with 0.1% methanol with consecutive methanol additions as
described in ref (). Large scale expression of the BBE variant protein was conducted
in a BBI CT5-2 fermenter (Sartorius). Fermentation was performed following
the Pichia Fermentation Process Guidelines from Invitrogen with a
modified basal salt medium. After a 96
h methanol induction, the fermentation was stopped and purification
was performed as described previously., Expression
of the correct variant protein was verified by matrix-assisted laser
desorption ionization time-of-flight mass spectrometry as described
previously.

Steady-State Kinetic Analysis
Steady-state turnover
rates were determined by following the conversion of (S)-reticuline to (S)-scoulerine by high-performance
liquid chromatography analysis of the reaction mixture as described
previously.

Transient Kinetics
Reductive half-reactions were analyzed
with a stopped-flow device (SF-61DX2, Hi-Tech) in an anaerobic atmosphere
of approximately 0.8 ppm oxygen in a glovebox from Belle Technology.
All samples were rendered oxygen-free by being flushed with nitrogen
and subsequent incubation in the glovebox. Changes in flavin absorbance
were followed using a PM-61s photomultiplier or a KinetaScanT diode
array detector (MG-6560). Apparent rate constants for the reductive
half-reaction were determined at six different substrate concentrations
from 30 to 300 μM (S)-reticuline with a protein
concentration of 15 μM in 150 mM NaCl and 50 mM Tris-HCl (pH
9.0 and 37 °C). Fitting of the obtained transients at 446 nm
was performed with SpecFit 32 (Spectrum Software Associates) using
a function of two exponentials.

Rates for the oxidative half-reaction
were determined by mixing air-saturated buffer (21% oxygen) with a
substrate-reduced enzyme solution. Reduction of the flavin cofactor
was performed with substoichiometric amounts of (S)-reticuline to prevent lag phases in the reoxidation process.

Anaerobic Photoreduction
Anaerobic photoreduction was
conducted as described in ref (). The reaction mixture consisted of 1 mM EDTA, 1 μM
5-deazariboflavin, and a 15 μM enzyme solution in 150 mM NaCl
and 50 mM Tris-HCl at different pH values (5.0–9.0). Prior
to photoreduction, the reaction mixtures were rendered anaerobic by
repeated cycles of evacuation and flushing with nitrogen in a special
glass cuvette. Photoillumination was conducted with a conventional
slide projector. All spectra were recorded with a Specord 205 spectrophotometer
(Analytic Jena) at 25 °C; 7.5 M urea in 50 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.0)
or acetonitrile was used for the denaturation of completely reduced
protein samples. For denaturation, the anaerobic samples were mixed
in equal amounts with denaturation reagent (urea or acetonitrile)
and were kept at 60 °C for 45 min. Afterward, spectra of the
denatured protein samples were recorded.

Redox Potential Determination
Redox potentials were
determined using the dye-equilibration method with the xanthine/xanthine
oxidase electron delivering system as described by Massey. All experiments were performed in 50 mM potassium
phosphate buffer (pH 7.0) at 25 °C containing benzyl viologen
(5 μM) as a mediator, 250 μM xanthine, and xanthine oxidase
in catalytic amounts (approximately 1 nM). To maintain anaerobic conditions,
all experiments were conducted with a stopped-flow device (SF-61DX2,
Hi-Tech) positioned in a glovebox from Belle Technology. Spectra were
recorded with a KinetaScanT diode array detector (MG-6560). Toluylene
blue (EM = 115 mV), thionine acetate (EM = 64 mV), toluidine blue (EM = 34 mV), and indigotrisulfonic acid potassium salt
(EM = −81 mV) were used as dyes
for redox potential determination. The potentials were calculated
from plots of log([ox]/[red]) of the respective BBE variant protein
versus log([ox]/[red]) of the dye according to the method of Minnaert.

Crystallization and Data Collection
Crystallization
of the BBE His174Ala variant was essentially performed as described
previously for BBE variants His104Ala and Cys166Ala. Briefly, crushed crystals of wild-type BBE grown using
the sitting drop vapor diffusion method were used for microseeding crystallization setups of the BBE His174Ala
variant. These were prepared by mixing 0.8 μL of protein at
120 mg/mL with 1.2 μL of reservoir solution [0.2 M MgCl2 and 30% (w/v) polyethylene glycol 4000 in 0.1 M Tris-HCl
(pH 8.5)] and equilibrated for 16 h prior to being seeded. Monoclinic
crystals appeared after 1 week and continued to grow for 3 weeks prior
to reaching the final dimensions. Substrate-soaked crystals were then
obtained by a 5 min incubation in the presence of 20 mM (S)-reticuline in the reservoir solution prior to being flash-frozen
in liquid nitrogen.

A data set for a substrate-soaked His174Ala
crystal was collected at beamline X11, DESY (Hamburg, Germany). Processing
of the data was performed using XDS, and
because of isomorphism with monoclinic wild-type BBE crystals (PDB
entry 3D2H),
the structure could be determined by rigid body fitting using PHENIX. The obtained model was further refined using
the same software starting with simulated annealing followed by several
rounds of maximum likelihood least-squares refinement of models modified
using the graphics program Coot employing
σA-weighted 2Fo – Fc and Fo – Fc electron density maps. A summary of data collection,
processing, and refinement statistics is presented in Table S1 of
the . Rfree values were computed
from a randomly chosen 5% of reflections not used throughout the refinement.
(S)-Reticuline was excluded from the initial refinement
process and inserted only in later rounds when clear electron density
was visible.

Results
General Properties
BBE His174Ala was expressed in P. pastoris KM71H cells using the fermentation protocol
established for wild-type BBE. The protein
could be detected in the fermentation supernatant in amounts similar
to the amount of wild-type BBE, and purification was performed using
a two-step purification protocol with consecutive hydrophobic interaction
and gel filtration chromatography. To test for covalent attachment
of the FAD cofactor, protein samples were precipitated with 13% (w/v)
trichloroacetic acid, and no free flavin could be detected in the
supernatant after centrifugation. Thus, it was assumed that in BBE
His174Ala the flavin cofactor is bound in a covalent manner. This
finding was later confirmed by elucidation of the three-dimensional
X-ray structure of the variant protein. The observed electron density
demonstrates a clear bicovalent linkage of the FAD to His104 and Cys166
at positions 8α and 6, respectively (Figure ).

(A) Amino acids in the proximity of the N1–C2=O region
of the isoalloxazine ring system of wild-type BBE. (B) For comparison,
the same region is shown for the His174Ala variant protein structure,
showing the sideways movement of the flavin ring as indicated by the
strengthened hydrogen bond to Tyr456 and the Phe180 main chain carbonyl.
The electron density shown in panel B represents the 2 Fo – Fc map contoured
at 1.5 σ. Distances for hydrogen bonds are given in angstroms.

Spectral Properties
UV–visible absorbance spectra
were recorded for native and denatured variant protein and are shown
in Figure . The spectral characteristics of
His174Ala reflect the covalent flavinylation as observed for wild-type
BBE. The spectrum after denaturation shows
only one absorption maximum at ∼440 nm and thus indicates a
modification of the flavin in its C6 position.,

Absorption
spectra of the His174Ala variant in comparison to the
wild-type enzyme. Absorption spectra of the native enzymes (A) and
the enzymes after heat denaturation (B). Solid lines represent data
for the wild-type enzyme in its native and denatured form. Dashed
lines represent data for the His174Ala variant. All spectra are normalized
to a protein concentration of ∼10 μM.

Photoreduction
Photoreduction was performed in the
presence of EDTA and 5-deazariboflavin by exposing the anaerobic sample
to light. His174Ala showed a different reduction pattern compared
to that of wild-type BBE, and spectra recorded during the reduction
of this variant are shown in Figure . Light
illumination of the His174Ala variant leads to a marginal formation
of a red anionic semiquinone, which was already shown for both wild-type
BBE and the Cys166Ala variant. After
the apparent complete reduction of the His174Ala variant, a nonisosbestic
hypsochromic shift of the absorption maximum to ∼357 nm was
observed, which was not detected in wild-type BBE (Figure S1 of the ). However, more significant
differences between wild-type BBE and the His174Ala variant were observed
upon reoxidation of the flavin cofactor after complete photoreduction.
Reoxidation of wild-type BBE resulted in an absorption spectrum with
a long wavelength absorbance between 550 and 900 nm, which is indicative
of the generation of 6-thio FAD. However,
reoxidation of the His174Ala variant protein resulted in an absorption
spectrum with characteristics of the Cys166Ala variant, and no 6-thio
FAD was observed. In the case of the
His174Ala variant, the resulting spectrum of the reoxidized FAD cofactor
showed a broad maximum ranging from 350 to 370 nm, which suggests
a cleavage of the 6-S-cysteinyl bond. Interestingly,
when the compound is exposed to oxygen, this spectrum slowly loses
its broad maximum, and after some hours, virtually the same spectrum
as at the beginning of the experiment was obtained. Thus, it is suggested
that the covalent cysteinyl bond is reversibly cleaved upon complete
photoreduction and that reoxidation of the cofactor induces an autocatalytic
process for re-forming the covalent linkage. To test this hypothesis,
the completely reduced species was denatured by the addition of urea
from a side arm of the anaerobic cuvette. The absorption spectra of
the fully reduced and subsequently denatured His174Ala variant are
shown in Figure . Strikingly, the resulting
spectrum has spectral properties similar to those of the Cys166Ala
variant by exhibiting two absorption maxima at ∼350 and 450
nm. Again, this is indicative of a cleavage
of the 6-S-cysteinyl linkage in His174Ala, which
seems to occur in the last phase of photoreduction. Thus, it appears
that the covalent flavinylation is affected by the removal of His174
because the wild-type and variant enzymes exhibit different behavior
upon photoirradation.

Anaerobic photoreduction and reoxidation of BBE His174Ala.
(A)
Selected spectra of the complete photoreduction. Solid lines represent
the spectrum prior to illumination and the spectrum of the fully reduced
flavin cofactor. Dotted lines are selected spectra recorded during
the course of photoreduction. The hypsochromic shift in the maximum
of the fully reduced species to 350 nm is indicated by a black arrow.
(B) Selected spectra recorded upon admission of oxygen: (−·−)
spectrum of the fully reduced flavin cofactor after photoillumination,
(···) spectrum after a 5 s exposure to oxygen, and
(—) characteristic spectrum of BBE His174Ala after reoxidation.
(C) Slow regeneration of the initial absorption spectrum. Solid lines
are spectra of the flavin cofactor 5 min and 5 h after the admission
of oxygen. Dashed lines show spectral changes that indicate a slow
regeneration of the flavin cofactor.

Absorption spectrum of completely reduced and consecutively
denatured
His174Ala. The black line is the spectrum of BBE His174Ala denatured
in its completely reduced form, whereas the gray line is the absorption
spectrum of denatured Cys166Ala.

Redox Potential Determination
To improve our understanding
of the influence of His174 on the covalent flavinylation and kinetic
properties of the His174Ala variant, the redox potential of the FAD
cofactor was determined. A xanthine/xanthine oxidase system in the
presence of suitable redox indicators was used, and a plot of log(BBEox/BBEred) versus log(dyeox/dyered) as described by Minnaert allowed the
estimation of the respective redox potential. Interestingly, the His174Ala
variant protein features a midpoint potential of 44 mV, which rather
resembles the potentials of the Cys166Ala and His104Ala variants with
only one covalent cofactor linkage. The crystal structure of BBE His174Ala,
however, shows clear electron density for an 8α-histidyl and
a 6-S-cysteinyl bond and hence did not suggest a
decreased midpoint potential, because of incomplete formation of the
bicovalent linkage.

Kinetic Characterization
We determined the kinetic
properties of BBE His174Ala to address the role of His174 for catalysis.
High-performance liquid chromatography was used to analyze the reaction
mixture after various time points of (S)-reticuline
conversion as reported for wild-type BBE. Table  shows a compilation of kinetic parameters
determined for the His174Ala variant protein, wild-type BBE, and the
variant proteins with one missing covalent linkage (Cys166Ala and
His104Ala).

Summary of the Kinetic Parameters
BBE	kred (s–1)	kox(M–1 s–1)	kcat (s–1)	E0 (mV)	Kd (μM)	
H174A	0.08 ± 0.01	(7.0 ± 0.3) × 103	0.07 ± 0.01	44 ± 3	68 ± 30	
wild type	103 ± 4	(0.5 ± 0.1) × 105	8.0 ± 0.2	132 ± 4	8.7 ± 0.8	
C166A	0.28 ± 0.02	(1.0 ± 0.1) × 105	0.48 ± 0.05	53 ± 2	17 ± 3	
H104A	3.4 ± 0.3	(0.8 ± 0.1) × 105	0.54 ± 0.02	28 ± 4	4 ± 2	
Kinetic data for wild-type BBE,
C166A, and H104A proteins were taken from refs () and ().

Substantial changes in all kinetic parameters were
observed for
BBE His174Ala. A kcat value of 0.07 ±
0.01 s–1 was determined, which accounts for an ∼120-fold
decrease in catalytic activity compared to that of the wild-type enzyme
(kcat = 8.0 ± 0.2 s–1). Thus, BBE His174Ala is less active than the monocovalently linked
Cys166Ala and His104Ala variant proteins., Addition of
exogenous imidazole to the reaction mixture buffer did not rescue
the activity of the His174Ala variant.
In the presence of 100 mM imidazole, the kcat value of His174Ala was determined to be 0.134 ± 0.038 s–1, which implies a very small effect on kcat compared to the value of 0.07 ± 0.01 s–1 in the absence of exogenous imidazole.

For the BBE His174Ala
variant, an 8-fold increase in the Kd value
was observed compared to that of the
wild-type enzyme (Kd values of 68 ±
30 and 8.7 ± 0.8 μM for BBE His174Ala and wild type, respectively),
which implies that replacement of His174 affects substrate binding.
To address the influence of the introduced amino acid exchange on
specific reaction steps, reductive and oxidative half-reactions of
(S)-reticuline conversion were assessed for the His174Ala
variant. Again, all experiments were performed under identical reaction
conditions as described for wild-type BBE. Interestingly, the His174Ala variant protein exhibited a very pronounced
effect on the reductive half-reaction. For the His174Ala variant,
a limiting reductive rate of 0.08 ± 0.01 s–1 was determined, which is an ∼1300-fold decrease in kred compared to that of the wild type (kred = 103 ± 4 s–1).

The oxidative rate was also influenced by the His to Ala replacement,
yielding a kox of (7.0 ± 0.3) ×
103 M–1 s–1 compared
to a value of (0.5 ± 0.1) × 105 M–1 s–1 for the wild-type enzyme.

It was shown before that for the wild-type enzyme
the oxidative
step is the rate-limiting step in substrate turnover. However, the kinetic parameters of BBE His174Ala suggest
that the substantially decreased reductive rate can be regarded as
the rate-limiting step in the enzymatic turnover of the variant protein.
Similar properties were observed for BBE Glu417Gln, where the catalytic
glutamate residue was replaced with glutamine. For Glu417Gln, a limiting
reductive rate of 0.067 ± 0.007 s–1 was observed, which is similar to the rate determined for
BBE His174Ala.

Structural Characterization
To rationalize the observed
significant changes in the rate constants for both reductive and oxidative
reaction steps, we determined the crystal structure of BBE His174Ala.
Because of the pronounced reduction in the reductive rate, the crystal
was soaked with (S)-reticuline to allow a better
characterization of the mode of substrate binding. However, only slow-growing
monoclinic crystals of the His174Ala variant could be obtained, which
because of their comparatively small size did not diffract as well
as in the case of the wild-type protein or the His104Ala and Cys166Ala
variants described previously., With respect to the
substrate-soaked wild-type crystals, however, the resolution of 2.65
Å is slightly better than the resolution of 2.8 Å obtained
previously with wild-type BBE.

Initial electron density maps
confirmed the presence of the bicovalent cofactor attachment and replacement
of His174 with Ala (Figure  B). While the
overall structural change compared to both the monoclinic and tetragonal
crystal forms is relatively small (root-mean-square deviations for
Cα atoms of 0.28 and 0.39 for PDB entries 3D2D and 3D2J()), there are some significant structural rearrangements
extending from the site of the amino acid substitution to the substrate
binding site. As shown in Figure , removal
of the histidine side chain leads to a peptide flip of the neighboring
Ala163 residue with its carbonyl oxygen now forming a hydrogen bond
to an ordered water molecule present on the re side
of the isoalloxazine ring close C4a, which had not been observed in
the substrate-soaked monoclinic wild-type structure. Interestingly, also the amide proton of the same peptide
bond interacts with a ligand not seen in any of the previously described
structures. The chloride ion positioned into the electron density
for this ligand is supported by its refined B factor,
which is close to that of the surrounding water molecules, and its
well-defined octahedral coordination with average distances of 3.2
Å to its hydrogen bond donors (Figure ). As a consequence of the newly formed chloride binding site, the
side chain of Phe332 is repositioned and via Met182 also induces rearrangements
of Trp165, which is an important residue in the substrate binding
site of BBE (Figure ). Moreover, also the
isoalloxazine of the flavin cofactor itself is shifted by ∼1
Å into the back of the substrate binding pocket because of the
missing hydrogen bond between His174 and the C2′ hydroxyl group
of the ribityl chain. This in turn opens space for a different rotamer
of Phe351, which renders the whole active site entrance loop more
ordered than the wild-type structures. With all these changes occurring
in the active site of the protein, it is also interesting to note
that the mode of (S)-reticuline binding itself is
only marginally affected by the His174Ala mutation. However, the backward
movement of the isoalloxazine ring system is partially followed by
the substrate increasing the hydrogen bond distance to the catalytic
base Glu417 from 2.8 Å in the wild-type structure to 3.2 Å. Another important feature of the electron
density shown in Figure  is its intactness
with respect to the isoalloxazine ring system, although the crystal
was incubated for 4 weeks under conditions identical to those of wild-type
BBE crystallized in the same crystal form. For the latter protein,
degradation of the flavin to the 4a-spirohydantoin was already observed
after 5 days (PDB entry 3D2D), suggesting a reduced
reactivity of the flavin cofactor with respect to potential degradation
pathways in the His174Ala variant.

Structural changes due to His174Ala substitution
observed in the
proximity of the isoalloxazine ring system. Wild-type carbon atoms
are colored gray, and the corresponding elements of the His174Ala
structure are colored green. Because of the missing imidazole ring
of His174, a flipped peptide bond is observed between Ala163 and Gly164.
The corresponding amide proton then provides one ligand for a newly
formed chloride binding site. Distances for the partial octahedral
coordination of the anion are given in angstroms. Water molecules
colored red belong to His174Ala, and the one colored violet belongs
to the wild-type protein. The bound chloride ion is colored green.

Additional structural changes due to altered amino acid
side chains
involved in the formation of the chloride ion coordination shell.
With Phe332 as a starting point, these changes extend via Met182 all
the way to the active site amino acid Trp165, which is in direct contact
with the substrate (S)-reticuline. Wild-type carbon
amino acids are colored gray, and the corresponding amino acids of
the His174Ala variant are colored green.

Discussion
The major objective of this study was to
investigate the role of
His174, a conserved active site amino acid among bicovalent flavoproteins,
for substrate turnover and bicovalent flavinylation of BBE. Sequence
alignments of all known bicovalently linked flavoproteins showed that
all bicovalent oxidases feature this histidine residue that interacts
with the C2′ hydroxyl group of the ribityl side chain of the
flavin cofactor (Figure A). Interestingly,
GilR from Streptomyces sp. and most pollen allergens
from different grasses possess a leucine or an asparagine residue
instead of the conserved histidine (see Figure S2 of the ). Recently, GilR was identified
as the first bicovalently linked dehydrogenase, and for most pollen allergens, no catalytic function had
been demonstrated until now.

However, initial studies of Phl
p 4 from timothy grass also showed
the dehydrogenase activity of the enzyme (W. Keller and D. Zafred,
University of Graz, personal communication). These findings suggest
that the conserved histidine residue is especially important for oxidases
but not for dehydrogenases within this family of bicovalent flavoenzymes.

A pronounced influence of the His174Ala replacement was observed
for all kinetic parameters. An ∼120-fold decrease in catalytic
activity compared to that of the wild-type enzyme was determined for
the His174Ala variant protein. This influence is much stronger than
that of the monocovalently linked BBE variants (Cys166Ala and His104Ala)
and is in the range of that of the Glu417Gln variant protein, where
the catalytic glutamate residue was exchanged. Strikingly, the same effect was obtained for the reductive
rate of BBE His174Ala. A drastic 1300-fold decrease in kred was determined compared to that of the wild-type enzyme.
Hence, the reduced kred and kcat values of the His174Ala variant suggest that His174
is required for efficient catalysis. It is obvious from the wild-type
crystal structure that His174 cannot directly interact with the flavin
isoalloxazine ring; however, it is involved in a hydrogen bonding
network by interacting with the C2′ hydroxyl group of the ribityl
side chain of the flavin that again interacts with the N1–C2=O
locus of the isoalloxazine ring system. Hence, this hydrogen bond
network might stabilize the intermediate negative charge during substrate
turnover (Scheme ). This lack of stabilization
of the reduced form of the cofactor could also explain the decreased
redox potential of the His174Ala variant protein. Although this variant
features a bicovalent cofactor linkage, its redox potential (44 ±
3 mV) is lowered compared to that of the wild-type enzyme (132 ±
4 mV) but is in the range of the monocovalent Cys166Ala and His104Ala
variant proteins (53 ± 2 and 28 ± 4 mV, respectively).

Moreover, the substantially decreased rate of
substrate turnover
is attributed not only to the lack of stabilization of the negatively
charged intermediate but also to structural alterations. In the crystal
structure of the His174Ala mutant protein, the flavin cofactor and
the substrate (S)-reticuline are slightly shifted
in the active site, leading to an increased distance between the catalytically
essential Glu417 and the 3′-hydroxyl residue of the substrate.
In a previous study, we have shown that Glu417 initiates substrate
oxidation by deprotonation of the 3′-hydroxyl residue of (S)-reticuline. This deprotonation
increases the nucleophilicity of the C2′ atom that then attacks
the N-methyl group of the substrate, resulting in
methylene bridge formation and the concomitant transfer of a hydride
to the flavin cofactor. Hence, an increased hydrogen bonding distance
between Glu417 and the C3′ hydroxyl residue could hamper proton
abstraction and hence slow the initiation of the concerted reaction.
Besides this strong influence on kcat and kred, we also observed a 7-fold decrease in the
oxidative rate when histidine 174 was replaced with alanine. Interestingly,
His174Ala was the first BBE variant protein with a significant effect
on the rate of cofactor reoxidation. In the crystal structure of the
His174Ala variant protein, a peptide flip of Ala163 that forms a hydrogen
bond to a structured water molecule in the substrate-soaked crystal
is observed. This water molecule possibly influences reoxidation of
the reduced cofactor by interfering with the site for dioxygen binding. For flavin-dependent oxidases, a glycine or
a proline residue was suggested to be required for providing enough
space for allowing dioxygen access to the isoalloxazine ring. Gly164, which forms a hydrogen bond to His174,
was identified as the respective amino acid residue in BBE. Removal of His174 results in a new orientation
of Gly164, which now might prevent oxygen from accessing the flavin
cofactor.

The hydrogen bonding interaction between Gly164 and
His174 also
suggests that His174 is unlikely to exist as a positively charged
imidazolium and is present as imidazole in BBE (Figure  and Scheme ).

Moreover, interesting
observations were made upon photoreduction
of the BBE His174Ala variant protein. When the wild-type enzyme is
completely reduced by photoirradiation, 6-thio FAD is formed, which
can effectively be stabilized by histidine 174. In case of the His174Ala variant, no 6-thio FAD was observed,
which might be attributed to a lack of stabilization of this modified
flavin. In the His174Ala variant, full reduction of the flavin cofactor
resulted in the cleavage of the C6–sulfur bond, i.e., the cysteinyl
linkage (Figure ). Here, the resulting spectrum
rather resembled that of the denatured Cys166Ala variant with only
one covalent linkage.

In conclusion, our results have shown
that His174 is an essential
active site residue in BBE, which participates in the stabilization
of the reduced form of the flavin by maintaining a hydrogen bond network
via the ribityl C2′ hydroxyl residue. Moreover, His174 engages
in a hydrogen bond interaction with the main chain amide group of
Gly164, which is apparently beneficial for the proper alignment of
other residues involved in the enzymatic reaction, such as Trp165.
Hence, the replacement of His174 destabilizes the reduced state of
FAD by disrupting the hydrogen bond network, leading to a less favorable
redox potential of the cofactor and a rearrangement of other amino
acid residues in and near the active site of the enzyme.

Supporting Information Available
Data statistics of X-ray crystallography,
figures that supplement the , and a
sequence alignment of bicovalent flavoproteins. This material is available
free of charge via the Internet at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bi300411n_si_001.pdf

The authors declare no
competing financial interest.

Abbreviations
BBEberberine
bridge enzyme

FADflavin adenine dinucleotide

GilRpregilvocarcin
V dehydrogenase

PDBProtein Data Bank

XDSX-ray detector software.

