In order
for multicellular organisms to survive, individual cells must adhere
to each other and to their extracellular surrounding. This adhesion
is primarily mediated by integrins, a
family of transmembrane glycoprotein heterodimers. Integrins connect
the extracellular matrix (ECM) and the cytoskeleton within the cells
through numerous interactions with their cytoplasmic targets. Integrins
also function as bidirectional signal transducers and may serve as sensors of ever-changing mechanical forces. It has been shown that integrins bind to ECM
proteins via their extracellular domains, which triggers conformational
changes and clustering of integrins. This clustering initially forms
a small network called motility-inducing focal complexes (FXs), which
could be ultimately replaced in fully spread cells by large intracellular
complexes of variable content known as focal adhesions (FAs).

Skelemin, also known as myomesin-1.1 and
originally identified as a muscle M-line cytoskeletal protein of 185
kDa, is expressed primarily in embryonic heart and has been shown to play a critical role in mediating the connection
between ECM and cytoskeleton during the early stages of cell spreading. It belongs to a family of cytoskeletal proteins,
all associated with myosin thick filaments in skeletal and cardiac
muscles, and contains a unique N-terminal myosin-binding domain, five
fibronectin (FN) type III-like domains, six immunoglobulin C2-like
(IgC2) domains, and a C-terminal immunoglobulin domain involved in
homodimerization. Its major isoform (myomesin-1.2)
is shorter by about a hundred residues, which are spliced out between
FN domains 2 and 3. Skelemin is localized to FXs, but not FAs, through
the direct interaction of its IgC2 domains 4 and 5 with β3-integrin cytoplasmic tail. The
second major member of this family, myomesin-2, is a product of myomesin
2 gene with a shorter N-terminus, resulting in a molecular weight
of about 165 kDa, and has about 71% homology with skelemin. It is
expressed in diverse nonmuscle tissues including CHO cells, platelets,
and endothelial cells.,

We and the others have shown
that skelemin is one of the rare proteins that can bind both β
and α subunit of integrin receptors., Although skelemin cannot activate integrins, it has been suggested
that skelemin exerts contractile force and modulates the attachment
of cytoskeletal proteins and Src to integrin clusters during early
stages of cell spreading. A recent study has unveiled the ability of skelemin filaments
to be stretched to about 2.5-fold its original length by reversible
unfolding of the linkers connecting Ig domains. Pinotsis and co-workers
have employed a combination of four complementary structural biology
methods to investigate how the repetitive structure of skelemin contributes
to muscle elasticity. This work explained, for the first time, skelemin’s
capability to act as a highly elastic ribbon for maintaining the overall
structural organization of the sarcomeric M-band of skeletal muscle.

In the present work, we investigated how two skelemin repeats are
organized and may contribute to its unique elastic properties in nonmuscle
cells. Knowledge of these details is particularly important considering
the role of skelemin as a connector between cell surface receptors
and the cytoskeleton. We previously determined the solution structure
of skelemin immoglobulin domain 4 (Sk4), modeled domain 5 (Sk5), and
investigated how major platelet integrin αIIbβ3 binds to Sk45. Here, we examined
skelemin tandem IgC2 domains 4 and 5 (hereafter addressed as Sk45)
together with their interconnecting linker using solution nuclear
magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopy. We present the structure of
Sk45 and the docking model of its tertiary complex with αIIbβ3 integrin cytoplasmic tails. We also
investigated thermodynamic profiles of skelemin interactions with
integrin cytoplasmic tails by isothermal titration calorimetry (ITC).
Overall, the docking model supports the role of skelemin in stabilizing
integrin activated, clustered state through the simultaneous binding
to its two separated cytoplasmic tails.

Experimental Procedures
Expression
and Purification, Peptides, and Cells
The cloning of mouse
Sk4 and Sk45 has been described previously. Single-site mutagenesis of Sk45, converting solvent-exposed C1354 to S (to improve solubility of recombinant construct)
and C-terminal K1424 to C (to introduce paramagnetic spin
label), was performed using the QuikChange kit (Agilent Technologies).
The mutant plasmids were transformed into Rosetta (DE3) competent
cells (EMD Millipore). Protein expression was carried out using LB
or M9 minimal media with 15NH4Cl and/or 13C-glucose as the sole nitrogen and carbon sources, at 37
°C. Cultures were induced with 1 mM ITPG at an OD600 of ∼0.6. The cells were harvested 4 h after induction. For
Sk4, Sk45 (construct with C1354S mutation), and Sk45m (construct
with both C1354S and K1424C mutations), cells
were resuspended in a buffer containing 20 mM Tris, pH 8, 300 mM NaCl,
10 mM imidazole, 1 mM DTT, 1 mM PMSF, 1 tablet of complete protease
inhibitor cocktail (Roche Applied Science). The suspension was lysed
by passage through a French press (Thermo Electron). The supernatant
fractions were loaded onto Ni-NTA agarose resin (Qiagen), and proteins
were eluted with a buffer containing 20 mM Tris, pH 7.5, 300 mM NaCl,
and 500 mM imidazole. To cleave the His-tag, thrombin was added directly
to the Ni-NTA column. Cleavage was done in a 37 °C incubator
for 4 h with periodic mixing (50 mM Tris, 150 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA,
pH 7.5). Thrombin was inhibited by the addition of equivalent amounts
of PMSF. The eluate was further purified by size exclusion chromatography
(16/60 Superdex 75 column, GE Healthcare) in 50 mM NaCl, 20 mM KPO4, pH 6.8.

Peptides, corresponding to the integrin cytoplasmic
tails, were synthesized chemically (NEOpeptides): αIIb (starting from W988), N-terminus of β3 (K716–W739), and C-terminus of β3 (K738-T762). Myristoylated peptides,
corresponding to skelemin’s sequence, were synthesized by Peptide
2.0 (Chantilly, VA): 1369THIVWYKDEREISVDEKHD1387 and 1377EREISAAAKHD1387, which
is a triple mutant (VDE → AAA).

Human fibrinogen was
obtained from Enzyme Research Laboratories (South Bend, IN). CHO cells
expressing αIIbβ3 were described
previously and were maintained in Dulbecco’s
modified Eagle’s medium/F-12 medium supplemented with 10% fetal
bovine serum and 25 mM HEPES.

NMR Spectroscopy
NMR experiments were performed on uniformly 15N/13C-labeled samples (unless stated otherwise) prepared in buffer containing
20 mM KPO4, pH 6.8, and 7% D2O. Spectra were
recorded at 25 °C on a Varian INOVA 600 MHz spectrometer equipped
with a cold probe. The standard BioPack pulse sequences were used.
Spectra were processed using NMRPipe and
analyzed with CCPN Analysis.

The
backbone resonance assignments for Sk45 were obtained from the set
of triple resonance experiments, HNCO, HN(CA)CO, HNCA, HNCACB, CBCA(CO)NH,
and HBHA(CO)NH. Because of a very high degeneracy of the peaks in
HCCH–COSY and HCCH-TOCSY spectra and very weak C(CO)NH and
H(CCO)NH spectra, only a partial assignment of the side chain resonances
was achieved from these data. The Sk45 tandem is very rich in methyl-containing
residues, which constitute 32% of the protein sequence. Since methyl
groups form the core of a protein and, thus, could provide very valuable
distance restrains for the structure calculation, we collected a methyl-optimized
(H)CCmHm-TOCSY experiment from the BioPack library. From this spectrum,
we were able to obtain the chemical shift assignment for all methyl
groups, and this information turned to be crucial for the convergence
of the structure calculation. In total, chemical shift assignment
was obtained for 80% of protons, 41% of carbons, and 71% of nitrogens.

1DHN residual dipolar couplings (RDC) were
derived from the difference between peaks positions in 1H–15N HSQC and TROSY spectra recorded in isotropic
and anisotropic conditions. Three different alignment media were used:
Pf1 phage (ASLA Biotech), mixture of C12E5/hexanol,
or C12E5/hexanol/sodium octyl sulfate (Sigma-Aldrich,
C12E15 concentration was 4.1%, C12E5:SOS = 30:1 molar ratio). In all
media, the His-tag of Sk45 was cleaved prior to collecting RDCs. A
data set for Sk45 with the His-tag intact was also collected in Pf1
phage solution.

Paramagnetic relaxation enhancement (PRE) experiments
were performed with Sk45m, where the solvent-exposed K1424 was mutated to cysteine. The 1H–15N
HSQC spectra were collected with and without 3-maleimido-PROXYL (m-PROXYL)
spin label. The effect of the spin label on the signal intensities
was estimated from the normalized intensity differences in the spectra
with and without the spin label.

Transferred NOEs (trNOE) for
αIIb cytoplasmic tail in complex with Sk45 were obtained
at the peptide to protein ratio of 100:1 with the mixing time of 400
ms as previously mentioned. The 1H assignments for αIIb were performed previously.

The titrations of αIIb or β3 into the Sk45 solution were monitored with 1H–15N HSQC spectra at the peptide to protein
ratios varied from 1:1 to 5:1.

Structures Calculation
The Sk45 structure calculation and NOE assignment was carried out
with ARIA 2.3 and Xplor-NIH. The unassigned NOEs from 3D 15N-NOESY
and 13C-NOESY experiments along with dihedral angle constraints
were used as an input for ARIA. The dihedral angles were predicted
with DANGLE in CCPN Analysis. In the
subsequent calculations, hydrogen bond constraints were introduced.
The characteristic NOE pattern, the CSI secondary structure prediction,
and H-D exchange data gave rise to 156 constraints (two constraints
per H-bond). In some cases, hydrogen bond constraints were set to
have multiple partners. Later, the obtained ARIA NOE assignments were
manually verified in CCPN Analysis. Stereospecific assignment of prochiral
groups was achieved using a floating assignment approach as implemented
in ARIA.

The structure was further refined with RDCs using Xplor-NIH.
Initially, the two domains were refined with RDCs independently. For
this, the sets of 1DHN RDCs for the three media
were divided in the two parts: one for each skelemin domain. In addition
to RDC restraints, the calculation was supplied with ARIA-derived
distance constraints, dihedral and H-bond restraints. In the next
step, the two domains were treated as rigid bodies connected by a
flexible linker and RDCs were used to orient the domains. This time,
every set of RDC restraints for the three different media was used
as a whole, containing RDCs for the both domains. A total of 1000
structures were calculated in the “rigid body” run and
the lowest energy 20 structures were further refined in water with
Xplor-NIH. In the water refinement step, all experimental constraints
were used, including NOEs, dihedral, H-bond, and RDC restraints. These
20 refined structures were chosen as a representative ensemble.

The αIIb peptide structure in the complex with Sk45
was obtained based upon trNOE restraints using ARIA, and the ensemble
of 20 structures with minimal overall energy was refined in explicit
water.

During the course of the calculations, the quality of
the molecular structures was assessed with ARIA/CNS built-in scripts
and PROCHECK-NMR.

Modeling
The HADDOCK
Web server was used for docking of αIIb and β3 integrin tails to Sk45. For αIIb/Sk45 binary complex determination, the best NMR structures
of αIIb and Sk45 from the NMR ensembles were chosen.
During the docking, the following residues were set as active: 990,
992–997 of αIIb and 1361, 1363, 1394 of Sk45.
For β3 docking, we have used the first representative
of the ensemble with PDB ID 1M80. The active residues for this docking were 716, 722,
724, and 725 of β3 and 1368, 1370, 1372, 1374, 1382,
1383, and 1411 of Sk45. The flexible unstructured N-terminal residues
(1207 to 1225) of Sk45 were removed before docking.

Electrostatic
Potential
The electrostatic potential of Sk45 was calculated
using Adaptive Poisson–Boltzmann Solver (APBS). The pdb file of Sk45 was uploaded to the pdb 2pqr Web server using PARSE as the force field and PROPKA to
assign protonation states. The output files were used to create the
electrostatic potential map by APBS. The electrostatic potential map
was visualized by UCSF Chimera using
the built-in electrostatic surface coloring module.

ITC
Isothermal titration calorimetry was performed on a low volume Nano
ITC (TA Instruments). Peptides corresponding to integrin cytoplasmic
tails were solubilized in the buffer 50 mM NaCl, 20 mM KPO4, and pH 6.8. All ITC experiments were performed at 25 °C, 300
rpm mixing, 300 s time intervals between injections, and 3 μL
injection volumes. The concentrations used are as follows: 2.5 mM
C-terminal β3 and 0.175 mM Sk4, 1.3 mM N-terminal
β3 and 0.177 mM Sk45, and 1.9 mM αIIb and 0.177 mM Sk45. The analysis of the data was done in NanoAnalyze
Software (TA Instruments) suite using “Independent”
model.

Adhesion Assays
The wells of 96-well tissue culture
plates (Immulon 4B) were coated with the 2.5 μg/mL of fibrinogen
overnight at 4 °C. The wells were postcoated with 1% BSA. Cells
were labeled with 10 μM calcein AM (Molecular Probes, Eugene,
OR) for 30 min at 37 °C, washed and resuspended in DMEM/F-12
medium at 1 × 105 cells/mL. Cells were mixed with
different concentrations of peptides for 20 min at 22 °C before
they were added to the wells coated with adhesive substrates. Aliquots
(100 μL) of cells were added to the wells and incubated at 37
°C for 30 min. The nonadherent cells were removed by two washes
with phosphate-buffered saline (PBS), and fluorescence was measured
in a fluorescence plate reader (Applied Biosystems, Framingham, MA).
The number of adherent cells was determined using the fluorescence
of aliquots with a known number of labeled cells.

Results
Structure of
Skelemin Tandem Sk45
Skelemin IgC domains 4 and 5 have been
shown to interact with β3 cytoplasmic tail. We have determined, by solution NMR, that a single
domain Sk4 adopts a very well-known IgC2-fold containing seven β-strands
in two β-sheets forming a β-sandwich. However, poor behavior of skelemin domain 5 in the solution
has precluded its detailed structural characterization by NMR. To
avoid this problem, and to improve the solubility of the tandem Sk45,
we have mutated the surface-exposed C1354 of domain 5 to
serine in order to obtain a 27 kDa protein construct suitable for
solution NMR studies.

The complete backbone and partial side
chain chemical shifts assignments were found sufficient for ab initio
structure calculation of the domains fold via the classical NOE-based
approach supported by RDC data. A total of 2647 NOE constraints, 351
RDCs, 156 H-bonds, and 311 backbone dihedral restraints, allowed us
to obtain the Sk45 folds with RMSD 0.97 Å for Sk4 domain (the
well-ordered residues 1227–1327 are used for superimposition)
and 1.37 Å for Sk5 domain (the well-ordered residues 1344–1380
and 1391–1427). As expected, the tandem domains 4 and 5 adopted
a well-known IgC2-fold and contained seven β-strands in two
β-sheets forming two β-sandwiches connected through a
partially helical linker. Figure A,B presents
20 structures with the lowest target energy functions. These structures
were obtained from the calculations where RDCs were divided in the
two separate sets (one for each domain), effectively treating the
two domains as independent entities. The RDC fits for this calculation
show an impeccable correlation within the individual domains (Figure A). However, the correlation is poor for the tandem
(Figure B), reflecting the fact that the mutual
orientation of the domains in these structures is not optimized.

Sk45 NMR
ensemble obtained through the calculation where RDC data for the two
domains were used independently (A, B). Sk4 domain and N-terminal
part of the linker is shown in orange, Sk5 domain–in blue,
the unstructured part of the linker–in green. (A) The structures
are superimposed over the domain 4 of the tandem Sk45 well-ordered
residues 1227–1327. (B) The structures are superimposed over
domain 5 of the tandem Sk45 well-ordered residues 1344–1380
and 1391–1427. Additional data used to confirm interdomains
orientation (C–D). (C) The residues affected by the introduction
of m-PROXYL spin label are in red. The spin modified residue is shown
with the thicker bonds and side chain displayed. (D) The residues
of Sk4 domain and the beginning of linker affected by the presence
of the Sk5 domain are shown with thicker bonds. The affected residues
were deduced from chemical shift perturbations in 1H–15N HSQC spectra of Sk4 and Sk45 constructs.

Quality of RDCs fits: the correlation fits of the experimental
and back-calculated RDCs for the best structure from the NMR ensemble
presented in Figure . (A) 1DHN RDCs data is split into two parts, one for each domain:
data in orange corresponds to Sk4 domain and data in blue–to
Sk5 domain. (B) The correlation fits of the experimental and back-calculated
RDCs for the best structure from the NMR ensemble. These fits are
obtained for 1DHN RDCs used as a single data
set for the two domains. The four RDCs fits are (from left to right):
Sk45 with His-tag in Pf1 anisotropic medium, Sk45 without tag in Pf1,
C12E5/hexanol, or C12E5/hexanol/SOS media. The fits are obtained with
MODULE.

Thus, the observed NOEs alone were insufficient for restricting
the domains connected in the tandem through a loosely structured helical
linker. Therefore, in order to define the mutual orientation of domains
4 and 5, we obtained and utilized long-range data, such as RDC and
PRE. As a rule, the RDC approach is based on the notion that when
a multidomain molecule with no or little relative interdomain motion
is settled within an anisotropic environment, the environment does
not change the mutual domain orientation. In turn, this implies that
the alignment tensors for each domain and for the entire molecule
in the anisotropic environment are equal. Thus, for orienting the
domains within the multidomain molecule by means of RDCs, the order
tensors of the domains have to be made collinear. However, an inherent
4-fold degeneracy exists since residual dipolar coupling constants
can be satisfied by tensors which differ by 180° around the tensor
axes. To resolve this ambiguity, data from several types of alignment
media are used simultaneously during structure calculations.

We have used the “rigid body”
approach for the domain orientation in the Sk45 tandem. The starting
structures had the domains refined with all experimental constraints
as described above. In the “rigid body” Xplor-NIH run,
we calculated 1000 structures in order to sample the entire conformational
space, and we used RDC constraints as a single set for every alignment
medium, which would treat the tandem as a whole. The final ensemble
of the 20 lowest energy structures has RMSD 3.1 Å over residues
1227–1327 (domain 4) and 1344–1427 (domain 5) and is
presented in Figure A. In order to lift the
4-fold degeneracy, the alignment media should produce noncollinear
order tensors. The orientation of the tensors that we obtained for
the four sets of RDCs differs by up to 45° (Figure B). 1DHN RDCs fits for both domains
within Sk45 structure are presented in Figure C. The quality of these fits is excellent, as justified by the correlation
coefficients of 0.96, 1.00, 1.00, and 0.99 for Sk45 with His-tag in
Pf1, Sk45 without His-tag in Pf1, C12E5/hexanol, and C12E5/hexanol/SOS
anisotropic media, respectively. Thus, we were able to find the interdomains
orientation. This ensemble has been deposited to the Protein Data
Bank (access code XXX). Statistics of this
ensemble are presented in Table .

Overlay of
Sk45 NMR ensemble with the X-ray structure of human homologue (PDB
ID 3RBS) and
the respective quality of RDCs fits. (A) The 20 lowest energy NMR
structures with the two domains oriented by means of RDC data. The
NMR ensemble and the X-ray structure (violet) are superimposed over
residues 1227–1327 (domain Sk4) and 1344–1427 (domain
Sk5). The linker region is magnified and is shown in ribbon presentation
for X-ray structure. (B) The relative orientation of the alignment
tensors for Sk45 with His-tag in Pf1 anisotropic medium (red), for
Sk45 without tag in Pf1 (magenta), C12E5/hexanol (gray) or C12E5/hexanol/SOS
(blue) anisotropic media. (C) The correlation fits of the experimental
and back-calculated 1DHN RDCs for the best structure
from the NMR ensemble of Sk45. (D) The correlation fits of the experimental
and back-calculated 1DHN RDCs for the X-ray
structure. The fits are obtained with Xplor-NIH tools.

Statistical Data for Sk45 NMR Structure
Calculations
total distance constraints	 	
 NOEs	2647	
 intraresidue	 888	
|i – j| = 1	 701	
|i – j| &lt; 5	 354	
|i – j| &gt; 4	 704	
 hydrogen bond constraints	 156	
dihedral angle restraints	 311	
1DHN RDC
restraints	 351	
RMSD for NMR
constraints	 	
 distance constraints
(Å)	0.209 ± 0.014	
 dihedral angle restraints (deg)	1.428 ± 0.133	
 RDCs (Hz)	2.317 ± 0.106	
deviations from idealized geometry	 	
 bonds (Å)	0.012 ± 0.000	
 angles
(deg)	1.460 ± 0.042	
 impropers (deg)	1.729 ± 0.045	
RMSD
(Å) for Sk4 domain (residues 1227–1327)	0.97	
RMSD (Å) for Sk5
domain (residues 1344–1380, 1391–1427)	1.37	
RMSD (Å) for Sk45 tandem (residues 1227–1327, 1344–1427)	3.1	
Procheck Ramachandran statistics (%)	 	
 most favored regions	65.3	
 allowed regions	27.3	
 generously allowed regions	5.6	
 disallowed regions	1.8	
The obtained domain orientation
coincides with PRE data, where the paramagnetic spin label, 3-maleimido-PROXYL
(m-PROXYL), is introduced to the solvent-exposed C-terminal cysteine
K1424C of the domain 5. The HSQC spectrum of Sk45 K1424C mutant resembles the spectrum of Sk45 with a difference
only near the mutation site. Thus, we can conclude that the molecular
Ig-fold is preserved in this mutant. Upon attaching the m-PROXYL spin
label to the protein, we have observed sequence specific 1H–15N HSQC signal attenuation. The peaks, which
are the most significantly deteriorated by the relaxation enhancement,
all belong to the residues located in the domain 5:1376, 1377, 1404,
1406, 1407, 1408, 1422, 1423, 1424, and 1425. As it is seen from the
NMR structure (Figure C), all these residues
(shown in red) are in close proximity to the introduced cysteine residue
at the position 1424 (depicted with the thicker bonds).

The
comparison of the 1H–15N HSQC spectra
of Sk4 and Sk45 constructs revealed residues that experienced shifts
in resonance frequencies due to the addition of the domain 5. As expected,
the most disturbed are Sk4 C-terminal residues 1322–1329, which
belong to the helical linker in Sk45. The other affected Sk4 residues
are 1234–1242, 1273, 1287–1295, and 1315–1319.
These regions in the presented NMR structure (Figure D, displayed with thicker bonds) are also in close proximity
to the C-terminal helix of Sk4 construct. Thus, PRE and chemical shift
perturbation data confirm that the two domains are rather distant
in space, and no interdomain interaction in the Sk45 tandem is observed.

Interaction of Sk45 with Cytoplasmic Tails of αIIbβ3 Integrin
Previously, we defined skelemin
binding surface on platelet integrin αIIbβ3 and demonstrated that this interaction is consistent with
an attenuated intersubunit clasp. To
address the mechanism of this interaction, and to define the thermodynamic
forces driving the process, we have employed ITC. We used Sk4 and
Sk45 constructs titrated with either full-length αIIb cytoplasmic tail (Figure A, ) or short synthetic peptides corresponding
to β3 N- or C-termini (), as previously described. The results, summarized in Table , revealed
very weak interactions which were in the tens of micromolar range.
These reactions were predominantly driven by entropy. For all cases,
the stoichiometry of interactions was found to be one.

(A) ITC data for the
Sk45 interaction with αIIb fitted with a single binding
site model. (B) The NMR ensemble of αIIb cytoplasmic
tail in the bound conformation as determined from trNOE data. The
conformer used for docking is shown in green. (C) A region of the 1H–15N HSQC spectra of Sk45 in absence (black)
and presence of β3 (red) at the protein/peptide ratio
1:3. Affected residues are labeled. (D) Effect of skelemin-derived
peptide on αIIbβ3-expressing CHO
cell adhesion. Microtiter wells were coated with 2.5 μg/mL of
fibrinogen and postcoated with 1% BSA. Calcein-labeled αIIbβ3-expressing CHO cells were incubated
with different concentration of THIVWYKDEREISVDEKHD (•) or
control EREISAAAKHD (○) peptides for 20 min at 22 °C.
After 30 min at 37 °C, nonadherent cells were removed, and adhesion
was determined. Data points are expressed as a percentage of control
adhesion (in the absence of peptides) and are the mean of three individual
experiments performed with triplicate determinations in each experiment.

Thermodynamic Analysis
of the Association of Skelemin and Integrin by ITC
titrant	C-terminal β3	N-terminal β3	αIIb	
protein	Sk4	Sk45	Sk45	
Kd (μM)	10.7 ± 9.9	37.2 ± 180	14.2 ± 4.3	
ΔG (kJ/mol)	–28.3	–25.3	–27.7	
ΔH (kJ/mol)	–0.7 ± 0.1	–1.7 ± 0.9	–1.6 ± 0.1	
–TΔS (kJ/mol)	–27.6	–23.6	–26.1	
stoichiometry, n	0.99 ± 0.10	1.30 ± 0.41	1.26 ± 0.05	
Titration of Sk45
with N-terminal β3 was noisy, resulting in inaccurate
fitting.

Because the interaction
of αIIb with skelemin is weak with fast off-rate,
we were able to perform the transferred NOE experiments on αIIb/Sk45 solution. With trNOE constraints supplied to ARIA,
we calculated the structure of the bound peptide. Upon binding, the
peptide adopts a U-shaped structure (ensemble depicted in Figure B). From the HSQC titration experiments, we found
that residues 1361, 1363, and 1394 form the binding site for αIIb on the Sk45 surface. The best NMR structures of αIIb and Sk45 were used for in silica docking with HADDOCK software.
After the docking of 1000 structures, the best 200 models were refined
in water, and among them the five clusters were identified by HADDOCK.
The largest cluster with the lowest score had 114 models with RMSD
4.1 Å from the overall lowest energy model.

We performed
trNOE experiments for the short synthetic β3 peptides
earlier and found a very limited number of additional peaks, preventing
us from determining the structure of the bound β3 peptides. Here, we studied β3 interaction with Sk45 by HSQC titration experiments performed
on the 15N-labeled Sk45 sample. In these experiments, we
were unable to observe any reliable chemical shift perturbations in
titration with C-terminal β3 peptide, most probably
due to the repelling effect of the flexible unstructured N-terminus
of Sk45. However, we observed concentration-dependent chemical shifts
(Figure C, ) and found that residues 1368, 1370,
1372, 1374, 1382–1384, and 1411 of Sk45 are affected by N-terminal
β3 peptide binding. These residues were used for
in silica docking of the β3 conformer (PDB ID 1M80) into the NMR structure
of Sk45 presented here. The best HADDOCK cluster contained 17 models
with RMSD 0.9 Å from the overall lowest energy model.

The
combined docking model of Sk45 tertiary complex with integrin cytoplasmic
tails is presented in Figure  and discussed
below. The data used to generate the model are summarized in .

(A) Model of tertiary integrin/skelemin
complex: Sk45 (tan) is shown bound to cytoplasmic tails of αIIb (green) and β3 (purple) in ribbon presentation.
Key residues are labeled. The inset shows a slightly rotated display
of the hydrogen bonding network for a better view. (B) Zoomed view
of the binding interface with Sk5 domain. The surface of Sk5 is colored
based on its electrostatic potential. (C) The tertiary complex is
arbitrarily placed with respect to the lipid bilayer represented by
POPC and POPE mixture shown in gray.
Each side is shown to better visualize the binding pockets and potential
orientation with the lipid bilayer. The inset depicts potentially
positively charged residues of Sk5 domain (colored in blue) that may
interact with the lipid bilayer.

To prove the relevance of the generated model interface in
vivo, and to further assess the role of the identified binding site
for the integrin αIIbβ3, we synthesized
the peptide THIVWYKDEREISVDEKHD, and tested the
effect of this peptide on the adhesion of CHO cells expressing αIIbβ3 to immobilized fibrinogen. This peptide
represents the two full-length β-strands of the domain 5 β-sandwich
of skelemin that come into contact with the membrane-proximal region
of β3 integrin, according to our model. This peptide
was considered to be stable enough to maintain a hairpin sort of structure
through the internal hydrogen bonds in the absence of the rest β-strands.
Increasing the concentration of the peptide progressively blocked
cell adhesion in dose-dependent manner, where the IC50 was
determined to be 33 μM as shown in Figure D. The inhibition was specific as the control peptide, in which VDE
residues were mutated to AAA, did not appear to have any effect on
cell adhesion.

Discussion
As a family of major
cell adhesion receptors, integrins uniquely combine bidirectional
signaling capabilities with the structural functions of linking extracellular
matrix proteins to the cytoskeleton. With a myriad of potential intracellular
targets, all these functions could be accomplished only through spatially
and temporally controlled interactions. We have investigated how major
platelet integrin, αIIbβ3, binds
to skelemin, a cytoskeletal protein found in nonmuscle cell focal
complexes during the earlier phases of cell spreading.

We solved
the NMR structure of the skelemin tandem domains with the help of
RDC data from the four alignment media for orienting the Sk45 two
domains in a solution with the “rigid body” approach.
Figure A depicts the superposition of the
representative ensemble of Sk45 NMR structures with the X-ray structure
of human myomesin-1 for comparison (PDB ID 3RBS, shown in violet with thicker bonds). We have back-calculated the RDCs for the crystal
structure of the myomesin-1 domains 10 and 11 and found no correlation
with RDCs set for the Pf1 medium (with 0.69 correlation coefficient
of this fit) as well as a rather poor correlation (correlation coefficient
of 0.93 in comparison to 1.00 of NMR ensemble) for the C12E5/hexanol
alignment medium (Figure D), suggesting a
notable deviation from the ensemble in the solution. Not surprisingly,
the major differences were found within the linker connecting domains
4 and 5 (shown zoomed in the inset of Figure A with Sk4 domain used for superimposition). While the X-ray structure
suggests the presence of well-defined straight helix through-out this
region, this is not the case in this solution. We observed that only
the N-terminal half of the linker, connected to domain 4, forms a
regular α-helix. The second C-terminal half of the linker was
quite loose, with a number of NMR resonances broadened out due to
conformational heterogeneity and no evidence for regular α-helical
characteristic (i, i+3) connections in NOESY spectra. There is also
a noticeable difference in the angle between the helix formed and
the β-strand to which it is attached. Thus, we conclude that
in solution the linker connecting two domains is much more flexible
and dynamic so that it could be deduced from the crystal structure.
As the linkers between individual Ig domains may serve as springs,
conferring the elasticity to the skelemin/target proteins assemblies,
or as sensors of mechanical forces applied across the membrane, this
particular finding is important for defining mechanical properties
in integrin signaling. The N-terminal half of the linker is stabilized
by the interactions with domain 4 as we observed in HSQC spectra.
This coincides with finding that Ig domain/helix interface area is
structurally conserved throughout other Ig tandem domains of myomesin-1. Limited flexibility of inter-Ig domains arrangements,
suggested from multiple crystal structures, is not exactly limited
in solution with the loose C-terminal half of the linker and noticeable
difference in the angle between the linker and domain 4 (see the inset
in Figure A).

The interaction of skelemin
with integrin αIIb and β3 cytoplasmic
tails was found to be very weak. In our ITC studies, the measured Kd values were all above 10 μM (Table ). Interestingly, this interaction was driven mainly
by entropy since the enthalpy contribution was measured to be very
small. The present data confirmed our previous findings, suggesting that (i) the skelemin/integrin interactions
are not very stable, which is an important feature allowing dynamic
regulation of cell spreading process, and (ii) multiple interactions
might be required to mediate physiologically significant responses
favoring the involvement of integrin clustering.

In addition,
our HSQC titration experiments indicated that α and β
binding interfaces on skelemin surface do not overlap, but are located
on the opposite sides of the domain 5, rendering the possibility of
competitive binding very unlikely. Because of the weakness of skelemin/integrin
interactions described above, it was not possible to conjure a high
resolution structure of the tertiary complex. Instead, we have docked
Sk45 with integrin αIIb and β3 cytoplasmic
tails utilizing HADDOCK. The docking was directed by the restraints
acquired through chemical shifts mapping, trNOE NMR experiments, and
published mutagenesis data., Figure  demonstrates the model of integrin/skelemin tertiary complex
and its potential placement with respect to the lipid bilayer.

The mode of integrin interaction with skelemin is quite different
between the two subunits, as can be deduced from the binding interface
between IgC-2 like domains 4–5 and αIIbβ3 cytoplasmic tails. For αIIb subunit, a number
of van der Waals interactions bring it into skelemin IgC5’s
predominantly hydrophobic binding pocket, with the major interactions
arising from αIIb F992 and F993 side chains found in close proximity to I1392 and the
side chain of αIIb W988 making hydrophobic
contacts with F1388, K1389, and, possibly, D1387 of IgC5. Additionally, a hydrogen bond is formed between
K994 amine of αIIb and the backbone oxygen
of A1343.

In contrast, binary β3/skelemin interface is mostly based upon a network of hydrogen bonds
between β3 N-terminus and skelemin IgC5, including
the linker. N-terminal K716 of β3 forms
hydrogen bonds with the side chain of E1384, while K725 hydrogen bonds with the backbone oxygen of D1415. There also are hydrophobic interactions between β3 H722 as well as the side chain carbons of Sk45 K1413 and E1368. From the skelemin side, IgC5 K1418 forms an extensive hydrogen bonding network, which includes
β3 residues D723, through both the side
chain and backbone oxygen, and E726, through the side chain
only. Our in-cell adhesion assay has further confirmed the proposed
arrangement (Figure D). Among these residues,
K716, H722, and K725 have been previously
identified as critical for interaction with the skelemin IgC-2 like
domains 3–7 using synthetic peptides corresponding to the membrane-proximal
part of the β3 cytoplasmic tail. In addition, αIIb F992 was shown to interact with skelemin. The electrostatic surface potential of the zoomed
IgC5 region presented in Figure B helps to
visualize a mostly hydrophobic cleft on the left interacting with
αIIb subunit and predominantly negatively charged
binding site for β3 subunit on the right. Two hydrogen
bonds are found within skelemin linker helix: the side chain nitrogen
of K1321 is connected to β3 N744 while E1328 oxygen interacts with the side chain amine
of R736. Because we have not observed the chemical shift
perturbations for domain 4 in our titration experiments, no restraints
linking β3 C-terminus to IgC4 were introduced during
the HADDOCK docking. Not surprisingly, the model demonstrates no major
interactions between IgC4 and β3, with only a couple
of hydrophobic contacts found between side chains of IgC4 residues
E1293 and N1294 and β3 A750.

Previously, we structurally characterized αIIbβ3 cytoplasmic heterodimer, which plays
an important role in maintaining integrin in its latent state. Superimposition of our tertiary model with αIIbβ3 heterodimer reveals steric clashes,
making it extremely difficult, if not impossible, for both the subunits
to interact with skelemin in the presence of intersubunit clasp. Since
some of the αIIb and β3 residues
critical for skelemin binding (αIIbF922 and β3H722) are also involved in the
formation of the αIIbβ3 clasp, it appears that unclasping of the tails is prerequisite
for skelemin binding. Although we have previously demonstrated that
αIIbβ3 does not interact with skelemin
in resting platelets, it is recruited to the receptor during platelet
adhesion and upon activation with agonists. Considering the fact that
cytoplasmic tails of αIIbβ3 have
a higher mutual affinity (of 5.7 μM as measured by ITC, ) than any single subunit to skelemin
(Table ), this observation supports the notion
that skelemin is not an integrin activator, but rather serves as a
modulator of integrin attachment to Src or cytoskeleton.

In
Figure C, we have positioned the tertiary
complex with respect to the lipid bilayer. As presented, skelemin
Ig domains 4 and 5 may be placed parallel to the membrane surface.
With this arrangement, αIIb subunit comes out of
the membrane almost perpendicularly with its W988 side
chain making contacts with lipid head-groups at the membrane-cytoplasm
interface. Integrin β3 subunit, on other hand, is
arranged at a sharp acute angle with its K716 side chain
making contacts with negatively charged patch on the surface of IgC5
which sticks out as being repelled by negatively charged inner leaflet
of the lipid bilayer. In the inset of Figure C, we have also marked IgC5 positively charged residues, which potentially
may interact with negatively charged lipids. The rest of IgC5 negative
patch is arranged to interact with either the sixth IgC-2 like domain
of skelemin or with any other potential target having positively charged
solvent exposed surface.

To conclude, we have determined a three-dimensional
structure of tandem IgC2-like domains 4 and 5 of skelemin, connected
through a stretchable helix-containing linker, by NMR. This linker
region was found to be restrained enough to define the mutual orientation
of the two domains tumbling as a single unit in solution, although
it is less more dynamic than suggested by earlier X-ray studies of
the human homologue myomesin-1. We have shown that interaction between
skelemin and integrin cytoplasmic domain is weak and predominantly
entropy driven. This is consistent with the findings that skelemin
is unable to activate the receptors. We have built a tertiary model
of αIIbβ3 integrin cytoplasmic tails
complexed with the tandem domains of skelemin and validated this model
with cellular adhesion assays. While some of the interactions between
K716 side chain of β3 tail and skelemin
may occur in the presence of αIIb subunit still bound
to β3, disruption of membrane-proximal α/β
clasp and release of αIIb F992 and β3 H722/D723/E726 side chains
is necessary for αIIb to bind to skelemin and for
β3 to stabilize its interface with skelemin. Thus,
our model favors skelemin role as a stabilizer for the activated integrins
and integrin clusters by connecting α and β subunits from
adjacent receptors.

Supporting Information Available
Table S1 with the summary of residues from both, skelemin and integrin
sites, used for docking, and two figures: Figure S1, presenting the
examples of ITC thermograms and respective binding curves, and Figure
S2, showing the graph of chemical shift perturbations and the affected
surface area of Sk45 upon titration with N-terminal β3 peptide.
This material is available free of charge via the Internet at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bi500680s_si_001.pdf

Author Present Address
⊥ (L.D.)
Laboratory of Chemical Physics, National Institute of Diabetes and
Digestive and Kidney Diseases, NIH, Bethesda, MD 20892–0520

The authors declare
no competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
We would like to
thank Drs. Sergiy Tyukhtenko from North Eastern University, Mark Maciejewski
from University of Connecticut Health Center, and G.T.V. Swapna from
Rutgers University for their help with data acquisition at high field
NMR spectrometers. The WeNMR project (European FP7 e-Infrastructure
grant, Contract No. 261572, www.wenmr.eu), supported by
the European Grid Initiative (EGI) through the national GRID Initiatives
of Belgium, France, Italy, Germany, The Netherlands, Poland, Portugal,
Spain, UK, South Africa, Malaysia, Taiwan, the Latin America GRID
infrastructure via the Gisela project and the US Open Science Grid
(OSG) are acknowledged for the use of web portals, computing, and
storage facilities.

Abbreviations
C12E5pentaethylene
glycol monododecyl ether

DTTdithiothreitol

ECMextracellular matrix

FAfocal adhesions

FNfibronectin

FXfocal complex

IgC2immunoglobulin C2-like domain

ITCisothermal titration calorimetry

m-PROXYL3-maleimido-PROXYL

NMRnuclear magnetic resonance
spectroscopy

NOEnuclear Overhauser effect

PMSFphenylmethanesufonyl fluoride

PREparamagnetic relaxation enhancement

RDCresidual dipolar coupling

SOSsodium octyl sulfate

TrisTris(hydroxymethyl)aminomenthane

trNOEtransferred nuclear
Overhauser effect

