The biosphere
is driven by membrane
proteins that participate in protonic circuits in which redox or photoredox
reactions drive the generation of the proton gradient used to sustain
the cell through a variety of direct and indirect pumps and nanomachines.− As structures have become available, and as molecular engineering
approaches have facilitated direct tests of the structural underpinnings,
our understanding of mechanism has expanded from the “black-box”
view provided by simple physicochemical approaches to the molecular
level. Advances in spectroscopy have supplemented this broad front
to provide atomistic detail. These methods can be amplified by specific
isotopic labeling. However, the enzymes of interest are often studied
in a context where such labeling is not available. Specific labeling
requires the use of auxotrophic strains and in the past has entailed
expression of the protein of interest in a prokaryotic background
in which auxotrophic strains have been developed, most commonly in Escherichia coli (cf. refs () and ()) The photosynthetic bacterium Rhodobacter sphaeroides has become a test vehicle for mechanistic studies of a number of
respiratory and photosynthetic membrane proteins. Under different
growth conditions, it expresses a remarkable metabolic versatility,
for example, a “mitochondrial” respiratory chain under
aerobic conditions and a photosynthetic chain under anaerobic illumination.
Because for many of the enzymes of interest the functional complex
cannot be expressed in E. coli, it has not been possible
to take advantage of specific isotopic labeling except by in vitro substitution. Auxotrophic strains have been developed
in Rb. sphaeroides by MacKenzie and colleagues, but in the wild-type 2.4.1 background, where
they were generated by transposon mutagenesis, which is a random technique.
Most studies of particular enzymes are performed in a modified genetic
background specifically developed to facilitate mutagenesis, protein
purification, deletion of extraneous genes for functions that interfere
with measurement, etc., and in these cases, it is of interest to generate
auxotrophic strains by deletion of a particular gene. Here we demonstrate
a general method for achieving this end through construction of a
methionine auxotroph in Rb. sphaeroides.

Central
to all the major electron transfer chains are enzymes of
the cytochrome (cyt) bc1 complex family,− which under many physiological conditions control the flux. In the
mitochondria that power eukaryotic cells, the cyt bc1 complex is known as complex III of the respiratory chain,
but the simpler enzymes of bacteria perform the same enzymatic function
and are more accessible to the experimental spectroscopic and kinetic
approaches exploited in previous work.

The Q cycle mechanism
of the cyt bc1 complex,− results in oxidation of two quinol
(QH2) molecules with release of four protons to the positive
side of the membrane (P phase, the intermembrane space in mitochondria,
the periplasm of bacteria), reduction of one quinone (Q) with uptake
of two protons from the negative side (N phase, the matrix in mitochondria,
the cytoplasm in bacteria), and the transfer of two electrons between
these phases, in an overall reaction for turnover given by

In the forward chemistry of the Q cycle, electrons from the
intermediate
semiquinone generated at the Qo site (SQo) upon
oxidation of QH2 are delivered to the Qi site
by the low-potential chain (hemes bL and bH) to reduce Q to QH2 in a two-electron
gate mechanism. With the quinone pool
initially oxidized, the electron from the first turnover of the Qo site (using QH2 generated in the photochemistry)
crosses the membrane to reduce Q at the Qi site to SQ,
while that from the second turnover reduces SQ to QH2.
The SQ intermediate at the Qi site (SQi) is
relatively stable, and can be generated by forward
chemistry, by reversal of the second step upon addition of a reductant
(ascorbate or QH2) to the complex with heme bH oxidized, or by redox titration. The physical chemistry
of the reaction can be studied via the kinetics of electron transfer
using spectrophotometry of the heme centers, and the thermodynamics
by taking advantage of the paramagnetic properties of the SQ. The
redox potentials of the SQ couples can be gleaned from the bell-shaped
titration curve, which when studied as a function of pH also maps
out pK values important for the mechanism., Current controversies discuss how these mechanistic considerations
relate to structures and atomistic detail. Several structures show
a quinone species bound at the Qi site; that from Protein
Data Bank (PDB) entry 2QJY() shows the Rb.
sphaeroides structure, which is most pertinent to this study
(Figure ). Specific mutagenesis coupled with
kinetic, spectroscopic, and thermodynamic measurements to explore
functional consequences had indicated that the three potential H-bonding
partners shown in Figure  were all important.,− More recently, high-resolution EPR approaches have
been used to explore the interaction between the SQi paramagnet
and nuclear spins in the immediate environment.− Our own results were quite coherent with the mutagenesis
studies and the structure shown; they revealed spin interaction with
a N atom, with characteristics compatible with the direct H-bond to
Nε of His-217 of the cyt b subunit,
additional 1H or 2H interactions indicating
a second H-bond, likely to either a water or Asp-252, and no other
strong spin interaction with protein or solvent.− However, structural
interpretations from both crystallographic− and spectroscopic approaches have been
controversial, with several other suggestions for H-bonding partnerships.

Qi site topology. Liganding
of ubiquinone at the Qi site of the Rb. sphaeroides
bc1 complex, showing potential hydrogen bonding
partners. Also shown
is the network of hydrogen bonds connecting Asn-221 and other residues
to the heme bH propionates and His-111,
one of the heme Fe ligands. The stereopair is for crossed-eye viewing:
structural data from PDB entry 2QJY, chain D. Residues discussed herein are
shown as wireframe models, labeled by residue number; UQ and heme bH are shown as ball-and-stick models, and crystallographic
waters are represented by spheres showing their O atoms (atom coloring
is CPK). Bonds of interest are shown as magenta lines, labeled by
lowercase italic letters, with details in Table . The hydrogen bond network involving crystallographically defined
waters (bonds d–m) is discussed
in the text.

Parameters
for Bonds Shown in Figure 
label	bond distance
(Å)	atom 1	atom 2	
a	2.26	H217 NE2	UQ2 O4	
 	 	 	 	
b	4.78	D252 OD2	UQ2 O1	
 	 	 	 	
c	4.56	N221 ND2	UQ2 O3	
 	 	 	 	
d	2.73	N221 OD1	H2O 1163	
e	2.51	H2O 1163	heme O2A	
f	2.59	H2O 1161	heme O1A	
g	3.35	R114 NH1	H2O 1161	
h	2.85	H111 ND	H2O 1161	
i	3.13	R114 NH2	heme O2A	
k	3.5	R114 NH2	H2O 1162	
l	2.47	heme O1D	H2O 1162	
m	3.64	H2O 1162	H2O 1163	
n	2.64	heme O2D	H2O 1115	
o	2.67	R125 NE	heme O2D	
Bond a is the primary bond stabilizing
Q.

Bond b is likely an
indirect H-bond
through water, as seen in some structures.

Bond c is included to show distance,
but no evidence for bond.

The set of H-bonds d through o connects the heme ligand, 
His-111, and the heme propionates,
to crystallographically defined waters and the protein, to form a
network. It seems likely that this network is more extensive and links
to proton conduction pathways to the aqueous phase through which protons
equilibrate with the heme, and possibly with changes in redox state
of the quinone, during the Qi-site reaction.

Detailed information about the influence
of the protein environment
on the electronic structure and distribution of the unpaired spin
density can be obtained from analysis of 13C couplings
of carbon nuclei in the quinone ring and substituents., However, as noted above, these data are currently not available
for the SQi in the Qi site, because approaches
for selective isotopic labeling of proteins and cofactors have not
been developed in Rb. sphaeroides. In this work,
we demonstrate isotopic labeling of the ring substituents of ubiquinone,
achieved through construction of a methionine auxotroph in Rb. sphaeroides strain BC17. We extend our studies by 13C labeling of the methyl and methoxy substituents of the
ubiquinone ring using 13C-labeled l-methionine,
which in the synthetic pathway provides the methyl groups. 13C hyperfine couplings for the methyl and two methoxy groups of SQi generated in situ in the native complex
in its membrane environment were determined by 2D ESEEM (HYSCORE).
Analysis of the data with the aid of DFT calculations has provided
a first look at the distribution of the unpaired spin density over
the ring and conformations of methoxy groups in SQi.

Experimental
Procedures
Construction of the Methionine Authotroph of Rb. sphaeroides
A methionine (Met) auxotroph of Rb. sphaeroides was generated by replacing the metA gene in the
chromosome with a cat gene that provides chloramphenicol
resistance. For the generation of the auxotroph, the chloramphenicol
resistance cassette flanked by ∼500 bp regions homologous to
the upstream and downstream regions of metA was constructed
by three-step polymerase chain reactions (PCRs). The double-stranded
linear PCR product was then inserted into suicide vector pLO1 containing
the sacB gene that kills Gram-negative cells when
expressed in the presence of sucrose., The recombinant
pLO1 derivative was transformed into E. coli S-17
and then mobilized into Rb. sphaeroides BC17, a bc1-deficient strain, by biparental conjugation. The Rb. sphaeroides conjugants were selected by their newly
acquired chloramphenicol resistance, and the cells containing the
pLO1 derivatives among the conjugants were deselected by culture in
the presence of sucrose. The deletion of metA in
the finally selected strains (metA::cat) was verified by the Met auxotrophic phenotype. Growth of this strain
in the presence of 13C methylmethionine results in 13C labeling of the methoxy and methyl carbons of the substituents
at positions 2, 3, and 5 on the ring of ubiquinone-10 (UQ-10) (Scheme ). Strain BC17 was derived from strain Ga, in which
the carotenoid synthetic chain of the parental 2.4.1 wild type was
truncated by random mutagenesis. In the BC17 strain, the fbc operon encoding the bc1 complex was
deleted from the chromosome to generate a background for experiments
in which expression of the catalytic subunits of the bc1 complex from the plasmid-borne operon in strains with
specific mutations has been exploited in the exploration of details
of the mechanism. This library of mutant strains from previous work
is now available for further study using isotopic labeling.

Preparation of Chromatophores
Chromatophores were prepared
according to established methods. Chromatophores
are sealed vesicles formed upon mechanical disruption of cells; inner
membrane invaginations break off and reseal, and they contain the
periplasmic medium (including cyt c2)
and the entire membrane-bound apparatus for photosynthetic phosphorylation.
The bc1 complex is therefore in its native
state and reacts with its native partners. The composition of the
chromatophore membrane depends on growth conditions, strain, etc.,
and can vary quite substantially. In the Ga parental strain, when
cells are grown under standard laboratory conditions and harvested
in late log phase, the ratio of bacterial reaction center to bc1 complex is approximately 2:1; however, the
components are likely distributed at random, and the ratio in individual
vesicles is stochastic within normal limits. However, the mean ratio
can vary over a wide range.

Characterization
of the Qi Site Semiquinone
Redox titrations were
performed in a potentiometric cell maintained
under anaerobic conditions using argon gas. Chromatophores were suspended
in 100 mM KCl and 50 mM MOPS (pH 7.0) or 100 mM KCl and 50 mM CHES
(pH 9.2) to a reaction center concentration of ∼0.7 mM, and
the redox potential was adjusted by adding small aliquots of potassium
ferricyanide or sodium dithionite. The following redox mediators were
present: 4 μM each of 2-OH-1,4-naphthoquinone and pyocyanin;
8 μM each of 3,6-diaminodurene, phenazine ethosulfate, and phenazine
methosulfate; and 40 μM each of p-benzoquinone,
1,2-naphthoquinone, 1,4-naphthoquinone, and duroquinone. The samples
were taken in the dark at the desired Eh values using an airtight syringe, placed in argon-flushed EPR tubes,
frozen rapidly, and stored in liquid nitrogen until the samples were
measured. At each point shown in the titration, data were obtained
in the absence and presence of antimycin, and the value shown represents
the difference, giving the antimycin-sensitive component (see Figure
S1 of the  and its
legend), contributing ∼87% of the overall signal at the peak
of the curve. However, because the antimycin-insensitive component
showed essentially the same amplitude over the range of the titration,
the fractional contributions varied.

EPR and ESEEM Measurements
The CW EPR measurements
were performed on an X-band Varian EPR-E122 spectrometer, with the
sample at 100 K. The pulsed EPR experiments were conducted using an
X-band Bruker ELEXSYS E580 spectrometer equipped with an Oxford CF
935 cryostat. All pulsed EPR measurements were taken at 80 K. The
2D ESEEM, four-pulse experiment (π/2−τ–π/2–t1–π–t2–π/2−τ–echo, also called
HYSCORE), with a magnetic field of 343.0 mT, a time between the first
and second pulses (τ) of 136 ns, and a microwave frequency of
9.619 GHz, was employed with appropriate
phase cycling schemes to eliminate unwanted features from the experimental
echo envelopes. The intensity of the echo after the fourth pulse was
measured with t2 and t1 varied and a constant τ. The length of a π/2
pulse was 16 ns and that of a π pulse 32 ns. HYSCORE data were
collected in the form of 2D time domain patterns containing 256 ×
256 points with steps of 20 or 32 ns. Spectral processing of ESEEM
patterns, including subtraction of the relaxation decay (fitting by
polynomials of three to six degrees), apodization (Hamming window),
zero filling, and fast Fourier transformation (FT), were performed
using Bruker WIN-EPR version 2.22 revision 10. Processed data were
then imported into Matlab R2010a via the EasySpin package either to be simulated by EasySpin version 4.5.5
or to be analyzed by a homemade script for fitting data in (ν1)2 versus (ν2)2 coordinates.
After the HYSCORE had been plotted as (ν1)2 versus (ν2)2, ridges were fit via a
linear regression with each point on the ridge weighted according
to its HYSCORE intensity (see below). The peculiarities of powder 13C HYSCORE spectra and all details of the analysis of the 13C cross-peaks from methyl and methoxy substituents are described
in the recent study of the 13C-labeled SQs in the QA and QB sites of the bacterial reaction center
(see also the ).

Computational Methods
All density
functional calculations
were performed using Gaussian 09. Geometries
were partially optimized at the B3LYP/6-31G(d) level, and hyperfine
couplings were calculated at the B3LYP/EPR-II level.

Results
Physicochemical
Properties of the Qi Site Semiquinone
The antimycin-sensitive
semiquinone generated in this work was
similar to those reported earlier in chromatophores from Rb.
sphaeroides() or in submitochondrial
particles (Figure ). The two values of pH at which measurements were taken preclude
detailed discussion of Em–pH relationships,
but our results are consistent with the previous work. The 13C labeling of the methyl groups does not influence the SQ line width,
indicating that it is still dominated by the g-tensor
anisotropy, and likely in the anionic form. The 1H–14N ESEEM spectra were identical with the spectra of unlabeled
UQ-10 SQs measured in the isolated bc1 complex,, thus confirming similar H-bond
patterns, independent of isolation procedures, membrane location,
or 13C labeling. This similarity also shows that there
is no significant contribution to the spectra from SQ species at catalytic
sites outside the bc1 complex.

Potentiometric
titration curves of the SQi EPR signals
at pH 7.0 and 9.2. The spectra were obtained in the range of redox
potentials between −80 and 265 mV vs the standard hydrogen
electrode (SHE). Redox potentiometry was performed under argon with
redox mediators, and the semiquinone radical was titrated with sodium
dithionite. EPR spectra were obtained using a Varian E-112 X-band
spectrometer with a magnetic field center of 325.0 mT and a field
sweep width of 20.0 mT. The semiquinone bound at the Qi site was assayed from the antimycin-sensitive component by measuring
the peak to trough amplitude of the g = 2.005 signal
obtained at 100 K with a microwave power of 0.2 mW, with occupancy
shown in arbitrary units.

Spectroscopic Properties
The 13C hyperfine
couplings in SQi were probed by HYSCORE experiments. Figure  (left) shows representative HYSCORE spectra for
SQi in the frequency interval from 0 to 7 MHz for both
axes. The spectrum of SQi contains the lines from 14N and 13C nuclei. 14N cross-peaks with
coordinates (3.1, 1.7) MHz produced by Nε of H217
were previously analyzed in detail., Here we focus
on the analysis of the 13C lines. The 13C cross-features
are located along the antidiagonal, symmetrically relative to the
diagonal point (νC, νC) where νC is ∼3.7 MHz, in the applied magnetic field. Those
include peak 1C with extended
shoulders around the diagonal point (νC, νC) and two pairs of cross-peaks 2C and 3C. Peak 1C has resolved shoulders with a splitting
of ∼1 MHz (see also Figure S3 of the ). Cross-peaks 2C and 3C are partially
overlapped but possess well-separated maxima at (5.0, 2.4) MHz (2C) and (5.9, 1.6) MHz (3C), which correspond to first-order estimated
hyperfine couplings of 2.6 and 4.3 MHz, respectively.

Hyperfine
tensors of the 13C nuclei contributing to the spectrum
of SQi can be obtained from the analysis of the contour
line shape of the cross-peaks. An analytical estimate of the 13C hyperfine tensors, i.e., a (isotropic
coupling constant) and T (anisotropic coupling constant),
was performed by plotting the HYSCORE spectrum in (ν1)2 versus (ν2)2 coordinates (Figure , right). As
a result, cross-peaks that are approximately axial appear as linear
segments that can be fit to a linear regression. Intersection points
of the linear fit with the line |ν1 + ν2| = 2νC define the principal values of the
hyperfine tensor. There are two possible assignments to (να⊥, νβ⊥) or (να∥, νβ∥) for each
crossing point and, consequently, two solutions, one for each assignment.
Linear regression analysis of cross-peaks 2C and 3C and calculation
of the tensors are discussed in the  (Table S1 and Figure S2).

Contour (left, top) and
stacked (left, bottom) HYSCORE spectra
of SQi in the bc1 complex [magnetic
field of 343.0 mT, time between first and second pulses (τ)
of 136 ns, and microwave frequency of 9.619 GHz]. Contour presentation
of the HYSCORE spectra of SQi in (ν1)2 vs (ν2)2 coordinates (right).
The curved line is defined by |ν1 + ν2| = 2νC. The inset shows the linear regression fit
for selected cross-peak 2C. A
graph showing the insert for the fitted ridge 3C is included in the .

To choose between the two sets
of axial tensors from the analysis
of the 13C HYSCORE plotted as (ν1)2 versus (ν2)2, the 13C ridges for SQi were simulated with EasySpin. Simulations were done starting from the squared-frequency
analysis and then further optimized by adjusting the values and introducing
rhombicity factor δ into the anisotropic hyperfine tensor (−T(1 + δ), −T(1 – δ),
2T). Simulated spectra were found to be essentially
independent of the relative Euler angles between the 13C hyperfine tensors, possibly because of the low level of hyperfine
anisotropy. Thus, calculations were performed without adjusting the
Euler angles. Spectra for two possible tensors for cross-features 2C and 3C and their comparison with the experiments are provided in
the  (Table S2 and
Figure S3).

Special comment is needed with regard to the analysis
of feature 1C. It did not fit
well with a single
set of a and T. This suggested that 1C results from a distribution of
methoxy orientations, and therefore, a distribution of a and T may be necessary. However, even after an
approximate distribution of hyperfine tensors had been implemented,
the simulations were unable to match the spectrum, giving a simple
featureless peak centered on the diagonal. As seen in the spectrum,
peak 1C instead clearly has symmetrical
shoulder features with a splitting of ∼1.0 MHz. A reasonable
fit for the 1C line shape was
achieved using a two-state model. T is not expected
to vary significantly from 0.5 MHz following the data listed in Table . Thus, it was fixed to that value, and spectra
were simulated with two unique isotropic coupling constants a corresponding to two different methoxy orientations contributing
to 1C. Optimization of the rhombicity
for 1C (which is fixed along with T for both methoxy orientations in the simulations), the
actual values of the two a’s, and the relative
populations of the two states has given a surprisingly agreeable simulation
when ∼60% is due to a methoxy conformation giving a = 0.2 MHz and 40% for a = 1.1 MHz (Figure S3 of
the ). The final
results of the simulations are summarized in Table  for comparison with the similar 13C tensors for
SQA and SQB in bacterial reaction centers.

13C Hyperfine
Tensors Determined
from the HYSCORE Spectral Simulations for SQi in Comparison
with SQA and SQB
 	13C peak	aiso (MHz)	T (MHz)	
Qi	1C	0.2
(60%) and 1.1 (40%)	0.5 (δ = 0.4)	
 	2C	2.5	0.5 (δ = 0.5)	
 	3C	–4.4	0.6 (δ = 0.3)	
 	 	 	 	
QA	1C	0	0.4	
 	2C	1.3	0.5	
 	3C	–3.7	0.4	
 	 	 	 	
QB	1C	1.5	0.4 (δ = 0.8)	
 	2C	–3.8	0.4	
 	3C	4.6	0.5 (δ = 0.3)	
From ref ().

δ was reported incorrectly
in ref () and has
been corrected here.

Discussion
Structural
Considerations
High-resolution structures
of mitochondrial (bovine, chicken, and yeast at ≥2.1 Å)
and bacterial complexes (at ≥2.6 Å) show different configurations
of the quinone species bound at the Qi site,,,,,− but all have the same
two residues close enough to the quinone to allow formation of either
direct or H2O-mediated H-bonds, H217 and D252 (in Rb. sphaeroides numbering). In a model structure, N221 was positioned as a potential ligand to
one of the methoxy O atoms, but the distance seen in crystallographic
structures is not compatible with such a role (Figure ). In the bovine mitochondrial complex (italic numbering),
the corresponding residues are H201 and D228, with N221 replaced by S205. However, we note that
in relation to this discussion, the data from crystallographic structures
relate to an unknown redox state of the Qi site occupant.
Also, the B factors of the occupant, even for the
highest-resolution structures, show more disorder than the best defined
regions, and there is considerable disagreement between different
structures with respect to the configuration. Because of these ambiguities,
interpretation with respect to semiquinone binding and selection of
models for quantum calculation cannot be unequivocal. However, mutagenesis
studies provided strong evidence of a functional role for each of
these residues.,−

DFT Computations
of 13C Tensors
For the
selectively 13C-labeled UQ-10 used here, three 13C hyperfine couplings are expected corresponding to the two methoxy
groups and the 5-CH3 group carbon nuclei. The HYSCORE spectra
of Figure  clearly illustrate these three 13C features for SQi. Analysis of the spectra shows
that for SQi one of these carbons has a small hyperfine
coupling of ∼0–1 MHz, whereas values with magnitudes
of 2.5 and 4.4 MHz can be estimated for the other two. For the assignment
of these measured tensors to the 13C nuclei of the methyl
or methoxy groups, it is necessary to compare with previous experimental
results in vitro and in vivo or
with values calculated using DFT approaches.

The DFT computational
approach extensively tested on the QA and QB sites in the bacterial reaction center from Rb. sphaeroides(−) has also been applied to the Qi site. We have chosen
to use the highest-resolution bovine mitochondrial structure available
(PDB entry 1PP9 at ≥2.1 Å resolution) as
the basis for our model, although the bacterial structure (PDB entry 2QJY at ≥2.6 Å
resolution) might seem to be the obvious
choice. The rationale for this choice is as follows. (i) The quantum
chemical models contain only D228 and H201 as contributions from the protein, and these same side chains (D252 and H217) contribute in the Rb. sphaeroides structures. (ii) Neither of the other potential
ligands, S205 in mitochondria or N221 in Rb. sphaeroides, is within H-bonding distance
of the quinone species in the structures. Other groups undoubtedly
contribute to the site, but we have no justification for preferring
the lower-resolution structure unless experimental data are available
to show specific parameters that would affect the EPR data. We have
analyzed two cases for the Qi site of the bovine bc1 complex structure (PDB entry 1PP9), with H201 either deprotonated (a) or protonated (b) at Nδ (Figure S4 of the ). Both models indicate that the COOH group of D228 and the NεH group of H201 are
hydrogen bonded to the carbonyls of the semiquinone. Geometry optimization
of both models shows that when Nδ of H201 is protonated, the proton from NεH transfers to
quinone O4 and the SQ is a neutral free radical with its OH group
acting as a donor of a hydrogen bond to Nε of H201. For the deprotonated Nδ model, the
SQ is an anion radical with both its O1 and O4 atoms accepting hydrogen
bonds from D228 and H201, respectively.
Previous experimental data for H-bond protons and Nε− are more consistent with the anion radical and rule out the neutral
radical. The DFT-calculated 13C hyperfine couplings for
the anion radical model are listed in Table , where we compare these with the experimental determinations. The
DFT-calculated values strongly support the assignment of the largest-magnitude
4.4 MHz value to the 5-CH3 carbon, the 2.5 MHz value to
the 3-methoxy carbon, and the smaller-magnitude 0.2 or 1.0 MHz value
to the 2-methoxy carbon.

Calculated 13C, Isotropic
Constant (a), and Anisotropic Hyperfine Tensor Components
(Tnn) (in megahertz) for the Anion Radical
Model of SQi
position	 	a	
13C–CH3 (5)	0.8
(T11)	–4.8 (|4.4|)	
 	–0.4 (T22)	 	
 	–0.4 (T33)	 	
 	 	 	
13C–CH3O (3)	0.8 (T11)	2.0 (|2.5|)	
 	–0.2 (T22)	 	
 	–0.6 (T33)	 	
 	 	 	
13C–CH3O (2)	0.6 (T11)	0.5 (|0.2|, |1.0|)	
 	–0.1 (T22)	 	
 	–0.6 (T33)	 	
The magnitudes of the experimental
isotropic hyperfine couplings are given in parentheses.

Spin populations calculated previously
for the ubisemiquinones
in model systems (QA and QB quinone sites and the high-affinity QH site of
cytochrome bo3 ubiquinol oxidase and its
D75H mutant,) are shown in Table . The last row contains spin populations for the
anion radical in the Qi site. Our assignment of the largest
hyperfine coupling to the 5-CH3 group in SQi is also consistent with experimental and calculated isotropic hyperfine
couplings (Table ) for the ubisemiquinones
from Table .

Mülliken
Spin Populations in
Selected SQs
semiquinone	C2	C3	C5	
SQA	0.11	–0.01	0.05	
SQB	0.09	0.03	0.07	
SQM1,	0.07	0.07	0.09	
SQM2,	0.11	0.00	0.07	
SQH	–0.02	0.16	0.14	
SQH (D75H)	0.00	0.16	0.13	
SQi	0.06	0.05	0.11	
From ref ().

From ref ().

SQM1, 6-methyl-UQ with
four H2O molecules; SQM2, 6-methyl-UQ with one
H2O (see Figure S5 of the ).

The
spin populations in Table  demonstrate
the asymmetry of the spin density distribution in different SQs resulting
from different interactions with their protein environment. Spin densities
obtained for SQH arise from stronger hydrogen bonding with
O1. In contrast, the opposite asymmetry of spin density distribution
in the QA site suggests stronger hydrogen bonding at O4.
The asymmetry in spin density distribution observed for the SQi radical might indicate that a slightly stronger hydrogen
bond is formed at O1 with D252. A notable peculiarity of the unpaired
spin density distribution for SQi is the similarity of
values for the spin populations on C2 (0.06) and C3 (0.05). This is
in contrast with the QA and QB sites where the
C2 population is much larger than C3 or with the QH site
where the opposite relationship occurs.

As shown previously,
the 13C isotropic hyperfine coupling
of the methoxy group will be proportional to the π(p) spin population
of the corresponding ring carbon and the dihedral angle of the methoxy
CO bond with respect to the SQ ring plane. The unpaired spin density giving rise to the 13C isotropic
hyperfine coupling for the methoxy group carbon atom arises from a
combination of spin polarization and hyperconjugation. When the methoxy
group is held in the ring plane, hyperconjugation is expected to be
zero and small negative hyperfine couplings are expected for in-plane
or near to in-plane orientations, due to spin polarization by the
methoxy oxygen spin density. As the methoxy orientation is moved progressively
out of plane, a positive contribution from hyperconjugation with the
ring carbon π(p) spin density arises. The agreement with experiments observed in Table  for the geometry-optimized isolated SQi model
(starting from the crystal structure coordinates) suggests that the
methoxy groups in the Qi site are close to the minimal
energy conformation of an isolated SQ. The conformations for the minimal
energy model are 3-methoxy (CM2–O2–C2–C1) = −68°
and 2-methoxy (CM3–O3–C3–C4) = 56°. This
is in contrast to the QA and QB site semiquinones
in bacterial photosynthetic reaction centers, which deviate significantly
from the optimal angles for an isolated model.

Comparison of Experimental and Calculated 13C Methyl (5′)
Isotropic Couplings in SQs
semiquinone	aexp(13C) (MHz)	acalc(13C) (MHz)	
SQA	–3.6	–2.9	
SQB	–4.0	–3.5	
(UQ-10)−	|4.0|	–3.0	
SQH	–6.1	–5.3	
SQH (D75H)	–4.7	–4.4	
SQi	–4.4	–4.8	
From ref ().

From ref ().

From ref ().

From ref ().

Influence of the Protein Environment on Methoxy Conformations
HYSCORE spectra of the SQ in the QA, QB,
and Qi sites resolve all three cross-peaks from the three 13C site-specifically labeled nuclei in the SQ structure, thus
suggesting significant constraints on the methoxy group conformation
by the protein environment. The 2-methoxy groups in SQA and SQB were shown to give rise to quite distinct 13C isotropic hyperfine couplings, with the magnitude of SQB exceeding that of SQA (Table ). The larger value for SQB could be qualitatively
explained by a more out-of-plane orientation of the 2-methoxy group
compared with SQA. DFT calculations demonstrated a strong
dependence of the electron affinity of the quinone on the methoxy
dihedral angles, and the higher redox
potential of the QB ubiquinone was rationalized on this
basis. A similar comparative analysis for the 3-methoxy orientation
was however precluded by the negligible unpaired spin density on the
adjusted C3 atom in SQA (Table ). In contrast to SQA and SQB, direct computation
of the SQi optimized structure and distribution of the
unpaired spin density allows us to assign the observed 13C couplings to particular substituents and gives an estimated conformation
of 3-methoxy that possesses a larger isotropic coupling (and larger
deviation) than 2-methoxy. On the other hand, this approach leaves
open the interpretation of the complex line shape of peak 1C assigned to the 2-methoxy group and suggests
a behavior more complex than a single conformation with a small strain.
Analysis of the bovine mitochondrial complex (PDB entry 1PP9) shows a different
conformation of the methoxy group for the quinone in the Qi site that may correlate with the two-conformation model giving a
best fit of 1C peaks with the
simulated spectra. This structural difference, however, was not found
in lower-resolution bacterial structures.

In contrast to the
spectra in proteins, the HYSCORE spectrum for the 13C methyl,
methoxy-labeled anion radical of UQ-10 in alcohol consists of two
broad cross-peaks extending along the antidiagonal (Figure S6 of the ) and does not show significant
intensity around the diagonal point. This spectrum may indicate substantial
discrete line widths of three individual couplings contributing to
these cross-peaks. In addition, the similarity between the spin density
on C2 and C3 for the anion radical (model SQM1 in Table ) suggests that its spin density distribution is
described well by the model and indicates a significant average deviation
from the in-plane configuration for both methoxy groups in an alcohol
solution. The spin density at C2 and C3 in SQi is also
similar, but the spectra are quite different, suggesting that a dynamic
situation in solution is replaced by a more constrained configuration
in the protein environment.

For the QA and QB sites, it has been suggested
that modification of the methoxy orientation fine-tunes the redox
potentials to ensure the transfer of an electron from QA to QB. However, the operational ranges at both QA and QB sites (Em,7 values of −100 and 0 mV, respectively) are at redox potentials
much lower than that of the Q pool (Em.7 ∼ 90 mV), while both the Qi site (Em,7 ∼ 150 mV) and the Qo site (Em,7 ∼ 120 mV) function at a higher potential., This substantial difference must be considered in discussing any
such control. The higher redox potential for Qi would at
least qualitatively be in accord with having methoxy groups near the
minimal energy conformations for the SQ form. This stabilizes the
semiquinone, increasing both the electron affinity and the redox potential.
However, the high potential for the Q/QH2 couple at both
these Qi and Qo sites is achieved through preferential
binding of QH2. Although both sites operate in the high-potential
range, their mechanism and function are very different. The difference
in function comes in part from the wide difference in SQ stability
and in part from mechanistic differences. The higher stability of
SQi allows it to function as an intermediate, storing the
first electron in a two-electron gate mechanism. This stability might
reflect the minimal energy configuration but certainly also reflects
the two H-bonds shown by our earlier ESEEM work.− In the bifurcated
reaction at the Qo site, the
very unstable SQo allows a thermodynamic coupling between
two electron transfer pathways, so that the work derived from oxidation
of QH2 to SQ by the high-potential chain (ISP, heme c1, and cyt c2) generates
a strong reductant in the Q/SQ couple to drive reduction at the Qi site, and maintenance of the proton gradient by electrogenic
electron transfer across the membrane. Clearly, factors other than
methoxy orientation are in play in the mechanisms of both sites.

The apparent influence of the protein environment on the conformation
of the methoxy groups in each particular case suggests that the role
of the methoxy conformations in the Qi site of the bc1 complex could be better understood from experiments
with Qi site mutants. A strategy exploiting mutagenesis
in the context of the synergy between spectroscopy and specific isotopic
labeling made possible with auxotrophic strains, and used with great
success in studies of the SQH species of the bo3 oxidase of E. coli,(,) can now be applied to the bc1 complex, where the richness of structural information and
kinetic studies opens wider horizons.

Mechanism of Formation
of SQ at the Qi Site
In earlier models, formation
of the SQ was considered in the context
of the disproportionation equilibria, determined by KS = ([SQ]2)/([Q][QH2]). An anomalous
feature was the low occupancy (&lt;0.5/heme bH), accounted for either in terms of a dimeric model, in which only one monomer could be occupied
at a time, or by quenching of the EPR signal by ferriheme bH in a fraction of the centers,, or by invoking limitations arising from the dissociation state of
a protein group. A third class of mechanism
involved the “cyt b-150” phenomena., Redox titration of heme bH in the presence
of antimycin shows a component usually analyzed as a single species
with an Em,7 of ∼40 mV. However,
in the absence of antimycin, the titration is biphasic, showing the
same overall amplitude, but with a fraction (dependent on pH) titrating
at Em,7 ∼ 150 mV. Addition of antimycin
induced a loss of this component to give an antimycin-induced oxidation
(see ref () for discussion).
The pH dependence of the 150 mV component correlated well with the
pH dependence of SQ formation, suggesting participation of heme bH in the formation of SQ through reversal of
the normal forward chemistry. As structures became available, and
more detailed spectroscopic observation addressed the binding of the
SQ more directly, additional complicating features were identified.
In particular, as discussed in ref (), it seems probable that the pattern of H-bonding
with the protein must change with the redox state of the quinone species
involved, and with the dissociation state of H217 and D252. The line
width of the SQ signal indicates the anionic semiquinone over a wide
range of pH, so the pH dependence has to be attributed to dissociable
group(s) of the protein rather than of the SQ. These questions have not recently been revisited, and detailed
discussion in the present context would be out of place. However,
because the quantum chemical calculations suggest that the anionic
semiquinone is associated with a protonated H217, it seems likely
that this residue is the dissociable group needed to explain the pH
dependence of SQ stability and identified
in this role in ref (). The other direct ligand included in the quantum chemical calculations
is D252. It is likely that the pKa of
this group in some configurations (for example, a vacant site) would
be influenced by interaction with K251, not yet included in the model.
In previous reports of the effects of mutation at N221,, we had discounted any importance of H-bonding because the N221P
strain showed kinetic behavior and thermodynamic properties similar
to those of the wild type. Although we could not exclude a weak interaction
of N221 with the methoxy O on the basis of 1H, 2H, 14N, or 15N proton spin interactions,− the high activity of the N221P strain and the similarity of the
kinetic behavior to that of the wild type seemed to argue strongly
against any H-bonding interaction. More recent experiments have failed
to reproduce this result. Unfortunately, the original N221P strain
was lost, but analysis of cells recovered from frozen stocks of chromatophore
preparations used in previous experiments showed the wild-type sequence.
We therefore believe our earlier results represent a wild-type strain
obtained by either reversion or contamination. We have reconstructed
an authentic N221P strain, but all attempts to grow this strain under
anaerobic photosynthetic conditions, which require an active bc1 complex, have failed. The failure of the
authentic N221P strain to grow would then indicate an important H-bonding
role for the native asparagine side chain, supported by the low rates
seen in N221I mutants. This necessitates
a revision of our earlier conclusions, with respect to both a general
H-bonding role and a more specific side chain-dependent interaction.
In structures, N221 is too distant to form a direct H-bond through
the side chain to the methoxy O (Figure  and
Table ), but this would be pertinent to the
data presented here only if the X-ray beam had induced reduction of
the SQ. The side chain is involved in a network of H-bonded groups
that includes waters and the heme propionates, and MD simulations
(see ref ()) suggest
additional waters that might provide a proton channel to the N phase.
The strong inhibition of transfer of an electron from heme bH to the Qi site upon mutation at
N221 could then indicate that the equilibration of the heme propionates,
and possibly of H111 and the SQ, with the pH of the N phase is important
in facilitating this electron transfer step. This brings up the question
of how heme bH is involved in the formation
of the SQ. The “cyt b-150” model had
suggested that the SQ is formed via reversal of the forward reaction:These reactions account well for the “cyt b-150” phenomena, and the oxidation of heme b–H induced upon addition of
antimycin,, but a simple thermodynamic model
does not explain the SQ occupancy or the shape of the titration curve
(which in the model was pH-dependent but experimentally shows the
same shape at all pH values). No detailed model including specification
of the dissociable groups involved in the equilibration of protons
with the “visible” reactants is yet available.

A more detailed examination of these different possibilities must
await further work on characterization of strains with mutations at
key residues involved in liganding the SQ or protonic equilibration
of the reaction components, more detailed MD and quantum chemical
models, and spectroscopic studies exploiting specific isotopic labeling
that will be possible with extensions of this work to other auxotrophic
strains.

Conclusion
Specific isotopic labeling
at the residue or substituent level
extends the scope of several important spectroscopic approaches to
structure at the atomistic level. Here we demonstrate isotopic labeling
of the ring substituents of ubiquinone, achieved through construction
of a methionine auxotroph in Rb. sphaeroides strain
BC17, and used to explore the question of electronic structure and
geometry of substituents at the Qi site of the bc1 complex. This topic has been controversial,
with different results reported from crystallography and from pulsed
EPR studies in mitochondrial and bacterial complexes. We extend our
studies of the complex in Rb. sphaeroides by isotopic
labeling of the methyl and methoxy substituents of the ubiquinone
ring using 13C and determination of the interaction of
the nuclear spins with the electron spin of the semiquinone generated in situ in the complex in its membrane environment. By using
HYSCORE spectroscopy, we have measured the isotropic and anisotropic
spin couplings to allow comparison with properties previously estimated
in the QA and QB sites of the bacterial reaction
center, and the QH site of the cyt bo3 oxidase of E. coli. Differences between
these sites, and the strong dependence of isotropic couplings on the
dihedral angles of the substituents, allow an exploration of the orientation
of the semiquinone methoxy groups in the catalytic site. The protocol
used in generation of the methionine auxotroph is applicable more
generally and, because it introduces a gene deletion using a suicide
plasmid, can be applied repeatedly. In particular, because auxotrophy
often will require deletion of a single gene, it is convenient when
a highly engineered background has been developed for mutational engineering
in the context of a specific protein, because previous manipulations
are undisturbed. In our case, construction of an auxotroph in the
BC17 strain allows conclusions from the spectroscopic studies to be
directly compared with experimental data derived from in situ assays of function through kinetic spectrophotometry using an extensive
collection of mutant strains.

Supporting Information Available
Relevant methodological details
and Figures S1–S6. This material is available free of charge
via the Internet at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bi500654y_si_001.pdf

Author Present Address
# Departamento
de Química Inorgânica, Instituto
de Química, Universidade Federal Fluminense, Campus do
Valonguinho, Centro, Niterói, RJ, CEP: 24020-141, Brazil

The authors
declare no competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
We thank
Professors Sam Kaplan, Ronald MacKenzie, and Jesus
Eraso for making available their set of auxotrophic strains and for
advice on engineering gene deletions.

Abbreviations
2Dtwo-dimensional

CWcontinuous-wave

DFTdensity functional
theory

B3LYPBecke3
Lee–Yang–Parr

SQsemiquinone

EPRelectron paramagnetic
resonance

ESEEMelectron spin echo envelope modulation

HYSCOREhyperfine sublevel correlation

UQ-10ubiquinone-10.

