Human HtrA1
(high-temperature
requirement protein A1, Uniprot entry Q92743) is a 51 kDa nonglycosylated
serine protease primarily located in the extracellular space. Here,
it is involved in remodeling of the extracellular matrix by interactions
and proteolysis of components like decorin, fibronectin, aggrecan,
and collagen.− The protease also regulates cellular signaling cascades by specific
breakdown of mediators like transforming growth factor-β, fibroblast
growth factor 8, and epidermal growth factor receptor.− In addition, HtrA1 is colocalized in the cytoplasmic compartment
with several intracellular identified substrates, such as tubulin
and the X-linked inhibitor of apoptosis (XIAP). Dysregulation of HtrA1 expression levels is associated
with cerebral small-vessel disease, age-related
macular degeneration (AMD),, osteoarthritis, amyloid neurological disorders,, corneal dystrophy, preeclampsia,, and numerous types of cancer., The specific downregulation
of HtrA1 in the latter case promotes the sustained survival of cancer
cells and the development of malignant metastatic behavior,,, most likely correlated with the
intracellular HtrA1 associated with microtubules and affecting cell
migratory and signaling properties.,,− Interestingly, autolytically N-terminally truncated
forms of HtrA1 exist in vivo, and such forms have
been suggested as prognostic markers in urothelial bladder cancer and in preeclamptic pregnancies. The exact role and trigger of autolytic maturation
is at present unknown.

HtrA1 is composed of three domains; the
central core contains the
catalytic triad (His220, Asp250, and Ser328) and is responsible for enzymatic activity and most reported
functions, such as substrate specificity, proteolysis, trimerization,
and liposome and cell-surface interactions. The N- and C-terminal domains of HtrA1 comprise an IGFBP-like/Kazal-like
tandem domain motif (termed the N-domain) and a PDZ domain, respectively.
Both seem largely dispensable for catalytic function, and whereas the PDZ domain facilitates protein–protein
interactions by tethering of the HtrA1 protease to specific sites
in the ECM or in the cell,,, the role of the N-domain remains enigmatic. The domain contains
a total of 16 cysteines, all forming part of an intensive disulfide
bond network (Figure ). It has previously
been shown that HtrA1 may undergo autolytic cleavage, and it was therefore
suggested that the N-terminal Kazal-like subdomain could play an autoinhibitory
function in this context. However, recent
studies have shown that neither the IGFBP- nor the Kazal-like structures
have retained their canonical functions required for IGF interaction
or protease inhibition, respectively. The lack of autoinhibition by the N-domain is further corroborated
by studies showing similar catalytic activities of full-length HtrA1
and ΔN-HtrA1 lacking the N-domain.,

HtrA1
domain organization and disulfide bond network.

The presence of processed HtrA1 forms in the intracellular
reducing
environment suggests that autolysis could be affected by changes in
the redox state of HtrA1, more specifically the integrity of the N-domain
disulfide bonds. In this study, we investigate the effect of antioxidant
components dithiothreitol (DTT), reduced glutathione (GSH), and thioredoxin
(TRX) on the activation of autolytic processing of full-length HtrA1.
We show that the TRX redox regulator is a physiologically relevant
trigger of autolysis and identify the major autolytic forms, which
are in good correlation with previous observations. In addition, the
autolytic activity displays a remarkably strong preference for cysteine
in the P1 position, which is novel insight into the action and specificity
of HtrA1 and explains the sensitivity toward the redox state of the
surrounding environment. Thus, we speculate that the autolysis of
HtrA1 and the presence of various mature forms in vivo could be correlated to disease-related dysregulations in the endogenous
redox balance.

Materials and Methods
Cloning and Expression
HtrA1 cDNA was obtained from
Invitrogen and amplified to incorporate a C-terminal His tag separated
from the C-terminus of HtrA1 by a FX protease cleavage site. The construct
was cloned into the pcDNAFRT/TO vector (Invitrogen) using KpnI and
XhoI restriction sites. The resulting mature translated protein (theoretical
molecular mass of 50.3 kDa) is termed HtrA1. Production of HtrA1 was
achieved in Freestyle 293-F cells (Life technologies) transfected
with the FRT-HtrA1-His plasmid at a cell density of 1 × 106 cells/mL using polyethyleneimine (PEI). The culture supernatant
was collected 48 h after transfection and dialyzed overnight at 4
°C into 20 mM Tris-HCl and 300 mM NaCl (pH 8.0). The HtrA1 protein
was purified by Ni affinity chromatography using a 5 mL Hitrap Chelating
column (GE Healthcare Life Sciences). The imidazole-eluted fractions
were pooled and dialyzed into TBS {Tris-buffered saline [20 mM Tris-HCl
and 150 mM NaCl (pH 7.4)]}. The purity and concentration was estimated
by sodium dodecyl sulfate–polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis
(SDS–PAGE). The N-terminal amino acid sequence of the 50 kDa
HtrA1 band was determined to be Ser30-Ala-Pro by Edman
degradation, in agreement with previous findings.

HtrA1 Reduction and Autolytic Cleavage
Reaction mixtures
for testing HtrA1 disulfide reducibility were set up with 65 μL
of TBS containing 1.5 μg of phenylmethanesulfonyl fluoride (PMSF)-treated
HtrA1 (2 mM PMSF for 2 h) and increasing concentrations of reducing
agents DTT, GSH, and TRX, all from Sigma-Aldrich. Reaction mixtures
were incubated at 37 °C for 30 min (DTT) or 1 h (GSH and TRX).
The TRX concentration range was selected to reach a 1:1 ratio of the
total number of cysteine bridges to TRX molecules at 4 μM TRX.
After incubation, samples were then treated for 10 min with 15 mM
iodoacetamide (IAA) to block free cysteines and to scavenge the excess
reducing agents present in the reaction mixture before SDS–PAGE.
For the assessment of autolytic cleavage in the presence of reducing
agents, reaction mixtures with catalytically active HtrA1 (1.5 μg)
were set up with either 1 mM DTT, 1 mM GSH, or 4 μM TRX and
incubated for 20 h at 37 °C. The activity was tested by titrating
HtrA1 (full-length or the autolytic products) against a fixed amount
of β-casein (3 μg). The proteolytic β-casein products
were analyzed after incubation for 30 min at 37 °C by SDS–PAGE.

SDS–PAGE and Edman Degradation
Samples were
boiled for 5 min in SDS–PAGE sample buffer in the presence
or absence of reducing agents, as specified in the text and figure
legends. Proteins were separated in 8 or 10 to 15% (w/v) gradient
polyacrylamide gels and run using the discontinuous ammediol/glycine
buffer system. Gels were stained with
Coomassie Brilliant Blue or blotted for 20 min to an Immobilon-P membrane
(Millipore) for N-terminal protein sequence analysis using a Procise
494-HT protein sequencer (Applied Biosystems).

Analysis of Autolytic Peptides
by Mass Spectrometry
HtrA1 (0.5 μg, 20 μg/mL)
was incubated at 37 °C
in the presence or absence of 5 mM DTT for 3 or 20 h. The reaction
was quenched by the addition of formic acid to a final concentration
of 1%. The samples, incubated for 20 h, were pretreated with 10 mM
fresh DTT for 15 min to ensure complete reduction of the disulfides
before the formic acid quenching step. Then they were micropurified
using C18 stage tips (Thermo Fisher Scientific), dried down in a SpeedVac,
and dissolved in 0.1% formic acid for liquid chromatography–tandem
mass spectrometry analysis. The samples were run three consecutive
times on an AB Sciex TripleTOF 5600 instrument. Data analysis was
conducted using the Mascot search engine with a peptide fragment mass
tolerance of 0.2 Da. Only peptides with a significance score of &lt;0.01
and an ion score cutoff of &gt;30 were considered reliable hits and
included
in the final list of identified HtrA1 N-terminal peptides. For an
autolytic cut site to be valid, the given P1 residue had to be identified
in at least two of the three replicates. MS Data Miner was used for the extraction of relevant data
from the Mascot search file.

Results
Reducing Agents
Differentially Affect HtrA1 Disulfide Bridges
Full-length
HtrA1 was expressed in the Freestyle 293 human cell
line and purified by Ni-NTA chromatography. To explore the stability
of the disulfides in the N-domain, we analyzed the susceptibility
of PMSF-inhibited HtrA1 to reduction by DTT, GSH, or TRX followed
by nonreducing SDS–PAGE (Figure ).
DTT and TRX but not GSH effectively led to a concentration-dependent
HtrA1 reduction, which was evident in the disappearance of the oxidized
HtrA1 band (Figure ). The reduction of HtrA1
happened gradually as a smear between the fully oxidized band (Figure A lane "0") and the fully reduced control
(Figure A, lane "R") was clearly
visible with increasing
concentration of reductant. Higher-molecular mass HtrA1 bands were
also observed, most likely because of reoxidation and formation of
intermolecular disulfides during the incubation (not shown). This
was more pronounced following the incubation with TRX, where the concentration
of the oxidant was lower. The experiment showed that TRX was able
to reduce the disulfide bridges in the N-domain of HtrA1. This has
previously been shown to occur in other proteins by an intramolecular
disulfide exchange cascade, and a similar
mechanism could be utilized during the TRX-mediated reduction of HtrA1.

Stability
of HtrA1 disulfide bonds toward reducing agents. HtrA1
(1.5 μg in each lane) was incubated with freshly prepared reducing
agents at the indicated concentrations for either 30 min (DTT) or
1 h (TRX and GSH) at 37 °C. Samples were then alkylated with
IAA and analyzed by nonreducing SDS–PAGE using 8% gels. The
reduction of HtrA1 by the different agents is reflected by the disappearance
of protein from the fully oxidized band. For 4 μM TRX reduction,
large cross-linked species were present at the top of the gel, representing
reoxidized intermolecular disulfides and thereby explaining the apparent
lack of protein at the expected sizes. A reduced control sample (R)
was boiled in the presence of 5 mM DTT and subsequently alkylated
with IAA before gel electrophoresis. The asterisk indicates a lower-molecular
mass form of HtrA1 that is released upon reduction, representing a
portion of HtrA1 that is nicked at loop residue Arg-103 or Arg-104
during cellular production and purification. The reduction of the
disulfide bridges in HtrA1 is effectively achieved by DTT and TRX
but not by GSH.

Autolysis Correlates with
the Reduction of Disulfide Bonds
The consequence of disulfide
bridge reduction was investigated
by incubating active HtrA1 for 20 h in the presence of 1 mM DTT, 1
mM GSH, or 4 μM TRX and analyzing the reaction products by SDS–PAGE
(Figure ). The analysis revealed three major
bands with lower molecular masses when the incubation was conducted
in the presence of DTT or TRX. GSH did not display noticeable differences
with respect to the control; however, if the concentration was increased
to 10 mM GSH, a small fraction of HtrA1 was also found to be processed
to the same three major bands (data not shown). The proteolytic activity
of the truncated forms was similar to that of intact HtrA1 as judged
by the ability to hydrolyze β-casein (Figure ). This was in support of a neglectable effect of the N-domain
on protease activity. The three autolytic forms were then subjected
to Edman degradation to determine the new N-termini resulting from
the major autolytic cuts. These were found to be Val-111 (top band,
cleavage site LC↓VC), Gln-131 (middle band, cleavage site LC↓QL),
and Leu-150 (lower band, cleavage site IV↓LQ), resulting in
theoretical molecular masses of 41.5, 39.5, and 37.2 kDa, respectively.
While the 37.2 kDa form contained Cys-155, the two larger forms contained
several cysteines. The presence of three bands indicated that autolysis
was incomplete, and we speculated that reoxidation of cysteine residues
during the 20 h incubation was hampering autolysis. This was investigated
by incubating HtrA1 for 72 h in the presence of DTT (5 mM) with the
addition of fresh DTT (5 mM) after 24 and 48 h. The results showed
that HtrA1 autolysis under these conditions proceeded to the 37.2
kDa band, confirming the need for reduced cysteines in the process
and explaining the lack of autolysis prior to disulfide reduction
(Figure ).

Disulfide bond reduction triggers HTRA1
autolysis. To active HtrA1
(1.5 μg) was added a reducing agent (1 mM DTT, 1 mM GSH, or
4 μM TRX) and the mixture was left for 20 h at 37 °C and
subsequently analyzed by nonreducing SDS–PAGE using a 5 to
15% gradient gel. Controls were included for the effect of HtrA1 activity
(lane 1, PMSF-treated) and for the effect of the reducing agent (lane
5, unreduced HtrA1). TRX alone was included for comparison (lane 6).
The reduction of disulfide bridges led to effective HtrA1 autolysis
when proteolytic activity was not inhibited, resulting in three major
autolytic products for DTT- and TRX-treated samples. The presence
of a smear in lane 1 and a faint high-molecular mass band around 100
kDa (dimeric species) was caused by reoxidation of disulfide bridges
by a lack of reducing power as a consequence of DTT oxidation over
time.

Autolytic forms display activity similar to
that of full-length
HtrA1. The activity of full-length HtrA1 and its autolytic products
was tested by incubating β-casein (3 μg) with increasing
amounts of HtrA1 (preincubated for 20 h with or without DTT). After
30 min, degradation products of β-casein were easily identified,
and no significant difference in the intensity or sizes of the products
was observed between full-length HtrA1 and the autolytically processed
versions. Assays were also performed after incubation of β-casein
with HtrA1 for 45 min or 1 h, giving similar results (data not shown).

Continued reduction and incubation provides
full HtrA1 autolysis.
HtrA1 was incubated with 5 mM DTT, and 1.5 μg aliquots were
removed at indicated time points, treated with 15 mM IAA for 15 min,
and then boiled in SDS–PAGE sample buffer to block further
autolysis. Additional 5 mM DTT was added after 24 and 48 h, providing
fresh reducing power. Unreduced HtrA1 was included for comparison
after incubation for 72 h. The continued HtrA1 autolysis in the presence
of sufficient reducing power led to more complete trimming to the
smallest of the three major autolytic forms.

Autolytic Cleavage Sites Reveal P1 Specificity for Cysteine
The identification of the major autolytic cut sites indicated that
HtrA1 cleaves efficiently with a cysteine in the P1 position. This
specificity had not previously been described for HtrA1, and to gain
further insight into HtrA1 autolytic P1 preferences, we used mass
spectrometry to analyze the N-domain (residues 30–157) fragment
peptide space generated after incubation with DTT for 3 or 12 h. The
weighted frequency of the P1 occurrences from Ser-30 to Gln-157 is
presented in Table . Indeed, cysteine was
found to be one of the preferred cleavage sites with cleavage at 7
of 16 positions in the N-domain. The other identified P1 cleavage
sites aligned well with previous reports on HtrA1 specificity. Evidently, many autolytic peptides had already
been generated after incubation for 3 h, suggesting rapid activation
of autolysis upon disulfide bridge reduction. The central role of
cysteines in this process probed us to investigate if general reduction
of disulfide bridges in other cysteine-rich proteins facilitated proteolysis
by HtrA1; however, no significant cleavage of reduced bovine pancreatic
trypsin inhibitor (8 cysteines) or reduced human serum albumin (34
cysteines) was seen after incubation at 37 °C for 3 h (data not
shown). This could indicate that autolysis by design is an inherent
feature of HtrA1 controlled by its cysteine specificity.

Unique Autolytic Cuts in the N-Terminal
Domain Observed by Mass Spectrometry
 	 	no.
of unique cuts	weighted
frequency 	
type (P1)	total no. in
the N-domain	incubation for 3 h at 37 °C with
5 mM DTT	incubation for 20 h at 37 °C with 5 mM DTT	incubation for 3 h at
37 °C with 5 mM DTT	incubation for 20 h at 37 °C with 5 mM DTT	
C	16	6	7	0.38	0.44	
A	19	6	4	0.32	0.21	
L	8	4	2	0.50	0.25	
Q	7	2	2	0.28	0.29	
R	13	2	2	0.15	0.15	
T	2	1	1	0.50	0.50	
V	9	1	1	0.11	0.11	
The position of each autolytic cut
was identified by analysis of the generated peptides, and the unique
cuts refer to the P1 residue type, looking exclusively at the N-domain
(residues 30–157). The weighted frequency = (the number of
unique cuts)/(total number in the N-domain).

Discussion
Autolysis of HtrA family
members has been observed previously,
but the functional consequences and triggers of autolysis have been
described only to a very limited extent. This study shows that HtrA1
autolysis is linked to the integrity of the disulfide bonds in the
N-domain. Following reducing conditions, three major bands were observed
via SDS–PAGE, corresponding to fragments starting at Val-111
(top band), Gln-131 (middle band), and Leu-150 (lower band) (Figure ), in agreement with the forms observed in vivo., The cleavage site at Val-111
is located directly at the border of the IGFBP-like and Kazal-like
domain (Figure ) and is represented mostly
at shorter incubation times. Further proteolysis produces the Gln-131
and Leu-150 N-termini, suggesting that initial proteolytic events
are required for effective exposure to continued autolysis. The Leu-150
form (lower band) contains Cys-155 and thus differs from commonly
produced ΔN-HtrA1 that lacks this residue. The loss of disulfide
bridge integrity is likely to compromise the structural stability
of the N-domain, possibly leading to partial unfolding. However, the
sequential autolysis toward smaller autolytic forms suggests that
the process is guided rather than being a random process facilitated
by unfolding. Thus, our findings indicate that the N-domain is proteolytically
processed to various degrees, correlated to the exposure time in an
effective reductive environment that exposes suitable cysteine cleavage
sites.

Structural representation of HtrA1 with the indicated locations
of the three primary N-termini generated by autolysis. The HtrA1 domain
architecture is visualized by representation of the structures for
the N-domain [Protein Data Bank (PDB) entry 3TJQ()], the trimeric proteolytic core (PDB entry 3NWU()), and the PDZ domain (PDB entry 2YTW()). Disulfide
bridges are shown as yellow spheres, and the catalytic triad is shown
as red spheres. The cut sites resulting in the three major autolytic
forms are numbered from 1 to 3, and their position in the folded N-domain
is indicated with arrows. The new N-termini were identified by Edman
degradation, and the surrounding sequence for each cut site is shown
below the structure. Cut sites 1 and 2 are the result of cleavages
with cysteine at position P1.

Intracellular HtrA1 is exposed to the ubiquitous cellular
redox
regulators TRX, GSH, and glutaredoxin. Of particular interest in this
study is the finding that TRX potentiates N-domain degradation, supporting
a correlation among intracellular HtrA1, redox balance, and autolysis.
Furthermore, it suggests that the presence of HtrA1 autolytic forms
is indicative of high intracellular (or extracellular) endogenous
TRX levels. Most studies, in which HtrA1 autolysis has been observed,
have been conducted in cancer cell lines, primarily to investigate
the pro-apoptotic behavior of HtrA1 and the consequences of HtrA1
knock-down or forced expression.,,, It is important to note that
increased intracellular levels of TRX and TRX reductase have been
associated with several cancer cell types, providing an explanation
for the observed autolysis of HtrA1 in such settings.− Treatment with the chemotherapeutic agents cisplatin and paclitaxel
in ovarian cancer cell lines leads to upregulation of endogenous intracellular
HtrA1 (and HtrA2), and this stimulates apoptosis through the targeted
breakdown of XIAP. Interestingly, a potential
role for autolytic products of HtrA1 in the induction of apoptosis
has been suggested because the expression of ΔN-HtrA1 in SKOV3
cells led to an increased level of apoptosis compared to that of WT
HtrA1., Recently, reduced levels of the autolytic
∼38 kDa product of HtrA1 were found to correlate with neoplastic
bladder tissue undergoing cancerous transformation, which indeed highlights
the importance of understanding the functional maturation of HtrA1
and the potential prognostic value of the autolytic forms.

Several physiological and pathological
conditions may result in
increased amounts of local or systemic intra- and extracellular TRX,
at levels that directly can impact HtrA1 autolysis. This is likely
to be the case in human placentas complicated by preeclampsia where
the presence of an autolytic 31 kDa form of HtrA1 correlates with
the severity of the condition. Preeclamptic
placentas display alterations in the global redox balance, and the
levels of antioxidant molecules (TRX and glutaredoxin) are elevated
in response to increased oxidative insults,, thereby providing a possible explanation for the enhanced HtrA1
autolysis. In general, plasma levels of all HtrA family members are
regulated during gestation, and an autolytic
form of HtrA3 (contains an N-domain similar to HtrA1) can be observed
in plasma, suggesting that autolysis goes beyond the intracellular
environment., For HtrA1, it still remains to
be established whether direct correlations exist between autolysis
and intra- or extracellular location and how functional differences
of the forms play a role.

On the basis of the findings in this
study, we suggest that the
observed autolysis of HtrA1 correlates with the redox balance of the
system, in particular the levels of TRX. Our data show that HtrA1
specifically cleaves residues in its N-terminal domain after reduction
of cysteine residues. Whether this cysteine cleavage property is used
in other cellular settings is yet to be explored. Future studies should
aim to resolve the functional aspect of the N-domain of HtrA1 but
also how this secreted protein ends up in the intracellular compartment
and whether such an event is linked to autolysis in any way.

The authors
declare no
competing financial interest.

Abbreviations
DTTdithiothreitol

GSHreduced glutathione

HtrA1high-temperature requirement
A1

IAAiodoacetamide

IGFBPinsulin-like
growth factor binding protein

TBSTris-buffered saline

TRXthioredoxin

WTwild type

XIAPX-linked inhibitor of apoptosis.

