Heart failure
is a frequent
cause of death, and those experiencing disease onset suffer significant
loss in the quality of life. With systolic heart failure, modest physical
exertion causes pain, weakness, or other symptoms indicative of inadequate
cardiac performance. It can have a hereditary link focused principally
on a malfunctioning myosin, the molecular motor powering heart contraction,
but is most often associated with cardiac muscle damage caused by
sudden or gradual arterial blockage. Pharmacological treatment frequently
targets the β-adrenergic pathway to upregulate contractile function
sometimes by enhancing calcium release into the cytoplasm. The β-adrenergic
pathway is an upstream modulator of a multifunctional signaling pathway
implying that unwanted effects associated with its modulation could
be bypassed by treating myosin directly.

Myosin in cardiac muscle
transduces ATP chemical energy into the
mechanical work of moving blood volume under pressure. Myosin is the
mover comprised of a catalytic motor domain containing ATP and actin
binding sites and mechanical elements coupling motor-generated impulsive
force to the myosin thick filament backbone. Myosin mechanical coupling
elements consist of a lever-arm domain and two stabilizing light chains,
essential (ELC) and regulatory (RLC), that undergo cyclical rotary
movement to impel bound filamentous actin. Linear actin displacement
due to lever-arm rotation is the myosin step-size. Post-translational
modifications affect the myosin mover., Phosphorylation
of S15 in RLC was specifically shown to enhance ventricle work productivity. We showed that tissue purified skeletal myosin
and ventricular cardiac myosin (βMys and gene MYH7) have 1 and
3 unitary step-sizes in vitro, respectively, and
suggested that this attribute contributes to tissue specific mechanisms
affecting contractility performance.,

Scheme  shows the myosin (M) ATPase
cycle
in the presence of actin (A). Blue and red arrows indicate the predominant
pathway, and the red arrow also indicates the weak to strong actin
binding transition initiating force development. Vmax and KM are Michaelis–Menten
constants measured from actin-activated myosin ATPase. Vmax scales with the phosphate release rate for muscle
myosins as indicated but also depends on the weak actomyosin binding
equilibrium., Actomyosin configurations are
characterized as weak and strong binding states based in part on their
ability to generate work with only the strongly bound state work-generating. In vitro motility has the myosin moving actin under unloaded
conditions with a motility velocity vm such thatfor
myosin step-size d and
duty cycle f. Duty cycle
is the time fraction actomyosin is strongly bound during an ATPase
cycle. Porcine cardiac myosin has f δ ≲
0.05., Cardiac and skeletal muscles maintain myosin
and actin filaments in a lattice favorable to their interaction. The
filaments slide relatively during contraction shortening. The low
duty cycle facilitates the rapid shortening in cardiac and skeletal
muscle because a strongly actin-bound myosin will retard movement
when it does not dissociate promptly after delivering its impulsive
force.

Skeletal and cardiac myosin binding small molecule effectors
are
inhibitors, including blebbistatin and N-benzyl-p-toluene sulfonamide (BTS). Skeletal myosin inhibition by blebbistatin is
attributed to its stabilization of an intermediate with a partially
closed actin-binding cleft in the motor domain. Cleft closure accompanies
strong actin binding at the end of the myosin power stroke. Blebbistatin
inhibits strong binding and in vitro motility. BTS is structurally analogous to blebbistatin
and likely to inhibit motility by a similar mechanism. A specific βMys activator in clinical
trials for systolic heart failure, omecamtive mecarbil (OM), specifically
binds the heavy chain near residue S148. It increases the myosin transitioning into the strongly actin-bound
state probably by stabilizing its actin-bound conformation. In cardiomyocytes,
the drug increases the cardiac myocyte contraction shortening length
without affecting the Ca2+ transient.

We evaluated
the OM mechanism for contractility enhancement by
measuring the cardiac myosin step-size, motility velocity, relative
step-frequency, and actin-activated myosin ATPase. Step-size and relative
step-frequency were efficiently measured using the novel Qdot super-resolution in vitro motility assay., We find that
OM has little impact on βMys actin-activated ATPase, in agreement
with prior results, or its 3 unitary
step-sizes but dramatically reduces motility velocity and affects
the relative step-frequency. The results imply a large increase in
duty cycle, while the quantitative change in relative step-frequency
sharply contrasts with the natural phosphorylation-activated βMys.
Preliminary results showing similar reduction in motility velocity
were reported. Our data indicate that
OM effectively converts the native βMys “muscle”
motor characteristics near to that of a processive motor. Contrasting
OM with natural βMys activation provides insight into activation
mechanisms and defines criteria for pharmaceutical activators.

Materials
and Methods
Chemicals
Omecamtiv mecarbil (OM) was purchased from
Selleckchem (Houston, TX). Quantum dot 565 streptavidin conjugate
(Qdot), phalloidin, rhodamine-phalloidin, and biotin-XX-phalloidin
were obtained from Life Technologies (Grand Island, NY). Glucose oxidase
was from MP Biomedicals (Santa Ana, CA). Other chemicals were purchased
from Sigma-Aldrich (St. Louis, MO) or Affymetrix (Cleveland, OH).
Protein concentrations were measured using the Bradford assay (Bio-Rad,
Hercules, CA).

Protein Preparations
βMys
was prepared from porcine
heart ventriculum as described previously., Rabbit
skeletal myosin was prepared from the leg and back muscles by the
method of Tonomura et al. Rabbit skeletal
heavy meromyosin (sHMM) was obtained by chymotryptic digestion of
myosin. G-Actin was obtained from rabbit
skeletal muscle acetone powder by using the method described by Pardee
and Spudich and then stored immediately
under argon gas in liquid nitrogen. The frozen G-actin was thawed
and spun at 160000g for 90 min to remove denatured
actin before use. Rhodamine-phalloidin or biotin-XX-phalloidin and
rhodamine-phalloidin labeling of actin filaments was performed as
described previously.

Actin-Activated
Myosin ATPase
Actin-activated myosin
ATPase was measured as described previously with some modifications. βMys stored in 50% glycerol was precipitated
with addition of 12 volumes of ice-cold water containing 2 mM DTT,
collected by centrifugation, and then resuspended in 300 mM KCl, 25
mM imidazole (pH 7.4), 4 mM MgCl2, 1 mM EGTA, 10 mM DTT,
and 10 μg/mL leupeptin. Myosin at a final concentration of 1
μM was titrated with 0.1, 2, 4, 8, 16, and 40 μM acin.
The ATPase assay buffer contained 25 mM imidazole (pH 7.4), 4 mM MgCl2, 1 mM EGTA, 10 mM DTT, 10 μg/mL leupeptin, 1% DMSO,
0.1 or 100 μM OM, and a final KCl concentration of 25 mM. Control
actin-activated ATPase had no DMSO or OM. ATPase reaction was initiated
by the addition of 3 mM ATP, and the mixture was incubated at 21 °C
for 5 min. OM was dissolved in DMSO before adding to the ATPase assay
buffer. Inorganic phosphate production was assessed using the method
of Fiske and Subbarow.

Dose response
of OM in actin-activated ATPase was measured as described above with
0.1–100 μM OM, 40 μM actin, and 1% DMSO.

In Vitro Motility
In vitro motility
and Qdot assays of βMys and sHMM were performed as
described previously, except for the presence
of 1% DMSO and 0–1.5 μM OM. βMys motility buffer
was 25 mM KCl, 25 mM imidazole (pH 7.4), 4 mM MgCl2, 1
mM EGTA, 20 mM DTT, 10 μg/mL leupeptin, 0.7% methylcellulose,
2 mM ATP, 3 mg/mL glucose, 0.018 mg/mL catalase, and 0.1 mg/mL glucose
oxidase. All the motility assays were performed at 21 °C.

In vitro motility was observed with through-the-objective
total internal reflection fluorescence (TIRF) on an Olympus IX71 inverted microscope using a 150×, 1.45 NA
objective. Images were acquired with an Andor EMCCD camera (iXon3 897 with 16 μm × 16 μm pixels and 16 bit
dynamic range) using the software supplied by the manufacturer (SOLIS).
The actin sliding velocities were analyzed manually using ImageJ (National
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD) plugin MtrackJ. The sliding velocity of actin filaments at each myosin
or OM concentration was measured by averaging the speeds of 40–60
filaments in 2–3 slides. Each actin filament was tracked for
3–5 μm in the case of βMys or 20–40 μm
in the case of sHMM. Control and OM-treated myosin experiments were
performed on two independent preparations of myosin and actin on different
days. More than 90% of the Qdot-labeled actin filaments translated
in the assay under all conditions tested.

In experiments using
the Qdot assay, images were collected at 5
or 2 frames per second and 30 or 50 ms exposures. The frame rates
correspond to 200 or 500 ms intervals indicated by Δt. Intensity values were converted to photons using the
conversion formula in SOLIS as appropriate for our camera and the
images output in TIFF format for reading into ImageJ. A single myosin
step is isolated in time and space and then characterized using super-resolution.

Super-resolution Measurements
Single-molecule dipole
emitters are represented in the microscope image space by the point
spread function (PSF). We estimate single molecule position with resolution
below the diffraction limit by locating the center of the PSF with
high precision., The process has been automated
in the QuickPALM ImageJ plugin super-resolution fitting algorithm
in 2 dimensions. QuickPALM identified
and localized point objects that qualified for super-resolution fitting
according to user specifications, including minimal SNR (&gt;25 isolating
Qdots) and maximal full width at half-maximum (fwhm) of 5 pixels (107
nm/pixel in object space for the 150× objective). The analysis
produced a table (SRTable) listing each qualifying particle, particle
position in pixels, position standard deviation, and frame identifier.
Using the SRTable, QuickPALM rendered the super-resolved particle
data as single pixels per particle in the frame sequence of the original
data. Rendered frames were read into ImageJ and analyzed with MTrackJ. Single-pixel resolution (107 nm) of the rendered
images is much less than super-resolution (&lt;10 nm). Manual tracking
was needed only to link the super-resolved particle positions into
a Qdot-labeled actin track connecting time-ordered frames. A separate
program, SRTrack written in Mathematica, linked the actual super-resolved
particle coordinate to the track and then updated the SRTable with
the frame-to-frame tracking linked list. SRTrack eliminated any incorrectly
identified MTrackJ particles that did not have a super-resolved equivalent.
The latter removed the effect of Qdot blinking. Representative Qdot
displacement versus time data are included in Movie S1 of the .

In any motility
assay a few Qdots did not visibly move due to apparent immobilization
on the glass surface. These particles were tracked at super-resolution
to quantitate thermal/mechanical fluctuations.

Simulation
We
simulated motility assay velocity event
density essentially as described previously for a 2.1 μm actin
filament. Velocity data were separated
into two data sets corresponding to the two independent protein preparations.
These two data sets were analyzed by simulation separately and then
together in a single pooled data set. The three results differ within
the boundaries of uncertainties indicated in . It suggests quantitative results are readily reproducible with
the standard protein preparations.

We input known Vmax and vm for the control
and OM treated conditions. The unknown parameter set actively searched
in the simulation consists of the actin binding probability for myosin,
myosin step-size, and step-frequency. Simulation generates unitary
myosin binding events during successive Δt’s
that are converted to actin displacement by the myosin step-size and
then to actin velocity by dividing by Δt. Simulated
and measured velocity event density histograms are compared for fit
to choose best fitting parameters. Unitary step events are counted
and converted to relative step-frequency by dividing the unitary step
count by the total number of unitary steps. The best fitting velocity
event density histogram and the corresponding relative step-frequencies
characterize the actomyosin interaction.

System Analytics
Unitary step-size is a fundamental
structural feature of the myosin mover. We introduce the relative
step-frequency, ωj, for unitary step j., It is a multiple unitary step motor characteristic proportional
to the rate of unloaded cross-bridge cycling with the higher rate
producing a more frequent jth step. Relative step-frequency is dimensionless
and normalized such that ωS + ωI + ωL = 1, where subscripts S, I, and L are for
the short (∼3 nm), intermediate (∼5 nm), and long (∼8
nm) nominal unitary steps, respectively. For native βMys, the
intermediate step has highest cycling rate followed by the long step
and then the short step with lowest cycling rate. Absolute cycling
rate for step j, Vj, has Vj = Vmaxωj, and Vmax = ∑j=S,I,LVj.

In an ensemble of cross-bridges
interacting with one actin filament, like the conditions in every
muscle or motility assay, only one actin velocity is possible, and
hence, motility velocity vm is the same
for each unitary step-size, implying each step-size has a unique duty
cycle. From eq , the step j duty cycleCharacteristics of the multistep
motor derive
from the step-frequency weighted averaged quantities indicated with
broken brackets, such that average time cross-bridges spend strongly
bound, ⟨ton⟩, computed from
eq  isAverage force is proportional
to the fraction of strongly actin bound cross-bridgesfor α the proportionality constant expressed
in units of force (uf) where α = 1. Average poweris dependent on relative step-frequency, step-size,
and Vmax but independent of vm. Dynamically averaged velocity, u,
computed from average step-size, ⟨d⟩,
and ⟨ton⟩indicates
trends in motility velocity accompanying
step-frequency changes.

Step-sizes {dS,dI,dL} are
constant due to immutable
myosin structural constraints, and we observe that Vmax and ωS change only modestly under
experimental conditions tested. Normalization implies {ωS,ωI,ωL} = {ωS,1 – ωS – ωL,ωL}; hence, ωL is the sole independent variable.
⟨P⟩ dependence on ωL contrasts natural and OM myosin activation mechanisms.

Results
βMys
ATPase Activity Measurements
Michaelis–Menten Vmax and KM characterize
actin-activated myosin ATPase with the maximal velocity for ATP hydrolysis
and affinity for actin, respectively. Table  lists Vmax and KM values appropriate for the in vitro motility
conditions. Figure  shows βMys ATPase
rate versus actin concentration in the absence of OM and in the presence
of 0.1 and 100 μM OM. All conditions indicate that the hydrolysis
rate saturates at &gt;10 μM actin. DMSO at ≤1% is introduced
into the assay with the addition of the OM as indicated previously. ATPase is compared in assay buffers with or
without 1% DMSO to indicate its negligible effect (filled triangles
or empty inverted triangles, respectively).

βMys actin-activated
ATPase in the presence of 0.1 μM
OM (▲) and 100 μM OM (●) and the control without
OM (▽). Solid lines represent fitting curves with ATPase =
(Vmax[actin])/(Km + [actin]). Parameter values for the curves are summarized
in Table . Control βMys actin-activated
ATPase had no OM or DMSO. Other conditions had OM and 1% DMSO.

βMys Actin-Activated
ATPase
and in Vitro Motility
 	βMys	pβMys	OM-treated βMys	
Vmax (s–1)	1.22 ± 0.05	1.26 ± 0.09	1.25 ± 0.08	
KM (μM)	5.71 ± 0.81	3 ± 1	4.12 ± 0.91	
vm (μm/s)	0.27 ± 0.02	0.32 ± 0.02	0.039 ± 0.002	
dS	2.79 ± 0.6	2.8 ± 0.3	2.6 ± 0.6	
dI	5.39 ± 0.4	4.8 ± 0.3	5.8 ± 0.5	
dL	7.80 ± 0.06	7.3 ± 0.2	8.8 ± 0.6	
ωS	0.181 ± 0.007	0.156 ± 0.007	0.154 ± 0.006	
ωI	0.507 ± 0.008	0.118 ± 0.008	0.422 ± 0.009	
ωL	0.312 ± 0.009	0.726 ± 0.008	0.424 ± 0.009	
fS (×103)	2.29 ± 0.01	1.73 ± 0.01	12.6 ± 0.1	
fI (×103)	12.34 ± 0.03	2.22 ± 0.02	78.6 ± 0.2	
fL (×103)	10.99 ± 0.04	20.86 ± 0.04	119.8 ± 0.4	
⟨d⟩ (nm)	5.67 ± 0.04	6.30 ± 0.04	6.58 ± 0.05	
⟨F⟩ (uf)	10.5 ± 0.1	16.1 ± 0.3	89.5 ± 1.5	
⟨P⟩ (μm/s) (uf)	2.84 ± 0.04	5.1 ± 0.1	3.49 ± 0.06	
All data taken
from ref ().

In the presence of 1 μM OM
and 1% DMSO. Values for Vmax and Km interpolated from data in Figure .

Figure  shows the dose response of Vmax to OM for saturating actin concentration
of 40 μM and 1% DMSO. Vmax is 1.16
± 0.02 s–1 for &lt;1 μM OM and increases
to 1.33 ± 0.04 s–1 for &gt;10 μM OM,
indicating
a 15% enhancement due to OM. The actin activation dose–response
curve trends like that reported for bovine myosin subfragment 1 (S1).Vmax amplitude differs
from that reported previously due to species specificity (porcine
vs bovine myosin) and different measurement conditions. Conditions
for the actin-activated myosin ATPase and in vitro motility measurements described next overlap to allow duty cycle
computation.

Dose response to OM of actin-activated βMys ATPase
for 40
μM actin in 1% DMSO. The point at each OM concentration represents
2 replicates. Means ± SD are plotted.

βMys in Vitro Motility Velocity
Figure
S2 of the  shows
βMys motility velocity, vm, at various
βMys bulk concentrations, in 1.5 μM OM and
1% DMSO. vm increases with increasing
[βMys] until reaching maximum (0.026 ± 0.001 μm/s)
at 0.06 μM βMys and then slightly decreasing to a constant
(0.021 ± 0.001 μm/s) at or beyond 0.08 μM. We showed
previously that rabbit skeletal heavy meromyosin (sHMM) glides at
its maximal velocity at or beyond the bulk concentration of 0.08 μM.

The isoform specific dose response of vm to OM is shown in Figure . Rhodamine-phalloidin labeled actin moves over βMys
or sHMM for 0.2 or 0.285 μM bulk protein concentration. DMSO
at ≤1% is introduced into the assay with the addition of the
OM. Motility is compared in assay buffers with or without 1% DMSO
to indicate its negligible effect on motility velocity (filled or
empty symbols, respectively). Actin sliding velocity for βMys
decreases ∼10-fold with increasing OM and saturates for [OM]
&gt; 0.75 μM. Actin sliding velocity for sHMM decreases ∼20%
under these conditions. Control experiments summarized by data in
Figures  and  and
the specificity of OM for βMys confirmed by Figure  indicate that porcine βMys recapitulates
the previous bovine βMys characterization of OM.

Dose response of βMys (circles) and sHMM (triangles) in vitro motility to OM and in motility assay buffers containing
1% DMSO (filled) or without DMSO (empty). Means ± SD are plotted.
Bulk concentrations of βMys and sHMM in the motility were 0.2
and 0.285 μM, respectively.

Analysis of the Qdot assay data permits subtraction of the
baselines
due to thermal/mechanical fluctuations that tend to remove the slowest
velocities in the velocity histogram and increasing the mean velocity.
These slowest velocities are randomly directed and contribute negligibly
to the standard in vitro motility velocity except
when directed movement is very slow. OM treated βMys requires
a 10–20 s Δt to allow actin the time
to move ≥1 pixel. This condition underestimates velocity as
the particle does not move along a line due to the thermal/mechanical
fluctuations. Subpixel movement is quantifiable with the Qdot assay,
and the Δt needed is 0.5 s. Average velocity
computed from super-resolution data suggests vm = 0.039 ± 0.002 (standard error) μm/s (Table ). This value for vm is used in all subsequent calculations as the best estimate for vm in the presence of OM.

Figure S3 of
the  indicates the
percentage of moving actin filaments in βMys
motility for various concentrations of OM. The high percentage of
moving filaments across all drug concentrations indicates assay quality.

βMys Step-Size and Relative Step-Frequency
The
Qdot assay has labeled actin translating over surface bound βMys
at 0.16 μM bulk protein concentration in the absence and presence
of 1.5 μM OM (with 1% DMSO). Inspection of actin filaments labeled
with Qdot/rhodamine shows that the Qdot sparsely labels intact filaments
with average length ∼2.1 μm long. A single myosin step
is isolated in time and space and then characterized using super-resolution.
Panels A and C of Figure  show actin sliding
velocity event density in the low-velocity domain of 0–15 nm/(Δt = 1) for Δt the 200 or 500 ms frame
capture interval in the absence or presence of OM, respectively. Baselines
due to thermal/mechanical fluctuations were subtracted as described
previously. Measured (■ and dashed
line) and simulated (red line) data are shown for the velocity curve.
Peaks in Figure  correspond to short (red),
intermediate (green), and long (blue) step-sizes. Some step combinations
are indicated with the appropriate symbol combinations and their lengths
for the best fitting simulation shown. Step-size estimates and their
standard error are computed by combining results from the 80 best
fitting simulations and are summarized in Table  in the rows labeled dS, dI, and dL. All values are
equivalent within error to our previous results for βMys and
pβMys., Previously measured average step-size
for βMys is 5–9 nm.,−

Qdot
assay velocity event density histogram (left) and step-frequency
histogram (right) for βMys in the absence (top row) or presence
(bottom row) of OM and 1% DMSO. Measured (■ and dashed line)
and simulated (red line) data are shown for the velocity curve. The
inset in panel C indicates translation of the motor domain associated
with a unitary step-size and a lever-arm rotation. Unitary steps of
∼3 nm (red), ∼5 nm (green), and ∼8 nm (blue)
are indicated symbolically near their event distribution peak. Several
unitary step combinations are also indicated. The simulated velocity
curve corresponds to the best fitting single simulation, while the
histograms summarize findings from the 80 best simulations. Each simulated
curve provided the number of unitary events for 3, 5, and 8 nm steps
that is converted to relative unitary step-frequency by dividing the
unitary step count by the total number of 3, 5, and 8 nm unitary steps,
respectively. Relative unitary step-frequency summed over the 3 unitary
steps is 1 for each simulation.

Panels B and D of Figure  show relative
step-frequency histograms and numerical averages ± SD for the
∼3, ∼5, and ∼8 nm unitary steps. Numerical average
relative step-frequencies for control βMys are identical within
error to previously reported values. The
5 nm step-size is predominant in control βMys. In the presence
of 1.5 μM OM, the frequency for the 5 nm step is diminished
in favor of the 8 nm unitary step. The 5 and 8 nm steps are equally
frequent. The short step-frequency is nearly unchanged. Relative step-frequency
estimates and their standard error are computed by combining results
from the 80 best fitting simulations and are summarized in Table  in the rows labeled ωS, ωI, and ωL.

Low probability event combinations
falling into the range occupied
by unitary steps are indicated under the velocity curve in panels
A and C of Figure  in the smaller font. The
short-step probability is too small to contribute significantly as
a doublet. The ∼8 nm step is similar in length to the short
and medium steps in combination. We adapted the simulation to investigate
the relative contributions of the combined steps and unitary 8 nm
step to the probability peak at 8 nm as described previously. We obtained results identical to those reported
previously, where with the 8 nm unitary step included in the simulation,
the best fits fully account for observation (red line in Figure A,C). Without the 8 nm unitary step, best fitting
causes the simulation to substantially overshoot the 3 and 5 nm peaks
in the event histogram indicating the event deficit at 8 nm. The peak
assigned to the combined 5 and 8 nm steps is substantially underoccupied
in the simulation, again demonstrating the need for the unitary 8
nm step. Representative curves were already shown for this case (blue
line in Figure 5A,B of ref ()).

Qdot assay analytics comparing native (black), phosphorylated
(blue),
and OM treated (red) βMys. The average force, ⟨F⟩, in units of force [uf and eq  (A)], dynamic velocity, u [eq  (B)], and average power, ⟨P⟩
[eq 7 (C)], were computed as a function of the relative step-frequency
for the long step, ωL, assuming relative step-frequency
for the short step, ωS, was constant and taken from
Table . System optimization calls for maximizing
⟨P⟩ with βMys activation. Panel
C shows that maximal ⟨P⟩ occurs for
maximal ωL. Activated ⟨P⟩
due to phosphorylation (blue arrow) is larger than activated ⟨P⟩ by OM treatment (red arrow). Blue and red arrows
follow the changes in ⟨F⟩ and u due to phosphorylation and OM treatment, respectively.
Arrows begin and end on values listed in Table .

Comparison of Natural and
Pharmaceutical Activated βMys
Natural activation of
βMys was accomplished by its phosphorylation
at S15 in RLC as described previously. All phosphorylated βMys (pβMys) data summarized here
were taken from ref (). Quantities {ωS,ωI,ωL}, {dS,dI,dL}, vm, and Vmax were measured for native (control),
OM treated (Figure ), and pβMys. They
are summarized in Table  along with computed
quantities {fS,fI,fL}, ⟨F⟩, and ⟨P⟩ (eqs –) and their standard errors.

Systemic Performance
Average power ⟨P⟩ tests system performance under conditions of varying
relative step-frequencies, {ωS,ωI,ωL}, where ωS is a constant taken from the data in Table  for βMys, pβMys, and OM treated βMys and
ωI = 1 – ωS – ωL; hence, ωL is the sole dependent variable.
This simplifies the subsequent discussion without altering the generality
of the results. Figure  indicates ⟨F⟩, u, and ⟨P⟩ for actual step-sizes {dS,dI,dL} versus ωL. Panels A and B indicate parabolic ⟨F⟩ and u with a minimum and maximum, respectively,
at ωL ≈ 0.31, i.e., the value used by the
native βMys where average motility velocity vm = 270 nm/s. Clearly, the native βMys is optimized
for peak speed. Panel C shows that for any motor (βMys, pβMys,
OM+βMys), ⟨P⟩ increases parabolically
(like ⟨F⟩) in ωL indicating
the significance of the relative step-frequency in system optimization.
Curves in panels A and B assume constant vm for a particular species (Table ) over a
changing ωL. This is unlikely to happen in the real
system because vm will probably vary but
the curves agree with the observation at the beginning and ending
of the arrows where vm is known. Curves
in panel C are independent of vm; hence,
they model the real system at all points. Curves differ for βMys,
pβMys, and OM+βMys species also due to their slightly
different step-sizes, ωS, and Vmax. The rising power at the low and high ends of the ordinate
in panel C reflects higher duty cycles.

Activation by phosphorylation
or treatment with OM in Figure  involves crossing
from black to blue or black to red square symbols, respectively. The
blue or red arrow indicates the effect of activation from native to
pβMys or OM+βMys, respectively. Transition in ⟨F⟩ and u has steeper slope for OM
versus natural activation. These characteristics indicate the underlying
mechanism for activation, i.e., increased duty cycle due to higher
actomyosin affinity for the OM treatment and higher relative step-frequency
for phosphorylation. We propose that natural activation with phosphorylation
is the gold standard to which pharmaceutical myosin activators be
compared.

Discussion
OM is the unique drug
selectively targeting cardiac myosin in vivo to activate
contraction. Earlier work with OM showed
it causes greater shortening of contracting cardiac myocytes without
affecting the calcium transient and that the activator stabilized
the strongly actin bound myosin conformation to increase force. A consequence of the strong actin binding stabilization
is that OM dramatically increases the βMys duty cycle. The duty
cycle is widely recognized as a key myosin characteristic naturally
adapted to fulfill the varied roles myosin has in living organisms.
Cellular myosins working in isolation have large duty cycle (τ
≳ 0.5) to maintain nearly uninterrupted actin contact to avoid
losing their way in the cytosol. At the
opposite extreme are the muscle myosins like βMys. These molecules
function in densely packed thick filaments interdigitated with actin
thin filaments in the muscle fiber lattice. They are adapted for high
velocity movement by their low duty cycle (δ ≲ 0.05). Naturally, intermediate duty cycle myosins fulfill
functions requiring fewer myosins working in concert to produce work
outside of muscle. The average duty cycle of βMys increased
from ∼0.01 to ∼0.09 due to treatment with OM implying
OM treated βMys is intermediate between muscle and processive
myosins.

The resting human heart completes a cycle in ∼1
s. It is
shortening for about half of that time, so we expect individual sarcomeres
to shorten at a rate of 0.3 μm/0.5 s or ∼0.6 μm/s.
The half-sarcomere, where we measure actin/myosin filament sliding
velocity, then translates at ∼0.3 μm/s. Unloaded shortening
of βMys in the in vitro motility assay is ∼0.27
μm/s in good agreement. A tripled heart rate in a stressed human
would require additional translation velocity that is very likely
matched by the in vitro assay at in vivo conditions of ionic strength and temperature. It is reasonable to surmise that the sliding velocity of
the low duty cycle native βMys is fully utilized under the normal
range of physiological conditions. OM treatment of βMys should
place drug-induced limitations on normal human physiology. For example,
a stressed human may not be able to triple heart rate because the ton needed is too small to achieve in the presence
of OM. Human clinical trials indicated a small decrease in resting
heart rate due to OM treatment. A 15%
heart rate decrease was registered in dogs with systolic heart failure. These data are consistent with an inhibited
sliding velocity for the OM treated βMys even at resting heart
rate.

With porcine βMys, we detected 3 unitary step-sizes
using
the Qdot assay versus the apparent single
5 nm unitary step for rabbit sHMM. In
βMys we observed most frequently a 5 nm step like that in sHMM,
a less frequent 8 nm step, and a rare 3 nm step. Relative frequencies
of the 3 and 5 nm steps are very different making it unlikely that
they are only substeps of the longer 8 nm unitary step. We explore
implications of the dramatic rise in duty cycle for the OM treated
βMys in the context of its three unitary step-sizes with comparison
of native, phosphorylated, and OM treated myosin movers in Table  and using the new system analytics described in . The pβMys is 81–89%
specifically modified at S15 of its regulatory light chain (RLC), and we use the motility data from ref (). We compare phosphorylated
and OM treated myosin because they are natural and pharmaceutical
myosin activators potentially useful for compensating heart failure. In both cases, myosin performance divergence
from native βMys occurs with minimal or no change in Vmax suggesting (for the case of the natural
activator) that modification of the fundamental catalytic activity
is impossible or counterproductive. The relative step-frequencies
and duty cycles,{ωS,ωI,ωL} and {fS,fI,fL}, indicate a shift in force
production significance away from the intermediate step in native
βMys to the long step in phosphorylated and OM treated βMys.
The shift is accompanied by rising average duty cycle, ⟨f⟩, and average force, ⟨F⟩, that is incremental or dramatic for pβMys or OM treated
βMys, respectively. The average power, ⟨P⟩, follows a different trend with pβMys the best power
generator. Although the OM treatment dramatically increases ⟨F⟩, it does so at the cost of lowering motility velocity.
In average power, OM treated is modestly higher than native βMys
while phosphorylation almost doubles native βMys power. The
effect for either activator is to cause healthy cross-bridges to develop
more force in a failing heart.

System analytics in the form
of quantities [average force (⟨F⟩),
dynamic velocity (u), and average
power (⟨P⟩) for the actual step-sizes
vs ωL in Figure ] strikingly
indicate that the native βMys is optimized for speed and that
the natural activator holds speed nearly constant while increasing
⟨F⟩ and ⟨P⟩
by increasing the relative step-frequency of the long step. In contrast,
OM treatment has a mixed impact that sacrifices speed for ⟨F⟩ thereby limiting its potential for increasing
power. The natural activator enhances force and power by adjusting
relative step-frequency in the system rather than adjusting the fundamental
catalytic activity of the motor. The OM activator enhances force by
increasing ton; however, this apparently
limits relative frequency for the long step to δ ≲ 0.4.
The mechanistic insights just described explain the role of phosphorylation
in heart regulation and how a synthetic enhancer differs from a natural
one. βMys phosphorylation is a nonlinear mechanism to adjust
force-velocity in the cardiac muscle. It is a target for heart failure
therapy that has already been recognized. OM follows an entirely different mechanism. Contrasting motility
modification due to OM with that from the pβMys as indicated
in Table  identifies the boilerplate screening
characteristics for the next-generation βMys activators.

The Qdot assay routinely estimates step-size from low duty cycle
muscle myosins using a standard research microscope setup. Typical experimental preparations are identical
to those for the in vitro motility assay except for
the Qdot labeling of actin. The latter is one additional incubation
step following preparation of the in vitro motility
slide. Optimizing conditions for estimating step-size follows the
previously established guidelines usually
requiring 2 or 3 measurement–analysis cycles to pinpoint optimal
parameters for exciting light intensity, Δt, camera exposure time, and bulk concentration of motor protein.
Once the conditions have been optimized, measurement consists of properly
imaging the movement of 40–60 Qdot labeled filaments in 2–3
slides for each condition or motor protein investigated. At present,
analysis is partially automated with the manual tracking of the Qdot
required just for linking individual Qdots over the sequential images
that undergo super-resolution analysis. One measurement–analysis
cycle requires 2–4 days of effort not including protein preparation.
Full automation of the analysis, with emphasis on making the assay
amenable to high-throughput screening, is in progress. Overall, the
Qdot assay is efficient, accurate, and inexpensive when compared to
the modern laser-trap assay.

Conclusions
Omecamtive mecarbil (OM) is known to specifically target βMys
and upregulate cardiomyocyte contractile displacement and cardiac
contractile force. Actin-activated myosin ATPase, in vitro step-size, relative step-frequency, and motility were measured to
critically compare the characteristics of βMys in control native,
OM treated, and phosphorylated βMys. Relative step-frequency
is a newly defined and fundamental characteristic of the multiple
unitary step-size βMys motor. Phosphorylation is the natural
activation mechanism for this motor. Principal analytical characteristics
are the average force (⟨F⟩), dynamic
velocity (u), and average power (⟨P⟩). They strikingly demonstrate that the native
βMys is optimized for speed and that the natural activator holds
speed near constant while maximizing ⟨F⟩
and ⟨P⟩ by increasing the relative
step-frequency for the longest unitary step-size of βMys. OM
treatment sacrifices speed for ⟨F⟩
by increasing actomyosin affinity and duty cycle thereby lowering
potential for increasing power. The natural activator enhances force
and power by adjusting relative step-frequency in the system rather
than adjusting the fundamental catalytic activity of the motor. The
former mechanism is a template for βMys activator screening.
The Qdot assay is an efficient, accurate, and inexpensive platform
technology for characterizing step-size and step-frequency in low
duty cycle myosins. The Qdot assay and associated analytics are promising
new techniques amenable to high-throughput screening of motor protein
modulators.

Supporting Information Available
Movie S1 of the Qdot-labeled
actin moving over βMys (Movie S1), motility velocity versus
bulk βMys concentration (Figure S2), and the percentage of moving
actin filaments versus OM concentration (Figure S3). This material
is available free of charge via the Internet at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bi500730t_si_001.pdf

bi500730t_si_002.avi

The authors declare no
competing financial interest.

Abbreviations
βMysporcine ventricular cardiac
myosin (heavy chain gene MYH7)

dmyosin step-size

ELCventricular myosin essential light
chain (gene MYL3)

⟨F⟩average force

fmyosin duty cycle

KMactin binding constant in the presence of ATP

OMomecamtive mecarbil

⟨P⟩average power

pβMysRLC S15-phosphorylated βMys

RLCventricular myosin regulatory light chain
(gene MYL2)

SDstandard
deviation

udynamically averaged velocity

vmmyosin in vitro motility velocity

Vmaxmaximal actin-activated
myosin ATPase

ωrelative step-frequency.

