Most cancer cells are metabolically
reprogrammed to take up and utilize an increased amount of glucose
relative to normal differentiated cells. The majority of the glucose taken up is secreted from cancer cells
in the form of lactate, even in the presence of sufficient oxygen
to support oxidative phosphorylation. This
metabolic shift is known as aerobic glycolysis, or the Warburg effect.
While Warburg metabolism is seemingly wasteful in terms of the energy
derived per mole of glucose, several hypotheses have been proposed
to explain its role in cellular proliferation.− One compelling
suggestion is that Warburg metabolism supports the synthesis of precursors
that are needed to produce biomass. A
dividing cell has elevated biosynthetic demands for the replication
of its DNA, RNA, proteins, and lipids for plasma membranes. There
are known pathways connecting glycolytic intermediates to the synthesis
of each of these macromolecular structures. Thus, glucose carbon has
multiple potential fates that support the doubling of cell mass.

Although a large proportion of glucose is secreted as lactate in
most cancer cells, it has been shown that this is not the sole fate
of glucose carbon.− The fate of the rest of the glucose carbon, however,
has not been carefully characterized. In this work, we accomplished
two objectives by studying HeLa cancer cells cultured in uniformly
labeled [13C]glucose ([U-13C]glucose). First,
we comprehensively characterized metabolites that are enriched with
glucose carbon. Second, we quantitated the amount of glucose carbon
that is partitioned to various biomass components such as proteins
and lipids.

Our approach to studying the fate of glucose was
to integrate two
complementary metabolomic technologies: solid-state nuclear magnetic
resonance (NMR) and liquid chromatography/mass spectrometry (LC/MS).
In brief, HeLa cells were first lyophilized. The dried cells were
then partitioned into two components, one for solid-state NMR (∼30
mg) and one for LC/MS (∼1 mg). For the solid-state NMR analysis,
the dried cells were analyzed intact with a transmission-line probe
and 12 T magnet. In contrast, for LC/MS analysis, the dried cells
were extracted by using methanol, water, and acetonitrile. The extracted metabolites were then seperated
by reversed-phase and hydrophilic liquid interaction chromatography
and analyzed with a 6540 Agilent QTOF or a Thermo Q Exactive Plus
mass spectrometer. Details describing
HeLa cell cultures, solid-state NMR experiments, metabolite extraction,
LC/MS parameters, and bioinformatic processing can be found in the .

For LC/MS analysis,
we grew parallel cultures of HeLa cells in
either natural-abundance glucose or [U-13C]glucose (n = 3 for each). The culture conditions were identical with
the exception of the glucose label. The natural-abundance samples
were cultured in 100% natural-abundance glucose, while the labeled
samples were cultured in 50% [U-13C]glucose and 50% natural-abundance
glucose for 48 h. In all experiments, the concentration of total glucose
was 22.2 mM.

The LC/MS data from each experiment were processed
by using metabolomic
software called X13CMS that we recently developed. X13CMS, an extension of the widely
used XCMS software, is designed to search
all detected compounds for isotope labels unbiasedly. By using X13CMS, we comprehensively identified metabolites that become
isotopically enriched in HeLa cells after 48 h of U–13C glucose incubation. Out of the 9,271 ions that we detected, we
found that 2,505 (∼27%) were enriched by U–13C glucose. A complete list of labeled ions is provided in .

As expected, the
label was identified in glycolytic intermediates.
The label was also found in all tricarboxylic acid (TCA) cycle metabolites,
pentose phosphate pathway intermediates, and lipids such as fatty
acids, phosphatidylcholines, phosphatidylethanolamines, phosphatidylinositols,
and phosphatidylserines.

Isotopologue patterns of adenine, glycine, and
ATP as determined
by LC/MS. Data are from HeLa cells cultured in 50% [U-13C]glucose and 50% natural-abundance glucose for 48 h.

Interestingly, however, purines were only minimally
labeled, presumably
because HeLa cells use glycine in the medium as a precursor instead
of glucose. Adenine is presented as a
representative example in Figure . The labeling
pattern shows that &lt;10% of adenine incorporates 13C.
The percentage of adenine incorporating multiple 13C atoms
is near the detection limit. These data are consistent with the labeling
patterns of adenosine and adenosine triphosphate (ATP). Adenosine
and ATP are composed of an adenine ring of five carbons and a ribose
sugar of five carbons. Our results indicate that the ribose sugar
of adenosine and ATP is enriched from glucose. The labeling of the
five remaining carbons that form the adenine ring is minimal, with
a pattern that is consistent with that detected for free adenine.
Further, we do not observe 13C labeling of glycine. It
was previously suggested that consumed glycine supports de
novo purine synthesis in rapidly dividing cancer cells., Our results are consistent with this finding. Despite taking up
increased levels of glucose, rapidly dividing HeLa cells use very
little glucose carbon for de novo purine synthesis.

When the LC/MS data are processed by X13CMS as described
above, we identify specific metabolites that are enriched by the [U-13C]glucose label. It is not possible with LC/MS, however,
to perform total accounting for the 13C label. That is,
we cannot quantify the size of each 13C-labeled metabolite
pool relative to the size of the total [13C]glucose pool
that was taken up by the cell because LC/MS analysis is performed
on cellular extracts. The contributions of 13C from macromolecules
as well as other metabolites lost during sample preparation are not
measured by LC/MS. Additionally, differences in ionization efficiencies
between molecules limit quantitative comparisons between 13C-labeled metabolites. Yet, determining the relative distributions
of the label has important biochemical value.

To achieve total
accounting of the isotope, we analyzed intact
HeLa cells cultured in [U-13C]glucose by solid-state NMR
(Figure ). By
measuring whole cells with cross-polarization magic-angle spinning 13C NMR, we quantitated all the 13C label in the
sample, including that in isotopically enriched proteins and genetic
material. We cultured HeLa cells in standard DMEM (unlabeled glucose
at 22.2 mM) for a natural-abundance control. When natural-abundance
contributions are removed from data from HeLa cells cultured in 5%
[U-13C]glucose for 48 h, we obtain a spectrum that represents
the fate of labeled glucose.

Total accounting of the label by cross-polarization
magic-angle
spinning (CPMAS) 13C NMR. Data colored red are from HeLa
cells cultured in 5% [U-13C]glucose and 95% natural-abundance
glucose for 48 h. Data colored black are from HeLa cells cultured
in 100% natural-abundance glucose for 48 h. Each spectrum resulted
from averaging 20K scans. The difference, colored blue, represents
the fate of glucose 13C.

The relative intensity of the NMR peaks can be used to quantitatively
compare the distribution of glucose fates (Figure ). For example, we can compare the amount of labeled glucose
carbon that is incorporated into proteins and peptides (174 ppm) to
the amount of labeled glucose carbon that is incorporated into lipids
(30 ppm). Importantly, we do not observe the incorporation of labeled
glucose carbon into purines (140–160 ppm). These results are consistent with the LC/MS data (Figure ). To distinguish the contributions of insoluble
proteins from soluble peptides (both at 174 ppm), we extracted the
cells and reanalyzed the insoluble pellet by solid-state NMR. We also
performed the same type of differential solid-state NMR comparison
on HeLa cell, lyophilized media before and after culturing cells for
48 h in [U-13C]glucose. By monitoring changes in the integrated
intensity of the 13C3 peak of lactate (22 ppm),
we determined that 76% of labeled glucose carbon is secreted as lactate.
The combination of multiple NMR experiments allowed the quantitation
of the fate of labeled glucose carbon in proteins, peptides, intracellular
sugars and glycerol, and lipids, yielding values of 9, 2, 7, and 4%,
respectively (Table ).

It is worth emphasizing
that, qualitatively, the solid-state NMR
results are simpler to interpret than the processed LC/MS data. While
the LC/MS data provide extensive information about the labeling of
specific metabolites, it is difficult to make generalizations about
classes of compounds given the thousands of rows in the X13CMS table and the difficulty in identifying each. Therefore, solid-state
NMR and LC/MS data sets are highly complementary. The solid-state
NMR results can be used as a general guide to generate hypotheses
that can then be assessed by mining the exhaustive X13CMS
tables.

Distribution of 13C in
HeLa Cells Labeled with 5% [U-13C]Glucose for 48 h
fate of glucose	% of glucose-derived
carbon in biomass	
secreted lactate	76	
proteins (insoluble)	9	
peptides (soluble)	2	
sugars and glycerol	7	
lipids	4	
purines	&lt;1	
other	2	
In summary,
rapidly dividing cancer cells, such as the HeLa cells
used in this study, undergo Warburg metabolism in which an increased
amount of glucose is taken up and utilized compared to normal differentiated
cells. Here we have comprehensively characterized the fates of glucose
into various biomass components by integrating LC/MS and solid-state
NMR technologies. We show that even though glucose can conceivably
be routed into glycine for purine biosynthesis, this pathway is not
active in HeLa cells. Only minimal 13C label from glucose
is detected in glycine and the purine rings of nucleotides. With the
total-accounting capabilities of solid-state NMR, we quantitated the
fate of glucose carbons in various components of biomass. The incorporation
of labeled carbon from glucose into proteins, lipids, and nucleotides
is not equal. Future work will explore how this incorporation changes
with time and how the incorporation of glucose carbon into each biomass
component is biochemically regulated.

Supporting Information Available
Supporting details and Table
S-1. This material is available free of charge via the Internet at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bi500763u_si_001.pdf

bi500763u_si_002.pdf

This work was
supported by the National Institutes of Health Grants R01 ES022181
(G.J.P.), L30 AG0 038036 (G.J.P.), and R01 EB002058 (J.S.).

The authors
declare no competing financial interests.

