CXCR4 is a member of the G protein-coupled
receptor
(GPCR) family, which
has a seven-transmembrane domain., Upon ligand
binding, CXCR4 transfers a signal into the cell and triggers
a series of corresponding signaling cascades.− Like other GPCRs,
CXCR4 consists of an amino (N) terminus,
three extracellular loops, three intracellular loops, seven transmembrane
(TM) helices, and a carboxyl (C) terminus. The multiple extracellular and TM domains of CXCR4 are
required for chemokine interactions and receptor signaling. The structures of several chemokines, including
stromal-cell-derived
factor (SDF-1α), and viral macrophage inflammatory
protein-II (vMIP-II),, binding to CXCR4 have been determined
by either nuclear magnetic
resonance (NMR) or X-ray techniques. Unlike other chemokine receptors
that have a number of distinct ligands, CXCR4 has only two endogenous
natural ligands identified to date, known as SDF-1α (CXCL12)
and ubiquitin.− CXCR4 can also be recognized by an antagonistic ligand,
namely vMIP-II, which is encoded by the Kaposi’s sarcoma-associated
herpes virus. The CXCR4–SDF-1α
interaction has essential
physiological and pathological functions in hematopoiesis, immunomodulation,
vascularization, cerebellar neuron migration, cancer metastasis, and
human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection.−

As we all know, the binding
assays for CXCR4 with [125I]SDF-1α are very arduous
and not at all user-friendly, especially
with respect to dealing with harmful radioactive materials. In the
past few years, several groups, including ours, have used CXCR4-specific
12G5 antibodies in place of [125I]SDF-1α for the
CXCR4 ligand competitive binding assay, because 12G5 antibodies can
strongly and selectively interact with the domains of extracellular
loops 1 and 2 (ECL1 and ECL2, respectively) of CXCR4., However, the 12G5 antibody-based binding assay is time-consuming
and expensive because it requires both primary antibodies and fluorescently
labeled secondary antibodies. The instability of these antibodies
further worsens the situation by reducing the effectiveness of the
assay.

DV1 is a synthetic peptide composed entirely of d-amino
acids derived from the modification of a 21-residue peptide from the
N-terminus of vMIP-II.− DV1 has been shown to compete more efficiently with
[125I]SDF-1α in the CXCR4 binding assay with an IC50 of 13 nM than the nonmodified V1 peptide (IC50 = 218 nM). Similarly, the CXCR4 binding affinity was much higher
for DV1
(IC50 = 32 nM) than for the V1 peptide (IC50 = 456 nM) in the CXCR4-specific mAb 12G5 competing binding assay., In contrast to its strong interaction with CXCR4, the DV1 peptide
showed no detectable CCR5 binding, even at concentrations as high
as 100 μM, when competing with [125I]MIP-1β. These results suggest that binding of the DV1
peptide
to CXCR4 is receptor-selective.

Here, we report a novel high-affinity
and receptor subresidue-selective
fluorescent CXCR4-specific probe, FITC-DV1. This novel probe was synthesized
by adding an aminocaproic acid and a lysine to the C-terminus of DV1
and conjugating a fluorescein isothiocyanate (FITC) group onto the
ε-amino moiety of the added lysine (the mass spectrometry data
for the identification of DV1 and FITC-DV1 are shown in Figures S1
and S2 of the ).

Prior to studying the binding affinity of FITC-DV1 for the CXCR4
receptor, we determined the saturation concentration for the binding
of FITC-DV1 to CXCR4 in CXCR4-overexpressing cells (CHO-CXCR4 cells)
(Figure ). The specific signals for binding
of FITC-DV1 to CXCR4 reached a plateau at a concentration of 800 nM.

Saturation
curve for binding of FITC-DV1 to CXCR4. Specific binding (■)
was obtained by subtracting nonspecific binding (▲) (obtained
from the binding of FITC-DV1 to wild-type CHO cells) from total binding
(▼). Means ± the standard deviation; n = 3 independent experiments.

Therefore, we employed a saturation concentration of 800
nM to
conduct and validate the FITC-DV1-based competitive binding assay.
Our subsequent binding experiments revealed that DV1 and SDF-1α
(Figure A and Table S1 of the ), as well as the well-known
small molecule ligands of CXCR4, AMD3100 and IT1t (Figure B and Table S1 of the ), all inhibited the binding of FITC-DV1 to CXCR4
in our assay (IC50 values listed in Table S2 of the ), suggesting that the
site of binding of FITC-DV1 to CXCR4 overlaps with those of SDF-1α,
12G5 Ab, AMD3100, and IT1t. The competition curves for FITC-DV1-based
and 12G5 Ab-based competitive binding were almost superimposable for
all these ligands (P &gt; 0.05). These results strongly
support the idea that FITC-DV1 is
a good chemical probe for ligand–CXCR4 interactions and its
efficacy is comparable to that of the specific antibody 12G5.

Competitive
CXCR4 binding activity of DV1, SDF-1α, AMD3100, and IT1t in
FITC-DV1- and 12G5 Ab-based competitive binding assays. (A) The competitive
capacities of DV1 (blue asterisks) and SDF-1α (maroon times
signs) in the FITC-DV1-based assay were comparable to those of DV1
(red circles) and SDF-1α (black triangles) in the 12G5 Ab-based
assay, for binding CXCR4. (B) The competitive capacities of AMD3100
(black asterisks) and IT1t (red times signs) in the FITC-DV1-based
assay were comparable to those of AMD3100 (black triangles) and IT1t
(black diamonds) in the 12G5 Ab-based assay, for binding CXCR4. Means
± the standard deviation; n = 3 independent
experiments.

CXCR4, CCR5, and CCR3
are all chemokine receptors that have highly
homologous protein sequences and three-dimensional structures. To
determine whether FITC-DV1 has any cross-reactivity with CCR5 and
CCR3, we performed further competitive assays. The binding activities
of FITC-DV1 were very low (IC50 &gt; 20 μM) for both
CCR5 and CCR3 (Figure ).

Binding activity of FITC-DV1
with CCR5 and CCR3. The IC50 values of FITC-DV1 against
CCR5 and CCR3 antibodies were both greater
than 20 μM. Means ± the standard deviation; n = 3 independent experiments.

Neither ubiquitin, a ligand of CXCR4, nor RANTES (a common
ligand
of CCR5 and CCR3) inhibited the binding of FITC-DV1 in the corresponding
CXCR4-, CCR5-, and CCR3-expressing cell lines (data not shown). Additionally,
FITC-DV1 did not show any inhibitory activity against CXCR7 Ab binding
with CXCR7, even at a high concentration of 5 μM. Therefore,
the relatively high binding affinity, along with the receptor selectivity
of FITC-DV1 toward CXCR4, makes it an excellent probe that can be
used in CXCR4 binding assays.

In conclusion, conventional radioactive
and antibody binding assays
are very costly and time-consuming. We have developed a new fluorescent
chemical ligand probe, FITC-DV1, which binds to CXCR4 with high affinity
and specificity. This FITC-DV1-based CXCR4 binding assay is superior
to radioactive [125I]SDF-1α- and 12G5 antibody-based
CXCR4 binding assays, as it is simple, sensitive, specific, time-saving,
and cost-effective. The convenience of this FITC-DV1-based assay may
help to pave the new way toward a better understanding of differential
ligand–CXCR4 interactions and to identify specific modulators
and new candidates for CXCR4. In addition, this novel approach for
developing a simple, stable, CXCR4-specific fluorescent ligand probe
could be widely applied to other GPCRs of interest.

Supporting Information Available
Experimental methods, Figures
S1 and S2, and Tables
S1 and S2. This material is available free of charge via the Internet
at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bi500500h_si_001.pdf

Author Contributions
Y.Y.
synthesized the peptides. Y.Y., Q.Z., and M.G. performed biological
experiments. Y.Y. and Q.Z. wrote the paper. X.Y., Z.H., and J.A. supervised
the work.

This work
was supported by grants from the National Institutes of
Health and the Carol M. Baldwin Breast Cancer Research Fund. Y.Y.
was supported in part by the Chinese Scholarship Council.

The
authors declare no competing
financial interest.

Acknowledgments
We thank the National Institutes of Health AIDS Reagent Program
for providing the CCR5 and CCR3 cell lines and anti-CCR3 and CCR5
antibodies.

