In mammals,
circadian rhythmicity
is a fundamental aspect of temporal organization in essentially every
cell in the body and modulates much of physiology, biochemistry, and
behavior; therefore, it is not surprising that disruption of the clock
can lead to many pathological states. Multiple signals originating
in the suprachiasmatic nucleus (SCN) of the hypothalamus, the so-called
“master circadian oscillator”, synchronize independent
oscillators in each cell and peripheral tissue as well as other brain
areas (reviewed in ref ()). Within these cells and tissues, a set of clock genes and their
protein products, which are highly conserved among animals, form transcription–translation
feedback loops to generate cell-autonomous rhythms. This molecular
clock, in turn, drives rhythmic gene expression, which will ultimately
exert control over almost every biological, physiological, and behavioral
process. Because the circadian clock is
situated in such a pivotal position, disruption of the circadian clock
by genetics and environmental conditions can result in dramatic changes
in both mental and physical health, and therefore, understanding how
circadian clocks maintain circadian rhythmicity is of central importance.

Although it has long been known that the circadian clock drives
rhythmic transcription of clock-controlled genes (ccgs) that control
rhythmic downstream processes, recent findings have challenged the
current transcription-centric model. For example, proteome analyses
have shown that as many as 50% of rhythmically expressed proteins
do not exhibit rhythmicity in their mRNA levels., This
inconsistency in rhythmic mRNA versus protein perhaps should not be
too surprising, given that the correlation between mRNA and protein
expression in general can be as low as 40%. In addition, mathematical modeling predicted more than 20 years
ago that regulation of mRNA stability is essential for rhythmic mRNA
expression. Therefore, in this review,
we will examine how circadian genomics has enhanced our understanding
of the relative roles of transcription and post-transcriptional control
in generating the output rhythms of the cell in mammals. We will also
discuss potential new applications of next-generation sequencing (NGS)
technology in circadian genomics to explore novel post-transcriptional
regulatory mechanisms. Regrettably, we will not cover epigenetic studies,
such as circadian regulation of DNA methylation and histone modifications,
although these have been extensively studied recently. Readers interested
in this area are encouraged to refer to other studies.−

Clock Genes
The late 1990s to early 2000s was a time of
great advancement in
circadian biology, with the discovery of many core clock genes and
the unraveling of the core circadian mechanism as an interlocking
transcription–translation feedback loop.− The core negative feedback loop consists of the transcription factor
CLOCK interacting with BMAL1 to activate transcription of the Period (Per) and Cryptochrome (Cry) genes, resulting in high levels of these
transcripts. The PER and CRY proteins then heterodimerize, translocate
back to the nucleus, and interact with the CLOCK–BMAL1 complex
to inhibit their own transcription. Subsequently, the PER–CRY
repressor complex is degraded, and CLOCK–BMAL1 can now activate
a new cycle of transcription. In addition to the primary negative
feedback loop, there is a second feedback loop involving the nuclear
hormone receptors Rev-erbs and RORs that negatively and positively regulate Bmal1 transcription,
respectively. This secondary loop is thought to add robustness to
the molecular clock., The entire cycle takes approximately
24 h to complete, and this is considered to be the driving force of
the cell-autonomous clock.

Microarray-Based Circadian Genomics
By the beginning of the 21st Century, we had considerable knowledge
about how the core oscillator generates circadian rhythms; however,
less was known about how the oscillator regulates downstream biological,
physiological, and behavioral processes that are under circadian control.
On the basis of the core molecular clock mechanism, which consists
of transcription–translation feedback loops, it was hypothesized
that rhythmic ccg expression, driven by the core clock, would function
as output molecules to control downstream processes.

On the
other hand, in the 1990s, it was becoming clear that there
was a need to develop a technique that could effectively measure the
expression of tens of thousands of genes simultaneously. Microarray
technology was thus developed to fulfill this goal and became commercially
available with a reasonable cost. Therefore, many circadian biologists
took advantage of this technique and identified hundreds of rhythmically
expressed ccgs in different organisms and tissues. ccgs in the SCN
were undoubtedly of prime importance in mammals; however, other tissues
such as liver, kidney, heart, pineal gland, distal colon, and Rat-1
and NIH3T3 cells were also examined.− Initial major findings from these microarrays were that each tissue
expressed at least several hundred ccgs, while only a few dozen ccgs
were identified in cell lines such as Rat-1 and NIH3T3 cells. Moreover,
there was significant tissue specificity in ccgs with only a small
proportion in common between each tissue. In fact, Per2 was the only mRNA that was commonly
identified as being rhythmic among all microarray studies from both
SCN and liver. Although this tissue specificity could simply be due
to the absence of expression of particular genes in one tissue compared
to another, and/or the differences in analytic parameters and assay
stringency (see ), identification of ccgs and their specificity in each tissue/cell
highlighted the fact that although the fundamental mechanisms driving
clocks in each cell are the same, they drive rhythmic expression of
specific subsets of genes that are relevant to that cell’s
function.

Even though microarrays served as important tools
in globally identifying
ccgs in various different tissues, they also presented some limitations.
For example, microarrays tend to underrepresent differences in gene
expression; the amplitude of mRNA expression rhythms in most ccgs
is &lt;3-fold on a microarray, even though many have greater magnitude
changes when measured by nonarray approaches such as quantitative
polymerase chain reaction or Northern blotting. In addition, the choice of probe sets included on each
array and errors in gene annotations for some of the probes (optimistically
estimated to be approximately 1–5%) were also concerns. Furthermore, the genes and specific probe sets
on each microarray platform are not identical, thus making it difficult
to compare data sets obtained from different platforms.

Next-Generation
Sequencing-Based Circadian Genomics
While microarray technology
flourished and was widely used in the
early to mid 2000s, there was also a strong demand for low-cost DNA
sequencing technologies that would potentially replace standard dye-terminator
methods. In fact, the development of the prototypic NGS technology
was already underway in the 1990s, although NGS sequencers did not
come onto the market until 2004. As expected, these NGS technologies
successfully reduced sequencing cost; for example, the cost to read
the entire human genome dropped from almost US $100000 in 2002 to
US $5000 in 2013. Furthermore, NGS has
a broad range of possible applications for many different genomic
studies, such as species classification and/or gene discovery, de novo assemblies of genomes that have not been sequenced
in the past, SNP identification, epigenetic analysis, DNA methylation
analysis, and, most notably, transcriptome analyses (RNA-seq) of cells,
tissues, and organisms. In fact, microarrays are now being replaced
by RNA-seq, because unlike a microarray, which requires that genes
have representative sequences embedded on a platform, NGS allows one
to quantify all known transcripts and to identify and quantify unknown
transcripts anywhere in a given genome.

When this new technology
was applied to mammalian circadian biology,
∼1000–2000 ccgs were identified in mouse liver,− which is 2–10-fold more the number identified by microarrays.
This is probably due to the more sensitive and comprehensive nature
of RNA-seq and the increased sensitivity in algorithms to extract
rhythmicity, although microarray technology also identified thousands
of ccgs with an increased time resolution in the sampling interval
(every one vs 4 h). In addition to increased
power in identifying ccgs, these series of new RNA-seq studies also
shed light on rhythmically expressed nonprotein coding transcripts,
such as long noncoding RNAs (lncRNAs) or microRNAs (miRNAs). Recent
findings suggest more than 90% of the entire genome is transcribed
in mammals, and the majority of these
transcripts account for nonprotein coding transcripts. Some of these
noncoding transcripts such as miRNAs and lncRNAs have regulatory functions
and likely contribute to the complexity of the organism by exerting
additional control over protein expression. Contributions of circadian
clock function to miRNA expression or vice versa have been widely
accepted and well established. In particular, miR-132 and miR-219
seem to be directly involved in the clock system and regulate the
circadian period or response to light. The expression of many miRNAs is found to be rhythmic, not only
in liver but also in retina and SCN,− and bioinformatics, as well as experimental evidence,
suggests that many core clock genes are under the control of miRNA.− A recent study has also shown that up to 30% of ccgs undergo miRNA-mediated
regulation to perhaps control the phase and amplitude of rhythmic
mRNA expression patterns post-transcriptionally. In addition to miRNAs, the expression of lncRNAs is rhythmic
in liver and pineal gland., Although the precise
roles for most lncRNAs remain largely elusive, studies of some lncRNAs
have revealed that they exert a diverse spectrum of regulatory mechanisms
across a variety of cellular pathways, ranging from embryonic stem
cell differentiation, imprinting, X-chromosome inactivation, cell
cycle regulation, and neuronal development, as well as diseases such
as cancer or neurological disorders (reviewed in ref ()). Therefore, it would
not be surprising that these rhythmically expressed lncRNAs take part
in regulating rhythmic processes. One notable lncRNA is an antisense
transcript of Per2,,, whose expression is antiphasic to the sense Per2 mRNA. Antisense transcripts make up a class of lncRNAs
that are transcribed from the opposite DNA strand of the sense RNA
transcripts with which they share sequence complementarity,− and the existence of a long antisense transcript for core clock
genes has also been reported in Neurospora and Antheraea pernyi (silkmoth)., The conservation
of antisense transcripts to core clock genes across kingdoms seems
to imply that this is an important mechanism for circadian clock regulation.

Another unexpected observation from circadian NGS analyses was
that rhythmic mRNA expression relies to a great extent upon post-transcriptional
regulation. By analyzing circadian NGS data using reads mapped not
only to exons but also to introns (as an indicator of pre-mRNA expression),
Koike et al. found that approximately
80% of ccg mRNAs did not undergo rhythmic de novo transcription. Similar findings were shown by Menet et al. using a method called Nascent-seq that directly
assesses rhythmic de novo transcription by measuring
nascent RNA levels. Furthermore, 50–70% of transcripts that
are rhythmic in de novo transcription do not exhibit
rhythmic mRNA expression. This type of
observation is unique to NGS and cannot be typically made from microarray
studies, because standard microarrays measure only the amount of transcript
that hybridizes to the pre-embedded specific probes, making it difficult
to distinguish pre-RNA from mRNA unless samples are prepared to represent
only nascent RNAs (i.e., from nuclear run-ons) or custom arrays are
specifically designed to contain probe sets to introns. All these
data strongly suggest that post-transcriptional regulation plays a
major role in driving mRNA oscillation rhythms.

Post-transcriptional Circadian
Genomics
Even before genomic studies became popular in the
circadian biology
field, several nongenomic approaches had already revealed that the
mammalian circadian clock system utilizes various post-transcriptional
regulatory mechanisms such as splicing, alternative polyadenylation, and poly(A)
tail length regulation− to control rhythmic gene expression. Theoretical
models also predicted that mRNA stability regulation was important
for cycling mRNAs, as mRNA half-life impacts their amplitude, and
the more stable the transcript, the lower the amplitude of its cycling. The key components of post-transcriptional regulation
are typically trans-acting factors (i.e., miRNAs and RNA-binding proteins)
acting on cis elements residing in target mRNAs, which leads to the
consequent regulation.

The first evidence of post-transcriptional
regulation in circadian
biology came from the study of the Drosophila Period (Per) gene, showing that the stability of Per mRNA is under circadian control and that its mRNA stability
changes around the clock. Similarly,
the mRNA stability of one of the mammalian Per homologue
genes, Period1, was also found to be regulated post-transcriptionally. The noncoding 3′UTR portion of Per1 mRNA plays a role in its stability control, and the
post-transcriptional regulators, LARK RNA-binding proteins, activate
translation of PER1 protein expression., Subsequently,
other cycling mRNAs, such as Per2, Per3, and Cry1, were also shown to be under mRNA stability
control in a clock-dependent manner, and their mRNAs are more stable
during the rising phase of mRNA cycling and less stable during the
declining phase. Three heterogeneous ribonucleoprotein particles (hnRNPs),
hnRNP I/PTB, hnRNP Q, and hnRNP D/AUF1, appear to take part in the
regulation of mRNA stability of the clock genes mentioned above, as
well as regulating the temporal translation of CRY1, PER1, REV-ERBα,
and AANAT, a rate-limiting enzyme in the melatonin-producing pathway.−

In addition, the circadian clock may regulate translation
more
broadly, because the activity of the translation initiation complex,
including the eukaryotic translational initiation factor 4E-binding
protein 1 (4E-BP1) as well as the mTORC1 pathway (both of which are
indispensable for protein synthesis), is under circadian control in
both SCN and liver.− 4E-BP1 also appears to desynchronize core clock function
and/or attenuate its light responsiveness by repressing the translation
of vasoactive intestinal peptide (VIP). Because VIP is a key neuropeptide
that synchronizes SCN cells to the environmental light–dark
cycle, as well as transmitting environmental cues (i.e., light) between
individual cells within the SCN, 4E-BP1-mediated
translation perhaps controls entrainment and synchrony of the master
clock. However, because 4E-BP1 acts generally in translation, it is
still unclear why circadian regulation of 4E-BP1 seems to cause specific
effects on VIP translation.

The emergence of genomic approaches
has improved our knowledge
of post-transcriptional regulation from a few specific examples to
a more global view. For example, a study with Affymetrix mouse exon
arrays discovered that 0.4% of genes were under the control of rhythmic
alternative splicing, although this is
a surprisingly small effect considering that alternative splicing
is a widespread and highly regulated event in mammals, affecting ∼80%
of mouse genes. Interestingly, circadian
alternative splicing correlated with rhythmic mRNA expression, supporting
the idea that circadian alternative splicing occurs cotranscriptionally. This could also explain why only a low percentage
of genes undergo circadian alternative splicing, as cotranscriptional
splicing is approximately 2-fold less efficient in mouse liver. Another microarray-based study, “poly(A)denylome
analysis”, which measured poly(A) tail lengths of individual
mRNAs, showed that approximately 2.5% of mRNAs have rhythmic poly(A)
tail lengths in mouse liver, and importantly, the fluctuation in the
poly(A) tail length, not the mRNA levels, correlated with the rhythmicity
of the protein levels. Furthermore, ribosome
profiling analyses, a technique used to isolate actively translated
RNAs from polyribosome fractions, discovered that approximately 2%
of expressed genes are translated rhythmically, independent of the
rhythmicity of steady-state mRNA. Corresponding
protein expression was validated as being rhythmic, indicating that
these mRNAs undergo post-transcriptional regulation to be translated
rhythmically.

Other genome-wide analyses also provided evidence
that post-transcriptional
events are critical for determining the pace and amplitude of the
circadian clock. The m6A RNA methylation-dependent RNA
processing pathway contributes to the period length, and cold-inducible RNA-binding protein (CIRBP) regulates
the amplitude. Genetic or pharmacological
disturbance of the m6A RNA methylation pathway resulted
in the elongation of the circadian period via the retention of methylated
RNAs in the nucleus. Notably, the m6A RIP (RNA immunoprecipitation)-seq
analysis revealed that core clock mRNAs such as Per1-3, Dbp, and Nr1d1,2 (Rev-erbα and Rev-erbβ), among other nonclock mRNAs,
have methylated adenines in their mRNAs, suggesting that these mRNAs
are substrates of the RNA methylation-dependent RNA processing pathway.
Given that m6A modification is ubiquitous, affecting &gt;7000
genes in humans, global regulation of
mRNAs with m6A modification, not just core clock mRNAs,
might contribute to the lengthening of the circadian period. In contrast,
depletion of CIRBP led to dampening of the rhythms, and this was accompanied
by the reduction in the level of expression of several clock proteins,
such as CLOCK, DBP, and PER2, with an only minor effect on their mRNA
levels; however, it is still unclear whether CIRBP directly binds
to pre-RNA/mRNA of these clock genes and controls their protein expression
post-transcriptionally. Given the broad impact of CIRBP on circadian
amplitude regulation, it is plausible that the effect of CIRBP is
indirect.

There are likely other post-transcriptional mechanisms
yet to be
discovered that control circadian clock function and/or circadian
gene expression. A number of different sequencing methods have been
developed that can be used to demonstrate circadian control of post-transcriptional
events, including Nascent-seq, GRO (global run-on)-seq, and NET (native
elongation transcript)-seq, to assess de novo RNA
synthesis;,, RIP (RNA immunoprecipitation)-seq and CLIP (cross-linking immunoprecipitation)-seq
to globally identify target RNA recognition sequences of an RNA-binding
protein;, BRIC (5′-bromouridine immunoprecipitation
chase)-seq for mRNA stability; CRAC (in vivo RNA cross-linking)-seq to identify target mRNAs of exosome-mediated mRNA decay; PAL [poly(A)
tail length]-seq or TAIL-seq, for poly(A) tail length
regulation; GTI (global translation initiation)-seq for translation
initiation sites; PARS (parallel analysis of RNA structure)-seq and
DMS (dimethyl sulfate)-seq for RNA secondary structure;, and m6A-seq for m6A modifications. Future studies using these and other techniques
will likely uncover a plethora of regulatory mechanisms that will
provide insight into how the circadian clock controls rhythmic gene
expression post-transcriptionally without relying on rhythmic de novo transcription (Figure ).

Potential
new applications of NGS technology in circadian genomics
to explore novel post-transcriptional regulatory mechanisms. Nascent-seq, GRO-seq, NET-seq, RIP-seq, CLIP-seq, BRIC-seq, CRAC-seq, PAL-seq or TAIL-seq,, GTI-seq, PARS-seq or DMS-seq,, and m6A-seq. RBP denotes
the RNA-binding protein.

Circadian Proteomics
Considering the fact that proteins,
not mRNAs, are the functional
entities that ultimately drive biological processes, identification
of rhythmically expressed proteins should be a priority; however,
this task has been difficult to achieve, mainly because of the difficulties
and expense of quantitative proteomic approaches. A recently developed
technique, SILAC (stable isotope labeling by amino acids in cell culture),
is beginning to overcome this issue. SILAC compares two groups of
samples, one of which is labeled with a “light” or normal
amino acid while the other is labeled with a “heavy”
amino acid (i.e., 2H vs 1H, 13C vs 12C, or 15N vs 14N). The samples are
mixed, and then mass spectrometry analysis is performed. The ratio
of peak intensities is then measured. Each peptide should appear as
a pair, differing only in the mass shift between the two samples with
light versus heavy amino acids, and this ratio of peak intensities
represents the ratio of the amount of each protein.

When this technique was applied to circadian proteomics,
5–10%
of all expressed proteins were determined to be rhythmic in mouse
liver,, a percentage that is very similar to the
percentage of ccgs identified in genomic analyses. Among these proteins,
however, only 50–80% had rhythmically expressed corresponding
mRNAs, further indicating that rhythmicity in mRNA and rhythmicity
in protein do not necessarily correlate. Perplexingly, neither SILAC
study identified any core clock proteins among the rhythmic proteins,
even though most circadian genomic studies, as well as Western blot
analyses, have found them to be rhythmically expressed. This was probably
due to the low expression levels of clock proteins that are below
the limit of detection of current technologies.

Limitations: How To Define
“Rhythmicity”?
Although genomic approaches
have been widely used and have identified
many new ccgs, they also have limitations. The results from genomic
and proteomic studies are somewhat inconsistent, and it is thus often
unclear which genes and/or proteins are actually playing important
roles in rhythmic processes. Even in cases when the exact same tissue
was examined, only a handful of genes were found to be in common between
different experiments. For example, of 97 or 408 genes identified
as ccgs in mouse SCN from two individual studies, only 27 genes were
shared between the data sets., In addition, of 395,
338, 524, 892, 1126, 1204, 1262, 2037, and 2741 ccgs identified in
various studies from mouse liver (four microarray and five RNA-seq
studies), only 30 genes were conserved in all four independent microarray
studies, 60 genes were shared in all five independent RNA-seq studies,
and just five ccgs (Hsd3b5, Lgals9, Per2, Por, and Usp2) were common in all nine studies.−,,− Obviously, a lowered threshold of commonality increases
the number of common ccgs; 19, 32, 80, and 126 genes were commonly
detected as being rhythmic from eight, seven, six, and five of all
nine studies, respectively. The majority of common ccgs consist of
clock genes [Arntl (Bmal1), Clock, Cry1, Nr1d1 (Rev-erbα), Nr1d2 (Rev-erbβ), and Rorc] and other relatively high-amplitude
ccgs [Ccrn4l (Nocturnin) and Avpr1a (arginine vasopressin receptor 1A)]; however, Per1 and Bmal were missing in some of these
data sets, and Dbp was not extracted as a ccg in
the three microarray studies from early days,− in spite of
their widely recognized robust hepatic rhythmic expression. This inconsistency issue was not restricted
to transcriptome analyses; other global circadian approaches revealed
a similar problem. The overlapping genes between Nascent-seq and intron
counts are still small,, although it is possible
that differences in criteria (intron cycling genes vs nascent transcripts)
affected the outcomes, even though both should indicate the status
of active de novo transcription. Moreover, two independent
SILAC proteome studies identified only 54 proteins shared between
the data sets, of 186 and 476 rhythmic proteins identified in each
study. This could be due to several factors: differences in the experimental
design, such as light versus dark condition (i.e., LD vs DD), sampling
intervals (i.e., every one vs four vs 6 h), or sampling duration [i.e.,
one vs two circadian cycle(s)], experimental conditions to lyse and/or
homogenize cells (i.e., solubility of proteins), sensitivity of mass
spectrometry/microarray/RNA-seq, methods used for circadian rhythmicity
analyses, or a combination of any of these. Biological variability
may also explain some discrepant results, but perhaps the most critical
factor is the analytical method used to define whether the expression
of a particular transcript is rhythmic or not; this further emphasizes
the difficulty of extracting ccgs from large data sets.

For
the detection of circadian rhythmicity, several algorithms
have been used historically, including JTK_CYCLE, ARSER, COSOPT, Fisher’s
G test, and CircWave (http://www.euclock.org/results/item/circ-wave.html).,, Each algorithm
has unique characteristics for detecting ccgs from noisy data sets,
and multiple factors such as tolerance to noise (i.e., outliers) and
fit to sinusoid can significantly affect the results. These algorithms
run using “periodic regression analysis”, which utilizes
the principles of regression analysis and tests the goodness of fit
between experimental data and a sinusoid, and/or “spectrum
analysis”, which calculates a periodic function that would
best fit the experimental data and analyzes periodic component(s)
within the data. More sensitive algorithms return larger numbers of
ccgs because they can detect low-amplitude rhythms. Moreover, the
numbers of ccgs can also be significantly affected by the normalization
process, especially for weakly rhythmic genes. In contrast to microarray
studies, in which quantile normalization has been the default methodology,
NGS technology still seeks an optimal normalization method, and this issue can also introduce variability
into the detection of rhythmicity. This raises the following serious
question: are these weakly rhythmic genes biologically meaningful?
There is no clear answer to the question yet, but the existence of
ccgs with low amplitudes may indicate that the circadian clock modulates
output physiology in a subtle manner.

As such, it is clear that
we have to be careful in interpreting
the data from genomic analyses. Just like any other biological experiments,
it is extremely difficult to exclude false positives without creating
false negatives and to set an arbitrary but significant threshold.
Less stringent parameters will most likely result in an increased
number of rhythmic genes and thus more common ccgs across the data
sets, although it is still unclear what would be the appropriate boundary
to distinguish rhythmic from nonrhythmic and biologically meaningful
rhythms from noise.

Concluding Remarks and Future Perspectives
There is no doubt that these various global approaches are powerful
and that it is important to identify rhythmically expressed genes
and, furthermore, to understand the level at which the clock exerts
its control to generate a rhythmic output; however, the identification
of the true ccgs, which are ultimately important for controlling circadian
physiology and behavior, can be challenging. What are “bona
fide” ccgs with functional importance? How can these be defined?
Within the 54 proteins commonly identified as being rhythmic in SILAC
studies, 11 proteins exhibited rhythmicity at the mRNA level in transcriptome
analyses (Table ). These genes appear to be
good candidates for “bona fide” ccgs; however, it is
dangerous to rely solely on gene expression data based on whether
a given mRNA or protein is rhythmic, because rhythmicity is determined
with an arbitrary significance threshold and it is virtually impossible
to eliminate all the false positives and/or negatives, as mentioned
above. Even if the amplitude of the expression rhythm of a gene is
too low to detect, output rhythms can be amplified by having multiple
weak ccgs functioning within the same pathway, and the rhythmic expression
of a key (i.e., rate-limiting) enzyme might be able to confer rhythmicity
to the entire pathway, in spite of a lack of rhythmicity in other
genes involved in the pathway.

Rhythmically Expressed
Genes at Protein
and mRNA Levels in Mouse Liver
gene	no. of positives	molecular function	
POR	9	cytochrome P450 reductase	
FKBP4	8	peptidyl-prolyl cis–trans isomerase	
TARS	8	threonyl-tRNA synthetase	
ALAS1	7	5-aminolevulinate
synthase	
ABCC2	6	canalicular multispecific
organic anion transporter	
CLPX	6	ATP-dependent
Clp protease
ATP-binding subunit	
CROT	6	peroxisomal carnitine O-octanoyltransferase	
SLC7A2	6	low-affinity cationic amino
acid transporter	
FMO5	5	dimethylaniline
monooxygenase	
GNE	5	bifunctional UDP-N-acetylglucosamine	
MAN2A1	5	α-mannosidase 2	
Numbers of studies
that identified
a given gene as being rhythmic.

Indeed, gene ontology analyses support the idea that there are
particular pathways that are common between experiments even though
specific ccgs are not. For instance, between SCN and liver, genes
involved in “Ubl conjugation (i.e., proteins that are post-translationally
modified by the attachment of at least one ubiquitin-like modifier
protein, such as ubiquitin and SUMO)” are enriched in data
sets from both tissues (Tables  and ). Given the involvement of ubiquitin ligases, FBXL3
and FBXL21, in the core clock mechanism, this result from ontology
analysis seems quite reasonable.− Additionally, keywords
describing “Nucleotide-Binding” and “Apoptosis”
appear to be under circadian control (Tables  and ), although the mechanistic analyses
that link these pathways to the circadian clock are still lacking.
It is possible that the circadian clock regulates the same pathways
in different tissues by utilizing different genes, even though there
are only a few overlapping ccgs between different tissues. It would
be interesting to pursue the possible mechanistic links between the
circadian clock and these processes.

Pathway/Domain
Terms Shared in Two
Independent SCN ccg Data Sets,
pathway	description	
circadian rhythm	GO:007623, Mmu04710	
acetylation	SP_PIR_KEYWORDS	
apoptosis	SP_PIR_KEYWORDS, GO:006915	
programmed cell
death	GO:0012501	
methylation	SP_PIR_KEYWORDS	
nucleus	SP_PIR_KEYWORDS	
phosphoprotein	SP_PIR_KEYWORDS	
Ubl conjugation	SP_PIR_KEYWORDS	
nucleotide binding	GO:0000166, IPR012677, SP_PIR_KEYWORDS	
membrane-enclosed lumen	GO:0031974	
organelle lumen	GO:0043233	
intracellular organelle
lumen	GO:0070013	
RNA recognition
motif (RRM)	IPR000504,
SM00360	
cell death	GO:0008219	
death	GO:0016265	
nuclear receptor ROR	IPR003079	
PAS	IPR000014, IPR013655, SM00086, UP_SEQ_FEATURE	
PAC
motif	IPR001610,
SM00091	
DAVID returns pathways that are
enriched in a given gene data set with each P value
being up to 0.1.

Pathway/Domain Terms Shared in Nine
Independent Liver ccg Data Sets−,,−
criteria	pathway	description	
P &lt; 0.05 in all	biological rhythms	SP_PIR_KEYWORDS	
 	circadian rhythms	mmu04710	
 	cytoplasm	SP_PIR_KEYWORDS	
 	endoplasmic reticulum	SP_PIR_KEYWORDS, GO:0005783	
 	lyase	SP_PIR_KEYWORDS	
 	phosphoprotein	SP_PIR_KEYWORDS	
 	steroid metabolic process	GO:0008202	
 	steroid hormone receptor	IPR001723	
 	nuclear hormone receptor	IPR000536, IPR008946	
 	zinc finger, nuclear hormone
receptor type	IPR001628	
 	basic leucine zipper	IPR011700	
 	ZnF_C4	SM00399	
 	ligand-binding domain of
hormone receptors	SM00430	
 	binding site:
substrate	UP_SEQ_FEATURE	
 	nucleotide binding	SP_PIR_KEYWORDS	
 	NADP	SP_PIR_KEYWORDS	
 	nucleotide binding	GO:0000166	
 	purine nucleotide binding	GO:0017076	
 	ribonucleotide binding	GO:0032553	
 	purine ribonucleotide
binding	GO:0032555	
P &lt; 0.05 in eight	rhythmic process	GO:0048511	
 	circadian rhythm	GO:0007623	
 	cofactor metabolic process	GO:0051186	
 	ligand-dependent nuclear
receptor activity	GO:004879	
 	cytosol	GO:0005829	
 	lipid biosynthetic process	GO:0008610	
 	amine biosynthetic process	GO:0009309	
 	regulation of cell death	GO:0010941	
 	regulation of apoptosis	GO:0042981	
 	regulation of programmed
cell death	GO:0043067	
 	endomembrane system	GO:0012505	
 	organelle membrane	GO:0031090	
 	oxidation reduction	GO:0055114	
 	oxidoreducatse	SP_PIR_KEYWORDS	
 	transferase	SP_PIR_KEYWORDS	
 	pyridoxal phosphate-dependent
transferase	IPR015421	
 	pyridoxal phosphate	SP_PIR_KEYWORDS	
 	Ubl conjucation	SP_PIR_KEYWORDS	
 	mutagenesis site	UP_SEQ_FEATURE	
 	BRLZ (basic leucine-zipper
motif)	SM00338	
 	NAD(P)-binding domain	IPR016040	
Pathways/domains that were also
enriched in proteome analyses.

In addition, integrative approaches involving many different types
of analysis will provide additional insight and power and will likely
be necessary to elucidate how the circadian clock regulates specific
biological pathways. For example, it is now widely recognized that
the circadian clock regulates metabolism, and disruption of the clock
leads to metabolic disorders, including obesity and diabetes, although
the detailed mechanisms are still being uncovered. To fill this gap,
an interesting approach, CircadiOmics, was performed that combined
gene ontology (pathway) analysis, transcriptome (microarray), protein–protein
interaction, Bmal1 ChIP (chromatin immunoprecipitation), transcription
factor motif analysis, and metabolomics assays. This approach predicted
the uracil salvage pathway should be under circadian control, and
this prediction was experimentally demonstrated.

Recent developments in NGS technology in the past
five years have
completely transformed our view of circadian genomics and unveiled
that the gene regulatory networks are far more complicated than we
have ever anticipated. A growing body of evidence suggests that transcriptional
mechanisms are not sufficient to sustain all rhythmic mRNA expression,
and many layers of regulation, particularly post-transcriptional regulation,
play significant roles in driving rhythmic gene expression. Despite
its significance, understanding of post-transcriptional mechanisms
still lags far behind that of transcriptional processes, and genome-wide
regulation of the post-transcriptional networks has yet to be examined.
Furthermore, this new concept also raises a series of critical questions:
What are the real entities that control circadian output pathways?
Are they ccgs or rhythmically expressed proteins? If so, what defines
the period, phase, and amplitude of rhythmic gene expression, especially
when global translation and de novo transcription
(nascent transcription) peak at early night?, If not, why do mRNAs/proteins need to be rhythmically generated?
It is possible that what has been considered “rhythmic transcription”
is a default mechanism that induces transcription once a day, as evidenced
by the fact that global transcription occurs predominantly at early
night. Perhaps post-transcriptional mechanisms
serve to determine the phase and amplitude of each cycling mRNA. The
circadian system ensures that the overt output rhythms are sustained
continuously and periodically by employing multiple different regulatory
mechanisms. Further studies will be needed to answer these questions
to fully understand the global impact that the circadian clock imposes
on downstream physiologies.

This work was
supported by the National Institutes of Health (Grants R01GM090247,
R21NS079986, and R01AG045795 to C.B.G.) and the Tomizawa Jun-ichi
&amp; Keiko Fund of Molecular Biology Society of Japan for Young Scientist
and the Brain and Behavior Research Foundation (NARSAD) (to S.K.).

The authors declare no
competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
We thank
all the Green lab members for helpful discussions
and comments, especially C. Rosensweig and Dr. M. de Groot for a critical
reading of the manuscript.

Abbreviations
Ccgclock-controlled
gene

NGSnext-generation
sequencing.

