The role of protein motions
in enzymatic catalysis is a research area of great interest where
much remains to be understood (e.g., refs (−)). Examining the similarities and differences in the dynamical features
of enzyme homologues that catalyze the same reaction affords the opportunity
to study the interplay of structure, flexibility, and function., Dihydrofolate reductase (5,6,7,8-tetrahydrofolate: NADP+ oxidoreductase, EC 1.5.1.3; DHFR) is a ubiquitous enzyme found in
prokaryotes and eukaryotes. It catalyzes the stereospecific transfer
of a hydride ion from nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate
(NADPH) cofactor to 7,8-dihydrofolate (DHF) to yield 5,6,7,8-tetrahydrofolate
(THF) and oxidized nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate (NADP+) and is the only source of THF, a one-carbon donor/acceptor
unit vital to the biosynthesis of purines, pyrimidines, and amino
acids.

X-ray crystallographic studies
of mesophilic and thermophilic orthologs,
including DHFR enzymes from E. coli (Ec-DHFR) or B. stearothermophilus (Bs-DHFR), most commonly reveal nearly identical structures.− By contrast, the catalytic behaviors of these enzymes diverge. In
the case of Ec-DHFR, kinetic studies of the hydride
transfer step as a function of temperature yielded an enthalpy of
activation between 3 and 6 kcal/mol and an isotope effect on the Arrhenius
prefactor (AH/AD) of 4.0 ± 1.5, compared to an
enthalpy of activation of 5.5 ± 0.1 kcal/mol and an isotope effect
on AH/AD that
is inverse for Bs-DHFR. Characteristic
of pairs of mesophile–thermophile homologues at room temperature, the rate of hydride transfer for the E. coli enzyme exceeds that of Bs-DHFR
by ca. 10-fold at pH 9. The high nonclassical
value for AH/AD with Ec-DHFR implicates
an efficient active site configuration for hydrogen tunneling from
the donor (NADPH) to acceptor (DHF) site,,, whereas the value of AH/AD for Bs-DHFR is closer
to that seen with low activity mutants of Ec-DHFR. The latter has been attributed to the inability
of the mutated enzymes to achieve the same degree of active site compression
as occurs in the wild-type (WT) enzyme. Such a compromised active site must then undergo local donor–acceptor
distance sampling, in order to restore the heavy atom distance that
can support tunneling, and is the source of the inverse values for AH/AD.,,

Hydrogen/deuterium exchange
(HDX) offers an excellent probe of
the impact of perturbations to protein structure and flexibility by
extrinsic parameters, such as pH and temperature (e.g., refs (−)). The impact of temperature under conditions of EX-2
exchange was recently probed using HDX linked to mass spectrometry
(HDX-MS) for Bs-DHFR. At the lowest temperature (10 °C) and longest time (300 min),
ca. 60% of exchangeable amides in Bs-DHFR became
deuterated. Most of the peptides derived from Bs-DHFR
showed relatively small increases in deuteration with increasing temperature,
while peptides derived from regions that bridge the cofactor and substrate-binding
sites showed a much higher sensitivity to temperature changes. These
spatially resolved differences were interpreted in the context of
positional differences in apparent ΔH°
for local protein unfolding.

Comparison of a number of thermophilic
proteins with their mesophilic
counterparts at low temperatures indicates increased rigidity in the
thermophilic forms, which may occur globally or be localized to specific
regions [cf. the studies of indoleglycerol phosphate synthase, xylose isomerase, and p-nitrobenzyl esterase−]. It has been suggested that
thermophilic enzymes gain thermostability by reducing conformational
flexibility and, as a consequence, sacrifice catalytic efficiency
at reduced temperature.,, Thus, the increased flexibility of thermophilic proteins at higher
temperature mimics the flexibility of mesophilic active sites at their
lower physiologically relevant temperature, and this comparative flexibility
is associated with optimal protein function.

In the present
work, we examine the interplay between protein flexibility
and function by comparing the extent of native state deuteration for Ec-DHFR close to its functional temperature (25 °C)
to the thermophilic variant Bs-DHFR at the same temperature,
i.e., far below its optimal growth temperature. Spatial resolution
is achieved by examining proteolytically generated peptides by HDX-MS.
Surprisingly, only a single region within Ec-DHFR,
which encompasses the interface between bound cofactor and substrate,
is more flexible at 25 °C in comparison to Bs-DHFR. The remainder of the Ec-DHFR shows either
the same or reduced flexibility than Bs-DHFR at 25
°C. The core peptide of Ec-DHFR that is shown
to have enhanced flexibility is homologous to the region of Bs-DHFR previously demonstrated to undergo regional unfolding
with a ΔH°unf value that is
similar to the ΔH‡ for hydride
transfer., These new data provide further support for
models in which the primary enthalpic barrier controlling enzymatic
hydrogen tunneling may derive from local, active site fluctuations
(protein reorganization).

Experimental Procedures
Protein Purification and Enzyme Assays
NADPH was purchased
from Sigma and used without further purification.
Dihydrofolate (DHF) was prepared as specified by Blakely et al. and
previously described.Bs-DHFR was cloned, expressed, purified, and assayed as described, with minor modifications. The final Bs-DHFR sample was adjusted to 5.9 mg/mL with a standard
buffer (25 mM KHPO4 pH 7.4, 125 mM KCl, and 2.5 mM DTT)
and stored in 50 μL aliquots at −80 °C. The Ec-DHFR protein, prepared according to established procedures, was exchanged into standard buffer using an
Amicon concentrator, followed by a PD10 column (Amersham 17-0851-01)
and adjusted to 6.0 mg/mL. The Ec-DHFR protein showed kcat = 8.3 s–1 in MTEN buffer
(pH 7) in the presence of 100 μM DHF and 100 μM NADPH,
a rate comparable to previously determined values.

Hydrogen–Deuterium Exchange Mass Spectrometry (HDX-MS)
Measurements
Protocols for HDX-MS on pepsin-generated peptides
were described
in Sours et al. Solutions of Ec-DHFR
were incubated at 25 °C in 90% (v/v) D2O between 0
and 5 h at the same time and under conditions identical to those for Bs-DHFR. Approximately 26 min
elapsed between the initial acidification and elution of the last
peptide from the column. HDX-MS and MS/MS measurements were performed
using a Q-Star Pulsar mass spectrometer (Applied Biosystems). Peptides
identified and confirmed by MS/MS for Ec-DHFR and Bs-DHFR are listed in .

We define the fractional deuteration
at time, t, as Nt/N∞, where Nt equals the number of deuterons exchanged
into each peptide
and N∞ equals the total number
of exchangeable amides (i.e., total peptides bonds minus the number
N-terminal to prolines) that should be deuterated at infinite time.
The Nt is the difference
between the corrected weighted average mass at time t (min), Mt,corr,BE,
and t = 0 min (M0,corr BE). Corrections for artifactual in-exchange and back-exchange were
calculated as described., Calculations of the
final D300 values (see text) with either
average back exchange values, or after correction for faster exchange
at the first amide of each peptide, do not alter the conclusions.
Time courses of deuteration or fractional deuteration were fit to
a two-exponential equation:where Y equals the number
of deuterons observed at time = t, N∞ equals the total exchangeable amides, A equals the number of amide hydrogens in each peptide exchanging
with fast kinetic rate constant, k1, B equals the number of amide hydrogens with slow rate constant, k2, and NE is the number of amide hydrogens that
remain nonexchanging at the longest time point (300 min; k(exchange) &lt; 0.002 min–1).

Controls for the Evaluation of Deuterium Exchange Differences
between Ec- and Bs-DHFR
Given the relatively low overall
sequence identity between Ec-DHFR and Bs-DHFR, some portion of the
observed deuterium exchange rate differences between these proteins
might arise from nearest-neighbor effects on the exchange properties
at each position along the protein chain. The intrinsic exchange rate
constant (i.e., the HDX of unprotected amide in solution) for each
positional amino acid was therefore estimated using the HX2 spreadsheet
calculator. This spreadsheet employs user-specified inputs of pH and
temperature to calculate the intrinsic exchange rate constant for
each amide, depending on side chain identity and position within the
polypeptide chain. The values for kint(i) were summed at each
position and normalized to the total number of exchanging amides to
obtain the average value for each peptide analyzed:

Possible structural origins of the
HDX results were also assessed
by examining the distance from each amide hydrogen to the protein
surface, based on PDB files for Ec-DHFR [PDBID: 5DFR (apo) and 1RX2 (with bound NAD+ and folate) and Bs-DHFR [PDBID: 1ZDR (apo)]. These were estimated from calculations
of solvent accessible surface using the program EDTSurf, which was modified to allow exclusion of internal
cavities [Xu, D., personal communication]. In-house scripts were used
to calculate distance to surface and are summarized in . Distances that differed by more than
0.5 Å between Ec-DHFR and Bs-DHFR were scored as significant changes. Additionally, the pattern
of H-bonding interactions was estimated, in which the amide nitrogen
acts as an H-donor and any oxygen or nitrogen atom can serve as hydrogen
acceptor. All possible H-donor/acceptor distances up to 3.5 Å
were filtered by a further constraint requiring hydrogen bond angle
&gt;120°.

Results
The eight nonoverlapping Ec-DHFR peptides identified
by LC-MS/MS and selected for HDX-MS analysis () covered 138 of 159 (87%) amino acids in the Ec-DHFR primary sequence. The same peptides were detected
by Yamamoto et al. in a prior hydrogen
exchange analysis of Ec-DHFR performed at 15 °C,
indicating reproducibility of pepsin digestion. Ten nonoverlapping
peptides previously reported for Bs-DHFR which covered
142 of 164 (87%) amino acids are included
in  for comparison to peptides
from Ec-DHFR. Figure A shows
peptides of Ec-DHFR aligned against those obtained
from Bs-DHFR. Peptides from Ec-DHFR
are longer (average 19 amino acids) than those from Bs-DHFR (average 13 amino acids), indicating differences in protease
cleavage between these orthologs. Observed peptides are highlighted
on the X-ray structures of apo Ec-DHFR (PDBID: 5DFR()) and apo-Bs-DHFR (PDB1D: 1ZDR()) (Figure B) and labeled next to
corresponding α-helix, β-sheet, or loop secondary structures.
For both enzymes, HDX-MS was performed in the absence of cofactor
or substrate. This condition allowed for the observation of greater
HDX, i.e., without the complication of cofactor/substrate protection;
the latter was expected to impair our ability to compare core regions
of Ec-DHFR to Bs-DHFR. Studies of
other proteins have revealed that while substrates can shift the equilibrium
distribution of conformational substates, they do not necessarily
generate new substates. In the case of
carboxypeptidase B, no detectable difference in HDX-MS was observed
in the absence or presence of substrate.

Observed
peptides in Ec-DHFR and Bs-DHFR.
(A) Eight nonoverlapping peptides in Ec-DHFR and
ten nonoverlapping peptides in Bs-DHFR, generated
by pepsin proteolysis were identified by MS/MS and highlighted against
the sequences of the two enzymes. (B) Left panel: observed peptides
from Ec-DHFR are mapped onto the X-ray structure
of the apo-Ec-DHFR (PDBID: 5DFR). Right panel: peptides from Bs-DHFR are mapped
onto the X-ray structure of apo-Bs-DHFR (PDBID: 1ZDR). Colors for each
peptide correspond to those in panel A.

HDX-MS measurements showed similar net deuteration
into Ec-DHFR and Bs-DHFR under matching
experimental
conditions. This can be seen after 300 min, where the fractional hydrogen
exchange summed over all analyzed peptides from each enzyme reached
72% in Ec-DHFR and 74% in Bs-DHFR
(Table ). Since the
peptides listed in Table  account for 87%
of the full-length sequences for Bs- and Ec- DHFR, the data in Table  are
a good approximation of overall deuteration. Thus, although greater
overall rigidity might be expected for a thermophilic enzyme, which
shows ca. 10-fold less rapid hydride transfer than its mesophilic
ortholog at 25 °C, the global exchange rates were comparable.

Summary of HDX into Peptides from Ec-DHFR and Bs-DHFR
peptide	residues	structural
element	N∞	N300 min	D300 min	sum kint (min–1)	avg kint (min–1)	
Ec1	9–28	M20 loop	17	13.4	0.79	6277	348	
Bs1	11–28	 	15	11.1	0.74	7263	453	
Ec2	29–62	αB,
βB, αC,
βC	30	22.1	0.74	17372	560	
Bs2A, 2B	29–58	 	26	24.4	0.94	13686	488	
Ec3	63–81	CD loop	17	12.6	0.74	8248	458	
Bs3	59–73	 	13	11.8	0.91	11568	826	
Ec4	82–92	αE	9	5.6	0.62	5940	594	
Bs4	81–94	 	13	11.4	0.88	4804	343	
Ec5	93–110	αF, βF	16	14.1	0.88	6914	406	
Bs5A, 5B	95–112	 	15	8.9	0.59	5781	340	
Ec6	119–133	FG loop	12	6.0	0.50	5484	322	
Bs6	119–134	 	12	8.3	0.69	5325	409	
Bs6	119–134	 	12	8.3	0.69	5325	409	
Ec7	138–152	GH loop	14	8.5	0.61	15957	1063	
Bs7	135–154	 	17	11.6	0.68	9687	538	
Ec8	154–159	βH	5	4.5	0.90	6850	1141	
Bs8	155–164	 	9	4.7	0.52	2692	269	
Number of exchangeable amides, calculated
as the number of peptide bonds minus those N-terminal to proline.

Observed deuteration at 300
min,
25 °C.

Fractional in-exchange
at 300 min,
25 °C, D300 min = N300 min/N∞.

We then examined variations in HDX by comparing peptides
paired
between each enzyme. Because the specific pepsin cleavage positions
were different, resulting in nonequivalent peptides that could not
be exactly aligned, we used two methods to enable comparison of the
mesophilic and thermophilic enzymes. First, when possible, shorter
peptides from one enzyme were “bundled” together in
order to match a longer peptide from the other enzyme. This was feasible
for peptides Bs2A + Bs2B and peptides Bs5A + Bs5B from thermophilic DHFR, which
could respectively be aligned against Ec2 and Ec5 in the mesophilic enzyme. Second, we report the extent
of deuteration normalized by the number of exchangeable amides in
each peptide in order to adjust for the differences in peptide length
and/or sequence between the two DHFRs.

Time courses for incorporation
of deuterium into individual peptides
are shown in Figure , matching the peptides
in Ec-DHFR to those with overlapping sequences in Bs-DHFR. Estimates of parameters describing the numbers
of amides exchanging with fast and slow rate constants were calculated
by nonlinear least-squares fitting and are summarized in . As in our analysis of HDX-MS in the Bs-DHFR, the observed rates
of exchange in Ec-DHFR are very rapid and, overall,
less reliable than the extent of exchange at the plateau region reached
at long times (ca. 300 min in Figure ). In
Table , we report the fractional deuteration
(D), calculated as the number of hydrogens observed
to have exchanged at 300 min (A + B, eq ) normalized by the number of exchangeable
amide hydrogens in each peptide, N∞.

Time courses
of fractional deuteration for peptides derived from Ec-DHFR (blue, 25 °C) and Bs-DHFR (green, 25
°C; red, 55 °C). Peptide pairs are (A) Ec1, Bs1, (B) Ec2, Bs2A + Bs2B, (C) Ec3, Bs3, (D) Ec4, Bs4, (E) Ec5, Bs5A + Bs5B, (F) Ec6, Bs6, (G) Ec7, Bs7, and
(H) Ec8, Bs8. X-axis indicates time of incubation in D2O; Y-axis indicates the extent of deuteration at each time point, divided
by the number of exchangeable amides in each peptide.

One factor that may become important in comparing
HDX between orthologs
is the influence of different peptide sequences on values of the chemical
exchange rate constant, kint, in eq :where kobs is
the observed rate of HDX under the current EX-2 condition and Kopen is the equilibrium constant for the transient
local opening of protein to a state that allows chemical exchange.
The earlier studies on Bs-DHFR at pH 7 showed mass
spectrometric patterns in support of an exchange mechanism in which
protein undergoes local rapid opening and closing (EX-2), followed
by a slow, rate-determining chemical exchange from the peptide amides. Because the amide chemical exchange varies with
each amino acid side chain, as well as the amino acid both N-terminal
and C-terminal to the amide hydrogen, a divergence of sequences for peptides derived from orthologous
proteins could limit direct comparison of rate constants. As summarized
in Table , variations in average intrinsic
rate constants (kint(av)) for peptides
aligned between Ec-DHFR and Bs-DHFR
went from a high of 87% to a low of 24% among the eight peptide pairs;
importantly, there is no consistent covariation between changes in D300 min and the average kint. As will be discussed below, two peptides (3 and 8)
with a large variation in kint that tracked
a significant change in D300 min have been eliminated from consideration for a variety of reasons.

Examination of individual peptides showed important regional variations
in HDX behavior between the two enzymes. Two regions showed greater
hydrogen exchange into Ec-DHFR compared to Bs-DHFR, peptides 5 and 8. Because of the poor alignment
between the Ec8 and Bs8 peptides,
the observed differences were not considered mechanistically significant
(see discussion below). However, peptide Ec5 aligns
exactly with peptides Bs5A and Bs5B, encompassing helix αF and part of βF, which comprise
the nicotinamide-binding site of each enzyme (Figure B). Ec5 has 16 exchangeable amides, of which
14.1 (88%) exchanged at 300 min, whereas Bs5A and Bs5B together have 15 exchangeable amides, of which 8.9
(59%) exchanged (Figure  and Table ). Thus, the extent of deuteration in Ec5 was at least 4 Da greater than Bs5A + Bs5B, which could not be accounted for by the difference
in number of exchangeable sites. In Bs-DHFR, αF-βF
was among the areas most highly protected from hydrogen exchange,
reaching 59% at 25 °C (Table ), but dramatically
increasing to 97% as the temperature was raised to 55 °C. Thus, this region showed one of the highest
apparent enthalpic changes of local unfolding in Bs-DHFR, which has been proposed to control the efficiency of nuclear
tunneling during hydride transfer.

Intriguingly, two regions showed lower hydrogen exchange into Ec-DHFR compared to Bs-DHFR. Paired with Ec2 are peptides Bs2A and Bs2B, which together contain 30 amino acids aligned starting at the
N-terminus of Ec2 (Figures A and ). Whereas 22.1 of the 30 (74%) exchangeable
amides in Ec2 were deuterated by 300 min, 24.4 of
the 26 (94%) exchangeable amides in Bs2A + Bs2B were deuterated (Table ), indicating
that at least two amides within this domain underwent exchange in Bs-DHFR but were nonexchanging in Ec-DHFR.
Likewise, peptide Ec4 and Bs4, corresponding
to helix αE and strand βE, were each aligned at their
C-terminus (Figures A and ). In Ec4 and Bs4, 5.6 of
the 9 exchangeable amides (62%) and 11.4 of the 13 exchangeable amides
(88%), respectively, underwent deuteration (Table ). Although Bs4 contains four more exchangeable
amides than Ec4, its deuteration exceeded that of Ec4 by 6 Da, revealing that two amides which were nonexchanging
in Ec4 were allowed to exchange in Bs4. Peptides Ec2 and Bs2 contain
helices αB and αC and strands βB and βC, while
peptides Ec4 and Bs4 contain helix
αE and strand βE. Together, these regions comprise most
of the adenosine-binding subdomain, revealing high conformational
mobility in Bs-DHFR that is suppressed in Ec-DHFR.

The remaining areas showed few differences
between mesophilic and
thermophilic DHFR. Peptides Ec1 and Bs1 encompass the M20 loop and helix αB in each enzyme (Figure B). Ec1 has 17 exchangeable amides,
of which 13.4 (79%) exchanged at 300 min, whereas Bs1 has 15 exchangeable amides, of which 11.1 (74%) exchanged (Table ). The additional two deuteration events in Ec1 could be accounted for by the longer length of this
peptide compared to Bs1; thus, the degree of exchange
might be similar between Ec- and Bs-DHFR within the region of overlap.

Peptides Ec3 and Bs3 include
the CD loop. Bs3 contains 13 exchangeable amides,
of which at 12 (91%) exchanged after 300 min, whereas Ec3 contains 17 exchangeable amides, of which 13 (74%) exchanged. Each
peptide is offset from the other by several residues, whereby Bs3 adds 4 residues N-terminal to the start of Ec3, and Ec3 adds 9 residues past the C-terminus of Bs3 (Figure A). The area directly
aligned between these peptides covers only 8 and 9 exchangeable amides
in Ec3 and Bs3, respectively. Most
of these residues would be expected to exchange in Bs, and a comparable level of exchange within this region in Ec3 could not be excluded. Thus, the comparison does not
necessarily reveal differences in deuteration in Ec3 compared to Bs3. Likewise, Ec6 and Bs6, covering the FG loop, showed significantly
lower HDX into Ec-DHFR than Bs-DHFR
(Figure B and Table ). This could, in principle, reflect enhanced conformational mobility
or solvent accessibility within Bs-DHFR compared
to Ec-DHFR. However, because Bs6
included two additional amides N-terminal to the start of the Ec6 sequence, the possibility that their corresponding hydrogens
exchanged by 300 min and accounted for the increased HDX in Bs6 could not be excluded. Indeed, the amide hydrogens corresponding
to Ser120 and Phe121 were highly solvent exposed in the X-ray structure
of Bs-DHFR (1ZDR) (data not shown), consistent with
an expectation of their rapid exchange. A similar argument could be
made for Ec7 and Bs7, which included
14 and 17 exchangeable amides, respectively. Although Bs7 was deuterated more than Ec7 by ∼3 Da,
the additional deuteration could not be ascribed unambiguously to
the region of overlap (Table ). Finally, the
C-terminal peptides, Ec8 and Bs8,
differ in length by almost 2-fold. Nonetheless, they both exchanged
between 4 and 5 hydrogens at 300 min, which may well have arisen from
a region in Bs8 which overlaps completely with Ec8.

The results above suggested that Bs-DHFR and Ec-DHFR differ in conformational mobility
within several
regions, represented by peptides 2, 4, and 5. However, because the
two enzymes share only partial sequence identity, it was important
to be certain that differences in solution hydrogen exchange were
not due to differences in structure between the two enzymes. Therefore,
X-ray coordinates of apo-enzymes Bs-DHFR (1ZDR) and Ec-DHFR (5DFR) were compared, in each case examining the
aligned structures for differences in solvent accessibility of amide
hydrogens that might be the cause of observed differences in deuteration.
This analysis focused on the peptide pairs Ec2-Bs2A/2B, Ec4-Bs4, and Ec5-Bs5.

Peptides Ec5, Bs5A, and Bs5B cover
the only region which displayed higher HDX in Ec-DHFR
than Bs-DHFR. Tertiary structures,
distances of amide hydrogens to surface, and hydrogen bond lengths
and angles were compared in this region to assess structural changes
which might account for the ≥5 Da difference in deuteration.
In general, residues and amide hydrogens superimposed well (Figure A), although at least four amide hydrogens showed
a shorter distance to surface in Bs-DHFR than Ec-DHFR, primarily due to reduced steric interactions with
side chains and/or backbone angles which tilted these atoms toward
solvent (); one amide hydrogen
showed longer distance to surface in Bs-DHFR than Ec-DHFR. With regard to hydrogen bonds satisfying the condition
&lt;3.5 Å and &gt;120°, two amides were identified in Bs5A and Bs5B that had no corresponding
interactions in Ec5 (). Overall, the tertiary structures indicated greater protection
of amide hydrogens from solvent in Ec-DHFR, contrary
to the HDX behavior. This supports the conclusion that the increased
deuteration of Ec5 compared to Bs5A + Bs5B reflects enhanced conformational mobility
in the mesophilic over the thermophilic enzyme in this region.

Structural
comparison of peptides from Ec-DHFR and Bs-DHFR. Peptide pairs are (A) Ec5 and Bs5A + Bs5B, (B) Ec2 and Bs2A + Bs2B, and (C) Ec4 and Bs4, showing peptides from Ec-DHFR in green and peptides from Bs-DHFR in brown.
Backbone amide hydrogens in peptides Ec5 and Bs5A + Bs5B as well as peptides Ec2 and Bs2A + Bs2B overlay
well, suggesting that differences in HDX in these regions reflect
changes in conformational mobility. Backbone amide hydrogens in peptides Ec4 and Bs4 show structural deviations
which suggest greater protection of Bs-DHFR from
solvent, opposite to the effects on HDX. The amide hydrogens in Ec- and Bs-DHFR are indicated in yellow
and black, respectively.

Peptides Ec2/Bs2A + Bs2B and Ec4/Bs4 showed significantly
higher deuteration into Bs-DHFR than Ec-DHFR. In Ec2 and Bs2A + Bs2B, the backbone structures and amide hydrogen positions
overlapped well (Figure B). Distance to surface
measurements suggested higher protection from solvent in Bs-DHFR than Ec-DHFR for six amide hydrogens and smaller
protection for four amide hydrogens, mostly due to differences in
side chain orientation. We observed no examples where hydrogen-bonding
patterns were disrupted in one enzyme but not the other. Thus, we
observed no clear-cut differences in structure around Ec2 and Bs2A/Bs2B, for which we might
expect higher HDX in the thermophilic enzyme.

On the other hand, Ec4 and Bs4, occurring in the surface loop
between helix αE and βE,
showed significant deviations in structure, from their N-termini up
to where residues Pro89 in Ec-DHFR and Asp91 in Bs-DHFR again superimposed (Figure C). Here, the Bs4 backbone formed a loop that was
constrained by cation–pi interactions between Trp85 and Arg89
side chains, whereas the Ec4 backbone showed less
restriction. Thus, direct comparisons could not be made between the
two enzymes in this region. Nevertheless, distance to surface calculations
showed that all five amides corresponding to residues 85–89
in Bs-DHFR were buried by 0.8–2.4 Å from
the surface, whereas only three amides for the corresponding residues
83–87 in Ec-DHFR were buried (0.5–1.9
Å), while two amides were fully exposed to solvent (). Because of this, hydrogen bonds at
two amides in Bs4 were absent at the same positions
in Ec4. Thus, on the basis of structure, Bs4 might be expected to show more protection from exchange
than Ec4, in contrast to the observed HDX behavior.
The results indicate that the increased deuteration in Bs-DHFR in these two regions is unlikely to arise from structural differences
and, instead, reflects enhanced conformational mobility in the thermophilic
enzyme over the mesophilic enzyme.

Discussion
Spatially Resolved HDX as a Probe of Temperature Adaptation
in Protein Flexibility for a Thermophilic vs Mesophilic Variant of
DHFR
A robust approach to understanding the relationship
of protein
motions to enzyme catalysis is to examine orthologous proteins that
have evolved to function in different temperature niches. The availability
of structurally similar DHFRs from a thermophilic (Bs-DHFR) and mesophilic (Ec-DHFR) source (cf. Figure B) has been exploited in the present work. The “corresponding
state hypothesis” predicts that
a protein that functions normally at elevated temperature will become
more rigid at reduced temperatures, reflecting the presence of interactions
that allow for protein stability at the elevated, physiologically
relevant temperature. At the same time, the elevation of temperature
enables the thermophilic protein to become flexible in regions of
the protein that control either the binding and release of substrates/products
or the bond cleavage events. In this manner, thermophilic proteins
can solve the combined need of stability and function at elevated
temperatures.

The dihydrofolate reductase from E. coli (Ec-DHFR) is a much studied mesophilic protein
from the perspective
of both protein dynamics and chemical catalysis. X-ray studies have
demonstrated that a flexible (M20) loop can assume different conformations
(open, closed, and occluded), and NMR studies showed that these conformational
changes occur on the same time scale as the progression of enzyme
from substrate to product complexes. In
a recent study of a thermophilic variant of DHFR (Bs-DHFR) by HDX-MS, a method was introduced for evaluating enthalpic
changes that correspond to local protein unfolding events and their
comparison to the enthalpic barrier of catalysis. A relevant finding
was that the motions corresponding to the enthalpic barrier for hydride
transfer were restricted to the central core of the protein near the
region of contact between cofactor and substrate.

In the present work, we have extended our study of
HDX-MS to the Ec-DHFR in an effort to examine similarities
and differences
between the two proteins under the 25 °C condition that Ec-DHFR functions. In particular, we wanted to determine
whether the expected enhanced mobility for the Ec-DHFR at 25 °C would occur throughout the entire protein or
be restricted to specific regions of protein such as the one that
intersects the NADP+ and substrate-binding pockets and
the surface loops. The net deuterium exchange at long times into both
proteins is quite similar, reinforcing the necessity to analyze and
compare individual peptides in order to detect possible differences
in local flexibility. Following the use of pepsin to digest the Ec-DHFR into small peptides for analysis of time-dependent
deuterium exchange, a total of eight unique peptides were chosen (87%
coverage of the total protein), for comparison to peptides chosen
from the previous analysis of Bs-DHFR (87% coverage) (Figure ).

Although the tertiary structures for Ec- and Bs-DHFR are almost identical (Figure B), significant differences exist
in their primary sequences. As a consequence, the position of cleavage
into peptides after exposure to the protease pepsin was different
for the DHFR variants, leading to nonequivalent peptides for comparison.
We were able to overcome this barrier, in part, by using the technique
of bundling shorter peptides obtained from Bs-DHFR
to match longer peptides in Ec-DHFR (in the case
of peptides 2 and 5). A second factor that will influence a comparison
of rates of deuterium incorporation into the backbone amides of orthologous
proteins with divergent primary sequences is the intrinsic rate constant
for chemical exchange (kint, eq ). Thus, a calculation of composite, average intrinsic
exchange rate was carried out for each peptide (). As summarized in Table , this type of comparative analysis for Ec- and Bs-DHFR showed no consistent covariation in kint(avg) and D300 min, with the majority of peptides yielding similar values for kint(avg). This property, together with the previously
noted large errors in the rate constants for fast (k1) and intermediate (k2) exchange
rate constants in Bs-DHFR, led us to focus on the plateau regions of the time courses, which
reflect the very slow, effectively nonexchanging, amide hydrogens
(k3 &lt; 0.002 min–1) on the time scale of the experiments (300 min).

From the
summary of such plateau data for Ec-DHFR
and Bs-DHFR at 25 °C (Table ) and accompanying analyses, it can be seen that three peptides
show a clear distinction: peptide 5, which indicates more complete
exchange in Ec-DHFR, and peptides 2 and 4, which
indicate less exchange into the mesophilic protein. That these differences
reflect local differences in protein flexibility is supported and
reinforced by a structural analysis of the distance from each peptide
hydrogen to the solvent surface (Figure  and ) in the intact protein structures. Thus,
while the average deuterium exchange into intact Ec- and Bs-DHFR is almost identical at 25 °C,
significant differences in flexibility between the two proteins emerge
when spatial resolution is introduced via the proteolytic digestion
of protein to allow peptide analysis by mass spectrometry.

Relevance of Observed Patterns for HDX in Ec-DHFR and Bs-DHFR
to Protein Motions Affecting the Hydride Transfer Step
Although
certain regions of the Ec- and Bs-DHFR were not available for direct comparison, it is
fortunate that peptides representing functionally important regions
of the protein could be contrasted. These include (1) the M20 and
FG loops, which change their position during the catalytic cycle in
WT Ec-DHFR, (2) the binding domains that
surround the adenosine ring of the NADPH cofactor and the polyglutamate
tail of the DHF substrate, and (3) a region of protein which includes
active site residues near the reactive portions of NADPH and DHF.

In a recently published work, a method for extracting apparent
enthalpies for local protein unfolding, ΔH°unf, was introduced. Among the 11 Bs-DHFR
peptides studied, all but two showed very small values for ΔH°unf that were ≤2 kcal/mol. These
included peptides 1, 2–4, and 6–8 (using the numbering
system of the present study). It was proposed that each of these low-enthalpy regions of protein would contribute
dominantly to the conformational sampling (preorganization) which
generates hydrogen tunneling-ready geometries (peptides 2–4,
7, and 8) and/or to the changes in protein structure which accompany
the progression of the ES complex through the catalytic cycle (peptides
1 and 6). As discussed in detail in several
recent reviews,, two classes of protein motions
appear essential for enzyme-catalyzed H-tunneling, termed preorganization
and reorganization (see below). The preorganization process represents
a sampling of protein conformational substates, with only a subset
of these being capable of achieving the hydrogen tunneling-appropriate
geometries. A low enthalpic barrier between conformational substates
may be desired from an evolutionary perspective, ensuring a smooth
conformational landscape that prevents the trapping of protein into
nonproductive conformers.

It is of considerable interest that
the majority of the comparable
peptides in the Ec-DHFR show little discernible difference
in relation to Bs-DHFR. It appears that for regions
of a thermophilic protein that display high flexibility at the elevated,
functional temperature, the additional property of small enthalpic
barriers for local unfolding may be predictive of positions with comparable
flexibility within a mesophilic ortholog at its reduced, functional
temperature. Among the peptides with comparable extent of exchange
in Ec- as Bs-DHFR are those representing
the M20 and FG loops.

A second important insight from the earlier
study of Bs-DHFR was the identification of two regions
of protein with a pronounced
temperature dependence for local protein unfolding: peptide 1, which
was not available for comparison between the Ec-
and Bs-DHFRs, and peptide 5, characterized in the
present study. It is most significant that, among the peptides
from Ec-DHFR that could be quantitatively compared to Bs-DHFR, peptide
5 is the only one that indicates enhanced flexibility within the Ec-DHFR
at 25 °C (Figure ). It is further notable that the Ea of
3–6 kcal/mol for the hydride transfer catalyzed by Ec-DHFR is comparable to the
apparent enthalpy of unfolding measured for the region corresponding
to region 5 in Bs-DHFR, ΔH°unf = 3.8 kcal/mol. While this result could simply be fortuitous, the combination of
our earlier study of Bs-DHFR and the present study point toward a key structural element that
resides within the active site of DHFR and controls a large portion
of the enthalpic barrier for H-tunneling. We had previously proposed
that the enthalpic barrier for hydride transfer in Bs-DHFR was likely to be dominated by local structural rearrangements
(reorganization) that influence the hydrogenic donor–acceptor
wave function overlap and not from loop motions that would include
the closed to occluded transition in the M20 loop. In a very recent study that combines NMR dispersion data
with X-ray crystallography, Wright and co-workers suggest that hydride
transfer in Ec-DHFR is linked to millisecond motion
within the protein core rather than the M20 loop. Reorganization arises from the need for changes in the
electrostatic environment in order to transiently generate energetic
degeneracy between reactant and product, together with any necessary
adjustments in the donor/acceptor distance R.,

Variations
in HDX between Ec-DHFR and Bs-DHFR.
Colored against the backbone structure of Ec-DHFR
(1RX2) are areas
where HDX in Ec-DHFR exceeds Bs-DHFR
(red), Bs-DHFR exceeds Ec-DHFR (blue),
or little differences are observed between the two enzymes (gray).

The enthalpies of activation for hydride transfer
for both Bs-DHFR (Ea =
5.5 ± 0.1
kcal/mol) and Ec-DHFR (Ea = 3–6 kcal/mol) are small and quite similar. Although there
is considerable uncertainty in Ea for Ec-DHFR, an elevated value of Ea for Bs-DHFR could be indicative of an enzyme active
site that is less optimized for hydrogen tunneling, as suggested from
the larger temperature dependence of the KIE (AH/AD = 0.57) in relation to Ec-DHFR (AH/AD = 4.0).

In addition to the above trends, there is the observation
of two
peptides (2 and 4) in Ec-DHFR which are less
flexible than the comparable peptides in Bs-DHFR (Figure ). This is not the first instance in which a reduced
temperature enzyme shows restricted motion in relation to its corresponding
high-temperature ortholog. In a study of homologous, temperature-adapted
forms of a prokaryotic alcohol dehydrogenase near their functional
temperatures of 65 °C (thermophilic variant) and 5 °C (psychrophilic
variant), families of peptides were identified that exchanged either
more or less at the reduced temperature of the psychrophile. The regions that showed greater extent of exchange
were, for the most part, interior to the protein and abutting regions
near the nicotinamide ring of cofactor and the substrate. By contrast,
the regions showing less exchange tended to be clustered closer to
the periphery of the protein and to form an enclosure surrounding
the faster exchanging region. In the
case of the Ec-DHFR, the observation of a restriction
of motions within secondary structural units that interact with the
nonreacting ends of the bound cofactor (at its adenosine ring) and
substrate (at the polyglutamate tail) is in marked contrast to the
behavior of peptide 5 that lies closer to the region of hydride transfer.
It is likely that the reduced motions in these remote regions of cofactor
and substrate binding play some role in catalysis, although it is
difficult to distinguish whether this is related to the binding and
positioning of cofactor and substrate or the subsequent rate of hydride
transfer.

Conclusions
The comparison of orthologous DHFRs (the
mesophilic Ec-DHFR to the thermophilic Bs-DHFR) at 25 °C
by HDX-MS identifies three distinct classes of differential conformational
flexibility. The majority of peptide fragments from both proteins
suggest similar native state HDX behavior; additionally, a single
peptide shows greater flexibility for Ec-DHFR and
two peptides show reduced flexibility (Figure ). The region of greater flexibility in Ec-DHFR
at 25 °C maps to the region previously identified in Bs-DHFR as controlling the enthalpic barrier for H-tunneling
from NADPH to DHF in Bs-DHFR. This catalysis-linked peptide is derived from the core
of the protein rather than any of the flanking loops.

Supporting Information Available
Peptides identified from each
protein, kinetic parameters for HDX, the distance to surface calculations
for each peptide bond, and the hydrogen bond distances and angles
for each peptide bond. This material is available free of charge via
the Internet at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bi200640s_si_001.pdf

Acknowledgments
The authors are indebted to Dr. Dong Xu (U. Michigan) for
modifying the EDTSurf program to allow the option of excluding internal
cavities, to Adam Ring (Colorado State University) for generating
distance to surface and hydrogen bond distance and angle measurements,
to Kelli Markham and Todd Fleischmann (U. Iowa) for providing Ec-DHFR, to Dr. Steven Damo (Vanderbilt University) for
assistance in purifying Bs-DHFR, and to Prof. David
Wemmer (UC Berkeley) for valuable discussions.

Abbreviations
DHFRdihydrofolate
reductase

DHFdihydrofolate

THFtetrahydrofolate

DTTdithiothreitol

MES2-(N-morpholino)ethanesulfonic acid

HDXhydrogen–deuterium exchange

HDX-MShydrogen–deuterium
exchange by mass spectrometry

Tmmelting temperature

KIEkinetic isotope
effect

Ec-DHFREscherichia coli dihydrofolate reductase

Bs-DHFRBacillus stearothermophilus dihydrofolate reductase

SDS-PAGEsodium dodecyl
sulfate polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis

LC-MSliquid chromatography/mass spectrometry

LC-MS/MSliquid chromatography
and mass spectrometric fragmentation

MTEN buffer50 mM 2-(N-morpholino)ethanesulfonic
acid, 25 mM tris(hydroxymethyl)aminomethane, 25 mM ethanolamine, and
100 mM NaCl.

We note that an earlier conclusion
of lower exchange into Bs-DHFR in comparison to Ec-DHFR was based on published
data for the E. coli enzyme at 15 °C. We believe
the conclusion in the current study is more accurate because it compares
matching experimental conditions for both enzymes.

