Dentatorubral-pallidoluysian
atrophy (DRPLA) is an inherited autosomal dominant neurodegenerative
disease with clinical manifestations that include dementia, ataxia,
epilepsy, chorea, and psychological disturbances. DRPLA is caused by an expansion of the CAG repeat region
within the atrophin-1 (ATN-1) gene from a normal value of fewer than 34 repeats to up to 90 in
DRPLA patients. The mean repeat number
in patients is estimated to be 63–68 repeats. DRPLA affects between 2 and 7 per million of the Japanese
population but is also found in European
and North American families. Model mice
with 129 repeats within an introduced ATN-1 transgene
exhibit a severe phenotype reminiscent of juvenile onset DRPLA.

Because the expression of the mutant ATN-1
protein causes DRPLA,
reducing the level of expression of mutant ATN-1 may delay the onset
or slow progression of the disease. Huntington disease (HD) is caused
by a similar CAG expansion within the gene encoding huntingtin (HTT)
protein. Pharmacological inhibition of
HTT protein expression with an antisense oligonucleotide that targets
both normal and mutant alleles has been shown to alleviate disease
and reverse some symptoms in a mouse HD model. This report, taken together with other studies, suggests that nucleic
acids may be a promising approach for developing agents for the treatment
of intractable neurological disease.− For ATN-1, one report
indicates that a 2′-O-methyl-substituted phosphorothioate
DNA oligonucleotide that targets the expanded CAG repeat reduces levels
of the mutant ATN-1 transcript.

Mice that lack the ATN-1 gene show
no phenotype, suggesting that allele-selective
silencing may
not be necessary. ATN-1 protein is a potent transcriptional regulator, and in the more complex human central nervous
system, ATN-1 may have more critical functions. Because of this uncertainty
about the role of ATN-1 in humans, effective allele-selective silencing
agents would be a useful option for clinical development.

We
began investigations into allele-selective targeting of trinucleotide
repeat genes using peptide nucleic acid (PNA) and locked nucleic acid
(LNA) oligomers complementary to the expanded CAG repeat within HTT
mRNA. We achieved allele-selective inhibition
of HTT protein expression, but allele selectivities for the inhibition
of wild-type (wt) HTT versus mutant HTT were rarely greater than 6-fold.
We reasoned that we might achieve more robust and selective inhibition
using duplex RNAs that were also complementary to the CAG repeat.
When we performed this experiment, we found that, while inhibition
by these compounds was potent, little or no selectivity was observed.

RNA interference by standard fully complementary siRNAs involves
cleavage of target mRNA and is a powerful mechanism for gene silencing,
possibly too powerful to allow discrimination between mutant and wild-type
alleles that differ only in the number of CAG repeats. Micro RNAs
(miRNAs) supply an endogenous gene silencing mechanism that typically
involves duplex RNAs that are mismatched relative to their mRNA targets.
Argonaute 2 (AGO2) is the catalytic engine of RNAi that allows cleavage of target RNAs when sequences are
fully complementary. The introduction of mismatches within the central
region of the duplex eliminates the potential for substrate cleavage
by AGO2.

To test whether redesigned
RNAs might offer better results, we
introduced mismatches into the center of the anti-CAG duplex RNAs.
These mismatch-containing RNAs proved to be powerful allele-selective
repressors of HTT expression, with several compounds
achieving selectivities of &gt;25-fold., These results
are consistent with the hypothesis that duplexes functioning through
a non-cleavage-dependent miRNA-like mechanism are better able to discriminate
between normal and extended CAG repeat targets. Krzyzosiak and co-workers
achieved similar results.

Subsequent
studies have demonstrated that mismatched bases were
not the only design element capable of promoting allele-selective
inhibition of HTT. Introducing unlocked nucleic acid
(UNA) nucleotides− or abasic substitutions into the central region of duplex RNAs also yielded highly selective
inhibition of HTT expression. These data demonstrate
that removing a nucleobase (abasic) or opening the ribose ring (UNA)
at central positions within the RNA duplex is sufficient to manipulate
AGO activity and make gene silencing become sensitive to the number
of CAG trinucleotides within a repeat region.

Allele-selective
inhibition through RNAi can also be achieved with
single-stranded RNA oligomers. Unmodified RNA, however, is rapidly
degraded and is not an effective gene silencing agent inside cells.
It is possible to introduce chemical modifications into single-stranded
RNA that stabilize the single strands and allow them to be potent
modulators of RNAi activity in cell culture and in animals. When we designed these single-stranded silencing
RNAs (ss-siRNAs) to target CAG repeats and introduced them into patient-derived
cells, the RNAs also proved to be potent and allele-selective agents
for inhibiting mutant HTT protein., Inhibition
by ss-siRNAs occurred through the RNAi pathway and could be observed
upon intraventricular administration in a mouse HD model.

CAG
expansions that occur within different genes cause several
diseases. For example, Machado Joseph disease (MJD) is caused by a
CAG expansion within the ataxin-3 (ATXN-3) gene. We found that duplex RNAs and ss-siRNAs targeting
the CAG repeat were allele-selective inhibitors of ATXN-3 protein
expression.,,

Here we further test the generality of anti-CAG oligomers
by testing
the hypothesis that allele-selective inhibition can be extended to ATN-1. We identify several duplex RNAs and ss-siRNAs that
target CAG repeats and inhibit expression of mutant ATN-1 protein
with good selectivity relative to the selectivity of inhibition of
wild-type protein expression. Our results suggest a potential approach
to therapeutic development for DRPLA.

Materials and Methods
RNA Synthesis
UNA-modified antisense RNAs and unmodified
sense RNAs were synthesized by Sigma Custom Products (The Woodlands,
TX). ss-siRNAs were synthesized at ISIS Pharmaceuticals. Chemically modified and abasic RNA oligonucleotides
were synthesized at Alnylam Pharmaceuticals. Double-stranded RNAs were prepared by annealing the two RNA strands
in 2.5× PBS solutions. Stock solutions (20 μM) were used
for transfection in cell cultures.

Cell Culture and Transfection
DRPLA patient-derived
fibroblast cell line GM13716 was obtained from the Coriell Institute
(Camden, NJ). The fibroblasts were maintained at 37 °C and 5%
CO2 in Minimal Essential Media Eagle (MEM) (Sigma, M4655)
supplemented with 15% heat-inactivated fetal bovine serum (Sigma)
and 0.5% MEM nonessential amino acids (Sigma). Cells were plated at
a density of 80000 per well of a six-well 35 mm diameter plate 48
h before transfection. siRNAs or ss-siRNAs were transfected into cells
with lipid RNAiMAX (Life Technologies) as previously described., Cells were typically harvested 2 days after transfection. The siRNA/siATN1
is a positive control siRNA targeting the ATN1 mRNA,
5′-UCGAUCUCAGUUCUUCCCGdTdT-3′
(AS). It was tested at a concentration of 50 nM in fibroblast cells.

Western Blot Analysis
Mutant and wild-type ATN-1 from
GM13716 cells were separated by sodium dodecyl sulfate–polyacrylamide
gel electrophoresis (SDS–PAGE) and analyzed by Western blot
analysis. Tris-HCl SDS–PAGE was used to separate ATN-1 isoforms
[separating gel consisting of a 5% acrylamide/bisacrylamide mixture
(37.5:1), 450 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.8), and 0.1% SDS; stacking gel consisting
of a 4% acrylamide/bisacrylamide mixture (37.5:1) and 150 mM Tris-HCl
(pH 6.8); running buffer consisting of Tris, glycine, and SDS buffer
(Bio-Rad)]. Gels were run at 75 V for 15 min and then at 120 V for
60 min. The electrophoresis tank was kept in an ice–water bath
to keep the temperature of the inner part of the tank containing the
gel at approximately 25 °C. Maintaining the temperature was necessary
to maximize the separation between mutant and wild-type bands and
to ensure that the bands that were due to ATN-1 were not obscured
by the detection of other proteins. The primary antibodies used included
anti-ATN-1 (A300–753A, Bethyl laboratories, 1:1000) and anti-β-actin
(Sigma, 1:10000). Protein bands were quantified using ImageJ. The
percentage of inhibition was calculated relative to a control sample.
Dose fitting curves were generated using GraphPad Prism 6 with the
equation y = 100[1 – xm/(nm + xm)], where y is the percentage of inhibition, x is
the siRNA concentration, n is the IC50 value, and m is the Hill coefficient.

Results
Assay
for Mutant versus Wild-Type ATN-1 Expression
To evaluate allele-selective silencing of ATN-1,
we used a fibroblast cell line derived from DRPLA patient cells
(GM13716). GM13716 cells are heterozygous for mutant ATN-1 and contain 16 CAG repeats in the wild-type allele and 68 repeats
within the mutant mRNA. The calculated molecular mass of the ATN-1
protein is approximately 125 kDa, and the CAG repeats are located
within the protein-encoding region (Figure A). Chemical modifications (Figure B) were
introduced into duplex RNAs and ss-siRNAs to improve RNA stability
and enhance allele-selective inhibition of mutant ATN-1 expression.

ATN-1 target mRNA, chemical modifications,
and
assay development. (A) Diagram of ATN-1 mutant and
wild-type mRNA showing the CAG repeat region that is the target for
duplex and single-stranded RNAs. (B) Chemical structures of modifications
used in this study. (C) Use of an siRNA, siATN1, targeting ATN-1 mRNA to identify the ATN-1 protein band in a control
fibroblast cell line. CM is a control duplex RNA that is not complementary
to ATN-1 mRNA. (D) Western analysis showing separation of mutant and
wild-type ATN-1 protein in DRPLA patient-derived cells compared with
a healthy control fibroblast cell line.

To assay the inhibition of mutant ATN-1 protein expression,
it
is necessary to separate mutant and wild-type variants. Separating
the mutant and wild-type forms of proteins derived from trinucleotide
repeat genes is relatively challenging because the mutant repeats
encode expanded glutamine tracts that add only a few thousand daltons
in molecular mass. For ATN-1, we faced additional challenges. The
best available antibodies for examining ATN-1 were not optimal because
cross reactivity caused the appearance of many bands in addition to
the one caused by ATN-1. Difficulty achieving clear results led us
to develop protocols for improving the identification of ATN-1 protein.

The ATN-1 protein migrates more slowly via SDS–PAGE than
would be predicted by its molecular mass, complicating identification. To confirm the identity of the ATN-1
protein band, we designed a duplex RNA targeting the ATN-1 exon region
downstream of the CAG repeat and tested the RNA in a control fibroblast
cell line, which exhibits only wild-type ATN-1 expression. We found
the ATN-1 protein, located at 170 kDa, disappeared after treatment
with siATN1 (Figure C). Next we tried to separate
the mutant band from the wild-type ATN-1 band by SDS–PAGE.
The Tris-acetate gel system used to separate HTT was inadequate, producing a blurred mutant band. Switching
to Tris-HCl-buffered gels produced sharper bands with good separation
of wild-type and mutant protein (Figure D).
Tris-HCl gels were constructed manually because similar commercial
precast gels did not yield a useful separation of the mutant and wild-type
bands.

Mismatch-Containing Duplexes Are Allele-Selective Inhibitors
of ATN-1 Expression
We began our investigation of selective
inhibition by testing RNA duplexes containing one or more mismatches
relative to the expanded CAG repeat within ATN-1 mRNA
(Figure A). We found that fully complementary
RNA REP showed only a 2.6-fold selectivity for inhibition of mutant
versus wild-type ATN-1 expression (Figure B). The poor selectivity of the fully complementary duplex is consistent
with earlier studies that investigated the inhibition of mutant HTT
or ATXN-3.,

Duplex RNAs are allele-selective inhibitors
of ATN-1 expression. Gels are Western analyses of
ATN-1 protein levels. Graphs
are based on triplicate determinations. (A) Sequences, IC50 values, and selectivities of duplex RNAs used for panels B–F.
Only the strand complementary to ATN-1 mRNA is shown. Both strands
of the duplex contain two DNA/T at the 3′ end. Mismatched bases
that are relative to the CAG repeat region are shown in bold italics.
(B–F) Gel and dose response graphs for duplex RNAs REP, P9,
P9-15, P9-16, and PM4, respectively.

By contrast, duplex RNA P9 that contained a single mismatched
base
at position 9 showed 12-fold selectivity (Figure C). The IC50 values for inhibiting the expression
of mutant ATN-1 were similar for REP and P9, 1.2 and 0.7 nM, respectively,
demonstrating that duplex P9 was more selective because it better
preserved the expression of wild-type ATN-1. We also examined duplexes
that combined a mismatch at the central P9 position with secondary
mismatches and found that they were also allele-selective. Duplex
P9-15 possessed a selectivity of 5-fold (Figure D), while duplex P9-16 (Figure E) was 10-fold
selective.

Up to four mismatches were tolerated within allele-selective
RNA
duplexes. A duplex RNA with four contiguous mismatches, duplex PM4,
possessed a potency of 1.4 nM for inhibition of mutant ATN-1 (Figure F). This potency was similar to that for REP or
P9. The selectivity of PM4 was greater than 18-fold, also similar
to that achieved by duplex P9. For allele-selective inhibition of
HTT expression, our mechanistic studies had suggested that binding
of mismatch-containing duplex RNAs was cooperative and that cooperative
binding of multiple duplexes weakened any detrimental impact of mismatches
on potency.

Effect of Chemically Modified
Nucleotides within Mismatched
RNAs
Chemical modifications are necessary to achieve the
stability needed to consider in vivo applications, and we examined whether modifications would
be compatible with discrimination between mutant and wild-type alleles
(Figure A and Figure S1 of the ). Chemically modified
duplexes containing multiple 2′-O-methyl (Figure B) modifications with one to four mismatches were
allele-selective inhibitors of ATN-1 expression (Figure B). Duplexes CMOD12 (three mismatches) and CMOD13 (four mismatches)
were chosen for closer examination and achieved 11- and 23-fold selectivities,
respectively (panels C and D of Figure , respectively).
IC50 values for inhibiting expression of mutant ATN-1 were
approximately 1 nM, similar to potencies for the unmodified duplexes
(Figure ).

Chemically modified siRNAs are allele-selective
inhibitors of ATN-1 expression. Gels are Western
analyses of ATN-1 levels.
Graphs are based on triplicate determinations. CM is a control duplex
RNA that is not complementary to ATN-1 mRNA. (A)
Sequences, IC50 values, and selectivities of chemically
modified duplex RNAs used for panels B–D. The bases shown in
bold italics are mismatched relative to the CAG repeat region. Lowercase
denotes 2′-O-methyl base substitutions. (B)
Western analysis showing inhibition of ATN-1 protein expression when
RNAs CMOD1, -2, -12, -13, -14, -22, and -23 and CM are added at a
concentration of 3 nM. (C and D) Dose–response curves related
to IC50 value determination for duplexes for CMOD12 and
CMOD13, respectively.

Effect of Abasic Substitutions on Allele-Selective Inhibition
of ATN-1
Another strategy for disrupting the cleavage function
of AGO2 is to remove the potential for base interactions entirely
by using abasic substitutions (Figure B).
We have previously shown that duplexes containing abasic substitutions
can be allele-selective inhibitors of ATXN-3 or HTT expression. For ATN-1, abasic-modified duplexes with one
to four substitutions (Figure A and Figure
S2 of the ) were
allele-selective when they were tested at 3 nM (Figure B). Duplexes containing abasic substitutions at different
positions were chosen for further analysis and were shown to possess
selectivities ranging from 3.9- to 7.9-fold (Figure C–E). As observed for unmodified and chemically modified
duplex RNAs, abasic RNAs possessed IC50 values for the
inhibition of the expression of mutant ATN-1 of ∼1 nM.

Abasic-substituted
duplex RNAs are allele-selective inhibitors
of ATN-1 expression. Gels are Western analyses of
ATN-1 levels. Graphs are based on triplicate determinations. CM is
a control duplex RNA that is not complementary to ATN-1 mRNA. (A) Sequences, IC50 values, and selectivities of
duplex RNA containing abasic substitutions that were used for panels
B–E. Y34 denotes (2R,3S,4S)-2-(hydroxymethyl)-4-methoxytetrahydrofuran-3-ol and Y33
(2R,3S)-2-(hydroxymethyl)tetrahydrofuran-3-ol.
Lowercase denotes 2′-O-methyl RNA substitutions.
(B) Western analysis for inhibition of ATN-1 expression by abasic-substituted
duplexes tested at 3 nM. (C–E) Dose–response curves
related to IC50 value determination for duplexes AB5, AB6,
and AB8, respectively.

Effect of UNA Substitutions on Allele-Selective Inhibition of
ATN-1
UNA nucleosides are acyclic and lack a connection between
the C2′ and C3′ atoms (Figure )., In contrast to abasic substitutions that
preserve the ribose backbone but lose the potential for base pairing,
UNA substitutions preserve the potential for base pairing but have
increased backbone flexibility.

We tested UNA-substituted duplexes
(Figure A and Figure S3 of the ) and observed that several
duplexes inhibited ATN-1 protein expression when they were tested
at 6 nM (Figure B). Three duplexes were chosen
for closer examination, including P9U9 that contained a mismatched
and UNA base at position 9, P9U13 that contained a mismatched base
at position 9 and a UNA base at position 13, and REPU9 that was fully
complementary to the CAG repeat within ATN-1 mRNA but contained a
UNA substitution at position 9. These UNA-substituted RNAs had selectivities
ranging from 2.4- to 5.3-fold (Figure C–E).
In contrast to the similar IC50 values (approximately 1
nM) for inhibiting expression of mutant HTT by mismatch-containing
or abasic-containing duplexes, the IC50 values of the UNA-substituted
form were 3–5 nM.

Allele-selective inhibition of ATN-1 expression
by UNA-substituted duplex RNAs. Gels are Western analyses of ATN-1
protein levels. Graphs are based on triplicate determinations. CM
is a control duplex RNA that is not complementary to ATN-1 mRNA and lacks full complementarity to any mRNA sequence. (A) Sequences,
IC50 values, and selectivities of UNA-substituted duplex
RNAs used for panels B–E. Only the antisense strand is shown.
Mismatched bases are shown in bold italics. (B) Western analysis for
inhibition of ATN-1 expression by UNA-substituted duplexes tested
at 6 nM. (C–E) Dose–response graphs for P9U9, P9U13,
and REPU9, respectively.

Allele-Selective Inhibition of ATN-1 Expression by ss-siRNAs
ss-siRNAs represent a new approach to gene silencing that uses
single-stranded modified RNAs that retain the ability to function
through the RNAi pathway. Previous work
has shown that ss-siRNAs can be allele-selective inhibitors of HTT, and ATXN-3 expression. To determine
whether ss-siRNAs could also allele-selectively inhibit the expression
of ATN-1, we tested a series of ss-siRNAs that varied in the position
and number of mismatched bases (Figure A and
Figure S4 of the ).

Allele-selective inhibition of ATN-1 expression
by ss-siRNAs. Gels are Western analyses of ATN-1 levels. Graphs are
based on triplicate determinations. CM is a control duplex RNA that
is not complementary to ATN-1 mRNA. (A) Sequences,
IC50 values, and selectivities of ss-siRNAs used for panels
B–I. A subscript s indicates a phosphorothioate (PS) linkage.
The 2′-O-methyl (2′-O-Me)-modified base is denoted in lowercase. The 2′-fluoro
(2′-F) group is shown in underlined uppercase. Tm means 2′-methoxyethyl (2′-MOE)-modified RNA T. Mismatched
bases are shown in bold italics. The terminal thymidine has a 5′-phosphate
or vinyl phosphonate. All other linkages are phosphates. (B and C)
Dose–response curves related to ss-siRNAs 553775 and 553822,
respectively. (D and E) ss-siRNAs tested at 3 and 6 nM, respectively.
(F–I) Dose–response curves for ss-siRNAs 557426, 618385,
618204, and 641384, respectively.

ss-siRNAs require 5′-vinyl phosphonate modification
for
action in vivo, and an ss-siRNA containing a vinyl
phosphonate and a position 9 mismatch was a potent (IC50 value of 1.1 nM) and allele-selective (&gt;23-fold) compound (Figure B). For cell culture testing, ss-siRNAs with 5′-phosphate
groups are active and are preferred for testing because the synthesis
of large numbers of compounds is more straightforward. ss-siRNA 553822
with a 5′-phosphate terminus behaved like 537775, with an IC50 value of 1.9 and a selectivity of &gt;13-fold (Figure C). We then assayed a series of 5′-phosphate
ss-siRNAs at 3 and 6 nM (panels D and E of Figure , respectively). ss-siRNA 557426 with three central mismatches
was both potent and selective, showing that multiple mismatches are
tolerated with the ss-siRNA framework (Figure F).

One goal for anti-CAG nucleic acids is the development
of compounds
that are selective for allele-selective inhibition of expression of
multiple trinucleotide repeat disease genes. Both ss-siRNAs with position
9 mismatches, 537775 and 553822, were allele-selective for the inhibition
of the expression of all three genes (Table ). We continued this analysis by examining inhibition of ATN-1 by
two other compounds, 618385 (Figure G) and
618204 (Figure H), that were allele-selective
for both HTT and ATXN-3. Of the two compounds, only ISIS 618204 was
allele-selective for all three trinucleotide repeat genes, with a
12.7-fold selectivity for mutant ATN-1. For comparison, we also examined
the inhibition by ISIS 641384 (Figure I) that
had been allele-selective for HTT but not ATXN-3. ISIS 641384 was
highly selective for inhibition of ATN-1 (&gt;20-fold), even though
it
had not been selective for ATXN-3.

Inhibition of Expression
of ATN-1,
ATXN-3, and HTT by Duplex RNAs and ss-siRNAs
 	effect
on HTT	effect on ATX-3	effect
on ATN-1	
name	mutant IC50 (nM)	wt IC50 (nM)	selectivity (x-fold)	mutant
IC50 (nM)	wt IC50 (nM)	selectivity (x-fold)	mutant IC50 (nM)	wt IC50 (nM)	selectivity (x-fold)	
dsRNAs	
P9	3.2 ± 0.3	&gt;100	&gt;31	4	50	11	0.7 ± 0.2	8.5 ± 1.6	12	
PM4	4.8 ± 1.6	&gt;100	&gt;21	6.5 ± 2.8	50	8	1.4 ± 0.3	&gt;25	&gt;18	
AB8	3.3 ± 0.6	&gt;100	&gt;30	3.3 ± 0.6	&gt;100	&gt;30	0.9 ± 0.2	3.5 ± 0.5	3.9	
P9U13	22 ± 0.4	&gt;100	&gt;43	13 ± 2.8	43 ± 7.9	3.2	3.9 ± 0.8	21 ± 7.8	5.3	
ss-siRNAs	
537775	3.5 ± 0.3	&gt;100	&gt;29	2.9 ± 0.3	24 ± 6	8	1.1 ± 0.2	&gt;25	&gt;23	
557426	3.3 ± 0.5	&gt;100	&gt;30	28 ± 2.2	67 ± 11	2.4	1.7 ± 0.3	&gt;25	&gt;15	
553822	4.9 ± 0.8	90 ± 9.7	18	8.4 ± 2.5	99 ± 28	12	1.9 ± 0.3	&gt;25	&gt;13	
618385	3.6 ± 0.4	53	14	1.4 ± 0.2	&gt;50	&gt;37	3.0 ± 0.4	8.5 ± 1.7	2.8	
641384	5.1 ± 0.4	&gt;100	&gt;19	5.1 ± 0.6	17 ± 2.9	3.4	1.2 ± 0.1	&gt;25	&gt;21	
618204	7.2 ± 1.2	&gt;100	&gt;14	3.1 ± 0.7	71 ± 26	23	1.1 ± 0.1	14 ± 6.1	13	
Discussion
DRPLA is a severe neurological disease with no known cure. Recent
advances in the delivery of active nucleic acids within the central
nervous system−, and other tissues suggest that gene silencing is a feasible strategy
for therapeutic development and might be used to silence the root
cause of DRPLA, expression of mutant ATN-1 protein. The allele-selective
duplex RNAs and ss-siRNAs described in this report provide several
options for developing therapeutic agents for the treatment of DRPLA.

DPRLA has a relatively small patient population. Drug discovery
would be facilitated if compounds being developed for other diseases
could also be applied to treat DPRLA. The anti-CAG nucleic acids we
describe here fit this paradigm. Both duplex RNAs and ss-siRNAs achieve
good potencies and greater than 10-fold allele selectivities for three
disease genes, ATN1, ATXN-3, and HTT. An anti-CAG development program may address multiple
diseases, a conclusion previously reached by van Roon-Mon and colleagues.

During our studies of anti-CAG nucleic
acids that act through the
RNAi pathway, we have tested more than 160 different compounds for
allele-selective inhibition of at least one trinucleotide repeat gene.
These compounds are derived from different classes of anti-CAG nucleic
acids, including mismatch-containing duplex RNA, UNA-containing duplex
RNA, abasic duplex RNA, and ss-siRNA. In broad terms, for inhibiting
ATN-1 protein expression, compounds containing mismatched bases achieved
allele selectivities higher than those of compounds with UNA or abasic
substitutions.

For 10 compounds, we obtained potency and selectivity
data for
the inhibition of expression of all three different trinucleotide
repeat genes, ATN1, ATXN-3, and HTT (Table ).,, All 10 compounds had selectivities of &gt;14-fold
for inhibition of HTT protein expression. For ATN-1 and ATXN-3 protein
expression, most compounds were also &gt;8-fold selective, demonstrating
that it is possible to obtain compounds with good selectivities for
inhibiting all three disease genes. This generality might allow the
eventual development of a single therapeutic for multiple trinucleotide
repeat diseases.

The three model cell lines used to examine
inhibition of HTT, ATXN-1,
and ATN-1 have similar normal and wild-type repeat numbers. For monitoring
HTT inhibition, we used GM04281 cells (69 repeats in the mutant allele
and 17 repeats in the normal allele); for monitoring ATXN-1 inhibition,
we used GM06151 cells (74 repeats in the mutant allele and 24 repeats
in the normal allele), and for monitoring ATN-1 inhibition, we used
GM13716 cells (68 repeats in the mutant allele and 16 CAG repeats
in the normal allele). Thus, the differences we observed are likely
dominated by the context of the surrounding gene, not the number of
expanded repeats.

Not every compound was a good inhibitor for
each of the three disease
genes. We found that some compounds were poorly (&lt;4-fold) selective
for inhibition of either mutant ATN-1 or ATXN-3 protein expression.
For example, abasic duplex AB8 was &gt;30-fold selective for HTT and
ATXN-3 and only 3.9-fold selective for inhibition of ATN-1 protein
expression. Conversely, ss-siRNA 618385 was &gt;37-fold selective
for
ATXN-3 and was poorly selective for ATN-1. These differences occur
even though the CAG repeat target is the same in all three expanded
mRNAs. Sequences surrounding the CAG repeat can influence recognition
by anti-CAG nucleic acids, but this influence is subtle and does not
impact the recognition of many compounds.

Our data demonstrate
that it is possible to achieve allele-selective
inhibition of ATN-1 protein expression, providing a starting point
for developing nucleic acids as a treatment for DRPLA. Several compounds
are allele-selective inhibitors of multiple trinucleotide repeat genes,
suggesting that it might be possible to identify a single compound
for the treatment of multiple diseases.

Supporting Information Available
Representative gel images of
the–dose response curves for inhibition of ATN-1 expression by UNA-modified P9 duplexes (Figures S1 and S2). This
material is available free of charge via the Internet at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bi500610r_si_001.pdf

Author Contributions
J.H. and
J.L. contributed equally to this work. J.H. and J.L. planned and executed
experiments for testing the inhibition of HTT. C.M. and X.Q. designed
and synthesized UNAs. T.P.P. designed and synthesized ss-siRNAs. M.M.
designed and synthesized chemically modified duplex RNAs. D.R.C. planned
experiments and wrote the manuscript.

Work in the
Corey Laboratory was supported by the National Institutes of Health
(National Institute of General Medical Sciences Grant 73042) and the
Robert A. Welch Foundation (I-1244). J.H. was supported by a Young
Investigator Award from the National Ataxia Foundation.

The authors declare the
following competing financial interest(s): ISIS Pharmaceuticals has
filed patent applications related to the use of single-stranded silencing
RNAs. The University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center has filed
a patent application related to use of duplex RNAs for allele-selective
gene silencing.

Abbreviations
ATN-1atrophin-1

HTThuntingtin

ATXN-3ataxin-3

DRPLAdentatorubral-pallidoluysian atrophy

UNAunlocked nucleic
acid

AGO2argonaute
2

ss-siRNAsingle-stranded
silencing RNA.

