Nitric oxide
synthase (NOS)
catalyzes the NADPH- and O2-dependent conversion of l-arginine to l-citrulline and nitric oxide (NO). NOS
produces NO in two O2- and NADPH-dependent monoxygenation
steps; in the first step, NOS converts l-arginine into Nω-hydroxy-l-arginine (NHA); in
the second step, NOS converts NHA to l-citrulline and NO
(Scheme ). The first step is a hydroxylation
that requires delivery of two electrons to the NOS ferriheme; product
formation in the second step requires only one electron overall. In
both steps, H4B rapidly provides a second electron, which
is necessary for oxygen activation, and the resulting H4B radical is subsequently rereduced. In
step one, the H4B radical is reduced by NADPH, whereas
in step two, the H4B radical is presumably reduced by the
initial product NO–, likely via FeIINO.−

Reaction Catalyzed by NOS
NO plays an essential signaling role in mammalian neurotransmission,
vasodilation, and immune response, and therefore
misregulation of NO production by NOS is implicated in many disease
states.− NOS homologues exist in bacteria as well, including the NOS-like
protein from the thermophilic bacterium Geobacillus
stearothermophilus (gsNOS)., Most of the bacterial NOSs discovered to date, including gsNOS,
are similar to mammalian NOSoxy, but unlike mammalian NOSs,
bacterial NOSs do not contain an attached reductase domain. Native
reductase partners for bacterial NOSs have yet to be identified, but
H2O2 is a viable in vitro cosubstrate. When bacterial NOSs are provided a mammalian
reductase domain partner and H4B, or if they have a fused reductase domain, they can catalyze O2- and NADPH-dependent oxidation of l-arginine to l-citrulline and NO. Crystal structures
of bacterial NOSs show a highly conserved active site like that of
mammalian NOSs, with the exception of minor changes just outside the
active site that likely contribute to gsNOS’s enhanced stability.,

The NOS monooxygenation reactions occur via heme-catalyzed
reductive
O2 activation similar to the cytochromes P450 (Scheme ). This sequence of reactions begins with reduction
of the ferric heme (1) to the ferrous state (2) by the reductase domain that originated from NADPH (Scheme ). Subsequent O2 binding forms a Fe(II)heme–O2 complex (3). A second one-electron reduction
by H4B forms the ferric heme-peroxo intermediate (4). In step one, this electron is replenished to the H4B radical by a reaction initiated by NADPH. In the second
step of NOS catalysis, when, stoichiometrically, only one electron
is required for product formation but two electrons are needed for
oxygen activation, the electron is returned to the H4B
radical from the formed Fe(II)–NO complex. Heme species 4 may be converted to product state 7 directly,
or it may accept one proton and form the ferric hydroperoxo species
(5). Species 5 may lead directly to 7, or it may be additionally protonated and release H2O, yielding compound I (Cpd I, 6). Cpd I is the
most reactive of the three possible active oxy species and, while
experimentally difficult to characterize, is presumed to be the most
common reactive species in heme-monooxygenation reactions.

Heme-Oxy Species Formed during Catalysis
The increased stability of
ferrous gsNOS–O2 in
comparison with mammalian NOSs has allowed better characterization
of NOS heme-oxy intermediates 4 and 5 during
catalysis. Cryoreduction/annealing/EPR/ENDOR studies have shown that
the ternary ferrous gsNOSoxygenase domain (gsNOSoxy)–O2–substrate complex that has been reduced radiolytically
by one additional electron at 77 K (in the absence of H4B) is competent to catalyze the first and second steps of the reaction
during annealing., Detailed EPR/ENDOR analysis of
the intermediates arising during annealing of the cryoreduced ternary
ferrous gsNOSoxy–O2–substrate
complex showed that oxidation of l-arginine to NHA is catalyzed
by Cpd I, whereas the ferric peroxo/hydroperoxo species (4/5) participates in the conversion of NHA into HNO and l-citrulline (in the absence of H4B). The low concentration
of the hydroperoxy species (5) that accumulates during
the second stage impedes more detailed characterization of its properties
and its contribution to the conversion of NHA into nitric oxide and l-citrulline. Indeed, an unusually large rhombicity of the EPR
signal of the detected hydroperoxy species may also be interpreted
in terms of a tetrahedral intermediate formed from a nucleophilic
addition of ferric peroxo intermediate 4 to a guanidinium
oxime. Importantly, these studies also show that the nature of the
substrates determines the catalytically active state (Scheme ): Cpd I (6) for l-Arg and
peroxo/hydroperoxo ferric intermediate (4/5) in the case of NHA.−

Recently, we determined substrate/inhibitor
characteristics of
methylated analogues of NHA with mammalian NOSs (Figure )., Singly methylated NHAs Nω-methoxy-l-arginine (NMOA) and Nω-hydroxy-Nω-methyl-l-arginine (NHMA) were found to be NO- and citrulline-producing
NOS substrates. However, there was a 10–15-fold decrease in kcat for all methylated analogues of NHA and
a strong increase in the uncoupling of NO production. Nω-Methoxy-Nω-methyl-l-arginine (NMMA), an analogue in which both the Nω-H proton and the Nω-OH proton are replaced with
a methyl substituent, is not a viable NOS substrate, but it fits in
the NOS active site well with micromolar binding affinity. These studies did not determine to what extent
these changes were the result of a lower intrinsic reactivity of the
analogues, as opposed to substrate-induced changes in the heme pocket
that led to the generation of alternative active heme species with
lower reactivity. In favor of this latter possibility, it was previously
shown that the structure of the guanidino moiety can significantly
affect the hydrogen-bonding network near the heme active site, which
subsequently controls proton transfer events in NOS and tunes its
oxidative chemistry.,

NHA substrate analogues.

We here report kinetic studies to determine the
effects of Nω-methylation of NHA on H2O2-dependent,
gsNOS-catalyzed conversion of substrate to product, comparing results
for NHA itself to those for alternative Nω-methylated-NHA
substrates, NMOA and NHMA, and inhibitor NMMA. To elucidate the effect
of methylating Nω-hydroxy l-arginine on the properties and reactivity of the one-electron-reduced
oxy-heme center of gsNOS, we have applied cryoreduction/annealing/EPR/ENDOR
techniques, along with measurements of solvent kinetic isotope effects
(sKIE), during 160 K cryoannealing of species formed by cryoreduction.

These experiments confirm that step two
of gsNOS catalysis involves
conformers of gsNOSoxy–O2–substrate
ternary complexes that generate the peroxoferric state 4 upon 77 K cryoreduction; this state converts during annealing to
the catalytically active hydroperoxoferric state 5. They
further reveal that methylation of the guanidinium Nω-H and Nω-OH of NHA inhibits the second, NO-producing,
reaction step (Scheme ) by favoring substates
of oxy-gsNOS in which the prompt protonation of 4 formed
during 77 K cryoreduction generates an ensemble of unreactive ferric
hydroperoxo intermediates, 5. It is proposed that methylated
NHA analogues produce this effect by modifying the hydrogen-bonding
network in the distal side of the active site. This mechanism is supported
by a quantitative correlation between the yield of the peroxo ferric
intermediate trapped at 77 K and the yield of l-citrulline
formed by reaction of the hydroperoxo ferric intermediate during annealing
of the cryoreduced samples. The present results again show how variations
in the properties of the substrate can modulate the reactivity of
a monooxygenase;,, in this case, methylation of the guanidinium moiety both finely
controls the proton transfer events in NOS and tunes the oxidative
chemistry of the hydroperoxoferriheme.

Materials and Methods
Materials
All chemicals, unless otherwise noted, were
obtained from Sigma-Aldrich and used without further purification.

Protein Purification
gsNOSoxy was expressed
and purified as previously described; iNOS was expressed and purified as described.

Substrate Synthesis
Substrate analogues
NMOA, NHMA,
NMMA, and MHA (Figure ) were synthesized as
previously described.

Determination
of Binding Constants of NHA and Its Analogues
to gsNOS
The determination of binding affinities of NHA and
its methylated analogues for gsNOSoxy(Ks) was performed spectrophotometrically as described previously, and is based on conversion of the low-spin complex of ferric gsNOSoxy with imidazole (ImH) into the high-spin state in the presence
of the analogues, induced by the competitive displacement of ImH coordinated
to heme iron(III) during substrate binding. Ks values of analogues were determined using the following equationwhere Ks for imidazole
was found to be 450 μM.

Kinetic Characterization
of Substrate Oxidation with H2O2
H2O2-dependent nitrite
formation was measured for each substrate with gsNOSoxy and murine iNOS in 96-well microplates at 25 °C. With a total
volume of 100 μL, each well contained the following: 20 μM
gsNOSoxy or 1 μM iNOS with 1 mM substrate (arginine,
NHA, NMOA, or NHMA), 10 μM H4B, and 20 mM H2O2 in 50 mM Tris buffer, pH 7.8, 10% glycerol, 150 mM
NaCl. The reaction was stopped at various time points by adding Griess
reagent (50 μL of each G1 and G2). Product formation was monitored by measuring the absorbance at 540
nm. Nitrite produced was quantified on the basis of nitrate standards.
Reported kobs (observed rate) values represent
averages from at least three experiments.

LC–MS Analysis of
Reaction Products after Cryoreduction
and Annealing
Urea (6 M final) was added to dislodge products
from the enzyme. Samples were filtered through 10 kDa MW cutoff filters
(Millipore) to remove gsNOSoxy. Amino acids in the flow
through were then NDA-derivatized as described and separated by reversed-phase liquid chromatography–mass
spectrometry using an Agilent 1200 series purification system equipped
with a diode array detector (SL 1315C) set to 460 and 254 nm and an
Agilent 6130A Single Quad detector using atmospheric pressure electrospray
ionization (API-ES) in the positive mode. A Phenomenex Gemini-NX C18
(4.6 × 50 mm, 5 μm, 100 Å) column was used with solvent
A as LC–MS grade water + 0.1% formic acid and solvent B as
LC–MS grade ACN + 0.1% formic acid. A gradient from 10% B to
90% B over 10 min was used at 1 mL/min. NDA–amino acid conjugates
were found to have the following retention times: NDA–NHA,
4.2 min; NDA–citrulline, 6.2 min; NDA–NMOA, 4.4 min;
NDA–NHMA, 4.4 min; and NDA–NMMA, 4.6 min. On the basis
of standard samples, substrates and l-citrulline were found
to ionize at approximately the same ratio and therefore percent turnover
was determined from integration of the MS peak areas.

Sample Preparation
for Cryoreduction
The samples of
ternary gsNOSoxy–O2–substrate
complexes for cryoreduction were prepared as described previously. Typically, the samples contained 500 μM
gsNOSoxy and 1.5 mM substrate in a 1:1 (v/v) mixture of
0.1 M Tris buffer, pH 8.3, 150 mM NaCI/ethylene glycol. In the samples
prepared in D2O/ethylene glycol-d2, the pH was adjusted to 7.9 (as measured by a pH electrode),
which is equivalent to pH 8.3 in H2O/ethylene glycol mixture. γ-Irradiation of the frozen hemoprotein
solution at 77 K was performed for ∼15 h (dose rate, 0.15 Mhrad/h;
total dose, 2.3 Mr) using a Gammacell 220 60Co.

Aqueous
Tris buffer is known to show a larger temperature variation than potassium
phosphate (KPi) buffer, but this behavior is modified in the presence
of high glycerol concentrations. As a result, we used optical spectroscopic
examination of the metMb aquo/hydroxo equilibrium at 77 K, metMb(H2O) (high spin) = MetMb(OH–) (low-spin) +
H+, to compare the effect of temperature on the Tris/glycerol
buffer system employed with that of KPi/glycerol buffer. Optical absorbance
spectra at 77 K were acquired from samples in EPR tubes in a quartz
finger Dewar flask with an Ocean Optics USB2000 spectrophotometer.

We find that the apparent pKa of the
metMb aquo/hydroxo transition determined spectrophotometrically for
50% glycerol/0.2 M buffer at 77 K with phosphate and Tris buffers
are 8.2 and 7.5, respectively (pH values measured at ambient). This
finding implies that the pH of the frozen Tris/glycerol buffer solution
is ∼0.7 units higher than that measured in phosphate buffer.
This implies that the cryoreduction experiments carried out with Tris/glycerol
buffer solutions made up to pH = 8.3 correspond to pH ∼ 9 in
the frozen solution.

Multiple lines of evidence have long established
that cryoreduction
at the dose used here has negligible effect on hemeprotein structure
and enzymatic activity. In the present
study, the clearest demonstration that this is the case is the observation
of quantitative formation of product for cryoreduced gsNOS with NHA
and NMA substrates. For completeness, enzymatic activities were measured
in fluid solution at ambient temperatures with procedures described
above (addition of Griess reagent, etc.) before and after freezing,
irradiation, and annealing. The activities of gsNOS before and after
this cryoreduction procedure are identical within experimental error
(±10%). Finally, subsequent to cryoreduction/annealing, all samples
were reduced with dithionite and treated with CO, and the absorptivities
compared with those before irradiation; in no case was the absorptivity
decreased by more than 5%.

Annealing over a temperature range
of 77–270 K was performed
by placing the EPR sample in the appropriate bath (n-pentane or methanol cooled with liquid nitrogen) and then refreezing
in liquid nitrogen.

EPR Spectroscopy
X-band CW EPR spectra
were recorded
on a Bruker ESP 300 spectrometer equipped with an Oxford Instrument
ESR 910 continuous He flow cryostat. Most EPR spectra were collected
at 28 K at 9.63 GHz, with a modulation amplitude of 10 G, modulation
frequency of 100 kHz, sweep time of 140 s, and time constant of 82
ms. γ-Irradiation at 77 K yields an intense EPR signal at g
= 2 from radiolytically generated radicals; such signals were truncated
in the reported spectra for clarity. In addition, γ-irradiation
produces hydrogen atoms within the fused silica tubes, and these give
a characteristic hyperfine doublet with A(1H) ≈
507 G. Upon annealing at temperatures above 77 K, both radical and
H atom signals decrease.

Kinetic progress curves of intermediates
during cryoannealing were obtained by fitting populations derived
from EPR spectra collected during stepwise annealing at fixed temperature
to eqs  and  (below).
Populations of the intermediates as a function of annealing times
were determined by simulating the experimental EPR spectra in the
low-spin ferriheme region as a sum of individual contributions from
the three interconverting low-spin intermediates, 4, 5, and 2.47, using the Bruker Symphonia program.
As there is no increase in high-spin signal during annealing, the
sum of these three is constant, and the fractional population of an
intermediate is determined as the ratio of the double integration
of its simulated EPR signal to the total double integral of the three
contributors. We estimate the errors in the resulting fractional populations
to be less than ±10%. The populations as a function of annealing
time were fit to the kinetic scheme of eq  (below)
assuming stretched-exponential kinetics, as embodied in eq , using Mathcad.

Results
and Discussion
Binding Constants of NHA Analogues for Ferric
gsNOS
Binding affinities (Ks)
of the methylated
substrate analogues with ferric gsNOSoxy were determined
using the spectroscopic binding assay described in the  and are presented in Table . Methylation of NHA results in a significant decrease
in the binding affinity for gsNOS (Table ).
The binding affinities of the methylated analogues depend on the methylation
position and decrease in the order NMMA &gt; NHMA&gt; NMOA&gt; MHA
(Table ). Interestingly, all NHA analogues
have a higher
binding affinity for gsNOSoxy than for mammalian iNOS (Table ), although the relative order of binding affinities
of the analogues for gsNOSoxy and iNOS is nearly conserved.

Binding Affinities (Ks) for NHA Analogues with gsNOSoxy and with
iNOS
 	Ks (μM)	
 	gsNOS	iNOS	
NHA	1.5 ± 0.4	29 ± 4	
NMOA	29 ± 2.2	122 ± 20	
NHMA	17 ± 3.5	34 ± 4	
NMMA	12 ± 1.5	70 ± 5	
MHA	&gt;10 mM	&gt;10 mM	
Complexes of NHA, NMOA,
NHMA, and NMMA with ferric gsNOS, like
substrate-free gsNOSoxy, show EPR spectra () characteristic of high-spin pentacoordinated
ferriheme. As shown in Table , methylation
of the guanidinium moiety of NHA results in relatively small shifts
of g-tensor components of the high-spin ferriheme center.
This observation suggests that the substrate modifications do not
induce significant changes of the Fe(III)–S(Cys) bond strength
relative to NHA binding and do not sterically perturb the heme conformation
and its environment. This conclusion is consistent with recently reported
X-ray data for complexes of these methylated NHA analogues with the
ferric nNOS oxygenase domain. Unlike
the methylated analogues of NHA considered above, MHA has the poorest
affinity for gsNOSoxy and forms a low-spin complex with
the oxidized enzyme whose rhombic EPR signal, g = [2.43,
2.29, 1.914] ( and Table ), is similar to that of N-alkyl-
and N-aryl-N′ hydroxyguanidines
complexed with mammalian NOSs, in which the guanidine N-OH group is
coordinated to ferric heme. The crystal
structure of the NOS–MHA complex shows that the presence of
an Nδ-methyl destroys the planarity of guanidine,
resulting in shortening of the distance between the Nω-hydroxyl group and the heme iron(III) that favors the formation
of a coordination bond.

g-Tensor Components for
Ferric gsNOSoxy and Its Complexes with NHA and the Methylated
NHA Derivatives
 	 	gmax(x)	gmid(y)	gmin(z)	
no substrate	HS	7.70	4.07	1.80	
 	LS	2.42	2.28	1.92	
NHA	HS	7.85	3.92	1.77	
NMOA	HS	7.69	4.08	1.80	
NHMA	HS	7.73	4.05	1.80	
NMMA	HS	7.80	4.02	1.80	
MHA	HS	7.745	4.09	1.80	
 	LS (major)	2.43	2.29	1.914	
Activity of gsNOS with
Methylated NHA Analogues
gsNOS
does not have a reductase domain associated with it that would require
an exogenous source of electrons for dioxygen activation. H2O2 was previously shown to serve as cosubstrate in gsNOSoxy-catalyzed l-arginine and NHA turnover. Therefore, the activity of gsNOSoxy with NHA analogues was estimated from the rate of nitrite production
in the presence of H2O2. Nitrite was quantitated
using the Griess reagent at various time points. Product formation was linear with time, allowing for determination
of an observed initial rate, which we have termed kobs. Data from the kinetic measurements are presented
in Table . gsNOS shows high activity with l-arginine and NHA (Table ). Substitution
of the Nω-H (NHMA) and Nω-OH (NMOA)
protons of NHA with methyl groups results in 2- and 5-fold decreases,
respectively, in substrate activity; replacing both protons (NMMA)
abolishes all reactivity (Table ). For comparison,
activities of mammalian iNOS with NHA analogues in the presence of
H2O2 were also measured, but in this case, only
NHA was found to produce a detectable level of nitrite. Interestingly,
we show here that l-arginine is a poor substrate for H2O2-dependent catalysis by iNOS, similar to a finding
by Marletta and co-workers for eNOS, whereas
it is a good substrate for gsNOS.

kobs for
Substrate Analogues and H2O2-Dependent gsNOS
and iNOS Catalysis
 	kobs (nmol NO2–/nmol NOS/h)	
 	gsNOS	iNOS	
l-arginine	3.5 ± 0.6	0.07 ± 0.05	
NHA	7.1 ± 1.6	3.0 ± 0.9	
NMOA	1.3 ± 0.6		
NHMA	3.7 ± 1.1		
NMMA	0.1 ± 0.1	0.1 ± 0.05	
No NO2 produced.

The inactivity
of peroxide-shunt pathways in the first half-reaction
of mammalian NOS (Scheme ) can be explained
either by suppression of the binding of H2O2 to the heme iron(III) in the presence of bound l-arginine
(e.g., l-arginine can sterically impede coordination of H2O2 to heme iron(III), as it does to the binding
of water) or by poor proton donation from the l-arginine
guanidinium group to the heme-coordinated H2O2 caused by an unfavorable geometry of Nω-H2+/Fe(III)-OOH. The latter explanation is supported by
the fact that the primary product of cryoreduction of mammalian eNOS–O2–l-Arg trapped at 77 K is the peroxy ferric
intermediate (4), in contrast to the trapping of the
hydroperoxo intermediate (5) in ferrous gsNOSoxy–O2–l-Arg., Suppression of proton delivery is expected both to slow the rate
of generation of CpdI and, as predicted by DFT computations, to lower
the reactivity of protonated l-arginine substrate as compared
to deprotonated l-arginine with ferrylheme. In this interpretation, the difference in efficacy of the
peroxide shunt reaction for gsNOS and mammalian NOSs indicates the
presence of structural differences in the oxyheme environments in
the presence of l-arginine, in particular, differences of
the proton delivery network coupled to the distal oxygen of the peroxo
ligand in the cryogenerated peroxo intermediate. These structural
distinctions might be responsible for the different effects from methylation
of Nω-OH and Nω-H on peroxide shunt
activities of gsNOS and iNOS (sensitivities of H2O2-dependent activities of gsNOS and iNOS to Nω-OH and Nω-H replacement by a methyl group) (Table ).

EPR of Cryoreduced Ternary gsNOSoxy/O2/Nω-Methylated NHA Complexes
EPR spectra
of radiolytically reduced ternary ferrous gsNOSoxy–O2 complexes with NHA and its methylated analogues at 77 K are
presented in Figure . The spectrum of the
cryoreduced oxy–gsNOSoxy–NHA complex shows
a dominant rhombic EPR signal with g = [2.27, 2.17, nd].
This signal was shown previously to belong to the cryogenerated peroxo-ferriheme
(4) species denoted as the g 2.27 species. Methylation of Nω-H in NHA
results in ∼2-fold decrease of the g 2.27 signal
and appearance of two new rhombic EPR signals, with g = [2.303, 2.16, nd] (g 2.30 species) and g = [2.337, 2.16, nd] (g 2.34 species). Such g tensors were previously shown to be characteristic of hydroperoxo
ferriheme (5) states. The
EPR spectrum of the cryoreduced complex with NMOA (Figure ) is dominated by the g 2.30 species,
with none of the g 2.34 species and little of the g 2.27 signal (NMOA suppresses the accumulation of the g 2.27 species by 10-fold). The EPR spectrum of cryoreduced
complex of gsNOSoxy–O2 with NMMA shows
no g 2.27 signal; the g 2.34 signal is dominant,
with a strong minority g 2.30 contribution. Comparative
analysis of the EPR spectra shows that the distribution of the cryogenerated
hydroperoxy g 2.30 and g 2.34 species is
affected significantly by the position of the CH3 substituent
in guanidine group of NHA (Figure ).

X-band CW EPR
spectra of cryoreduced ternary complexes oxy gsNOS
with NHA, NHMA, NMOA, and NMMA. The H atom doublet signal is marked
by an asterisk. Instrument conditions: T = 28 K;
modulation amplitude, 10 G; microwave power, 10 mW, microwave frequency,
9.364 GHz.

As proposed previously, cryogenerated 4/NHA remains
unprotonated at 77 K because there is not an appropriately positioned
water molecule in the H-bonding network near the distal oxygen of
the cryogenerated peroxy ligand that can mediate its protonation at,
and even below, 77 K. Accumulation of
intermediate 5 during radiolytic reduction at 77 K in
the presence of the methylated NHA analogues, rather than intermediate 4, indicates that binding of these NHA analogues alters the
proton-delivery network, presumably introducing a water molecule that
facilitates proton delivery to the cryogenerated peroxo ligand of 4 at 77 K. The presence of the two distinct g 2.30 and g 2.34 species in cryoreduced ternary complexes
of gsNOSoxy–O2 with methylated NHA analogues
further indicates that a hydrogen bond and/or steric interactions
with the bound O2 of the oxy-heme in the presence of the
NHA analogues stabilizes the O2 in at least two different
conformations.

Annealing of the Cryoreduced Ternary gsNOSoxy–O2–Substrate Intermediates
As shown previously,
the 77 K cryogenerated peroxy gsNOS–NHA complex (4/NHA) is competent to quantitatively convert bound substrate into
citrulline and HNO during cryoannealing. Kinetic studies further suggested that 4/NHA converts
to the hydroperoxo ferriheme species, 5/NHA, during cryoannealing
and that this state is catalytically active in the conversion of NHA
into product; more detailed kinetic studies
presented here support that conclusion.

As shown in Figure , progressive annealing of cryogenerated 4/NHA at 160 K causes its EPR signal to decay, and early in this process
a weak signal appears with g1 = 2.36, which is assigned to the catalytically active hydroperoxo ferric
species 5/NHA. Further annealing produces two low-spin
ferriheme EPR signals associated with conformers of the primary product
of NHA hydroxylation, one with g = [2.47, 226; 1.91]
(major, denoted as g 2.47 state) and the other with g = [2.49, 2.226, 191] (minor) (Figure ). As described previously, the g 2.47 state shows a strongly coupled 1H ENDOR
signal that is exchangeable in D2O, with Amax ∼10 MHz, comparable with the 1H
ENDOR signal from the water of low-spin aqua (HxO, x = 1 or 2) ferric NOS, indicating that this product state contains an aqua-ferriheme,
as expected for reaction of 5 with NHA substrate. The
small differences in the g-values of the g 2.47 product state and the resting aqua-ferriheme state likely reflect
the perturbing effect of the products that temporarily reside in the
heme pocket. The g 2.47 signal disappears at temperatures
above 170 K, and its decay is accompanied by the appearance of an
EPR signal of the NO-ferroheme, g = [2.08, nd, 1.969]
(Figure ). These results imply that annealing
of cryogenerated 4/NHA at 160–170 K converts it
to the g 2.47 ferriheme, generating l-citrulline
and HNO/NO– as the primary products of NHA oxidation;
during subsequent annealing at T &gt; 170 K, the
HNO
reacts with the ferriheme to generate the NO-ferroheme adduct.

Low-spin region
of EPR spectra of cryoreduced oxy gsNOS–NHA
annealed under the indicated conditions (no changes are observed in
high-spin region). Instrument conditions as those in Figure .

The above analysis rests
on the assignment of the g 2.36 species as the catalytically
active 5/NHA. However,
the low concentration of this 2.36 species precludes
its detailed spectroscopic characterization. Thus, although the g-values of this species are compatible with the assignment
as 5/NHA, the unusually large rhombicity of the EPR signal
of the 2.36 intermediate might instead be interpreted
in terms of an Fe–O–O–C tetrahedral-carbon intermediate
formed from a nucleophilic addition of the peroxo moiety of the ferric
peroxo intermediate to a guanidiniumoxime. To test the assignment,
we extended the cryoannealing studies of 4/NHA at 160
K by examining not only of the loss of 4/NHA at 160 K
but also the parallel appearance and loss of g 2.36 and
the progressive appearance of g 2.47, doing so with both
H2O (Figure A) and D2O (Figure B) buffers.

Kinetic progress curess
for the 160 K cryoannealing of 4/NHA (A), 5/NHA = g 2.36 (B), and g 2.47 primary product
(C). Solid lines are fits to the equation
given in the .

Figure A shows that the progress curves
for the three species during 160 K cryoannealing can be well-described
by the coupled first-order differential equations for a two-step kinetic
schemein which
both of the two successive steps
(i = 1, 2) exhibit “stretched exponential”
behavior, as seen before for the decay
of 4/NHA. The differential
equations for such a kinetic model are given in eq , where the rate coefficients decrease in time and are characterized
by decay times, τi and coefficients, ai.

This behavior
is indicative that the monitored species exist as
a distribution of conformational substates, with the decay constant
varying over the distribution. In this formulation, each step is described
by an average reaction time, τ, while the breadth of the distribution
is reflected in the constant, 0 &lt; a ≤ 1,
with smaller values for a corresponding to greater
breadth of distribution.

As can be seen in Figure , this equation
fits the observed time courses in both H and D isotopic buffers very
well; the rate parameters are listed in Table . Most importantly, the kinetic coupling between 4/NHA
decay and g 2.36 formation occurs with a strong solvent
kinetic isotope effect (sKIE) (Table ): sKIE(160
K)1 = τ1(D2O)/τ1(H2O) = 84 min/11 min ≈ 7.5 (85% D2O),
as reported. This confirms that the g 2.36 species is indeed 5/NHA formed by protonation
of the peroxo moiety in 4/NHA and is not a product of
the reaction of 4/NHA with substrate, as such a process
would not involve proton transfer and a strong sKIE. The subsequent
kinetic coupling of g 2.36 to the formation of the 2.47 product state, combined with the ENDOR evidence that
Cpd I is not the reactive species, then
confirms that g 2.36 = 5/NHA is indeed the
reactive species in NHA hydroxylation. The observation of a significant
sKIE associated with this process, τ2(D2O)/τ2(H2O) = 50 min/14 min ≈ 3.6
(85% D2O) (Table ), indicates a
difference in the reactivity of the OOH and OOD moieties of 5 and/or of the solvent-exchanged NHA. The conclusion that 5/NHA is the reactive species in the second step of NO generation
by gsNOS correlates well with our findings that gsNOS efficiently
catalyzes H2O2-dependent conversion of NHA into
NO and citrulline.

Kinetic Parameters (Eqs  and ) for Cryoannealing of 4/NHA (Figure )
 	first
step	second step	
 	τ1	a1	τ2	a2	
H2O	11 min	0.36	14 min	0.66	
D2O	84 min	0.34	50 min	0.62	
sKIE	∼7.5	 	∼3.5	 	
τi(D2O)/τ1(H2O).

HPLC analysis of the
cryoreduced oxy gsNOS/NHA samples further
annealed at 273 K shows quantitative conversion of bound NHA to l-citrulline (in our experiments, this corresponds to formation
of 0.20 ± 0.02 mM l-citrulline), confirming the catalytic
significance of the cryoreduction measurements. As a rule, the amount
of the gsNOSFe(II)–NO complex detected in the annealed samples
is less than the amount of l-citrulline, but this can be
attributed both to an instability of the NO adduct of NOS in the presence
of O2 and to side reactions of HNO with O2 and
products of radiolysis. Indeed, as follows from the data presented
in Figure , even changing the temperature
of annealing from 200 to 237 K results in a remarkable decrease of
the Fe(II)–NO signal.

As shown in Figures  and , the hydroperoxo
ferric intermediates (5) that accumulate upon 77 K cryoreduction
in the presence
of methylated analogues of NHA (Figure ) decay
significantly faster then cryogenerated 4/NHA; this decay
usually is completes by 145 K instead of 160 K, as in the case of
NHA. Low-spin ferriheme states with g ∼ [2.45–2.50,
2.25, 1.90], quite distinguishable from the g 2.47 product
species, are produced by the decays with methylated analogues. During
annealing up to 237 K, only weak EPR signals characteristic of Fe(II)–NO
are observed in the case of cryoreduced gsNOSoxy–NHMA
(Figure ), and no signal from the Fe(II)–NO
complex was detected during annealing of the cryoreduced ferrous gsNOSoxy–O2 complexes with NMOA and NMMA (). Note that the EPR spectrum
of the intermediates formed during cryoannealing of samples with 5–NHMA, 5–NMOA, and 5–NMMA resemble that reported for 5–l-arginine, which was shown to
involve hydroxylation by Cpd I. However, with the analogues, the absence
of any FeNO products of reaction in the case of NMOA and NMMA show
that low-spin ferriheme states formed during relaxation of 5–NMOA and 5–NMMA result not from product
formation but most likely from reduction of Cpd I to the aqua ferric
state by radiolytically generated radicals, as happens for cryoreduced
substrate-free gsNOSoxy–O2.

EPR spectra of cryoreduced oxy gsNOS–NHMA annealed
under
the indicated conditions. Instrument conditions are as those in Figure . The relative fractional populations of species
A–C were determined by reproducing the observed spectrum as
a sum of contributions from simulations of the three individual species,
as calculated using the Bruker Symphonia program (see ).

It is important to note that the g-values of
the nonreactive
ferric hydroperoxo species trapped during 77 K cryoreduction of the
oxy gsNOS/methylated NHA analogues (Figure ) differ from those of the reactive g 2.36 form of 5/NHA generated by annealing 4/NHA. This observation
indicates that methylation of NHA alters the structure and lowers
the reactivity of this form of the hydroperoxy ferric intermediate
with these substrates. It seems likely, in fact, that the nonreactive
forms of 5 are diverted to the formation of Cpd I.

The key findings of this study are as follows: (i) Measurements
of sKIEs during 160 K cryoanneling of the g 2.26 peroxo
ferric species 4/NHA state trapped during 77 K cryoreduction
of oxy NOS/NHA confirm the previous conclusion that NHA is hydroxylated
by the g 2.36 hydroperoxo ferriheme state of gsNOS. Product
analysis for the cryoreduced samples with NHMA, NMOA, and NMMA annealed
at 273 K showed that l-citrulline formation during relaxation
of cryoreduced samples of gsNOSoxy–O2 with NHA and its methylated analogues is 0.2, 0.13, 0.03, and ∼0.01
mM, respectively. These yields of l-citrulline correlate
quite well with the intensity of the EPR g 2.26 signal
of peroxo ferric species 4, which converts to the reactive g 2.36 form of 5. There is also some correlation
between the yield of l-citrulline in these experiments and
the kcat for H2O2-dependent conversion of the substrates by gsNOS (Table ). Correspondingly, no detectable amount of cyanoornithine,
formed when Cpd I is the reactive species, was found in the samples. (ii) The formation, structure, and reactivity
of 5 are modulated by the methylation of NHA.

Conclusions
Recently, it has been shown that the replacement of protons of
Nω-H and Nω-OH of NHA for CH3 strongly decreases the rate of conversion of NHA to l-citrulline by nNOS and iNOS and causes significant uncoupling. The data presented herein allow more detailed
insight into the possible mechanism of the inhibitory effects of the
methylated analogues. Catalysis measurements show that Nω-methylation of NHA has a qualitatively similar effect on H2O2-dependent, gsNOS-catalyzed conversion of substrate
to product. The cryoreduction data show that binding Nω-H- and Nω-OH-methylated NHA analogues significantly
enhance proton delivery to the distal oxygen of the cryogenerated
peroxo ligand at 77 K (likely from NHA itself), thereby decreasing the yield of the peroxo intermediate
trapped at 77 K and leading to the observation of the hydroperoxo
intermediate at that temperature, as summarized in Table . As shown previously, the presence of an ordered
water molecule near the distal oxygen of the peroxide ligand is essential
to this delivery process; therefore, we conclude that the methylated
NHA analogues have induced the binding of such a water molecule to
the oxyheme center.

Results of Cryoreduction/Annealing
 	observed, 77 K	cryoannealing	product	
NHA	4/NHA	5/NHA	+	
NHMA	4/NHMA	5/NHMA	+	
5′/NHMA	5′/NHMA	—	
NMOA	4′/NMOA + 5′/NMOA	5′/NMOA	—	
NMMA	5′/NMMA	5′/NMMA	—	
Annealing experiments have shown that conformers of
gsNOSoxy–O2–substrate ternary
complexes that generate
the peroxoferric state 4 convert to a catalytically active
hydroperoxoferric state 5 (Table ). Methylation of NHA causes a redistribution of the primary products
of cryoreduction, increasing the population of conformational substates
of the parent gsNOSoxy–O2–substrate
complex in which intermediate 4 does not accumulate at
77 K but is protonated to form an ensemble of unreactive ferric hydroperoxo
intermediates, 5. Methylation likely produces the redistribution
by introducing an ordered water molecule adjacent to the distal oxygen
of the Fe–O–O moiety that facilitates delivery of the
proton(s) to the one-electron-reduced oxy-heme moiety. The g-values of the resultant intermediate 5 differs from
those of the reactive g 2.36 5/NHA intermediate, indicating
that methylation-induced changes in the structure of 5 likely reduce its reactivity.

These results once again show
how variations in the properties
of the substrate can modulate the reactivity of a monooxygenase;,, in this case, methylation of
the guanidinium moiety both finely controls the proton transfer events
in NOS and tunes the oxidative chemistry of the hydroperoxoferriheme.
The present findings further indicate that the difference in efficacy
of the peroxide shunt reaction for gsNOS and mammalian NOSs reflects
differences of the proton-delivery network coupled to the distal oxygen
of peroxo ligand in the cryogenerated peroxo intermediate in the presence
of l-arginine.

Supporting Information Available
EPR spectra of ferric gsNOS
and complexes with NHA and methylated analogues, EPR spectra of cryoreduced
gsNOSoxy–NMOA, and EPR spectra of cryoreduced gsNOSoxy–NMMA. This material is available free of charge
via the Internet at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bi500485z_si_001.pdf

Author Present Address
∥ (K.J.L.) Beloit College, Department of Chemistry,
700 College St,
Beloit, Wisconsin 53511, United States.

This work was
supported by the NIH (HL13531 to B.M.H., GM049725 to R.B.S., and a
Ruth L. Kirschstein Postdoctoral Award, GM09184-01, to S.E.C.) and
by the NSF (CHE-0749997 to B.R.C.).

The authors declare no
competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
We thank Prof.
Howard Halpern, University of Chicago, for
arranging access to the Gammacell 220 Irradiator.

