Understanding
the thermodynamics
of binding can be an important element in the optimization of the
binding of a drug to its receptor.− Ionotropic glutamate
receptors are ligand-gated ion channels that are important drug targets
because of their roles in a variety of neurological diseases, and
in learning and memory. This group of
neurotransmitter receptors consists of three major subtypes that include
(1) α-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methyl-4-isoxazole-propionic acid receptors
(AMPA; GluA1–4), (2) kainate receptors (GluK1–5), and
(3) N-methyl-d-aspartic acid receptors (NMDA;
GluN1, GluN2A–D, and GluN3A and -B). AMPA receptors are responsible
for most of the fast excitatory transmission in the vertebrate central
nervous system (CNS). They assemble as homo- or heterotetrameric channels,
and each subunit is modularly arranged with an N-terminal domain,
a ligand-binding domain (LBD), a transmembrane region, and a C-terminal
domain. Both extracellular domains are
arranged as dimers of dimers, with subunit crossover occurring between
the N-terminal and ligand-binding domains. The LBD can be produced in isolation by bacterial expression and has been shown to be an effective model system
for understanding the details of effector binding.

The LBD is a bilobed structure, and glutamate binds
in the cleft
between the two lobes. The mechanism of activation follows a three-step
process, which includes the binding of glutamate to lobe 1, followed
by closure of the lobes and interaction with lobe 2, and finally the
stabilization of the closed lobe form with the formation of two hydrogen
bonds. A range of compounds can bind to
the agonist site, all of which bind in the same manner to lobe 1.
The size of the compound, the characteristics of the interaction with
lobe 2, and the stability of the fully closed form (including the
presence of two stabilizing hydrogen bonds) determine if a compound
is a full agonist, partial agonist, or antagonist. This is illustrated
by derivatives of the natural product, willardiine, which has served
as a scaffold for a range of glutamateric agonists and antagonists., Substituting the willardiine ring at position 3 with a carboxybenzyl
or carboxyethyl substituent results in an antagonist with binding
driven largely by a favorable enthalpy decrease. Alternatively, 5-iodowillardiine (IW) is a partial agonist
with binding driven largely by an entropy increase at physiological
pH. We describe here the thermodynamics
of the binding of a series of willardiine partial agonists, to the GluA2 LBD using isothermal titration calorimetry (ITC). These
analogues, modified at position 5 (F, Cl, I, H, and NO2), illustrate the effect of ligand charge on the entropic and enthalpic
contributions to the Gibbs free energy of binding and suggest how
the structure of the agonist can be modified to optimize the enthalpic
component of binding.

Methods
Protein Purification
The plasmid for the GluA2 ligand-binding
domain, GluA2 LBD, was provided by E. Gouaux. It consists of residues
N392–K506 and P632–S775 of the full rat GluA2-flop subunit
with a “GT” linker connecting K506 and P632. The plasmid was transformed in the Origami B
(DE3) Escherichia coli strain, and the GluA2 LBD
was expressed and purified as described previously. Because of the necessity of obtaining accurate protein
concentrations and the difficulties with standard methods for protein
concentration, thiol quantitation was used (Thiol and Sulfide Quantitation
Kit, Molecular Probes), based on a method described by Singh et al., In this assay, the thiols in the protein reduce a disulfide-inhibited
derivative of papain, which releases the active enzyme in a stoichiometric
manner. A chromogenic papain substrate is then used to measure the
activity of the enzyme colorimetrically. As a standard, Ellman’s
Reagent was used to determine the thiol concentration of l-cysteine standard solutions. Because the number of thiols in each
protein molecule is known (four cysteines), we can determine the number
of protein molecules within the protein sample. At the same time,
we determined the absorbance at 280 nm of an identical protein aliquot,
which allowed us to determine the extinction coefficient for our preparation
of GluA2 LBD (58363 M–1). The protein concentrations
reflect the GluA2 LBD monomer. The dimerization constant for the GluA2
LBD is on the order of 6–40 mM,, so that no
significant concentration of dimer was present at the concentrations
of protein used in these experiments.

Isothermal Titration Calorimetry
(ITC)
ITC experiments
were conducted on a Microcal VP-ITC calorimeter at 10, 15, and 20
°C. Willardiine derivatives were obtained from Tocris and Abcam
Biochemicals. The final protein concentration ranged from 8 to 40
μM. Titrations were conducted in the same buffer over a range
of temperatures (5–20 °C) using a syringe speed of 300
rpm and a reference power of 10 μcal/s. Typical titration experiments
consisted of 35 injections in which the individual injections were
6 μL (0.4 mM ligand) and were made every 240 s. The calibrated
cell feedback signal (microcalories per second) was collected at 2
s intervals. The areas derived from the first injection were not used
in the analysis. Experimental data were corrected for buffer mismatch
by subtracting control titrations of the ligand solution into the
ITC buffer (phosphate or cacodylate).

The thermograms were analyzed
using the competitive binding approach described by Sigurskjold et
al., with the glutamate-bound state as
the reference state. Data were fit using a Ka for the binding
of glutamate of 1.0 × 106 M–1. The
binding stoichiometry (n), the apparent enthalpy
of binding (ΔΔH), and Ka were obtained by fitting. The value of n is the molar ratio of the ligand to the protein, and ΔΔH is expressed in kilocalories per mole of injectant. The
values of n, Ka, and
ΔΔH were used to compute ΔΔS° and ΔΔG° at the
experimental temperature (T). Whenever possible,
the binding reactions were conducted at multiple temperatures, so
that the change in heat capacity (ΔΔCp) of the binding reaction could be determined.

Implications of Competition Binding for Thermodynamic Parameters
Because of the low stability of the apo state in combination with
the difficulty of completely removing glutamate from the GluA2 LBD
sample, more consistent results were obtained using competition experiments,
that is, the competition of a given ligand with glutamate. The ground
state is, in this case, defined as the glutamate-bound state rather
than the apo state. For a related AMPA receptor LBD (GluA4), Madden
and collaborators were able to obtain
thermodynamic parameters for the binding of glutamate to the apo state
(ΔH values of −2.49 ± 0.03 and
−4.21 ± 0.03 kcal/mol at 15 and 20 °C, respectively;
−TΔS° values of
−5.39 and −3.96 kcal/mol at 15 and 20 °C, respectively;
ΔCp of −171
cal mol–1 K–1). Despite the fact
that the binding sites of all AMPA receptors are very similar,− the thermodynamic parameters for GluA4 LBD cannot necessarily be
compared directly to the quantities determined for the GluA2 LBD.
However, referencing the glutamate-bound state of GluA2 at physiological
pH does reveal the quantitative and qualitative differences between
the thermodynamic parameters of the binding of willardiine ligands,
as shown in Figure C. Likewise, in the calculation
of ΔΔCp (slope
of ΔΔH vs temperature), the reference
state is constant for each temperature (Figure ). ΔCp (heat capacity
relative to the apo state) would be determined by the difference between
ΔΔCp and
the ΔCp for glutamate
relative to the apo state.

Thermograms showing raw (top) and integrated
(bottom) data for
NW (A) and IW (B) displacement of glutamate from the GluA2 LBD at
20 °C. The molar ratio is the ratio of ligand to protein. Fits
were performed as described by Sigurskjold et al. (C) Calculated ΔΔH, −TΔΔS°, and ΔΔG values for displacement of glutamate by the five willardiine
derivatives. (D) Structures of the willardiine derivatives.

The ionization state of glutamate
can change at high and low pH,
in that the pKa of the γ-carboxyl
of glutamate is approximately 4 and that of the α-amine is approximately
9.5. Nevertheless, the nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectra of
glutamate bound to GluA2 LBD at these pH values are only slightly
changed, suggesting that neither the uncharged
γ-carboxyl form nor the uncharged α-amine form of glutamate
is likely to bind. Thus, the ΔG° for binding
of glutamate to the apo state would be unchanged, and the effect of
pH on the willardiine binding would be reflected in the competition
thermograms.

Crystallography
Crystals were grown
using the hanging
drop technique at 4 °C. Each drop contained a 1:1 (v/v) ratio
of protein solution to reservoir solution [16–18% PEG 8K, 0.1
M sodium cacodylate, and 0.1–0.15 M zinc acetate (pH 3.5)].
Data were collected at Cornell High Energy Synchrotron Source (CHESS)
beamline A1 (wavelength of 0.987 Å, temperature of 100 K) using
a Quantum-210 Area Detector Systems charge-coupled device detector.
Data were indexed and scaled using HKL-3000. Structures were determined with molecular replacement and refined
with Phenix. Model building was conducted
with Coot version 0.7.

Results
The apo form of the GluA2 LBD is difficult to prepare and is much
less stable than ligand-bound forms, so the experiments described
here were conducted as competition binding relative to the glutamate-bound
form. For this reason, thermodynamic parameters are expressed with
the glutamate-bound form as the reference state (ΔΔH, −TΔΔS°, and ΔΔCp). Panels A and B of Figure  show thermograms (pH 7.2 and 20 °C) of the
displacement of glutamate by 5-nitrowillardiine (NW) and IW. The most
striking difference is that the reaction is exothermic for NW and
endothermic for IW. The thermograms for 5-chlorowillardiine (ClW),
willardiine (HW), and 5-fluorowillardiine (FW) indicate endothermic
processes (Figure S1 of the ). The enthalpy change becomes progressively less favorable with
decreasing electronegativity of the substituent [increasing ΔΔH (Figure C)], with only NW having
a favorable ΔΔH (−9 ± 1 kcal/mol).
Conversely, at 20 °C, the entropic component of the displacement
(−TΔΔS°)
is favorable for all of the derivatives except NW. The favorability
of the entropy of binding decreases as a function of electronegativity,
with IW and HW having the largest increases.

The influence of
substituent electronegativity on the thermodynamic
parameters suggested that the differing pKa of the uracil ring, due to the different analogues in position 5,
may affect the thermodynamics of binding. While the pKa of all the halogenated uracils is ∼8, those of
HW and NW are approximately 10 and 6, respectively., This means that willardiine and the halogenated analogues were,
at physiological pH, in mostly uncharged (protonated) states (Figure A). NW, however, was in a mostly charged (deprotonated)
state. The GluA2 LBD is well-behaved between pH 4 and 10, with minor
changes in the NMR 1H–15N HSQC spectrum. We tested the possibility that the charged state
of the ligand could affect the enthalpy versus entropy distribution
by changing the pH. Thus, binding of largely uncharged (protonated
uracil ring) NW was examined at pH 4, and binding of largely charged
(deprotonated uracil ring) HW was examined at pH 10.

(A) Ionization states
of the uracil ring of NW. Similar ionization
states are possible for the other willardiine derivatives. (B) Effect
of a change in pH on the thermodynamic parameters for NW (left) and
HW (right) at 10 °C. For both compounds, the pH at which the
ionized state is favored is shown on the left and that for which the
un-ionized state is favored is shown on the right. (C) Structure of
the binding site, showing the direct interactions between NW and the
GluA2 LBD [Protein Data Bank (PDB) entry 3RTW()]. (D) Structure
of the binding site for NW showing the hydrogen bonding network associated
with the nitrogen at position 3 of the willardiine ring in the charged
form (pH 6.5, PDB entry 3RTW()). On the left is the
structure and on the right a schematic. In the schematic, NW is colored
blue, the protein black, and water green and the H-bonds are colored
red. (E) Structure of NW bound to the GluA2 LBD obtained at pH 3.5
(PDB entry 4Q30). At this pH, the ring is largely uncharged. The formatting of this
panel is similar to that of panel D. Note the change in the H-bonding
network. The potential H-bond between the hydroxyl of S654 and the
uracil carbonyl is shown with a question mark because the distance
between the two oxygens is relatively long, 3.5 Å, and the angle
between this H-bond and the H-bond with the water is not favorable
(80°).

Unlike the case at pH
7.2, at pH 10, the displacement of glutamate
by HW (approximately 80% deprotonated) was exothermic, with a favorable
binding enthalpy of −5 ± 1 kcal/mol (Figure B, 10 °C). The ΔΔH at pH
10 is 14 ± 3 kcal/mol more favorable than at pH 7.2. Deprotonation,
however, results in a −TΔΔS° that is less favorable by 14 ± 3 kcal/mol than
at pH 7.2. This is a clear example of enthalpy–entropy compensation,
where the interactions that result in a favorable enthalpy change
result in an increased order of the system, and thus in an equivalent
entropic cost (decrease). The compensation between enthalpic and entropic
factors results in a negligible difference in ΔΔG° between the binding of protonated and deprotonated
forms of willardiine.

Dependence of ΔΔH on temperature.

At pH 4, the uracil ring in NW
is more than 97% protonated (uncharged).
At this pH, the binding reaction is endothermic, unlike binding at
pH 7.2, with a ΔΔH of 7 ± 1 kcal/mol
(Figure B). This is 10 kcal/mol less favorable
than the binding at pH 7.2. However, at pH 4, the −TΔΔS° is 7 ± 2 kcal/mol
more favorable than in the deprotonated form. Although there is also
an enthalpy–entropy compensation observed between the two pH
values for NW, a decrease in the free energy of binding by 0.7 ±
0.3 kcal/mol is observed, with a lower binding affinity at pH 4. Because
of the role of the side chain of E705 in the binding site (Figure C–E), the decrease in affinity at pH 4 could
be, in part, related to a partial protonation at this site. Nevertheless,
the data strongly indicate that, although pH is a minor determinant
of ΔΔG° (and, thus, the KD of binding) of willardiine analogues, the
distribution of entropy and enthalpy changes varies with the charged
state of the uracil ring in a predictable way. In particular, a negatively
charged state correlates with an exothermic binding enthalpy, while
an uncharged state correlates with an endothermic binding enthalpy.
This would suggest that for enthalpy optimization, the presence of
a negative charge on the ligand as it interacts with lobe 2 would
be preferred. This is consistent with the observed binding of other
charged willardiines.

The temperature
profile of the thermodynamic parameters can provide
more detailed insight into the binding modes of these ligands. Within
a narrow temperature range, the temperature dependence of ΔΔH is given bywhere ΔΔHo is the binding enthalpy at an arbitrary reference
temperature, To, and ΔΔCp is the heat capacity change
of binding.
The values of ΔΔCp are determined from the slope of a plot of ΔΔH versus temperature as shown in Figure . The interpretation
of ΔΔCp is
somewhat complex because it is based on a competition measurement.
However, Madden and collaborators described
the temperature dependence of ΔH for glutamate
binding to the apo form in a related LBD (GluA4), and the ΔΔCp was −171 cal mol–1 K–1. In comparison, the ΔΔCp for NW binding relative to
glutamate is more negative (−671 cal mol–1 K–1), suggesting that the ΔCp for NW binding relative to that of
the apo form would be considerably more negative than for glutamate
binding. This is consistent with burying polar groups upon binding.
In addition, in comparison to the other willardiine derivatives used,
NW has a negatively charged nitro group at position 5 and, as discussed
above, the uracil ring is largely charged at physiological pH. Thus,
the uracil ring of NW is more charged than the other willardiines
used or glutamate, consistent with its more negative change in heat
capacity. For the other willardiines, which have largely uncharged
uracil rings at physiological pH and have halogens or a proton at
position 5, the temperature dependence of ΔΔH is similar to or less than that of glutamate alone, possibly suggesting
that their ΔCp (relative
to apo) is either near zero or slightly negative. Given the polarity
of the binding site and the H-bonds formed by the uracil ring with
lobe 2 of GluA2, the binding is unlikely to be driven by the hydrophobic
effect, which predicts a positive ΔCp. Overall, because the binding of agonists and antagonists
shows very consistent interactions with lobe 1, it is the interaction
with lobe 2 that contributes to the thermodynamics of binding and
the efficacy of a ligand. Like the pH effects described above, these
results suggest that charged interactions with lobe 2 contribute to
the optimization of the enthalpy of the reaction, particularly at
physiological temperatures (extrapolating from the temperature dependence
shown in Figure ).

While crystal structures
of NW bound to GluA2 LBD differ little
when the pH of the crystallization medium is changed from 6.5 (Figure D) to 3.5 (Figure E and
Table S1 of the ),
the ITC results suggest that the binding interactions in the charged
form differ significantly from those in the uncharged form. An extensive
H-bonding network is present in which both the nitrogen at position
3 on the uracil ring and the α-amide are involved. A similar
network is observed for all of the willardiine derivatives modified
at position 5 and bound to GluA2,, or GluA3. A change in
the configuration of the H-bond donors and acceptors could accommodate
the charged and uncharged forms of the uracil ring (Figure D vs Figure E), maintaining
a similar network. In the charged form (Figure D), the H-bond between the willardiine and the hydroxyl of T655 may
be stronger, perhaps giving rise to the more favorable enthalpy change.
Additionally, the number of H-bonds formed by the hydroxyl of S654
is expected to change with the charge state. If the uracil ring is
charged, the hydroxyl of S654 forms two favorable H-bonds. However,
when the uracil ring is uncharged, the H-bond with water seems favorable,
but the H-bond shown with the ring carbonyl does not have a favorable
angle or distance and may or may not be present, possibly reducing
the enthalpy of binding at lower pH values. Although this is a complex
experiment because it compares bound willardiine to bound glutamate,
the glutamate reference state remains largely constant (for a given
condition). Thus, the binding of the charged state of the willardiines
may be expected to have a change in enthalpy more favorable than that
of the uncharged state. Interaction with solvent may also affect the
thermodynamics such that a portion of the enthalpic and entropic differences
may well be associated with differences in the enthalpy and entropy
of the interactions with water.

Nevertheless, these results
strongly suggest that the willardiine
partial agonists can bind in either the charged or uncharged state
of the uracil ring and provide a tool for showing how the enthalpy
of binding can be optimized. The differences between the binding of
the charged form of the uracil ring and the uncharged form are negligible
in the crystal structure. Therefore, the difference is likely to arise,
at least in part, from the increased strength of the H-bonding in
the charged form that would stabilize the closed lobe form of the
protein. This increases the enthalpy of binding at an entropic cost.

Discussion
A great deal of consideration has been given to strategies for
the development of lead compounds for drug development. Although large
hydrophobic drugs can be optimized to relatively high free energies
of binding, the driving force is often a change in the entropy due
to the increase in the degrees of freedom of water when the hydrophobic
surface is buried in the protein. This sometimes results in compounds
with poor solubility and selectivity. In a number of cases (e.g.,
HIV protease inhibitors and statins), optimizing binding enthalpy improved the affinity
and selectivity. In the case of glutamate receptors, drugs targeting
the agonist-binding site and the several allosteric sites have significant
therapeutic potential. Of those drugs that act at the agonist-binding
site, subtype selective antagonists may be more likely to have therapeutic
efficacy for AMPA and kainate receptors, whereas partial agonists
seem to have better therapeutic profiles for NMDA receptors. Our studies of willardiine partial agonists
suggested that even when bound, the receptor exhibits considerable
dynamics on the microsecond to millisecond time scale. The electronegativity of the substituent has
been correlated with the affinity of the willardiine derivative, and
the size of the substituent has been correlated with efficacy. Measurements of HD exchange, disulfide trapping experiments, and residual dipolar coupling measurements suggested that it is the stability of the fully closed lobe form
that determines the efficacy of the partial agonist. For the halogenated
willardiines, all of the previous studies were conducted below the
uracil pKa, so that the uncharged form
predominated, and the binding was driven largely by entropy. While the interaction with lobe 2 is clearly
not hydrophobic, in the uncharged state, the H-bonds are not formed
through charged interactions and are thus weaker than what one would
see with, for example, the γ-carboxyl of glutamate. The work
described here suggests that interactions with lobe 2 that are driven
by charge lead to higher enthalpies of binding and lower entropy (possibly
accompanied by lower dynamics in the ligand–receptor complex).
This would suggest that in the future design of partial agonists for
NMDA receptors or antagonists for AMPA and kainate receptors, an important
consideration would be to build one or more charge interactions into
the portion of the molecule that interacts with lobe 2, taking into
consideration transfer through the blood–brain barrier in the
case of drugs targeted to the CNS. These results illustrate the power
of ITC in combination with X-ray crystallography and NMR spectroscopy
in improving our understanding of the important thermodynamic characteristics
of ligand binding to this essential neurotransmitter receptor.

Supporting Information Available
Thermograms and integrated
data for the binding of derivatives not shown in the body of the paper
at pH 7.2 and 20 °C (Figure S1) and structural statistics for
the crystal structure of the GluA2 LBD bound to nitrowillardiine (NW)
at pH 3.5 (Table S1). This material is available free of charge via
the Internet at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bi500511m_si_001.pdf

The authors
declare no
competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
We thank J. W. Brady, L. Nowak, C. P. Ptak, B.
Romero, and
G. A. Weiland (Cornell University) for helpful discussions.

Abbreviations
AMPAα-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methyl-4-isoxazole-propionic
acid

ClW(S)-5-chlorowillardiine

GluA2subtype of the AMPA receptor

ITCisothermal titration calorimetry

FW(S)-5-fluorowillardiine

HWwillardiine

IW(S)-5-iodowillardiine

LBDligand-binding domain

NMDAN-methyl-d-aspartic acid

NW(S)-5-nitrowillardiine.

