Flavin-containing monooxygenases
(FMOs) use the flavin adenine dinucleotide (FAD) cofactor and NADPH
to activate and thereby unleash the oxidative power of O2. Genome sequencing shows FMOs are widespread in all five kingdoms
of life. In the mammalian liver, FMOs
catalyze the hydroxylation of xenobiotics that contain soft, nucleophilic
groups, solubilizing them and initiating their breakdown.− These enzymes have been shown to act on hundreds of structurally
diverse substrates in an extremely nonspecific way. Bacterial, fungal,
and plant FMOs share strong sequence and mechanistic similarities
with the liver enzymes, though they are involved in biosynthetic pathways. How the latter direct O2 toward only
the appropriate substrates, despite their similarity to the very promiscuous
liver proteins, is not clear.

The bacterial p-hydroxy-benzoic acid hydroxylase
(PHBH) is an FAD-dependent monooxygenase from a completely different
sequence family which nonetheless provides an elegant paradigm for
reaction control.− Its O2 reactivity is regulated by conformational changes
that are triggered by shifts in protonation states. The substrate
binds in its monoanionic form with a hydroxyl group adjacent to the
site of hydroxylation. A conformational change is stimulated by deprotonation
of this buried hydroxyl group, bringing FAD proximal to NADPH. Hence,
FAD reduction can occur only after binding of the properly proofread
substrate. The triggering proton is funneled out of the protein via
a H-bond network connecting the phenolate to a histidine at the surface
of the enzyme.− The same network of H-bonds was also shown to be important for controlling
formation of the reactive C4a-OOH species which carries out an electrophilic
attack on the substrate.

Other well-studied
FMOs involved in biodegradations, including
Baeyer–Villiger monooxygenases (BVMOs),, liver
microsomal FMOs (mFMOs), and phylogenetically
distant two component monooxygenases, lack a PHBH-like substrate proofreading mechanism. They rather form
a kinetically stable C4a-OO(H) species that persists until a substrate
arrives and reacts with it. Generating such a highly reactive intermediate
without a substrate bound and in spite of the H2O2 that will be produced if none is available is a “bold”
catalytic strategy. Hydrogen bonding
interactions between the flavin isoalloxazine-N5H and either the amide portion of NADP or an amino acid side-chain
appear to be critical for stabilizing the C4a-OO(H) against elimination
of H2O2 or hydrolysis. These enzymes can be extraordinarily nonspecific for their substrates.
The liver FMOs, for example, hydroxylate hundreds of structurally
diverse nucleophiles.

FMOs associated
with siderophore biosynthesis present an unusual
conundrum. They readily form a stable C4a-OO(H) in the absence of
substrate, like the promiscuous liver FMOs. However, characterized siderophore-associated FMOs have exquisite
specificity, largely hydroxylating only one substrate with efficiency.− SidA is a fungal FMO that catalyzes the NADPH-dependent hydroxylation
of the amine side-chain of the amino acid l-ornithine. Acetylation
of the same side-chain yields a hydroxamic acid, which the fungus
uses to chelate Fe(III). Three such modified amino acids are joined
by nonribsosomal peptide synthetases into a siderophore, which Aspergillus fumigatus and related fungi use for Fe uptake,
intracellular trafficking, and storage. Because SidA is so important
to iron metabolism in these species, it has been proposed from a biological
perspective to be a potential antifungal target.−

SidA’s
specificity for l-Orn in spite of its bold
catalytic platform allows it to discriminate even against l-Lys, an amino acid with a side-chain that differs only by one methylene
unit. l-Lys is not a substrate but, rather, dramatically
destabilizes the C4a-OOH intermediate, accelerating its conversion
to H2O2 and FAD by 150-fold. Positively charged l-Arg, in turn, accelerates
the rate of C4a-OOH formation by a similar amount while having no
effect on any other catalytic step. The
recent publication of the structures of both SidA and its bacterial
homologue PvdA suggests that these proteins have well-defined substrate
binding pockets.− We hypothesized and our results here confirm that the protonation
states of l-Orn and l-Lys are critical regulators
of reactivity in the SidA from A. fumigatus. A model
is proposed in which l-Lys accelerates H2O2 release via an acid–base mechanism and where the side-chain
position largely determines whether hydroxylation can occur.

Experimental
Procedures
Standard Procedures, Chemicals, and Equipment
All reagents
were obtained from commercial sources and used without further purification
unless otherwise stated. SidA from A. fumigatus was
expressed and prepared as previously described. Protein concentrations were routinely determined by the
Bradford assay, and bound FAD (typically ∼70% of the SidA monomers)
was determined by UV/vis. The buffers
used were 200 mM potassium phosphate (pH 6–7.6), 200 mM Tris-SO4 (pH 7.8–8.8), 200 mM sodium carbonate (pH 9–10).
Deuterated water (D2O, 99.9%, Cambridge Isotopes) was used
to prepare buffers for solvent isotope studies, and the pD was calculated
by adding 0.4 units to the measured pH. Ultrapure Milli-Q water was
used in the preparation of all other reagents. Spectrophotometric
and steady-state kinetic measurements were made at 25 °C using
a Varian Cary 50 spectrophotometer equipped with a Peltier-style thermostat.
Transient kinetics were measured with a Hi-Tech Scientific DX-2 stopped
flow spectrometer with diode array detection and a continuous flow
water bath at 25 °C, as described in further detail below. Data
were plotted using Kaleidagraph. Data fits by nonlinear regression
were produced by the same software for the steady-state data and by
Kinetic Studio for the stopped-flow data. SPECFIT/32 software was
used for singular value decomposition analyses.

Steady State
Activity Assays
Reactions were monitored
continuously via the oxidation of NADPH at 25 °C (λmax = 340 nm; ε = 6220 cm–1 M–1). All reactions were initiated with ∼2 μM enzyme. Enzyme
was kept in the storage buffer at pH 8 and diluted into assay buffers
at the desired pH immediately prior to measurement. The ionic strength
of the buffered solutions was made constant at 200 mM by addition
of NaCl. Rates were referenced to the concentration of flavin-containing
enzyme subunit. Specific activities are reported as 1 μM NADPH
consumed s–1 mg–1 of SidA and
are the average of three replicates.

Circular Dichroism Spectroscopy
(CD)
SidA (2.2 μM,
0.2 mg/mL) in a solution of 50 mM buffer at desired pH (0.2 μm-filtered)
was scanned, and the ellipticity was measured on a JASCO-815 A CD
spectropolarimeter from 190 to 260 nm (300 μL, 1 mm path length).
Scans were measured at 50 nm/min, a response time of 1 s (DIT), and
data pitch of 1.

Transient Kinetics of Reductive and Oxidative
Half Reactions
As a Function of pH
Reduction of the enzyme by NADPH and
subsequent reactions with O2 in the presence/absence of
substrate and analogues were studied by stopped-flow spectrophotometry
at 25 °C in single-mixing mode. Enzyme solutions were prepared
inside a gastight tonometer and made anaerobic via repeated cycles
of evacuation and purging with hydrated nitrogen or argon gas. Solutions
before mixing consisted of 20–40 μM FAD-containing enzyme
subunit. For studies of the reductive half reaction, the solution
in the second syringe contained NADPH where the buffer was deoxygenated
with Ar or N2 via bubbling. For studies of the oxidative
half reaction, a second syringe contained air-equilibrated buffer
alone or aerated buffer with 15 mM of l-Orn, l-Lys,
or their side-chain methylated forms. The rate constants for the formation
of the C4a-OO(H) intermediate and for its reaction with either l-Orn or l-Lys are independent of whether the amino
acids are supplied with the enzyme in the first syringe or with the
oxygenated buffer in the second syringe, indicating that enzyme/amino
acid equilibration is rapid relative to the reaction of enzyme with
O2.,

A pH jump procedure was
used to achieve desired pH values. Briefly, concentrated enzyme solutions
were prepared in 20 mM Tris-SO4 pH 8.0 and 200 mM NaCl
in one syringe and mixed with a second syringe containing 200 mM buffer
at close to the desired pH (6.2, 6.8, 7.2, 7.8, 8.2, 8.8, 9.2, 9.8).
The final pH of each solution after mixing was determined by measurement
with a pH electrode (Corning). For all studies of the oxidative half
reaction in D2O, the enzyme was first solvent exchanged
into 20 mM Tris-Cl and 200 mM NaCl prepared with D2O (pD
= 8.0). The enzyme was mixed with aerated buffers prepared in D2O with/without added l-Orn or l-Lys and
having pD values the same as the pH values above. To maintain continuity
between kinetic measurements, protiated Tris buffer salts were used.
These are expected to add a very small amount of protons to the overall
solvent and to slightly lower the measured solvent kinetic isotope
effects (SKIEs) from their actual values. Hence, the SKIEs reported
here are lower limits.

Reactions of SidA with NADPH as a Function
of pH
Anaerobic
enzyme solutions were monitored via stopped flow methods following
rapid mixing with anaerobic buffer that contained 240 μM NADPH
for a final NADPH concentration 120 μM in 200 mM buffer of the
appropriate pH. Reactions were monitored by the disappearance of the
λmax 450 nm and fitted using the sum of two exponentials
as described previously.,

Data Analysis
The pH dependencies of rate constants kFAD were fitted using a single-pKa model
(eq ) (Kaleidagraph). Y
represents the pH-independent value of kFAD.

Hydroxylamine Detection
Hydroxylamine products were
quantified by first oxidizing them (using KI/H2SO4) to their corresponding deaminated forms plus nitrite. Control experiments
using l-Orn and l-Lys indicate that their amine
side-chains are not converted to nitrite. The nitrite was then analyzed
using a modified form of the Griess assay, in which the nitrite is reacted with sulfanilic acid to generate
the corresponding diazonium salt. This species is then coupled with
α-naphthylamine to generate a strongly absorbing azo dye. A
total of 90 μL of the reaction to be analyzed was mixed with
10 μL of 0.3 M sulfuric acid. A total of 100 μL 1% (w/v)
sulfanilic acid in 30% (v/v) acetic acid was added followed by 40
μL of 1.3% (w/v) potassium iodide solution in glacial acetic
acid. Samples were incubated 5–7 min at room temperature. I2 forming in the solution was cleared with 40 μL of 0.1
M sodium thiosulfate solution followed by the addition of 40 μL
of 0.6% (w/v) α-naphthylamine in 30% (v/v) acetic acid and 15
min incubation. Sample absorbances were measured at 529 nm. The concentration
of hydroxylated product was determined by comparison to a standard
curve (0–160 μM NH2OH).

Results
Protein and
Activity: Stability with pH
A plot of specific
activity versus pH for SidA peaks at 8.8 and drops sharply thereafter
(). The
secondary structure and bound flavin content of SidA are unchanged
over pH 6–10 according to the protein’s CD and UV/vis
spectra, respectively (data not shown). These results suggest that
the protein remains intact and that changes in specific activity with
pH occurring within this range are due to factors other than loss
of protein structure.

Kinetics of SidA Reduction with NADPH as
a Function of pH
The reaction of oxidized SidA with NADPH
was monitored over pH
6–9. Kinetic traces at 450 nm were fit to the sum of two exponentials.
The first phase (kred) accounts for the
majority of the amplitude change (). The second phase occurs with a k = 0.2 s–1 that is independent of NADPH concentration,
the presence of substrate, or the presence of l-Arg. This
phase was observed previously and may be due to a conformational change
in the protein following reduction. Neither
rate constant changes appreciably over pH 6.2–9.8, either for
the enzyme alone or in the presence of l-Orn, l-Lys,
or l-Arg (data not shown). Similar pH-independence was observed
for the reductive half reaction of cyclohexanone monooxygenase (CHMO),
a Baeyer–Villiger monooxygenase (BVMO).

pH Dependence of C4a-(Hydro)peroxyflavin
Intermediate Formation
SidA was reduced anaerobically by
titrimetric addition of 1 equiv
of NADPH and then rapidly mixed with air-saturated buffers of varying
pH (KM[O2] for SidA = 16 μM
at pH 8, 25 °C). The formation of
C4a-(hydro)peroxy intermediates (C4a-OO(H)) was monitored over time.
At pH &lt; 8.2, an intermediate with λmax = 369 nm
forms. The intermediate blue-shifts to 357 nm at pH &gt; 8.8. It was
not possible to determine an exact pKa due to large overlap in the UV/vis spectra of the two species, though
it appears to be in the 8.2–8.8 range. Similar observed shifts
in the λmax for this intermediate have been ascribed
to the formation of C4a-OOH at lower pH and C4a-OO– at higher in both CHMO and PvdA.,,, The data are also consistent
with a pH-dependent change in the flavin environment, due for example
to movement of active site side-chains. The C4a-OO(H) intermediate
forms more rapidly in the presence of l-Arg, but its decay
rate is unchanged. Hence, it is more
long-lived and easier to monitor in the presence of l-Arg
().

Representative whole spectra and kinetic traces for C4a-OO(H) formation
(370 nm) are shown in Figures  and , respectively. Traces
at 370 nm were fit with single exponential curves to derive values
for kC4a-OOH. pH has little effect
on (&lt;2-fold changes) on kC4a-OOH (data not shown; see R. E. Frederick, Ph.D. Thesis, University of
Notre Dame.) Second-order rate constants for C4a-OOH formation were
likewise pH-independent in the C2 oxidase component of p-hydroxyphenylacetate (HPA) 3-hydroxylase (HPAH) and in p-hydroxy-benzoic acid hydroxylase
(PHBH). The lack of any acidic pH dependence
suggests that the FADH2 ⇆ FADH– + H+ equilibrium in each of these enzymes occurs with
a pKa less than 6.2, as the neutral flavin
is not expected to react with O2.

Spectra of species formed
following rapid mixing of reduced SidA
(15 μM) with O2-saturated buffer, illustrating intermediate
formation and conversion to FAD (pH 6.2, 25 °C). (A) Reduced/FADH– SidA (dotted line), C4a-OOH intermediate (heavy solid
line, diamonds), and oxidized/FAD SidA (heavy solid line). The spectrum
of the C4a-OOH intermediate was measured 7.51 s after mixing, and
the stable FAD end product after 738 s. (B) Conversion of the C4a-OOH
intermediate (heavy solid line, diamonds) to oxidized FAD (heavy solid
line). Spectra were measured at 7.51, 24.4, 40.9, 100, 145, 201, 351
s, and 738 s with intermediate time spectra shown in gray. Note that
in this sample, some oxidation of the intermediate has already begun
to occur, leading to the observed asymmetry of the spectrum relative
to panel A, with added absorbance at 450 nm.

Conversion of the Intermediate to FAD and Peroxide
In the
absence of a hydroxylation substrate, the C4a-OO(H) intermediate
converts via a slow monophasic process to FAD and H2O2. This conversion is characterized by an increase in the absorbance
at 450 nm due to the oxidized cofactor, FAD (representative kinetic
traces at 450 nm in ; spectra in Figure ). Values for first-order
rate constants (kFAD) exhibit a strong
pH dependence (Figure ), ranging from 0.004
s–1 at pH 6.2 to 0.370 s–1 at
pH 9.8 (∼2 orders of magnitude change), with a pKa of 9.3 ± 0.05 (eq ). It
was not possible to measure the pH dependence above pH 9.5; we therefore
report the pKa as ≥9.3 (Table ).

The rate constant for the conversion of C4a-OOH to FAD
(kFAD) is strongly dependent on pH. Rates
constants
were measured by fitting exponential curves to kinetic traces at 450
nm. A pKa of 9.3 ± 0.1 was obtained
from a fit of the data to eq . The average
of three measurements as shown. Errors (± one standard deviation)
here and in Figure  are contained within the
size of the plotted data point.

pKa Values
for the Rate Constants for Conversion of C4a-OO(H) to FAD and Product
amino acid	pKa	
none	≥9.3	
l-ornithine	7.0 ± 0.1	
N5-methyl-l-ornithine	8.9 ± 0.1	
N5-dimethyl-l-ornithine	≥9.3	
lysine	7.6 ± 0.1	
N6-methyl-l-lysine	8.2 ± 0.1	
N6-trimethyl-l-lysine	≥9.3	
l-arginine	 	
l-citrulline	 	
The conversion of the intermediate
to FAD in the presence of l-Orn results in hydroxylation
with minimal H2O2 formed (see text for hydroxylation
efficiencies).

The conversion
of the intermediate
to FAD in the presence of both lysine and its analogues results in
stoichiometric H2O2 formation.

Arginine and citrulline have no
effect on the rate or pH dependence of intermediate conversion to
FAD.

Intermediate Formation
in the Presence of l-Orn, l-Lys, and Their Methylated
Derivatives
The reaction
of NADPH-reduced SidA with O2 was again monitored as a
function of pH but in the presence of 15 mM l-Orn (substrate), l-Lys (reaction uncoupler), or their side-chain-methylated forms
(Figures  and ). If the proton on the C4a-OO(H) originates from
the amino acid ligand (Scheme ), the apparent
rate constant for this step is expected to be faster when a ligand-derived
proton is available. However, kC4a-OOH remains pH-independent in the presence of either l-Lys
or l-Orn, suggesting that either the ligand is not the origin
of the proton or that the enzyme-bound amine pKa too high to be probed over pH 6–9.3 (data not shown.)

Representative
kinetic traces for the reaction of reduced SidA
with air-saturated buffer at pH 6.2 (circles) and 9.8 (squares) illustrate
the effects of pH on the rates of intermediate formation (monitored
at 370 nm) and conversion to FAD (450 nm) in the presence of 15 mM l-Orn (A) and 15 mM l-Lys (B). Intermediate formation
does not depend on pH, while conversion to FAD in each case does.
Similar data were measured in the absence of added substrate/effector.
(See .).

(A) Rate constants for the conversion of the C4a-OOH intermediate
to FAD (kFAD) measured in the presence
of 15 mM l-Orn (closed circles) or l-Lys (closed
squares). The values for kFAD measured
with no added amino acid (open circles) are shown on the same scale
for comparison. (B) Methylation of the side-chain lowers kFAD and shifts the pKas measured in A to more basic values, consistent with the
lower nucleophilicity of the secondary amine (N5-Me-l-Orn: closed circles; N6-Me-l-Lys: closed squares). (C) The pH dependence
and magnitudes of kFAD for N5-(Me)2-l-Orn (open circles) and N6-(Me)3-l-Lys (closed squares)
resemble those for the no-amino-acid case (closed circles).

SidA-Catalyzed Hydroxylation of l-Orn
The flavin isoalloxazine-N5H is shown in bold/red. The proton potentially
transferred to the FAD–OH leaving group is shown in bold/green.
The NADPH and flavin structures are shown in abbreviated form. The
nicotinamide portion of NADPH shown in light gray could not be resolved
in the crystal structure of oxidized PvdA. (See text.)

To distinguish these possibilities, the pH profile for kC4a-OOH was measured in the presence
of methylated l-Orn and l-Lys. Methylation of the
amine maintains its positive charge, reduces the number of protons,
and renders the remaining protons less acidic. We hypothesized that, if proton donation from the ligand
were needed for C4a-OO(H) formation (or breakdown), these steps should
be significantly slowed in the presence of the methylated amino acids
relative to their unfunctionalized counterparts. Additionally, trimethylated l-Lys has no proton available to donate to a putative C4a-OO-.
The rate constants for C4a-OO(H) formation were unchanged in the presence
of l-Orn or l-Lys versus their derivatives, abbreviated
here as N6-Me-l-Lys, N6-(Me)3-l-Lys, N5-Me-l-Orn, and N5-(Me)2-l-Orn (data not shown). The pH independence
observed for kC4a-OOH in the absence
of amino acids was likewise maintained. These results suggest that
the C4a-OOH proton does not come from the ligand side-chain.

C4a-OO(H)
Reactions As a Function of pH
The rate constant kFAD depends strongly on both pH and the nature
of the added amino acid ligand (Figures  and ). In 15 mM l-Lys, kFAD is pH dependent with a pKa of
7.5 ± 0.1; in 15 mM l-Orn, the pKa is 7.0 ± 0.1 (Table , Figure B). These pKa’s
are each ∼3 units below the side-chain pKa’s for the free amino acids. Importantly, there is
no basic residue in the vicinity of the substrate binding site (see
Figure ), suggesting that the observed pKa’s are not due to a basic residue that
itself acts on the bound amino acids. Both l-Orn and l-Lys destabilize the C4a-OOH to a similar extent (i.e., exhibit
similar values for kFAD), though they
result in two distinct reaction products (l-OrnOH versus
H2O2). If the observed
pH dependence of kFAD is due to the l-Orn or l-Lys ligand side-chain, then both facilitate
C4a-OOH breakdown in their neutral forms. Neutral l-Orn-NH2 is a better nucleophile than its positively charged counterpart
and therefore is better able to attack the terminal oxygen of the
C4a-OOH. Neutral l-LysNH2 could facilitate proton
transfer from the flavin-N5H to the C4a-OOH,
catalyzing H2O2 production, either by physically
interrupting the hydrogen bonding interaction between NADP+ and the flavin-N5H, or by acting as
a base/proton shuttle between the flavin-N5H and C4a-OOH. The hydrogen bonding interaction between the flavin-N5H proton and NADP+ is believed to
be a key mediator of C4a-OOH stability.,

Ligands in
the active sites of ornithine hydroxylases SidA and
PvdA. (A) SidA crystallized with FAD, NADP+ and ornithine
(PBD code: 4B63). (B) SidA crystallized with FAD, NADP+ and lysine (PBD
code: 4B64).
(C) SidA crystallized with FAD, NADP+ and arginine. The
crystal was soaked in a solution containing dithionite (PBD code: 4B66). (D) SidA crystallized
with FAD, NADP+, and arginine. The crystal was soaked in
a solution containing dithionite and subsequently in an oxygenated
solution (PBD code: 4B68). (E) Product structure of PvdA (PDB code: 3S5W). The FAD and NADP+ are shown as sticks and labeled only in panel A but are in
consistent locations in all panels. The substrate amino acid is also
shown as sticks and labeled in each panel. The water molecule hypothesized
to mimic the location of the terminal oxygen in the C4a-OOH intermediate
is shown as a red sphere in the relevant structures (panels A and
D). The C4a carbon to which the dioxygen binds is labeled in panel
A, and the ε, ζ, and η positions are labeled in
the amino acid side-chains as required for the discussion. Figure
was generated using PyMOL (W. DeLano, The PyMOL Molecular Graphics
System, DeLano Scientific, San Carolos, CA, 2002).

To test the hypothesis that the l-Orn/l-Lys side-chains
are the origin of the observed pKas, pH profiles for kFAD were
measured in the presence of monomethylated l-Orn and l-Lys (Figure B). Their side-chains
are expected to have a slightly elevated pKa (∼1–2 pH units) due to the electron-donating inductive
effects of the methyl group on the secondary amine. Consistent with the expected trends, the pKa for kFAD shifts from 7.0
to 8.9 ± 0.1 (ornithine) and from 7.6 to 8.2 ± 0.06 (lysine),
in the presence of the methylated amino acids. The magnitudes of the
measured rate constants are likewise smaller. The slower reactions
could be due to steric hindrance afforded by methylating the amine
or to changes in the nucleophilicity/acidity of the amine nitrogen.

To further probe the possible roles of proton transfer in l-Orn hydroxylation and in l-Lys-stimulated release of H2O2, the pH dependence of kFAD was measured in the presence of dimethylated l-Orn and trimethylated l-Lys (Figure C). Both derivatives are competitive inhibitors with l-Orn
and hence can bind in the active site. However, dimethyl-l-Orn in its neutral form is expected to lack the proton which would
be formally donated to the FAD–OH leaving group concomitant
with the hydroxylation step (Scheme ). Trimethyl-l-Lys is incapable of binding a proton and hence cannot act
as a base. The pH profiles for kFAD measured
in the presence of either of these derivatives are similar to one
another and to the no-substrate case: kFAD has a pKa ≥ 9.3, a magnitude
similar to that in the absence of added amino acid, and no hydroxylated
product is observed.

Notably, l-citrulline and l-arginine had no effect
on the pH dependence of either kFAD or kC4a-OOH (Table ). l-Citrulline is structurally analogous to l-Arg
but has no acidic or basic side-chain groups. It is possible that
the pKa for SidA-bound l-Arg
(aqueous pKa = 12.5) is outside of the
range attainable for SidA.

Hydroxylation Efficiency As a Function of
pH
SidA’s
hydroxylation efficiency was measured at pH 6.2, 8.2, and 9.8 to determine
whether the degree of coupling of C4a-OO(H) formation to substrate
hydroxylation is affected across the pH range studied. At all three
pH values, the coupling ratios ([hydroxylated product/C4a-OOH] ×
100%) were nearly 100%.

Solvent Isotope Effects (H2O/D2O) on C4a-OO(H)
Formation
SKIEs report on the involvement of solvent-exchangeable
protons in a particular kinetic step; a SKIE is expected if proton/deuteron
transfer is fully or partially rate limiting. To determine whether
steps in the O2 reaction are rate limited by proton transfers,
the effect of deuterated solvent (D2O) on kC4a-OOH and kFAD was
measured. Because enzyme solutions were allowed to equilibrate for
several hours with deuterated buffers prior to measurement, all protons
with exchange half-lives on the order of minutes or less (including
the side-chain protons of l-Lys, l-Orn, and the
flavin-N5H) are expected to be replaced
with deuterium in these measurements. In addition, the equilibration
of l-Lys or l-Orn with the protein has been shown
to occur rapidly relative to the reaction of reduced enzyme with O2. Hence, l-Lys/l-Orn, when present, are expected to be bound to the protein.

The formation of the C4a-OOH(D) intermediate and its subsequent conversion
to FAD were monitored via stopped-flow using air-saturated buffer
±15 mM l-Lys or l-Orn at near neutral pH/pD
(6.8). The flavin and l-Lys/l-Orn are expected to
be primarily in their FADH– and positively charged
forms, respectively. The species giving rise to the optically observed
pKa between 8.2 and 8.8 (see above), attributed
to either a C4a-OO–/C4a-OOH equilibrium or a pH-dependent
active site structural rearrangement, will likewise be in its acidic
form. The appearance of the spectra and the number and nature of exponential
phases observed were not affected by the solvent isotope; effects
were confined to the magnitudes of the measured rate constants in
H2O (kH) versus D2O buffer (kD). The rate constant kC4a-OOH(D) in the absence of amino acid
substrate/effector has a small but measurable SKIE of 1.4 ± 0.1,
lowering to 1.1 ± 0.1 in the presence of l-Lys and 1.0
± 0.1 in the presence of l-Orn. This rate constant may
encompass up to three elementary steps: the reaction between FADH– and O2 to give a flavin-semiquinone/superoxide
radical pair; the spin inversion and recombination of these species
to form C4a-OO–; and the donation of a proton to
this species to generate C4a-OOH. Because the third step is the only
one involving a proton/deuteron, it is the most plausible candidate
as the source of the small SKIE. The origin of the proton is unclear,
but the kinetic data above suggest that the l-Lys/l-Orn side-chain is not its source. The small suppressive influence
of l-Lys/l-Orn on the magnitude of the SKIE suggests
that they interact with the proton responsible for the SKIE.

Solvent
Isotope Effects (H2O/D2O) on C4a-OOH(D)
Reactions
A small SKIE of 1.7 ± 0.05 was measured for kFAD (kFADH/kFADD) in the presence of
15 mM l-Orn. This suggests that one of three potential microscopic
steps involving proton transfer—(1) loss of a proton from l-Orn or the flavin-N5, (2) transfer
of a proton to the FAD–OH leaving group, or (3) hydrolysis
of the FAD–OH to yield FAD—is partly rate limiting.

A similar SKIE of 1.9 ± 0.2 was measured for peroxide production
from the C4a-OOH(D). Peroxide elimination could occur in a single
step via direct migration of the flavin-N5 proton to the C4a-OOH. This reaction could also involve water as
a proton donor/acceptor. The SKIE increases dramatically in the presence
of 15 mM l-Lys to 6.6 ± 0.3, clearly suggesting a change
in the peroxide elimination mechanism due to the presence of l-Lys with rate limiting proton transfer. The origins of the large
SKIE for kFAD will be further probed in
a more complete study of isotope effects in future work.

Discussion
FMOs involved in the biosynthesis of siderophores present two dilemmas.
First, they are remarkably substrate-specific in spite of their “bold”
reaction mechanism, in which a highly reactive flavin-C4a-OOH intermediate
is generated even in the absence of a waiting substrate. Second, they have very different interactions
with very closely related amino acids. Namely, l-Orn is SidA’s
only efficient hydroxylation substrate. l-Lys, just one methylene
unit longer, stimulates fast and complete uncoupling of O2-activation from hydroxylation, causing H2O2 to be emitted at a rate nearly equivalent to the rate at which l-Orn would be hydroxylated. How the protein discriminates among
and executes different functions in response to these amino acids
is unclear. Given their structural similarity and positive charge,
we hypothesized that their protonation states and those of the enzyme
could critically modulate enzyme/amino acid interactions in these
FMOs. The influences of pH and solvent isotope (D2O versus
H2O) on each of the successive steps of the reaction of
SidA, a structurally characterized fungal FMO, were therefore investigated.

The rates of FAD reduction
and formation of the reactive C4a-OOH
intermediate are insensitive to pH or solvent isotope over the range
of pH for which the enzyme is stable. This suggests that l-Lys and l-Orn bind SidA in their positively charged forms
and that intermediate formation is unaffected by the protonation states
of the enzyme or substrate. l-Orn and l-Lys have
a modestly stimulatory effect on the rate of O2 activation
in SidA and l-Arg a much more pronounced one, while the uncharged
isostere l-citrulline has almost none. A conserved, positively charged residue supports the initial
formation of a flavin-semiquinone-superoxide radical pair in some
flavin oxidases. It is possible that
the positive charge on the exogenously added amino acid side-chain,
and in particular Arg with its more flexible positioning (see below),
could have an analogous effect.

By contrast, all three of the
reactions of the C4a-OOH intermediate—spontaneous
elimination of H2O2, production of H2O2 in a Lys-stimulated fashion, or hydroxylation of l-Orn—show pronounced sensitivity to pH (Figures  and ). The simplest of
these reactions is peroxide elimination from the C4a intermediate,
which occurs very slowly when no substrate or effectors are present.
This intermediate is kinetically stabilized in several flavoproteins
via a hydrogen bond between the flavin-N5H and either an active site side-chain (in C2, e.g., a serine residue)
or the amide group of NADP (as seen for example in crystal structures
of SidA, PAMO, PvdA, and pyranose-2-oxidase (P2O)).,,,, Hydrogen bonding prevents this key proton from migrating
to the neighboring C4a-OOH, which would lead to nonproductive generation
of FAD and H2O2. An analogous mechanism for
H2O2 elimination involving the flavin-N5H was proposed for the flavin-mononucleotide
(FMN) dependent oxidase P2O and supported
by experiments involving transient deuterium labeling of the flavin-N5. Similar pKa’s (&gt;9.3) on the rate constant for
peroxide
elimination in SidA (kFAD) and the C2
protein and SKIEs of 2.8 (P2O) and 1.9
(SidA) further suggest that the mechanisms for H2O2 release may be the same in each case.

The presence
of l-Lys has dramatic effects on the rate
of peroxide release (described by kFAD) as well as on its pH and solvent-isotope dependence, suggesting
that proton transfer is integral to l-Lys’s role.
The observed SKIE on kFAD shifts from
1.9 to 6.6 when l-Lys is present, indicative of a distinct
change in the peroxide elimination mechanism to one where a proton/deuteron
transfer is rate limiting. At the same time, the pKa for kFAD shifts from &gt;9.3
in the absence of l-Lys to 7.5 in its presence. This pKa is roughly 3 units below the pKa for free l-Lys and is tentatively ascribed
to the l-Lys-NH3+ side-chain. Peroxide
production is faster on the basic side of this pKa or in the presence of neutral l-Lys-NH2. Hence, l-Lys does not appear to act as an acid
toward the C4a-OOH. Rather, the neutral l-Lys side-chain
could accelerate peroxide production by acting first as a base toward
the flavin-N5H and then as an acid toward
the C4a-OOH. This mechanism is consistent with the observed pH-rate
profiles for kFAD in the presence of N6-Me-l-Lys and N6-(Me)3-l-Lys. In the former case, methylation
of the side-chain reduces its acidity, giving rise to the observed
shift in the pKa for kFAD from 7.5 (l-Lys) to 8.1. It also results
in slower H2O2 production (kFAD), possibly due to the altered acid/base properties
of the nitrogen, the need for the amine group to rotate to interact
with the flavin-N5H/C4a-OOH groups, or both. In the presence
of trimethylated l-Lys, the values for kFAD are no larger than in the no-amino-acid case and show
a similar pH dependency. This suggests that l-Lys-N(Me)3+, a competitive inhibitor with l-Orn
that can presumably bind in the active site, lacks a needed proton
for it to have its effects on kFAD.

When l-Orn is present, the C4a-OO(H) intermediate does
not eliminate H2O2 but instead appears to hydroxylate
an equivalent of l-Orn over the full accessible range of
pH. The rate constant (kFAD) for the reaction
of the C4a-OO(H) intermediate to produce N5-hydroxy-l-Orn, H2O, and FAD is, like peroxide
elimination in the presence of l-Lys, strongly dependent
on pH. In this case, the pKa is approximately
7.0: again roughly 3 pH units below the anticipated pKa of the free amino acid. An analogous dependence of the
rate constant for the C4a-OOH/substrate reaction was observed for
the PHBH from P. aeruginosa but not for C2, though
both carry out electrophilic aromatic substitution reactions on phenolic
substrates. In the former case, partial deprotonation of the phenolic
−OH group is proposed to occur in the transition state for
the hydroxylation reaction, making the aromatic portion of the substrate
a better nucleophile toward the distal oxygen of the C4a-OOH intermediate. In the latter case, the hydroxylation itself
is pH independent, but the rate constant for dehydration of the resulting
flavin C4a–OH to the oxidized FMN exhibits a pKa, above which the reaction becomes faster. The uncharged
bound substrate was proposed to partially inhibit dehydration at low
pH, while the corresponding anionic/deprotonated form does not.

Taken together, the data suggest that l-Orn like l-Lys binds in its positively charged, side-chain
protonated form.
Loss of a proton to form the neutral l-Orn-NH2, tentatively ascribed to the observed pKa of 7.0 in the kFAD/pH plot shown in
Figure , renders the side-chain more nucleophilic
toward the C4a-OOH. A second proton must be liberated from l-Orn’s side-chain amine as the tetrahedral transition state
breaks down (Scheme ). Consistent with the
need for the overall loss of two protons from l-Orn, the
magnitude of kFAD is greatly diminished
in the presence of N5-(Me)2-l-Orn, which has only one to give, and a hydroxylated product
is not observed. The pH dependence of the reaction of the C4a-OOH
with N5-(Me)2-l-Orn
is moreover similar to that observed for spontaneous C4a-OOH breakdown
(Figure C). Each of these observations is
consistent with the second ornithine-derived proton departing with
the FAD–OH leaving group to generate FAD and H2O.
The moderate SKIE of 1.7 observed for the net conversion of the l-Orn and C4a-OOH to l-Orn-OH and FAD (where the FAD–OH
intermediate is not observed) suggests partial rate limitation due
to a step involving proton migration. For the hydroxylation reaction
(Scheme ), this step could be the loss of
the Orn-NH2 side-chain proton, formally to the FAD-O– leaving group, that occurs concurrently with hydroxylation.
Or, it could be the migration of the flavin-N5H proton to the adjacent FAD–OH, leading to loss of
H2O and production of FAD. The latter step is similar to
simple C4a-OOH breakdown. The magnitude of the SKIEs for either of
these steps is nearly the same.

Why the deprotonated l-Lys would act as a base toward
the flavin-N5H, while l-Orn acts
as a nucleophile toward the distal oxygen of the C4a-OOH, is not obvious.
Prior work with PHBH showed that the attack angle between the substrate
and the transferred oxygen atom is a critical determinant of the hydroxylation
reaction.− It is possible that, in SidA, the l-Orn
side-chain is well positioned for attack of the amine lone pair on
the C4a-OOH LUMO, while the slightly longer l-Lys is not.
Relevant structural data exist that allow us to examine this possibility.
Eight structures of SidA have been determined in different oxidation
states and with different substrates/effectors (ornithine, lysine
and arginine) and two have been determined for PvdA, the structural
and functional homologue from P. aeruginosa., Five of these active sites are shown in Figure . For all of the structures, the backbone portion of the amino
acid is held in place by a hydrogen bonding network that is conserved
between the two proteins. Therefore, the differences among the structures
are primarily in the chemical nature and placement of the amino acid
side-chain, the planarity or butterfly bend of the isoalloxazine ring
of the FAD for the oxidized and reduced structures, respectively,
and the orientation of the nicotinamide ring of the NADP(H). Our focus
is on the placement of the side-chain; however, it should be noted
that in the PvdA product structure shown here, the nicotinamide ring
of the NADPH was not modeled as there was not density for this portion
of the molecule, an indication that this segment of the NADPH is mobile. It has been hypothesized that this mobility
is catalytically important, allowing the nicotinamide first to assume
an optimal geometry for hydride transfer to the flavin and then to
form the intermediate-stabilizing hydrogen bond to the flavin N5H.

Comparison of the bound substrates/effectors
in Figure  shows differences primarily at
the side-chain termini
that appear to reflect their different reactivities. In the SidA structure
with l-Orn bound (Figure A), the
side-chain is in an extended conformation. A water molecule is observed
in proximity to the C4a of the flavin rings that has been proposed
to mimic the distal oxygen of the C4a-OOH intermediate. The ε-nitrogen of l-Orn is indeed
well positioned to act as a nucleophile toward an oxygen atom in this
position. The PvdA product structure with hydroxyl-l-Orn
bound is shown for comparison (Figure E),
highlighting the placement of the oxygen that was derived from the
C4a-OOH and is now covalently attached to the ε–nitrogen.
In the structure of SidA with lysine bound (Figure B), by contrast, the water molecule is not present because
the ζ-nitrogen of lysine is occupying a location too close to
this site (within 1.5 Å). Lysine is consequently not a substrate
(does not get hydroxylated on the terminal nitrogen) because the ζ-nitrogen
extends too far into the active site, where it may be better positioned
to interact with the flavin-N5H or the
flavin-proximal oxygen of the C4a-OOH, rather than the terminal −OH.
This geometry of the lysine side-chain may facilitate transfer of
a proton from the N5 of the flavin, thereby
promoting the formation of H2O2 and giving rise
to the large observed SKIE (Scheme ).

Proposed Mechanism for l-Lys-Stimulated Elimination of H2O2 from C4a-OOH
The
proton derived from the flavin
isoalloxazine-N5H and transferred via l-Lys to H2O2 is shown in bold/red.

Interestingly, the SidA structure with arginine bound
(Figure C) also lacks the water molecule at
the expected
position of the electrophilic terminus of the C4a-OOH due to proximity
of the η-nitrogen (less than 2 Å), and the side-chain is
not fully extended. However, the ε-nitrogen can make a hydrogen
bond to a water molecule in an extended geometry similar to that seen
in the SidA-ornithine structure (reoxidized structure; Figure D). As noted above, arginine is not a substrate,
but it stimulates the activation of O2 for formation of
the C4a-OOH at a rate approximately 30-fold faster relative to l-Orn or l-Lys or 150-fold faster than if no positively
charged substrate or effector were present. At the same time, unlike l-Lys, l-Arg has no effect
on the rate of C4a-OOH decay to FAD and H2O2. The unique properties of l-Arg may be a due to a combination
of several features. For example: an optimal geometry and charge for
promoting activation of dioxygen to form the C4a-OOH might be achievable
due to the flexibility of the arginine side-chain. The lack of a sufficiently
nucleophilic nitrogen and/or the inability of the epsilon nitrogen
of arginine to lose a second hydrogen (Scheme ) prevents arginine hydroxylation, in spite of its optimal position
and in spite of the fact that arginine hydroxylation is known to occur
elsewhere in biochemistry, that is, in NO synthases.

Conclusions
SidA’s remarkable ability to distinguish l-Orn, l-Lys, and l-Arg appears to depend on the precise positioning,
the protonation states, and the nucleophilicity of each of these amino
acids. While all bind in their positively charged forms, only l-Orn and l-Lys are acidic enough to deprotonate to
the neutral primary amine form. The neutral amine in turn is sufficiently
nucleophilic to attack the terminal oxygen of the C4a-OOH, provided
that the attack angle is optimal (l-Orn, Scheme ). Alternatively, the neutral amine, if it reaches
farther toward the flavin, could act to facilitate proton transfer
between the flavin-N5 and the C4a-OOH,
catalyzing production of H2O2 (l-Lys,
Scheme ). While the latter proposed role for l-Lys is still speculative, the large SKIE for H2O2 loss specifically in the presence of l-Lys
clearly indicates that a proton transfer limits this reaction’s
rate. The static positive charge and flexibility of the alkylguanidinium
side-chain both appear to underwrite its role in promoting O2 activation. At the same time, its poor nucleophilicity likely protects
it from hydroxylation by the C4a-OOH.

SidA’s ability
to “feel” and respond differently
to pools of structurally similar metabolites may serve some as yet
unknown biological function. It is interesting to note that l-Orn, l-Lys, and l-Arg are all available in the
cytosol where SidA is proposed to reside and that the composition
of the free amino acid pool changes dramatically under conditions
of iron stress. Iron starvation also
stimulates the initiation of peptidic siderophore production by SidA.
It has been suggested that l-Arg can only partition away
from the synthesis of essential proteins if it is present in high
enough abundance. Sensed sufficiency
of l-Arg may be communicated to the siderophore biosynthesis
pathway through SidA. By the same token, l-Lys-stimulated
production of peroxide might serve some role, particularly since H2O2 is known to act as a signaling molecule. Plant
homologues of SidA known as the yuccas initiate production of the
hormone auxin, a major regulator of plant growth which is known to
be generated in a spatially and temporally controlled fashion. It will be of interest to see whether the yuccas
likewise discriminate very similar metabolites and whether their protonation
states and structures play similar roles in these important enzymes.

Supporting Information Available
Additional
spectral and kinetic
data referred to but not essential for the discussion of the data
contained in the text. This material is available free of charge via
the Internet at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bi401256b_si_001.pdf

Author Present Address
# University of Texas at San Antonio.

The authors declare
no
competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
We thank Prof Donald Kurtz (University of Texas at San Antonio)
for allowing Dr. Frederick to complete her final experiments in his
laboratory. We also thank Profs. Dave Ballou (University of Michigan)
and Pimchai Chaiyen (Mahidol University) for helpful comments related
to this manuscript. Garrett Moraski is thanked for helpful discussions.

Abbreviations
FMOflavin monooxygenase

BVMOBayer–Villiger
monooxygenase

FADflavin adenine dinucleotide

SidAPvdA, ornithine monooxygenases

PAMOphenylalanine monooxygenase

P2Opyranose-2-oxidase

PHBHpara-hydroxybenzoic
acid hydroxylase

FMOflavin monooxygenase

