Bacimethrin [1 (Scheme )] is
an analogue of the thiamin pyrimidine that
exhibits antibiotic activity against a variety of yeast and bacteria. The toxicity of 1 involves its conversion,
by the endogenous thiamin biosynthetic enzymes, to 2′-methoxythiamin
pyrophosphate (3), which inhibits a subset of the thiamin-dependent
enzymes in Escherichia coli (α-ketoglutarate
dehydrogenase, transketolase, and deoxy-d-xylulose-5-phosphate
synthase).,

Enzymatic Conversion of 1 by
the Late Thiamin Pyrophosphate
Biosynthetic Enzymes to the Antivitamin 3
The biosynthesis of the thiamin pyrimidine in
bacteria and in yeast
is remarkably complex, as illustrated by the labeling patterns shown
in Scheme . The bacterial pathway involves
a unique rearrangement of 5-aminoimidazole ribonucleotide (AIR, 4), while the yeast pathway involves a Diels–Alder
addition of enzyme-bound pyridoxal phosphate (PLP, 6)
to an active site histidine followed by a complex rearrangement., Given the mechanistic complexity of this chemistry, the potentially
“simpler” biosynthesis of bacimethrin was of interest
and is the focus of this paper.

Our starting hypothesis for
the biosynthesis of bacimethrin involved
hydroxymethylation of cytosine and pyrimidine methylation (Figure
S1 of the ). This
hypothesis led us to an operon in Clostridium botulinum A ATCC 19397 containing genes annotated as a thymidylate synthase,
a putative glycosyltransferase, an S-adenosylmethionine-dependent
methyltransferase, and a phosphomethylpyrimidine kinase (Figure ). Additionally, the cluster contained genes proposed
to encode an ABC transporter and a putative thiaminase-I. The biosynthetic
genes and the thiaminase were cloned and heterologously expressed
in E. coli. The polyhistidine-tagged recombinant
proteins were purified by nickel affinity chromatography, and then
the catalytic activity of each enzyme was determined.

Complex
and Unprecedented Chemistry of Thiamin Pyrimidine Biosynthesis
in Bacteria and Yeast
Genetic organization and homology-based annotation of the bacimethrin
biosynthetic cluster (red) of C. botulinum A ATCC
19397: (1) ABC transporter, (2) ABC transporter, (3) glycosyltransferase
(bcmB), (4) thymidylate synthase (bcmA), (5) methyltransferase (bcmC), (6) thiaminase-I
(bcmE), (7) pyrimidine kinase (bcmD), and (8) hypothetical.

BcmA catalyzes the methylenetetrahydrofolate-dependent hydroxymethylation
of cytidine 5′-monophosphate (CMP, 9) to give
5-hydroxymethylcytidine 5′-monophosphate [10 (Scheme )]. BcmB catalyzes the N-glycosyl
bond cleavage of 10 to give 5-hydroxymethylcytosine (11). BcmC catalyzes the methylation
of 11 to give 1. Bacimethrin is then pyrophosphorylated
by BcmD to produce 12. Each enzymatic reaction was analyzed
by reverse-phase high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC), and
the identities of the products were verified by co-elution with authentic
standards (Figure ).

Formation of 1 from 11, catalyzed by
BcmC, was also confirmed by positive ion mode electrospray ionization
time-of-flight mass spectrometry analysis. The observed mass for 1 was 156.078 Da [theoretical exact mass [M + H]+ = 156.0773 Da (Figure S4 of the )]. Fragmentation of this ion by collision-induced dissociation resulted
in the accumulation of daughter ions at 138 Da (loss of water) and
81 Da (pyrimidine fragmentation), consistent with the bacimethrin
structure.

A putative thiaminase-I gene, bcmE, is located
in the bacimethrin biosynthetic gene cluster. Thiaminases catalyze degradation of thiamin by replacement of the
thiazole moiety with a wide range of nucleophiles (type I) or water
(type II)., Its presence suggested that BcmE might function
as a resistance protein catalyzing the degradation of methoxythiamin.
To test this hypothesis, BcmE was incubated with thiamin (13) or 2′-methoxythiamin (16) as a possible substrate.
The reaction was monitored by 1H nuclear magnetic resonance
(NMR) spectroscopy, and under conditions where BcmE efficiently cleaved 13, no reaction of 16 was observed (Figure ). Thus, bcmE encodes a thiamin-specific
degradation enzyme and is not involved in protecting C. botulinum from the toxicity of methoxythiamin.

HPLC chromatograms for
the reactions catalyzed by BcmA, BcmB, BcmC,
and BcmD. (A) BcmA-catalyzed reaction showing the partial conversion
of 9 to 10. (B) BcmB-catalyzed reaction
(black trace) of the BcmA reaction mixture showing conversion of 10 to 11 (the authentic standard of 11 is colored green). (C) BcmABC-catalyzed reaction (black trace) showing
the conversion of 9 to 1. The red and blue
traces are for authentic standards of 1 and S-adenosylhomocysteine (SAH), respectively. (D) BcmD-catalyzed reaction
(black trace) showing the conversion of 1 to 12. The purple trace is for an authentic standard of 1.

Pathway for the Biosynthesis of Bacimethrin
Pyrophosphate 12 Catalyzed by BcmABCD
The identification of the bacimethrin biosynthetic
cluster led
us to explore the prevalence of this pathway in other bacteria. Sequence
analysis using the Microbes Online Database reveals the presence of
the pathway in several strains of C. botulinum and Burkholderia pseudomallei as well as Clostridium
sporogenes, Burkholderia thailandensis,
and Burkholderia glumae. In addition, bacimethrin
was previously isolated from Bacillus megaterium and Streptomyces albus.(,) Interestingly, in all
of the sequenced genomes, the thiaminase-I gene is found in the bacimethrin
biosynthetic cluster. This observation suggests that bacimethrin and
thiaminase-I are elements of a coordinated antibiotic strategy in
which degradation of environmental thiamin by secreted thiaminase-I
makes target bacteria more sensitive to the toxicity of bacimethrin.
Such a strategy highlights the complex chemical logic underlying the
dynamics of microbial communities.

Analysis of the BcmE-catalyzed reaction.
(A) 1H NMR
for the reaction shown in panel C. (B) 1H NMR for the reaction
shown in panel D. δH for the thiazolium C2 proton
in 13 shifts from 9.38 (red) to 8.73 ppm in thiazole 15 (blue). Exchange with water was not observed under the
reaction conditions.

Supporting Information Available
Detailed experimental methods.
This material is available free of charge via the Internet at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bi500281a_si_001.pdf

Author Contributions
L.E.C. and
S.E.O. contributed equally to this work. L.E.C., S.E.O., and T.P.B.
were responsible for experimental design and preparation of the manuscript.
L.E.C. and S.E.O. were responsible for execution of the biochemical
studies.

This research
was supported by National Institutes of Health Grant DK44083 to T.P.B.
and Robert A. Welch Foundation Grant A-0034.

The authors declare no
competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
We thank Cynthia L. Kinsland from Cornell
University (Ithaca,
NY) for the construction of pOHT-bcmE and Ahmed Al-Harrasi
for the synthesis of bacimethrin and 2′-methoxythiamin.

