Introduction
α-Syn is a major
component of the Lewy body that is generally
found in the brain of the Parkinson’s disease (PD) patients
and is implicated in the familial PD. Point
mutants of α-Syn also have been suggested to be related with
the autosomal-dominant form of PD. α-Syn
is a small and peripheral membrane-binding protein that is widely expressed in central neurons, and is specifically
localized and bound to the synaptic membrane, which might be important for synaptic plasticity.

It was shown that overexpression of α-Syn both
in yeast and in Drosophila inhibits vesicular transport from endoplasmic reticulum
to the Golgi
complex. Overexpression of α-Syn in chromaffin and rat brain
cells largely decreased the neurotransmitter release. However, knockout of α-Syn showed little effect on
the release, which might be due to the
functional redundancy among synuclein isoforms α, β and
γ. Indeed, a recent triple knockout study revealed the increased
release at least for young mice, indicating
that synucleins might function as a regulator for neuroexocytosis.

The neurotransmitter release at the synapse requires the fusion
of vesicles with the presynaptic plasma membrane. It is believed that
synaptic vesicle fusion is mediated by SNARE proteins. Target plasma
membrane (t-) SNAREs syntaxin 1A and SNAP-25, and vesicle (v-) SNARE
synaptobrevin/vesicle-associated membrane protein (VAMP) 2 associate
to form the SNAREpin, which bridges two membranes, facilitating fusion. Although it was recently shown that the C-terminal
region of α-Syn interacts with VAMP2 and promotes SNARE assembly, this interaction appears to be a different function
of α-Syn, not affecting the neurotransmitter release. It was however shown that α-Syn reduces
exocytosis in yeast and causes the decrease of the copy number of
the SNARE complex in mammalian cells, raising the possibility that α-Syn might affect SNARE-dependent
fusion directly. Most recently, an in vitro study using ensemble lipid
mixing reported the inhibition effect of α-Syn in neuronal SNARE-mediated
membrane fusion.

In this work,
we attempt to explore the direct impact of α-Syn
on SNARE-dependent membrane fusion in a more defined setting. The
classical ensemble fluorescence fusion assay employing SNARE-reconstituted
proteoliposomes with on lipid-mixing indicators confirmed the inhibition
role of α-Syn. The known pathotype mutants α-Syn E46K,
A53T, and A30P are shown to have a varying degree of membrane affinities. Interestingly, it was found that the rank order
of the inhibition potency is consistent with the rank order of their
membrane affinities. Furthermore, by using a more powerful single-vesicle
fusion assay unambiguously detecting different stages of fusion including
docking, hemi and full fusion, we found that α-Syn does not
interfere with the fusion step. Instead, α-Syn significantly
reduces SNARE-mediated vesicle docking, which appears as inhibition
of fusion in ensemble assays. Moreover, we found that C-terminal truncated α-Syn,
which blocks the interaction between α-Syn and VAMP2, has similar
inhibitory effect as wild-type α-Syn, suggesting that α-Syn
interacting with VAMP2 is not required for its inhibition in lipid
mixing. Finally, similar inhibition in vesicle docking was also observed
in yeast SNARE mediated ensemble lipid mixing further supporting the
conclusion that this impairment in vesicle docking by α-Syn
is not from specific protein interaction. However, when the membrane
binding affinity of α-Syn was eliminated by removing the phosphatidylserine
(PS) from the membrane, α-Syn was no longer effective in inhibiting
lipid mixing. Thus, our results suggest that α-Syn’s
membrane binding is the main cause of the inhibition of SNARE-dependent
lipid mixing.

Materials and Methods
Plasmid Constructs and
Site-Directed Mutagenesis
DNA
sequences encoding syntaxin 1A (amino acids 1-288 with three cysteines
replaced by alanines), VAMP2 (amino acids 1-116 with C103 replaced
by alanines), SNAP-25 (amino acids 1-206 with four native cysteines
replaced by alanines), SNAP-25 BoNT/E (amino acids 1-180), soluble
VAMP2 (amino acids 1-96), α-synuclein (amino acids 1-140), α-synuclein
(1-95) (amino acids 1-95), Sso1p (amino acids 185-290), for which
the N-terminal a-helix Habc domain was deleted, and Snc2p (amino acid
1-115) were inserted into the pGEX-KG vector as N-terminal glutathione
S-transferase (GST) fusion proteins. Sec9c (amino acid 401-651 of
Sec9) was inserted into the PET-28b vector as C-terminal His6-tagged
fusion protein. We used the Quick Change site-directed mutagenesis
kit (Stratagene) to generate mutants, including α-Syn A30P,
α-Syn E46K, and α-Syn A53T; DNA sequences were confirmed
by the Iowa State University DNA Sequencing Facility.

Protein Expression
and Purification
All N-terminal
GST recombinant neuronal and yeast SNARE proteins and α-Syn
were expressed in Escherichia coli Rosetta (DE3)
pLysS (Novagene). The His-tagged proteins were expressed in an E. coli BL21 (DE3) (Novagen). Details of purification can
be found in our previous work.,

Membrane Reconstitution
The mixture of POPC (1-palmitoyl-2-dioleoyl-sn-glycero-3-phosphatidylcholine), DOPS (1,2-dioleoyl-sn-glycero-3-phosphatidylserine), cholesterol, and DiI (t-vesicles)
or DiD (v-vesicles) (molar ratio of 43:15:40:2) in chloroform was
dried in a vacuum and was resuspended in a buffer (25 mM HEPES/KOH,
100 mM KCl, pH 7.4) to make the total lipid concentration of about
10 mM. Protein-free large unilamellar vesicles (∼100 nm in
diameter) were prepared by extrusion through polycarbonate filters
(Avanti Polar Lipids). For net neutral charge lipid mixing, 15 mol
% DOPS was replaced by equimolar quantity of POPC.

Syntaxin
1A and SNAP-25 (or Sso1p for yeast SNARE mediated lipid mixing), in
a molar ratio of 1:1.5, were premixed, and the mixture was left at
room temperature for 1 h to form the complex before the reconstitution.
For membrane reconstitution, proteins were mixed with vesicles at
the protein to lipid molar ratio of 1:200 with ∼0.8 g per 100
mL OG in the buffer at 4 °C for 15 min. The mixture was diluted
two times with dialysis buffer (25 mM HEPES, 100 mM KCl, pH 7.4),
and this diluted mixture was then dialyzed in 2 L dialysis buffer
at 4 °C overnight.

Ensemble Lipid Mixing Assay
For
neuronal SNARE dependent
lipid mixing, reconstituted t-vesicle and v-vesicle were mixed at
a ratio of 1:1. The total lipid concentration in the reaction is 0.1
mM. The fluorescence intensity was monitored in two channels with
the excitation wavelength of 530 nm and emission wavelengths of 570
and 670 nm for DiI and DiD dye pairs, respectively. Fluorescence changes
were recorded with the same Varian fluorometer. All measurements were
performed at 35 °C. The initial rate was calculated by analyzing
the slope value within the beginning 150 s, and the initial rate of
control group was normalized to 1.

Single-Vesicle Assays
A quartz slide was cleaned using
the 5% Alconox solution followed by 1 M potassium hydroxide and then
coated with 99:1 (mol/mol) mPEG:biotin-PEG (Laysan Bio). This PEG-treated
quartz slide was placed as the bottom surface of a microfluidic chamber
to be used as the imaging surface of our prism-type total internal
reflection fluorescence (TIRF) microscopy (based on IX-71, Olympus).
To monitor interactions between single v- and t-vesicles, the v-vesicles
(30 mM [lipids]) were attached on this quartz imaging surface via
neutravidin (Invitrogen) that acts as molecular glue between biotin-PEG
and biotinylated lipids. The t-vesicles (10 mM [lipids]) and the Ca2+ ion solution were mixed together just prior to the main
reaction. This t-vesicles-Ca2+ mixture was introduced into
the flow chamber for the fusion reaction, and the temperature was
maintained at 37 °C during the reaction for half an hour.

In the docking number analysis, we used a computer algorithm that
detects local Gaussian maxima in the TIRF images that were recorded
by an electron-multiplying charge-coupled device (iXon DU897E, Andor
technology) to count the number of the single vesicle complexes in
a given area (programs available at http://bio.physics.illinois.edu/). Our TIRF microscopy monitored the imaging area of 45*90 mm2 at a time, and we calculated the ratio of docked t-vesicles
and total anchored v-vesicles as docking probability. Therefore, it
could be directly compared for different molecular conditions. Using
the same algorithm as used for the docking number analysis, each vesicle–vesicle
docking event and the subsequent fusion process were individually
identified. We quantified the FRET efficiency using the equation,
Ia/(Id+ Ia) where Id and Ia are the donor and acceptor fluorescence
intensities, respectively. Fusion percentage was calculated by the
percentage of fusion events with FRET efficiency higher than 0.5.

For the real-time imaging of small sulforhodamine B content release,
the same PEG surface was used as above. After the surface was coated
with neutravidin, the sulforhodamine B containing v-SNARE vesicles
were immobilized on the PEG-coated surface. After two rounds of 1
mL buffer wash, empty t-SNARE vesicles were injected into the channel
incubating with v-SNARE vesicles. After 30 min incubation at room
temperature (∼25 °C), the dialysis buffer with or without
500 μM Ca2+ was injected into the flow chamber at
a speed of 33 μL/s by a motorized syringe pump.

Western Blot
Purified α-syn was resolved by 12%
SDS-PAGE and then transferred to PVDF membrane (Millipore). The membrane
was blocked with 5% (w/v) nonfat dry milk in TBST (20 mM Tris-HCl,
pH 7.6, 150 mM NaCl, 0.1% Tween-20) for 1 h and incubated with α-Syn
primary antibody (1:1,500, 701085, Life Technologies) at 4 °C
overnight. The membrane was then washed with TBST and incubated with
Peroxidase anti-Rabbit-IgG secondary antibody (1:3,000, 1213156A,
Invitrogen) at room temperature for 1 h. Then the membrane was washed
with TBST again and reacted with SuperSignal West Pico Chemiluminescent
Substrate (Thermo Scientific). The bands were visualized by ChemiDOC
system (Bio-Rad).

Cosedimentation Assay
The binding
properties of α-Syn
to proteoliposomes (VAMP2- and Snc2p-vesicles) and protein-free vesicles
were measured through the high-speed cosedimentation assay using Airfuge
Air-Driven Ultracentrifuge (Beckman). Membrane reconstitution was
performed the same as the sample used in our fluorescence assay except
20 mol % DOPS was used in the negative charged vesicles. 200 μL
each vesicle (200 μM) was incubated with 8 μM α-Syn
in dialysis buffer (25 mM HEPES pH 7.4, 100 mM KCl) for 1 h at room
temperature, and then the mixture was subjected to Airfuge at 90,000
rpm and 30 psi for 30 min at 4 °C. Pelleted vesicles and/or vesicle-bound
α-Syn were resuspended using the same buffer and resubjected
to centrifuge for three times. Finally, the pellets were resuspended
in 60 μL of the same buffer, and 5 μL of each sample was
analyzed by Western blot using α-Syn antibody.

Results
α-Syn
Inhibits Ensemble SNARE-Induced Lipid Mixing
Previous in vivo studies suggested that overexpression
of α-Syn inhibits neurotransmitter release., Therefore,
we asked if α-Syn interferes with the lipid mixing step during
membrane remodeling. To answer this question, we carried out the fluorescence
lipid mixing assay, in which wild-type t-SNARE (a 1:1 mixture of Syntaxin
1A and SNAP-25) was reconstituted to t-vesicles that contained 2 mol
% fluorescence donor lipid DiI, while wild-type VAMP2 was reconstituted
to v-vesicles containing 2 mol % fluorescence acceptor lipid DiD for
the ensemble fluorescence detection of lipid mixing (Figure a). With this setup the fusion between t- and v-vesicles
caused the increase of the acceptor DiD signal due to Förster
(fluorescence) resonance energy transfer (FRET) (the red trace in
Figure b). To show that lipid mixing probed
by FRET between DiI and DiD was SNARE-dependent we carried out lipid
mixing without SNAP-25 or in the presence of the SNAP-25E mutant that
is the product of the proteolytic cleavage of SNAP-25 by botulinum
neurotoxin E (BoNT/E). In both cases we did not observe noticeable
lipid mixing, indicating that lipid mixing here was SNARE-dependent
(the black and cyan traces in Figure b, respectively).
Also, soluble VAMP2 (Vps, amino acids 1-96), which is often used as
a competitive inhibitor for SNARE-dependent membrane fusion, showed
complete inhibition of lipid mixing at 10 μM (the dark red trace
in Figure b), further supporting the SNARE-dependency
of lipid mixing.

α-Syn inhibits SNARE-induced ensemble lipid mixing.
(a) Scheme
of ensemble lipid mixing assay involving SNARE-reconstituted vesicles.
(b) The change of fluorescence intensity of DiD reflects lipid mixing.
The red trace is the control with t-liposome reconstituted with Syn/SNAP-25
and v-liposome reconstituted with VAMP2. The yellow trace represents
the lipid mixing for 5 μM α-Syn, the green trace for 10
μM α-Syn, the blue trace for 25 μM α-Syn,
and the pink trace for 50 μM α-Syn. The dark red trace
is the lipid mixing control with 10 μM soluble VAMP2 (Vps).
(c) Normalized initial rates of the lipid mixing assays at different
α-Syn concentrations. Error bars (the standard deviation) were
from 3 independent measurements with 3 different preparations.

Upon addition of α-Syn lipid
mixing was dramatically inhibited,
even at the concentration of 5 μM (the yellow trace in Figure b). With the increased concentration of α-Syn,
the lipid mixing was attenuated progressively more (Figure b). The analysis of the initial rates of lipid mixing
indicates that 50 μM α-Syn can block SNARE-induced lipid
mixing as much as 70% (Figure c). Because
lipid mixing is strictly SNARE-dependent we can rule out the possibility
that α-Syn blocks SNARE-independent spontaneous fusion of membranes.

α-Syn Pathotype Mutants Show Parallel Gain- and Loss-of-Functions
in Membrane Binding vs Fusion Inhibition
In vivo studies indicated that membrane binding ability of α-Syn may
be correlated with its inhibition of the neurotransmitter release. To investigate whether α-Syn’s
membrane affinity is related to its inhibition of SNARE-dependent
lipid mixing, we carried out the ensemble lipid mixing assays with
three mutants of α-Syn, A30P, E46K, and A53T, which are linked
to rare inherited PD. NMR studies indicated
that α-Syn A30P has a decreased lipid affinity, while α-Syn
E46K has an increased affinity when compared with that of the wild-type.
Meanwhile, α-Syn A53T is similar to the wild-type in its membrane
binding activity. Interestingly, the
lipid mixing assay revealed that α-Syn A30P was somewhat less
effective in inhibiting SNARE-dependent lipid mixing than wild-type
(Figure a and b).
In contrast, α-Syn E46K was a little more potent than the wild-type
(Figure c and d).
Meanwhile, α-Syn A53T showed little difference from the wild-type
(Figure e and f).
The results show a correlation between the α-Syn’s membrane
binding activity and its inhibitory activity for SNARE-dependent lipid
mixing. Thus, membrane binding may be necessary for the inhibition
of SNARE-dependent membrane fusion by α-Syn.

Lipid binding affinity
of α-Syn correlates to the inhibition
effect. The change of fluorescence intensity of DiD reflects lipid
mixing. The red traces are the lipid mixing control group. The green
traces represent lipid mixing with α-Syn, while the blue, cyan,
and pink traces represent lipid mixing with α-Syn A30P (A),
α-Syn E46K (C), and α-Syn A53T (E) at the concentration
of 10 μM, 25 μM, and 50 μM, respectively. The black
trace is the lipid mixing control with 10 μM Vps. Normalized
initial rates of the lipid mixing assays at different α-Syn
and α-Syn A30P (B), α-Syn E46K (D), and α-Syn A53T
(F) concentrations. Error bars representing the standard deviation
were obtained from 3 independent measurements with 3 different preparations.

α-Syn Reduces Vesicle
Docking without Interfering Lipid
Mixing
SNARE-mediated membrane fusion is a process involving
multiple steps: docking, hemifusion, and full (complete) fusion. However,
the ensemble assay cannot dissect individual steps. Recent studies showed that the rate of ensemble lipid mixing
is mainly limited by the docking step, which causes a misinterpretation of fusion since a particular factor
that is added to the experiment may increase docking rather than fusion.
In order to overcome these limitations of ensemble assays, several
new techniques have been developed for observing lipid mixing at the
single-vesicle level. By monitoring FRET
of individual donor/acceptor vesicle pairs (Figure a), the single-vesicle assay can detect different stages of
fusion including docking and hemi- and full fusion, which was not
possible for previous ensemble assays. Through single-vesicle lipid mixing, we found that α-Syn significantly
reduces the vesicle docking induced by SNAREs (Figure b). For the full lipid mixing indicated by a high FRET value,
the effect of α-Syn is negligible (Figure c). We also tested three mutants of α-Syn, A30P, E46K, and
A53T, in the single-vesicle lipid mixing assay. We observe a good
correlation between membrane affinities of α-Syn mutants and
vesicle docking (Figure d). However, similar
to wild-type, they have no observable effect on lipid mixing between
two lipid bilayers (Figure e). Thus, the results
show the variation of lipid mixing among α-Syn mutants in the
ensemble assay was largely due to the negative influence on vesicle
docking.

α-Syn specifically inhibits vesicle docking. (a) Scheme of
the single-vesicle lipid mixing assay involving SNARE-reconstituted
vesicles. (b) Bar graph of the vesicle docking probability (b) or
the lipid mixing fraction (c) with or without α-Syn. Different
effects on the vesicle docking probability (d) and lipid mixing (e)
by α-Syn mutants. Error bars, which represent the standard deviations,
were obtained from 3 independent measurements with 3 different preparations.

α-Syn Has No Effect
on Ca2+-Triggered Content
Release at Single Vesicle Level
Lipid mixing does not necessarily
imply complete fusion since hemifusion alone can also produce mixing
of lipid molecules. Any assay relying
on lipid-mixing readouts can lead to the misinterpretation of membrane
fusion. With newly developed single-vesicle content-mixing assay monitoring
dequenching of small content dyes (sulforhodamine B), we found that
α-Syn does not influence fast content release triggered by Ca2+ (Figure ). For this experiment,
we included full-length synaptotagmin 1, the calcium sensor, in our single vesicle assay.

α-Syn has little
effect on Ca2+-triggered content
mixing. (a) The real-time synaptic vesicle content mixing assay mediated
by SNAREs and Syt1. The black lines represent the accumulated content
mixing events in the presence of SNAREs and Syt1 only, while the red
traces represent content mixing events with 25 μM α-Syn.
(b) Fraction of content mixing events happened within 60 s. Error
bars, which represent the standard deviation, were obtained from at
least n = 3 independent measurements with 3 different
preparations.

α-Syn Inhibits Lipid-Mixing
via Interaction with Negative
Charged Lipids but Not VAMP2
Our results showed a correlation
between the α-Syn’s membrane affinity and its inhibitory
activity for SNARE-dependent lipid mixing (Figure ). Thus, we questioned if α-Syn’s fusion-inhibiting
activity is mainly due to its membrane interaction or its interaction
with VAMP2 which was reported previously., It
has been shown that the N-terminal region of VAMP2 interacts with
the C-terminal region of α-Syn. To test if this specific interaction plays a role in the α-Syn’s
inhibition of SNARE-dependent lipid mixing, we used a C-terminal truncated
α-Syn mutant (amino acids, 1-95) to block α-Syn’s
binding to VAMP2. Even in the absence of the interaction with VAMP2,
the truncated α-Syn mutant has a similar inhibitory effect on
lipid mixing as the α-Syn wild-type (Figure a), suggesting that α-Syn interaction with VAMP2 is
not required for the inhibition of lipid mixing. Furthermore, we investigated
the effect of α-Syn on lipid mixing induced by a yeast SNARE
family, which is involved in Golgi-to-plasma membrane trafficking
in yeast, and is distantly related to the neuronal
SNARE family with only less than 30% sequence identities. As expected, a significant inhibition of lipid
mixing was observed by α-Syn ( Figure a and b),
and the vesicle cosedimentation assay shows that α-Syn has little
affinity with v-vesicles reconstituted with yeast v-SNARE Snc2p ( Figure c). Thus, it confirms that the α-Syn’s interaction with
v-SNARE is not necessary for its inhibition in lipid mixing. Meanwhile,
in the absence of the negative charged lipid DOPS, we did not observe
any inhibition in lipid mixing at various α-Syn concentrations
within experimental errors (Figure b and c), even though there is some binding of the α-Syn
to VAMP2 containing v-vesicles ( Figure c). Thus, the results show that membrane
binding, but not the VAMP2 interaction, is the main cause of the α-Syn’s
fusion inhibiting activity.

α-Syn inhibits lipid fusion via membrane
binding but not
interacting with VAMP2. (a) C-terminal truncated α-Syn(1-95)
inhibits ensemble lipid mixing as wild-type α-Syn. The black
trace is the control with t-liposome reconstituted with Syn/SNAP-25
and v-liposome reconstituted with VAMP2. The green and blue traces
represent lipid mixing with 25 μM α-Syn and α-Syn(1-95),
respectively. (b) The inhibition role of α-Syn on ensemble lipid
mixing depends on charged lipid molecules, PS. The change of fluorescence
intensity of DiD reflects neutral lipid mixing (only POPC and Cholesterol).
The red trace is the control with t-liposome reconstituted with Syn/SNAP-25
and v-liposome reconstituted with VAMP2. The green trace represents
the lipid mixing for 10 μM α-Syn, the blue trace for 25
μM α-Syn, and the pink trace for 50 μM α-Syn.
The black trace is the lipid mixing control with 10 μM soluble
VAMP2 (Vps). (c) Normalized initial rates of the lipid mixing assays
at different α-Syn concentrations. Error bars for the standard
deviation were obtained from 3 independent measurements with 3 different
preparations.

Discussion
There
is compelling evidence that α-Syn buildup in cells
at high concentrations interferes with exocytotic pathways: α-Syn
block the ER to Golgi trafficking in yeast and in mammalian cells., Overexpression of α-Syn
in Chromaffin cells as well as in mouse neurons inhibits release of
neurotransmitters., Although it is most likely that
α-Syn interferes with the exocytotic machinery, the molecular
mechanism by which high α-Syn blocks the exocytosis has not
been known. In this work, using in vitro reconstitution,
we show that α-Syn at high concentrations (&gt;5 μM) influences
SNARE-dependent membrane fusion by inhibiting the docking step.

The proteoliposome fusion assay at single-vesicle level probes
membrane remodeling steps and our results show that α-Syn inhibits
specifically the docking step. Meanwhile, several cellular measurements
indicate that α-Syn disrupts the upstream trafficking stages
including vesicle tethering or vesicle clustering as well, resulting
in dispersion of vesicles away from the fusion active zone., Therefore, it is possible that α-Syn interferes with the neuroexocytotic
pathway at the multiple stages, warranting further investigation.

It has been previously argued that inhibition of exocytosis by
α-Syn represents its toxicity., If so, we
might have expected that the familial PD-causing mutations A30P, E46K,
and A53T gave stronger inhibition for SNARE-dependent lipid mixing.
On the contrary, our results revealed that there is no clear correlation
between its fusion-inhibiting activity and disease-causing mutations.
The findings here are short of revealing the pathogenic mechanism
of familial PD. Therefore, we hesitate to conclude yet whether the
fusion-inhibiting activity of α-Syn perhaps represents its toxicity
or not. It is possible that the familial PD-causing mutants are just
more susceptible to the cellular or exogenous factors that lead to
transformation of α-Syn to protofibrils, which is believed to
be its disease-causing form, and their
disease characteristics are not fully reflected in our results.

It appears that the inhibition of docking by α-Syn is coupled
with the α-Syn’s membrane binding but not with the interaction
with VAMP2. A line of evidence supports this claim: (1) in the absence
of the negatively charged lipid PS, which strongly favors α-Syn’s
membrane binding, the fusion-inhibiting activity of α-Syn is
abrogated; (2) the gain-of-function mutant α-Syn E46K in membrane
binding inhibits membrane fusion more than the wild-type, while the
loss-of-function mutant A30P inhibits fusion less than the wild-type;
(3) the C-terminal truncated α-Syn mutant, without its binding
to VAMP2, shows a similar inhibition in lipid mixing as the wild-type;
(4) it exhibits a strong inhibitory activity for another SNAREs involved
in yeast trafficking, which shows no interaction with α-Syn;
and (5) despite some α-Syn’s binding v-SNARE in the absence
of negatively charged lipid, the fusion inhibitory activity of α-Syn
is completely abrogated in the absence of negatively charged PS.

How could the membrane binding of α-Syn inhibit the docking
step? A recent report by Sudhof and co-worker shows that α-Syn
at high concentration can cluster vesicles, perhaps due to the cross-linking
of vesicles by α-Syn’s intervesicular interactions using
its two membrane binding helices., Although Sudhof
and co-workers speculated that the vesicle clustering might be partly
due to its binding to VAMP2, our results argue that its interaction
with VAMP2 does not play a role in inhibiting vesicle docking. We
also emphasize here that the fusion inhibition by α-Syn at high
concentration differs from the fusion inhibition α-Syn oligomers
at much lower concentrations in that the latter requires α-Syn’s
interaction with VAMP2.

In conclusion, our in vitro results demonstrate
that α-Syn has the capacity of influencing SNARE-dependent membrane
fusion by reducing vesicle docking, most likely via membrane binding,
without interfering with the release of contents.

Supporting Information Available
α-Syn inhibits yeast
SNARE mediated lipid fusion, α-Syn cosedimentation experiment,
as well as α-Syn and mutants oligomerization Western blotting
analysis. This material is available free of charge via the Internet
at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bi5002536_si_001.pdf

The
authors
declare no competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
We thank Dr. Taekjip Ha (University of Illinois at Urbana–Champaign,
Urbana, IL, U.S.A.) for providing the analysis program for the single
vesicle assay. This work was also supported by grants from National
Institutes of Health (R01GM063915 to R.L.).

