Huntington’s
disease
(HD) is one of several human disorders caused by a genetic mutation
that expands CAG repeats within genes encoding several different proteins.− Expansion of the polyglutamine tracts in these proteins beyond a
disease-specific threshold correlates to a decrease in the age of
pathological onset and an increase in toxicity. In HD and other polyQ expansion disorders, disease pathology
is associated with protein misfolding and aggregation, including the
formation of amyloid-like fibrils. Some experimental evidence supports
a toxic role of the polyQ amyloid-like aggregates,− with toxicity being dependent
on the nature of the aggregates, but others
argue for a protective, nontoxic role for the mature aggregates. Given the potential impact on disease toxicity
and the fact that both polyQ expansion and some level of misfolding,
aggregation, or oligomerization are common features among the CAG
repeat diseases, much work has been done to characterize the aggregation
process. The aggregation propensity of polyQ model peptides increases
with Gln repeat length. In addition, variations
in the flanking sequences can have a dramatic impact on the conformation
and aggregation propensity of the polyQ tract and thus may in part
explain threshold differences between the CAG expansion disorders.−

In HD, Gln expansion occurs in the huntingtin (htt) protein
leading
to protein misfolding and aggregation. Observed aggregates contain
N-terminal fragments of htt generated
by protease activity or aberrant splicing. In animal studies, overexpression of the fragment
corresponding to mutant htt’s exon 1 leads to neurodegeneration
that mimics key features of HD. On either
side of the polyQ domain, htt exon 1 features flanking segments that
act as binding sites for htt-binding proteins and modulate the binding
to membranes and subcellular targeting.,, In cellular studies of mutant htt exon 1, the flanking
domains modulate not only the aggregation propensity but also the
aggregate morphology, recruitment of other proteins, and toxicity.,− A Pro-rich domain (PRD) that follows the polyQ domain
greatly reduces the aggregation propensity,−, leading to suggestions that it may in part function to reduce the
risk of misfolding and disease., Preceding the polyQ
domain, htt features a 17-residue sequence of mixed hydrophobic and
hydrophilic amino acids, termed NT17 or httNT, which in
contrast to the PRD initiates and accelerates aggregation., In doing so, httNT facilitates a distinct multistage
aggregation pathway that features α-helix-rich oligomeric species
(in contrast to polyQ model peptide aggregation).−

Disease
toxicity in HD is thought to reflect a gain of toxic function
that accompanies conformational changes in the mutant protein. As
in other protein misfolding diseases, different conformational states
populate the misfolding and aggregation pathway. These different species
could all contribute to disease toxicity in their own way, whether
by being toxic in their own right, causing toxicity by sequestering
vital polyQ-containing proteins, or reducing toxicity by sequestering
toxic oligomers or monomers. Therefore, there has been much interest
in understanding the conformational changes that occur during aggregation
in HD and other deposition-related disorders.

As for other amyloidogenic
proteins, nucleation of a β-sheet-rich
amyloid-like conformation is a pivotal event in the aggregation of
mutant htt N-terminal fragments. This nucleation event can take place
in the monomeric or oligomeric state and precedes and allows the formation
of antiparallel β-sheet-rich fibrillar aggregates that have
all of the features of amyloid-like fibrils. Earlier studies have
shown that the C-terminal PRD counteracts the nucleation of β-sheet
structure, possibly by inducing polyproline II (PPII) structure in
an extended stretch of the preceding polyQ segment.,,,, These observations are primarily based on solution
studies of various monomeric species and reflect a backbone-mediated
effect of the PPII-structured PRD on the conformational ensemble of
the nonaggregated polyQ domain. The degree to which this inferred
induction of PPII in the glutamines persists in the oligomeric or
fibrillar species has remained unclear. One might expect that also
in the fibrils one or more Gln residues at the C-terminal end of the
polyQ domain remain outside the amyloid core, perhaps in a PPII conformation.

The N-terminal flanking domain, httNT, is responsible
for the formation of oligomeric assemblies.,,, The oligomerization
precedes the nucleation of β-sheet structure and is instead
characterized by extensive α-helical structure.− This α-helicity is largely attributed to the httNT segment, although it may also extend into the polyQ domain,, because the latter has a length-dependent propensity for α-helical
structure that is modulated by flanking domains.,− The oligomer ensemble seems to have an enhanced propensity (compared
with the monomers) for β-sheet nucleation, translating into
greatly accelerated formation of the β-sheet-rich fibrils., Thus, the httNT segment effectively counteracts the effects
of the PRD and may allow aggregation under conditions where the PRD
alone would effectively prevent fibril formation. Also in the fibrils, intermolecular interactions among
the httNT amphipathic α-helices appear to contribute
to the stability and supramolecular structure., Weakening of such interactions, e.g., by httNT phosphorylation,
results in decreases in aggregation propensity, aggregate stability,
and disease toxicity.,

We previously showed by
magic-angle-spinning (MAS) solid-state
NMR (ssNMR) and transmission electron microscopy (TEM) that htt peptide
fragments aggregate into fibrils with a β-sheet core, but with
different secondary structures in the flanking domains. Subsequently, electron paramagnetic resonance
studies of htt exon 1 outfitted with spin-labels suggested a similar
domain assembly of mutant exon 1 fibrils, while also yielding evidence
of fibrillar httNT–httNT interactions. Our study of fibril formation in the presence
of phosphomimetic httNT mutations also indicated a role
for intermolecular httNT interactions in the stabilization
of fibrillar and oligomeric assemblies, with apparent consequences for cellular toxicity., The connection among aggregate structure, stability, and toxicity may in part reflect changes in the access to
proteases and chaperones as they interact with oligomeric and aggregated
states of htt.,

Because of the limited
structural data about the fibrils and in
particular the oligomeric species, we lack an in-depth understanding
of the structural transformations within mutant htt during misfolding
and self-assembly. For instance, it is uncertain whether or how the
PRD affects the secondary structure of the C-terminal tail end of
the polyQ domain in the fibrils. Are the preceding Gln residues in
a PPII-like structure, as they seem to be in the monomers, or is this
“protective” effect overcome once nucleation and propagation
of β-structure have taken place? How accessible and dynamic
are the flanking domains in mature fibrils, given their apparent role
in stabilizing the various aggregated species? Here, we address these
questions through the use of MAS ssNMR, initially on fibrils obtained
from a peptide construct (httNTQ30P10K2) that aggregates into fibrils. These constructs recapitulate the aggregation behavior of htt exon
1 and have been used in biophysical,
mechanistic, and structural studies by us and others.,,,,,− This includes several detailed studies of the individual and combined
impacts of the flanking domains on aggregation kinetics and aggregate
morphology.,,, These synthetic constructs facilitate the
residue-specific labeling that permits unambiguous identification
of specific residues within the various domains. This, in turn, allows
for a careful analysis of the structural and dynamic features of these
residues. We complement these residue-specific insights with the first
ssNMR studies of fibrils prepared from uniformly labeled, full-length
mutant htt exon 1. We observe by MAS ssNMR that, in contrast to its
effect on the monomeric species, the proximity of the oligoPro flanking
domain does not prevent β-sheet structure near the C-terminal
end of the polyQ domain. Fibril maturation leads to formation of a
relatively well-ordered amyloid core that consists of β-sheet
structure and contains most of the polyQ domain. Quantitative site-specific
dynamics measurements reveal that, despite their stabilizing role
and supramolecular interactions, the httNT α-helices
outside this amyloid core undergo molten-globule-like motions.

Experimental
Procedures
Preparation of Residue-Specifically Labeled Fibrils
Residue-specifically labeled peptides were prepared by solid-phase
synthesis at the Small Scale Synthesis facility of the Keck Biotechnology
Resource Laboratory of Yale University (New Haven, CT). Site-specific
labeling with uniformly 13C- and 15N-labeled
residues was performed at various positions as indicated in Table . Fmoc- and side-chain-protected 13C-
and 15N-labeled amino acids were purchased from Cambridge
Isotope Laboratories (Andover, MA) and Isotec (Sigma-Aldrich, St.
Louis, MO). The peptides were obtained crude for in-house purification
and disaggregation, as previously described., Aggregation was initiated starting with disaggregated peptide and
performed in PBS buffer (pH 7.4) at 37 °C, monitored by a high-performance
liquid chromatography-based sedimentation assay, and allowed to proceed
to completion., After being washed with deionized
water, mature fibrils were pelleted into 3.2 mm zirconia MAS rotors
(Bruker Biospin, Billerica, MA, and CortecNet, Voisins-le-Bretonneux,
France) by centrifugation using a home-built ultracentrifugal sample
packing tool. Samples were kept hydrated and unfrozen unless otherwise
stated.

Nomenclature and Site-Specific Labeling
of the httNTQ30P10K2 Peptides
 	labeling	sequence	
LQP-labeled	U-13C,15N-[L7, Q47, P48]	MATLEKLMKAFESLKSF-QQQ26QQPP9K2	
LAQ-labeled	U-13C,15N-[L4, A10, Q46]	MATLEKLMKAFESLKSF-QQQ26QQPP9K2	
MA-labeled	U-13C,15N-[M8, A10]	MATLEKLMKAFESLKSF-QQQ26QQPP9K2	
LKSQ-labeled	U-13C,15N-[L4, K6, S16, Q19]	MATLEKLMKAFESLKSF-QQQ26QQPP9K2	
MF-labeled	U-13C,15N-[M8, F11]	MATLEKLMKAFESLKSF-QQQ26QQPP9K2	
MAS ssNMR samples contained approximately
8 mg of peptide (with the exception of 1.8 mg in the LKSQ-labeled
peptide sample).

Isotopically labeled residues are
underlined.

Preparation
of Uniformly Labeled htt Exon 1 Fibrils
To complement the
residue-specifically labeled fibrils, we also prepared
fibrils from uniformly 13C- and 15N-labeled
htt exon 1. To do so, we expressed in Escherichia coli full-length exon 1 fused via its N-terminus to maltose-binding protein
(MBP). The employed construct was based on a previously reported construct but features a new linker design that avoids
the inclusion of extra residues prior to the httNT upon
cleavage with factor Xa. The BL21(DE3)pLysS cells (Invitrogen, Grand
Island, NY) were incubated in Luria-Bertani medium with ampicillin
and chloramphenicol at 37 °C and 250 rpm. The cells were obtained
by centrifugation (7200g) and resuspended in M9 medium
containing 0.2% (w/v) [U-13C]-d-glucose and 0.1%
(w/v) [15N]ammonium chloride (Cambridge Isotope Laboratories,
Tewksbury, MA) as carbon and nitrogen sources. The cells were incubated
at 37 °C until an optical density (OD600) of 0.6 had
been reached and then incubated at 18 °C until an OD600 of 0.7 had been reached. Overexpression was induced by adding 0.5
mM isopropyl β-d-thiogalactopyranoside (RPI Corp.,
Mt Prospect, IL), supplemented with 0.02% (w/v) [13C]-d-glucose and 0.01% (w/v) [15N]ammonium chloride,
and 100 μM ZnSO4. The protein was expressed at 18
°C for 16 h, after which the cells were harvested by centrifugation
and the cell pellets resuspended in PBS (pH 7.4) with 1 mM phenylmethanesulfonyl
fluoride (ACROS, Fair Lawn, NJ). Cells were opened using a microfluidizer
(Microfluidics, Westwood, MA), and cell debris was removed by centrifugation.
The fusion protein was purified with a Histrap FF column (GE Healthcare)
and assessed for purity by sodium dodecyl sulfate–polyacrylamide
gel electrophoresis (SDS–PAGE) (12%). Protein identity and
isotopic labeling were verified with matrix-assisted laser desorption
ionization (MALDI) and electrospray ionization (ESI) time-of-flight
(TOF) mass spectrometry at the University of Pittsburgh’s Genomics
and Proteomics Core Laboratories. Purified fusion protein was buffer-exchanged
to PBS in centrifugal filter units (Millipore, Billerica, MA). To
remove the MBP fusion domain, release htt exon 1, and induce fibrillation, the fusion protein (at 5.8 mg/mL) was treated
with factor Xa protease (0.0028 mg/mL) (Promega, Madison, WI) at 37
°C. The generation and identity of the released htt exon 1 were
tested by SDS–PAGE (12%) and ESI-TOF mass spectrometry. Uniformly 13C,15N-labeled htt exon 1 aggregates were pelleted
down, resuspended in 1 mL of PBS, and then pelleted into a 3.2 mm
MAS rotor using a centrifugal packing tool, as described above.

MAS Solid-State NMR
All experiments were performed
with a wide bore Bruker Avance I NMR spectrometer operating at a 1H Larmor frequency of 600 MHz (14.1 T), using either a standard
bore 3.2 mm HFCN MAS probe or a 3.2 mm EFree HCN MAS probe from Bruker
Biospin. The sample temperature was controlled using a constant flow
of cooled gas. Spectra were acquired with the Bruker Topspin software
but processed and analyzed with NMRPipe, Sparky, and CCPNMR/Analysis.
External referencing to 4,4-dimethyl-4-silapentane-1-sulfonic acid
(DSS) was done indirectly via the 13C signals of adamantane. For all spectra shown, additional experimental
details can be found in Table S1 of the .

MAS ssNMR Assignments
Residue-specific 13C and 15N assignments were obtained via two-dimensional
(2D) 13C–13C and 15N–13C experiments. These experiments involved 1H–13C/15N and 15N–13C
cross-polarization (CP) steps combined with 13C–13C transfers via dipolar assisted rotational resonance (DARR) mixing (8–15 ms). Typically, 83 kHz two-pulse
phase modulation (TPPM) 1H
decoupling was applied during acquisition and evolution. MAS spinning
rates (9–10 kHz) and other details can be found in Table S1
of the .

MAS ssNMR Dynamics
Measurements
To probe for site-specific
dynamics in the httNT and polyQ domains, 15N
longitudinal relaxation was measured for backbone 15N sites
using a series of 1H–15N CP experiments
incorporating a 15N T1 relaxation
period, analogous to earlier work., These measurements
were performed at 19–22 kHz MAS, where systematic MAS-dependent
measurements had shown 15N–15N spin diffusion
to be effectively suppressed. During acquisition, 83 kHz TPPM 1H decoupling was applied. As a complementary indicator of
dynamics, we measured the one-bond N–H dipolar couplings of
selected labeled sites. This was done at 10 kHz MAS through use of
constant-time DIPSHIFT experiments involving
rotor-synchronous incrementation of an R1817 symmetry sequence (89 kHz RF power), at the expense of 100 kHz continuous wave 1H decoupling.
The experimental data curves were analyzed using numerical simulations
with SpinEvolution, optimizing both the
(apparent) N–H distance and exponential damping during the
R sequence mixing time. The apparent N–H distances were converted
into dipolar coupling constants (in kilohertz). As a complementary,
qualitative measure of dynamics, we performed comparative one-dimensional
(1D) 13C experiments comparing 13C direct polarization
(DP) to signals obtained via dipolar-based 1H–13C CP, under otherwise identical conditions. These two polarization
techniques have differential sensitivities to dynamics, and their
comparison has been used to gain insight into local dynamics in various
biological systems.

MAS ssNMR Solvent Exposure Measurements
To probe site-specific
proximity to the fibril surface and exposure to solvent, we used MAS
ssNMR measurements in which protons from highly mobile water molecules
are selectively used as a source of polarization. These experiments
featured a 1H–13C CP step preceded by
a 3 ms T2 relaxation filter and a variable-time 1H–1H spin diffusion period, using a pulse
sequence as previously described.− These experiments were
performed using a range of spin diffusion periods from 0 to 7 ms,
after which the repolarization of the peptide signals was monitored
by comparing peak intensities to the unfiltered 1H–13C CP signal. These spectra were obtained at 10 kHz MAS, with
83 kHz TPPM 1H decoupling during acquisition.

Results
Structural
Analysis of the Q/P Junction
Previous studies
have shown that within monomeric peptides the C-terminal oligoPro
domain disrupts the conformational ensemble of the Pro-proximal Gln
residues by inducing PPII structure within a stretch of multiple Gln
residues.,,,, To probe whether or
how this disruption of the polyQ domain is retained in fibrils, we
performed MAS ssNMR on aggregates prepared from httNTQ30P10K2 peptides featuring site-specific
labeling of residues within and beyond the C-terminal end of the polyQ
segment. We previously submitted such aggregates (with differing labeling
schemes) to TEM to show their fibrillar morphology. Here we examine fibrils prepared from the LQP-labeled peptide
(Table ) that is 13C- and 15N-labeled in Q47 and P48, which constitute the Q/P junction.
Using standard 2D ssNMR spectra (e.g., Figure a,b), we obtained assignments for the labeled residues. P48, which
is the first Pro of the oligoPro domain, is found to have 13C chemical shifts that match typical chemical shifts of Pro residues
in a PPII 31 helix., Figure  illustrates the nearly perfect correspondence between the
P48 peaks (Figure a, black arrows) and the
solution NMR chemical shifts (Figure c) of
a PPII oligoproline segment in the decapeptide, APSYSPPPPP,
bound by α-spectrin SH3 (Figure d, BMRB
entry 15013). We previously found that unlabeled oligoPro in httNTQ30P10K2 aggregates showed the same
shifts (Figure b), indicating PPII helix structure
throughout the oligoPro domain. These ssNMR data on fibrils are in
agreement with solution NMR studies of oligoPro in much shorter polyQ-containing
peptides in the monomeric state, although no 13C chemical
shifts are available for direct comparison.

13C chemical shift assignments via 2D MAS ssNMR spectra.
(a) Aliphatic-carbonyl (left) and intra-aliphatic (right) spectral
regions from an 8 ms DARR 13C–13C 2D
spectrum on LQP-labeled httNTQ30P10K2 fibrils at 275 K. (b–d) Comparison of individual
Gln residues in different parts of the polyQ domain: (b) Q47 (15 ms
DARR, 9.8 kHz MAS), (c) Q46 (8 ms DARR, 10 kHz MAS), and (d) Q19 (25
ms DARR, 13 kHz MAS, data from ref ()). In these spectra, color-coded lines, boxes,
and quoted letters (“a”, “b”, etc.) mark
the Gln conformers discussed in the text. In panels b–d, peaks
from labeled residues L4, K6, L7, and P48 are indicated. (e) Backbone
and (f–h) side-chain 13C chemical shifts for Gln
in httNTQ30P10K2 fibrils.
Red/blue color coding indicates conformers “a” and “b”
(see refs () and ()). Newly observed resonances
for Q46 and Q47 are shown with paler color to indicate the conformers,
where applicable. Green conformers for Q46 and Q47 resemble a “Q(3)”
conformer reported in polyQ fibrils, with
a Cδ shift near 180 ppm. Missing resonances are indicated with
asterisks. (i) Fractions of residues Q18, Q19, Q46, and Q47 that feature
the amyloid core signature, estimated from ssNMR 2D peak volumes.

13C chemical shifts for Pro in httNTQ30P10K2 fibrils. (a) 1H–13C 1D CP MAS spectrum of LQP-labeled
fibrils at 9.8 kHz MAS,
showing the peaks due to the first Pro (P48, black arrows). (b) Natural
abundance Pro signals (black arrows) in unlabeled httNTQ30P10K2 fibrils at 10 kHz MAS. Unmarked peaks are due to other residues, either
isotopically enriched (in panel a) or at natural abundance. Panel
(b) adapted with permission from ref (). Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society. (c)
Chemical shifts of Pro in an example of PPII-structured oligoPro (shown
in panel d), from previously published solution NMR on a chimera of
the peptide APSYSPPPPP and
α-spectrin SH3.

Next, we examined the extent to which Gln residues
preceding oligoPro
are affected by the proximity to the oligoPro segment and the end
of the polyQ domain. Previously, we have identified a signature chemical
shift pattern that characterizes polyQ amyloid core residues. This pattern features two coexisting equal populations
of Gln residues that have different NMR signals. As such chemical
shift differences imply distinct conformations, we have referred to
these Gln as conformers “a” and “b”. They
feature unique Cβ and Cγ chemical shifts that are highly
uncommon in other protein structures, but thus far
have been seen in all ssNMR studies of polyQ amyloid.,,, Figure d shows a representative 2D MAS ssNMR
spectrum of httNTQ30P10K2 aggregates in which Q19 (the second
Gln in the polyQ segment) is uniformly isotopically labeled. The sets
of peaks corresponding to the two amyloid core conformers “a”
and “b” are highlighted with red and blue boxes, as
well as matching colored labels Q19 “a” and Q19 “b”,
respectively. We adopt the same conformer-specific color coding in
subsequent figures. The corresponding sets of 13C chemical
shifts are also shown as red and blue bar graphs in Figure e.

The peaks for the 13C- and 15N-labeled Q47
(green and magenta lines in Figure a; dashed
boxes in Figure b), directly preceding P48,
clearly lack these chemical shifts that identify the β-sheet
polyQ core. Q47 displays some structural heterogeneity, with two major
conformers that are marked as “c1” and “c2”
in Figure . The Q47 Cβ and Cγ
chemical shifts near ∼30 and ∼34 ppm, respectively,
are very different from the polyQ core signature and more similar
to typical Gln shifts found in globular proteins. Thus, Q47 is structurally
heterogeneous and not participating in the polyQ amyloid core. Given
the multiresidue effect of the PPII-structured oligoPro flanking sequence
in the monomeric state, one may expect a similar conformation for
residues further into the polyQ segment. To investigate this, we prepared
a fibril sample with isotopic labels in Q46 [alongside labeling of
L4 and A10 in the httNT segment (Table )]. Figure c shows results from a 13C–13C 2D experiment on this sample, again
highlighting in color-coded, dashed boxes the peaks assigned to Q46.
Unlike Q47, the majority population of this residue does feature the 13C amyloid core shifts (compare to Q19 in Figure d) and is thus found in the amyloid core.,,, A small fraction (∼25%) of Q46 adopts chemical shifts that
resemble those of Q47, indicating that in some of the peptide chains
this residue is outside the core. This contrasts with Q19, which lacks
detectable signals with non-core shift values, but resembles Q18,
the first residue of the polyQ domain, which also exhibits a small
fraction of Gln outside the amyloid core (Figure i). Thus, in these peptide fibrils, we see a highly localized
conformational disruption of the amyloid core at both ends of the
polyQ domain, which is most pronounced in the single residue just
prior to the oligoPro flanking segment.

Solvent Accessibility and
Mobility in the Q/P Junction
Having established that the
Q/P junction constitutes a remarkably
tight transition between two secondary structure elements, we performed
MAS ssNMR experiments to assess the solvent accessibility of this
structural motif that acts as a recognition site for certain htt-binding
proteins.,,, First, we directly probed water accessibility via T2-filtered 13C MAS ssNMR, previously used on other amyloid fibrils and
membrane proteins.,, After signals from (rigid) protein protons had been eliminated (Figure b, red), time-dependent 1H polarization
transfer from mobile water reflects the proximity of specific residues
to the fibril surface. We observe a differential
repolarization of the residues in the different peptide domains (Figure c). The fastest transfer occurs to L7, which is
outside the amyloid core and in the N-terminal α-helix (see
below). At the Q/P junction, Q47 and P48 both show increased water
accessibility compared to that of the dehydrated amyloid core.

Solvent exposure and dynamics at the Q/P junction of httNTQ30P10K2 fibrils. (a) 1H–13C CP spectrum of the LQP-labeled sample.
(b)
A 3 ms T2 filter eliminates virtually
all signals (red). 1H–1H mixing (7 ms,
black) allows 1H polarization transfer from mobile waters
to the fibrils. The most prominent peaks are due to L7 in the httNT helix, followed by P48 and Q47 (each Cα marked with
an arrow). (c) Polarization buildup curves of Cα sites (marked
in (panel b) as a function of 1H–1H mixing,
normalized relative to the unfiltered 1H–13C CP signal in panel a. (d) Comparison of 1H–13C CP (black) and 13C DP (cyan) spectra on LQP-labeled
fibrils. Unlike L7 peaks, various Q47 peaks are notably narrower in
the DP data, reflecting locally increased dynamics. The DP spectrum
is rescaled up to allow better comparison of the line widths.

To evaluate local dynamics, we
compared the peak intensities of
CP-based and DP 13C ssNMR spectra. The dipolar mediated 1H–13C transfer in CP experiments is less
effective for mobile sites, while the slow relaxation recovery of
rigid 13C signals suppresses the most rigid sites in the
DP spectra. Thus, mobile and rigid residues can be distinguished and
even spectroscopically “filtered out”. At the htt Q/P
junction, these experiments reveal populations of Q47 with different
levels of dynamics. Upon examination of the side-chain Cγ (Figure d), the c2 conformer of Q47 is suppressed in the 13C DP experiment (i.e., is rigid), while conformer c1 is present
and even reveals a quite narrow line width (i.e., slower T2 relaxation due to faster dynamics). The absolute peak
intensities (and their differences between the CP and DP experiments)
for both these Q47 conformers are indicative of dynamics significantly
greater than that of the amyloid core (Figure S1 of the ). Thus, Q47 features increased
mobility and solvent exposure, consistent with its location outside,
or at the surface of, the polyQ amyloid core.

Uniformly 13C- and 15N-Labeled Exon 1
Aggregates
To complement the residue-specific insights into
the Gln and Pro domains allowed by the use of our synthetic peptide
aggregates, we also prepared uniformly 13C- and 15N-labeled htt exon 1 by overexpression in E. coli. Removal of the MBP fusion domain by factor Xa treatment released
htt exon 1 with a 44-residue polyQ domain and a C-terminal His tag.
Because of a new linker design, factor Xa cleavage did not leave additional
residues N-terminal to the httNT segment, as validated
by ESI TOF mass spectrometry data showing the released exon 1 to have
the gene-encoded start Met-Ala-Thr. Under conditions analogous to
those used in our study of the residue-specifically labeled samples,
1.1 mg of the fibrillized uniformly 13C- and 15N-labeled protein was analyzed by 2D 13C–13C ssNMR spectroscopy. The obtained spectrum (Figure ) is dominated by the signals from the most rigid parts of
the sample: the 44-residue polyQ domain and the many prolines in the
C-terminal PRD segment. These signals match those obtained from the
residue-specific labels discussed in the synthetic htt exon 1 model
peptide samples. This can be readily appreciated from Figure b, in which spectra from the fully labeled and residue-specifically
labeled fibrils are overlaid (see also Figure S2 of the ). Thus, it appears that
the NMR signals observed for specific residues labeled in the polyQ
core of the httNTQ30P10K2 fibrils (i.e., Q18, Q19, and Q46) similarly apply to the bulk of
the polyQ domain of htt exon 1. Analogously, the signals of P48 (Figure ) match those of the uniformly 13C- and 15N-labeled PRD in Figure . These data
support our earlier analysis of the bulk natural abundance 13C signals of both Gln and Pro in httNTQ30P10K2 fibrils. The htt
exon 1 spectra are dominated by the large numbers of Gln and Pro residues,
as may be expected. Consistent with its dynamic nature (see below),
in the current size-limited sample it is difficult to detect the signals
from httNT.

PolyQ and PRD bulk signals. (a) 2D 13C–13C spectrum of 1.1 mg of uniformly 13C- and 15N-labeled fibrillar htt exon 1 featuring a 44-residue polyQ
domain.
The predominant peaks are due to the Gln in the polyQ amyloid core
and the Pro residues of the PRD. (b) These peaks match those of the
residue-specifically labeled httNTQ30P10K2 fibrils from panels a and d of Figure : Q19 signals (black spectrum; Figure d) match the signal of the uniformly 13C- and 15N-labeled polyQ; P48 signals (dark gray; Figure a) match those of the fully labeled PRD prolines. Asterisks
indicate spinning sidebands. Hash marks indicate httNT peaks
that are visible in the httNTQ30P10K2 sample, but not detectable in the current htt exon
1 samples (see the text). All data are obtained at 600 MHz, using
15 or 25 ms DARR (see Table S1 of the ).

Dynamics of the httNT α-Helix Backbone
We have previously identified the presence of a defined α-helical
segment within httNT in the httNTQ30P10K2 fibrillar aggregates. Those initial measurements, which for the first time demonstrated
the presence of an α-helix in the fibrils and delineated its
exact sequence location, were limited to qualitative measurements
of dynamics because of small sample sizes. Here, we performed more
detailed and quantitative ssNMR experiments on several new httNTQ30P10K2 samples containing
more peptide and new labeling patterns (Table ). Via 2D MAS ssNMR experiments on the mature aggregates, we obtained
assignments for five httNT residues: L4, K6, L7, M8, and
A10 (e.g., Figure S3 and Table S2 of the ; BMRB entry 25146). The obtained assignments validated
and reproduced several previous assignments,, and in all cases, the chemical shifts of the labeled httNT sites are indicative of α-helical secondary structure. Moreover,
the new assignments allow for application of more quantitative torsion
angle analysis (with TALOS+), yielding
the following α-helical dihedral angles for L7: ϕ = −63
± 3°, and ψ = −42 ± 5° (Figure S3
of the ). These new
samples also allow for quantitative analysis of the dynamics of the
httNT α-helix, through the use of several complementary
MAS ssNMR measurements. First, we probed domain dynamics by measuring
the 15N longitudinal relaxation rates for the backbone
nitrogens of residues in the α-helix. On the basis of our published and current (Figure S3 of the ) ssNMR data, we know that both M8 and
A10 form part of the httNT α-helix retained in the
fibrils. Consistent with them undergoing similar (domain) motion,
both residues have similar 15N backbone R1 values, i.e., 0.11 ± 0.07 s–1 (Figure a). This value exceeds the 15N R1 of structured regions of,
e.g., crystalline GB1 and are closer to the R1 of solvent-exposed loop regions. To test how this compares to the rigidity of the polyQ core, we
also measured the backbone 15N R1 rate for site-specifically uniformly 13C- and 15N-labeled Q10 in K2Q11PGQ11D2 fibrils (see also ref ()). The two distinct NMR signals seen for this single amyloid
core residue have backbone 15N R1 values of 0.02–0.05 s–1 (Figure b), which resemble the structured regions in crystalline
proteins.

Dynamics measurements. (a and b) 15N longitudinal relaxation
for (a) residues in the httNT α-helix of httNTQ30P10K2 and (b) residue
Q10 of the polyQ amyloid core of K2Q11PGQ11D2. (a) Relaxation curves are shown for the unfrozen
sample (red) and frozen sample (blue). (b) 15N longitudinal
relaxation curves at 275 K for conformers “a” and “b”
of Q10 in unfrozen polyQ peptide K2Q11PGQ11D2 (described in ref ()). Data were obtained as 1D 15N spectra
at 19–22 kHz MAS. (c and d) N–H dipolar recoupling curves
for M8 and A10 in the httNT of httNTQ30P10K2 fibrils, obtained on unfrozen (287 K,
red) or frozen (250 K, blue) samples, respectively. (e) N–H
coupling measurements of the polyQ amyloid core, showing separate
curves for both conformers of the uniformly 13C- and 15N-labeled residue Q10 in unfrozen (275 K) fibrillar K2Q11PGQ11D2. Panels c–e
used an R1817 symmetry sequence
at 10 kHz MAS. All data were acquired at 600 MHz (1H).

Order Parameters Validate
httNT α-Helix Dynamics
One concern with
a reliance on T1 NMR
relaxation in MAS NMR as a measure of dynamics is that the T1 relaxation may contain significant nonmotional
contributions, for instance because of the proximity of methyl groups
that act as relaxation sinks.− This is one of the reasons why
the comparison of 13C CP and DP spectra that we previously
applied is primarily a qualitative measurement.
To address this concern, we took two alternative and complementary
approaches: order parameter measurements and a determination of the
temperature dependence of the MAS ssNMR dynamics measurements.

NMR order parameters provide a measure of dynamics that is based
on the fact that, e.g., N–H dipolar couplings are reduced (“averaged”)
by local dynamics. We probed the backbone N–H dipolar couplings
in the N-terminal α-helix using R sequence-based DIPSHIFT experiments
(see ). As shown in
Figure c–e, the time-dependent oscillations
are different for residues in the httNT α-helix (Figure c,d) compared to those in a β-sheet polyQ
core residue (Figure e). Data analysis via
numerical simulations indicates significant differences in the corresponding
N–H dipolar order parameters. Simulations of rigid sites (the
polyQ core residue and data below) reproduced the experimental data
very well and indicated dipolar coupling constants of ∼11.2
± 0.4 kHz. These are consistent with an essentially rigid state,
as also seen in other amyloid-like fibrils. Residues M8 and A10 in the httNT α-helix feature
a decreased dipolar coupling strength (9.5 ± 1.5 kHz) and increased
relaxation damping, indicative of pronounced molecular motion. For
these dynamic sites, the fit quality was poorer, presumably because
of an inability to fully capture the effects of anisotropic and heterogeneous
dynamics. We note that the fits above did not explicitly consider
the 1H chemical shift anisotropy (CSA). In test simulations using standard CSA values,, the trend in coupling constants seen for the httNT and
amyloid core residues was unchanged, even though the exact fit optima
were dependent on the precise CSA values employed.

httNT α-Helix Motion Is Coupled to the Solvent
To further
test the connection between these NMR parameters and
true dynamics, we also examined the effect of sample temperature on
both the relaxation and order parameter measurements. In particular,
we reduced the sample temperature until the solvent froze, as validated
by observation of the broadening of the water 1H NMR signals.
As a result, the 15N longitudinal relaxation of both labeled
httNT α-helix residues slowed to R1 values of 0.02 ± 0.03 s–1 (for
M8) and 0.03 ± 0.04 s–1 (A10), which match
those of residues in a structured polyQ core (Figure a, blue). In addition, a dramatic change in the N–H
dipolar recoupling experiments is observed (Figure c,d, blue). The low-temperature N–H dipolar coupling
data feature larger dipolar coupling constants (∼10.5 ±
0.3 kHz) and reduced relaxation damping, resulting in curves that
more closely resemble those of the rigid polyQ core (compare to Figure e).

The effects of freezing the sample are
also manifest in 13C-based ssNMR experiments, where we
observe an increased 1H–13C CP intensity
and a larger CP–DP difference in backbone and aromatic sites
(Figure ). This indicates rigidification of
the backbones and side chains and also shows that these difference
experiments are indeed reflective of increased dynamics. In other
words, previously noted differences between the polyQ amyloid core
and httNT segment are not
simply due to the absence and presence of methyl groups in either
domain.

1D 13C ssNMR of fibrils of mixed (1:1) MF-labeled and
LAQ-labeled peptides at (a) 287 K and (b) 265 K and mixed MA-labeled
and LQP-labeled peptides at (c) 287 K and (d) 270 K. A CP–DP
difference spectrum is colored red and blue, with the corresponding 1H–13C CP spectrum colored gray. The relative
increase in intensity in the difference spectra, when the solvent
freezes, indicates a rigidification that applies to the backbone as
well as (hydrophobic) side chains (e.g., F11 in panel b). This implies
solvent-coupled dynamics that extend to the hydrophobic face of the
amphipathic α-helix (see Figure S3 of the ).

Discussion
Secondary Structure of Fibrillar PolyQ and
Its Flanking Domains
In monomeric polypeptides, the oligoPro
flanking segment adopts
a PPII conformation that modulates the structure of multiple preceding
Gln residues,,,,, presumably
allowed in part by Gln’s innate propensity for PPII structure, (Figure ). Our MAS ssNMR data (Figures  and ) show that the oligoPro
segment in our httNTQ30P10K2 fibrils also adopts a PPII helix, which starts from the very first
Pro residue. The same resonances are also seen in Figure  for Pro residues in uniformly 13C- and 15N-labeled htt exon 1 fibrils. We also found that the Gln
residue preceding the PRD fails to adopt the canonical β-sheet
polyQ amyloid conformation. This is indicated by the complete absence
of the characteristic polyQ ssNMR signature (Figure ) as well as the increased motion and solvent accessibility
of this residue (Figure ). Remarkably, unlike
the case in earlier solution-state studies, we find that in the fibrils
this oligoPro-induced non-β-structure is mostly limited to a
single Gln. In the fibrils, the penultimate Gln, Q46, does display
the chemical shift signature of the polyQ amyloid core. A minor population
(∼25%) of Q46 is found to show some of the characteristic side-chain
chemical shifts that are seen for Q47 and attributed to mobile residues
outside the amyloid core (see also below).
In the uniformly 13C- and 15N-labeled htt exon
1 fibrils, we find that the bulk of the polyQ domain features the
same two sets of ssNMR signals. Thus, the amyloid core is formed by
Gln residues throughout most of the polyQ segment. These data are
in line with our previous analysis of
the bulk Gln signals in unlabeled httNTQ30P10K2 fibrils. They are also reminiscent of the results
of the ssNMR study of aggregated uniformly labeled polyQ without htt
flanking domains. Thus, once formation
of amyloid structure is initiated (either by spontaneous nucleation
or via seeded elongation by preformed polyQ amyloid), β-sheet
structure propagates throughout essentially the entire polyQ domain.
As may be expected, there is no indication of β-sheet structure
in the oligoPro segment, in contrast to the formation of some β-structure
in the final residues of httNT (see ref ()). Thus, the “protective”
ability of the oligoPro segment to induce PPII structure within multiple
preceding Gln residues is specific to the monomeric (and possibly
oligomeric) species and is not retained in the mature amyloid aggregates.

Secondary
structure of htt N-terminal fragments under differing
conditions. (a) NMR studies have shown extensive α-helicity
in isolated httNT upon interacting with a lipid bilayer. (b) In crystals formed from a MBP fusion construct,
httNT is fully α-helical, followed by partial α-helicity
in the N-terminal part of the polyQ domain. The oligoPro segment forms a PPII helix, with extended or PPII structure
for several preceding Gln residues. (c) Mature fibrils feature a relatively
well-defined β-sheet amyloid core (dashed blue box; see also
Figure ), formed at the expense of any α-helical
or PPII structure within the polyQ. A short α-helix in httNT helps stabilize the fibrils via molten-globule-like assemblies
that may be inherited from non-β oligomers (see the text).

By ssNMR, we find in fibrils an
α-helix in httNT that spans only part of this N-terminal
segment (Figure , Figure S3 of the , and refs () and ()) and undergoes extensive dynamics (e.g., Figure ). Although various studies have proposed or discussed α-helical
structure for httNT,,,,, these studies did not take place in the context of fibrils. An intriguing
feature of the fibrillar httNT α-helix is that it
is shorter than α-helices seen in experimental studies in the
context of non-oligomers, membranes, and the crystal lattice of a
chimeric construct (Figure ).,,, The detailed conformation of the oligomers remains uncertain, but
it is clear that interactions between httNT α-helices
are critical for their formation.,−,, At the same time, intermolecular interactions seem to be required
to have httNT form stable α-helical structure.,,

Previous studies have reported
that the polyQ domain may have a
propensity for α-helical content,,, especially in the N-terminal polyQ portion when attached
to an α-helical flanking domain.,,, As one example (Figure b), extensive α-helical structure is seen
within the polyQ domain of N-terminal htt fragments fused to MBP. Once fibril formation has reached completion,
our use of MAS ssNMR on fibrils shows that no α-helical structure
remains in the polyQ domain., Indeed, this β-structure
actually extends into the C-terminal end of the httNT segment,
at its C-terminal junction with the polyQ (Figure ).

Boundaries and Alignment of the PolyQ Amyloid
Core
We previously described how the β-sheet
polyQ amyloid core can be identified on the basis of its unique chemical
shift signature featuring the two conformers “a” and
“b” (as illustrated in Figure  in red and blue, respectively). Through our use of synthetic peptides
and residue-specific labeling, we have shown that these two conformers
are observed even for a single labeled residue independent of its
position in the polyQ domain. In httNTQ30P10K2 aggregates, this signature was seen when we
labeled the first two Gln residues directly following the httNT flanking domain. Here, we show
it is also present near the C-terminal end of the polyQ domain, providing
further support to our hypothesis that this doubled signature is a
general and intrinsic feature of Gln throughout the β-strands
of polyQ amyloid. Moreover, we also showed that the same chemical
shifts are seen for the Gln residues that make up the bulk of the
polyQ amyloid core in the uniformly 13C- and 15N-labeled htt exon 1 fibrils (Figure ). This
complements and confirms our previous analysis of unlabeled httNTQ30P10K2 fibrils, based
on spectroscopic filtering of the rigid amyloid core. Work by the Baldus group on polyQ fibrils lacking htt-like
flanking domains reproduced our assignments of the amyloid core signals,
even though, because of their labeling approach, it was not apparent
that the doubled signature is an attribute of each individual amyloid
core residue. We are pursuing further
ssNMR studies into the conformational underpinnings of this polyQ-specific
amyloid signature, which we here employ
to establish the presence or absence of specific residues within the
amyloid core.

In many amyloids, one finds well-defined boundaries
for the fibrils’ β-sheet amyloid core. In these amyloids,
β-strand-based “unit cells” within the β-sheets
stack into a single well-defined register that balances the alignment
of hydrophobic residues, the formation of Asn or Gln “ladders”,
and the interactions of charged residues. This is perhaps most obvious
in the commonly found parallel in-register amyloid structures, where
the β-sheets are defined by translation of a unit cell featuring
a single β-strand.− Also more complex cases, such
as the fibrils formed by the fungal prion HET-s or the antiparallel fibrils made by Iowa mutant Aβ, feature a strictly aligned repeating unit within
the fibrillar β-sheets (see Figure a,b).
Misalignment of new β-strands that are added to the elongating
fibril has a significant energetic penalty, resulting in the templated
elongation into structurally homogeneous fibrils. However, during
elongation of polyQ amyloid, the alignment constraints on incoming
polypeptide chains are much less rigorous because of the repetitive
and degenerate nature of the primary sequence. This translates into
an ability to incorporate polyQ domains of other lengths and from
other proteins, a phenomenon previously described as “promiscuous”
polyQ amyloid growth.,− Even when a homogeneous pool
of polyQ peptides is forming amyloid, the penalty of having incoming
peptide chains not lining up perfectly with the existing amyloid core
is likely to be relatively small, especially for longer polyQ lengths.
Thus, this would allow for a “misalignment” (from the
point of view of residue number, if not of residue type) of the incoming
peptide chains with the existing polyQ amyloid core. This translates
into having peptide chains in various residue number “registers”
inside each individual fibril. Among other effects, this kind of chain
misalignment could lead to the generation of disordered loops and
tails decorating the amyloid core, with lengths and locations that
vary from peptide to peptide, even within one fibril. A previous in silico study has noted this kind of imperfect alignment
and how it resulted in disordered tails at the ends of the polyQ peptide. In ssNMR experiments, such disordered non-β-segments
would manifest themselves as Gln signals lacking the amyloid core
signature and featuring enhanced dynamics. Such signals were observed
in a previous ssNMR study of polyQ fibrils
lacking htt-based flanking domains (see also below). Although these
were discussed in the context of flexible loops, they would also be
expected for “tail ends” of disordered Gln beyond the
polyQ core. Here, we find in htt context that the uniformly 13C- and 15N-labeled fibrils also contain this type of signal,
with it accounting for 11% of the Gln based on an integration of the
Cδ−Cγ/Cβ cross-peaks. In the site-specifically
labeled httNTQ30P10K2 fibrils,
we observe that the final Gln (Q47) has chemical shifts that closely
match those of the disordered glutamines. On the other hand, for the
very first Gln residue of the polyQ segment (Q18) and also the penultimate Gln (Q46), both of which form
part of the amyloid core, we find only minor populations of the disordered
Gln residues (∼15 and 25%, respectively). The second Gln residue,
Q19, lacks such a disordered population (Figure i). These observations seem consistent with a very limited degree
of residue number misalignment within the polyQ amyloid core. It remains
unclear whether this is the full explanation of these observations.
Generally, we note that the proportion of disordered glutamines in
these fibril samples seems to be lower than that reported for polyQ
fibrils lacking htt flanking domains. This might imply an ordering effect of the non-β httNT and oligoPro flanking sequences, which could effectively help “set
the register” of the polyQ amyloid core. Alternatively, this may also in part reflect a dependence
on the polyQ length, because in the study mentioned above the disordered
Gln pool seemed to be most pronounced in the longest polyQ. Moreover, the degree of structural and dynamic
disorder within the polyQ domains of the fibrils can be affected by
the aggregation conditions, as previously discussed for htt exon 1
aggregates.

Peptide-chain (mis)alignment
during amyloid elongation. The amyloid
cores of (a) HET-s and (b) Iowa mutant Aβ are assembled from
strictly aligned repeating “unit cells” (dashed rectangles)., Incoming peptide chains align their charged (red/blue) and hydrogen-bonding
side chains (Asn/Gln; green). (c–e) The antiparallel β-sheet
polyQ amyloid is more forgiving of misalignment of incoming peptide
chains, because a different alignment with the amyloid core (green)
still allows for similar backbone- and side-chain hydrogen bonding
to the core (dashed lines). This would leave varying numbers of non-amyloid
Gln residues at the N- and C-terminal polyQ ends (as shown in panel
c–e) and in flexible loops. This may explain the localized
disorder in Gln at or near the polyQ end (Figure i). These non-amyloid signals are largely (for 75% of the
fibrillized httNTQ30P10K2 peptides) limited to the final Gln, consistent with the schematic
shown in panel e.

The mobile, non-amyloid
core Gln residues that were identified
as the “Q(3)” population by the Baldus group feature a distinct chemical shift pattern. It
can be distinguished from the polyQ core residues, by its Cδ
chemical shift near 180 ppm (Figure e, green
bars at the far right) or the presence of an off-diagonal Cβ–Cγ
peak in 13C–13C 2D spectra (Figure b). A close inspection of several other Gln-labeled
fibrils that we have studied (refs (), (), and () and unpublished
results) reveals weak signals with similar chemical shifts. This includes
both the uniformly 13C- and 15N-labeled exon
1 fibrils’ bulk Gln signals and specifically the first and
last Gln residues in our httNTQ30P10K2 fibrils. Perhaps most strikingly, this applies to residue
Q47, which has peaks (in particular conformer c1) that closely resemble
these chemical shift values (Figure e). The
most notable deviation is in the 13CO chemical shift, but
this is likely due to the well-established effect of the adjacent
Pro. The Q47 chemical shifts also bear
a strong resemblance to those of Gln preceding Pro in intrinsically
disordered proteins (IDPs), which have a characteristic set of backbone
chemical shifts of ∼174 ppm (CO) and ∼53.5 ppm (Cα).
These differ significantly from both random coil shifts and non-pre-proline
IDP Gln residues. Therefore, the final Gln is indeed disordered and
affected by the PPII oligoPro segment. We speculate that Q47 might
feature a PPII-like structure that resembles the conformation of the
oligoPro-flanked polyQ tail prior to β-nucleation.

htt-Binding
Proteins and Their Effect on Aggregation
Thus, we localized
at the Q/P junction a transition from β-sheet
to PPII structure, occurring remarkably abruptly at the final Gln
residue, which lacks the amyloid core signal and instead features
increased dynamics and water exposure. The PPII-structured oligoPro
elements are known to provide the binding sites for certain htt-binding
proteins, some of which can bind to fibrils. One of these, the PPII-binding WW domain protein FE65 is thought
to specifically recognize this particular Q/P junction, which would
require the observed accessibility (i.e., solvent exposure) of said
junction. The anti-oligoproline antibody
MW7 can bind aggregates from mice,,− and it can also destabilize preexisting fibrils and even interfere
with fibril formation. Our experiments
indicate that one of its oligoPro-binding sites occurs at the very
edge of the amyloid core. Optimal tight binding of MW7 to this site
may thus interfere with the formation of the polyQ amyloid core or
at least reduce the stability of the fibrillar assembly.

Molten-Globule-like
Dynamics of the α-Helical httNT Segment
Intermolecular httNT interactions
play a crucial role in accelerating the aggregation of htt fibrils,
by allowing the formation of α-helix-rich oligomers.,,, httNT–httNT interactions also contribute
to the stability of the mature fibrils., Our MAS ssNMR
data show that in mature fibrils the α-helical segments nonetheless
remain at least partly solvent-exposed. Moreover, despite the structural
role in the fibrils,, the httNT α-helix
experiences solvent-coupled dynamics, in both its backbone and its
hydrophobic side chains. This is reflected in greater 15N and 13C longitudinal relaxation rates and reduction
of N–H dipolar coupling. The pronounced effect of freezing
the solvent shows that this mobility is coupled closely to the solvent
dynamics. Solvent freezing impacts even the hydrophobic face of the
amphipathic helix (e.g., Phe ring in Figure ), which would form the hydrophobic core of clustering of the amphipathic
α-helices within the fibrils. Thus, our ssNMR data indicate
that the interacting httNT α-helices in the fibrils
are in a molten-globule-like state, in which amphipathic α-helices
are formed and interact but remain flexible and loosely packed. Although
we still lack a good understanding of the structure and dynamics of
htt-related oligomers, such molten-globule-like httNT assemblies
remind us of the proposed molten-globule-like intermediate states
of other amyloid-forming proteins.− If the α-helix-rich oligomers formed by htt
N-terminal fragments turn out to be dynamic, then the dynamic httNT α-helices in the fibrils might even trace their origins
to the initial interactions in the self-assembly of the oligomeric
precursors.

Conclusions
Extensive structural
changes are common during the aggregation
of amyloidogenic proteins. This includes the loss of native secondary
and tertiary structure elements as well as the formation of the highly
rigid, intermolecularly hydrogen-bonded β-sheets that characterize
amyloid-like fibrils. Through the use of MAS ssNMR spectroscopy, we
have gained new insights into the structural features of the polyQ
domain and its flanking segments after the aggregation of htt N-terminal
fragments. Following nucleation, a β-sheet-based amyloid core
is formed in the polyQ domain, which includes Gln residues very close
to the C-terminal oligoPro segment. The latter forms a PPII helix
that extends to, but fails to significantly disrupt, the polyQ amyloid
core in mature fibrils. This contrasts with its effect prior to fibril
formation, when it modulates the conformational ensemble of multiple
preceding glutamines sufficiently to suppress nucleation. The β-sheet
amyloid core extends slightly beyond the N-terminal end of the polyQ
segment, stopping short of the amphipathic α-helix close to
the very N-terminus. Here, we found that
this amphipathic helix displays pronounced solvent-coupled dynamics,
seemingly reflecting a molten-globule-like assembly that is reminiscent
of some oligomeric amyloid precursors. While α-helix-rich and
dynamic oligomeric intermediates are implicated in other amyloid-forming
proteins and peptides,− htt-related fibrils may be relatively unusual for such proteins
in that they retain a substantial part of these structural and dynamic
features in the mature fibrils. The obtained new insights into the
structure of htt-related fibrils may also help explain reported inhibitory
effects and aggregate binding characteristics of antibodies and other
htt-binding proteins.

Supporting Information Available
Tables S1 and S2 and Figures
S1–S3. This material is available free of charge via the Internet
at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bi501010q_si_001.pdf

Author Present Address
§ K.K.: Indian Institute of Technology Jodhpur, Jodhpur, Rajasthan,
India.

Author Present Address
|| Z.H.: Russell
H. Morgan Department of Radiology &amp; Radiological
Science, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD
21287-0006.

This work was
supported by funds from the University of Pittsburgh and the National
Institutes of Health (Grants R01 AG019322 to R.W. and P.C.A.v.d.W.,
R01 GM099718 to R.W., and T32 GM088119 to C.L.H.) and Grant UL1 RR024153
from the National Center for Research Resources (NCRR).

The authors declare
no
competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
We thank Mike
Delk, Guy Uechi, Ravindra Kodali, and Bankanidhi
Sahoo for technical assistance and helpful discussions.

Abbreviations
CPcross-polarization

CSAchemical shift anisotropy

DARRdipolar-assisted rotational
resonance

DPdirect
polarization

DSS4,4-dimethyl-4-silapentane-1-sulfonic acid

HDHuntington’s disease

htthuntingtin

httNThtt N-terminal
segment (MATLEKLMKAFESLKSF)

IDPintrinsically disordered
protein

MASmagic
angle spinning

MBPmaltose-binding protein

oligoProoligoproline

polyQpolyglutamine

PPIIpolyproline type II

PRDproline-rich domain

ssNMRsolid-state NMR

TPPMtwo-pulse phase modulation.

