DNA is a polyanion that is effectively neutralized
with diffusible
cations even at low salt concentrations.− The formation of electrostatic
salt bridges between the nonbridging phosphate oxygens and basic amino
acids of DNA binding proteins releases cations to the bulk solvent,
providing a non-sequence-specific entropic driving force for protein–DNA
binding., In high-resolution crystallography, mono-
and divalent cations are often observed at the major groove edge of
guanines.− Positively charged basic amino acid side chains are often observed
at the same locations. The presence of
diffusible and protein-tethered cations suggests that they stabilize
the ensemble of nucleic acid, water, and salt. We reported that disruption
of such major groove cation binding sites by the substitution of 7-deazaG
(c7G) or 8-oxoguanine (8oG) was destabilizing because of a reduction in
the enthalpy term that was not fully compensated by an increase in
entropy. To further explore the thermodynamic role of major groove
cations in DNA stability, we created a model system to recapitulate
the observed locations of major groove monovalent cations by synthesizing
7-aminomethyl-7-deazaguanine (7amG) and
incorporating it into sites with different flanking sequences. The covalent tethering of a cation in the major
groove at c7G restored the stability of the DNA to that of the unmodified
DNA. A 7-hydroxymethyl-7-deazaguanine
(7hmG) isostere was shown to be as destabilizing as (or more destabilizing
than) the c7G nucleotide, indicating the critical role of the cationic
charge in the enthalpic stabilization. This effect was in contrast to salt bridge formation involving the
phosphate backbone that is considered to be entropy-driven. Molecular modeling suggested that the tethered
cation introduced by 7amG was located in the major groove and did
not form a salt bridge with the flanking bases or backbone. In this
study, this important structural feature of the model is confirmed
and the local stabilization of base pairing at and flanking the 7amG
nucleotide in the 5′-direction is demonstrated. This structural
information supports the contention that major groove cations that
do not make any electrostatic contact with the DNA can stabilize the
duplex because of an enthalpic effect, which may also be used by proteins
in their recognition of specific DNA sequences.

Materials and Methods
The unmodified oligodeoxynucleotides were synthesized by the Midland
Certified Reagent Co. (Midland, TX) and purified by anion exchange
high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC). The phosphoramidite
derivative of 7-aminomethyl-7-deaza-dG (7amG) nucleoside was synthesized
as described previously and incorporated
into 5′-d(GAGAXCGCTCTC)-3′, where X represents 7amG. The purities of the oligodeoxynucleotides
were verified by HPLC using a semipreparative reverse-phase column
(YMC, C18, 5 μm, 250 mm × 10.0 mm) equilibrated with 0.1
M ammonium formate (pH 7.0). All of the oligodeoxynucleotides were
desalted using G-25 Sephadex, lyophilized, and characterized by matrix-assisted
laser desorption ionization time-of-flight mass spectrometry (calculated
mass for [M – H]−m/z 3674.5, found m/z 3674.8).
The oligodeoxynucleotides were annealed in appropriate buffers, being
heated to 85 °C for 15 min and and cooled to room temperature.
The oligodeoxynucleotide concentrations were determined by UV absorbance
at 25 °C using an extinction coefficient of 1.11 × 105 M–1 cm–1 at 260 nm.

NMR
The modified and unmodified
samples were dissolved
to a duplex concentration of 0.25 mM in 180 μL of 200 mM NaCl,
50 μM Na2EDTA, and 10 mM NaH2PO4 (pH 7.0). The samples were exchanged with D2O and dissolved
in 180 μL of 99.99% D2O to observe nonexchangeable
protons in the spectra. For the observation of exchangeable protons,
the samples were dissolved in 180 μL of a 9:1 H2O/D2O mixture. The NOESY and DQF-COSY spectra of samples in D2O were collected at 25 °C on a Bruker AV-III 800 MHz
spectrometer using a CPTCI probe. For the assignment of exchangeable
protons, NOESY experiments with mixing times of 150, 200, and 250
ms and TPPI quadrature detection were conducted. These data were recorded
with 2048 real data points in the t2 dimension
and 1024 data points in the t1 dimension.
The relaxation delay was 2.0 s. The data in the t1 and t2 dimension were zero-filled
to give a matrix of 2K × 2K real points. The NMR spectra for
the exchangeable protons were recorded at 5, 15, 25, 35, 45, 55, and
65 °C on a Bruker AV-III 600 MHz spectrometer equipped with a
CPQCI probe. The NOESY, spectra of unmodified and modified
samples in H2O were collected at 5 °C with mixing
times of 70 and 250 ms at 600 MHz. Water suppression was achieved
by a gradient Watergate pulse sequence. Chemical shifts were referenced to water. NMR data were processed
with TOPSPIN version 2.0.b.6 (Bruker Biospin Inc., Billerica, MA).

Experimental Distance Restraints
The volumes of cross-peaks
for the NOESY spectrum recorded at a mixing time of 250 ms were obtained
using SPARKY. These were combined with
intensities generated from the complete relaxation matrix analysis
of a starting structure to generate a
hybrid intensity matrix. To refine the hybrid intensity matrix and
optimize the agreement between calculated and experimental NOE intensities,
MARDIGRAS was used. The RANDMARDI algorithm conducted 50 iterations for each set
of data, randomizing peak volumes within limits specified by the input
noise level. The molecular motion was assumed to be isotropic. The
volume error was defined as one-half the volume of the weakest cross-peak.
Calculations were performed using a B-DNA initial structure generated using INSIGHT II (Accelyris, Inc.,
San Diego, CA), and NOE intensities derived from experiments with
a mixing time of 250 ms, and with three isotropic correlation times
(2, 3, and 4 ns), yielding three sets of distances. Analysis of these
data yielded the experimental distance restraints and standard deviations
for the distance restraints used in subsequent restrained molecular
dynamics calculations. For partially overlapped cross-peaks, the upper
bounds on the distances were increased. Additional empirical restraints
for base pair, phosphodiester backbone, and deoxyribose pseudorotation
were obtained from canonical values derived from B-type DNA.

Restrained Molecular Dynamics (rMD) Calculations
Classical
B-DNA was used as the reference to create
the starting structure for rMD calculations. The 7amG adduct was constructed
by bonding the aminomethyl group to the C7 atom on the G5 nucleotide in both strands, using INSIGHT II. The coordinates, connectivity,
and parameters for the models were obtained from xLEaP. The restrained electrostatic potential charges
for the 7amG adduct were calculated with the B3LYP/6-31G* basis set
using GAUSSIAN. The starting structure
was energy minimized for all atoms using AMBER. The rMD calculations were performed with AMBER using a simulated annealing protocol with the
parm99 force field. Calculations performed in vacuo were initiated by coupling to a heating bath with
a target temperature of 600 K. The generalized Born method was used
to model solvation., The force constants for empirical
hydrogen bonding and all NOE restraints were maintained at 32 kcal
mol–1 Å–2. Initially, 20000
steps of a simulated annealing protocol were performed. The system
was heated from 0 to 600 K for the first 1000 steps, with a coupling
of 0.5 ps. During steps 1001–2000, the system was maintained
at 600 K and then cooled to 100 K over 18000 steps with a coupling
of 4 ps. The final cooling from 100 to 0 K during steps 18001–20000
was performed with a coupling of 1 ps. Subsequently, a 100000-step
simulated annealing protocol with an integrator time step of 1 fs
was performed. The system was heated to 600 K in 5000 steps, maintained
at 600 K for 5000 steps, and then cooled to 100 K with a time constant
of 4.0 ps over 80000 steps. A final cooling stage was applied to relax
the system to 0 K with a time constant of 1.0 ps over 10000 steps.
After each cycle, a set of structural coordinates was saved for energy
minimization. To obtain an average structure, 10 emergent structures
were chosen on the basis of the lowest deviations from the experimental
distance and dihedral restraints and were energy minimized. Back-calculations
of theoretical NMR intensities from the emergent structure were performed
using CORMA.

Measurement of Base Pair
Opening
NMR data were collected
at 15 °C at 500 MHz using a Bruker AV-III spectrometer equipped
with a 5 mm CPQCI probe. The samples were dissolved in 180 mL of a
90% H2O/10% D2O solution containing 100 mM NaCl,
0.05 mM Na2EDTA, 0.011 M NaN3, 1 mM triethanolamine,
and 10 mM NaH2PO4 (pH 8.0). The transfer of
magnetization from water to the imino protons was followed by observation
of the imino protons after a variable mixing time. For selective spin inversion of the water protons, a 2
ms 180° sinc pulse with 1000 points was used. To minimize effects
of radiation damping during the mixing time, a 0.1 G/cm gradient was
used. Water suppression was achieved by a binominal 1–1 echo
sequence, jump and return, with flanking
1 ms smooth square shape gradients, 15 G/cm. Sixteen values of the
variable delay ranging form 1 ms to 15 s were used for each experiment.
All data were processed and analyzed with TOPSPIN. Ammonia was used
as the acceptor because of its small size and lack of charge and to
minimize catalysis due to the presence of OH– ions. The ammonia-catalyzed exchange was measured
at pH 8.− The ammonia was titrated from stock solutions, with concentrations
that ranged from 0.1 to 5 M. The DNA samples contained 1 mM triethanolamine,
which was used to monitor the pH of the NMR sample during the titration, in situ, by measuring the chemical shift difference between
the two methylene groups. The pKa of 9.22 for ammonia at 15 °C was used.
The concentration of the ammonia base was calculated from the total
ammonia concentration (c0) and the pH
as

The data analysis and fits were performed
using PRISM version 6.0b (GraphPad Software, Inc., La Jolla, CA).
The exchange rates in the absence and presence of added ammonia were
calculated from the equationwhere Iz(tmix) and Iz,eq are
intensities of the imino proton peaks at a given value of tmix and at equilibrium, respectively, kex is the chemical exchange rate, R1w is the longitudinal relaxation rate of water, 3.15
s as determined separately under the same conditions, R1i is the sum of the imino proton relaxation rate and kex, and E is the efficiency
of water inversion using the value of −2., In general, equilibrium constants for base pair opening were calculated
by fitting the imino exchange rate data as a function of ammonia concentration
to the equationwhere Kop is the
equilibrium constant for base pair opening, kop and kcl are the rates for base
pair opening and closing, respectively, and kB is the rate constant for exchange catalysis calculated as
described by Parker and Stivers.

Data Deposition
Complete structure factor and data
coordinates were deposited in the Nucleic Acid Database (http://ndbserver.rutgers.edu) as PDB entry 2LIA.

Results
Sample Characterization
The [5′-d(GAGAXCGCTCTC)-3′]2 duplex, in which X = G (OL-1a) or 7amG (OL-1b) (Scheme ), is self-complementary with a pseudodyad axis of symmetry.
Thermal melting studies of the OL-1b duplex at a strand concentration
of 7 μM indicated a single melting transition with a Tm of 52 °C at 10 mM NaCl and a Tm of 67 °C at 100 mM NaCl. No evidence
of a second thermal melting transition, corresponding to the formation
of an intramolecular hairpin, was observed. A series of 1H NMR spectra were recorded as a function
of temperature. These exhibited a single set of imino resonances with
good spectral resolution suitable for NMR analyses.

(A) Structure of
the X = 7-Aminomethyl-7-deaza-dG (7amG) Modification and (B) Sequences and Numbering of the Nucleotides
for Unmodified OL-1a and Modified OL-1b Duplexes
The 7-aminomethyl
moiety is
colored red.

NMR Assignments
Nonexchangeable
DNA Protons
The sequential assignment
was accomplished using standard protocols., An expanded plot of NOE sequential connectivity between the base
protons and the deoxyribose H1′ protons exhibited sharp and
generally well-resolved cross-peaks (Figure ). However, there was substantial spectral overlap involving T9 and T11 H6. All sequential NOEs from G1 to C12 were observed. No NOEs showed unusual intensities.
At A4, X5, and C6, the NOE cross-peak
intensities between the base protons and the deoxyribose H1′
protons were of the same relative magnitudes as those between other
bases in the sequence. The 7amG H8 resonance was observed at 6.4 ppm,
shifted upfield by approximately 1 ppm with respect to that of the
unmodified oligodeoxynucleotide. This was attributed to the differential
electronic density for c7G as compared to G. Proton resonances from
the neighboring A4 and C6 bases exhibited chemical
shift changes of &lt;0.1 ppm, compared with those bases in the unmodified
OL-1a duplex. The chemical shifts of the oligodeoxynucleotide nonexchangeable
protons are provided in Table S1 of the .

Expanded plots from the aromatic–anomeric region
of the
800 MHz NOESY spectra. (A) Sequential NOEs between base aromatic and
deoxyribose H1′ protons for the OL-1a duplex. (B) Sequential
NOEs between base aromatic and deoxyribose H1′ protons for
the OL-1b duplex. The data were collected at 25 °C.

Aminomethyl Protons
The methylene
proton resonances
of the 7-aminomethyl moiety of c7G were assigned from an analysis
of COSY and NOESY spectra. The NOESY spectrum for the OL-1b duplex
is shown in Figure . Two intense resonances
at 3.4 and 3.6 ppm were assigned to the methylene protons. Their stereotopic
assignments could not be made. Both of the methylene protons exhibited
intense NOEs to imidazole protons A4 H8 and X5 H8. Weaker NOEs were observed from the methylene protons to the
A4 deoxyribose H1′, H2′, H2″, and
H3′ protons. Weak NOEs between the methylene protons and C6 H5 were also observed.

Expanded plot from the 800 MHz NOESY spectrum
showing the assignment
of the 7amG methylene protons in the OL-1b duplex. The data were collected
at 25 °C.

Exchangeable Protons
Figure  shows the NOESY spectra for the
OL-1a and OL-1b duplexes in the
far downfield region of the base imino resonances, showing connectivity
of the purine N1H and pyrimidine N3H imino protons. For both duplexes,
the resonances were assigned on the basis of their sequential connectivity
in NOESY spectra. In both instances, these assignments were supported
by their NOE cross-peaks to Watson–Crick base-paired amino
protons. For the OL-1a duplex, the sequential
connectivity was obtained from base pairs G3:C10 → A4:T9 → G5:C8 → C6:G7. Likewise, for the OL-1b
duplex, the sequential connectivity was obtained from base pairs G3:C10 → A4:T9 →
X5:C8 → C6:G7.
The imino resonance from X5 in the OL-1b duplex shifted
downfield by 0.2 ppm compared to that of the OL-1a duplex. For both
duplexes, the imino proton resonances of the G1:C12 terminal base pair and the A2:T11 penultimate
base pair were broadened, which was attributed to rapid exchange with
water.

Expanded plots from the 600 MHz NOESY spectra showing NOE connectivity
of the guanine N1H and thymine N3H imino protons (lower panels) and
the cytosine N4H and adenine N6H amino protons (upper panels). (A) The OL-1a duplex.
The cross-peaks are assigned as: a, T9 N3H → A4N6H2; b, T9 N3H → A4 H2; c, G5 N1H → C8 H5; d, G5 N1H → C8N4H1; e, G5 N1H → A4 H2; f, G5 N1H → C8N4H2; g, G7 N1H → C6 H5; h, G7 N1H → C6N4H1; i, G7 N1H → C6N4H2. (B) The OL-1b duplex.
The X5 imino resonance is shown in red. The cross-peaks
are assigned as: a′, T9 N3H → A4N6H2; b′, T9 N3H → A4 H2; c′, X5 N1H →
C8 H5; d′, X5 N1H → C8N4H1; e′, X5 N1H → A4 H2; f′, X5 N1H →
C8N4H2; g′,
G7 N1H → C6 H5; h′, G7 N1H → C6N4H1; i′, G7 N1H → C6N4H2. The spectra were collected at 5 °C.

Restrained Molecular Dynamics
Calculations
A total
of 211 experimentally determined NOEs involving the nonexchangeable
protons of OL-1b were obtained and converted to experimental distance
restraints using MARDIGRAS. Of the experimental
distance restraints, 114 were intranucleotide restraints and 97 were
internucleotide restraints. These are summarized in Table S2 of the . There were a total of
31 experimental distance restraints involving the 7amG base. The spectral
overlap involving T9 and T11 H6 (Figure ) resulted in greater errors in estimating a number
of intra- and internucleotide NOEs involving nucleotides T9, C10, and T11. Additional NOEs involving exchangeable
protons that did not have a distance calculated by MARDIGRAS were
estimated by examining relative peak intensities. The experimental
distance restraints were combined with 52 empirical base pairing restraints,
and 200 empirical torsion angle restraints, involving the deoxyribose
torsion angles and the phosphodiester backbones (Tables S3–S5
of the ). The utilization
of these empirical base pairing and torsion angle restraints was predicated
upon the observation that minimal spectroscopic changes were noted
for the OL-1b duplex as compared to the unmodified OL-1a duplex, suggesting
that the target structure must be similar to that of canonical B-form
DNA, with regard to the conservation of Watson–Crick base pairing
and propeller twisting between base pairs. Likewise, it was anticipated
that the phosphodiester backbone geometry of canonical B-form DNA
was maintained and that the 2′-deoxyribose pseudorotation equilibria
remained predominately in the C2′-endo conformation associated
with B-form DNA.

To determine the structure of the modified
OL-1b duplex, a series of restrained molecular dynamics calculations,
using a simulated annealing protocol, and employing the experimental
and empirical distance and dihedral angle restraints, was performed.
The calculations were initiated from energy-minimized B-form DNA starting
structures. The target temperature was 600 K. The convergence of the
rMD calculations was assessed for structures having the smallest number
of deviations from the experimental distance and dihedral restraints,
the lowest van der Waals energies, and the lowest overall energies.
Finally, the emergent structures were subjected to 250 iterations
of potential energy minimization without restraints and superimposed
to obtain the average structure. Figure  shows
these superimposed structures, and Figure  shows the average structure. The structural refinement statistics
are summarized in Table .

Superposition of emergent
structures from the rMD calculations,
for the OL-1b duplex. Nucleotide X5 is colored red.

Expanded view of the average potential energy-minimized
conformation
for the OL-1b duplex emergent from the rMD calculations, viewed from
the major groove. Nucleotide X5 is colored red.

NMR Restraints and Statistical Analysis
of the Refined Structure of the OL-1b Duplex
NMR restraints
(no.)	 	
total restraints for
rMD calculations	772	
experimental NOE distance
restraints	211	
intranucleotide NOE
restraints	114	
internucleotide NOE
restraints	97	
restraints of 7amG
base	31	
empirical base pair
restraints	52	
empirical torsion
angle restraints	200	
backbone torsion
angle restraints	100	
deoxyribose torsion
angle restraints	100	
structure
refinement statistics	 	
no. of
distance restraint
violations	54	
no. of torsion restraint
violations	11	
total distance penalty/maximal
penalty (kcal/mol)	2.84/0.01	
total torsion penalty/maximal
penalty (kcal/mol)	1.13/0.30	
distant restraint
force field (kcal mol–1 Å–2)	32	
torsion restraint
force field (kcal mol–1 deg–2)	32	
NMR R factor
(Rx) (×10–2)	8.89	
intranucleotide NOEs	6.13	
internucleotide NOEs	12.6	
root-mean-square
deviation
of refined structures (on all atoms)	0.45	
The mixing time used to calculate Rx was 250 ms.

Rx =
∑|(a0)i1/6 – (ac)i1/6|/|(a0)i1/6|, where a0 and ac are the intensities
of observed (non-zero) and calculated NOE cross-peaks, respectively.

The precision of the rMD calculations
was determined by pairwise
root-mean-square deviation (rmsd) calculations of the emergent structures,
following potential energy minimization. The greatest pairwise rmsd
value was 0.45 Å. The accuracy of the rMD calculations with respect
to interproton distances was examined by calculations of theoretical
NMR intensities from the emergent average structure using CORMA (Figure ). At nucleotides
T9, C10, and T11 in the complementary
strand, where spectral overlap prevented more accurate distance measurements
from being obtained, the structure was less well refined, as was indicated
by the somewhat higher Rx values. Nevertheless,
the total sixth-root residual Rx value
for the OL-1b duplex was 0.089. The overall intra- and internucleotide
sixth-root residual Rx values were 0.061
and 0.126, respectively (Table ). Thus, the
calculated NOE intensities for the average structure showed satisfactory
agreement with the experimental NOE data.

Nucleotide-by-nucleotide Rx sixth-root
residuals calculated for the average refined structure of the OL-1b
duplex.

Structure of the 7amG-Modified
DNA Duplex
The average
energy-minimized structure emergent from the rMD calculations was
a right-handed duplex with the 7amG aminomethyl moiety located in
the major groove (Figures  and ). The cationic amine was 2.8 Å from the major groove
face of the modified guanine and was in plane with the X5:C8 base pair. Watson–Crick base pairing at the
X5:C8 base pair was intact. No changes in Watson–Crick
base pairing were observed elsewhere in the duplex. Figure  shows base stacking interactions within the central
segment of the OL-1b duplex. The presence of the 7amG modification
did not substantially alter base stacking interactions with either
the 5′-neighboring A4:T9 base pair or
with the 3′-neighboring C6:G7 base pair.
The results of helicoidal analysis for the OL-1b duplex conducted
with Curves+ are provided in Tables S6
and S7 and Figure S1 of the .

Expanded view of the average structure obtained from the rMD calculations
of the OL-1b duplex, showing base stacking interactions: (top) stacking
of base pair A4:T9 above base pair X5:C8 and (bottom) stacking of base pair X5:C8 above base pair C6:G7. The X5 base is colored red.

Thermodynamic Analysis
A series of temperature-dependent
NMR experiments were performed monitoring the Watson–Crick
base-paired guanine N1H and thymine N3H imino proton resonances (Figure ). In the OL-1b duplex, the X5:C8 base pair N1H imino proton resonance remained sharp at 55
°C, which was consistent with the stabilization effect of 7amG. In addition, in the OL-1b duplex at the 5′-flanking
A4:T9 base pair, the N3H imino proton resonance
was visible at 45 °C, while it was broadened in the unmodified
OL-1a duplex. A similar effect was observed for the G3:C10 N1H imino proton, which was visible in the modified OL-1b
duplex but broadened at 45 °C in the OL-1a duplex. At 65 °C,
neither duplex was completely denatured, which was consistent with
thermal melting UV experiments. The temperature
dependencies on the line widths for base pairs of the unmodified and
modified duplexes are compared in Figure S2 of the .

Expansions of 1H NMR spectra
showing the imino proton
resonances as a function of temperature for (A) the OL-1a duplex and
(B) the OL-1b duplex. The X5 imino resonance is colored
red. The 600 MHz spectra were collected at 15 °C.

Base Pair Opening
To quantitatively
examine base pair
opening, the transfer of magnetization from water after variable times
was followed by the observation of the guanine N1H and thymine N3H
imino protons at 15 °C. The imino
proton exchange rates were measured in the absence or presence of
added ammonia base catalyst, (Figure ). In general, the exchange of nucleic acid imino protons
with solvent follows a two-state model in which the base pair undergoes
a conformational change from a closed to an open state, in which the
chemical exchange occurs. The base pair
opened state is exchange competent because the imino proton is accessible
to proton acceptors present in solution. As described by Russu and
co-workers,, in the EX1 regime, the concentration
of proton acceptors is high enough for rapid exchange from the open
state (kex,open ≫ kcl), so chemical exchange occurs at each opening event
and kex = kop. In the EX2 regime, where the concentration of base catalyst is
low (kex,open ≪ kcl), the rate of exchange from the open state is proportional
to the observed exchange rate and proton acceptor.,

Plots of imino proton exchange rates, kex, obtained by monitoring the transfer of magnetization
from water
as a function of added ammonia base catalyst. (A) The left panel shows
base pair G3:C10 in the OL-1a duplex, and the
right panel shows base pair G3:C10 in the OL-1b
duplex. (B) The left panel shows base pair A4:T9 in the OL-1a duplex, and the right panel shows base pair A4:T9 in the OL-1b duplex. (C) The left panel shows base
pair G5:C8 in the OL-1a duplex, and the right
panel shows base pair X5:C8 in the OL-1b duplex.
(D) The left panel shows base pair C6:G7 in
the OL-1a duplex, and the right panel shows base pair C6:G7 in the OL-1b duplex.

The OL-1b DNA duplex contained the protonated 7amG modification,
and we desired to minimize the potential for deprotonation of the
latter. Consequently, we decided to work at pH 8. The work of Russu
and co-workers− provided precedent. However, at pH 8, the concentration of ammonia
base that could be attained during the course of the titrations was
limited. During the titrations, the concentration of ammonia base
was calculated taking into account the pKa of ammonia at 15 °C and the pH. The samples contained triethanolamine as an internal standard, allowing
the pH to be monitored, in situ. The pH remained
within the range of 8.0–8.2 during the course of the titrations.
Additional titrations were conducted on the unmodified OL-1a duplex
at pH 9. For the 7amG nucleotide in the OL-1b duplex, the N7 purine
has been replaced with a carbon atom. Consequently, NMR was used to
examine the imino proton pKa values for
the OL-1b duplex. For the 7amG nucleotide, the N1H imino proton pKa was 9.5, somewhat greater than the typical
guanine pKa of 9.2. The 7amG nucleotide
did not alter the imino proton pKa values
of the neighboring base pairs.

Figure  shows imino proton exchange rates
measured in the absence or presence of added ammonia base catalyst
for base pairs G3:C10, A4:T9, G5:C8, and C6:G7 in
the OL-1a duplex and base pairs G3:C10, A4:T9, X5:C8, and C6:G7 in the OL-1b duplex. The initial NMR spectra were
collected in the absence of ammonia. For both duplexes, OL-1a and
OL-1b, it was observed that the measured kex rates increased most rapidly for base pair A4:T9 as ammonia was added. Of the three G:C base pairs that were monitored,
the measured kex rates increased most
rapidly for base pair G3:C10, which was located
between two A:T base pairs. The two central core G:C base pairs, G5:C8 and C6:G7, showed only
small increases in kex over the course
of the ammonia titrations (Figure ). With
the exception of base pair G3:C10 in the unmodified
OL-1a duplex, a linear relation between the ammonia catalyst concentration
and kex was observed in all instances.
This indicated the presence of the EX2 regime,, for which the concentration of base catalyst was low (kex,open ≪ kcl), and
the rate of exchange from the open state was proportional to the observed
exchange rate and proton acceptor. For these base pairs at 15 °C
and pH 8, chemical exchange was the rate-limiting step and the EX1
base pair opening-limited exchange regime, was not achieved at the highest ammonia concentrations that could
be attained. Therefore, only equilibrium constants for base pair opening
were determined, by fitting the exchange rates as a function of ammonia
concentration as described by eq ., The exception was base pair G3:C10 in the
unmodified OL-1a duplex (Figure ). For this
base pair, data at low concentrations of ammonia, which exhibited
a linear relation between the ammonia catalyst concentration and kex, were fit to eq .
At the highest concentrations of ammonia, the imino proton exchange
rate for base pair G3:C10 in the unmodified
OL-1a duplex appeared to be approaching the EX2 regime. Thus, the kex data over the complete range of ammonia concentrations
for base pair G3:C10 in the unmodified duplex
were also fit to the equation kex = (kopkB[B])/(kcl + kB[B]). Figure S3 of the  shows representative time courses of transfer of
solvent magnetization to the imino protons.

At 15 °C, the
equilibrium constants for base pair opening
at base pair X5:C8 in the OL-1b duplex and base
pair G5:C8 in the OL-1a duplex were both 0.2
× 106. Thus, the aminomethyl moiety in the OL-1b duplex
did not alter the thermodynamics of base pair opening at this site.
However, the thermodynamics of base pair opening at both the 5′-neighbor
base pair A4:T9 and the next nearest 5′-neighbor
base pair G3:C10 were altered by the aminomethyl
moiety. The equilibrium constant for base pair opening, αKop, for base pair A4:T9 in the modified OL-1b duplex was 8.8 × 106, as compared
to the αKop value of 13.8 ×
106 for base pair A4:T9 in the unmodified
OL-1a duplex. This suggested that the overall fraction of time the
A4:T9 base pair of the modified OL-1a duplex
was exposed to the solution was reduced, reflecting a reduced probability
of imino proton exchange. Similarly, in the modified OL-1b duplex,
αKop for the G3·C10 base pair was 3.0 × 106 versus 4.1 ×
106 for the same base pair in the unmodified OL-1a duplex.

Discussion
The incorporation of 7amG into the OL-1b duplex
precisely positions
a cationic charge into the major groove of DNA. This allows the study
of thermodynamic and conformational changes induced by site-specific
modulation of DNA groove electrostatics. Thermodynamic parameters
for the modified OL-1b duplex obtained by UV melting and differential
scanning calorimetry (DSC) analyses revealed
that the 7amG substitution in the OL-1b duplex was stabilizing relative
to the unmodified OL-1a duplex (ΔΔG =
2.2 kcal/mol), which was attributed to an enthalpic effect (ΔΔH = 14.7 kcal/mol). This contrasts
with nonspecific electrostatic effects, which are generally believed
to be entropy-driven.

Structural Basis for Stabilization
of DNA by 7amG Substitution
The stabilization of the 7amG-modified
OL-1b duplex not only involves the modified
X5:C8 base pair but also extends in the 5′-direction
relative to X5, to involve the A4:T9 and G3:C8 base pairs. Qualitatively, this
can be observed in NMR spectra collected as a function of temperature
(Figure ). For the modified OL-1b duplex,
the thymine N3H imino proton resonance of the A4:T9 base pair remains visible at 45 °C, whereas in the unmodified
OL-1a duplex, this resonance is exchange broadened at 45 °C.
Likewise, for the modified OL-1b duplex at 45 °C, the guanine
N1H imino proton resonance of base pair G3:C8 is visible, but for the unmodified Ol-1a duplex, the guanine N1H
imino proton resonance of the G3:C8 base pair
is broadened.

The exchange data provide a quantitative measure
of the stabilization of the modified OL-1b duplex at the X5:C8 base pair and extending
in the 5′-direction. At 15 °C, no change in αKop is observed at the X5:C8 modified base pair (Table ), which suggests
that the four G:C base pairs comprising the central core of the OL-1b
duplex are stable. This is consistent with the Tm of 65 °C measured for this duplex. In contrast, a significant change is observed for the 5′-neighbor
A4:T9 base pair (Table ), for which the value of αKop decreases
from 13.8 × 106 to 8.8 × 106 in the
presence of the cationic amine at base pair X5:C8. Likewise, at base pair G3:C10, the value
of αKop decreases from 4.1 ×
106 to 3.0 × 106 in the presence of the
cationic amine tethered at base pair X5:C8.
The opposite effect occurs in the 3′-direction. Thus, at base
pair C6:G7, the value of αKop increases from 0.2 × 106 to 0.4 ×
106 in the presence of the cationic amine tethered at base
pair X5:C8. This may be explained by weakened
nonspecific cation binding at base pair C6:G7 in the presence of the cationic amine tethered at base pair X5:C8, caused by coulombic repulsion.

Calculated Imino Proton Exchange Rates
in the Absence of Added Catalyst and Equilibrium Constants for Base
Pair Opening, for Base Pairs G3:C10, A4:T9, G5:C8, and C6:G7 in the OL-1a and OL-1b Duplexes
 	kex (s–1)	αKop ×
106	
base	OL-1a	OL-1b	OL-1a	OL-1b	
G3	0.8 ± 0.1	0.5 ± 0.1	4.1 ± 0.2	3.0 ± 0.04	
T9	1.1 ± 0.05	0.5 ± 0.03	13.8 ± 0.1	8.8 ± 0.2	
G5	0.5 ± 0.06	0.4 ± 0.04	0.20 ± 0.002	0.20 ± 0.004	
G7	0.7 ± 0.08	0.5 ± 0.03	0.20 ± 0.002	0.40 ± 0.007	
Measured at 15 °C.

The observed exchange rate without
addition of ammonia catalyst.

Structure of the 7amG-Modified OL-1b Duplex
The location
of the cationic amine of 7amG 2.8 Å from the major groove face
of the modified guanine and in plane with the X5:C8 base pair is within the range observed in crystal structures
for diffusible cations,− and cationic groups on basic amino acid residues of DNA-interacting
proteins.− The location of the tethered NH3+ ion is such that it cannot make a salt bridge contact with the phosphate
backbone because the nearest phosphate oxygen is &gt;5 Å away.
Moreover,
the cationic amine is not located within H-bonding distance of the
flanking base pairs. If H-bonding were an important factor in the
stabilization, then this would have been observed for the hydroxymethyl
analogue. This was not the case. There
is also no evidence of a change in major groove dimension because
of the collapse of the phosphate backbone onto the tethered cation,
as has been predicted for divalent cations as a source of DNA bending.

The NMR data indicate that the site-specific
positioning of this cationic amine does not greatly alter the structure
of the OL-1b duplex, as compared to the unmodified OL-1a duplex. This
suggests that the enthalpic stabilization of the OL-1b duplex by the
7amG modification is not due to intrinsic
differences in either base stacking or Watson–Crick hydrogen
bonding (Figure ). Figure  reveals only minor chemical shift changes for the base aromatic
and deoxyribose H1′ protons of the two duplexes. A comparison
of the chemical shifts of the Watson–Crick imino base-paired
protons and amino base-paired protons (Figure ) also shows minimal differences between the OL-1a and OL-1b duplexes,
consistent with the conclusion that the site-specific positioning
of the tethered amine in the major groove has a negligible effect
upon the structure of this duplex in solution.

Site-Specific Positioning
of Cations in the DNA Major Groove
Studies of the regioselectivity
of DNA alkylation at the N7-dG
position by a series of alkylating agents have revealed that compounds
reacting with DNA via methanediazonium ion (CH3N2+) intermediates, such as methylnitrosourea (MNU), produce sequence-dependent alkylation patterns.− Similar patterns have been observed for nitrogen mustards,N-nitrosoureas,, and triazenes. These effects are muted
if the alkylation is conducted in ssDNA versus dsDNA. Collectively, these data suggest that at the microscopic
level, the electrostatic landscape of DNA exhibits major groove sequence
specificity, in addition to the counterion
condensation theory of overall DNA charge neutralization,− which is not predicted to exhibit sequence specificity.

Braunlin
and co-workers,, have shown that di- and trivalent ions, including Mg2+, Ca2+, and Co3+, preferentially associate
with the major groove of DNA at dG:dC base pairs, and they have proposed
that neighboring dG’s provide sequence-specific divalent cation
binding sites because they can exploit the spatial relationship between
the N7 and O6 atoms of the dG base. High-resolution crystallographic experiments
often allow the observation of specific cations in the major groove
near dG:dC base pairs and in the minor groove near dA:dT base pairs. The self-complementary DDD has been crystallized
in the presence of Tl+, providing the precise placement
of site-specific cations in the major groove, which are at locations similar to that observed herein for the 7amG-modified
OL-1b duplex.

The replacement of the N7 atom on guanine with
carbon alters the
electronic properties of the heterocycle. It also eliminates a major
groove cation-binding site and removes a potential hydrogen bond acceptor
site. Thus, one would anticipate that the introduction of a 7-deaza-dG
nucleotide might destabilize the duplex. This has been demonstrated
for the [d(GXAATTCC)]2 duplex, where X = 7-deaza-dG. Indeed,
incorporation of 7-deaza-dG into the DDD [d(CGCGAATTCXCG)]2, where X = 7-deaza-dG, revealed a thermodynamic effect at the 5′-neighbor
base pair, attributed to changes in hydration and cation organization. In contrast, the insertion of 7amG into the
OL-1b duplex creates 100% occupancy of a cation binding site adjacent
to base pair X5:C8.

Summary
The consequences
of site-specifically placing a cationic 7-aminomethyl-7-deaza-2′-deoxyguanosine
(7amG) into d(GAGAXCGCTCTC)2, where X = 7amG, have been explored.
The tethered cationic amines are in plane with the modified base pairs.
The X5:C8 base pair is stabilized. Additionally,
the two 5′-neighboring A4:T9 and G3:C10 base pairs are stabilized with respect to
the exchange of their imino protons with water. The equilibrium constant
for base pair opening decreases for base pair A4:T9 as compared to that for base pair A4:T9 in the unmodified duplex, indicating that the overall fraction of
base pair A4:T9 in the open state of the modified
duplex decreases. A smaller decrease in the equilibrium constant for
base pair opening is observed for base pair G3:C10. The fact that the enthalpic stabilization of the modified OL-1b
duplex not only involves the modified
X5:C8 base pair but also extends in the 5′-direction
to involve the A4:T9 and G3:C8 base pairs provides a new example of cation-mediated sequence-specific
modulation of DNA stability.

Supporting Information Available
1H chemical shifts
of the nonexchangeable protons of the OL-1b duplex (Table S1), NOE
distance restraints used for the structural refinement of the OL-1b
duplex (Table S2), backbone restraints generated for the OL-1b duplex
used in rMD calculations (Table S3), deoxyribose restraints generated
for the OL-1b duplex used in rMD calculations (Table S4), base pair
restraints generated for the OL-1b duplex used in rMD calculations
(Table S5), base pairing and base stacking helicoidal parameters of
the refined structure of the OL-1b duplex (Table S6), backbone torsion
angles of the refined OL-1b duplex with averaged values from two symmetry-related
strands (Table S7), backbone torsion angles of the refined OL-1b duplex
(Figure S1), line widths of the guanine N1H and thymine N3H imino
proton resonances as a function of temperature (Figure S2), and representative
time courses of transfer of solvent magnetization to the imino protons
for the OL-1a and OL-1b duplexes (Figure S3). This material is available
free of charge via the Internet at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bi400695r_si_001.pdf

This
work was
supported by National Institutes of Health (NIH) Grants P01 CA-160032
and R01 ES-05509 (M.P.S.), R01 CA-76049 (B.G.), and R01 CA-29088 (B.G.).
Additional support for core instrumentation was provided by NIH center
grants P30 ES-00267, Vanderbilt University Center in Molecular Toxicology,
and P30 CA-068485, Vanderbilt-Ingram Cancer Center. Funding for NMR
was supplied by NIH Grants S10 RR-05805 and S10 RR-025677 and National
Science Foundation Grant DBI 0922862, the latter funded by the American
Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law 111-5), and by Vanderbilt
University.

The authors declare no
competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
We thank
Prof. Carmelo J. Rizzo and Ms. Albena Kozekova for
assistance with the synthesis of the 7amG-modified oligodeoxynucleotide.

