As a component of the soluble N-ethylmaleimide-sensitive factor attachment protein receptor
(SNARE) complex, syntaxin (STX) participates in the regulation of
neurotransmitter release into the synaptic cleft by participating
in the process of synaptic vesicle fusion with the membrane of the
nerve cell. The sequence alignment for
the 1A and 1B isoforms of STX (Figure ) identifies
the known functional segments of this plasma membrane-associated multidomain
protein: the N-terminus stretch, the triply helical (Habc) regulatory
domain, a SNARE motif, and a membrane-anchoring C-terminal transmembrane
(TM) segment which is connected to the SNARE fragment through a linker
region.

Sequence alignment of two human syntaxin
1 isoforms: Syntaxin 1A (top row) and Syntaxin 1B (bottom row). Sequence
identity of these two isoforms is 83%. For completeness, the alignment
also shows the location of different domains of syntaxin.

Two structurally distinct conformations of STX
are known (see refs ( and ) and references therein). During vesicular fusion, STX is considered
to be in the “open” conformation in which its SNARE
motif forms an extended and intertwined four α-helix bundle
structure with other members of the SNARE complex (SNAP-25 and synaptobrevin
2).,, Recent X-ray structural
analysis and molecular dynamics (MD) simulations of such a neuronal
SNARE core revealed that the helical region on STX continuously extends
from the SNARE motif toward the C-terminus and includes both the linker
and the TM segments.

In the structurally
“closed” state, STX can bind the cytosolic protein Munc18a,
one of the proteins known to regulate the vesicular fusion process
(for reviews see refs ( and )). The refined X-ray structure of a Munc18a-STX complex showed that in the “closed” state,
the SNARE motif of STX is folded onto the Habc domain and is involved
in interaction with Munc18a. In addition, the stretch of the N-terminus
segment (residues 2–9) of STX was found in the crystallographic
structure to be partially helical and in contact with Munc18a.

The transitions of STX between these structurally different open
and closed states, are not well characterized, yet
it is clear that in the open conformation, STX can be anchored to
the plasma membrane only through the TM domain, whereas the rest of
the protein is expected to extend away from the lipid bilayer. In
the closed state, however, the Habc domain, the SNARE motif, and even
the N-terminus stretch could all interact with the plasma membrane.
The consequences of such juxtamembrane positioning are likely to be
very important functionally because STX has been implicated in the
regulation of neurotransmitter transporters (NTs) such as the dopamine
transporter (DAT),− as well as of NET and SERT, the norepinephrine and
serotonin transporters in the same family., Furthermore, phosphorylation of STX at S14 in the N-terminus segment,
by casein kinase-2 (CK2),− has been suggested to have dramatic effects on DAT/STX
localization and subsequently on DAT synaptic transmission,− all of which indicates that during cell signaling STX is engaged
in regulated, functionally relevant interactions with DAT through
its own N-terminus. Steric considerations indicate that for such interaction
to take place, STX must adopt conformations that are similar to the
closed state, so as to allow the N-terminal region to achieve a juxtamembrane
position in which it can interact with the N-terminus of DAT.

The proximity of the STX cytosolic domain to the membrane may also
impact the organization and function of STX through interactions with
membrane components. Thus, several studies have identified a regulatory
role for highly charged phosphatidylinositol 4,5-biphosphate (PIP2) lipids in the clustering of STX in lipid domains.− Specifically, when STX construct including residues 183–288
(STX183–288) was reconstituted into model lipid
membranes and investigated with fluorescence quenching or FRET experiments,
the cluster formation by this construct was shown to be dependent
on PIP2 and cholesterol content; addition of as little
as 1–5% PIP2 lipid reversed cholesterol-driven STX
clustering. Interestingly, a follow-up
study by the same authors showed that
PIP2 lipids are capable of disrupting STX183–288 clustering even in the presence of physiological concentrations
of weakly charged (−1 charge) phosphatidylserine (PS) lipid,
which was attributed to the strong electrostatic forces between acidic
PIP2 lipids and the positively charged stretch K259-A260-R261-R262-K263-K264
(KARRKK) in the STX linker region of the protein.,,, But because
these studies utilized STX construct lacking both the Habc and the
N-terminal region, the authors could not address the consequences
of electrostatic interactions between PIP2 lipids and basic
residues residing in these domains of STX (Figure ). This is taken up in a more recent study, in PC12 cells,
that confirmed the importance of electrostatic protein–lipid
interactions by showing that the electrostatic forces between STX
and PIP2 can drive STX sequestration into PIP2-enriched domains. Reconstitution of
PIP2 lipids and the C-terminal part of STX (residues 257–288,
STXTM) into giant unilamellar vesicles resulted in segregation
of STXTM and PIP2 into microdomains, and coarse-grained
MD simulations showed spontaneous PIP2 lipid-driven STXTM sequestration. Still, details
about STX-PIP2 lipid interactions in a structural context
of the full-length protein are missing despite the detailed experimental− and computational, explorations.

To gain such
insights, assess the mechanistic involvement of PIP2 lipids
in functionally important STX phosphorylation, and develop experimentally
testable hypotheses, we considered (i) the specific mechanistic phenotypes,
and (ii) the functionally relevant structural elements in STX, that
can be modulated by phosphorylation or PIP2 depletion.
To this end we carried out a quantitative evaluation of the role of
interactions between STX and PIP2 lipids in determining
both the conformational preferences of STX as a whole, and the disposition
of its N-terminal domain in particular (since this region contains
the S14 residue targeted by the CK2 kinase). We applied a multiscale
computational protocol, which combines iteratively the recently developed
mean-field mesoscale approach to model protein–lipid interactions− with atomistic MD simulations, to study the dynamics of a full length
STX protein model in its “closed” conformation, embedded
in PIP2-rich, or PIP2-depleted, lipid membranes.
This approach allowed us to sample efficiently both long-time lipid
kinetics and STX conformational dynamics.

We observed demixing
of PIP2 lipids in the membrane bilayer containing 5% PIP2, and a segregation of PIP2 lipids around STX that
was driven by their strong electrostatic interactions with STX at
specific sites (our simulations established that as many as five PIP2 lipid molecules can simultaneously bind STX). The location
of the critical interaction sites was not confined to the juxtamembrane
region of STX (TM segment/linker), but also included the N-terminus
stretch and the Habc domain. By comparing STX conformational dynamics
in PIP2-rich and PIP2-depleted bilayers we established
that the segregation of PIP2 lipids has a profound effect
on the positioning of the STX N-terminal segment with respect to the
membrane/water interface, stabilizing it in a conformation where the
Serine14 targeted by the CK2 kinase is highly accessible. In contrast,
we show here that if the electrostatic interactions are diminished
or eliminated, e.g., for a Lys2Ala (K2A) STX mutant designed to test
the findings, or in simulations of STX in pure POPC membranes in the
absence of PIP2, then the STX N-terminus adopts structural
conformations in which S14 is occluded and less accessible to the
kinase. These predictions from the computational study suggest that
the ability of CK2 to phosphorylate STX at S14 is dependent on the
interaction with PIP2-rich domains of the cell membrane
and would be diminished upon decreasing cellular levels of PIP2.

Methods and Procedures
Atomistic Model of Full-Length STX
The complete structure
of full-length STX has not been determined, but much structural information
for different regions of STX is available from a number of X-ray crystallography
and NMR studies.,− Our atomistic model of the full-length Syntaxin 1B in a “closed”
state was constructed with the use of data from several high-resolution
X-ray structures of STX complexes, complemented with results from
structure-prediction methods (see below). The sequence of syntaxin
1B is highly conserved among species (i.e., human, mouse, and rat),
and the 1A and 1B isoforms of human syntaxin share ∼83% sequence
conservation (Figure ). For these reasons,
we simplify notations by using the STX abbreviation throughout the
text to refer to both 1A and 1B isoforms of syntaxin.

The template
for the full-length STX in a closed state consisted of two specific
X-ray structures of STX (Figure A,B): One from its complex with the neuronal SNARE proteins (PDBid: 3HD7) and another from its complex with
the Munc18a protein (PDBid: 3C98). In the 3HD7 structure
(see Figure A), the STX C-terminus region
(from residue 188 to 286 including the SNARE motif, linker region,
and the TM segment) is in an “open” extended helical
conformation and in complex with other SNARE proteins. In the 3C98
structure, the 27–248 residue stretch of STX, which includes
the Habc domain and part of the SNARE motif (see Figure B and the alignment in Figure ), is
in a “closed” state and in contact with the Munc18a
protein. In addition, this structure also includes a resolved piece
of the STX N-terminal region (residues 2–9) found to be near
helical and interacting with Munc18a.

The “closed” state model
of syntaxin was built by combining two high resolution X-ray structures
(3HD7 and 3C98) with the model of the N-terminus predicted with Rosetta.
(A) In 3HD7, the stretch of residues 188–286 of syntaxin 1A
(yellow) forms an extended intertwined helical bundle with other SNARE
proteins, Snap-25 and synaptobrevin-2 (cyan). The structural information
from 3HD7 was used to model residues 188–245 (shown in space
fill rendering in yellow in panel A). (B) In 3C98, syntaxin 1A is
in the “closed” state (yellow) and in complex with Munc18a
protein (cyan). Residue segments 2–9 and 27–248 have
been resolved in this structure and are shown without Munc18a. Panel
B also illustrates how the “closed” state model of STX
(pink) superimposes on the structural model in 3C98. (C) Fold prediction
from Rosetta for the N-terminus region of STX. Upper and lower panels
show alignments of the predicted structure for the N-terminal 1–26
residue stretch (pink) with X-ray structures of syntaxin 1 and syntaxin
4 N-peptides (yellow), respectively. Crystallographic models for syntaxin
1 (residues 2–9) and syntaxin 4 (residues 1–19) N-peptides
were taken from PDBid 3C98 and 2PJX, respectively. The root-mean-square deviation (rmsd) for the aligned
helical regions was 1 Å for syntaxin 1 and 2.3 Å for syntaxin
4. (D) Orientation of the “closed” state STX (cartoon)
with respect to the lipid membrane (lines). Intracellular and extracellular
leaflets are top and bottom leaflets respectively. The membranes consisted
of either mixture of neuronal lipids (5:45:50 PIP2/POPE/POPC
on the intracellular leaflet and 30:70 sphingomyelin/POPC on the extracellular
leaflet, referred to as the PM membrane in the text) or contained
only POPC lipid, ∼800 lipids in total. (E) Electrostatic potential
isosurfaces for STX at +25 eV (positive, blue) and −25 eV (negative,
red) levels in the same orientation as in panel D. The electrostatic
calculation was performed using APBS software version 4.0.

The Modeller suite of programs was used to combine the two structure components of STX,
3C98 (residues 27–248) and 3HD7 (residues 245–286) into
a “closed state”-like fold of the full-length protein.
(We note that combining these crystallographic models using different
criteria, e.g., residues 27–190 from 3C98 and residues 188–286
from 3HD7, produces an extended conformation of the protein, consistent
with the “open” state). To complete the “closed
STX model”, we built the crystallographically disordered portion
of the STX N-terminus region (residues 1–26) using the knowledge-based
structure prediction tool Rosetta. Structure
predictions from Rosetta were filtered through clustering, and 1000
different structures were obtained and clustered according to a criterion
of maximization of common structure conservation (calculated with
the in-house algorithm RMSDTT now implemented
in VMD). Clusters including the largest
numbers of conformations (usually 2–3 top clusters for each
construct) were thus identified and further refined to find the most
conserved motifs within each cluster.

Figure C shows the predicted fold of the STX N-terminus, and Figure B shows the alignment of the modeled full-length
STX with the STX in the 3C98 structure, illustrating not only the
very similar fold of the Habc and SNARE domains, but also the structural
correspondence between the N-terminal residues 2–9 in our predicted
model and in the 3C98 structure (Figure C,
upper panel). Furthermore, we find that the computationally derived
model for the N-terminus is similar to the structure (PDBid: 2PJX) of the N-peptide
from syntaxin 4 (STX4) protein, which has high sequence similarity
(∼70%) to the N-terminal stretch of STX that was crystallized
in the complex with Munc18c. As shown
in Figure C (lower panel), the 1–19
stretch of the STX4 N-peptide from 2PJX aligns well with the predicted
structure (with a root-mean square deviation (rmsd) of ∼2.3
Å for backbone atoms of residues 4–16). Importantly, we
note that the predicted fold of the full-length STX brings the N-terminus
to a juxtamembrane position near the TM segment/linker region (Figure D). As shown in Figure E
and discussed below, the proximity of the N-terminus and TM stretch
to the membrane, generates a large positive electrostatic potential
near the bilayer surface, which is thus expected to have a strong
effect on PIP2 lipid sequestration.

An Iterative Approach Using Coarse-Grained and Atomistic Descriptions
to Quantify Interactions between STX and PIP2 Lipids
The process of PIP2 lipid segregation near STX was modeled
with an iterative approach combining all-atom MD simulations with
mesoscale simulations using the self-consistent mean-field model,
CGM, that we have formulated and implemented as described previously.− In our combined iterative approach, CGM is used first to calculate
the steady state lipid distributions around the protein, and the corresponding
free energies, and the resulting equilibrium lipid distributions constitute
the starting configuration of the STX/membrane complex in the subsequent
all-atom MD simulations (see below).

In the CMG approach a coarse-grained
representation of proteins and membranes is obtained by using information
about the material properties of proteins, membranes, and their lipid
components, as well as their interactions. The resulting coarse-grained
model treats the membrane as a two-dimensional, tensionless, incompressible,
low-dielectric medium, whereas the protein is treated in 3D full atomistic
detail, and the entire protein/membrane complex is immersed in high-dielectric
solution media.−

The first step in the mesoscale simulation
is the definition of the steady state of membrane-associated proteins
with the degrees of freedom (i.e., electrostatics, lipid mixing) determined
self-consistently from the minimization of the governing mean-field
based free energy functional F.− This functional
includes contributions from the relevant degrees of freedom and depends
on local lipid component densities φ(x,y). The composition field φ(x,y)
relates to the surface charge densities σ(x,y) through σ(x,y) = (e/a)φ(x,y)z(x,y), where z(x,y) denotes valency
of the lipid at (x,y), a is the area per lipid headgroup, and e represents
the elementary charge. As demonstrated earlier,, minimization of F with respect to concentrations
of the mobile ions in the solution (which contribute to the electrostatic
interactions) leads to a nonlinear Poisson–Boltzmann (NLPB)
equation:The solution of eq  yields the reduced electrostatic potential Φ in space (λ
being the Debye length of the electrolyte solution). This electrostatic
potential is self-consistently dependent on the local lipid concentrations
through the entropic penalty due to lipid segregation (demixing)− on the upper and the lower surfaces of the membrane. Within CGM
a self-consistent search for the free energy minimum is carried out
by linking the electrostatic potential Φ and the spatial charged-lipid
compositions φ on each leaflet of the membrane, to the respective
electrochemical potentials μ through the Cahn–Hilliard
(CH) equation:

Here Dlip is the lipid diffusion coefficient that should not affect the equilibrium
state.

To obtain a quantitative description of STX/PIP2 interactions in different functional states of STX, the CGM approach
for the multicomponent membrane is iteratively combined with atomistic
MD simulations that start from the lipid compositions in the steady
state lipid distributions around STX predicted from the CGM calculations.
The MD simulations probe the conformational changes in the protein
in response to lipid rearrangements. New lipid distributions that
correspond to the conformational changes in STX are then obtained
by transforming back the atomistic representations into coarse-grained
descriptions for CGM minimization. The iterations between CGM and
atomistic MD calculations are done until convergence is achieved.

All Atom MD Simulations
The all atom representations
of the STX/membrane complex were constructed with the CHARMM-GUI membrane-builder
web-tool. To mimic a lipid composition
in typical plasma membrane, we chose
a compositionally asymmetric lipid bilayer (referred to throughout
as the “PM membrane”), with a composition of 5:45:50
PIP2/POPE(phosphatidylethanolamine)/POPC(phosphatidylcholine)
on the intracellular (IC) leaflet, and 30:70 sphingomyelin (SM)/POPC
on the extracellular (EC) leaflet. Because PIP2 and SM
lipids are not part of the standard CHARMM-GUI lipid library, an atomistic
lipid bilayer was assembled first as a homogeneous mixture of 5:45:50
DAPC(diarachidoylphosphatidylcholine)/POPE/POPC lipids on one leaflet,
and 30:70 DPPC (dipalmitoylphosphatidylcholine)/POPC lipids on the
other leaflet. All DAPC and DPPC lipids where then replaced with PIP2 and sphingomyelin (SM) lipids respectively. On the basis
of the CGM results from the first iteration (Figure A,B), full-length STX was inserted into the PM bilayer such
that a single PIP2 lipid ended up positioned near (within
2 Å of) the R261/K264 pair of residues (shown in green in Figure C and also highlighted in Figure D), and four other PIP2 lipid molecules were positioned
at distance 6 Å &lt; d &lt; 10 Å from STX
(lipids depicted in yellow and pink in Figure C). Overall, the IC leaflet contained 396 lipids, and the EC leaflet
consisted of 400 lipids. The STX/PM complex was then solvated and
ionized with 0.1 M Na/Cl for electroneutrality, for a final count
of 321073 atoms in the system.

Multiscale modeling of the STX embedded
in PM (neuronal plasma membrane model). Panels (A, B) and (C, D) depict
coarse-grained and all-atom representations of the system, respectively.
In all the panels STX is shown in cartoon with Lys and Arg residues
highlighted in licorice. (A) Steady-state distribution of PIP2 lipids (colored shades represent ratios of local φ
and average φ0 lipid fraction values) from the CGM
minimization procedure. STX1–246 was used for this
calculation (see text), and the intracellular (IC) membrane leaflet
facing STX started with a uniform composition of φ0PIP2 = 0.05 and φ0POPC+POPE = 0.95. For clarity, only the part of the bilayer leaflet near the
protein is shown. (B) Similar to panel (A) but showing the segment
of the IC leaflet for which the CGM calculation predicts an excess
of PIP2 lipids (φ/φ0 &gt;1) at equilibrium. Several key Lys/Arg residues are highlighted.
(C) Initial placement of PIP2 lipids (shown in space-fill)
in the all-atom construct of STX in PM. On the basis of the findings
from the CGM minimization, one PIP2 (in green) was placed
within 2 Å of the R261/K264 residue pair. Two PIP2 lipids (in yellow) were located 6 Å away from the protein,
and two other PIP2 lipids (in pink) were positioned 10
Å away from STX. Bilayer leaflets are indicated by the phosphate
atoms in their lipid head-groups (shown in gold), and the rest of
the system is removed for clarity. (D) Zoom-in on the region where
the strongest electrostatic interaction between STX and PIP2 is expected. Color code is the same as in (C).

All MD simulations were performed with the NAnoscale
Molecular Dynamics (NAMD) suite using
constant temperature and pressure conditions with semi-isotropic pressure
coupling, and utilizing PME for long-range electrostatics. The all-atom CHARMM27 force field with CMAP
corrections for proteins, and the recently
improved CHARMM36 force fields for POPE and POPC lipids were used throughout. For SM and PIP2, we used CHARMM36-compatible all-atom force field parameter sets
described in refs () and (), respectively.
The Nose-Hoover Langevin piston method, was used to
control the target pressure with the LangevinPistonPeriod set to 100
fs and LangevinPistonDecay set to 50 fs. All MD simulations were performed
with rigidBonds allowing 2 fs time step. The simulated systems were
equilibrated for 5 ns following a procedure described recently. According to this protocol, the STX backbone
was initially fixed and then harmonically constrained, and water was
prevented from penetrating the protein TM-lipid interface. Constraints
were released gradually in four 300 ps-step MD simulations with decreasing
force constants of 1, 0.5, 0.1, and 0.01 kcal/(mol·Å2), respectively. Following this equilibration phase, the STX/PM
complex was simulated for 90 ns. In all MD simulations, STX was capped
with standard charged N- and C-termini.

Starting with CGM calculations
for the STX model and homogeneous lipid distributions of various compositions,
the iterative protocol was applied only for the IC leaflet because
charged PIP2 lipids (−4 charge at neutral pH) are not included in the EC leaflet (see above).
This was done by creating appropriate average fractions (i.e., φ0PIP2 = 0.05, φ0POPC+POPE = 0.95, corresponding to the average surface charge density of σ0 = −0.0031e). For simplicity, this
charged surface was assumed to remain planar in the course of the
CGM minimization.

According to the protocol, the protein, STX, was considered in full atomistic detail
throughout, with partial charge and atomic radii taken from the all-atom
CHARMM27 force field with CMAP corrections for proteins). To solve the NLPB eq  we considered only the 1–264 residue stretch of STX (STX1–264) that includes all the basic amino acids but excludes
most of the TM segment (Figure ). This partial
structure was used only in the CGM level simulations where the neglected
part of the TM domain is not expected to affect electrostatic interactions
of STX with PIP2.

MD Simulations of STX in POPC Membranes
STX was also
simulated in pure POPC membranes containing 710 lipids (270 052
atoms in total), using NAMD. The simulation protocol used was the
same as described above, and the system was simulated for 100 ns after
the initial equilibration phase (see above).

Simulations of the STX K2A Mutant in PM
All-atom MD
simulations of an STX K2A mutant (STXK2A) in the PM membrane
started with the K2A mutation carried out with VMD on the STX structure
used in the initial CGM minimization procedure (see above, and also
Figures  and ). The
starting distribution of lipids around STXK2A was taken
from the initial point of the wild type STX all-atom MD simulations
in PM mixture (Figure ). After solvating and
ionizing, the STXK2A/PM complex was simulated for 100 ns
beyond the initial equilibration phase, under the simulation conditions
identical to those described above.

Analysis of Atomistic Trajectories
Stability and convergence
of all three atomistic MD simulations (STX wild type in PM and in
POPC membranes, and the STX K2A mutant in PM) were monitored by tracking
the rmsd profiles for the protein in the respective simulations, which
were largely unchanged for the later halves of the trajectories (data
not shown).

Calculation of Solvent Accessible Surface Areas (SASA) from
All-Atom MD Trajectories
SASAs were calculated with the NACCESS
package. NACCESS implements the standard
solvent accessibility definition introduced by Lee and Richards which makes use of rolling a spherical probe
of rp radius on the van der Waals surface
of the protein. SASA for a particular atom on the protein is then
calculated as the area on the surface of a sphere of radius R, on each point of which the center of the probe molecule
can be placed in contact with this atom without penetrating any other
atoms of the protein. The radius R is defined as
a sum of the van der Waals radius of the atom and rp.

Quantification of Helix Distortions in All-Atom MD Trajectories
Structural perturbations related to helix kink or twist in STX
TM segment were quantified with the ProKink package in the publicly available software Simulaid. Geometric definitions and the computational
protocol implemented in ProKink are as described previously.,

Results
First CGM/MD Round in the Iterative Protocol
CGM 1
The NLPB equation was solved numerically with
the APBS multigrid solver on 1 Å-spaced cubic 256 Å3 mesh as described previously,, considering
0.1 M ionic solution of monovalent counterions (corresponding to λ
= 9.65 Å Debye length), and using a dielectric constant of 2
for membrane interior and protein, and 80 for the solution. The STX1–264 was positioned initially near the membrane so
that the minimum distance between STX1–264 and the
lipid surface was 2 Å (Figure ).

The PIP2 lipid distribution around STX is illustrated
in Figure  for the equilibrium conditions
obtained with the CGM approach; it is inhomogeneous. The obvious segregation
of PIP2 is confined to the membrane region near the linker
segment of STX (dark shading in Figure ).
Specifically, the strongest effect on PIP2 lipid sequestration
seems to come from the electrostatic interactions with residues R261
and K264 that are part of the KARRKK basic stretch on STX. This stretch
has been implicated in electrostatic interactions with PIP2 lipids− and has been shown recently through mutation studies to regulate
STX clustering.,

On the basis of the lateral
area of the membrane region where aggregation of PIP2 lipids
have been predicted from our CGM minimization (Figure B) and assuming a = 65 Å2 for the area per lipid headgroup, we estimated from the distribution
pattern in Figure B that the number of PIP2 lipids sequestered by STX in the conformation used in these
initial CGM calculations is between one and two. Next, we used this
information as described in  to build
the cognate all-atom STX/membrane complex used as the starting point
for the subsequent atomistic MD simulations in this first iteration
(MD 1).

MD 1
Figure A shows a final
snapshot of STX in PM after 90 ns of all-atom MD simulations, and
Figures B–C quantify the dynamics of
PIP2 aggregation around STX during the MD trajectory. This
atomistic simulation was initiated from the configuration of STX/PM
complex from the preceding CMG simulations as described above (see
also Figure ). During the MD simulations,
a single STX establishes stable interactions simultaneously with five
different PIP2 molecules: in addition to one PIP2 lipid (designated as PIP2 “4” in Figure ) that was initially placed near the STX linker
region, two other PIP2 molecules (“2” and
“3” in Figure ) approached STX
within the first few nanoseconds of simulations. One of them (PIP2 “2”) binds to residue K55 in the Habc domain,
and the other (PIP2 “3”) to the N-terminal
stretch of residues 1–3. Interestingly, PIP2 “3”
and PIP2 “4” come together near STX due to
electrostatic interactions with residues in both the N-terminus (M1/K2/D3)
and the linker region (R261/K264). Two additional PIP2 lipids
(“1” and “5” in Figure ) are sequestered by STX after ∼70 ns. PIP2 “1” establishes interactions with K181 (residue connecting
Habc domain to the SNARE motif, see Figure ), whereas PIP2 “5” is in contact with K255/K259/R262
residue triplet in the linker region.

STX interacts simultaneously with five
PIP2 molecules. (A) Snapshot after 90 ns of atomistic MD
simulations of STX/PM complex, showing five different PIP2 lipids (in space fill representation) bound to STX (in cartoon).
Key basic residues of STX are highlighted, and PIP2 lipids
are numbered for designation purposes. Membrane leaflets are traced
by their lipid phosphate atoms (in gold) and for clarity, the rest
of the simulated system is removed. (B) Time-evolution of the cumulative
number of PIP2 molecules within 3.5 Å of STX, depicted
and numbered as in A. (C) Time-evolution of the minimum distances
between STX and five PIP2 lipids.

Structural comparison of STX in the initial frame
(Figure D) and after 90 ns of MD (Figure A) shows that concomitant with PIP2 sequestration,
substantial changes occur in side-chain orientations of several critical
residues. In particular, the side-chains of K181 and K55 reorient
during the simulation so that their ε-amino groups face the
membrane. The Cα-Cβ-Cγ-Cδ dihedral angle of K55, for example, changed
during the initial equilibration phase of the MD simulation (see ) from an initial 170° (nearly parallel
to the bilayer plane), to 75° (nearly perpendicular), and maintained
this membrane-facing conformation for the remainder of the trajectory.
Furthermore, dramatic conformational changes are observed in the N-terminus
region of STX resulting in movement of M1/K2/D3 residues toward the
lipid membrane (see Figure A). With this repositioning,
the M1/K2/D3 triplet of residues together with the side-chains of
R261/K264 from the linker region coordinate the electrostatic interactions
with two PIP2 molecules (Figure B).

Structural elements of STX responsible for PIP2 lipid
sequestration. (A, B) Two PIP2 molecules (“3”
and “4”, see also Figure A)
are held near STX by interactions with M1/K2/D3 residues in the N-terminus
and R261/K264 in the linker region. (A) Time-evolution of the minimum
distance between amino groups of M1 (red), K2 (green), and D3 (blue)
and PIP2 molecule “3”. (B) Snapshot after
90 ns of atomistic MD simulations illustrating electrostatic interactions
with M1/K2/D3 (drawn in ball and stick) and R261/K264 (licorice).
The STX fragment is depicted in cartoon, and PIP2 lipids
“3” and “4” are represented in space-fill.
(C–G) STX TM/linker helical region undergoes conformational
change upon binding of PIP2 lipids. (C) Time-evolution
of changes in the 246–288 helix around K264; the kink (upper
panel) and face shift (lower panel) angles are calculated with ProKink. (D–F) Snapshots of STX TM/linker helix
and neighboring PIP2 lipids (“4” and “5”
as designated in Figure A) taken at trajectory
time-points t = 0 ns (D), t = 40
ns (E), and t = 90 ns (F). The helix is shown in
cartoon, and K255, K259, and R262 are drawn in licorice. (G) Superposition
of conformations of the STX TM/linker helical segment at t = 0 ns (cyan), t = 40 ns (blue), and t = 90 ns (orange) time-points highlighting the face shift in the
helix. K255/K259/R262 residues are depicted in licorice.

The Membrane Embedded STX Sequesters Five PIP2 Lipids
Simultaneously
Analysis of the MD simulation trajectory reveals
a series of structural perturbations and conformational rearrangements
that reflect the local interactions of STX with the PIP2 lipids. These dynamic conformational changes include the kinking
of the TM segment (residues 265–288), and the twisting (face
shift) motion of the TM (Figure C–G).
All these perturbations observed in the MD trajectory result from
the interaction of the polybasic K259-A260-R261-R262-K263-K264 segment
with specific PIP2 lipids, and are consistent with experimentally
measured synergistic effect that these residues have on PIP2 binding. Notably, our results show
that in addition to the KARRKK region, other basic residues such as
K255 and the K55 and K181 residues in the regulatory Habc domain and
the N-terminal segment play important roles in the interactions with
PIP2 lipids.

Second CGM Round in the Iterative Protocol
Continuing
the iterative protocol, the self-consistent CGM minimization procedure
was repeated (CGM 2) using the STX conformation after 90 ns of all-atom
MD simulation. As shown in Figure , we found
that the PIP2 demixing predicted by this round of CGM is
different from that obtained with the initial STX model (compare to
Figure B). Because of the conformational rearrangements
described above, STX gained increased ability to sequester multiple
PIP2 lipids, as seen in the membrane region facing residues
K181/R150/K55. The membrane area exposed to the face of the linker
helix containing K255/K259/R262 also exhibits somewhat stronger PIP2 demixing (light brown shades in Figure ) compared to the CGM predictions from CGM 1 that started with the
initial STX model. The estimate for PIP2 lipid sequestration
from this round is 4–5 lipids (with two positioned near the
K181/R150/K55 cluster of residues) and between two and three PIP2 molecules near the linker region; this CGM result is in excellent
agreement with the predictions from the preceding all-atom simulations.
Such consistency between the coarse-grained and all-atom representations
demonstrates the appropriateness and complementarity of the two approaches
for quantification of PIP2 lipid sequestration around STX.

Results
from iteration 2 between CGM minimization and MD equilibration: The
steady-state distribution of PIP2 lipids around STX obtained
from the CGM minimization scheme using the STX conformation after
90 ns of all-atom MD simulations (shown in Figure A). Calculated as in Figure , but
with an initially uniform composition of the membrane characterized
by φ0PIP2 = 0.05 and φ0POPC+POPE = 0.95. (A) Only part of the membrane leaflet
near the protein is shown and the CGM solution (color shades) represents
ratios of local φ and average φ0 lipid fraction
values. (B) Similar to panel A, but showing only
regions on the membrane leaflet with excess PIP2 lipids
(φ/φ0 &gt; 1).

Control Simulations Substantiate the Role of PIP2 Lipid Sequestration by STX
Control simulations included
one system in which the STX is immersed in a PIP2-free
membrane model (i.e., POPC), and another in which a lysine-to-alanine
mutant at position 2, STXK2A, is immersed in the PIP2-containing PM membranes. The K2A mutation was designed in
light of the strong tendency of the N-terminus region to interact
with sequestered PIP2 lipids, as observed in the MD simulations
of STX in PM membranes.

Comparing the STXK2A and
STXWT MD simulations, we found a similar extent of PIP2 segregation around STXK2A and STXWT (data not shown). But analysis of the conformational changes in
STX N-terminus and its interactions with PIP2 shows that
PIP2 lipids sequestered near the protein N-terminus region
are stabilized by a different set of interactions in the two simulations.
Thus, for the STXK2A system we identified R4 and R25 in
the N-terminus as residues responsible for interactions with PIP2 lipids (see Figure A), in contrast
to the results from the STXWT simulations where the M1/K2/D3
triplet of residues was found to interact with PIP2 lipids.
Moreover, in the STXK2A simulations the basic residues
in the linker region are seen to coordinate interactions with PIP2 lipids somewhat differently than in the STXWT system.
Specifically, as illustrated in Figure A,
in STXK2A, the K259/K263/K264 group of residues interacts
with PIP2 lipids that have been sequestered from the N-terminus-facing
side of the linker region, and K255/R262 bind to a single PIP2 lipid that approached the opposite face of the STX juxtamembrane
helix. In STXWT, PIP2 lipids aggregated in similar
positions were stabilized by R261/K264 and K255/K259/R262 residues,
respectively (see Figures  and ).

Different interactions of the N-terminus fragment in wild type
(STXWT) and K2A mutant (STXK2A) STX with PIP2 lipids result in distinct conformational changes. (A) Snapshot
after 90 ns of MD trajectory of STXK2A (cartoon) highlighting
interactions between sequestered PIP2 lipids and residues
in the N-terminal and linker regions. Key positions (R4, R25, K255,
K259, R262, K263, K264) are shown in licorice. PIP2 molecules
and the S14 residue in the STXK2A N-terminus are shown
in space-fill. The panel inset describes the evolution in time of
minimum distances between PIP2 and residues R4 and R25.
(B, C) Differential positioning of S14 (space-fill) in STXWT (in B) and STXK2A (in C). The snapshots were taken after
90 ns of MD simulations in the PM bilayer. The proteins are drawn
in cartoon, and the lipid membrane is represented by the location
of the lipid headgroup phosphate atoms (gold). (D) Evolution of the
secondary structure of N-terminus region (residues 1–30) in
STXWT (lower panel) and STXK2A (upper panel)
during the simulations. Colors indicate the type of secondary structure:
blue for 3-helix, and purple for 4-helix. Changes in colors over trajectory
time indicate that the corresponding residue is in one or the other
secondary structure at a particular time-point; the red ovals highlight
the region near S14 residue, which is seen to assume different secondary
structure in the wild type and the mutant STX. The secondary structure
assessment was carried out with the Simulaid software.

Comparison with the Control Simulations Reveals the Role of
STX/PIP2 Interactions in Regulating Access to the Phosphorylation
Site S14
Because our goal was to test the hypothesis that
the presence of PIP2 lipids in the membrane affects the
ability of STX to become phosphorylated by CK2 enzyme at the S14 position,
we sought to establish the link between the conformational changes
due to the observed STX/PIP2 interactions and the accessibility
of that site. To this end, we calculated solvent accessible surface
areas (SASAs) with probes of different radii in the MD trajectories of all the simulations: STX in PM, STX in
POPC membranes, and the lysine to alanine mutant, STXK2A, in PM (see ).

By varying the
radii rp of the probes used in the SASA
calculations we obtain detailed information about the accessibility
of the phosphorylation site to reagents of different sizes and bulk.
Consequently, Figure A compares the SASA calculated
for S14 (SASAS14) in the various MD trajectories using
probes of different radii, rp. The profile
for the wild type STX (STXWT) in PM shows an increase in
SASAS14 with increasing rp,
which indicates that for STXWT in PM S14 is accessible
to a large reagent such as the phosphorylating enzyme. Results in
Figure B–D further illustrate that
S14 in “STXWT in PM” is one of a few residues
only for which the SASA value increases for larger probe radii (darker
shades in Figure B–D), while the majority
of positions on STXWT show a decrease in SASA (red shades
in Figure B–D) upon increasing rp.

(A) Solvent exposure of the S14 residue in the
N-terminus of STX. The profile of the solvent accessible surface area
(SASA) of S14 (calculated as described in ) is shown as a function of the probe radius, rp, in three MD trajectories: Wild type STX (STXWT) in PM (open circles), STXWT in POPC (filled squares),
and K2A STX mutant (STXK2A) in PM (open triangles). The
error bars indicate the standard deviations. (B–D) Atomic detail
SASA maps for STXWT simulated in PM and measured with different
probe radii: rp = 1.4
Å (in B), rp = 5.4 Å (C), and rp = 9.4 Å (D). STXWT in these representative snapshots is shown in space-fill,
and each atom of the protein is colored according to its SASA value
(see color code). The location of S14 is highlighted in each panel.

In contrast, the accessibility profile for the
mutant STXK2A in PM shows that SASAS14 for rp = 1.4 Å is substantially
lower than for STXWT in PM, and the larger probe radii
produced further decreases in the SASAS14 value suggesting
that in the STXK2A construct the S14 site is largely inaccessible
to a relevant reagent. The results of the simulations show that these
differences in S14 accessibility patterns are brought about by the
structural responses of the two STX constructs to the modes of PIP2 sequestration. Thus, the N-terminus region containing the
S14 residue in the two constructs is stabilized in structurally different
conformation and assumes distinct juxtamembrane position due to the
difference in the perturbations produced by PIP2 sequestration
(cf. Figure B,C). In STXWT, the
N-terminal helical stretch (residues 6–16) is positioned farther
from the PM membrane surface compared to its location in STXK2A. Furthermore, as illustrated in Figure D,
residues 12–15 that were in a 4-helix arrangement in STXWT, become unwound in STXK2A (compare secondary
structures in the regions highlighted by ovals in the two panels of
Figure D); this has key mechanistic implications
for the accessibility of S14 as discussed below.

Central to
our hypothesis regarding the involvement of PIP2 interactions
in the phosphorylation of S14, we find that the hydroxyl moiety (OH)
of S14 remains solvent accessible in the STXWT simulations,
whereas in STXK2A, the OH group becomes occluded due to
partial unwinding of the N-terminal helix (Figure D). Remarkably, the hydroxyl group on S14 in STXK2A establishes strong interactions with D17 (see Figure A–C) as a result of the local change in the secondary
structure of the N-terminus, and due to this interaction the D17 side
chain is largely occluded in the STXK2A mutant (Figure D) whereas in STXWT D17 is highly exposed.
This difference is likely to be of critical functional importance
because in syntaxin 1B, D17 is part of the highly acidic motif DDEEE
(or DDDDD in syntaxin 1A) (see Figure ); this
motif is known to be a specific site-recognition consensus sequence
for the CK2 phosphorylating enzyme. In
fact, recent studies have shown that D17A or D17K mutations on STX
disrupted the ability of CK2 to phosphorylate STX. The molecular level differences in the N-terminus of the
STXWT and STXK2A constructs uncovered in our
analysis, which stem from different PIP2 segregation patterns,
are thus seen to lead to the differential accessibility of the critical
elements for STX phosphorylation (Figures A and D).

Residues S14 and D17 exhibit different
interaction pattern in STXWT and STXK2A. (A,
B) Views of the N-terminus region of STXK2A (in A) and
STXWT (in B) interacting with the PM membrane. S14 and
D17 are shown in red and yellow space-fill representations, respectively.
(C) Minimum distance between S14 and D17 residues as a function of
time in simulations of STXWT (solid) and STXK2A (dashed). (D) SASA calculated for D17 residue with probes of different
radii, in STXWT (circles) and STXK2A (triangles)
simulations.

Interestingly, in the computational control experiments
in which disruption of the electrostatic interactions between STX
and the lipid membrane was achieved by depleting the bilayer of PIP2 (i.e., in simulations of STXWT in POPC membranes),
we found diminished S14 exposure when measured with probes of large
radii (representing accessibility by a kinase – see ). The decrease compared to accessibility
measured in PIP2-enriched membranes is evident in Figure A from plots corresponding to simulations of STXWT in POPC and PM membranes. To establish the structural mechanisms
responsible for this difference, we compared the dynamics of STXWT N-terminus, and of S14 residue in particular, in POPC and
PM membranes. As illustrated in Figure ,
equilibration of the N-terminal segment of STXWT in the
two membranes results in differential positioning of S14 residue with
respect to the STX TM segment in the two compared membranes (Figure B,C). Thus, the distance between the Cα carbons of S14 and K263 (Figure D) shows
that compared to PM membrane, S14 is positioned ∼12 Å
closer to K263 in the POPC membrane. This major difference in the
positioning of the S14 residue observed in the comparison of STX embedded
in POPC and PM membranes is responsible for the different exposure
of S14 calculated in the two membranes for reagents representing the
CK2 enzyme.

The N-terminus of STXWT in PM and POPC membranes
assumes different positions relative to both the lipid bilayer and
the linker region. (A) STXWT in the POPC membrane. Representation
is the same as in Figure ; S14 is shown in
space-fill. (B, C) Superposition of STXWT (cartoon) structures
in PM (cyan) and POPC (purple) shown in two different views. S14 and
K263 residues are highlighted in space-fill representations (K263
is at the interface between the linker and the TM segment). The two
structures were superimposed by the backbone atoms of the 246–288
residues. (D) Distance between Cα atoms of S14 and
K263 as a function of time plotted for the later parts of the respective
trajectories.

Discussion
The computational analysis of the mechanisms
underlying the role of PIP2 lipids confirms the working
hypothesis that the presence of PIP2 lipids in the membrane
affects the ability of STX to become phosphorylated by CK2 enzyme
at the S14 position, and supports the general notion that the electrostatic
interactions between STX and these lipids can modulate many processes
in which the protein is involved at the synapse. These electrostatic
interactions were shown here to be critical for the accessibility
of S14 for the functionally important phosphorylation of STX by CK2.− Thus, studies based on PIP2-depletion from cell membranes
have established that colocalization of STX with PIP2 lipids
is a requirement for the STX phosphorylation, and that depletion of
PIP2 from cell membranes decreases phosphorylation of STX.
In turn, in membranes expressing the dopamine transporter, DAT, this
phosphorylation event appears to affect direct STX/DAT interactions
(ref () and Galli,
in preparation) that are important for regulation of AMPH-mediated
reverse transport of DA (efflux) through the DAT.,,

By virtue of the atomistic detail,
our results show how the modulation by PIP2 lipids is achieved
as a direct effect of the interactions on the local structural properties
of STX in the juxtamembrane region. Specifically, our inferences about
the relation between PIP2 lipid segregation and the spatial
organization of the STX N-terminus in general, and of the S14 residue
in particular, are substantiated by the results of the simulations.
Moreover, these simulations identify the mechanisms by which altered
patterns of STX/PIP2 interactions (e.g., due to K2A mutation
or PIP2-depletion) result in the type of changes in accessibility
of S14 that can modulate the phosphorylation of STX at that site.

The multiscale computational approach that combines elements from
the mean-field level coarse-grained representations, with all-atomistic
MD simulations, was shown here to be very well suited for the computational
prediction of the pattern of PIP2 lipid distribution around
STX constructs in the steady state. From these simulations we found
that STX in the “closed”-like conformation we modeled
can simultaneously attract as many as five PIP2 molecules.
Importantly, our results show that the key residues that establish
interactions with PIP2 lipids reside not only in the previously
identified polybasic KARRKK motif in STX linker region,− but also in the N-terminus stretch as well as in the Habc domain.
The PIP2 enrichment we found in the membrane area facing
the K55/R150/K181 basic residues from the Habc domain suggests that
these residues attract PIP2 lipids that can strongly anchor
the Habc domain to the membrane (compare STX positioning in PIP2-enriched vs PIP2-depleted membranes in Figure ). Moreover, we found that the basic residues in
the KARRKK linker motif act synergistically with residues from the
N-terminus to attract PIP2 lipids. Thus, the M1/K2/D3 triplet
from the N-terminus, together with R261 and K264 from the linker,
sequester two PIP2 lipids, whereas the K255/K259/R262 sequence
in the linker attracts an additional PIP2 molecule. The
participation of M1/K2/D3 residues in the interactions with PIP2 lipids as identified from our study appears to be critical
for the conformational properties of the N-terminus region as a whole,
and of the S14 residue in particular. This experimentally testable
prediction from the computational analysis offers a direct probe of
the molecular models and proposed protein–PIP2 interaction
mechanisms.

Together, the mechanistic observations from our
computational analysis led to the prediction that a K2A mutation in
the N-terminus, which causes a remodeling of the STX/PIP2 interactions, would result in a functional phenotype that mimics
PIP2-depletion phenotypes. Compared to the wild type construct,
this mutation was shown to bring about a new set of interactions between
PIP2 and N-terminus, which involves residues R4 and R25
as shown in Figure . Because these electrostatic
interactions required partial unwinding of the N-terminal helix, we
found that the S14 residue was again occluded from the solvent, as
in the case of PIP2-depletion. Interestingly, the concomitant
lowering of the accessible surface area of the D17 residue that resides
in the CK2 enzyme site-recognition motif, which appears to be due to strong interactions with S14 in the STXK2A mutant shown in Figure , strengthens
the prediction that the K2A mutation will have a profound effect on
the ability of STX to become phosphorylated at S14 and engage in the
DA efflux mechanism.

The computational simulations and mechanistic
analyses have thus yielded specific predictions concerning those structural
and dynamic elements in STX that can be modulated by electrostatic
interactions of STX with PIP2 lipids. Further, the computational
control experiments in which disruption of the PIP2 anchoring
and interactions was achieved by depleting the membrane of PIP2 (simulations of STXWT in POPC membranes) resulted
in equilibration of the N-terminus in a conformation where S14 was
closer to both the STX linker region and the membrane, causing a reduction
of the S14 exposure to probes that represent large reagents such as
the CK2 kinase. This is in agreement with our experimental observations
about the reduced phosphorylation in PIP2-depleted membranes
compared to PIP2-enriched membranes (Galli, in preparation).
The detailed atomistic explanation of the mechanisms enables structure-specific
predictions to be drawn from the computational work. These predictions
are, therefore, directly testable experimentally by structural modifications,
in a manner that can validate the important insights about the mechanistic
involvement of PIP2 in the functionally critical phosphorylation
of STX.

The authors declare no competing
financial interest.

Acknowledgments
We acknowledge insightful discussions with Daniel Harries
and Jose Manuel Perez Aguilar. This work was supported by the computational
resources of (1) the Institute for Computational Biomedicine at Weill
Medical College of Cornell University, (2) the New York Blue Gene
Computational Science facility housed at Brookhaven National Lab,
and (3) NSF Teragrid allocation MCB090132.

