Bacteria
communicate by means
of small molecules called autoinducers to assess local cell population
density through a process known as quorum sensing.− Gram-negative
bacteria use N-acyl-homoserine lactone (AHL) mediated
quorum sensing to regulate key physiological activities that include
virulence, biofilm formation, and toxin production.− Bacterial AHL synthases belong to the LuxI family of proteins that
use acyl-ACP (ACP = acyl carrier protein) and S-adenosyl-l-methionine (SAM) to make intracellular AHL autoinducers.− Since the AHL autoinducers synthesized by a bacterium are species-specific,
tight specificity in the native AHL signal synthesized by each bacterium
is critical for efficient interbacterial communication. While SAM
is a conserved substrate for AHL synthases, specificity in the AHL
signal arises from the structure of the acyl chain (short-chain vs
long-chain, substituted vs unsubstituted, etc.) in the acyl-ACP substrate.− In order to achieve tight AHL signal specificity, AHL synthases
must be able to selectively recognize the correct acyl-ACP substrate
from the cellular acyl-ACP pool to synthesize the native autoinducer.
The molecular basis of substrate selectivity in AHL synthases, however,
remains poorly understood.

Quorum sensing in Burkholderia
mallei has been
implicated in chronic infections associated with Glanders disease.−B. mallei contains BmaI1-BmaR1 and BmaI3-BmaR3
homologs that make octanoyl homoserine lactone and 3-hydroxyoctanoyl
homoserine lactone autoinducers, respectively., In BmaI1-catalyzed octanoyl-homoserine lactone synthesis, the acylation
step involves transfer of the fatty acyl group from octanoyl-ACP to
the α-amino group in SAM, with cleavage of the acyl-thioester
bond to release holo-ACP (Figure ).,, Although SAM is used as a methyl
donor in several biological reactions, in AHL synthesis, the 3-amino-3-carboxypropyl
group of this substrate is utilized to form a homoserine lactone ring
accompanied by release of methylthioadenosine (MTA).− While the lactone ring is a conserved moiety in acyl homoserine
lactones, the specificity in autoinducer signal arises from the acyl-chain
of the acyl-ACP substrate.,,− Therefore, to achieve tight AHL signal specificity, BmaI1 must selectively
recognize octanoyl-ACP from other non-native (nonspecific) acyl-ACPs
in the cellular acyl-ACP pool. If the enzyme were not selective, a
non-native acyl-ACP substrate reacting with BmaI1 would result in
synthesis of nonspecific acyl-homoserine lactones that would add noise
to interbacterial communication. It is therefore imperative for an
acyl-homoserine lactone synthase enzyme such as BmaI1 to keep AHL
synthesis rates low with nonspecific acyl-ACP substrates. How AHL
synthase enzymes achieve this task remains a mystery.

BmaI1 catalyzed AHL synthesis.
Octanoyl-ACP (C8ACP) is the acyl-donor,
and S-adenosyl-l-methionine (SAM) is the
acyl-acceptor in this reaction. The lactone moiety in AHL autoinducer
is derived from the SAM substrate, and the acyl-chain is obtained
from acyl-ACP.

To limit buildup of nonspecific
signals (noise) during intercellular
communication, it is reasonable to assume a model where fatty acid
biosynthesis could be modulated to favor accumulation of native acyl-ACPs.
Hoang et al. have demonstrated that under certain limiting conditions
such as inhibition of the β-keto acyl-ACP reductase enzyme during
fatty acid biosynthesis, a long-chain AHL synthase enzyme (LasI) synthesized
short-chain AHLs both in vitro and in vivo, probably due to changes
in composition of metabolic acyl-ACP pool. Although we cannot rule out the possibility that in vivo metabolic
activity might adapt to facilitate accrual of certain acyl-ACPs in
response to an environmental need such as quorum sensing, controlling
AHL synthesis by modulating fatty acid biosynthesis alone seems far-fetched.
We believe that the specificity in AHL signal synthesis most likely
arises from a combination of modulated acyl-ACP pool supply and effective
substrate discrimination by AHL synthase enzymes. Although there is
some evidence supporting the latter proposition, the extent to which
signal synthesis enzymes contribute to achieving tight quorum sensing
signal specificity is unknown. To address this long-standing question,
we used mechanistic enzymology to investigate how an acyl-homoserine
lactone synthase specifically recognizes its native acyl-ACP from
non-native acyl-ACP substrates.

Substrates used in this
study. The acyl–acyl carrier protein
substrates for BmaI1 was enzymatically synthesized from corresponding
acyl-CoA substrates through Bacillus subtilis Sfp
phosphopantetheinyl transferase. Pantetheine linker connects the acyl-chain
to the carrier protein and 3′5′-ADP in acyl-ACP and
acyl-CoA, respectively.

X-ray structures of Pantoea stewartii EsaI
(3-oxohexanoyl-homoserine
lactone synthase), Pseudomonas aeruginosa LasI (3-oxododecanoyl-homoserine
lactone synthase), and Burkholderia glumae TofI (octanoyl-homoserine
lactone synthase) reveal a V-shaped hydrophobic cleft that accommodates
the acyl-chain of an acyl-ACP substrate.−, The amino acids lining the cleft appear to confer
specificity to the acyl-chain binding in this pocket., For instance, in the 3-oxohexanoyl-homoserine lactone synthase EsaI,
the acyl-chain pocket is lined with bulky amino acid side chains restricting
the acyl-chain length to six carbons. In the X-ray structure of EsaI
and LasI, the acyl-chain pocket carries a threonine residue (Thr140
in EsaI and Thr142/Thr144 in LasI) that could act as specificity determinants
between 3-oxoacyl-ACP and unsubstituted acyl-ACP substrate. Mass-spectrometry
analysis of AHLs produced in vivo by the EsaI Thr140Ala mutant showed
a dramatic increase in unsubstituted hexanoyl homoserine lactone over
the native autoinducer, the 3-oxohexanoyl homoserine lactone. Similar results were observed when the Thr142
residue in LasI was mutated to glycine or alanine (although the shift
was smaller than with EsaI). Interestingly, when the Thr144 residue
in LasI was mutated to valine, multiple AHLs including odd and even
chains, saturated and unsaturated, 3-oxo and 3-hydroxyl chains were
detected. It is evident from the above
studies that amino acids lining the acyl-chain pocket contribute to
acyl-chain selectivity. It is not apparent, however, just how this
pocket alone can aid acyl-homoserine lactone synthase to select against
nonspecific acyl-ACP substrates with only subtle structural variations
in the acyl-chain (3-oxo vs 3-hydroxyl, two carbon shorter or longer
acyl-chains etc.). Clearly, additional interactions between phosphopantetheine
and ACP with the enzyme must also play a significant role in substrate
selectivity.

In this paper, we focus our study on the BmaI1
AHL synthase enzyme
to address two key questions: (a) What are the differences in rates
of AHL synthesis between native and non-native acyl-ACP substrates
reacting with BmaI1? (b) How does BmaI1 recognize its native octanoyl-ACP
from other non-native, shorter or longer-chain acyl-ACP substrates?
Our findings imply that only the native acyl-ACP substrate forms a
stable and productive E·acyl-ACP·SAM ternary complex with
BmaI1. On the basis of our data, we conclude that formation of a stable
and productive E·acyl-ACP·SAM ternary complex is an important
contributor to acyl-ACP substrate recognition, which increases the
catalytic efficiency of octanoyl-ACP relative to non-native acyl-ACPs
reacting with with BmaI1 acyl-homoserine lactone synthase enzyme.

Materials
and Methods
Materials
All acyl-CoA’s were purchased from
Sigma-Aldrich Chemical Co. or Life Sciences Resources Inc., Milwaukee,
WI. All chemicals used for protein purification, enzyme assays, and
HPLC solvents were from Sigma-Aldrich or ThermoFisher Scientific.
UV–vis data were acquired using a Thermo Scientific Evolution260
spectrophotometer, and HPLC data were obtained using an Accela600
instrument from Thermo Scientific. The molecular mass of ACP and its
derivatives were determined using a Bruker maXis quadrupole time-of-flight
(Q-TOF) spectrometer. The methylthioadenosine nucleosidase (MTAN)
gene was obtained from Dr. Ken Cornell at Boise State University.
The plasmid carrying the genes for the B. mallei ATCC23344
BmaI1 and Escherichia coli DK574-pJT94 ACP were obtained
as a generous gift from Dr. Peter Greenberg at the University of Washington,
Seattle. The plasmid carrying Bacillus subtilis Sfp
phosphopantetheinyl transferase was supplied by Dr. Michael Burkart
at the University of California, San Diego.

Protein Purification
BmaI1 was expressed and purified
by a minor modification of previously published protocols. Briefly, 2 L of Luria–Bertani broth with
100 μg/mL streptomycin was inoculated with BmaI1 and grown at
37 °C. Expression was then induced at the mid-log phase by addition
of 0.5 mM IPTG, cooled to 16 °C, and allowed to express overnight.
Growth cultures were then centrifuged at 4500g at
4 °C for 15 min to pellet cells, which were frozen at −80
°C until further use. Frozen pellets were thawed on ice for 45
min prior to lysis. For each liter of growth culture, 2 mL B-PER reagent
(Thermo Scientific), 20 μL of DNase and RNase (1 mg/mL) and
25 μL of phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride (13 mg PMSF in 750 μL
isopropyl alcohol) solution were added, followed by incubation at
room temperature for 15 min under gentle shaking before being centrifuged
at 13000g for 10 min. Purification was achieved via
Ni2+-NTA affinity chromatography. The supernatant was loaded
on to a Ni2+-NTA column, pre-equilibrated with 0.5 M NaCl
in 50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.5 (Buffer A), and washed with 10 mL of 50
mM imidazole in buffer A. BmaI1 was eluted from the column using 10
mL of 300 mM imidazole in buffer A. BmaI1 purity was confirmed using
SDS-PAGE. Protein concentration was determined using UV–vis
measurement (ε280 = 29450 M–1 cm–1).

Purification of E. coli apo-acyl
carrier protein (apo-ACP) was accomplished by minor modification of
previously published protocols.− Chemical lysis of cell pellets was achieved with B-PER reagent,
as described above. ACP was purified using a Whatman DE52 diaminoethyl
cellulose resin. The ACP was precipitated by addition of 0.02% sodium
deoxycholate and 5% trichloroacetate, and after 30 min, the pellet
was collected by centrifugation and resuspended in 0.5 M Tris-HCl,
pH 8.0 buffer. This precipitation step was omitted to prepare unprecipitated
apo-ACP. Fractions containing pure protein by SDS-PAGE were desalted
using a PD10 column (GE Life Sciences) and concentrated using a 3
kDa MWCO spin filter column.

Acyl-ACPs were prepared from acyl-CoAs
and apo-ACP by means of
the B. subtilis Sfp phosphopantetheinyl transferase
enzyme.,, The transferase
reaction mixture (2 mL) contained 50 mM Tris-HCl pH 6.8, 10 mM magnesium
chloride, 750 μM apo-ACP, 937 μM acyl-CoA (1.25×
apo-ACP), and 3 μM Sfp. During the preparation of long-chain
acyl-ACPs (carbon chain lengths greater than eight), precipitates
formed in the reaction mixture prevented the reaction from proceeding
to completion. To avoid precipitation, the corresponding long-chain
acyl-CoAs were incrementally added to the reaction mixture over 15
min intervals. The transferase reactions were incubated at 37 °C
and monitored by UHPLC for completion. Ammonium sulfate at 75% saturation
was then added and the reaction mixture was stirred for 1 h at 4 °C
to precipitate Sfp. The precipitated Sfp was pelleted by centrifugation
at 13000g for 15 min. For preparation of precipitated
acyl-ACP, the reaction mixture was precipitated with two volumes of
acetone overnight at −20 °C, resuspended in 15 mL of 25
mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.5, and desalted with a 3 kDa MWCO spin filter column.
The acetone precipitation step was omitted to prepare unprecipitated
acyl-ACPs.

Molecular Mass Determination
The
molecular masses of
ACP and its derivatives were determined using a Bruker maXis quadrupole-time-of-flight
(Q-TOF) mass spectrometer equipped with electrospray ionization (ESI).
Ten microliters of samples were injected onto a Phenomenex C18 column
(100 × 2.1 mm, 2.6 μ) followed by a simple linear gradient
for sample desalting and separation. The initial eluent was 98% mobile
phase A (99.9% water, 0.1% formic acid) and 2% B (99.9% acetonitrile,
0.1% formic acid) for 5 min, and then mobile phase B was increased
to 50% over 25 min. The LC eluent was diverted to waste during the
first 5 min of the gradient to eliminate salts in the sample buffer.
Mass analysis was performed using the positive ion mode with a spray
voltage of 4000 V. The obtained mass spectra were deconvoluted using
Bruker Data Analysis 4.0 software. ACP: calculated mass 8508.3 Da,
observed mass 8507.5 Da; C4ACP: calculated mass 8916.8 Da, observed
mass 8918.2 Da; C6ACP: calculated mass 8944.9 Da, observed mass 8946.2
Da; C8ACP: calculated mass 8973.0 Da, observed mass 8974.4 Da; C10ACP:
calculated mass 9000.8 Da, observed mass 9002.3 Da.

BmaI1 Assays
The enzymatic reaction catalyzed by BmaI1
was monitored using a colorimetric assay that is sensitive to the
free holo-ACP thiol generated at the acylation step in AHL synthesis., A typical reaction contained 30 μM dichlorophenolindophenol
(DCPIP) and 100 mM HEPES, pH 7.2. C8ACP was varied between 2.5 and
40 μM, and SAM was varied between 250 and 1500 μM. The
initial rates were fit to the Cleland SEQUEN program (eq ) to estimate kinetic constants. To estimate Michaelis constants for nonspecific acyl-ACPs, SAM was
fixed at 3 or 6 mM, while the acyl-ACP concentrations varied from
5 to 100 μM. To estimate the Km value
of SAM, acyl-ACP was maintained at 4–10× the acyl-ACP’s Km. The nonenzymatic, background rates with DCPIP
increased in proportion with an increase in SAM concentration. In
addition, we also observed a smaller increase in background rates
with DCPIP when acyl-ACP concentration was increased. To minimize
background rates, SAM concentration was capped between 3 and 6 mM.
Since fixed substrates may not be under true saturating conditions,
both Michaelis constants and turnover number determined in this study
must be interpreted as apparent kinetic constants. Prior to enzyme
addition, both SAM and acyl-ACP substrates were incubated with DCPIP
in the assay buffer for 10 min or longer until background rates become
negligible. Reactions were then initiated by the addition of BmaI1
(0.24, 0.56, 1.0, 2.0, 5.0 μM for octanoyl-ACP, hexanoyl-ACP,
decanoyl-ACP, butyryl-ACP, and octanoyl-CoA respectively). The thiol-dependent
reduction of DCPIP was monitored at 600 nm (ε600 =
21000 M–1 cm–1) over 15 min. The
initial rate data were fit to the Michaelis–Menten or a substrate
inhibition equation (eq ) using GraphPad Prism
6.0. All experiments were done in triplicate to check for reproducibility
and to estimate errors.

For substrates that displayed nonhyperbolic
rate curve behavior, the substrate–velocity data were fitted
to eq . The K0.5 value determined from data fit is assumed to reflect the apparent
Michaelis constant (Km) for the substrate.

HPLC Assay
To monitor holo-ACP by HPLC, we used a gradient
beginning at 75% solvent A and ending with 25% A over a 10 min period
at a flow rate of 600 μL/min. To monitor MTA, the gradient began
at 0% B and ended at 30% B over a 10 min interval. The flow rate was
maintained at 500 μL/min. Solvent A is 0.1% TFA in nanopure
water, and solvent B is 0.1% TFA in acetonitrile. To test for the
acylation reaction, 40 μM octanoyl-ACP and 40 μM BmaI1
enzyme were incubated at room temperature for 60 min in 100 mM HEPES
buffer pH 7.2. After 60 min, 1.2 mM SAM-chloride (Sigma) was added
to the reaction mixture, which was allowed to incubate for an additional
30 min before being injected onto the HPLC. The reaction was monitored
for BmaI1 dependent holo-ACP release (Figure ). To test for the lactonization reaction, a mixture of SAM chloride,
methylthioadenosine nucleosidase (MTAN), and BmaI1 was incubated at
concentrations of 100 μM, 1.6 μM, and 20 μM respectively.
A control experiment was also performed with only 100 μM SAM
chloride. Both the reaction and control were incubated for 1 h. 60
μM C8ACP was then added to the reaction mixture, and adenine
release by {BmaI1-MTAN} enzyme couple was monitored as described above
(Figure ).

Mechanism of substrate addition in BmaI1.
(A) Octanoyl-ACP and
SAM substrate-velocity data fit to a sequential equation (eq  in main text). Since the data fitted equally well
to the ping-pong equation, an independent HPLC-based experiment was
conducted to distinguish between these two mechanistic possibilities.
Panels B–F refer to HPLC experiments that tested for the ping-pong
mechanism of substrate addition in BmaI1. (B) HPLC chromatogram for
40 μM C8ACP (octanoyl-ACP) incubating with 40 μM BmaI1
at 30 min (blue) and 60 min (red). Holo-ACP was not released when
SAM was excluded from reaction mixture. (C) Holo-ACP release monitored
after 30 min incubation of reaction mixture ‘B’ with
1.2 mM SAM-chloride (red). When SAM is included in the reaction mixture,
acylation occurred as seen by the decrease in C8ACP peak area with
a concomitant increase in the holo-ACP peak area. (D) Control reaction
for incubation of 100 μM SAM with 1.6 μM methylthioadenosine
nucleosidase (MTAN). S-Adenosylhomocysteine (SAH)
and methylthioadenosine (MTA) impurities in SAM commercial sample
react with MTAN to release adenine. Since adenine has a higher extinction
coefficient at 260 nm than methylthioadenosine (MTA), MTAN was included
in this assay. SAM and MTAN incubation was monitored at 5 min (blue)
and 45 min (red). (E) BmaI1 addition to the reaction mixture D (SAM
+ MTAN). Twenty micromolar BmaI1 was added to reaction mixture D that
was preincubated for 45 min. The chromatogram was monitored after
60 min of enzyme addition (red). There is no change in peak area for
SAM and adenine, suggesting no reaction occurred between SAM and BmaI1.
(F) Addition of 60 μM C8ACP to the reaction mixture E (SAM +
MTAN + BmaI1). Chromatogram monitored after 80 min (red) of octanoyl-ACP
addition revealed an increase in adenine peak area with a concomitant
decrease in SAM peak area. BmaI1 reacting with C8ACP and SAM release
MTA, which reacts with MTAN coupling enzyme to release adenine. Therefore,
lactonization reaction is dependent on addition of C8ACP substrate
excluding a ping-pong mechanism for BmaI1.

Results and Discussion
Precipitation Affects Acyl-ACP Activity
Phosphopantetheinyl
transferase (Sfp) catalyzes reaction of octanoyl-CoA (C8CoA) with
apo-ACP yielding octanoyl-ACP (C8ACP). Three different methods were
used to prepare octanoyl-ACP: (a) apo-ACP precipitated and octanoyl-ACP
unprecipitated, (b) both apo-ACP and octanoyl-ACP precipitated, and
(c) both apo-ACP and octanoyl-ACP unprecipitated. To purify apo, holo
and acyl-ACPs, some laboratories precipitated the acyl carrier protein
while others did not.− Since we noticed significant variations in how ACPs were purified
among these laboratories, we asked if precipitating apo-ACP or acyl-ACP
would affect acyl-substrate activity with acyl-homoserine lactone
synthase, BmaI1? Indeed, we observed that BmaI1 activity is sensitive
to apo and acyl-ACP precipitation. Interestingly, we observed substrate
inhibition only for precipitated apo-ACP and unprecipitated octanoyl-ACP
(method “a” above), which was also the most-active substrate
in this series. To check if these observations could arise from experimental
artifacts in our assay conditions, we compared the activity of precipitated
apo-ACP and precipitated octanoyl-ACP substrate with BmaI1 with a
previously published report from Greenberg’s laboratory. The kcat and Km and the kinetic response for precipitated
octanoyl-ACP with BmaI1 are in-line with findings from Greenberg’s
laboratory, which reassures us that our kinetic observations are real
and would most likely be reproducible at other laboratories. Although acyl-ACP precipitation resulted in
a 3-fold decrease in substrate activity with BmaI1, we were unable
to see any noticeable difference between precipitated and unprecipitated
acyl-ACP in conformationally sensitive (native) gel electrophoresis
(Table ). From these results, one must conclude
that if acetone precipitation altered acyl-ACP tertiary structure,
it must be subtle and undetected by native gel electrophoresis. Our
kinetic data reveal that acyl-ACP substrate activity with BmaI1 is
sensitive to protein precipitation (Figure , Table ).

Apo-ACP and acyl-ACP precipitation on
BmaI1 activity. Substrate–velocity
curves for (A) apo-ACP precipitated, octanoyl-ACP unprecipitated,
(B) both apo-ACP and octanoyl-ACP precipitated, (C) both apo-ACP and
octanoyl-ACP unprecipitated substrates. Each experiment was conducted
in triplicate and the rates were averaged. SAM concentration was fixed
at 3 mM, and BmaI1 concentration was maintained at 0.24 μM (A)
or 0.40 μM (B and C) in these experiments. The most active octanoyl-ACP
sample was obtained when the precipitation step was included in apo-ACP
and omitted from acyl-ACP purification.

Precipitation Effects on Acyl-ACP
Substrate Activity
apo-ACP precipitation	acyl-ACP precipitation	kcat (s–1)	Km(μM)	kcat/Km (M–1) (s–1)	kcat/Km relative	
yes	no	0.096 ± 0.010	6 ± 1	(1.6 ± 0.3) × 104	1	
yes	yes	0.062 ± 0.003	11 ± 3	(0.56 ± 0.15) × 104	0.35	
no	no	0.076 ± 0.008	30 ± 6	(0.26 ± 0.06) × 104	0.16	
SAM is the fixed
substrate.

[{kcat/Km}acyl-ACP/{1.6 ×
104}].

Octanoyl-ACP
and SAM Substrates Add in Sequential Order to BmaI1
The substrate
velocity data for octanoyl-ACP and SAM reacting with
BmaI1 fit well to both sequential and ping-pong equations (eqs  and ).,− In order to distinguish between these two mechanisms,
we resorted to HPLC. If substrate addition followed a ping-pong mechanism,
we should observe release of one of the products (holo-ACP, MTA, C8-HSL)
before the second substrate reacted with the enzyme. Therefore, we
sought to check if a BmaI1–octanoyl–ACP mixture could
release holo-ACP in the absence of SAM (acylation reaction) and if
a BmaI1–SAM mixture could release MTA in the absence of octanoyl-ACP
(lactonization reaction). If octanoyl-ACP reacted first with BmaI1
via ping-pong mechanism, then an active site nucleophile could release
holo-ACP resulting in an acyl-enzyme complex. SAM could then react
with the acyl-enzyme complex to complete the acylation step. Alternatively,
if lactonization occurred prior to binding of octanoyl-ACP substrate
to BmaI1, we should observe MTA release even if acyl-ACP is excluded
from the reaction. However, we did not observe the release of either
holo-ACP or MTA unless both substrates were added to the reaction
mixture. Therefore, this result excludes the ping-pong mechanism of
substrate addition to BmaI1. Interestingly, when the substrate–velocity
data were fitted to a sequential equation, we found that the substrate
dissociation constant for the first substrate (Kia) was 125 ± 43 nM. It was then apparent that the magnitude
of the Kia*KmB term in the denominator for the sequential substrate–velocity
equation (eq ) is smaller compared to (KmA[B] + KmB[A] + [A][B]). Therefore, under these conditions, a sequential
substrate–velocity equation would resemble a ping-pong equation
(compare eqs  and ),
which is probably why our data fit equally well to both eqs  and ?

To determine
whether substrate addition is ordered or random, we attempted to conduct
product inhibition studies with BmaI1. The low Kia value suggested that the first substrate binds tightly to
the enzyme (kon ≫ koff). Therefore, the mechanism of substrate addition must
either follow an ordered sequential or a preferred-ordered random
sequential pathway, where acyl-ACP is most likely the first substrate
to add to the enzyme (Km of acyl-ACP is
much lower than Km of SAM). This is contrary
to the well-studied RhlI enzyme, where butyryl-ACP and SAM substrates
follow an ordered sequential path with SAM substrate binding first
to the enzyme. In BmaI1, if acyl-ACP
is the first substrate to add to the enzyme, then the last product
released should inhibit BmaI1 in a competitive manner under varying
acyl-ACP substrate and nonsaturating, fixed SAM conditions. Furthermore,
when the fixed SAM concentration was kept around its Km value and acyl-ACP substrate was varied, we should observe
noncompetitive and uncompetitive inhibition with BmaI1 for first and
second products, respectively. Nonetheless, a thiol-sensitive DCPIP
assay was unsuited to measure holo-ACP inhibition. In addition, weak
inhibition observed with MTA and solubility issues with octanoyl homoserine
lactone in the enzyme assay buffer precluded us from conducting product
inhibition studies with BmaI1.

Catalytic Efficiencies
for Nonspecific Acyl-Donor Substrates
Nonspecific acyl-ACPs
are less active compared to the native octanoyl-ACP
(C8ACP) in reaction with BmaI1 (Table ). The
increase in Km was smaller compared to
the decrease in kcat. Among the nonspecific
acyl-ACP substrates tested, hexanoyl-ACP (C6ACP) was the most active
substrate with BmaI1. The catalytic efficiencies for butyryl-ACP (C4ACP)
and decanoyl-ACP (C10ACP) decreased more than 20-fold compared to
octanoyl-ACP. For octanoyl-CoA (C8CoA), however, both kcat and Km values were severely
affected (Table ). The 5000-fold decrease
in catalytic efficiency for octanoyl-CoA relative to octanoyl-ACP
indicates ACP contributes significantly to substrate activity (Table ). Furthermore, we found that 3′5′-ADP
inhibited BmaI1 with a half-maximal inhibitory concentration (IC50)
greater than 1.5 mM. The weak affinity of the nucleotide moiety to
BmaI1 suggests that the enzyme does not actively discriminate against
3′5′-ADP. Our results are in-line with in vivo observations
where wild-type B. mallei is known to make three
acyl-HSLs, namely, octanoyl-homoserine lactone, hexanoyl-homoserine
lactone (both made by BmaI1), and 3-hydroxyoctanoyl-homoserine lactone
synthesized by BmaI3 AHL synthase.

Acyl-ACP Substrate Specificity
variable S	fixed S	kcat (s–1)	Km μM	kcat/Km (M–1) (s–1)	kcat/Km relative	
C8ACP	SAM-Cl	0.096 ± 0.010	6 ± 1	(1.6 ± 0.3) × 104	1.00	
C6ACP	SAM-Cl	0.025 ± 0.002	4 ± 1	(0.63 ± 0.16) × 104	0.38	
C4ACP	SAM-Cl	0.010 ± 0.001	29 ± 2	(3.4 ± 0.4) × 102	0.02	
C10ACP	SAM-Cl	0.015 ± 0.002	19 ± 4	(7.9 ± 0.2) × 102	0.05	
C8CoA	SAM-Cl	0.002 ± 0.0002	541 ± 14	3.4 ± 0.3	0.0002	
Apo-ACP precipitated, acyl-ACP unprecipitated.

[{kcat/Km}acyl-ACP/{1.6 ×
104}].

The Michaelis
constant for SAM was less affected when the fixed
substrate was a non-native acyl-ACP substrate (Table ). SAM substrate catalytic efficiencies decreased in the following
order when the fixed acyl-donor substrate was C8ACP &gt; C6ACP &gt;
C10ACP,
C4ACP &gt; C8CoA. However, the magnitude of decrease in kcat/Km with varying SAM was
lower than that from varying acyl-ACP (Table ).

Effect of Nonspecific Acyl-ACP Substrates
on SAM Activity
variable S	fixed S	kcat (s–1)	Km (mM)	kcat/Km (M–1) (s–1)	kcat/Km relative	
SAM-Cl	C8ACP	0.096 ± 0.010	1.80 ± 0.50	54 ± 16	1.00	
SAM-Cl	C6ACP	0.028 ± 0.002	0.54 ± 0.07	52 ± 7	0.98	
SAM-Cl	C4ACP	0.018 ± 0.003	1.91 ± 0.32	10 ± 2	0.18	
SAM-Cl	C10ACP	0.007 ± 0.001	0.80 ± 0.08	8 ± 1	0.16	
SAM-Cl	C8CoA	0.003 ± 0.0002	0.94 ± 0.08	3 ± 0.2	0.05	
[{kcat/Km}/{54}].

Substrate Velocity Curves for Nonspecific Acyl-Donor Substrates
We noticed differences in kinetic responses between good and poor
acyl-ACP substrates reacting with BmaI1. In this study, based on the kcat/Km values, we
consider octanoyl-ACP and hexanoyl-ACP as good substrates, while butyryl-ACP,
decanoyl-ACP, and octanoyl-CoA are collectively grouped as poor substrates
(Tables  and ). Irrespective
of the varying substrate (SAM or acyl-ACP), the overall pattern in
substrate-velocity curves was hyperbolic for good substrates and sigmoidal
for poor substrates (Figures  and ). Sigmoidal or nonhyperbolic response in rate curves
is usually indicative of kinetic cooperativity.− Moreover, substrates with higher kcat/Km also displayed substrate inhibition
characteristics (Figures  and ). The implications of nonhyperbolic substrate velocity behavior
for poor substrates and substrate inhibition for good substrates on
mechanism of BmaI1 catalyzed AHL synthesis are discussed below.

Substrate–velocity
curves for nonspecific acyl-ACP substrates
reacting with BmaI1. Initial rate as a function of substrate concentration
for 3 mM SAM chloride (fixed) and (A) varying butyryl-ACP in 2 μM
BmaI1, (B) varying hexanoyl-ACP in 0.56 μM BmaI1, (C) varying
decanoyl-ACP in 1 μM BmaI1, and (D) varying octanoyl-CoA in
5 μM BmaI1. Each data point was repeated in triplicate, and
the average rate was reported in these graphs. We used higher concentrations
of enzyme for assaying poor substrates to obtain comparable rates
between assays. The rate curves were sigmoidal for poor substrates
(butyryl-ACP, octanoyl-CoA) and hyperbolic for hexanoyl-ACP and decanoyl-ACP
substrates. The dissociation constant for hexanoyl-ACP substrate inhibition
is 69 ± 14 μM. Deviations from Michaelis–Menten
behavior for butyryl-ACP and octanoyl-CoA are indicative of kinetic
cooperativity. Positive cooperativity (Hill slope &gt; 1) was observed
for both of these substrates. Acyl-ACP substrates were enzymatically
synthesized from apo-ACP and acyl-CoA. While apo-ACP was precipitated,
all acyl-ACP samples (C4ACP, C6ACP, and C10ACP) were prepared by omitting
the acetone precipitation step in substrate purification.

Substrate–velocity curves for SAM. (A–D)
Rate curves
for SAM when the fixed substrate was 150 μM butyryl-ACP, 38
μM hexanoyl-ACP, 36 μM decanoyl-ACP, and 522 μM
octanoyl-CoA respectively. Although apo-ACP was precipitated and resuspended,
the precipitation step was omitted during preparation of acyl-ACP
(fixed) substrates used in this study. The enzyme concentrations were
varied from 0.5 to 5 μM depending on the acyl-ACP substrate
used in the experiment. The data points for rate-curves came from
an average of triplicate measurements.

Mechanism of Acyl-ACP Substrate Recognition
BmaI1 reacting
with a nonspecific acyl-ACP substrate will synthesize a nonspecific
AHL autoinducer. In order to achieve higher specificity in signal
synthesis, it is imperative for an AHL synthase enzyme like BmaI1
to keep rates with non-native substrates low. To put this in simple
terms, BmaI1 should be able to selectively recognize native acyl-ACP
from non-native acyl-ACPs in the cytosol to achieve tight signal specificity.
Indeed, we noticed differences in kinetic responses and rates between
native and non-native acyl-ACP substrates reacting with BmaI1. We
observed hyperbolic kinetic response and substrate inhibition for
good substrates and non-Michaelis–Menten kinetic response for
poor substrates. Substrate inhibition could arise when two substrate
molecules bind to the enzyme to form an ES2 complex or
the enzyme undergoes slow isomerization. Furthermore, random addition of substrates to a bisubstrate enzyme
could also give rise to substrate inhibition.,, Sigmoidal substrate–velocity curves
observed for poor substrates suggest kinetic cooperativity involving
random order substrate addition or a hysteretic or mnemonic enzyme.
To the best of our knowledge, oligomerization of acyl-homoserine lactone
synthase enzymes has never been detected. The models described below
assume a monomeric state for active, BmaI1 AHL synthase enzyme.

Random Addition of Substrates
In a random mechanism,
either substrate could add to free enzyme to form E·acyl-ACP
(EA) and E·SAM (EB) complexes (Scheme ). Although the acyl-ACP substrate could bind to either E or E·SAM
complex, the low Kia value for octanoyl-ACP
suggests that acyl-ACP must bind more tightly to the free enzyme “E”
form. If substrates add in a random fashion, the path where acyl-ACP
binds as the first substrate should be favored over SAM binding first
to the free enzyme. Hence, we see this case as an example of a preferred-order
random mechanism. If this is true, then good substrates such as octanoyl-ACP
will bind to “E” populating the kinetically favored
pathway (E ⇌ E·octanoyl-ACP ⇌ E·octanoyl-ACP·SAM;
top pathway in Scheme ). This model assumes
an [E·SAM·octanoyl-ACP] ternary complex formed in the bottom
pathway is less productive or nonproductive, and the resultant steady-state
rate is the sum of rates from both of these pathways. When SAM is
held constant and octanoyl-ACP concentration is increased from low
to high values, more acyl-ACP will bind to the E.SAM complex gradually
shifting the reaction toward the disfavored pathway thereby decreasing
the overall steady-state rates (Figure ).
Under fixed octanoyl-ACP conditions, however, BmaI1 must predominantly
exist as E·octanoyl-ACP complex (Kia is 125 nM). SAM binds to this complex, and the reaction follows
the kinetically preferred pathway. If this model is valid, we must
see a hyperbolic rate curve for varying SAM, and indeed this is our
observation. The moderately active two-carbon shorter hexanoyl-ACP
also falls into this category.

Substrates Add in Random Order to
BmaI1
Substrates A and B correspond
to acyl-ACP and SAM, respectively. The path highlighted in blue is
kinetically favored and red is disfavored. The pathway for non-native
acyl-ACP substrate turnover under low and high substrate concentrations
is described in this scheme.

For a poor substrate
such as butyrylACP or octanoyl-CoA, E·butyryl-ACP
or E·octanoyl-CoA complex is less stable favoring E ⇌
E·butyryl-ACP or E ⇌ E·octanoyl-CoA equilibrium toward
free enzyme, E. SAM can then bind to E to form E·SAM. As the
concentration of butyryl-ACP or octanoyl-CoA is steadily increased
from low to high values, the acyl-ACP or acyl-CoA substrate will first
bind to E·SAM, which exists at higher concentrations, to form
a nonproductive [E·SAM·butyryl-ACP] or [E·SAM·octanoyl-CoA]
ternary complex (bottom pathway in Scheme ). Therefore, rates do not increase with an increase in acyl-substrate
concentration, accounting for the lag-phase in the substrate-velocity
curve. At higher butyryl-ACP or octanoyl-CoA concentrations, however,
more of the acyl-donor substrate would bind to E shifting the AHL
synthesis reaction coordinate toward the kinetically preferred pathway
leading to the upward increase in the substrate–velocity curve
(top pathway in Scheme , Figure A,D). The only exception is decanoyl-ACP, which shows hyperbolic
behavior (Figure C). The lack of a lag-phase
at low decanoyl-ACP concentrations suggests that AHL synthesis proceeds
via the preferred pathway. Therefore, according to this model, the
E·decanoyl-ACP complex should be relatively more stable (decanoyl
acyl-chain is only two carbons longer than octanoyl acyl-chain) compared
to E·butyryl-ACP or E·octanoyl-CoA complexes. The [E·decanoyl-ACP·SAM]
ternary complex, however, may not be in a productive conformation,
thus decreasing kcat and catalytic efficiency
for this substrate. We also find that when SAM is the varied substrate,
the rate curves were nonhyperbolic at fixed concentrations of butyryl-ACP,
decanoyl-ACP, and octanoyl-CoA (Figure ).
For these poor substrates, E·acyl-ACP (or E·octanoyl-CoA)
should be less stable, and therefore E·acyl-ACP ⇌ E should
favor E. Therefore, at low concentrations, SAM binds to E (which is
present in excess relative to E·acyl-ACP) to form E·SAM
populating the kinetically disfavored pathway accounting for the lag
phase in the substrate–velocity curve (Scheme ). Alternatively, [E·acyl-ACP·SAM] could be unreactive
at low SAM concentrations. When SAM concentration is high, the reaction
proceeds via the kinetically favored pathway causing the upward lift
in the rate-curve. As discussed above, both good and poor substrates
fit the preferred-order, random mechanism model. The relative distribution
between favored and disfavored paths for substrate addition will depend
on the type of acyl-ACP substrate reacting with BmaI1.

Alternative
Possibilities
Although a random addition
of substrate model provides a rationale to understand kinetic cooperativity
observed for non-native substrates reacting with BmaI, other models
that could potentially fit our collected data are considered below.−

Acyl-Carrier Protein Existing in Multiple Conformations
Although this model could provide a reasonable explanation for
kinetic cooperativity observed for some substrates, we think this
scenario is less likely because octanoyl-CoA, a nonprotein based substrate,
displays nonhyperbolic kinetics, while the rate curve for decanoyl-ACP,
an ACP based poor substrate, is hyperbolic. These results suggest
that the cooperative behavior observed for some of these substrates
most likely arises from acyl-ACP binding to more than one enzyme species (such as E and E·SAM).

Slow Conformational Transition between Multiple
Free Enzyme Species in Solution As Observed in a Hysteretic or Mnemonic
Enzyme
Enzyme hysteresis is often accompanied by a lag or
burst in substrate utilization. A closer look at our progress curves,
however, did not reveal lag or burst phases in the time scale of our
steady-state assay conditions. Since we do not have any substantial
evidence yet to support the existence of more than one free enzyme
species (like E and E*) in solution, we have to assume that random
addition of substrates model best supports our current data.

Conclusions
Our data suggest that the rate curves for substrates
with low kcat/Km show cooperative
behavior, while others display a standard Michaelis–Menten
response. While alternate possibilities discussed above could potentially
explain cooperative kinetics observed for non-native acyl-ACPs in
reaction with BmaI1, our best evidence so far supports
a model involving random addition of substrates with acyl-ACP binding
first to the free enzyme (top pathway in Scheme ) more kinetically preferred over SAM binding first to the enzyme
(bottom pathway in Scheme ). For poor substrates,
the lag phase observed in the rate curves at low substrate concentrations
suggests that catalytic turnover either goes through a less-productive
(kinetically disfavored) path or forms an abortive complex. For substrates
with higher kcat/Km (octanoyl-ACP and hexanoyl-ACP), substrate inhibition is
observed at saturating concentrations. Although a simplistic model
for substrate inhibition proposes binding of two substrate molecules
to an enzyme to form an ES2 complex, in many instances,
however, substrate inhibition involves a more complex mechanism that
includes slow-transition between multiple enzyme species in solution. Nonetheless, we do not have any evidence yet
to support the existence of an ES2 complex. However, on
the basis of our current data, we can infer that positive cooperativity
observed for poor substrates and substrate inhibition seen for good
substrates lends support to the hypothesis that acyl-ACP can potentially
bind to more than one enzyme species, E and E·SAM. The kinetic
cooperativity observed for poor, non-native acyl-ACP substrates raise
an important question: why do poor substrates populate less
favored kinetic paths and thus display a nonhyperbolic kinetic response? Perhaps E·acyl-ACP complex is less stable for a poor acyl-ACP
substrate? If E·acyl-ACP were unstable or short-lived, then E·SAM
would accumulate in solution. Acyl-ACP binding to E·SAM would
populate alternative, less favored paths for AHL synthesis (Figure A) and thus form the basis of kinetic cooperativity
observed for these substrates.

Native acyl-ACP substrate recognition
by BmaI1. (A) Favored versus
disfavored paths for AHL synthesis. The favored path is highlighted
in blue and the disfavored path is in red. Productive and nonproductive
enzyme–substrate complexes are represented by solid (blue)
and dotted (red) rectangles, respectively. (B) A cartoon diagram representing
a stable and productive [BmaI1·acyl-ACP·SAM] ternary complex.
Acyl-chain, ACP, and SAM binding pockets in BmaI1 are represented
in red, green, and blue colors, respectively. PP in this figure refers
to the phosphopantetheine linker. For octanoyl-ACP, the thioester
acyl carbonyl and SAM amine are locked in optimal conformation to
facilitate acylation. A nonoptimal fit for non-native acyl-ACP substrates
in BmaI1 active site should affect enzyme–substrate ternary
complex stability, which decreases the catalytic constant and overall
catalytic efficiencies for these substrates relative to octanoyl-ACP.

The acyl carrier protein is an
all α-helical, four-helix
protein with the acyl chain sequestered in a hydrophobic tunnel between
helices II and IV. The dynamic, acyl carrier protein offers some unique
structural features that allow this protein to interact with a wide-range
of partner enzymes in multiple metabolic pathways in vivo. A number
of acyl-ACP structures both as an apo-structure and in complex with
a partner enzyme have been published.− Acyl-ACP crystal structures show that the hydrophobic tunnel is
plastic, and binding of the fatty acyl-chain can expand the internal
cavity volume to about 164 Å3 for decanoyl-ACP relative
to apo-ACP.− The phosphopantetheine moiety is partially buried inside this core
to different extents depending on the acyl-ACP, which would give a
unique surface contour for each acyl-ACP. Perhaps this forms an important
part of the recognition surface that promotes specificity in its interactions
with the partner enzyme? Once substrate-specific recognition is achieved,
protein–protein interactions between ACP and a partner enzyme
will mediate the reporting of the acyl-chain from acyl-ACP to the
enzyme active site. A recently published report on FabA-acyl-ACP cross-linked
structure suggests that the switch-blade release of the acyl-chain
from acyl-ACP is a multistep process that begins with electrostatic
binding interactions between negatively charged phosphopantetheine
and a positively charged basic patch in FabA. Salt-bridges between
ACP helix II and R132, K161 amino acid residues of FabA form to anchor
the ES complex and enzyme-assisted movement of ACP helix III facilitates
acyl-chain reporting to acyl-chain binding pocket in FabA., If BmaI1 specifically recognizes octanoyl-ACP surface contour, then
an altered recognition surface between BmaI1 and a non-native acyl-ACP
substrate could potentially influence the rate of acyl-chain release,
which could also affect the formation of a stable and productive E·acyl-ACP
complex necessary to progress the AHL synthesis reaction along the
kinetically preferred pathway.

FabA·acyl-ACP cocrystal
structures show that acyl-chain release
from acyl-ACP is enzyme dependent. Therefore,
specificity in enzyme-acyl-ACP substrate recognition should play a
major role in this chain-flipping event. For a poor substrate, the
lack of such specific interactions in the E·acyl-ACP complex
might hinder acyl-chain flipping or alternatively, the acyl-chain
could be unstable when bound at the BmaI1 active site. In that instance,
one could envision that the acyl-chain will be sequestered back between
ACP helices II and IV thereby promoting the dissociation of the E·acyl-ACP
complex. When a good substrate such as octanoyl-ACP binds to BmaI1,
specificity achieved in formation of the E·acyl-ACP complex must
facilitate acyl-chain reporting to the enzyme acyl-chain pocket. This
will further enhance the stability of ES complex and aid in anchoring
the acyl-ACP substrate in a productive conformation, optimal for acylation.
A productive E·acyl-ACP complex would entail precise positioning
of the thioester acyl carbonyl (acyl-donor) and SAM amine (acyl-acceptor)
moieties to form a productive E·acyl-ACP.SAM ternary complex,
conducive for acylation (Figure B).

We observed standard Michaelis–Menten response with octanoyl-ACP,
hexanoyl-ACP, and decanoyl-ACP substrates (Figure ). The close structural similarity of hexanoyl-ACP and decanoyl-ACP
with octanoyl-ACP suggests that these substrates must be able to form
a relatively stable E·acyl-ACP complex. Since kcat and Km for hexanoyl-ACP
is similar to octanoyl-ACP, this indicates that a two-carbon shorter
acyl-chain packs reasonably well compared to the two-carbon longer
chain in the BmaI1 acyl-chain binding pocket. Although we observed
a hyperbolic response for decanoyl-ACP, the reduced kcat and higher Km for this
substrate relative to hexanoyl-ACP suggest that E·decanoyl-ACP
is in a less productive conformation (the acyl-chain not anchored
optimally for acylation) compared to E·hexanoyl-ACP. For poor
substrates such as butyryl-ACP and octanoyl-CoA, the lag phase in
substrate velocity curves observed at low substrate concentration
hints that E·butyryl-ACP and E·octanoyl-CoA complex is less
stable favoring the dissociation of this complex. MD simulations of
acyl-ACPs suggest that the tip of the acyl-chain attempts to reach
the bottom of hydrophobic cavity formed between helices II and IV
of the ACP. Therefore, a four-carbon
shorter acyl-chain in butyryl-ACP should possess higher conformational
mobility in BmaI1 acyl-chain binding pocket promoting the dissociation
of E·butyryl-ACP complex. For the octanoyl-CoA substrate, the
lack of ACP moiety should severely impair the formation of a productive
ES complex. In short, hexanoyl-ACP and decanoyl ACP (substrates that
closely resemble the octanoyl-ACP structure) can form a stable ES
complex, but in a less productive mode for acylation. On the other
hand, butyryl-ACP and octanoyl-CoA (substrates that possess larger
structural deviations from octanoyl-ACP) can form neither stable nor
productive ES complex. It seems that only the native acyl-ACP substrate
can form both stable and productive ES complex, and therefore AHL
synthesis rates with the octanoyl-ACP substrate are significantly
higher than non-native acyl-ACP substrates. Cocrystallization of inert
acyl-ACP analogues carrying native and non-native acyl-chains and
SAM with BmaI1 is in progress to further understand structural differences
between BmaI·(native)acyl-ACP·SAM and BmaI1·(non-native)acyl-ACP·SAM
ternary complexes. In conclusion, our data suggest that recognition
of native acyl-ACP substrate by BmaI1 is achieved through the formation
of a stable and productive E·acyl-ACP·SAM ternary complex.
Non-native acyl-donor substrates unable to form tight E·acyl-ACP·SAM
ternary complexes are thus effectively discriminated by the enzyme.
These results offer insights into understanding the molecular basis
of tight signal specificity observed in B. mallei quorum sensing.

Supporting Information Available
Mass-spectra of ACP and its
derivatives. This material is available free of charge via the Internet
at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bi5009529_si_001.pdf

Author Present Address
§ X.P.:
Biomolecular Research Center, Boise State University, 1910
University Drive, Boise, Idaho 83725.

The authors
declare no competing financial interest.

Abbreviations Used
ACPacyl carrier protein

AHLacyl-homoserine lactone

MTAmethyl thioadenosine

C8-HSLoctanoyl-homoserine
lactone

AHL synthaseacyl-homoserine lactone synthase

acyl-ACPacyl–acyl carrier protein

SAMS-adenosyl-l-methionine

B-PERbacterial protein extraction reagent

DCPIPdichlorophenolindophenol

HEPES(4-(2-hydroxyethyl)-1-piperazineethanesulfonic
acid

Tristris(hydroxymethyl)aminomethane

Q-TOFquadrupole-time-of-flight

ESIelectrosprayionization

C4ACPbutyryl-ACP

C6ACPhexanoyl-ACP

C8ACPoctanoyl-ACP

C10ACPdecanoyl-ACP

C8CoAoctanoyl-CoA

3′5-ADP3′5′-adenosinediphosphate

IPTGisopropyl-β-d-thiogalactoside

