Iron is the
second most abundant
metal in the Earth’s crust and is critical for many life processes
despite its extreme insolubility and toxicity under physiological
conditions. Thus, biological systems have
developed specialized mechanisms for transport, storage, and uptake
of this essential nutrient. To obtain iron, many bacteria produce
siderophores that bind extracellular iron, diffuse to the bacterial
surface, and are taken up via specific receptor proteins.− Certain bacteria can also utilize siderophores produced by other
microbial species (xeno-siderophores) if they produce the cognate
transporters. Heme can also serve as an iron source,, and some bacteria can utilize host transferrin- or lactoferrin-bound
iron.− In Gram-negative bacteria, iron sources are typically bound by an
outer membrane receptor (OMR) and transported to the periplasm using
energy supplied by the TonB complex. A
substrate-specific periplasmic binding protein (PBP) interacts with
the iron source, binds the cargo between two lobes, and delivers it
across the periplasm to the appropriate ATP-binding cassette (ABC)
transporter for transit to the cytoplasm.−

The PBPs
involved in bacterial iron uptake have historically been
classified as either unchelated iron binders or chelated iron binders
(i.e., iron-siderophore complex binders).,− However, the unchelated iron binders are not always
categorized together. (Unchelated iron has variously been referred
to in the literature as naked or inorganic iron in reference to direct
binding to the +3 ion.) One prototypical unchelated iron binder is
the periplasmic ferric iron binding protein FbpANg from Neisseria gonorrheae. FbpANg is required for utilization of host-transferrin-derived
iron and binds Fe3+ directly in the first coordination
shell in the presence of a requisite synergistic anion.,− Unchelated iron binding proteins from other bacteria, including
some that do not produce transferrin or lactoferrin receptors, have
also been shown to bind iron directly. However, the anion-dependence,
iron-coordination geometry, and type of amino acid side chains involved
in iron sequestration vary.,− It has been shown that even among homologues of FbpANg, direct iron binding is accomplished in a variety of ways by bacteria
that use a variety of iron sources. On
the other hand, one prototypical binder of chelated iron is the iron-siderophore
binding PBP FhuD from Escherichia coli.− The reported crystal structures of FhuD show that the first coordination
shell of iron is occupied by the siderophore, and the protein occupies
the second coordination shell.

The schemes currently used to categorize protein families, of which
the periplasmic components of iron uptake systems are members, use
a variety of classification criteria, but all imply separate functions:
either unchelated iron transport or iron-siderophore transport.,Here we report a novel capacity for a periplasmic protein
that is involved in iron uptake in Bordetella
pertussis: the ability to bind iron directly
and the ability to bind iron-siderophore complexes.

The Gram-negative bacterial species B. pertussis is a respiratory pathogen that causes whooping cough in humans.,B. pertussis can acquire iron using
its heme uptake system or its native
dihydroxamate siderophore alcaligin (ALC; Figure S1 in  [SI])., It can also use xeno-siderophores, including desferrioxamine B (DFB),
ferrichrome (FC), and enterobactin (ENT),
among others (Figure ; Figure S1 in ). Of the Bordetella siderophore systems, only the ALC and
ENT systems have been characterized., The ALC genes
encode ALC biosynthesis, export and regulation activities, and the
OMR. The ENT gene cluster encodes the
OMR, an IroE hydrolase orthologue, and a transcriptional regulator. Notably, there are no genes predicted to encode
cognate periplasmic iron-siderophore binders (or ABC transporters)
within the ALC and ENT chromosomal gene clusters.

Bordetella FbpA-dependent iron uptake
via alcaligin (pink rectangles) and xeno- (e.g., ENT, DFB, FC; green
circle) siderophores. Host iron sources include transferrin or lactoferrin
(Tf/Lf) as well as others not shown. TonB-dependent receptors (green
and pink) are shown in the outer membrane (OM); the TonB complex and
the ABC transporter FbpB/CBp are in the cytoplasmic membrane
(CM). FbpABp is shown in the periplasm, and a previous
study showed that it is important in unchelated iron and iron-siderophore
utilization.

Recently, we identified fbpA as an iron
repressible B. pertussis gene that
is also present in other Bordetellae.fbpA encodes a periplasmic
protein (FbpABp) with
significant structural similarity to iron binding proteins from Serratia marcescens,Neisseria spp., and Haemophilus influenzae.,,B. pertussis fbpA is predicted to
be cotranscribed with fbpB and fbpC, which encode the permease and ATPase components of an ABC transporter. B. pertussis fbpA mutants were defective
in using unchelated iron for growth and, remarkably, were also defective
in using the native siderophore and xeno-siderophores for growth. Heme iron assimilation was not affected by fbpA inactivation. Since the prototypic bacterial siderophore
system relies on a siderophore-specific PBP and associated ABC transporter,
these Bordetella results were unusual
as ALC, ENT, DFB, and FC are quite structurally different (Figure
S1 in ). Not only are their functional
groups different, but the hexadentate siderophores ENT, DFB, and FC
bind iron in a 1:1 ratio, whereas tetradentate ALC binds iron in a
2:3 ratio (Fe3+:ALC) at physiological pH (see ).,,, These results suggested that
FbpABp interacts with diverse ferric siderophores to mediate
iron transport to the cytosol. To our knowledge, a PBP capable of
binding iron directly and capable of binding iron-siderophore complexes
has not been described previously. The biological purpose of direct
interaction with iron by a PBP involved in iron-siderophore utilization
may represent a new paradigm for PBP function.

The X-ray crystal
structures of apo-FbpABp (PDB: 1Y9U), Fe–FbpABp–carbonate
(PDB: 2OWT),
and Fe–FbpABp–(oxalate)2 (PDB: 2OWS) have been reported
and show that FbpABp can directly
coordinate Fe3+ through its conserved tyrosine residues
(Y143, Y199, and Y200)., Similar to FbpANg, the crystal structures of
FbpABp show iron bound directly by the protein with an
anion present., These solid state studies of
FbpABp, coupled with its known requirement for ferric siderophore
utilization,,, indicate that FbpABp is similar to other unchelated iron
binders, but also has potentially unique functions in ferric siderophore
utilization.

In this study, using FbpABp produced
naturally in Bordetella cells, we quantified
Fe3+ sequestration
by FbpABp in the presence of various synergistic anions
in solution. We also demonstrated that FbpABp binds ferric
complexes of ALC, ENT, DFB, and FC, all with micromolar affinity,
and characterized those binding interactions in solution. This report
describes B. pertussis FbpABp as the first known example of a promiscuous periplasmic iron transport
component that binds both unchelated iron and ferric siderophores
and thus may act as a nodal point in non-heme Bordetella iron transport.

Experimental Methods
Materials
All
chemicals used were of highest purity
grade: MES (2-(N-morpholino)ethanesulfonic acid)
buffer, desferrioxamine B mesylate salt, and ferrichrome solution
(iron free, from Ustilago sphaerogena) (Sigma Chemicals); sodium chloride, sodium carbonate (Fisher Chemical);
sodium oxalate (Allied Chemical); sodium citrate (J. T. Baker); and
sodium NTA (Aldrich Chemical Co.). Iron-free 50 mM MES, 100 mM NaCl
buffer solutions were prepared in acid-washed buffer bottles by dissolving
the required amount of MES and NaCl in deionized water, and the pH
was adjusted to 6.5 by addition of acid/alkali. Chelex 100 (BioRad)
beads were added to this solution to remove iron contamination and
left overnight followed by filtration to remove the beads. All experiments
were performed in pH 6.5 buffer as the pH of the periplasm is believed
to be slightly acidic relative to the surroundings., Apo-alcaligin and enterobactin were purified as described previously,
from supernatant fluids of Bordetella bronchiseptica and E. coli, respectively.,,

Purification of FbpABp
B.
bronchiseptica strain BRM72 (ΔfbpA) carrying plasmid pBBR/fbpABp encoding fbpA from B. pertussis strain Tohama I was used to produce the FbpABp protein
in the periplasm under natural iron starvation conditions. Bacteria
were cultured in iron-depleted Stainer–Scholte medium, containing 0.5% casamino acids and gentamicin
(10 μg/mL) at 35 °C. FbpABpwas extracted from
the bacteria by osmotic shock treatment as described previously. The osmotic shock fraction was clarified by
centrifugation, followed by filtration using a low protein binding
polyethersulfone membrane filter with 0.2 μm pore size. The
clarified osmotic shock fraction was dialyzed against 10 mM Tris buffer,
pH 8.6, at 4 °C, and applied to a 2.5 cm × 15 cm DEAE CL-6B
Sepharose anion-exchange column. The column was washed with 10 bed
volumes of 10 mM Tris buffer, pH 8.6, then eluted with a 4-bed volume
continuous gradient of 0.0–0.5 M NaCl. Peak fractions were
pooled and dialyzed against 10 mM Tris buffer, pH 8.6. Purified FbpABp was concentrated by ultrafiltration and the protein concentration
was determined using the Bradford method with bovine serum albumin
as the standard. The identity of the
FbpABp protein was confirmed by liquid chromatography–tandem
mass spectrometry (80% coverage, 100% protein identification probability)
using an LTQ ion trap mass spectrometer. An SDS-PAGE gel showing FbpABp is presented in the  as Figure
S10.

Preparation and Characterization of Fe-FbpABp–X
Assemblies
UV–vis spectra were recorded using a Cary-50
UV–vis spectrophotometer with 1 cm path length cells in 50
mM MES, 100 mM NaCl at pH 6.5 and room temperature. The molar absorptivity
of holo-FbpABp was calculated on the basis of the absorbance
band at 280 nm from an iron-loaded FbpABp sample (ε
= 44000 M–1 cm–1) and the characteristic
absorbance band in the visible region of the spectrum in the presence
of various anions. The molar absorptivity of apo-FbpABp is 38500 M–1 cm–1 at 280 nm
and is ∼10% lower than that of holo-FbpABp following
a trend reported by us for FbpANg in a previous study.

Fe–FbpABp–X (X
= carbonate or oxalate) was prepared by adding 50 equiv of Na-carbonate
or oxalate from freshly prepared stock solutions (50 mM) to apo-FbpABp in 50 mM MES, 100 mM NaCl at pH 6.5. The resulting solutions
were allowed to equilibrate for 30 min before 10 equiv of standardized
Fe(ClO4)3 solution were added, and the solutions
were gently mixed for 30 min and then allowed to stand overnight at
4 °C to precipitate any unreacted iron, which was removed by
filtration with a syringe-driven 0.2 μM filter unit (Corning
Corporation). Fe–FbpABp–citrate was prepared
by adding 10 equiv of Na-citrate from a freshly prepared stock solution
(20 mM) to apo-FbpABp followed by 2 equiv of Fe-citrate
(1:1, 2 mM). Similarly, to prepare Fe–FbpABp–NTA,
10 equiv of Na-NTA from a stock solution (20 mM) were added to apo-FbpABp followed by the addition of 2 equiv of Fe-NTA (1:1, 2 mM).
Additional Fe(ClO4)3/Fe-citrate/Fe-NTA was titrated
into the solutions of protein complexes until no further increase
in intensity of the corresponding charge transfer band was observed,
ensuring fully iron-loaded protein complex formation. Formation of
the corresponding ternary complexes was confirmed by the appearance
of well-resolved charge transfer bands in the visible region of the
absorption spectrum of the respective Fe–FbpABp–X
species (X = citrate, carbonate, oxalate, or NTA). All protein complexes
were dialyzed against 50 mM MES, 100 mM NaCl at pH 6.5 buffer three
times using Slide-A-Lyzer dialysis cassette (Thermo Scientific) to
remove excess iron and anion.

A competitive equilibrium between
Fe–FbpABp–X
(X = oxalate, carbonate, citrate, or NTA) and EDTA (eq ) was employed to determine the Fe3+ binding constants
of ternary complexes for Fe–FbpABp–X, as
defined in eq , using  described previously.

Characterization
of apo-FbpABp Interactions with
Ferric Siderophores
Fluorescence spectroscopy was used to
quantitatively determine the interaction between apo-FbpABp and ferric siderophores. All fluorescence spectra were recorded
on JOBIN-YVON-SPEX Fluorolog3 fluorimeter at right angle mode with
5 nm slit width and in 50 mM MES, 100 mM NaCl buffer at pH 6.5 and
room temperature. To minimize the intrinsic emission from the tyrosine
residues, the apo-FbpABp was excited at 297 nm. The observed
intrinsic emission from apo-FbpABp is the summation of
emissions from individual tryptophan residues and is centered at 352
nm under our experimental conditions. This indicates a hydrophilic
environment on average for the four tryptophan residues present in
FbpABp., Quenching of the intrinsic tryptophan
emission band upon ligand (Fe3+-siderophore) addition is
an indication of reduction in the concentration of the free apo-FbpABp in solution that can emit at 352 nm, and these data were
used to determine the binding affinity of FbpABp with various
Fe3+-siderophores. An apparent Fe3+-siderophore/apo-FbpABp dissociation constant (Kd) corresponding
to the equilibrium in eq  was determined by
fluorescence titration using eq , where P represents
FbpABp, Fe-sid represents both ferric native and ferric
xeno-siderophores and P(Fe-sid) represents the FbpABp(Fe-siderophore)
complex. Reproducible results were only obtained for a one-site binding
model. The experimental design and data analysis approach was the
same asthat used previously by us and others.,,,Kd values were obtained from plots of
eq , where Q% is the observed
% quenching at each point in the titration and Qmax is the maximum % quenching.

A possible exchange
of Fe3+ between Fe-siderophores and apo-FbpABp was monitored
using UV–visible spectroscopy by monitoring the CT band of
the Fe-siderophore over a 6 h time period (protein:ferric xeno-siderophore
1:2; protein:ferric native siderophore = 2:1).

Protein Modeling
Iron and siderophore binding sites
were modeled starting with RCSB Protein Data Bank structures 1Y9U:A and 2OWT (to which hydrogens
were added).1Y9U is the structure for the B. pertussis ferric binding protein in the apo (open)
conformation. 2OWT represents the holo (closed) structure, and its ligands, CO32– and iron, were removed before docking.
Ligands for docking were downloaded from either RCSB Protein Data
Bank (www.rcsb.org) or, in the case of ferrioxamine B and ferric-alcaligin (Fe2ALC3), and the alcaligin monomer
(ALC), from the Cambridge Crystallographic Data Centre (reference
codes: 155586, TEQKUV, and C00080, respectively). Patchdock was used to find the initial docking sites,
and models were fine-tuned with Chimera. The superposition of the alcaligin (monomer)-bound model with the 2OWS structure was created
with the Matchmaker utility implemented in Chimera. Models were evaluated
using ERRATv2, and the best scoring value
for each is reported.

Results and Discussion
Crystal structures
of holo-FbpABp established that it
binds Fe3+ directly in the presence of synergistic anions
(oxalate and carbonate),, and Bordetella growth studies showed that FbpABp is essential for the utilization of Fe3+ bound to multiple
structurally distinct siderophores. The
flexibility of the β-sheet hinge region of FbpABp is consistent with the possibility of such substrate binding promiscuity.
Modeling of ferric native and xeno-siderophore binding between the
two lobes of FbpABp (Figures S2–S5 in ) predicted favorable binding interactions,
supporting the possibility that FbpABp can act as a ferric
siderophore chaperone. In the following sections we describe the interaction
of FbpABp with unchelated Fe3+ and with iron-siderophore
complexes utilized by Bordetella.

FbpABp Strongly Sequesters Unchelated Fe3+ in the Presence
of Various Synergistic Anions
Crystal structures
reported for Fe–FbpABp–(oxalate)2 and Fe–FbpABp–carbonate show that Fe3+ is bound to the three conserved tyrosine residues on the
C-lobe of the protein., Until now there has been no report
that quantifies FbpABp–Fe3+ binding interactions.
Here we have determined the Fe3+ affinity of each Fe–FbpABp–X assembly, where X is citrate, carbonate, oxalate,
or nitrilotriacetate (NTA). Figure  shows
a representative overlay of the visible spectra for all Fe–FbpABp–X assemblies prepared individually as described in , indicating the anion promiscuity
of FbpABp in sequestering Fe3+ and modulation
of the position of the charge transfer (CT) bands by various anions
(Table ). No Fe3+ sequestration
was observed in the absence of a suitable synergistic anion. In silico modeling also identified an arginine residue (R105)
involved in anion binding in other FbpABp homologues (Table
S1 in ) that is conserved in FbpABp. The appearance of characteristic CT bands that are unique
for different anions indicates that these anions directly participate
in iron sequestration at the first coordination shell and are synergistic
anions.

Visible region spectra of Fe-FbpABp-X (X = citrate,
carbonate, oxalate, or NTA) in 50 mM MES, 100 mM NaCl at pH 6.5. Protein
concentrations are indicated.

Biophysical Characterization of Fe-FbpABp-X (X = Citrate, Carbonate, Oxalate, or NTA) at pH 6.5 in
50 mM MES, 100 mM NaCl
anion	λmax, nm	ε, M–1 cm–1	K′eff, M–1	
citrate	410	3433	7.0 ± 3.7 × 1016	
NTA	466	3049	4.7 ± 2.0 × 1016	
oxalate	440	3143	5.5 ± 1.2 × 1016	
carbonate	412	3390	1.2 ± 0.03 × 1016	
Effective stability constants corresponding
to eq . Values reported represent the variation
in two independent determinations.

The observed Fe3+ affinity constants (K′eff) defined in eq  and
determined as described in  are listed in Table . K′eff values (∼1016 M–1) are approximately 1–2 orders of magnitude less than those
reported for FbpANg, which may be due to a difference in
coordination environment provided by these two proteins.,,,

We conclude that FbpABp is capable of sequestering
Fe3+aq with high affinity (K′eff ≈ 1016 M–1) in the
presence of various synergistic anions. In these assemblies, the anions
and the protein both occupy the first coordination shell of Fe3+.

FbpABp Binds Ferric Siderophore
Complexes
Our hypothesis based on Bordetella growth experiments using fbpA mutants42 and in silico modeling (Figures S2–S5 in ) proposed that FbpABp has the potential
to bind ferric native and xeno-siderophores as illustrated in eq . To investigate this possible interaction we carried
out fluorescence quenching titrations involving apo-FbpABp and ferric-alcaligin, or one of the ferric xeno-siderophores. Apo-FbpABp, with four tryptophan residues in its structure, emits at
352 nm when excited at 297 nm, indicating a hydrophilic average environment
for the tryptophans. Although both ferric
native and xeno-siderophores showed concentration-dependent quenching
of the intrinsic emission band, the concentration dependence, change
in band position, and maximum quenching (Qmax) differed appreciably between the two types of siderophores. This
suggests a differential mode of interaction between FbpABp and the ferric native siderophore versus the ferric xeno-siderophores.
The affinities (Kd; eq ) of all the holo-siderophores for FbpABp were
calculated using these concentration dependent quenching data as described
in . Figure a shows representative quenching spectra when Fe2(ALC)3 was titrated into a solution of apo-FbpABp, and Figure b shows the fit of these data
using a one site binding model.

(a) Representative fluorescence emission
spectra for FbpABp (1 μM) in the presence of increasing
concentrations of Fe2(ALC)3 (0–2 μM).
Upon addition of
Fe2(ALC)3, emission decreases and a blue shift
of ∼8 nm is observed. Refer to the  section for experimental conditions. (b) A plot of
Q% FbpABp fluorescence emission (352 nm) vs increasing
[Fe2(ALC)3]. Filled circles represent actual
data points, and the smooth line is the best fit of eq  to the data. Average Kd for eq  = 0.13 ± 0.04 μM and Qmax = ∼80%.

The Kd value for Fe2(ALC)3 binding to apo-FbpABp is 0.13 ±
0.04 μM.
Similar micromolar affinity for ferric-hydroxamate siderophore binding
to FhuD from E. coli has been reported. Figure a shows an ∼8
nm blue shift in the emission band, indicating a change in average
tryptophan environment from hydrophilic to hydrophobic surroundings. Consequently, we conclude that addition of Fe2(ALC)3 to apo-FbpABp leads to a change
of conformation of FbpABp concomitant with a change in
tryptophan hydrophilicity.

Kd values
calculated using the same
mathematical model for the ferric xeno-siderophores (ENT, DFB, and
FC) were found to be an order of magnitude higher than the Kd calculated for Fe2(ALC)3 (Kd ≈ 1 μM). Representative
data are presented in  (Figures S6–S8).
The Qmax for the xeno-siderophore titrations
range from 20 to 60%, whereas for the Fe2(ALC)3 titration Qmax is 80%. We interpret
this as indicative of the involvement of the tryptophan residues (or
a subset) to a greater extent for the protein–ligand interaction
in the presence of Fe2(ALC)3 than for the ferric
xeno-siderophores.

When the apo-siderophores (ALC and ENT, as
representative hydroxamate
and cathecholate siderophores, respectively) were titrated into a
solution containing apo-FbpABp in separate experiments
(final protein:apo-siderophore = 1:4 and 1:2, respectively), the apo-protein
fluorescence emission band did not show significant quenching (&lt;16%;
Figure S9 in ). This suggests that only
a very weak interaction occurs between these apo-siderophores and
the apo-protein. A similar result was obtained when a UV–vis
spectral difference experiment was performed between apo-DFB and apo-FbpABp (results not shown), once again indicating that the apo-protein
is not able to bind an apo-siderophore effectively. These experiments
suggest that the “binding interaction” that we observe
quantitatively using a fluorescence emission quenching assay for holo-siderophores
and apo-FbpABp is ligand-conformation specific and in fact
requires the siderophore to be bound to Fe3+.

These
results indicate that in addition to binding directly to
unchelated Fe3+, FbpABp can bind the native
ferric siderophore (ALC) with Kd = ∼0.1
μM and various ferric xeno-siderophores with Kd = ∼1.0 μM. This finding is consistent with
earlier growth studies demonstrating that Bordetella fbpA mutants are impaired in their utilization
of ferric siderophores as well as unchelated iron. These results also support our hypothesis derived from in silico modeling (Figures S2–S5 in ) and represent the first quantification of
the capacity of a bacterial periplasmic protein to bind iron both
directly and indirectly.

Fe3+ Exchange within the FbpABp/holo-Siderophore
Assembly
The fact that FbpABp can bind unchelated
Fe3+ with high affinity (Table ) and can form a “chaperone-like” assembly with a ferric
siderophore complex with micromolar binding affinity (eq ) led us to expand our working hypothesis to include the possibility
of an exchange mechanism for Fe3+ between the protein bound
holo-siderophore and the apo-protein. This is illustrated in eq , where “sid” indicates both native
and xeno-siderophores, and Y represents either a siderophore or an
opportunistic environmental synergistic anion. Such a process may
represent a key step in the iron transport mechanism to the cytoplasm.

To test this extended
hypothesis we performed time-dependent UV–vis spectroscopy
experiments in which apo-FbpABp was added to ferric siderophore
complexes, and the characteristic CT band for the ferric siderophore
was monitored over time. Exchange of Fe3+ from the siderophore
into the FbpABp binding site will change the position/intensity
of the ferric siderophore CT band due to a donor group change in the
first coordination shell of the Fe3+.

For all ferric
xeno-siderophore complexes investigated, the characteristic
ligand-to-metal charge transfer band remained constant in position
and intensity, even after exposure to apo-FbpABp for 3
h at pH 6.5 (Figure a). These results indicated
that there is no change of the ferric siderophore first coordination
shell in the presence of the protein and discounts an exchange reaction
as described in eq . This observation is not
surprising, given that the stability constants for the holo-siderophore
complexes (∼1023–1049 M–1),, are much higher than the Fe3+ association
constant observed for holo-FbpABp (∼1016 M–1) (Table ). However,
a conformational change destabilizing the iron-siderophore binding
pocket in the presence of a small-molecule chelator could facilitate
dissociation of the Fe3+ into the protein binding pocket.
In order to test this hypothesis for the iron-exchange reaction shown
in eq , we carried out the reaction in the
presence of biologically relevant anions. Our choice of anions was
citrate and phosphate, which either form stable Fe–FbpABp–X complexes or have been shown to facilitate the
insertion of Fe3+ into N. gonorrheae FbpA, respectively. Even in the presence
of 50-fold excess of either of these anions there was no exchange
of Fe3+ between a xeno-siderophore and FbpABp. On the basis of these observations we conclude that FbpABp is unable to remove Fe3+ from a ferric xeno-siderophore
or detectably alter the first coordination shell of Fe3+ under the in vitro conditions used.

(a) UV–vis spectra
with charge transfer (CT) band at 493
nm for Fe-ENT (15.4 μM) before and after addition of FbpABp (7.5 μM) in 50 mM MES, 100 mM NaCl at pH 6.5; (b)
UV–vis spectra for Fe2(ALC)3 (9 μM)
before and after addition of apoFbpABp (18 μM) showing
a shift in λmax from 428 nm (CT band for Fe2ALC3) to 410 nm. The mixture of Fe2(ALC)3 and FbpABp was monitored for 3 h, and the spectrum
displayed here is from the end of that incubation.

The results were quite different for the reaction
between apo-FbpABp and holo-ALC, the native siderophore
produced and utilized
by the Bordetellae. At our experimental
conditions the predominant species for holo-ALC is Fe2(ALC)3 (see ), which is the expected in vivo form of the ferric siderophore and is hypothesized
to be the form of the complex recognized by the outer membrane receptor
FauA.,, The ligand-to-metal
CT band characteristic of Fe2(ALC)3 occurs at
428 nm, whereas the mononuclear species Fe(ALC)(OH2)2+, which predominates at pH &lt; 1, absorbs at
longer wavelengths, λmax = 500 nm. Immediately after Fe2(ALC)3 was mixed
with a solution of apo-FbpABp the λmax shifted from 428 to 410 nm (Figure b). As
reported in Table , Fe–FbpABp–carbonate exhibits an absorption peak at 412 nm. The possibility
of forming a carbonate complex was eliminated by the observation that
this 410 nm peak appeared even in the absence of carbonate (degassed
sample of Fe2(ALC)3 was mixed with degassed
apo-FbpABp under an argon blanket). The appearance of this
new absorption peak can be interpreted as due to a perturbation of
the first coordination shell of Fe3+ in Fe2(ALC)3 as a result of binding with FbpABp. This change
of environment for Fe3+ could simply be due to a binding
interaction between the protein and the holo-siderophore or could
be indicative of the first step of iron release from Fe2(ALC)3, which requires reorganization of the Fe(III) first
coordination shell. As noted above, the fluorescence emission quenching
experiment involving apo-FbpABp and Fe2(ALC)3 also shows a lower Kd value,
and a movement of the tryptophan residues from hydrophilic to hydrophobic
environment (Δλemission ≈ 8 nm; Figure a) compared to xeno-siderophore and apo-FbpABp interactions. These changes in the UV–vis and fluorescence
spectral band positions and the greater observed affinity of FbpABp for the native siderophore (compared to the affinity with
xeno-siderophores) suggest that reaction of Fe2ALC3 with apo-FbpABp may result in the formation of
a precursor complex to Fe-FbpABp-ALC under our experimental
conditions.

Our modeling study shows the feasibility of the
formation of Fe–FbpABp–ALC as shown in Figure a.
In our model ALC serves as the “synergistic anion” in
the exchange of Fe3+ from Fe2ALC3 to FbpABp. This may represent a step in the process of
delivering iron to the cytosol. In Figure b we have superimposed the model of Fe–FbpABp–ALC
on the reported crystal structure of Fe–FbpABp–(oxalate)2 (PDB: 2OWS). Both the model and the crystal structure show Fe3+ sequestered
by two conserved tyrosine residues from FbpABp and the
rest of the octahedral geometry first coordination shell occupied
by an “external ligand” or synergistic anion (either
ALC or two oxalate anions). The model fits very well with the crystal
structure (RMSD 0.578 Å) and shows that in the model the ALC
backbone can interact with the same amino acid residues that interact
with the two oxalates in the crystal structure (Arg137 (2.67 Å);
Asp179 (4.23 Å); Tyr200 (2.42 Å), Tyr143 (2.79 Å)).
Two additional anion–protein interactions are predicted by
the model of Fe–FbpABp–ALC (Glu15 (1.42 Å)
and His141 (4.25 Å)). This superposition between the modeled
structure and the crystal structure of 2OWS strongly supports the feasibility of
forming a Fe–FbpABp–ALC assembly and may
explain the appearance of the 410 nm band in our Fe3+-exchange
experiment.

Panel (a): Model of Fe-ALC in the binding cleft of FbpABp (2WOT); ERRAT
score 95.425. Docked structure created with Patchdock using 2OWT as receptor and
the ferric-alcaligin monomer (obtained from CCDC: C00080) as ligand.
Panel (b): Model of Fe–FbpABp–ALC superimposed
on the crystal structure of Fe–FbpABp–(oxalate)2 (2OWS); 2OWS is
shown in orange, the two oxalate anions are red, FbpABp is tan, and alcaligin is blue. Structures were aligned using the
“Matchmaker” utility in Chimera. RMSD: 0.578 Å.

Conclusion
The
results presented here demonstrate a previously undescribed
dual capacity for a periplasmic iron-uptake protein. FbpABp is capable of tightly binding unchelated Fe3+ directly
in the presence of synergistic anions in vitro (K′eff ≈ 1016 M–1) and can also bind the native ferric siderophore (Fe2(ALC)3) and ferric xeno-siderophore complexes with 0.1
and 1.0 μM affinities, respectively. Furthermore, Fe2(ALC)3 binding by FbpABp perturbs the coordination
of Fe3+ in the native alcaligin siderophore complex in
such a manner as to indicate partial dislocation of Fe3+ to the FbpABp binding site. This observation suggests
a possible iron removal mechanism. These novel abilities are consistent
with Bordetella studies showing that
FbpABp is required by these respiratory pathogens for the
utilization of both inorganic iron and siderophore-bound iron. Our report describes the unique and opportunistic
binding modes of Bordetella FbpA, hints
at the possible function of this promiscuity, and begs the question,
can other PBPs involved in iron-uptake bind iron both directly and
indirectly?

Supporting Information Available
A summary of the iron(III)
coordination chemistry of ALC, protein modeling and docking, fluorescence
data, protein gel, and amino acid residue comparison. This material
is available free of charge via the Internet at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bi5002823_si_001.pdf

Support for
this study was provided by the National Science Foundation Grant CHE-0809466
(to A.L.C.), Duke University, and Public Health Service Grant AI31088
(to S.K.A.) from the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious
Diseases.

The authors declare no
competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
A.L.C. thanks the Santa Fe Institute,
Santa Fe, NM, for their
hospitality during the period when part of this manuscript was written.

Abbreviations
Fe3+Ferric iron

FbpABpferric
binding protein from Bordetella pertussis

FbpANg ferric binding
protein from Neisseria gonorrheaeFe-FbpABp-X (X = carbonate,
oxalate, NTA, or citrate)Fe3+ complex of
FbpABp where both the protein and the anion (X) are in
the first coordination shell of iron

Fe-siderophore or Fe-sidferric ion completely
sequestered by the siderophore

FbpABp(Fe-siderophore) or FbpABp(Fe-sid)FbpABp chaperone complex of Fe-siderophore where
the protein only interacts at the second coordination shell of iron

Fe-FbpABp-siderophore
or Fe-FbpABp-sidFe3+ complex
of FbpABp where both the protein and the siderophore occupy
first coordination shell of iron

ALCalcaligin

FCferrichrome

ENTenterobactin

DFBdesferrioxamine B

Q%percent fluorescence quenching

Qmaxmaximum
percent fluorescence quenching

