In eukaryotes, c-type cytochromes
are important metalloproteins that function in diverse cellular processes
such as mitochondrial respiration and programmed cell death., Cytochromes c are covalently attached to heme via thioether bonds
formed between the two vinyl groups of the heme and two cysteinyl
thiol groups in the conserved heme-binding motif of the apocytochrome
protein at CysXxxXxxCysHis (CXXCH). The covalent attachment
of the heme cofactor occurs post-translationally within the mitochondrial
intermembrane space., The enzyme that catalyzes heme
attachment in mitochondria is known as holocytochrome c synthase (HCCS).
It has been demonstrated that thioether formation is spontaneous as
long as the cysteinyl thiols of cytochrome c and the heme iron are
both in the reduced state., Therefore, the role
of HCCS is likely to facilitate proper stereospecific positioning
of these two substrates at its active site. Fungi possess two related
HCCS proteins; one matures cytochrome c and another matures cytochrome c1.− However, humans
and other animals express a single HCCS that recognizes both c-type
cytochromes. HCCS is an essential protein in animals, with mutations in the X-linked human HCCS gene resulting
in lethality in males and in a rare disease called microphthalmia
with linear skin defects (MLS) in females.

HCCS-mediated cytochrome c maturation is referred to as System
III in eukaryotes and performs a function similar to the well-characterized
Systems I and II found in prokaryotes and plants.− However, these
pathways are unrelated to System III since each protein in Systems
I and II appears to be divergent from HCCS at the sequence level., Unlike the elaborate multiprotein, integral membrane complexes of
Systems I and II, System III is rather simple, with HCCS peripherally
associated with the inner mitochondrial membrane, though predicted
to be a soluble protein.,, Despite the apparent simplicity of HCCS, and its discovery over
25 years ago, only recently has a greater understanding of its structure
and function emerged. In 1987, Dumont and colleagues complemented
a respiratory-deficient Saccharomyces cerevisiae strain
with the yeast HCCS gene, designating it the cytochrome c heme lyase. Many of the earlier studies on HCCS relied on
isolated mitochondrial fractions to indirectly assess the functional
capabilities of this enzyme, in which it was also shown that HCCS
is necessary for import of apocytochrome c into the mitochondrial
intermembrane space.− A recent breakthrough in the purification of a functional
recombinant HCCS has facilitated the present study on the mechanistic
and structure/function properties of HCCS.

We recently purified the human HCCS from Escherichia
coli membranes (as a GST-fusion) showing that it possesses
endogenously synthesized heme. The HCCS
protein is purified from isolated E. coli membranes
using detergent, whereas its product, holocytochrome c, is released
into the E. coli cytoplasm. It was discovered that
a conserved histidine in human HCCS, His154, provides an essential
axial ligand to the heme substrate. By copurifying the human HCCS
and its cognate human cytochrome c, it was shown that an HCCS: heme-scaffold
is required for the recruitment of the cytochrome c acceptor substrate. These data provided the basis for the following
proposed four-step cytochrome c assembly mediated by HCCS (Figure A): (1) HCCS binds to the heme-cofactor with His154
serving as an axial ligand. (2) Heme-bound HCCS recognizes and binds
to cytochrome c (referred to as apocytochrome c in its nascent state),
with the histidine (of CXXCH) from apocytochrome c (His19) supplying
the second axial ligand. (3) HCCS catalyzes (by orchestrating substrate
proximity and orientation) formation of the covalent thioether bonds
between cytochrome c and heme, forming holocytochrome c (i.e., the
heme-bound state of cytochrome c). And (4) HCCS releases holocytochrome
c to fold into its native conformation. (Note that only when the two
thioether bonds are formed (step 3) is the holocytochrome c released
(step 4) from the complex.) The recombinant functional assays and
purification of the human HCCS now make it possible to perform a comprehensive
structure/function study on this previously uncharacterized protein.
The analysis of key residues in HCCS that participate in the above
steps is presented in the current study.

HCCS model for cytochrome
c assembly and primary sequence. (A) Model of HCCS-mediated cytochrome
c assembly adapted from ref (). (B) ClustalW-generated alignment of HCCS homologues from
various eukaryotic organisms. Sequences with extensive gaps in conservation
were condensed, with the number of intervening residues enclosed by
brackets. Residues shaded in gray are conserved across diverse phyla.
Residues shaded in yellow are conserved in HCCS homologues from animals.
Putative functional and/or structural domains are indicated (DI, DII,
DIII, and DIV) and are enclosed by black boxes. Domains that mediate
mitochondrial import are enclosed by red-dashed boxes. Black dots
indicate residues that were substituted either previously (H154 and
H211 in ref ()) or
for the present study. The His154 ligand to heme iron is shaded blue.
Red asterisks indicate residues that undergo mutation in patients
with MLS (E159 and R217). Hs, Homo sapien (UniProt P53701); Ec, Equus caballus (UniProt F6YF82); Xl, Xenopus laevis (UniProt Q6DOG6); Dm, Drosophila melanogaster (UniProt Q9VD55); Ts, Trichinella spiralis (UniProt E5SBT9); Vc, Volvox carteri (UniProt D8U027); Nc, Neurosporo crassa (UniProt P14187).

The sequence alignment of HCCS
homologues from diverse eukaryotic organisms, including fungi, protozoa,
and metazoans, reveals that HCCS maintains less than 20% sequence
identity, with 46 residues completely conserved (Figure B). Results presented here suggest that the conserved amino
acid residues in HCCS group together in what we describe as four putative
domains (Figure B, solid lined boxes). Previous
characterization of the mitochondrial targeting signal of HCCS identified
two internal regions that were both necessary and sufficient to mediate
its translocation across the outer membrane of the mitochondria and
into the intermembrane space (Figure B, dashed red-lined boxes). The sequence limits
of one of these sorting domains overlaps with one of the functional
assignments described here (Figure B, domain
II), signifying a potential dual role for the conserved residues contained
therein. In the present study, we performed a systematic mutational
analysis to uncover the roles of highly conserved amino acids and
establish whether “domains” with distinguishable functional
roles might indeed be present.

We present evidence that conserved
residues in two of the putative domains (I and II) are involved in
heme binding (Figure A, step 1), which in
some instances also affected the release of the holocytochrome c product
(Figure A, step 4). In addition, our data
suggest that the conserved residues in the C-terminal domain (IV)
contribute to the overall folding and/or stability of HCCS (see ). The functional impacts of the HCCS
substitutions associated with the human disease MLS (E159K and R217C,
red asterisks in Figure B) were investigated,
ultimately revealing defects in heme-binding (E159K) and potentially
protein folding (R217C). Finally, results using exogenously added
δ-aminolevulinic acid (ALA), a heme precursor that increases
the levels of endogenous heme available for heme proteins, supported
the functional assignments of certain mutations involved in heme binding.
Notably, some of these HCCS defects could be corrected for function
by exogenous ALA. These analyses not only provide insight into the
mechanistic roles of the conserved residues involved in HCCS-mediated
cytochrome c assembly but also support our model identifying heme
as the core component driving the synthetase activity of HCCS.

Materials
and Methods
Construction of Strains and Plasmids
Plasmids used
in this study, pRGK403 (N-terminal GST-tagged human HCCS) and pRGK405
(human cytochrome c (CYCS)), have been described previously. All oligonucleotide primer sequences and derived
plasmids are reported in  (Table S1). Nucleotide substitutions
were engineered using the QuikChange II Site-Directed Mutagenesis
kit (Agilent Technologies) according to the manufacturer’s
specifications. All cloning steps were confirmed by sequencing. Verified
clones were transformed into the E. coli Δccm
strain RK103.

BPER Functional Assay
E. coli strains were grown overnight and used
to inoculate 5 mL of LB broth supplemented with appropriate antibiotics.
These cultures were grown at 37 °C with shaking at 200 rpm for
3 h, followed by induction with 0.1 mM IPTG and 0.8% arabinose (wt/vol)
for an additional 3 h. For ALA-supplemented cultures, ALA (Sigma)
was added at 50 μg/mL during induction. Cells were harvested
by centrifugation at 4500g, and the cell pellet was
lysed in 200 μL of B-PER reagent (Thermo Scientific). Total
protein was quantified using the Nanodrop 1000 spectrophotometer (Thermo
Scientific), and 100 μg of extracted protein was resolved by
SDS-PAGE, transferred to nitrocellulose, and analyzed by heme stain.

Protein Expression and Purification
GST-HCCS proteins were
expressed (with or without cytochrome c) and purified from the E. coli Δccm strain RK103 as described previously. Briefly, 100 mL starter cultures were grown
overnight at 37 °C with shaking at 200 rpm and used to inoculate
1 L of LB broth supplemented with the appropriate antibiotics. Following
1 h growth of the 1 L cultures at 37 °C with shaking at 120 rpm,
the cultures were induced with 0.1 mM IPTG for expression of pGEX-HCCS
plasmids for 5 h. For coexpression of pBAD-cycS (cytochrome c), the
cultures were induced with 0.2% arabinose (wt/vol) 2 h after the induction
of HCCS expression. Cells were harvested by centrifugation at 4500g, resuspended in PBS with 1 mM PMSF, and sonicated. The
crude sonicate was cleared by centrifugation at 24000g for 20 min, and the membrane fraction was isolated by ultracentrifugation
at 100000g for 45 min. Membrane pellets were solubilized
in 50 mM Tris (pH 8), 150 mM NaCl, 1% Triton X-100 on ice for 1 h.
Solubilized membranes were loaded onto glutathione agarose (Pierce)
for an overnight batch pull-down of GST-HCCS protein (with or without
the copurified cytochrome c). Bound GST-HCCS protein or cocomplexes
were eluted with 20 mM reduced glutathione in 50 mM Tris (pH 8), 150
mM NaCl, 0.02% Triton X-100, concentrated in an Amicon Ultra Centrifugal
Filter (Millipore), and the total protein concentration was determined
using the Bradford reagent (Sigma).

Heme Stain
Heme
stains were performed as described previously. Briefly, to preserve the heme signal, protein samples were
prepared for SDS-PAGE with loading dye at 1:1 (v/v) that did not contain
reducing agents, and the samples were not boiled. Following electrophoresis,
proteins were transferred to nitrocellulose, and the chemiluminescent
signal for the heme stain was developed using the SuperSignal Femto
kit (Thermo Scientific) and detected with the ImageQuant LAS4000 mini
detection system (Fujifilm-GE Healthcare). For the BPER functional
assay, the heme stained cytochrome c signal was quantified by densitometry
using ImageJ analysis software (NIH).

Antibodies and Immunoblotting
A GST tagged version of the WT human HCCS was expressed, purified,
and injected into rabbits for the production of antisera against GST-HCCS
by Cocalico Biologicals. To purify the antibodies, sodium dextran
sulfate was added to the serum at 0.25% (wt/vol) followed by the addition
of CaCl2 at 11% (wt/vol) and centrifugation at 11000g. A saturated 76% ammonium sulfate-PBS solution (wt/vol)
was added to the supernatant and incubated with gentle agitation at
4 °C overnight. The antibodies were pelleted by centrifugation
at 11000g, washed in the ammonium sulfate-PBS solution,
resuspended in PBS at 1/10 the starting serum volume, and dialyzed
with PBS overnight. A working solution of the prepared antisera against
GST-HCCS was made and used at a dilution of 1:5000. Protein A peroxidase
(Sigma) was used as a secondary label for detection. The chemiluminescent
signal for anti-GST-HCCS immunoblots was developed using the Immobilon
Western kit (Millipore) and detected by the ImageQuant LAS 4000 mini
detection system (Fujifilm-GE Healthcare).

Reduced Pyridine Hemochrome
Heme type and concentration in purified protein preparations was
determined by pyridine extraction as described previously. Briefly, 0.5 M NaOH and pyridine were added
to 100 μg of purified protein to yield final concentrations
of 100 mM NaOH and 20% pyridine (v/v). Samples were chemically reduced
with the addition of solid sodium dithionite (sodium hydrosulfite),
and UV–vis spectra were recorded from 500 to 600 nm. Heme concentration
was determined using an extinction coefficient of 23.9 mM–1 cm–1.

UV–vis
Absorption Spectroscopy
UV–vis absorption spectra
were recorded with a Shimadzu UV-2101 PC UV–vis scanning spectrophotometer
at room temperature as described previously. All spectra were obtained in the same buffer in which the proteins
were purified: 50 mM Tris (pH 8), 150 mM NaCl, and 0.02% Triton X-100.
Chemically reduced spectra were generated upon the addition of solid
sodium dithionite (sodium hydrosulfite) to the purified sample. Where
specified, imidazole (1 M, pH 7) was added to purified protein samples
at 100 mM prior to spectra acquisition.

Results
We engineered
29 HCCS mutants, changing the conserved residues to (1) an alanine,
(2) an amino acid of opposite or like charge, and/or (3) an amino
acid with disease relevance (i.e., MLS mutations E159K and R217C).
In most cases, we decided not to substitute conserved residues that
lacked reactive side chains (e.g., alanines, glycines, prolines, and
leucines). In short, we discovered that 17 of the mutants were nonfunctional,
and, of those, 12 were poorly expressed or unstable (see below). To
determine the functional consequences of each mutation, we coexpressed
each HCCS variant along with an arabinose-inducible gene for the human
cytochrome c in an E. coli strain lacking its own
endogenous cytochrome c maturation system (Δccm). HCCS mutants
that maintained synthetase activity (i.e., attached heme and released
the 12 kDa holocytochrome c product) yielded holocytochrome c at levels
comparable to or better than wild type (WT) HCCS; mutants with functional
defects released significantly less holocytochrome c (Figures  and ). We define “function”
or “activity” as the ability to both attach heme to
and subsequently release the cytochrome c acceptor as detected either
by heme stain (Figure ) or spectrally (). For clarity, the functional data
for each mutant will be discussed according to the respective domains.
Note that a priori we evaluated the “domains”
initially based on their natural clustering in the HCCS alignment
(Figure B). We suggest that the data in general
also support the presence of functional “domains.” However,
regardless of the validity of domain assignment, results concerning
the structure/function contributions of individual residues are important
to the understanding of this enzyme.

Substitution of conserved residues in
HCCS putative domains modulate synthetase function. Recombinant GST-HCCS
variants with substitutions in (A) Domain I, (B) Domain II, (C) Domain
III, and (D) Domain IV were coexpressed with cytochrome c in Δccm E. coli. Cells were lysed with BPER reagent, and protein
extracts were resolved by SDS-PAGE and transferred to nitrocellulose.
Released cytochrome c was detected by heme stain and signal intensity
was quantified by densitometry and plotted in GraphPad Prism. Data
shown represent the average amount of cytochrome c released by each
mutant relative to the level released by WT ± SEM, n = 4.

Synthetase Function of HCCS Variants
Domain
I
We tested four of the nine amino acid residues in domain
I (human HCCS amino acid positions 115–133) that are completely
conserved across diverse phyla, along with a Met residue at position
130 in human HCCS, which is conserved in animals (Figure B). Initial assays were carried out in small scale
cultures with BPER-extracted protein assayed for holocytochrome c
by heme staining post-SDS-PAGE. We observed that HCCS variants with
mutations in domain I retained activity, with some mutants releasing
&gt;1.5 fold more holocytochrome c than WT (Figure A and ; e.g., see W118A
and N128A). These results suggest that certain mutations can enhance
HCCS activity, perhaps through altered heme/product-binding properties
(e.g., increasing step 4, Release, see below and ). Even double mutants Y120A/P121A and N128A/M130A
maintained activity similar to WT (Figure A and ), indicating that these
residues do not significantly contribute to HCCS synthetase activity.

For a more quantitative assessment of mutant activity, and as a
complement to the small-scale assay, we used UV–vis spectroscopy
to analyze the holocytochrome c released by the HCCS mutants and the
WT HCCS control. Covalently attached heme in cytochrome c absorbs
at 550 nm, producing a sharp alpha peak when reduced, which was measured
to determine relative amounts of cytochrome c present. Consistent
with our densitometric analysis of heme stains (i.e., the small-scale
BPER assay in Figure A), the UV–vis
absorption spectra of the respective soluble fractions confirmed that
the W118A and N128A HCCS variants yielded up to 2-fold more matured
cytochrome c than WT (). Below we show data that is consistent with the proposal that residues
in this domain contribute to HCCS: heme interactions leading to increases
in released holocytochrome c.

Domain II
Of the
nine conserved residues in domain II (human HCCS amino acid residues
154–169) (Figure B), we made substitutions
at six positions. Residues in domain II were previously designated
as part of the mitochondrial import signal of HCCS; however, we have already shown that the His154 residue
serves as an essential ligand required for heme binding and subsequent
cytochrome c maturation. The synthetase
activity of the H154A HCCS mutant was completely abrogated. Similar
to the H154A HCCS mutant, substitution of several other conserved
residues in domain II resulted in significantly reduced activity (Figure B and ). For
instance, alanine substitutions at residues Trp162, Trp168, and Glu169
largely abolished HCCS activity, yielding low to undetectable levels
of holocytochrome c, as determined by heme stain and UV–vis
spectroscopy (Figure B, ). An exception was observed in the
substitution of Asn155, the conserved residue adjacent to His154.
Mutation of Asn155 resulted in a 2-fold increase in HCCS activity
(Figure B). Spectral quantitation of the released
holocytochrome c from the N155A HCCS mutant further confirmed this
increase ().

Domain II contains the conserved residue Glu159, which is mutated
to a lysine in some patients with MLS disease. A previous report has shown that the equivalent substitution
in yeast HCCS at the corresponding glutamate residue renders the protein
nonfunctional in recombinant E. coli. We observed that the production of holocytochrome
c by human E159K HCCS was significantly reduced in small scale cultures,
yielding less than 20% of the WT levels (Figure B and ). However, when we substituted
an alanine residue for Glu159 in human HCCS (E159A), holocytochrome
c yields increased 2-fold above that of WT (Figure B, ). Moreover,
when we replaced Glu159 with an aspartate residue, thus maintaining
the charge, WT activity was restored (Figure B, ). These results
suggest that the positive charge of the MLS-associated lysine substitution
at Glu159 in HCCS causes functional perturbations that ultimately
lead to the MLS disease phenotype (see below).

Domain III
The seven conserved residues in domain III (human HCCS amino acids
207–213) are part of the bipartite mitochondrial targeting
signal (human HCCS amino acids 189–216) (Figure B) identified near the C-terminal portion of the yeast HCCS,
previously shown to be necessary and sufficient for mitochondrial
import. We made substitutions at two
of these residues, His211 and Trp213. We mutated the conserved histidine
at position 211 in our earlier study and determined that this residue
did not make a major contribution to the synthetase activity of HCCS,
in that cytochrome c production remained within 2-fold of WT levels
when His211 was substituted with other amino acids. In the current study, we expressed a W213A HCCS mutant
and also observed synthetase activity similar to WT (Figure C, ). We thus focused on residues in the other domains for this study,
with the likelihood that domain III represents the mitochondrial targeting
domain.

Domain IV
Of the 13 conserved residues in domain IV
(human HCCS amino acids 217–258), we made substitutions at
5 positions, along with an aspartate at position 257 (Figure B). While designating the boundaries of the assigned
domains, we observed that the C-terminal portion of HCCS (composed
of domains III and IV) contained several alternating charged residues,
particularly arginines and aspartates, most of which were evolutionarily
invariant (Figure B). We hypothesized that
the frequency of the highly conserved DR/DXR motif may have functional
significance; therefore, we made single and double substitutions at
many of these Asp and Arg residues in domain IV and measured the cytochrome
c levels produced by these mutants. We found that, in nearly every
case, substitution of the C-terminal aspartate and arginine residues
(e.g., Asp227 and Arg246) resulted in inactive HCCS proteins (Figure D, ). For instance, when we changed Asp257 and Arg258 to alanines in
tandem, generating the HCCS double mutant D257A/R258A, we observed
that cytochrome c yields were approximately 10-fold less than that
of WT (Figure D, ), indicating that at least one of these residues
is important for HCCS activity. Only the single mutation of Asp257
to alanine (D257A) yielded WT levels of function (Figure D, ). Interestingly, Asp257 is only conserved among HCCS enzymes in
animals (Figure B). When we tested the R258A
single mutant, HCCS activity was reduced to a level similar to the
D257A/R258A double mutant (Figure D). The
large scale assays were also consistent with the synthetase activity
observed in the small-scale preparations for these substitutions ().

Amino acid Arg217
in domain IV is the second of two residues implicated in MLS disease,
where it is mutated to a cysteine residue. When the corresponding
mutation was generated in yeast, HCCS activity was severely attenuated. Likewise in the current study with human HCCS,
the R217C mutant exhibited a clear defect in cytochrome c maturation,
yielding no detectable product by heme stain or spectral analysis
(Figure D, ). To test whether the positive charge of Arg217
was important, we substituted either a glutamate (negatively charged),
a lysine residue (positively charged), or an alanine for Arg217. We
observed that no Arg217 variants retained activity.

Expression
and Purification of HCCS Mutants
Of the 29 HCCS variants
generated, 17 exhibited defects in the release of matured cytochrome
c, with substitutions in domain IV comprising the majority of these
nonfunctional mutants. We considered that the lack of activity may
be due to HCCS expression defects and/or protein instability caused
by certain mutations. Accordingly, subsequent purification of some
of the nonfunctional mutants produced poor protein yields when expressed
either alone or with the cytochrome c substrate (), suggesting that the corresponding mutations perturbed
the structural integrity of HCCS. For example, the MLS HCCS mutant
R217C fit into this category, as well as almost all of the domain
IV substitutions, in which less than 25% WT protein yields were obtained.
Therefore, HCCS mutants that yielded insufficient protein (namely,
W162A, W168A/E169A, W168A, E169A, E169K, R127C, R217K, R217D, R217A,
R246A, D257K, and R258E HCCS mutants) were not pursued further.

Mutations in Domains I and II of HCCS Affect Heme Interactions
Domain
I: Trp118, Asn128, and Met130
Since several mutants in domain
I appeared to display enhanced activity, we hypothesized that the
corresponding residues mediate interactions with heme, thus leading
to the increased release of the cytochrome c product (see Figure A, step 4) when mutated. Our previous study established
that while HCCS by itself purifies with a b-type heme partially in
the ferrous (Fe2+) state, recombinant WT HCCS largely copurifies
in complex with holocytochrome c, when coexpressed. To investigate the substrate interactions of the domain
I mutants, we expressed each HCCS mutant with (or without) the cytochrome
c substrate. These proteins were then purified from detergent-solubilized
membranes and assessed for their respective spectral properties.

As previously reported, the Soret peak
of the WT HCCS–heme–cytochrome c ternary complex corresponded
to 409 nm (characteristic of ferric (Fe3+) heme), while
the longer wavelength alpha and beta peaks appeared broader and less
defined between 500–600 nm (Figure A, black). Chemical reduction of the heme-containing WT complex with
sodium dithionite resulted in a characteristic red-shift of the Soret
peak to 420 nm and increased absorption of the alpha and beta peaks
at 555 and 524 nm, respectively (Figure A,
red). A pyridine hemochrome of the reduced WT complex showed a peak
absorption at 551 nm (inset, Figure A), consistent
with the conclusion that the majority of the heme in the complex is
c-type (i.e., covalently attached to the bound cytochrome c). By contrast, the HCCS mutants W118A and N128A/M130A
displayed spectral features that differed significantly from the WT
HCCS–cytochrome c cocomplex (Figures B–C). Notably, the wavelength maxima of the Soret peaks for
both of these mutants indicated the presence of heme iron in the characteristically
ferrous (Fe2+) state (418 nm for W118A and 419 nm for N128A/M130A)
and remained unchanged upon the addition of reducing agent (Figure B,C). The alpha peaks of both mutants sharpened
at 552 nm under reducing conditions (Figure B,C), and the pyridine spectra for both complexes yielded alpha peak
maxima at 553–554 nm (Figure B,C, inset).
These results indicate the presence of b-type heme (i.e., a pyridine
spectrum alpha maximum in between that expected for predominate c-type
(550 nm) or b-type heme (556 nm)). Therefore,
we propose that these mutant complexes contain a mixture of b- and
c-type heme species.

Mutation of HCCS Domain I residues alter heme interactions.
Recombinant GST-HCCS protein (alone) and GST-HCCS: cytochrome c cocomplexes
were purified from Δccm E. coli and prepared
for UV/vis absorption spectroscopy and SDS-PAGE. Shown are spectra
for (A) WT HCCS/cyt c, (B) W118A HCCS/cyt c, and (C) N128A/M130A HCCS/cyt
c following purification (black line), chemical reduction with sodium
dithionite (red), and extraction with pyridine (inset). (D) Soret
peak spectra were obtained from cocomplexes representing WT HCCS/cyt
c (left) and W118A HCCS/cyt c (right) following purification (black)
and treatment with 100 mM imidazole (purple). UV/vis spectra between
500–580 nm (alpha/beta region) of cocomplexes treated with
100 mM imidazole following chemical reduction with sodium dithionite
are shown for (E) WT HCCS/cyt c, (F) W118A HCCS/cyt c, (G) N128A/M130A
HCCS/cyt c, (H) N128A HCCS/cyt c, and (I) M130A HCCS/cyt c. (J) Heme
stain of the indicated purified cocomplexes following SDS-PAGE and
transfer to nitrocellulose. (K) Heme stain (top) and GST-HCCS immunoblot
(bottom) of the indicated purified cocomplexes following SDS-PAGE
and transfer to nitrocellulose. (L) UV–vis spectra of sodium
dithionite reduced purified cocomplexes from WT HCCS (black), Y120A
HCCS (red), and P121A HCCS (blue). (M) UV–vis spectra of HCCS
proteins (alone) purified from WT HCCS (black) and Y120A/P121A HCCS
(green). (N) UV–vis spectra of purified cocomplexes from WT
HCCS/cyt c (black) and Y120A/P121A HCCS/cyt c (orange). (O) Heme stain
(top) and GST-HCCS immunoblot (bottom) of the indicated purified cocomplexes
following SDS-PAGE and transfer to nitrocellulose. (P) UV–vis
spectra of HCCS proteins (alone) purified from WT HCCS (black), Y120A
HCCS (red), and P121A HCCS (blue). Arrows indicate wavelength (nm)
of peak absorption maxima. All spectra were performed with equal amounts
(50–100 μg) of total purified protein. All SDS-PAGE samples
were equally loaded (2–5 μg of total purified protein
each). For all proteins, Bradford quantitation was confirmed by Coomassie
staining, which also indicated that GST-HCCS proteins were obtained
at &gt;90% purity.

To further examine the
qualities of the heme interactions of these mutants, we added exogenous
imidazole (a structural mimic of histidine that can displace transient
heme ligands,, to each purified HCCS cocomplex and obtained UV–vis absorption
spectra. In the presence of imidazole, the Soret peak of the WT cocomplex
does not shift from its initial position at 410 nm (Figure D, left), consistent with our prior conclusion that
the heme ligands of the HCCS–cytochrome c complex (i.e., His154
and His19, respectively) stably occupy the axial coordination positions
of the heme iron (see Figure A, step 2). However,
the Soret peak of the W118A HCCS cocomplex is blue-shifted 3 nm (from
418 to 415 nm) in the presence of imidazole, suggesting that a labile
heme ligand was indeed replaced upon addition of the compound (Figure D, right). This spectral shift in the Soret peak
is characteristic of HCCS protein purified alone (i.e., in the absence
of the cytochrome c acceptor substrate) with the b-type heme stabilized
by the His154 ligand of HCCS and an unidentified ligand occupying
the other axial coordination site. Chemical
reduction of imidazole-treated W118A HCCS cocomplexes resulted in
the resolution of a broad split-alpha peak with maxima at 553 and
559 nm, unlike the WT complex (Figure E,F).
We propose that the appearance of an alpha peak/shoulder at 553 and
559 nm indicates the presence of both c- and b-type heme, respectively.
These results support the proposition that the mutant complex contains
a mixture of heme types, a feature perhaps associated with the enhanced
release function. That is, less holocytochrome c is trapped in complex
(see steps 2 and 3 of Figure A) with HCCS
mutants that exhibit higher release activity (step 4).

Similar
to the W118A HCCS variant, reduction of imidazole-treated cocomplexes
from the N128A/M130A HCCS double mutant resulted in the formation
of a broad split alpha peak-shoulder at 552 and 560 nm (Figure G), suggesting that this mutant also contained a
mixture of heme species. When we assessed the single HCCS mutants
N128A and M130A, we observed that their individual spectral contributions
could be distinguished in the composite features of the N128A/M130A
double mutant. For instance, the Soret peak of cocomplexes from the
N128A HCCS mutant appeared at 419 nm and did not red-shift upon the
addition of sodium dithionite to further reduce the heme iron (), similar to the N128A/M130A double
mutant (Figure C). However, chemical reduction
of N128A HCCS cocomplexes did not resolve an alpha peak (), suggesting that any copurified cytochrome
c was significantly below spectral limits of detection. Consistent
with this data, heme staining of the N128A HCCS cocomplex revealed
that the heme signal for cytochrome c was significantly lower than
the levels copurified with WT HCCS (Figure J, Holo-cyt c). The lower levels of cytochrome c copurified with
the N128A HCCS mutant are also consistent with the observed functional
enhancement in the release of the holocytochrome c product (Figure A, ). Furthermore, chemical reduction of imidazole-treated N128A HCCS
cocomplexes yielded an alpha peak at 560 nm (Figure H), indicating b-type heme as the predominate species present.
Similar to the role of Trp118, these data suggest that the Asn128
residue in HCCS also contributes to the formation and stability of
the cocomplex and potentially participates in the controlled release
of the matured cytochrome c product.

Analysis of the M130A HCCS
cocomplex revealed that this mutant possessed heme characteristics
similar to WT ( and Table ). Addition of imidazole to purified M130A HCCS
cocomplexes did not shift the Soret peak (data not shown), and subsequent
chemical reduction of the imidazole-treated cocomplexes resulted in
a comparable alpha peak maximum at 552 nm (Figure I, compare to Figure E), suggesting
that both axial coordination sites of the bound heme were occupied
by stable ligands (presumably His154 from HCCS and His19 from cytochrome
c). Consistent with these data, heme stain analysis of M130A HCCS
cocomplexes indicated that this mutant copurified with holocytochrome
c at levels similar to WT HCCS (Figure J,
Holo-cyt c). In Figure J, it is shown that
some b-type heme remains associated with HCCS, while in the WT cocomplex,
most heme is associated with the holocytochrome c, as noted previously. Though conserved in animal HCCS enzymes, Met130
is variant in the yeast HCCS homologue (Figure B). Our results suggest that Met130 is not required for the HCCS
functions evaluated here.

Quantitation of Heme
Bound to Purified HCCS
 	total heme	
putative domain	HCCS variant	expressed
alone	coexpressed with cytochrome c acceptor	
 	WT	1	1	
Domain I	W118A	1.2 ± 0.06	0.7 ± 0.02	
 	Y120A/P121A	&lt;0.10	&lt;0.10	
 	Y120A	&lt;0.10	1.0 ± 0.06	
 	P121A	0.5 ± 0.14	0.7 ± 0.13	
 	N128A/M130A	0.9 ± 0.03	0.6 ± 0.07	
 	N128A	1.3 ± 0.51	0.8 ± 0.17	
 	M130A	1.1 ± 0.18	1.2 ± 0.07	
Domain II	N155A	1.0 ± 0.09	0.5 ± 0.12	
 	E159K	0.5 ± 0.10	0.3 ± 0.08	
 	E159A	0.4 ± 0.07	0.3 ± 0.05	
 	E159D	1.2 ± 0.23	0.9 ± 0.09	
Bound heme was determined from reduced pyridine hemochrome
spectra using 100 μg of total purified protein. Each value is
relative to the amount of total heme purified with WT HCCS under each
respective condition, which has been set to 1. Data shown represent
the average of at least two separate experiments ± SEM.

Domain I: Tyr120 and Pro121
Functional analysis of the Y120A and P121A HCCS single variants
established that these mutants displayed WT-like and enhanced release
function, respectively (Figure A, ). On the basis of these
data, we predicted that the heme profile of the Y120A HCCS mutant
would be similar to WT, while that of the P121A HCCS mutant would
be considerably different. Accordingly, heme staining and spectral
analysis of the purified Y120A HCCS cocomplexes were similar to the
features displayed by WT HCCS, particularly in the resolution of the
reduced alpha peak at 554 nm (Figure K,L and
Table ). Co-complexes from the P121A HCCS
mutant exhibited a heme profile characteristic of HCCS purified in
the absence of the cytochrome c acceptor (Figure K,L and Table ), consistent with the
observed enhanced release function (Figure A, ).

While
evaluating the function of the Y120A/P121A HCCS double mutant, we
discovered that the UV–vis absorption-based quantitative measurement
of the released cytochrome c in the soluble fraction largely conflicted
with the near-WT levels detected by heme stain from our small scale
functional assay. Following coexpression and purification, the UV–vis
absorption spectra of the soluble fraction from the Y120A/P121A HCCS
double mutant indicated that the levels of matured cytochrome c present
were less than half that obtained from the WT (), representing a significant decrease
in function. To uncover the basis for this, we investigated the spectral
properties of the Y120A/P121A HCCS double mutant, both in the presence
and absence of the cytochrome c acceptor substrate. Interestingly,
in both cases (i.e., with and without cytochrome c) we found that
the Y120A/P121A HCCS mutant exhibited very little spectral evidence
of heme binding (Figure M,N and Table ), which was also consistent with the heme stain
analysis of the purified protein (Figure K,O).
Despite the lack of copurified heme, Y120A/P121A HCCS retains at least
50% WT function (), which distinguishes
this mutant from the completely nonfunctional H154A HCCS variant described
in our previous study. Although the Y120A/P121A
HCCS double mutant was significantly deficient in heme binding, the
single Y120A HCCS mutant purified with WT-levels of heme when coexpressed
with the cytochrome c substrate (Figure K,L
and Table ). However, when we expressed the
single Y120A and P121A HCCS mutants alone (i.e., in the absence of
the cytochrome c acceptor), we discovered that both mutants exhibited
heme-binding defects, with the former displaying a defect nearly as
severe as the Y120A/P121A HCCS double mutant (Figure O–P and Table ). We speculate
in the  that heme-binding “defects”
can impact both steps 1 and 4 (Figure A) of
HCCS-mediated cytochrome c assembly, so that levels of the final released
holocytochrome c product ultimately depend on the strength of the
interaction between heme and HCCS.

Domain II: Asn155
The functional data for the N155A HCCS mutant indicated that this
substitution resulted in a 2-fold increase in cytochrome c synthesis,
suggesting an enhanced release function. When we examined the spectral
features of purified N155A HCCS cocomplexes, we observed characteristics
shared by the domain I mutants that exhibited a similar increase in
function. For instance, the Soret peak of the N155A HCCS mutant cocomplexes
(422 nm) indicated the presence of heme in the ferrous (Fe2+) state (Figure A, black). Chemical reduction
with sodium dithionite did not cause a shift in the Soret (Figure A, red), similar to WT HCCS when purified alone.
These data were confirmed by heme stain analysis showing that the
N155A HCCS cocomplex purified with predominantly b-type heme bound
to the HCCS protein, while the majority of the heme in the WT cocomplex
was covalently attached to the cytochrome c substrate (Figure B), a result consistent with the respective reduced
pyridine hemochrome spectra (Figure A, inset).

Mutation
of HCCS Domain II residues alter heme interactions. Recombinant GST-HCCS
protein (alone) and GST-HCCS: cytochrome c cocomplexes were purified
from E. coli and prepared for UV/vis absorption spectroscopy
and SDS-PAGE. (A) UV–vis spectra of purified (black), sodium
dithionite reduced (red), and pyridine extracted (inset) N155A HCCS/cyt
cocomplexes. (B) Heme stain (top) and GST-HCCS immunoblot (bottom)
of the indicated purified cocomplexes following SDS-PAGE and transfer
to nitrocellulose. (C) UV–vis spectra of purified WT HCCS protein
(black) and N155A HCCS protein (orange). (D) UV–vis spectra
of purified cocomplexes from WT HCCS/cyt c (black), E159D HCCS/cyt
c (orange), E159K HCCS/cyt c (red), and E159A (green). (E) Heme stain
(top) of the indicated purified cocomplexes following SDS-PAGE and
transfer to nitrocellulose, and corresponding Coomassie stain (bottom).
(F) UV–vis spectra of purified WT HCCS protein (black), E159D
HCCS protein (orange), E159K HCCS protein (red), and E159A HCCS protein
(green). Arrows indicate wavelength (nm) of absorption maxima. All
spectra were performed with equal amounts (50–100 μg)
of total purified protein. All SDS-PAGE samples were equally loaded
(2–5 μgof total purified protein each). For all proteins,
Bradford quantitation was confirmed by Coomassie staining, which also
indicated that GST-HCCS proteins were obtained at &gt;90% purity.

Considering the proximity of Asn155
to the essential heme iron ligand of HCCS (His154), the heme-binding
properties of this mutant were of particular interest. When we expressed
the N155A HCCS mutant in the absence of the cytochrome c acceptor,
we observed that the mutant purified with heme at levels comparable
to WT HCCS (Figure C and Table ), indicating that Asn155 is not required for the initial
heme binding step that facilitates the recruitment of the cytochrome
c substrate (Figure A, step 1). Collectively,
these data suggest that Asn155 may play a role in stabilizing the
heme-dependent interactions between cytochrome c and HCCS, thus impacting
the step 4 release (see ).

Domain
II: Glu159
We showed that substitution of the MLS disease-relevant
HCCS residue Glu159 with different amino acids had various functional
impacts ranging from significantly reduced activity (MLS E159K) to
2-fold enhancement (E159A) (Figure B, ). Accordingly, the heme
profiles of the Glu159 HCCS mutants also exhibited features suggestive
of altered substrate interactions. For instance, heme stains and UV–vis
absorption spectra indicated that the MLS-associated HCCS variant,
E159K, copurified with up to 3-fold less heme relative to WT when
expressed in both the presence (Figure D,E
and Table ) and absence (Figure F and Table ) of the cytochrome c
acceptor, suggesting a heme-binding defect (see Figure A, step 1) consistent with its decreased function. Interestingly,
the E159A HCCS mutant, which exhibited enhanced function, also copurified
with substantially less heme compared to WT HCCS (Figure D–F and Table ).
These data are consistent with the proposal that Glu159 contributes
to heme binding, with side-chains that effect largely step 1 (E159K)
or steps 1 and 4 (E159A). In line with this hypothesis, we observed
that the E159D HCCS mutant, which exhibited WT-like function (Figure B), bound to heme at near WT-levels (Figure F and Table ), but did not
copurify with holocytochrome c (Figure E).
These data indicate that both the charge and size of the Glu159 side-chain
play a role in HCCS function and identify an inherent heme-binding
defect caused by the MLS-associated lysine mutation that likely contributes
to the disease-causing phenotype. Moreover, the results with this
individual residue reflect the idea that a single side chain that
interacts with the heme in HCCS can impact step 1 or step 4, resulting
in quite different levels of released holocytochrome c.

Addition
of ALA Rescues and Enhances Function of HCCS Heme-Binding Domain Mutants
Aminolevulinic acid (ALA) synthesis is the rate-limiting step of
heme biosynthesis. Because ALA is the
first committed precursor, exogenously added ALA often increases the
level of heme in recombinant heme proteins. We have demonstrated that several HCCS residues play a role in heme
binding, resulting in either enhanced or impaired synthetase function
when mutated. Therefore, we investigated whether modulating the level
of heme in the presence of the cytochrome c substrate would elicit
a functional response in HCCS-mediated holocytochrome c production.

When we added ALA to bacterial cultures coexpressing cytochrome
c and WT HCCS, we observed a 1.5-fold increase in the level of released
holocytochrome c (Figures  and ), suggesting that the ALA-mediated increase
in heme had a slight effect on the activity of the WT protein. As
a control, we treated the H154A HCCS variant, which does not bind
heme, with ALA and observed that this
mutant remained completely defective (Figures  and ). When we examined the effects
of ALA on the domain I HCCS mutants W118A and Y120A/P121A, the Y120A/P121A
HCCS mutant showed nearly a 5-fold increase in holocytochrome c production
while the W118A HCCS mutant showed a 2-fold increase (Figures  and ). The functionally
impaired domain II HCCS mutant W162A showed nearly a 10-fold increase
in cytochrome c production in the presence of ALA (Figures  and ), indicating
that the increased cellular availability of heme effectively rescued
the function of this mutant. Finally, we compared the effects of ALA
on the MLS mutants E159K HCCS (domain II) and R217C HCCS (domain IV),
which exhibited defects in heme binding and protein folding/stability,
respectively. We observed that the holocytochrome c product of the
E159K HCCS mutant increased by 6-fold, while that of the R217C HCCS
mutant appeared unaffected (Figures  and ). These data suggest that the increased levels
of heme generated from the addition of ALA drives the substrate interaction
dynamics of the HCCS mutants with heme-binding defects (i.e., defects
that are independent of the heme iron coordination chemistry).

ALA treatment
rescues synthetase function of HCCS mutants with heme binding defects.
Recombinant GST-HCCS variants were coexpressed with cytochrome c in
Δccm E. coli either in the presence (gray bars)
or absence of ALA (black bars). Cells were lysed with BPER reagent
and protein extracts were resolved by SDS-PAGE and transferred to
nitrocellulose. Released cytochrome c was detected by heme stain and
signal intensity was quantified by densitometry and plotted in GraphPad
Prism. Data shown represent the average amount of cytochrome c released
by each mutant relative to the level released by WT in the absence
of ALA ± SEM, n = 3.

Discussion
Our data indicate that the conserved residues
of HCCS contribute to its function by modulating the interaction dynamics
of the enzyme with its substrates: heme and cytochrome c. Our conclusions
regarding the roles of these conserved residues are discussed below
in the context of their domain assignments.

Domains I and II: HCCS–Substrate
Interaction
In our proposed model of HCCS-mediated cytochrome
c assembly (Figure A), the interaction of
HCCS with heme, facilitated by domain II residue His154 (step 1),
is required for the docking of the apocytochrome c substrate (step
2), which is followed by the covalent attachment of heme to apocytochrome
c (step 3), and subsequent release of the heme-bound cytochrome c
product (step 4). The current study identified several residues (Domain
I: Trp118, Pro121, Asn128, and Domain II: Asn155) wherein substitutions
resulted in a steady-state decrease in complex formation (step 3)
and enhanced release of holocytochrome c (step 4). The majority of
the heme in the purified WT HCCS cocomplex is c-type (i.e., covalently
attached to the cytochrome c). However, pyridine hemochrome absorption
spectra of W118A and N128A HCCS cocomplexes revealed that these mutants
purify with a mixture of b- and c-type heme, which presumably stems
from the rapid release of the holocytochrome c product from the HCCS
active site and subsequent binding of another heme molecule, in preparation
for the next maturation cycle. Spectral analysis indicates that when
cytochrome c is in complex with HCCS, the axial coordination positions
of the heme iron (Fe) are occupied by His154 from HCCS and His19 from
cytochrome c. Release of the holocytochrome
c product from HCCS would therefore require the displacement of His154
from its axial position, followed by the discharge of the heme cofactor
from HCCS as holocytochrome c. Therefore, the observed enhancement
in holocytochrome c release by these substitutions might be due to
a more facilitated displacement of His154 or through weaker associations
directly with the heme molecule.

Although complex formation
with cytochrome c is observed with WT HCCS in our bacterial model
system, the remarkable stability of this interaction is not well understood.
It is possible that such interactions occur in the native mitochondrial
environment and are related to the import-associated binding interactions
of HCCS with the apocytochrome c. It
is likely that a balance between heme binding (step 1) and release
(step 4) has evolved to optimize both the import of apocytochrome
c and the synthesis of holocytochrome c, with conserved residues impacting
either or both steps. In this respect, heme appears to be the central
hub to direct HCCS function.

Heme binding domains of proteins
typically contain residues that can coordinate the heme iron (Fe)
(e.g., histidine, methionine, and cysteine) as well as make contacts
with the hydrophobic porphyrin ring structure (e.g., tryptophan, phenylalanine,
and tyrosine). While a confirmed heme
axial ligand of HCCS resides in domain II (His154), we conclude that
the heme binding property of HCCS spans at least two domains of conserved
residues (Domain I, e.g., Tyr120 and Domain II, e.g., Glu159, Trp162)
in the protein. On the basis of our previous study characterizing
the H154A HCCS mutant, we proposed that
binding of the heme substrate to HCCS (step 1) primes the enzyme for
cytochrome c interaction. Although His154 (in domain II) has been
established as a true heme ligand of HCCS that is absolutely required
for heme binding and subsequent function, our data indicate that the
domain I residue Tyr120 also mediates direct interactions with the
heme substrate and potentially contributes to its stabilization with
the enzyme. Heme binding was severely abrogated in both the Y120A/P121A
double and Y120A single HCCS mutants; however, unlike H154A HCCS,
these mutants retained synthetase function. This indicates that these
mutants could mediate sufficient heme interactions in vivo to drive cytochrome c assembly, but these interactions were likely
inadequate to withstand our protein purification methods. The fact
that the addition of exogenous ALA dramatically enhanced (5-fold)
the activity of the Y120A/P121A HCCS mutant further supports this
conclusion (Figure ). The Y120A HCCS/cytochrome
c cocomplex purified with WT-levels of heme; therefore, we conclude
that the weak heme interactions at the active site of the Y120A HCCS
mutant are stabilized by the binding of the cytochrome c substrate,
as proposed for WT HCCS. It is possible
that Tyr120 represents the “unknown” weak, second ligand
(with His154) for binding the heme iron. This ligand is replaced by
the incoming His19 of apocytochrome c.

Defects in heme-binding
were also observed with the MLS-associated E159K HCCS mutant; however,
the synthetase activity of this mutant varied widely from 10% to 70%
WT levels, depending on the culture volumes used to measure the HCCS-mediated
release of matured cytochrome c (). Another study examining the functional effects of human E159K
HCCS in a respiratory-deficient yeast model system reported that this
mutant remains competent in mediating apocytochrome c translocation
across the mitochondrial membrane; however, yeast viability via respiration
was compromised, indicating a synthetase defect. Any impairment in HCCS function is not well-tolerated by
animal cells, which depend on optimal cytochrome c levels to satisfy
energy requirements and regulate developmental progression. Although Glu159 is located in the previously
reported targeting signal of HCCS (ref () and Figure B), its mitochondrial
localization is not disrupted by the lysine substitution. Therefore, the heme-binding defect of E159K
HCCS identified in our study likely accounts for the functional perturbations
of the enzyme. Consistent with this conclusion, we observed that the
addition of ALA restored the activity of E159K HCCS from 15% to WT-levels
in our small culture volume functional assay (Figure ). Further studies are warranted to determine if the E159K
defect is corrected by ALA in eukaryotic mitochondria.

C-Terminal
Domain: HCCS Localization, Folding, and Stability
The conserved
residues of domains III and IV, including the second MLS-associated
residue Arg217, reside in the C-terminal portion of the HCCS protein
(Figure B). Although Arg217 borders one of
the internal targeting motifs (outside of domain III), the MLS-associated
cysteine mutation does not disrupt the mitochondrial targeting of
HCCS; therefore, we designated it as
being part of domain IV since the phenotype of the R217C mutation
resulted in both function- and folding/stability-related defects,
similar to those observed with the other variants in this domain.
The synthetase defect of the Arg217Cys mutation in human HCCS has
been established previously; however,
we determined that HCCS function is abolished with virtually any substitution
of Arg217, suggesting that this residue is essential to HCCS activity/structure.

The collective data for the domain IV mutants suggest that the
C-terminal portion of HCCS is required for the proper folding and/or
stability of the protein. We previously demonstrated that in recombinant E. coli, the human HCCS required an N-terminal GST-fusion
for optimal expression. Furthermore, we discovered that recombinant
GST-HCCS tightly associates with the membrane and that nearly all
soluble (i.e., cytoplasmic) forms were degraded. We thus cannot rule out that domain IV is required for
membrane localization, without which, proteolysis occurs.

Supporting Information Available
Figures
S1 (UV/vis absorption spectra (alpha peak region) of cytochrome c
released by HCCS (WT and variants)), S2 (UV/vis absorption spectra
of N128A and M130A HCCS mutants), and S3 (heme stain of cytochrome
c released by HCCS (WT and variants) in the presence and absence of
ALA). Tables S1 (description of oligonucleotide primer sequences used
for the site-directed mutagenesis of HCCS and the derived plasmids),
S2 (quantitation of the cytochrome c released by HCCS (WT and variants)),
and S3 (quantitation of total GST HCCS protein purified in the presence
and absence of cytochrome c). This material is available free of charge
via the Internet at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bi500704p_si_001.pdf

Author Present Address
‡ (B.S.)
The Institute for Genomic Biology, University of Illinois at Urbana–Champaign,
IL 61801.

The authors declare no competing
financial interest.

Acknowledgments
We thank Vivien Goh and the Washington
University Bio437 class (2012) for assistance in constructing HCCS
mutants and Dr. Molly Sutherland for reading our manuscript and providing
helpful comments and suggestions.

Abbreviations
HCCS, holocytochrome c
synthaseALA, aminolevulinic acidMLS, microphthalmia
with linear skin defectsCcm, cytochrome c maturationBPER, bacterial protein extraction reagentWT, wild-typeGST, glutathione-S-transferaseUV/vis, ultraviolet/visiblecyt c, cytochrome cnm, nanometerIPTG, isopropyl β-d-1-thiogalactopyranosidePBS, phosphate buffered salinePMSF, phenylmethanesulfonyl fluoride