Aromatic
amino acids play distinct
structural and functional roles, because of the combination of hydrophobicity
with the unique interactions possible via the negatively charged aromatic
faces and the positively charged aromatic edges.− Aromatic quadrupoles, in contrast to simple aliphatic
hydrophobic groups (e.g., cyclohexyl or tert-butyl),
provide the possibility of specific structural interactions and well-defined
geometric orientations for aromatic rings that are distinct from those
possible solely via the hydrophobic effect.

Aromatic residues
exhibit special interactions with proline residues,
which promote cis amide bonds via local aromatic–proline
interactions (either aromatic–cis-proline
sequences or Hα-cis-proline–aromatic
sequences) (Figure ).− In the Protein Data Bank (PDB) and in model peptides, proline–proline
and aromatic–proline sequences are the most likely to adopt
a cis amide bond. In aromatic–proline sequences,
the population of cis amide bonds correlates with
aromatic electronics, consistent with a C–H/π interaction
in which the partial positive charge on the hydrogen of a polarized
proline C–H bond (i.e., Hα or Hδ, adjacent to the
electron-withdrawing amide carbonyl and/or amide nitrogen) interacts
with the negatively charged face of the aromatic ring to stabilize
the cis amide bond, in a manner comparable to a classical
cation−π interaction.,,,,− The aromatic–proline interaction also could
potentially, with appropriate geometry, be additionally stabilized
by interactions between the aromatic π orbitals and the σ*
orbital of the C–H bond, which is consistent with the observation
of sub-van der Waals distances in a significant number of C–H/π
interactions, including those in small molecules, peptides, and proteins.,,− Thus, the aromatic–proline interaction can be considered
electrostatic (δ–aromatic·δ+proline) and/or potentially stereoelectronic (πaromatic → σ*proline C–H) in nature, in addition to contributions from the hydrophobic effect.
The strength of a C–H/π interaction is dependent on the
electronics of the aromatic system, as is typical for cation−π
and polar X–H/π interactions, with stronger interactions
observed for more electron-rich aromatics and weaker interactions
for electron-poor aromatics.,,,,

Aromatic–proline
interactions that favor cis amide bonds in proline-rich
sequences. (a) Aromatic–cis-proline interaction.
(b) Hα-cis-proline–aromatic interaction.
Hα (i – 2)-cis-proline–aromatic
interactions
may occur with the Hα of any residue two residues prior to (i – 2 to) the aromatic residue but are most favorable
with proline. (c) Conformational heterogeneity
in proline-rich sequences (PPFPP) due to multiple aromatic–proline
interactions. Additional cis–trans isomerism is possible at other X-Pro sequences.

Proline-rich domains, as defined in ref (), are among the most common
domains in eukaryotes.
Proline-rich domains have central functional roles, including in protein–protein
interactions, in linking globular or other functional domains, and
in responsiveness to phosphorylation.− Proline-rich domains are considered to be intrinsically
disordered, rendering them resistant to structural analysis by X-ray
crystallography. To understand protein structure within proline-rich
domains, we recently analyzed the propensities of the 20 canonical
amino acids to adopt the polyproline helix (PPII) conformation, via
a host–guest model system that was designed to understand the
conformational preferences in a typical proline-rich sequence (Ac-GPPXPPGY-NH2, where X is any canonical amino acid). In that work, we found that the aromatic residues Phe,
Tyr, and Trp strongly disfavor polyproline helix when they are present
in proline-rich sequences, via the induction of very large populations
of cis amide bonds (45–60% of all species
contained at least one cis amide, compared to ≤10%
of species with a cis amide bond for nonaromatic
residues X). The very large population of cis amide
bonds for peptides with aromatic residues in this context, which inherently
prevents polyproline II helix formation in the residues involved in
the cis amide bond, was primarily due to substantial
induction of cis amide bonds at both the Pro2–cis-Pro3–aromatic4 and the aromatic4–cis-Pro5 sequences (Figure ). In
addition, bioinformatics analysis of proline-rich sequences from diverse
eukaryotes (humans, mice, Drosophila, Caenorhabditis
elegans, and Arabidopsis) demonstrated very
strong biases against the incorporation of aromatic residues in proline-rich
sequences, presumably because of substantial conformational heterogeneity
that would result from multiple cis–trans isomerism events. Notably, collagen sequences (containing
ProHypGly consensus repeats that assemble into a triple helix of polyproline
helices) also exhibit very strong preferences against replacement
of either the Pro or Hyp residues with aromatic amino acids, presumably
because of similar problems of conformational heterogeneity and resultant
slow kinetics in collagen folding and assembly. Collectively, these data suggest that the very poor PPII
propensity of aromatic residues in proline-rich sequences, in contrast
to non-proline-rich sequences, is due to the special interactions
of the proline residues with the aromatic rings inducing multiple cis amide bonds and non-PPII structure (Figure c).−

The polyproline helix is a fundamental secondary structure
of proteins
that is widely employed in molecular design because of its rigidity
and lack of dependence on hydrogen bonding.,,− Notably, both aromatic residues and polyproline helices are, separately,
broadly employed in molecular recognition.,,, The incorporation
of aromatic amino acids within polyproline helices thus could be exploited
in molecular recognition and biomolecular design. In peptides with
aromatic–proline dipeptide sequences, the population of trans amide bonds can be increased using electron-poor aromatics,
which weakens the aromatic–proline interaction. These data
suggest that electron-deficient aromatic amino acids in proline-rich
sequences could potentially promote polyproline helix. Herein, we
examine the ability to control structure in proline-rich peptides
using aromatic electronic effects.

Experimental Procedures
Peptide
Synthesis
Peptides were synthesized via standard
solid-phase peptide synthesis and purified to homogeneity via high-performance
liquid chromatography (HPLC), as determined by the presence of a single
peak on HPLC re-injection (&gt;95% purity). Peptide synthesis and
characterization
details are given in the .

Circular Dichroism (CD)
CD experiments were conducted
on a Jasco J-810 spectropolarimeter. Unless otherwise indicated, peptides
were analyzed at 25 °C in aqueous buffer containing 5 mM phosphate
and 25 mM KF. CD data are the average of at least three independent
trials. Data are background-corrected but not smoothed. Error bars
indicate the standard error.

Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR) Spectroscopy
NMR experiments
were conducted at 23 °C in 90% H2O/10% D2O containing 5 mM phosphate buffer (pH 4 or as indicated) and 25
mM NaCl, unless otherwise indicated. NMR experiments were conducted
using watergate water suppression. Populations of species with all-trans amide bonds versus species with one or more cis amide bonds were determined via integration of all peaks
associated with a resonance in the one-dimensional spectrum using
assignments from TOCSY spectra or by analogy. Each calculated % cis (= 100 – % of the all-trans species
= 100 × (sum of all species containing at least one cis amide bond divided by the total of all species, including the all-trans species)) involved integration of multiple sets of
resonances to confirm the conformational identity. In peptides, % cis includes all populations of peptide species containing
at least one cis amide bond, compared to the peptide
species containing all-trans amide bonds. The error
in each % cis is estimated to be ≤±3
percentage points.

Results and Discussion
To test whether
the electronics of aromatic amino acids could be
used to control cis–trans isomerism and polyproline helix structure within proline-rich sequences,
a series of Ac-GPPXPPGY-NH2 peptides was synthesized, where X is one of a series of electron-rich
to electron-poor aromatic amino acids. Peptides were synthesized using
both commercially available amino acids, as well as derivatives of
4-thiophenylalanine, which were synthesized from the peptide containing
4-iodophenylalanine and a copper-mediated cross-coupling reaction
of thiolacetic acid with the fully synthesized peptide on the solid
phase. Thiolysis of the resultant peptide yielded 4-thiophenylalanine.

All peptides were analyzed by NMR spectroscopy,
and the populations
of species with all-trans amide bonds versus those
with one or more cis amide bonds were quantified
(Figure  and Table ). As expected, the peptide containing the electron-donating amino
substituent (4-NH2-Phe) exhibited large populations of
species with cis amide bonds, similar to those observed
with Tyr. In contrast, increasingly electron-withdrawing substituents
exhibited reduced populations of cis amide bonds,
in a manner concomitant with aromatic electronics. These data are
consistent with the interpretation that large populations of cis amide bonds for aromatic amino acids in proline-rich
sequences are due to C–H/π interactions, which are weaker
with less electron-rich aromatics. As expected for a π-facial
interaction,,− the effects
observed were broadly independent of the position on the aromatic
ring (2- vs 3- vs 4-substituted). These data demonstrate the ability
to modulate cis–trans isomerism
within a proline-rich sequence using aromatic electronics. Interestingly,
by NMR, significant upfield shifts were observed in a subset of proline
resonances (Figures S14–S24 of the ), compared to the peptides for which X is alanine,
consistent with aromatic–proline interactions that place these
proline hydrogens near the face of the aromatic ring. Moreover, the
extent of upfield proline chemical shifts correlated with aromatic
electronics, with the largest effects in the X = tryptophan peptide,
the smallest effects in the X = pentafluorophenylalanine peptide,
and intermediate effects in peptides with other aromatic amino acids.
Notably, the 3JαN coupling
constant, which correlates with the backbone torsion angle ϕ, of the aromatic guest residue (X) in the species
with all-trans amide bonds was 6.9–7.9 Hz.
These data indicate the compatibility of aromatic residues with polyproline
helix when in the all-trans amide conformation, as
has been observed previously for aromatic residues in glycine-rich
sequences.−

1H NMR spectra (amide–aromatic region) of Ac-GPPXPPGY-NH2 peptides, where X is phenylalanine substituted as indicated.
NMR spectra for peptides for which X is Phe, Tyr, or Trp are shown
in ref (). All other
NMR spectra are given in the . In the peptide with pentafluorophenylalanine (bottom), the peak
assignments for the major (all-trans amide bonds)
species are δ 8.66 (Gly7 amide), 8.24 (F5-Phe amide),
8.13 (Gly1 amide), 7.74 (Tyr8 amide), 7.40 (-CONH2), 6.99
(Tyr aromatic), 6.90 (-CONH2), and 6.62 (Tyr aromatic).
Analogous resonance assignments apply for the all-trans amide species in other peptides. For species with cis amide bonds, glycine amides are readily identified by their pseudotriplet
(doublet of doublet) coupling patterns, while C-terminal carboxamides
are readily identified as singlets, with the singlet at ∼7.40
ppm being a relatively isolated resonance that in most cases can be
used to determine the number and relative populations of the species
present. The glycine amide peaks downfield of the all-trans species at ∼8.5 ppm also are diagnostic of the relative populations
of the species with cis amide bonds. Control experiments
with Pro3 or Pro5 replaced with Leu or Hyp confirmed that the major cis–trans isomerization events were
those indicated in Figure .

Summary of 1H NMR Data
for All Ac-GPPXPPGY-NH2 Peptides
X	% cis	Ktrans/∑cis	
Trp	63	0.59	
4-OH-Phe (Tyr)	58	0.74	
4-S–-Phe	57	0.77	
4-NH2-Phe	56	0.80	
4-SH-Phe	56	0.80	
Phe (4-H)	51	0.97	
3,4-di-F-Phe	49	1.1	
4-OAc-Phe (TyrAc)	49	1.1	
2-F-Phe	46	1.2	
4-I-Phe	46	1.2	
3-F-Phe	45	1.2	
3-Cl-Phe	45	1.2	
4-S-(2-NO2Bn)-Phe	45	1.2	
3,4-di-Cl-Phe	41	1.4	
3,5-di-F-Phe	41	1.4	
4-F-Phe	40	1.5	
3-NO2-Phe	36	1.8	
4-CF3-Phe	34	2.0	
4-NO2-Phe	32	2.1	
4-SAc-Phe	31	2.2	
4-+NH3-Phe	17	4.9	
pentafluoro-Phe	16	5.2	
His(H+)	8	12.3	
% cis is the
percent of the total peptide species containing at least one cis amide bond. ∑cis is the sum
of the population of all species containing at least one cis amide bond. Ktrans/Σcis is the ratio of the population of the species
will all-trans amide bonds divided by the sum of
the populations of all species containing at least one cis amide bond.

Among the
aromatic amino acids examined, the smallest populations
of cis amide bonds were observed for peptides with
electron-withdrawing substituents, including 4-nitrophenylalanine,
4-thioacetylphenylalanine, protonated 4-aminophenylalanine, and pentafluorophenylalanine.
In contrast to most aromatic residues, the peptide with pentafluorophenylalanine
exhibited only one major species by NMR, with populations of species
with cis amide bonds that were close to the small
populations of cis amide bonds observed in peptides
with aliphatic amino acids (≤10% cis). To identify the compatibility of electron-poor
aromatic amino acids with PPII, the peptide with pentafluorophenylalanine
was examined by CD. The CD spectrum of this peptide exhibited a significant
positive band with a λmax of 223 nm and a larger
minimum at a λmin of 204 nm, typical of PPII observed
in peptides and proteins,,,− indicating that the peptide with pentafluorophenylalanine significantly
adopts PPII (Figure ).

CD spectra of Ac-GPPXPPGY-NH2 peptides. Left: X = pentafluorophenylalanine. Right: X =
4-NH2-phenylalanine (blue squares, pH 7) and X = 4-+NH3-phenylalanine (red circles, pH 3). Peptides
for which X is Phe, Tyr, and Trp exhibited no difference in CD spectra
at pH 3 vs pH 7 (Figure S1 of the ). CD spectra of peptides for which X is one of the 20 canonical
amino acids, including PPII-favoring Pro, Leu, and Ala and PPII-disfavoring
Thr, Ile, and Val, are shown in ref (). PPII in this context is indicated by the presence
of a positive band at a λmax of ∼228 nm, with
red-shifted and smaller maxima indicating lower PPII content.,,−

The peptides with thioacetate/thiol/thiolate substituents
(4-thiophenylalanine,
pKa = 6.4) or ammonium/amine substituents [conjugate acid of aniline, pKa = 4.9; measured pKa within peptide of 4.7 ± 0.2 (Figure S7 of the )] exhibited NMR spectra that indicated
that peptide structure could be controlled by chemical reactions (e.g.,
thiolysis of a thioester) or solution acidity. To examine the use
of pH as an electronic switch of structure, the peptide Ac-GPPXPPGY-NH2 (X = 4-aminophenylalanine) was analyzed by CD in both the
ammonium (pH 3) and amine (pH 7) protonation states (Figure ). At pH 7 (Ar-NH2 protonation state),
this peptide exhibited a diffuse CD spectrum with a positive band
with a λmax of 240 nm, substantially red-shifted
from that of an ideal PPII, and also consistent with a strong aromatic
contribution to CD.,,,, In contrast,
at pH 3 (Ar-+NH3 protonation state), where small
populations of cis amide bonds were observed, this
peptide exhibited a CD signature consistent with a stable polyproline
helix (λmax = 229 nm; λmin = 204
nm), similar to that observed for the peptide with pentafluorophenylalanine
or peptides with nonaromatic guest residues.

These data indicate that aromatic residues in proline-rich
peptides
can be used to switch conformational ensembles from species with large
populations of cis amide bonds, with an inherently
more compact conformation, to species with predominantly trans amide bonds and a relatively more extended polyproline helix conformation.
PPII structures are stable in proline-rich sequences despite the absence
of hydrogen bonds, because of the presence of n → π*
interactions between adjacent residues and the absence of competing
hydrogen-bonded structures.,,− We sought to examine whether alternating block sequences of proline
and aromatic residues with two electronically distinct states could
be used to develop electronic switches of peptide structure. Peptides
were synthesized with one (Ac-PPXPPGY-NH2), two (Ac-PPXPPXPPGY-NH2), or three (Ac-PPXPPXPPXPPGY-NH2 and Ac-PPXPPXPPX-NH2) 4-aminophenylalanine residues embedded within proline-rich
sequences. As a secondary structure, polyproline helix exhibits a
3.1 Å rise/residue. Thus, these peptides, if in a polyproline
helix throughout their proline–aromatic sequence, would extend
16, 25, and 34 Å, respectively, with all aromatic residues along
one PPII-helical face.

These peptides were analyzed by CD and
NMR in both protonation
states (Figure ). At pH 7 (Ar-NH2 protonation state), by CD all peptides exhibited broad bands with
maxima at ∼240 nm, similar to that observed in the Ac-GPPXPPGY-NH2 model peptide containing 4-NH2-Phe. By NMR, high
populations of cis amide bond and exceptional conformational hetereogeneity
were observed in all peptides with 4-NH2–Phe, consistent
with this residue inducing substantial populations of cis amide bond
around each aromatic residue via multiple aromatic-proline interactions.
In contrast, at pH 3 (Ar-+NH3 protonation state),
by CD all peptides exhibited a positive band at 225–230 nm,
the loss of the intense band at 240 nm, and a more defined minimum
at 205–210 nm, consistent with typical PPII CD spectra. NMR
confirmed a substantially reduced population of cis amide bonds in these peptides, despite two, four, and six (for peptides
with one, two, and three PPX sequences, respectively) potential cis-proline–aromatic or aromatic–cis-proline interactions in these peptides (pages S25–S27 and
S34–S36 and Figures S25–S27 of the ).

In the simplified NMR spectra
of the Ac-PPXPPGY-NH2 peptides
(Figure a,b), the equilibrium
between the all-trans conformation and conformations
with each of the individual cis amide bonds [aromatic–cis-Pro and Pro–cis-Pro–aromatic
(Figure c)] could be determined. In the amine
(Ar-NH2) protonation state, the individual equilibria of
aromatic–proline interactions exhibited Ktrans/cis = 2.5 and 1.6.
In contrast, in the ammonium (Ar-+NH3) protonation
state, Ktrans/cis = 8.1 and 6.1 were observed, representing ΔΔG = −0.66 and −0.75 kcal mol–1, respectively, of increased preference for trans amide at each of these prolines in the peptides with an electron-withdrawing
ammonium compared to an electron-donating amine. These peptides also
exhibited temperature-dependent CD spectra that were consistent with
the presence of PPII as the major species in the ammonium protonation
state, but non-PPII structures as the major species in the amine protonation
state (Figures S8–S10 of the ). In total, these data demonstrate that aromatic
electronic properties can be used to switch cis–trans isomerism in proline-rich sequences and polyproline
helix conformation. Given the range of potentially electronically
tunable and conditionally responsive aromatic amino acids, and the
large distances that could be spanned by polyproline helices, including
within collagen triple helices, these data suggest the application
of aromatic electronics in proline-rich sequences as an intriguing
strategy in macromolecular control.

(a and b) NMR spectra of Ac-PPXPPGY-NH2 (X = 4-aminophenylalanine) at (a) pH 3 and (b) pH 7 at 4
°C. In these simplified NMR spectra, four prominent species are
observed, including all-trans amide bonds, aromatic–cis-Pro, Pro–cis-Pro–aromatic,
and presumably the peptide with both aromatic–cis-Pro and Pro–cis-Pro–aromatic species.
(c–f) CD spectra of Ac-(PPX)nPPGY-NH2 [(c) n = 1; (d) n = 2;
(e) n = 3] and (f) Ac-PPXPPXPPX-NH2 peptides, X = 4-aminophenylalanine, at pH 3 (R-+NH3, red circles) and pH 7 (R-NH2, blue squares).
These peptides all exhibit one major species by NMR at pH 3, but a
mixture of species at pH 7 (). Additional comparative CD spectra are given in Figures S2–S5
of the . pH-dependent
CD spectra for Ac-PPXPPGY-NH2 and
Ac-(PPX)3PPGY-NH2 are shown in Figure
S6 of the . Temperature-dependent
CD data for Ac-PPXPPGY-NH2 at pH
3 and 7 are shown in Figure S8 of the . Temperature-dependent CD data for Ac-(PPX)3PPGY-NH2 at pH 3 and 7 are shown in Figure S9 of
the . Temperature-dependent
CD data for Ac-GPPPPPGY-NH2 are given in ref ().

We have previously demonstrated,
in model peptides and in peptides
derived from the microtubule-binding protein tau, that serine/threonine
phosphorylation can induce a reversible conformational switch to PPII., The basis of this switch is the modification of a residue with poor
PPII propensity (Ser or Thr) to a residue with substantially greater
PPII propensity (phosphoserine or phosphothreonine). Herein, we demonstrate
the ability to use aromatic electronics to control polyproline helix
conformation., Electron-rich aromatic amino
acids preceding or following proline residues strongly favor cis-proline amide bonds, and thus strongly disfavor polyproline
helix, because of multiple favorable proline–aromatic C–H/π
interactions. In contrast, in electron-poor aromatic residues, the
reduced electron density in the π face (reducing the electrostatic
driving force of a C–H/π interaction) significantly reduces
the population of cis-proline amide bonds, resulting
in substantially greater polyproline helix.

C–H/π
interactions are typically observed when polarized
C–H bonds interact with aromatic rings, with a favorable interaction
between δ– of the aromatic ring and δ+ of the polarized C–H bond. C–H/π interactions
are significantly electrostatic in nature, with substantial additional
contributions from the hydrophobic effect and from dispersion forces.,,,,− The significantly electrostatic
nature of C–H/π interactions is consistent with their
geometric dependence, their common orientation toward the centroid
of the aromatic ring, and the observation of stronger C–H/π
interactions with more acidic hydrogens. Interestingly, surveys of
the CSD and the PDB have revealed that many C–H/π interactions
exhibit distances below the sum of the van der Waals radii (nonbonded
H···C distances of &lt;2.90 Å), and also orientations
of the C–H bond away from the centroid of the aromatic ring.,,,− The observation of sub-van der Waals distances is consistent with
a potential additional role of stereoelectronic effects in stabilizing
C–H/π interactions, with appropriate overlap of the donor
π orbitals with the σ* orbital of the C–H bond.
These orbital interactions are analogous to stereoelectronic effects
observed in C–H···O interactions, with C–H
σ* acceptors to an O lone pair donor. Short C···H distances are found in both aromatic–cis-proline interactions and Hα-cis-proline–aromatic interactions (Figure ;, see refs (), (), (), (−), and () for additional
examples). Notably, in these structures, the C–H bond is often
oriented away from the centroid of the aromatic ring, positioning
the C–H σ* orbital near the aromatic π HOMO. These
distances and geometries, which are divergent from described idealized
C–H/π interaction geometries based on optimized electrostatic
interactions, are consistent with a potential role for stereoelectronic
effects in stabilizing aromatic–proline C–H/π
interactions.

Aromatic–proline interactions with short inter-residue
C–H
distances. Distances shown are between the indicated Pro Hα
and the indicated carbons of the aromatic ring, with distances &lt;
2.90 Å being less than the sum of the van der Waals radii of
C and H. Hydrogens were added in Pymol. (a) Residues 191 and 192 of
PDB entry 3wfh (sequence WP, 1.90 Å resolution, anti-prostaglandin E2 Fab).
(b) Residues 71 and 72 of PDB entry 1h4i (sequence FP, 1.94 Å resolution, Methylobacterium extorquens methanol dehydrogenase). (c) Residues 79–81 of PDB entry 1aoc (sequence PPF, 2.00
Å resolution, horseshoe crab coagulogen).

Conclusion
Electron-rich aromatic amino acids
strongly disfavor polyproline
helix in proline-rich sequences because of cis–trans isomerism resulting from multiple aromatic–proline
interactions. In contrast, electron-poor aromatic amino acids disfavor
aromatic–proline interactions and favor polyproline helix.
Electron-poor aromatic amino acids provide special capabilities to
integrate aromatic residues into polyproline helices and to serve
as the basis of aromatic electronic switches to change structure.
The use of aromatic electronics to tune polyproline helix conformation
could have broad applications in biomolecular design, medicinal chemistry,
biomaterials, and engineering.

Supporting Information Available
Peptide synthesis and characterization
data, additional temperature-dependent and pH-dependent CD data, full
NMR spectra for all peptides, and TOCSY spectra of selected peptides.
This material is available free of charge via the Internet at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bi500696k_si_001.pdf

This work was
supported by the National Science Foundation (CHE-0547973) and the
National Institutes of Health (RR17716).

The authors
declare no competing financial interest.

Acknowledgments
We thank
Alaina M. Brown for initial results for Ac-GPPXPPGY-NH2 peptides with Ala, Phe, Tyr, and Trp. We thank Himal K. Ganguly
for helpful discussions.

