Protein kinases
are an important
family of enzymes that govern many signaling processes within cells
by transferring the γ-phosphate of ATP onto a substrate protein.
The addition of a phosphate group produces large and diverse effects
on the modified proteins but is often associated with activating or
inhibiting a cellular process. Because of the vast importance of protein
kinases in cellular processes, dysfunctional kinase signaling can
lead to several diseases including cancer. Protein kinases are thus important drug targets, and better understanding
of kinase structure, function, and catalysis will advance our strategies
for drug targeting.

cAMP-dependent protein kinase, also called
protein kinase A (PKA),
is one of the most well-studied protein kinases, and because of the
high conservation of the protein kinase family, it serves as a model
for all protein kinases. Under nonactivating
conditions, PKA exists as a heterotetrameric holoenzyme complex composed
of a regulatory (R) subunit dimer that binds and inhibits two catalytic
(C) subunit monomers. PKA is activated by cAMP, which binds to the
R-subunits and releases the inhibition of the C-subunits. Once released from R-subunit inhibition, the
active C-subunits can phosphorylate target proteins at membranes,
in the cytoplasm, and in the nucleus. In many cases, PKA is targeted
to a specific site where it is dedicated to the regulation of a colocalized
protein. The C-subunit of PKA was the first kinase structure solved, and this structure defined the bilobal architecture
that is shared by all protein kinases. These lobes were termed the
N-lobe (or small lobe) and C-lobe (or large lobe). Many subsequent
crystal structures defined the wide range of conformations adopted
by the dynamic protein kinases. The C-subunit has been crystallized
in several states termed “open,” “closed,”
and “intermediate” based on the relative orientation
of the N- and C-lobes. The open conformation adopts the largest distance
between the N- and C-lobe and was observed with the apo C-subunit
and with the C-subunit bound to an inhibitor peptide IP20., The closed conformation displays tight packing between the N-lobe
and the C-lobe, which causes a closing of the active site cleft and
the exclusion of water, and this conformation is typically seen when
the protein is crystallized with IP20 and ATP or ATP analogues. A representative intermediate conformation was
observed when the C-subunit was crystallized with adenosine; however, there is clearly an ensemble of intermediate
conformations. These crystal structures, as well as NMR data, demonstrate that the C-subunit adopts a wide
ensemble of conformations, and these dynamics and conformations contribute
to the regulation of enzyme activity.

The kinetics and phosphoryl
transfer reaction by PKA are also well-characterized,
and these studies have improved our understanding of kinase reaction
progression. Pre-steady-state and steady-state
kinetics of PKA showed that phosphoryl transfer of the γ-phosphate
of ATP onto the substrate is a very rapid event; it is other processes
that govern the rate of the reaction. These rate-limiting steps are
also regulated by magnesium ion. Most
protein kinases, including PKA, require magnesium to bind ATP and
catalyze phosphoryl transfer under physiological conditions. At low
magnesium concentration (0.5 mM), PKA has a higher turnover rate than
at high magnesium concentration (10 mM), and at the low magnesium
concentration, the turnover rate is governed partially by ADP release
and partially by conformational changes that occur before and after
phosphoryl transfer.− At high magnesium ion concentrations, the PKA reaction
rate is governed by ADP release,, and the conformational changes that are associated with ADP release.
Therefore, ADP release is one of the most important steps in PKA reaction
turnover and is highly influenced by the magnesium ions.

PKA
binds two magnesium ions, which were termed Mg1 and Mg2. Mg1
binds in a bidentate manner with Asp184 of the “DFG”
motif as well as the β- and γ-phosphates of ATP. Mg2 coordinates
with one oxygen atom of Asp184, with Asn171, and with the α-
and γ-phosphates of ATP., Each magnesium ion
also binds water molecules to fulfill an octahedral coordination state. The nomenclature of these magnesium ions as
Mg1 and Mg2 was made based on an older crystal structure that reported
electron density for mostly one magnesium ion when the C-subunit was
crystallized with a low concentration of magnesium. The ion that showed more electron density was thus termed
Mg1 because it was thought to bind first or more strongly with ATP,
and the other ion was termed Mg2. Despite this nomenclature, recent
studies suggest that the designation of the two Mg ions most likely
does not correlate with the order in which they bind. Another crystal
structure of the C-subunit obtained under low magnesium concentration
shows electron density for only one magnesium ion, but the ion observed
in the crystal structure corresponds to the Mg2 ion. Furthermore, other protein kinases such as CDK2 often crystallize
with one magnesium ion, and the ion observed is analogous to Mg2. Finally, separate crystal structure studies
of reaction progression by PKA and CDK2 both identify Mg2 as the ion
that likely remains in the active site following phosphoryl transfer
while Mg1 is lost, suggesting that Mg2 may be the more stably bound
ion., In contrast, loss of Mg1 may be an important
part of the rate-limiting step of ADP release and may explain the
slower turnover rate at high magnesium concentration due to continued
occupancy of both metal binding sites.

To further elucidate
reaction progression by PKA and the conformations
involved in the reaction trajectory, we obtained the first crystal
structure of the C-subunit bound only to ADP by soaking apo crystals
with ADP and magnesium. No crystal structures of the C-subunit bound
only to ATP or ADP were previously solved because the inhibitor peptide,
IP20, is generally necessary to crystallize PKA with nucleotide. There
is a structure of the C-subunit bound only to adenosine. However, adenosine lacks the phosphate groups,
and therefore, it lacks information about the magnesium ions and lacks
information on reaction turnover since adenosine is not a naturally
bound product. Here we report the apo structure of the C-subunit refined
to 2.9 Å resolution and the ADP bound structure refined to 3.5
Å resolution. The ADP bound structure supports previous findings
that ADP binds with Mg2. Also, the ADP bound structure adopts a conformation
that does not conform to the “open”, “closed”,
or previously solved “intermediate” states, and therefore,
the structure further defines the conformational flexibility of the
protein and provides insights into the motions and mechanisms that
may govern ADP release. These structures highlight in particular the
dynamic nature of the C-tail and show how its motions and functions
are correlated with the Gly-rich loop. Both motifs are highly ordered
and linked in the closed conformation. In the ADP bound structure,
the C-tail is disordered, the Gly-rich loop is open, and the two motifs
are not coupled. The order–disorder transition of the C-tail
and its role in the recruitment and release of nucleotides from the
active site is clearly highlighted in the ensemble of structures described
here.

Materials and Methods
Purification of the Myristylated C-Subunit
Protein
The myristylated K7C C-subunit was prepared by coexpression
with
yeast NMT as described previously and
purified following a method described previously. The K7C mutant was used for crystallization because it
increases the yield of the myristylated protein. The myristylated
protein was used for crystallization because the apo structure was
initially obtained to characterize the role of N-myristylation in
PKA structure.

Crystallization and ADP Soaking
The apo myristylated
K7C C-subunit crystallized under similar conditions utilized for the
previous apo WT nonmyristylated C-subunit structure. The protein was dialyzed overnight into 50 mM bicine, 150
mM ammonium acetate, 10 mM DTT, pH 8.0. Then the protein was concentrated
to approximately 8–10 mg/mL. The protein was setup for crystallization
using the hanging drop vapor diffusion method at 4 °C. The protein
was screened against different well solutions with 2-methyl-2,4-pentanediol
(MPD) concentrations ranging from 2% to 18% and with 9–13%
methanol added to the well solution immediately before sealing the
well. The crystals were obtained using 8 μL drops of 1:1 volume
of protein solution to well solution. Crystals typically appeared
in 1–2 months, unlike the previous apo C-subunit structure,
which reported crystal appearance in 6–12 months. The apo myristylated K7C C-subunit structure
was obtained from a crystal grown with a well solution containing
8% MPD and 9% MeOH added to the well. The protein crystallized contained
two sites of phosphorylation on Thr197 and Ser338.

Attempts
to cocrystallize the C-subunit with ADP were unsuccessful. Therefore,
in order to obtain an ADP bound structure, the apo crystals were soaked
with ADP and MgCl2. A solution of ADP and MgCl2 was prepared in 0.1 M Tris buffer at pH 7.0 and added to the crystal
drop to yield a final drop concentration of approximately 5 mM ADP
and 5 mM MgCl2. The crystals were allowed to soak for 24–48
h before being harvested and flash frozen. The structure reported
here was obtained from a crystal soaked with ADP/MgCl2 for
48 h.

Data Collection and Refinement
The crystals were flash
cooled in liquid nitrogen with cryoprotectant solution (16% MPD and
15% glycerol). Data was collected on the synchrotron beamline 8.2.1
of the Advanced Light Source, Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratories
(Berkeley, California). The crystal structures were integrated using
iMOSFLM. The protein crystallized in
the P21 space group as with the previous
apo structure. Molecular replacement was carried out using Phaser with the previously solved apo C-subunit structure,
PDB ID 1J3H, as a search model for the apo structure and with
the apo structure solved here as the search model for the ADP bound
structure. The refinement was performed using refmac5, and model building was done in Coot. Refinement was performed using a TLS and restrained
refinement along with noncrystallographic symmetry (NCS) restraints.
The TLS groups and NCS restraints used corresponded to the small lobe
(residues 10–126 and 327–350) and large lobe (residues
127–326). The apo and ADP bound structures were refined to Rwork/Rfree of 24.4%/29.2%
and 22.7%/28.4%, respectively. The data collection and refinement
statistics are shown in Table  with Ramachandran
values as defined in MolProbity.

Crystallography Data Collection and
Refinement Statistics
 	apo	ADP bound	
PDB
ID	4NTS	4NTT	
space group	P21	P21	
cell dimensions	 	 	
a (Å)	50.96	50.48	
b (Å)	142.61	143.15	
c (Å)	63.16	62.57	
α, β, γ (deg)	90,
103.61, 90	90, 103.61, 90	
unique
reflections	19,014 (2,818)	10,660 (1,572)	
multiplicity	3.1 (3.1)	2.7 (2.7)	
resolution range (Å)	61.38–2.90 (3.06–2.90)	32.15–3.50 (3.69–3.50)	
Rmerge (%)	5.1 (44.1)	10.5 (48.6)	
I (σI)	9.7 (2.1)	5.7 (2.4)	
completeness (%)	97.7 (99.0)	97.5 (98.4)	
Rwork/Rfree (%)	24.4/29.2	22.7/28.4	
 	 	 	
avg temp factors (B factors) for all atoms (Å2), chain A/chain B	 	 	
all residues	72.2/69.0	103.2/99.7	
N-lobe (residues 1–126)	72.1/77.8	104.3/104.4	
C-lobe (residues 127–300)	65.2/55.1	97.3/91.2	
C-tail (residues 301–350)	96.2/96.6	121.4/118.5	
near FDDY (residues 320–335)	117.2/134.4	133.9/130.5	
ADP	NA	161.8/124.2	
magnesium	NA	62.2/78.8	
Ramachandran angles (%)	 	 	
favored regions	93.66	91.54	
allowed regions	100	100	
rms deviations	 	 	
bond lengths (Å)	0.006	0.007	
bond angles (deg)	1.013	1.114	
Data collection was performed at
ALS laboratory in Berkeley, CA on beamline 8.2.1.

Values in parentheses correspond
to the highest resolution shell.

To calculate the Rfree, 5% of the data
was excluded from the refinement
.

Ramachandran plot quality
as defined
in MolProbity.

PDB Deposition
The coordinates and structure factors
for the apo and ADP bound structures were deposited into the RCSB
PDB with accession codes of 4NTS and 4NTT, respectively.

Results
Apo C-Subunit Structure
The myristylated C-subunit
of PKA was crystallized in an apo state to determine any effects of
myristylation in the absence of ligands. A K7C mutant was crystallized
because it increases the yield of the myristylated protein. The apo crystal structure was refined at 2.9
Å resolution (Table , Figure A). There is electron density for myristic acid
in one of the two molecules in the asymmetric unit (ASU); however,
there is density for only 4 of the 14 carbon atoms of myristic acid
(Figure B). The lack of electron density for
myristic acid implies that the myristic acid group binding within
the hydrophobic pocket could be involved in forming a closed state
since there is more electron density for the myristic acid group in
structures that adopt a closed conformation, particularly in the binary
complex that contains only peptide, compared with the open conformation
adopted here in an apo state. The lack
of density likely reflects high flexibility or disorder of the myristyl
group, and this flexibility may correlate with different steps of
the catalytic cycle.

Apo structure of the catalytic subunit of PKA. (A) The
overall
apo structure is displayed in ribbon representation with chain A colored
gray and chain B colored olive and with chains A and B aligned by
the entire protein. (B) (left) The myristic acid binding pocket for
chains A and B, which are colored as in panel A, is displayed along
with the 2Fo – Fc electron density at 1σ shown in blue for the myristic
acid group from chain A. There is no electron density for myristic
acid in chain B. (right) In contrast, the 2Fo – Fc electron density
at 1σ is visible for the entire myristic acid group in the closed
state (4DFX). (C) The 2Fo – Fc electron density at 1σ is shown in blue
for the C-terminal tail of chains A and B.

The overall structure of the myristylated apo C-subunit reported
here is in an open conformation similar to the previous WT nonmyristylated
apo structure (1J3H). There are two molecules in the ASU
that are similar to each other with an RMSD of 0.66 Å between
chain A and chain B when aligned by the whole protein (Figure A). The structure is very similar to the previous
apo structure with a few differences. For example, the Cys199 residue
was modified with β-mercaptoethanol in the previous apo structure
and is unmodified in this structure. This caused some small shifts
in the residues at the activation loop in the structure reported here
compared with the previous structure, and the position of the residues
in this structure are more likely to represent the native apo conformation
since modification of Cys199 renders the C-subunit inactive. Furthermore, the previous structure showed electron
density for 2-methyl-2,4-pentanediol (MPD) in the myristic acid pocket,
but since our structures used the myristylated protein, instead there
is electron density that corresponds to the myristic acid group in
chain A and no electron density in the myristic acid pocket in chain
B. Finally, the C-tail was not modeled in the previous apo structure
due to lack of electron density. Although the electron density of
the C-tail in this structure is also very poor with little density
for residues 318–330 in both molecules, we did model the C-tail
into the structure. However, the C-tail is still not well resolved,
the temperature factors are very high, and there is also no clear
density for the side chains (Table , Figure C). The modeled C-tail should be interpreted as
showing the tentative location of the backbone of this region of the
protein. The fact that the C-tail is disordered may cause disordering
of other regions in the apo protein. The side chain of Arg56 is disordered
here, whereas in the closed conformation this arginine interacts with
Glu333 in the C-tail. This arginine is one link between the C-tail
and the Gly-rich loop, and this communication is lost in the apo conformation
when the C-tail becomes disordered. Although the apo structure did
not show enhanced stability of the myristylated N-terminus nor show
large differences compared with the previous apo structure, it did
allow us to ask about ADP binding and release since this has been
a key missing step in the reaction pathway.

Overall ADP Bound C-Subunit
Structure
The ADP bound
structure of the C-subunit was obtained by soaking apo crystals with
Mg/ADP and was refined to 3.5 Å resolution (Table ). The overall ADP bound structure is most similar to the
apo structure with an RMSD of 0.74 Å between the apo and ADP
bound structures aligned by the entire protein using both molecules
in the ASU. The two molecules in the ASU of the ADP bound structure
are similar to each other with RMSD values between chain A and chain
B for the overall protein of 0.61 Å. ADP and one magnesium ion
are present in both molecules in the asymmetric unit (Figure ). The main differences between chain A and chain
B occur at the Gly-rich loop and C-terminal tail.

ADP bound structure of
the C-subunit of PKA. The overall ADP bound
structure of the C-subunit is displayed in ribbon representation with
chain A colored gray and chain B colored cyan, and the two molecules
from the asymmetric unit are aligned by the entire protein. ADP from
each molecule is displayed in stick representation and colored by
element, Asn171 and Asp184 that bind to the magnesium are displayed
in stick representation and colored by element, and the magnesium
ion is colored by chain and displayed in sphere representation.

As with the apo structure, the
electron density of the C-terminal
tail is not strong, but there was enough electron density to model
the approximate location of the peptide backbone. Also, the C-terminal
tail typically forms part of the adenine binding pocket when the C-subunit
is bound to nucleotide. In chain B, there was some positive electron
density in the region that Phe327 and Tyr330 typically occupy when
bound to nucleotide without the C-tail modeled, and there is some
electron density with the C-tail modeled with the residue side-chains
at this location using omit maps. Therefore, the side chains of these
amino acid residues are modeled in the structure for chain B and show
how these two aromatic side chains bind ADP (Figure A). Mutagenesis of either of these residues leads to severe
defects in activity.− In chain A, the C-tail does not form part of the
binding site, and this is due most likely to close crystal packing
at the C-tail with a symmetry related molecule (Figure A,B). Another difference between chain A and chain B is the
conformation of the Gly-rich loop. Residues 50–53 are much
lower in chain A than chain B, especially Ser53. It is possible that
Ser53 helps to bind to ADP more in chain A than chain B because of
the lack of the C-tail forming part of the binding site (Figure C).

Changes at the C-terminal tail and Gly-rich loop in the
ADP bound
structure. (A) The 2Fo – Fc electron density at 1σ is displayed
in blue for the C-terminal tail of chain B from the ADP bound structure,
and the resulting Fo – Fc electron density map contoured to 2.5σ
is displayed in green for the C-tail from chain B when the C-terminal
tail is excluded from the final model of the structure. (B) Chain
A, gray, and chain B, olive, are displayed is ribbon representation
and aligned by the entire protein. A symmetry related molecule near
the C-terminal tail of chain A is displayed in black transparent cartoon
representation showing that crystal packing prevents chain A from
adopting the C-tail conformation adopted by chain B. (C) The apo structure,
the ADP bound structure, and a ternary structure, 1RDQ, were aligned by the entire protein, and the location of
the Gly-rich loop from each structure following this alignment is
displayed.

ADP and one magnesium ion are
present at the active site in both
molecules in the ASU, and there is strong electron density to validate
their presence (Figure ). Before ADP and magnesium
were included in the structure, there was strong positive electron
density for ADP/Mg in both molecules in the ASU, and the final electron
density for ADP/Mg, as modeled, is convincing (Figure ). However, the electron density is better in chain B than
in chain A, and correspondingly, the B-factor values are higher for
the ADP/Mg in chain A than chain B (Table ). It is possible that the better electron density in chain B is
because the C-tail can form part of the ADP binding pocket in chain
B but not chain A. Therefore, this adds credence to the importance
of these residues for binding to nucleotide, which was also verified
with mutagenesis previously− and with hydrogen–deuterium
exchange coupled to mass spectrometry measured with the C-subunit
bound to ADP.

Electron density for
ADP from each molecule in the asymmetric unit.
The Fo – Fc electron density at 3σ from the first refinement of
the ADP bound structure without ADP or magnesium modeled into the
structure is displayed for chains A and B (top), and the 2Fo – Fc electron
density of the final model contoured to 1σ is displayed for
each chain (bottom).

Despite binding to ADP, the C-subunit still adopts a largely
open
conformation. The Gly-rich loop is still raised much more than the
closed state, although it is lowered compared with the apo state (Figure A,B). Similarly, the C-terminal tail forms part
of the binding site for ADP in chain B, but the C-tail does not close
down onto the active site to the same extent in the ADP bound structure
as it does in the closed state (Figure A–C).
Therefore, the ADP bound structure adopts a conformation that does
not conform to any of the previously identified states, open, closed,
or intermediate. This fact is further illustrated by examining different
distances between residues or regions of the protein that characterize
the different states (Table ). These distances
are different in the ADP bound structure than in the open, closed,
or intermediate states. Therefore, the ADP bound structure displays
a new conformation of the C-subunit that could represent a conformation
involved in ADP release. Additionally, there are differences in each
molecule in the ASU suggesting that these could represent an ensemble
of intermediate states during ADP release.

ADP bound structure adopts
a unique conformation. (A) A stereoview
of the apo structure reported here is displayed in surface representation
with the N-lobe (residues 1–126) colored gray, large lobe (residues
127–300) colored olive, and C-tail (residues 301–350)
colored red. Chain B from the ADP bound structure and a ternary structure, 1RDQ, are aligned with the apo structure by the entire protein.
The C-tail and Gly-rich loop from the ADP bound structure are colored
blue and shown in ribbon representation, and the C-tail and Gly-rich
loop from the ternary structure are colored black and displayed in
ribbon representation. The inhibitor peptide, IP20, from the ternary
structure is colored cyan and shown in ribbon representation. (B)
A stereoview of chain B from the ADP bound structure is displayed
in surface representation with the regions of the protein colored
as in panel A. The C-tail and Gly-rich loop from the ternary structure, 1RDQ, aligned with the
ADP bound structure by the entire protein are shown in ribbon representation
and colored blue. IP20 is depicted as in panel A. (C) The dynamic
nature of the C-tail. The ADP bound structure, colored red, adopts
a conformation that does not conform to the open state colored olive,
or the closed state colored gray. The residues Phe327 and Tyr330 are
displayed in surface representation which are important for ATP binding,
colored black.

Distances
within the C-Subunit That
Define Different Conformations
conformation:	ADP bound (chain A/B)	open	intermediate	closed	closed	closed	
peptide	none	IP20	none	IP20	IP20	IP20	
nucleotide	ADP	none	adenosine	ATP	none	AMP-PNP	
PDB ID	4NTT	1CTP	1BKX	1ATP	1APM	1CDK	
His87–Thr197 (N-PO4)	6.7/6.3	7.1	3.2	2.7	2.8	2.8	
Glu170–Tyr330
(backbone C=O–OH)	NA/12.3	14.6	8.6	8.2	8.2	7.9	
Adapted
from Johnson et al.

Mg Binding Site and Implications on Reaction
Progression
There is only one magnesium ion present in the
ADP bound structure
unlike typical PKA ternary structures, which display two magnesium
ions at the active site. The magnesium
ion at the active site in the ADP bound structure corresponds to Mg2.
Although the location of the magnesium ion does not exactly match
the typical position of Mg2, the magnesium ion is clearly situated
between Asp184 and Asn171, which would correspond to the Mg2 ion (Figure A). To further verify that the magnesium ion is
modeled correctly and corresponds to Mg2, the magnesium ion was removed
from the final model of the structure, which was then refined. The
corresponding Fo – Fc map shows strong positive electron density at the site
where the magnesium ion was modeled, and again, the site corresponds
to Mg2 based on its location between Asp184 and Asn171 (Figure B). Therefore, Mg2 is the ion that binds more strongly
with ADP and verifies previous studies suggesting that Mg1 is lost
following phosphoryl transfer.,

ADP binds at the active
site with Mg2. (A) The active site of chain
B from the ADP bound structure is displayed in cartoon representation
with ADP displayed in stick representation and magnesium displayed
in sphere representation. The side chain of Asn171 and Asp184, which
chelate the magnesium ions, are displayed in stick representation.
(B) The resulting Fo – Fc electron density map obtained by omitting
the magnesium ion from the final ADP bound structure is displayed
contoured to 3σ showing strong positive electron density at
the Mg2 site with no density for the Mg1 site. The ternary structure, 1RDQ, colored olive was aligned by the entire protein to the
ADP bound structure to illustrate the location of Asn171, Asp184,
ATP, and the magnesium ions from the ternary structure.

Discussion
The apo and ADP bound
structures provide several insights into
PKA structure, conformational dynamics, and reaction progression.
Although the myristylated apo structure presented here is similar
to the previous apo structure, it provides
important new information. For instance, the myristic acid group is
more disengaged from the enzyme in an apo state than in the ligand
bound states based on very little or no electron density for the myristic
acid group for chain A and chain B, respectively. This lack of density
suggests that the myristyl moiety is disordered in an apo state and
may become more ordered or more tightly anchored to the protein in
the presence of ligands. Comparing the apo state to the ADP bound
structure also highlights the disorder to order transition of the
C-tail, which coordinates with many other regions of the protein.
The C-tail and Gly-rich loop are tightly coupled to ligand binding
and are better resolved and more tightly coupled together in the presence
of ligands. Finally, the ADP bound structure provides a glimpse into
the motions and steps that may govern reaction progression by PKA
and likely many, if not all, protein kinases.

The ADP bound
structure displays one magnesium ion bound at the
active site that corresponds to Mg2, which is situated between Asp184
of the DFG motif and Asn171 (Figure A,B).
This structure suggests that PKA binds ADP with Mg2, and therefore,
Mg1 must be released following phosphoryl transfer. This mode of reaction
progression was seen previously in both CDK2 and PKA., Crystal structures showed that ADP can bind with one or two magnesium
ions at the active site of PKA or CDK2, and if only one magnesium
ion is bound, the ion corresponds to Mg2. Release of Mg1 is therefore
hypothesized to be an important part of the rate-limiting step of
ADP release. Furthermore, computational studies that investigated
the mode of ADP release from PKA with two magnesium ions bound suggested
that ADP release was so energetically unfavorable that it was nearly
impossible without release of one or both magnesium ions. This structure supports the previous findings
and hypothesis because PKA binds to ADP with one magnesium ion corresponding
to Mg2.

An examination of several kinase structures bound to
ADP suggests
that many kinases may release Mg1 following phosphoryl transfer or
bind Mg2 more strongly than Mg1. Several kinase structures crystallized
with ADP show two magnesium ions at the active site that correspond
to Mg1 and Mg2.,, In other cases, when a kinase binds one magnesium ion at the active
site, the ion bound corresponds to Mg2.,− Therefore, it is likely that many protein kinases bind two magnesium
ions to facilitate phosphoryl transfer. Kinases can then retain both
ions following phosphoryl transfer or can release one ion, the Mg1
ion, to facilitate ADP release. There are, however, some kinase structures
bound to ADP that bind the magnesium ions in positions that do not
correspond to the Mg2 and Mg1 sites seen in PKA,, and there are structures with only one magnesium ion bound that
binds only to ADP and no amino acid residues., Therefore, these magnesium binding sites and mode of magnesium release
may not be universal for all kinases but likely control many kinases.

In addition to validating the potential mode of magnesium release
during reaction turnover, the ADP bound structure also provides a
glimpse of possible motions and conformations involved in ADP release.
The ADP bound structure adopts a mostly open conformation, but it
is still more closed than the apo state (Figure A–C). The Gly-rich loop lowers compared with the apo state
to help bind to ADP at the active site but not as much as in the ternary,
closed state. Similarly, the C-tail moves into the active site to
bind to ADP with residues Phe327 and Tyr330, as in the closed state,
but the C-tail does not move into the active site to the same extent
in the ADP bound structure as in the intermediate or closed states
(Figure A–C).

ADP release likely
proceeds with opening of the enzyme cleft via
rising of the Gly-rich loop and C-terminal tail as shown in the ADP
bound structure (Figure A–C). Also,
one of the molecules in the asymmetric unit, chain A, does not show
the C-tail binding at the active site because it is blocked by a symmetry
related molecule (Figure B). ADP is still
present at the active site in chain A but is not as stably bound as
in chain B based on electron density and B-factor values. Therefore,
a possible mode of ADP release involves removal of the C-terminal
tail from the active site following general opening of the active
site, which then destabilizes ADP binding allowing for release. Combining
the information about the role of the magnesium ions in ADP release,
a potential mode of reaction progression and ADP release by PKA becomes
evident. Following phosphoryl transfer, Mg1 is released, which destabilizes
ADP binding. Subsequently, the active site opens through rising of
the Gly-rich loop and disengagement of the C-terminal tail, which
is no longer coupled to the Gly-rich loop. This uncoupling of the
C-tail from the Gly-rich loop would further facilitate ADP release
(Figure ). It is also possible that ADP release
is not controlled by movement of the C-tail alone but by the coordinated
motions of both the C-tail and Gly-rich loop together. Therefore,
these structures begin to explain how the rate limiting step of ADP
release may proceed and identify conformations and movements involved
in this process. Also, each of the two molecules in the ASU exemplify
possible conformations and trajectories involved in this release step.
Our recent elucidation of a community map for PKA shows clearly how
the C-tail and β strands one and two function as an integrated
community in the closed conformation, whereas this community is uncoupled
in the apo conformation (McClendon, C. et al., manuscript in preparation).

Schematic
representation of possible steps and conformations involved
in reaction turnover by PKA. This depiction highlights conformational
changes that may occur including opening of the active site following
substrate release. See Bastidas et al. and Jacobsen et al. for more detailed
depictions of possible substrate binding and release steps.

In summary, the ADP bound structure
reported here further defines
the conformational flexibility of the C-subunit and does not conform
to any of the previously defined states, open, closed, or intermediate.
Furthermore, the ADP bound structure provides evidence of how reaction
progression may proceed in PKA and kinases in general. ADP binds at
the active site with only one magnesium ion corresponding to Mg2,
which is consistent with previous reports suggesting that Mg1 is released
following phosphoryl transfer, and release of Mg1 may be an important
step that precedes ADP release. Additionally, the conformation adopted
with the ADP bound structure presents evidence of the conformational
changes that may precede ADP release during reaction turnover including
opening of the active site by movement of the Gly-rich loop and C-tail
away from the active site.

Supporting Information Available
Validation of the Mg2 position
in the ADP-bound structure (4NTT), performed with the CheckMyMetal web server, a metal
binding site validation server, showing that the Mg2 in chain A has
a good metal–ligand distance distribution in comparison with
Cambridge Structural Database but the Mg2 in chain B is poorly coordinated
in both geometry and metal–ligand distance distribution, suggesting
the dynamics feature of the chain B. This material is available free
of charge via the Internet at http://pubs.acs.org.

Supplementary Material
bi500684c_si_001.pdf

The project
described was supported by grants from the National Institutes of
Health (Grant GM19301 to S.S.T. and Grant F31GM099415 to A.C.B.).
Additionally, Adam C. Bastidas acknowledges funding through the Ford
Foundation Diversity Fellowship.

The authors
declare no
competing financial interest.

Abbreviations
PKAprotein kinase A

C-subunitcatalytic subunit of PKA

R-subunitregulatory
subunit of PKA

myrmyristylated

PKIprotein kinase inhibitor

bicineN,N-bis(2-hydroxyethyl)glycine

MPD2-methyl-2,4-pentanediol

