Introduction
Postia Fr. is a brown rot polypore genus, which contains annual species with mainly soft, whitish basidiocarps, thin-walled, hyaline spores and monomitic hyphal system with clamped generative hyphae (). Previously most of the taxa were considered to be members of the genus Tyromyces P. Karst. (e.g. , , ). However,  proved that the type (Tyromyces
chioneus (Fr.) P. Karst.) of Tyromyces P. Karst. is a white rot species. Hence he examined Tyromyces s. l. and found that Postia Fr. Fries, 1874 is the earlier legitimate name of the brown rot Postia
caesia and Postia
subcaesia. Ryvarden and Gilbertson combine for the same species into the genus Oligoporus Bref., 1888, based on the opinion, according to which Postia Fr. is a nomen provisorium or nudum of Fries (, ). Nevertheless, the solution of Jülich that Postia was validly published by Fries () was accepted by several mycologists (e.g. , , ). Previous phylogenetic study of Tyromyces s. l. shows that the distinction between Postia and Oligoporus is not significant (). However a recent work shows that the two genera are different and the species of the Postia
caesia complex belong to the Postia sensu stricto clade ().

Based on the bluish tints of the basidiocarp and the lack of the chlamydospores in culture, Postia
caesia complex forms a distinctive morphological group within the genus (). Five species of this group occur in Europe. Postia
caesia (Schrad.) P. Karst. is a widespread species around the word, which in Europe grows preferably on gymnosperms (, ). Postia
subcaesia (A. David) Jülich is macroscopically similar, but mainly grows on angiospermic trees and has narrower spores (). Postia
alni Niemelä &amp; Vampola also occurs on deciduous trees, but has smaller basidiocarp and the surface of the pileus is not as hairy as that of the Postia
subcaesia has (Fig. ) (). Postia
luteocaesia (A. David) Jülich is a rare Central-European species, which grows on Pinus. The main characteristic of this species is the bright yellow color of the basidiocarp besides the blue-grayish discoloration (, ). From the Mediterranean region Postia
mediterraneocaesia M. Pierre &amp; B. Rivoire has been described which has spores wider than 1.5 μm as Postia
caesia and Postia
luteocaesia ().

Based on microscopic characters and host preference Postia
alni shows a great similarity to Postia
subcaesia. It differs by the matted pileus surface and the smaller size of the basidiocarp (, ). Previously some mycologists (, , ) also observed the macroscopical variability of Postia
subcaesia s. l., but there was not any valid new taxa name published. Velenovsky described a species (Polyporus
alni Velen., 1922) which is identical with Postia
alni, however it is illegitimate, because it is a later homonym of Polyporus
alni Sorokin, 1892. Accordingly, Niemelä and Vampola described the new species under the name Postia
alni, retaining the epithet, which was given by Velenovsky ().

Previously in Hungary, only two species were known within the Postia
caesia complex: Postia
caesia and Postia
subcaesia (e.g. , ). In this study Postia
alni is recorded for the first time from Hungary from two locations.

Materials and methods
The basidiocarps (Fig. ) were collected in Juhdöglő-völgy Forest Reserve (Vértes Mts) and Dobogókő (Visegrádi Mts). Both of them were growing on dead Fagussylvatica. The specimens (PV188, PV977) were placed into the personal collection of the author (PV) and are available at the Botanical Department of Corvinus University of Budapest, Hungary. The identification of the specimens were based on the works of  and . For microscopical studies a Zeiss Axio Imager.A2 light microscope was used. For the measurements a × 1000 magnification objective, oil immersion and the program AxioVision Release 4.8.2 were used. The line drawings of the anatomical characteristics of the basidiocarp (Fig. ) were made by the author with a drawing tube. The key of the European Postiacaesia complex was prepared after the following works: , , ,  and .

Taxon treatments

Postia
alni

Niemelä &amp; Vampola, 2001

Materials
Type status:
Other material. Occurrence: recordNumber: PV 188; recordedBy: V. Papp; Location: continent: Europe; country: Hungary; county: Fejér; locality: Juhdöglő-völgy Forest Reserve; Event: year: 2010; month: 9; day: 14; habitat: on dead Fagus sylvatica; Record Level: institutionID: Corvinus University of Budapest

Type status:
Other material. Occurrence: recordNumber: PV 977; recordedBy: V. Papp; Location: continent: Europe; country: Hungary; county: Pest; locality: Dobogókő; Event: year: 2013; month: 11; day: 24; habitat: on dead Fagus sylvatica; Record Level: institutionID: Corvinus University of Budapest

Description
Basidiocarp annual, up to 3(–5) cm, white or cream color with bluish-grey tint. Pileus surface azonate, glabrous or slightly tomentose, but not fairy. Pores roundish, 4–5/mm. Context whitish, not zonate, soft when fresh, hard when dried. Hyphal system monomitic. Hyphae with clamp connections, thin- to thick-walled, 2.6–4.2 μm wide. Some contextual hyphae with finger-like branches. Cystidia absent and no cystidioles. Basidia clavate with 4 sterigmata and basal clamp, 10.2–15.6 μm. Basidiospores mostly allantoid, thin walled, 4.7–5.6 × 1.1–1.4 μm.

Identification Keys
Key to the European Postia
caesia complex
1	Basidiospores 1.5–2(2.2) μm wide, occurs on conifers or hardwoods	

	
–	Basidiospores up to 1.5 μm wide, occurs mainly on hardwoods	

	
2	Pore surface vivid yellow, basidiospores (4.5–)4.7–6.3(–6.5) × (1.5–)1.6–1.9(–2) μm (Q = 3.03–3.15), growing on Pinus, rare species	
Postia
luteocaesia
	
–	Bright yellow color not present	

	
3	Mediterranean species, basidiocarps small size (up to 25 mm long), lightly greyish-blue when bruised, hyphae in pileipellis are encrusted, basidiospores (4,25–)4.7(–6.12) × (1.45–)1.5(–1.68) μm (Q = 3.2), occurs on conifers and hardwoods	
Postia
mediterraneocaesia
	
–	Wide spread species, basidiocarps larger (up to 6 cm long), upper surface tomentose to hairy, strongly bluish when bruised, basidiospores (4.4–)4.5–5.8(–6) × (1.3–)1.5–1.8(–2) μm, occurs mainly on conifers	
Postia
caesia
	
4	Basidiocarps orbicular, small, up to 4(5) cm, upper surface matted, or with very low tomentum, not hairy	
Postia
alni
	
–	Basidiocarps wide, larger, usually more than 5 cm, upper surface hairy	
Postia
subcaesia
	
Discussion
There are many difficulties related to the identification of the species of the Postia
caesia complex. There are some confusing East-Asian collection data that cannot be identified as either Postia
alni or Postia
subcaesia (). For instance,  mentioned Postia
alni from China and gave spore size (less than 4 μm) that is different from the European taxa (4.4–6 μm in ). Molecular data () showed that the taxonomy of this group is more complicated and further studies are needed for the identification of the species of the complex.

Supplementary Material
XML Treatment for
Postia
alni

Anatomical structure of Postiaalni (PV188). Scale bar = 10 μm. Drawings: V. Papp.

Contextual hyphal system;

Hyphae from dissepiments edge;

Basidia;

Basidioles;

Basidiospores.

Cross-section of the basidiocarp of Postia
subcaesia. Photo: V. Papp.

Cross-section of the basidiocarp of Postia
alni. Photo: V. Papp.

