Introduction
The National Wildlife Refuge system is an invaluable resource in the protection of biological diversity (; ; ). The conservation of imperiled species and the protection of biological integrity at national wildlife refuges are mandates of the Federal Fish and Wildlife Service (Policy 601 FW 3). This policy considers the protection of a broad spectrum of fish, wildlife, and habitat resources and evaluates processes necessary to restore lost or severely degraded components. Ecosystem services provided by refuges are assessed at a total value of US $32.3 billion/year ().

National Wildlife Refuge System Administration Act of 1966 as amended by the National Wildlife Refuge System Improvement Act of 1997, 16 U.S.C. 668dd-668ee (Refuge Administration Act), Section 4(a)(4)(B) states that "In administering the System, the Secretary shall... ensure that the biological integrity, diversity, and environmental health of the System are maintained for the benefit of present and future generations of Americans" (). Biological integrity, diversity, and environmental health can be described at various landscape scales from refuge to ecosystem, national, and international levels (, , , ). Each landscape scale has a measure of biological integrity, diversity, and environmental health that depends on existing habitats, ecosystem processes, and alterations (, ). Biological integrity, diversity, and environmental health can vary among refuges and often within refuges over time based on system resistance and resilience ().

The goal of biological integrity, unlike fishable and swimmable goals, encompasses all factors affecting the ecosystem ().  define biological integrity as “the capability of supporting and maintaining a balanced, integrated, adaptive community of organisms having a species composition, diversity, and functional organization comparable to that of the natural habitat of the region.” That is, a site with high biological integrity will have had little or no influence from human society. Biological integrity lies along a continuum from a system extensively altered by significant human impacts in the landscape to a natural system undisturbed by anthropogenic influences on the system (, , ). No landscape retains absolute biological integrity, diversity, and environmental health; however, the prevention of further loss of natural biological features and processes is a protection mandate.

Biological diversity is evaluated at various taxonomic levels, and for purposes of Endangered Species Act implementation at distinct population segments (, ). Evaluations of biological diversity begin with population surveys and studies of species level flora and fauna, which are the basic elements of biodiversity. The refuge system's focus is on native species and natural communities, such as those found under historic conditions. Biological diversity is evaluated at various landscape scales, while evaluations of biological diversity focus is at the refuge scale (). The maintenance of populations of breeding individuals that are genetically viable and functional require necessary provision for the breeding, migrating, and wintering needs of species. Every effort is made to maximize the size of habitat blocks and maintain connectivity between blocks of habitats, unless such connectivity causes adverse effects on wildlife or habitat, such as by facilitating the spread of invasive species ().

Ecological health is defined by the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service Refuge System as the extent that environmental composition, structure, and function have been altered from historic conditions (). Environmental composition refers to abiotic components such as air, water, and soils that are integrated with biotic components. Environmental structure refers to the organization of abiotic components, such as atmospheric layering, aquifer structure, and topography. Environmental function includes the abiotic processes, such as wind, tidal regimes, evaporation, and erosion. A diversity of heterogeneous abiotic composition, structure, and function supports a variety of biological composition, structure, and function.

Limited biological integrity studies have been conducted on National Wildlife Refuges, with the exception of contaminant studies at the Patoka River National Wildlife Refuge (, , , , ), a baseline survey at the Big Oaks National Wildlife Refuge (), and a contaminants investigation at Patoka River, Muscatatuck, and Big Oaks NWR (). The current study documents an inventory of aquatic assemblage biodiversity from three National Wildlife Refuges in southern Indiana and evaluates the status and condition of refuge biological integrity based on indices of biotic integrity and biological diversity indices compared to historical biodiversity information.

Materials and methods

Study area


The Patoka River watershed (Fig. ) has a drainage basin of approximately 2170.4 km2 (838 mi2) and has a wide range of known conditions that are impairing NWR stream quality including acid mine drainage, oil and gas exploration, and impacts from coal mining (). The area supports the largest known populations of the Indiana crayfish (Orconectes
indianensis Hay 1896), a former Federal candidate species (). Numerous stream segments are listed by the State of Indiana as “not meeting” aquatic life designated uses because of metal contamination (, ). The entire length of the South Fork Patoka River is listed as “not meeting” aquatic life designated uses because of acid mine drainage contamination.

Sampling was conducted over two years in both the Patoka and Vernon Fork of the Muscatatuck river drainage. The Patoka River National Wildlife Refuge (NWR) is the sole refuge in the Patoka watershed (Fig. ), while two refuges occur in the Vernon Fork of the Muscatatuck River, including the Big Oaks (Fig. ) and Muscatatuck (Fig. ) NWRs. The Muscatatuck River includes a 2952.6 km2 (1,140 mi2) watershed that includes a wide range of biological habitats and environmental conditions (Figs , ). The Vernon Fork of the Muscatatuck watershed includes Sloan’s crayfish (Orconectes
sloanii Bundy 1876), a species of special interest to US Fish and Wildlife Service, Region 3, which has experienced intensive invasion threats from the rusty crayfish (Orconectes
rusticus Girard 1852). Nutrient impacts are pervasive throughout the Vernon Fork watershed. The Muscatatuck NWR receives runoff drainage through Sandy Branch and Mutton Creek from the City of Seymour, Indiana, and from high density residential land uses. Metal levels in fish tissue exceeded fish consumption advisories within several of the lakes on the Muscatatuck NWR (). The State of Indiana determined that several streams entering the Muscatatuck NWR are listed as “not meeting” designated uses for aquatic life. Perhaps a larger landscape issue is present at Big Oaks NWR, which incorporates portions of Jefferson Proving Ground, a former military base that has documented impairments from exploded ordnance, depleted uranium, and metal contamination ().


Study design


Sampling design incorporated a random probability selection for a portion of sites based on bridge access. Contamination at Big Oaks NWR required crews to access streams from bridge access points due to safety concerns from unexploded ordinance. As a result, all of the random sampling was conducted at bridge access points to maintain consistency. A panel survey design stratified sites with some selected from prior surveys (, ), while a subset of random probability sites was sampled for aquatic macroinvertebrates and crayfish assemblages (see Suppl. material  for list of sites). Fifty probability sites and 37 targeted sites were sampled on the Patoka River NWR (Fig. ), 30 probability and 4 targeted sites were sampled on the Big Oaks National Wildlife Refuge in Jennings, Jefferson, and Ripley counties (Fig. ), and 20 probability and a single targeted site selected at the Muscatatuck NWR in Jackson and Jennings counties (Fig. ). These sites represent a variety of habitat types including lakes, ponds, wetlands, streams, and large rivers (Suppl. material ).

Sampling gear was selected for each of the appropriate habitat types. Lake and wetland areas were sampled using a boat mounted Smith Root 2500 watt DC generator unit. Large to medium size streams (&gt; 8 m wetted width) were assessed using a long-line or backpack electrofishing unit. Small streams (&lt; 8 m wetted width) were assessed using a Smith-Root DC generator backpack unit. Sampling of streams was conducted along a linear reach based on 15 times the wetted stream width (). Sample reach distance length increased with stream width so that a minimum of 50 m (wetted width &lt;3.3) and maximum of 500 m was sampled. Lakes, ponds, wetlands and moist soil units (MSU) reaches were sampled based on 500 m linear distance and 1800 s. Lake reaches were selected based on natural shoreline features, which included intact riparian vegetation and bank condition. Two 500 m reaches were sampled on Lake Linda, Stansfield Lake, Moss Lake, and MSU with reaches distributed on opposing shores. Due to shallow conditions in Moss Lake, about 500 m of accessible water was sampled at a single site.


Field and Laboratory methods


Fish collection methods. Daytime inventories were conducted using standard fish community sampling equipment during the summer season (i.e., June-September). The appropriate sampling gear for each site was determined by the field crew chief. Sampling was conducted by the same crew leader, using the same techniques, and equipment, during all sampling periods. Five percent of sites were sampled by both crew leaders to validate crew performance. No statistical difference (Student’s t-test, α = 0.05) was observed in results between crews. Relative abundance (catch per unit effort or CPUE is the number of fish per minute of electrofishing effort) data were gathered by performing surveys at reaches using appropriate electrofishing gear. Sampling gear included a model 6A Smith-Root boat-mounted electrofishing unit in nonwadeable, large main stem rivers and lakes, while Smith Root backpack and longline systems were used in tributaries. Longline units used the same generator and transformer unit, i.e., 3500 watt DC generator and 6A Smith Root unit, as the boat mounted unit. Gear selection was based on stream width with longline units used on large, wadeable wetted widths (&gt;8 m).

Electrofishing surveys included systematic sampling of all representative habitats within each reach, including shallows, instream cover, and the thalweg or deepest point in the cross sectional profile. A representative sample was collected from each reach. Captured fish were placed into a live well until a sampling event was completed. Each survey event included documentation of species identification, batch weight, number of fish captured, presence of external disease including deformities, eroded fins, lesions, and tumor anomalies (DELTs) for each individual and an estimate of qualitative habitat condition ().

Fish identified in the field had vouchers of 2-3 individuals for later taxonomic verification, while difficult species and other small minnow, darter, and madtom species were preserved in 10% formalin for laboratory processing using standard taxonomic keys (, , , , ). Scientific names are included in Tables , ,  including authorities in Table .

Macroinvertebrate collection methods. Daytime macroinvertebrate assemblages were sampled using a “representative habitat sampling” procedure developed for streams (). D-nets were used to collect 20-efforts within representative habitat throughout the reach distance length. An effort is a 60-second sample of a specific habitat type that represents a proportion of the reach scale habitat. Efforts were established to correlate with the predominant habitats present within the reach. For example, habitats were segregated into rock, fines, overhanging vegetation, woody debris, coarse particulate material, and other categories (). So, if rocky riffle habitat represents 50% of the habitat within the stream reach, then 10 of the 20 efforts would be collected within that particular habitat type. The individuals collected during the 20 effort D-net sampling were composited and preserved in 95% ethanol for laboratory sorting.

Samples were brought to the laboratory for sorting of stream bank composited samples. The sample contents were placed into a 250 mm x 250 mm (10 x 10 inch) gridded sorting pan (). Sorting was done until 300 organism subsample was obtained. The grid picked was selected using a random number generator (i.e., Research Randomizer http://www.randomizer.org/form.htm) to determine the appropriate square to be sorted. Sorting included the entire square until the 300th organism was picked; however, the square that contained the 300th individual was sorted until it was fully picked. Reach macroinvertebrate density varied with sample and ranged from a maximum of all 100 squares picked (and either less than 300 individuals or more than 300 individuals) to fewer than all squares sorted and less than 300 total individual organisms.

After the completion of the 300 organism sort, a 15 minute large-rare examination was completed for samples that were not entirely picked. A large-rare sort included the remaining squares were scanned for taxa that had not been previously observed with emphasis on unique taxa not previously observed. Individuals from the large-rare pan sorted pick were identified and data content was incorporated into species richness metric calculations, but were not included in trophic or relative abundance metrics following standard procedures (). All individuals were identified to the lowest possible taxonomic levels, i.e., genus or species, following state-of-the-art taxonomic resolution appropriate for that particular taxon (, , ). Scientific names including authorities are listed in Table .

Crayfish collection methods. Crayfish sampling included the evaluation of primary, secondary, and tertiary burrowing species (, ). Primary, secondary, and tertiary burrowing as defined by . Primary burrowers are terrestrial species that do not require submergence under water and dig extensive burrows with complex ventilation holes. Secondary burrowers dig burrows into the side of the bank and inhabit both aquatic and terrestrial habitats, while tertiary burrowers are mostly aquatic and do not dig burrows other than shallow depressions in stream beds as streams desiccate.

Catch-per-unit-effort (CPUE) is based on the number of individuals collected per effort required to sample each site based on the stream size. Greater sized streams had more effort. Effort is based on the 15 times the wetted width in a linear distance sampled.

Burrowing crayfish were collected using excavation and plunging techniques (, ). Individuals were coaxed from their burrow by pouring water down the burrow and agitating the water. If the crayfish failed to emerge, then a toilet plunger was used to force the crayfish from the burrow (). If that failed to dislodge the crayfish, then a hand shovel was used to excavate the burrow and retrieve the individual (). Secondary and tertiary burrowers were collected using a backpack electrofishing unit. Secondary burrowers were also collected by hand by turning over large rocks in the stream. By flipping rocks, the crayfish could be easily collected by hand. Tertiary burrowers were collected with a dip net or by hand. All crayfish species collected from each site had an estimate of relative abundance based on a standard catch-per-unit-effort per site () or number of individuals per square meter sampled.

Specimens were preserved in 70% ethanol, returned to the laboratory for processing, and identified using standard taxonomic references including , , and . Scientific names and authorities are cited in Table .


Assessment of Biological Integrity


 developed and calibrated an index of biotic integrity (IBI) for fish assemblages in the Eastern Corn Belt Plain Ecoregion based on data from 200 least impacted sites. Reference condition models are a conservative approach for establishing expected attributes of the biological assemblage, since these models recognize that pristine conditions are limited or in such small distributions that they might not be extant ().  developed reference condition calibrations following  and used a maximum species area curve to determine expectations and scoring criteria (). Scoring classifications and expectations follow .

 created a habitat condition index based on substrate, riparian corridor, stream sinuosity, cover, riffle-run quality, pool quality, and habitat cycle percentage and gradient. The Qualitative Habitat Evaluation Index (QHEI) is a measure of condition that was originally developed in the Midwestern United States. Scores range from 0-100 ponts with higher values representing increasing habitat quality. Habitat condition scores greater than 66 points are considered meeting aquatic life designated uses.  found that habitat condition increased directly and proportionally with fish assemblage quality.


Statistical analyses


Cumulative frequency distributions of IBI scores and descriptive statistics for each refuge were completed using Statistica (). Relative abundance was based on the number of individuals per unit distance and time () and was transformed into percent occurrence based on total numbers of individuals collected at each site. This approach assures that species richness area curves are comparable between watersheds and ecoregions. Spline-smoothed pleths were created based on reach scale average species richness and then averages were joined to produce hot-spot biodiversity, habitat condition and index of biotic integrity depictions for each watershed ().

Taxon treatments
Synurella
dentata
Hubricht 1943

Distribution
Patoka River NWR: 22, 27, 29, 41, 64-66, 82, 83

Muscatatuck NWR: 8-11, 13, 19, 20

Big Oaks NWR: 29

The toothed spring amphipod (Synurella
dentata) was collected by ) from Big Creek from Three Raiders Monument. This species is ubiquitous in springs and some caves.

Ecology
Synurella
dentata was a dominant species represented by a 16% occurrence and is considered to have a wide habitat tolerance. The toothed spring amphipod (Synurella
dentata) is a cave spring species associated with karst habitats ().

Conservation
The toothed spring amphipod has a species conservation rank of S4/G5.

Lirceus
fontinalis
Rafinesque-Schmaltz 1820

Distribution
Patoka River NWR: 1, 3, 22, 25, 27, 29-31, 35, 36, 73, 79

Muscatatuck NWR: 7-13, 16, 19, 20

Big Oaks NWR: 13, 15, 20

The species ranges from southern Indiana, Kentucky, southwestern Ohio, and northern Tennessee (). The bluegrass spring isopod was collected from caves in the Middle Fork, Big Creek, and Graham Creek watersheds.

Ecology
Lirceus
fontinalis (24%) was dominant within the refuges and is considered to have a wide habitat tolerance. The bluegrass spring isopod is a cave spring species associated with karst habitats ().

Conservation
The bluegrass spring isopod has a conservation species rank is S3/G4.

Orconectes (Faxonius) indianensis
(Hay 1896)

Distribution
Patoka River NWR: 1-3, 6-7, 17, 19, 22, 25, 26, 29, 34, 38-40, 63

Ecology
An additional sixteen records of Indiana crayfish were found from areas surrounding the refuge. These sites included solid rock substrate habitats as described by  and .

Conservation
This former Federal candidate species does not warrant protection based on current and previously known collection information (, ). The Patoka River supports the largest known populations of the Indiana crayfish, which is a former Federal candidate species ().

Orconectes (Rhoadesius) sloanii
(Bundy 1876)

Distribution
Muscatatuck NWR: 5, 6, 10, 13-15, 20

Big Oaks NWR: 5, 7-13, 15, 16, 20, 23, 25, 27, 29, 30, 32

Extensive survey of southwestern Ohio and southeastern Indiana documented the distribution and status of Sloan’s crayfish. Closer inspection of St John's (1988) distribution maps show that areas included within the Big Oaks National Wildlife Refuge were represented by only Sloan’s crayfish and did not possess the invasive rusty crayfish. Our sampling results found similar results as .

Ecology
Sloan’s crayfish was collected at 76.5% of the sites in the Big Oaks refuge. Relative abundance averaged 13.6 individuals per site. Mean density of Sloan’s crayfish was 0.272 individuals per square meter. Sloan’s crayfish was collected at 36.8% of the sites on the Muscatatuck refuge. Relative abundance averaged 9.14 individuals per site. Mean density of Sloan’s crayfish was 0.182 individuals per square meter.

Conservation
Sloan’s crayfish (Orconectes
sloanii) is a species of special interest to US Fish and Wildlife Service, Region 3, which has experienced intensive invasion threats from the rusty crayfish (Orconectes
rusticus Girard 1852). Nutrient impacts are pervasive throughout the Vernon Fork watershed. The Muscatatuck NWR receives runoff drainage through Sandy Branch and Mutton Creek from the City of Seymour, Indiana, and from high density residential land uses.

Sloan’s crayfish is stable and has a relatively high relative abundance in the Big Oaks and Muscatatuck National Wildlife Refuges. No instances of rusty crayfish were observed in either of the refuges (Table ).

Notropis
ariommus
(Cope 1867)

Distribution
Big Oaks NWR: 1, 11, 20

The collection of popeye shiner represent the first record for this species in Indiana since the species was originally described from the White River near Indianapolis in the late 1800’s. During this study specimens were collected from Otter Creek, Big Graham Creek, and Big Creek (Table ).

Ecology
The species was collected from moderate sized flowing rivers over cobble and gravel substrates.

Conservation
The species has been considered extirpated within Indiana, but with these records should be considered for additional study to determine the species current status.

Centrarchus
macropterus
(Lacepede 1801)

Distribution
Patoka River NWR: 62, 68

Muscatatuck NWR: 2, 5, 12

Flier is a centarchid species largely associated with the southeastern and eastern United States. Its distribution is restricted to the Coastal Plain from the Chesapeake Bay to Eastern Texas and north through the Mississippi Embayment to southern Illinois and Indiana (, ). Records for Indiana depict its distribution to be limited to the southwestern and central portions of the state (). The flier was collected from three sites in this study including the Vernon Fork, from Mutton Creek, and from Moss Lake (Table ). These records constitute the furthest northern and easternmost collections within the species range (, ).

Ecology
A total of 11 individuals were collected from the Muscatatuck NWR. Our flier individuals occurred in pool and low-flow, basic gradient streams with wood debris (, ).

Lepomis (Lepomis) symmetricus
Forbes 1883

Distribution
Patoka River NWR: 52

The Bantam sunfish is reported from the Patoka River watershed from Rough Creek. This watershed has experienced extensive acid mine drainage impacts.

Ecology
Lepomis
symmetricus was collected from a pool about 1 m in depth from the areas upstream from the bridge.

Conservation
Lepomis
symmetricus is rare and is considered endangered within the State of Indiana.

Ammocrypta (Ammocrypta) pellucida
(Putnam 1863)

Distribution
Muscatatuck NWR: 15

Ecology
The eastern sand darter (Ammocrypta
pellucida) was collected from one site on the Vernon Fork Muscatatuck River (Table ). Three individuals were collected from the Vernon Fork over shallow, sandy-riffle habitat.

Conservation
The eastern sand darter was once recognized as state threatened species based on limited presence in the state (), but has since been removed from threatened status. The eastern sand darter is still considered rare and is susceptible to impacts of habitat degradation ().

Etheostoma (Etheostoma) histrio
Jordan and Gilbert 1887

Distribution
Patoka River NWR: 78

Muscatatuck NWR: 6, 14

The harlequin darter was thought to be extripated from Indiana until its rediscovery within the White River Drainage in 1991 (). It has since been collected from other subwatersheds within the White River and also from the Patoka River (). The harlequin darter was collected from Vernon Fork Muscatatuck River at two sites, while the rediscovery of it was documented in the mainstem Patoka River upstream to the mouth of South Fork Patoka River. These records constitute the furthest removed records for the harlequin darter from the main stem of either branch of the White River (Table ).

Ecology
Two Harlequin darter individuals were collected over gravel/sand riffles with swift current.

Analysis

Habitat patterns at a watershed scale


There is a direct correlation between landscape scale ecological patterns and reach scale habitat measures (). Natural landscapes provide important ecological services that promote biological diversity and integrity. The QHEI scores at a watershed scale show that the Patoka River drainage (Fig. a) has the lowest overall habitat scores compared to the Muscatatuck River (Fig. b). Patoka River drainage habitat is highest in the upper watershed surrounding Hoosier National Forest and Patoka Lake. The lowest habitat scores were associated with the declining habitat condition in the lower watershed. This decline is attributed to agriculture, legacy mining, channel modification, and oil and gas exploration (Fig. a).

The Muscatatuck River drainage comparatively has the highest habitat quality of the two drainages. The Muscatatuck NWR has the lower habitat quality associated with the refuge borders compared to the Big Oaks NWR (Fig. b). Edge effects from agricultural land use was the primary factor effecting the eastern boundary of the Big Oaks refuge, while at the Muscatatuck NWR the streams drain from the north to south in orientation. The northern edge of the Muscatatuck refuge is most influenced by agriculture, while the eastern and western margins of the refuge had the highest habitat scores.


Biological diversity, composition, and assemblage changes



Patoka River NWR


Species richness and composition. We collected 9,658 individuals representing 82 fish species from streams and rivers on the Patoka River National Wildlife Refuge and tributaries (Table  and Table ). Dominant families included the Cyprinidae (20 species), Centrarchidae (15 species) and Catostomidae (12 species), which was comparable to similar historical catches (, , ). Dominant species included longear sunfish (Lepomis
megalotis)(1,314 individuals), central stoneroller (Campostoma
anomalum) (827 individuals), bluegill (Lepomis
macrochirus)(461 individuals) and striped shiner (Luxilus
chrysocephalus) (378 individuals). These species were dominant in pool habitats (longear sunfish and bluegill), headwater streams (central stoneroller), and in wadable stream pool habitats (striped shiner) draining the refuge (Table 2). During the second sampling season four dominant species included creek chub (Semotilus
atromaculatus) (671 individuals), western mosquitofish (Gambusia
affinis
affinis)(568 individuals), bluntnose minnow (Pimephales
notatus) (524 individuals), and blackstripe topminnow (Fundulus
notatus)(423 individuals). These species are tolerant forms that can occupy acid mine drainage streams (pH &lt; 5).

Macroinvertebrate species richness and composition. No previous macroinvertebrate investigation has been conducted in the Patoka River drainage at the lowest taxonomic resolution levels. During this investigation of the Patoka River watershed, 355 taxa representing 93 families were collected (Table ). Dominant orders included the Hemiptera and Diptera (12 families), Coleoptera (11 families), and Ephemeroptera (8 families). Among the most diverse macroinvertebrate taxa was the Diptera or flies and midges (103 taxa), Hemiptera or true bugs (67 taxa), and the Odonata or dragonflies (47 taxa) (Table ). Based on comparing macroinvertebrate species composition differences between annual events, 2006 surveys found 16 mayfly taxa compared to 11 mayfly taxa in 2007. Unique taxa collected during 2006 included, Baetis
intercalaris, Procloeon spp., Psuedocloeon spp., Hexagenia
limbata, Tricorythodes spp., and Choroterpes spp., while during 2007 Ameletus spp., Acerpenna
pygmaea, Plauditus
dubius, Plauditus spp., and Nixes spp. were collected (Table 3). Three stonefly taxa were collected during the inventory including Acroneuria spp. and Neoperla spp during 2006 and Isoperla spp. during 2007 (Table ). Caddisfly taxa collected during 2006 and 2007 included 25 taxa (Table ). During 2006, 13 caddisfly taxa were unique including, Hydropsyche betteni-depravata, Hydropsyche cuanis, H. hageni, H. simulans, Oxyethira spp., Nectopsyche
candida, N.
exquisite, Nectopsyche spp., Oecetis
cinerascens, Chimarra
aterrima, C.
obscura, Cernotina
spicata, and Neurclipsis
crepuscularis. During 2007, seven taxa were unique including, Hydropsyche
betteni, Ironoquia spp., Chimarra spp., Ptilostomis spp., Polycentropus spp., Rhacophila spp., and Neophylax spp.

Crayfish species richness and composition. Several studies of crayfish near the Patoka River NWR have been conducted (, , , ).  described the crayfish assemblages of the Patoka River watershed including species occurring around the National Wildlife Refuge. A new species of crayfish, the paintedhand mudbug Cambarus
polychromatus Thoma, Jezerinac, and Simon 2005 was described from Flat Creek on the Patoka River NWR ().  described the onservation status of the Indiana crayfish, while  described the reproductive biology, distribution, and habitat needs of species occurring in the Patoka River drainage.  studied the effects of oil brine and acid mine leachate on the crayfish fauna of the Patoka River watershed. The current study evaluated 88 sites (Suppl. material ), which include the same locations as previously sampled for fish and macroinvertebrate assemblages (Table ). Similar species richness in the area surrounding the Patoka River NWR was found as in previous studies (). The dominant species was the calico crayfish (Orconectes
immunis), which was found throughout the refuge and areas surrounding the Patoka River NWR. Both northern crayfish (Orconectes
virilis) and White River crayfish (Procambarus
acutus) were collected from single locations. Two species of primary burrowing crayfish were collected from the refuge (Table ). The paintedhand mudbug was more common than the Great Plains mudbug. No invasive crayfish species were found during the present sampling in the Patoka River watershed.


Changes in Biological diversity


Fish assemblage record changes. Five times as much collection effort was expended in the Patoka watershed since 1992 than had previously occurred over the last two centuries.  documented the increase in species diversity as a result of increased sampling intensity. Nine first species records were found in the watershed between 1992-2002, including threadfin shad (Dorosoma petenense), cypress minnow (Hybognathus
hayi), ribbon shiner (Lythrurus
fumeus), pallid shiner (Notropis
amnis), Southern redbelly dace (Chrosomus
erythrogaster), fathead minnow (Pimephales
promelas), blacknose dace (Rhinichthys
obtusus), and starhead topminnow (Fundulus
dispar). The range extension of ribbon shiner may have been a result of misidentification since prior identification of redfin shiner (Lythrurus
umbratilis) was documented. This species does not occur in the upper portion of the Patoka watershed. The ribbon shiner was previously known from only a few small streams in southwestern Indiana (). Bait-bucket release of fathead minnow into the watershed was speculated by , while the presence of threadfin shad was probably a result of immigration from upstream reservoir habitats. Pallid shiner and starhead topminnow presence suggest that water quality conditions were improving. These fish species are considered sensitive to acidity and turbidity (). Newly found species since 1993 added the discovery of lake chubsucker (Erimyzon
sucetta) and paddlefish (Polyodon
spathula) (Doug Carnahan, Indiana DNR, personal communication) in oxbow lakes from the floodplain wetlands. Other new discoveries include goldeye (Hiodon
alosoides), shoal chub (Macrhybopsis
hyostoma), channel shiner (Notropis
wickliffi), silver redhorse (Moxostoma
anisurum), and stonecat (Noturus
flavus). Species that were rediscovered include river shiner (Notropis
blennius), sand shiner (N.
stramineus), bullhead minnow (Pimephales
vigilax), shorthead redhorse (Moxostoma
macrolepidotum), brook silverside (Labidesthes
sicculus), yellow bass (Morone
mississippiensis), and smallmouth bass (Micropterus
dolomieu).

The increase in the number of species records was directly a result of increased sampling effort. The rediscovery of lake chubsucker, paddlefish, rock bass (Ambloplites
rupestris), slough darter (Etheostoma
gracile), harlequin darter, blackside darter (Percina
maculata), dusky darter, and banded sculpin (Cottus
carolinae) are all species sensitive to siltation and acidity. The increased occurrence of these species in the watershed may be an environmental indicator of recovery. Species composition additions during 2006 included Spotted gar (Lepisosteus
oculatus), longnose gar (L.
osseus), skipjack herring (Alosa
chrysochloris), ribbon shiner, southern redbelly dace, white sucker (Catostomus
commersonii), black buffalo (Ictiobus
niger), spotted sucker (Minytrema
melanops), black redhorse (Moxostoma
duquesnei), stonecat, banded sculpin, rock bass, smallmouth bass, white crappie (Pomoxis
annularis), black crappie (P.
nigromaculatus), harlequin darter, and slenderhead darter (Percina
phoxocephala). Many species, such as rock bass, southern redbelly dace, banded sculpin, smallmouth bass, and slenderhead darter, were collected in areas upstream of the refuge in high gradient tributaries that drain the Hoosier National Forest. While large river, floodplain species such as spotted and longnose gar, black buffalo, spotted sucker, and harlequin darter were collected from the Patoka River downstream of the refuge. Forty-eight of the 82 fish species (58.5%) collected during 2006 were also collected during 2007. During 2007, first records for species composition additions included goldeye, threadfin shad, bigeye chub (Hybopsis
amblops), bighead carp (Hypophthalmichthys
nobilis), bullhead minnow, quillback (Carpiodes
cyprinus), lake chubsucker, shorthead redhorse (Moxostoma
macrolepidotum), white catfish, tadpole madtom (Noturus
gyrinus), brindled madtom (Noturus
miurus), freckled madtom (Noturus
nocturnus), central mudminnow (Umbra
limi), flier (Centrarchus
macropterus), orangespotted sunfish (Lepomis
humilis), redspotted sunfish (Lepomis
miurus), and bantam sunfish (Lepomis
symmetricus).

First drainage records for fish. First records of six species collected from Patoka River National Wildlife Refuge was previously unknown from the Patoka River (Table ). These species included skipjack herring, bigeye shiner (Notropis
boops), silver carp (Hypophthalmichthys
molitrix), bighead carp, white catfish, and freckled madtom. Skipjack herring is a large river species that is common in the Wabash River. The species was collected from the Patoka River near Meridian Road. The skipjack herring is a pelagic species that is capable of feeding as an adult predator. Bigeye chub was collected from a single site on the Patoka River (at SR 164/162 bridge). This species has experienced significant decline over its range in Illinois and Ohio, but has maintained large populations in Indiana portions of its range. The species is a benthic insectivore that is usually associated with expansive sand bars and coarse gravel and sand substrates. Freckled madtom was collected from Hunley Creek at US 231 bridge. The freckled madtom is a nocturnal species that spends most of its time hiding beneath instream habitat cover. It is possible that this species may have been misidentified in the past since it is similar to several other Noturus species that were previously found in the watershed.

Alien fish species presence. Silver carp and bighead carp are exotic species from southeast Asia, while white catfish is a non-indigenous species from the Atlantic Slope. These species were all collected from the Patoka River at Oatsville Bottom, while the Asian carps were also collected from the Patoka River upstream of the dam at Winslow. These records represent the first records for these species in the Patoka River. The white catfish was stocked into Patoka Lake and into several other large reservoirs in Indiana near Indianapolis (). The species has a forked tail similar to other members of genus Ictalurus, but has white chin barbels and a head shape like other Ameiurus. White catfish was only collected from the Patoka River at Oatsville Bottom (Table ). These species were collected from large main stem river habitats over degraded substrates.


Big Oaks NWR


Fish species richness and composition. Surveys of streams, lakes, and ponds on the Big Oaks National Wildlife Refuge collected 9,747 individuals representing 37 fish species (Table ). Dominant families include the Cyprinidae (12 species), Centrarchidae (8 species) and Percidae (5 species).  reported collecting 6,703 individuals and dominant families included Cyprinidae (12 species), Centrarchidae (7 species), and Percidae (7 species) during 1993. Historically, bluntnose minnow (1,512 individuals), striped shiner (1,146 individuals), and creek chub (778 individuals) were the three dominant species on the Big Oaks National Wildlife Refuge (). During 2006, the dominant species include bluegill (1,159 individuals), bluntnose minnow (964 individuals), creek chub (523 individuals) and central stoneroller (426 individuals). These species were dominant in lakes (bluegill), headwater streams (bluntnose minnow and creek chub), and in large wadable streams (central stoneroller) draining the refuge, respectively (Table 1). During 2007, the dominant species included bluntnose minnow (857 individuals), central stoneroller (751 individuals), creek chub (485 individuals), and striped shiner (461 individuals). These four minnow species were dominant at Little Otter Creek (site 5), Rush Creek, and a variety of sites on Graham Creek (Big and Little Graham Creeks).

Macroinvertebrate species richness and composition. A subterranean faunal study was completed by .  documented the cave and spring invertebrate faunas of Big Oaks National Wildlife Refuge. No other surface water surveys of macroinvertebrate assemblages have been completed near the National Wildlife Refuge or in the Vernon Fork of the Muscatatuck River watershed in the vicinity of the refuge. The current study is the first comprehensive evaluation of the Big Oaks National Wildlife Refuge that included taxonomic identification to lowest possible levels. Several cave and spring invertebrate taxa were collected during the surface water surveys. During this investigation of the Big Oaks National Wildlife Refuge watersheds, 163 taxa representing 66 families were collected (Table ). Dominant families included the Hemiptera, Diptera, and Odonata (8 families), and Coleoptera and Ephemeroptera (7 families). Among the most diverse taxa was the Diptera or flies and midges (35 taxa), Hemiptera or true bugs (25 taxa), Odonata or dragonflies (24 taxa), and Ephemeroptera or mayflies (18 taxa).

Comparison of macroinvertebrate sampling between 2006 and 2007 showed an increase in the number of sensitive taxa were found at the Big Oaks National Wildlife Refuge (Table ). During the 2006 sampling, 12 unique mayfly taxa including Baetis
flavistriga, B.
intercalaris, Ephemera spp., Leucrocuta spp., Maccaffertium
pulchellum, Stenacron spp., Isonychia spp., and Choroterpes
basalis. During 2007, unique mayfly taxa collected included Ephemera
simulans, Attenella
attenuate, Stenacron
interpunctatum, Paraleptophlebia spp. Three stonefly taxa were collected including Acroneuria spp., and Leuctra spp. during 2006 and Acroneuria
evoluta during 2007. Six caddisfly species were collected during surveys at Big Oaks National Wildlife Refuge during 2006-2007 (Table ). Four taxa were unique with two collected in 2006 (Hydropsyche
betteni and Chimarra spp.) and two in 2007 (Cerclea
flava and Cernotina
spicata).

Crayfish species richness and composition. Limited information about crayfish species is available from the Big Oaks National Wildlife Refuge.  documented the presence of the karst crayfish (Cambarus
laevis) from the springs and caves occurring on the refuge.  evaluated the distribution of Sloan’s crayfish from areas around the refuge and repeated sampling of select sites in southwestern Ohio (). The results of St. John’s survey resulted in Sloan’s crayfish being considered vulnerable. Thirty four sites were sampled at the Big Oaks National Wildlife Refuge (Suppl. material b). These sites represented a wide range of stream sizes from headwater creeks to moderate sized rivers, ponds, and impounded lakes. Seven crayfish species were collected from the Big Oaks National Wildlife Refuge (Table ). Three primary burrowing species were collected including the paintedhand mudbug, Ortmann’s mudbug, and the Great Plains mudbug. Four species of tertiary burrowing crayfish were collected including Sloan’s crayfish, northern crayfish, Mud River crayfish (Orconectes
juvenilis), and calico crayfish. The Mud River crayfish is a native species and is known from the study area (). The species resembles the rusty crayfish, but differs in the shape of the mandibles and the first form male gonopod (). The rusty crayfish is native to the Whitewater River drainage, which is just to the east of the National Wildlife Refuge. No specimens of the rusty crayfish were observed on the refuge; however, specimens were collected from streams that pass through the refuge in areas upstream.

Two orconectid species were collected from only a few sites on the refuge (Table ). The northern crayfish was collected from two sites on Otter Creek, while the calico crayfish was collected from Little Otter Creek. Both species appear superficially similar; however, the calico crayfish has a deeply incised (notched) dactyl while the northern crayfish does not. There are also differences in the shape and curvature of the first form male gonopod. The northern crayfish reaches much larger sizes and is known to inhabit firm substrates including gravel and cobble substrates, while the calico crayfish inhabits sand and other fine substrates. No crayfish were collected from lentic habitats on the refuge. No crayfish were collected from Old Timbers Lake (site 6), Gate 8 pond (site 14), or Kruegers Lake (site 34). In addition, no crayfish were collected from Big Creek (site 28). The Big Creek site was impounded by a beaver dam and was more lentic than lotic during the time period when sampled. Two attempts to collect crayfish from this site both resulted in no crayfish being collected.


Changes in Biological Diversity


Fish assemblage record changes. Eleven fish species were collected from the refuge during historical events that were not collected during the current surveys (). Longnose gar, bowfin (Amia
calva), gizzard shad (Dorosoma
cepedianum), carp (Cyprinus
carpio), mimic shiner (Notropis
volucellus), suckermouth minnow (Phenacobius
mirabilis), spotted sucker, channel catfish (Ictalurus
punctatus), spotted bass (Micropterus
punctulatus), logperch (Percina
caprodes), and blackside darter (Percina
maculata) were only found during the 1993 surveys. Longnose gar, bowfin, and gizzard shad were collected as single individuals and were found at Blue Hole on Otter Creek. This site was not surveyed during the current investigation due to access restrictions. Carp, an exotic species, was not collected during 2006-2007 surveys, but was found during 1993 as a single individual at Otter Creek and at Graham Creek. Suckermouth minnow, mimic shiner, logperch, and blackside darter were collected from Otter Creek from locations not sampled during the 2006-2007 surveys. These species were either represented by single individuals or were collected from single locations.

During the 2006 sampling, nine species were collected from Big Oaks National Wildlife Refuge that had not been collected during 2007 (Table ). These species included golden shiner (Notemigonus
crysoleucas), popeye shiner (Notropis
ariommus), grass pickerel (Esox
americanus), brown bullhead (Ameiurus
nebulosus), blackstripe topminnow, brook silverside, redear sunfish (Lepomis
microlophus), smallmouth bass, and black crappie. The habitats that these nine fish species were collected include a variety of specific microhabitats. Golden shiner was collected from Big Creek from pool habitat over sand and gravel substrates. This area was associated with a beaver dam that created lentic conditions on Big Creek. Grass pickerel was collected from Little Graham Creek, Marble Creek, an unnamed tributary of Big Creek, and Middle Fork Creek. This species is a pelagic predator that usually is associated with submerged aquatic vegetation, woody debris, and leaf debris. Brown bullhead was collected from Otter Creek from a deep pool along an outside channel bend. The species was associated with large collapsed clay bank habitat that had recently been severed from the bank. Blackstripe topminnow is a surface dwelling species that is commonly associated with overhanging grasses or submerged aquatic vegetation. The species was only collected from Big Creek. Brook silverside is also a pelagic species that usually occurs in lakes; however, the species was collected from Little Graham Creek. Redear sunfish is typically a lake inhabitant that is not native to southeastern Indiana. It has been stocked throughout the state into lentic systems. The species was collected from Old Timbers Lake, Gate 8 pond, and Kruegers Lake, as well as, Little Otter Creek. The species grows to large sizes and is a desirable sport fish among anglers. Likewise, black crappie is also a lake species occurring around woody debris and submerged tree trunks. The species was also collected from Old Timbers Lake, Gate 8 pond, and Kruegers Lake. Smallmouth bass was collected from Otter Creek. This species is a native predator that is an important indicator of water quality because of the temperature sensitivity to cool water temperatures. Twenty-seven of the 36 fish species collected during 2006 were also collected during 2007 (Table ). The only species that was unique to the 2007 surveys included silver shiner, which was collected from Graham Creek. The silver shiner is a large insectivorous minnow species that is an indicator of high quality habitat and water conditions.

Alien species presence. During the 2006-2007 surveys, the western mosquitofish and redear sunfish were collected. The western mosquitofish was collected from three sites on Little Graham Creek (Table ). This species is widely stocked into ponds and slow moving waters for mosquito control; however, diet studies in Indiana streams has shown that the species consumes snails and other aquatic insects and not mosquitoes ().


Muscatatuck NWR


Fish species richness and composition. Fifty one species of fish representing 14 families were collected from the 15 sample sites (Table ). Overall, minnows (Cyprinidae), suckers (Catostomidae), sunfish (Centarchidae), and darters (Percidae) were the most dominate families. Fish assemblage structure differed according to stream size and hydrologic characteristics of each environment. Four lakes were sampled including a moist soil unit (MSU) on refuge property (Suppl. material c). All four sites are artificial impoundments and three (Lake Linda, Stansfield Lake, and MSU) have been stocked for sport fishing. Sixteen species belonging to eight families were collected from these sites. The most numerically dominate group at Lake Linda, Stansfield Lake, and MSU was Centarchidae. Bluegill, redear sunfish, and largemouth bass (Micropterus
salmoides) constituted over three-fourths of the catch with 42.3, 32.9, and 13.6 % of catch, respectively. Largemouth bass (56.1%), bowfin (19.7%), and bluegill (13.2%) were the most dominate fish by weight. These three waterbodies remain level year round and are mostly dominated by stocked fish. The water level in Moss Lake is managed according to season and its fish assemblage differed from the other lentic sites. Moss Lake was sampled during low flow conditions and was heavily vegetated with aquatic macrophytes. In Moss Lake, western mosquitofish, golden shiner, and bowfin were the most numerically dominate fish representing 32.1, 30.4, and 14.8% of catch, respectively. Bowfin also constituted 91% of the catch by relative biomass followed by largemouth bass (4.1%) and bluegill (2%).

Four medium-large wadable streams (&gt;8 m wetted width) were sampled. Mutton Creek was sampled upstream of US 31 bridge where it is a channelized and slow flowing stream. Mutton Creek was dominated by centarchid and catostomid species. Longear sunfish (31.7%), spotted sucker (26.2%), and warmouth (Lepomis
gulosus) (12.4%) were the most numerically dominant species. Spotted sucker (60.7%), white sucker (11.4%), and bowfin (7.28%) were the most common fish by relative biomass at Mutton Creek. The Vernon Fork Muscatatuck River was sampled at three locations including, upstream and downstream of the refuge and a single site on the refuge. These three sites had similar diverse fish assemblages (Table ). Thirty nine species from nine families were collected from the Vernon Fork. The most dominant species by number were longear sunfish (27.9%), bullhead minnow (26.4%), and spotfin shiner (Cyprinella
spiloptera) (6%). The most dominant species at the three Vernon Fork sites were longear sunfish (23.7%), golden redhorse (Moxostoma
erythrurum) (18.4%), black redhorse (14.5%), silver redhorse (10%), and northern hogsucker (Hypentelium
nigricans) (9.8%).

Seven small streams (&lt;8 m wetted width) were sampled on refuge property (Suppl. material c). Many of these streams were channelized or effected by impoundments and were dominated mostly by cyprinid and centarchid species. Twenty three species were collected at these stream sites (Table ). Creek chub (50%), central mudminnow (9.8%), green sunfish (Lepomis
cyanellus) (8.6%), and bluegill (6%) were the most numerically dominate species. Creek chub was also the most dominant species by mass (21.5%) followed by grass pickerel (16.5%), and green sunfish (16%).

Macroinvertebrate species richness and composition. The current study is the first comprehensive evaluation of the Muscatatuck National Wildlife Refuge that included taxonomic identifications to lowest possible levels. Eleven sites were sampled for macroinvertebrates (Fig. ), which correspond to the same sites as sampled for fish assemblages (Suppl. material d).

During 2007, nearly 2,505 individuals representing 96 taxa and 45 families were collected from the refuge (Table ). Dominant families included the Ephemeroptera (6 families), Odonata and Coleoptera (5 families), and Diptera (4 families). Among the most diverse taxa was the Diptera or flies and midges (26 taxa), Coleoptera (10 taxa), and Ephemeroptera and Odonata (9 taxa). The three most dominant taxa in the refuge included isopods and amphipods (Table ). The dominant taxa included Lirceus
fontinalis (24%), Synurella
dentata (16%), and Hyalella
azteca (14%) (). Hyalella
azteca is an epibenthic detritivore that occurs in a wide range of habitats. The Ephemeroptera, Plecoptera, and Trichoptera (EPT) taxa are considered among the most sensitive groups of aquatic macroinvertebrates in North American streams (). Nine mayfly taxa were collected from the Muscatatuck National Wildlife Refuge (Table ). Taxa sensitive to water quality degradation included Acerpenna
macdunnoughi and Eurylophella. Intermediate mayfly taxa sensitive to degradation includes Plauditus and Leptophlebia. Caenis, Callibaetis, Stenacron, Siphlonurus, and Stenonema
femoratum are considered tolerant members of the mayfly group (). These species are capable of tolerating warm water and lower dissolved oxygen levels. Two stonefly taxa include the very sensitive Isoperla and Amphinemura. Six members of the order Trichoptera were collected including the sensitive Pycnopsyche and Rhyacophila; and intermediate tolerant Cheumatopsyche, Hydropsyche, Ironoquia, Ptilostomis ().

Crayfish species richness and composition. Limited crayfish species information is available from the vicinity of the Muscatatuck National Wildlife Refuge.  and  evaluated the distribution of Sloan’s crayfish from areas around the refuge and repeat sampled select sites in southwestern Ohio. Nineteen sites on the Muscatatuck National Wildlife Refuge were surveyed for crayfish species during the 2007 inventory (Table ). These sites represented a wide range of stream sizes from headwater creeks to moderate sized rivers, ponds, and impounded lakes.

Six crayfish species were collected from the Muscatatuck National Wildlife Refuge (Table ). Two primary burrowing species were collected including the paintedhand mudbug and the Great Plains mudbug. The Great Plains mudbug was most common on the refuge occurring at 14 sites (73.7% sites). A blue form of the Great Plains mudbug was collected downstream of the Stanfield Lake outlet (site 16). The habitat had a large number of burrows and the soil was grey in color. The blue-form crayfish when left in the sun returned to the typical olive green and brown coloration suggesting perhaps a vitamin deficiency. Two secondary burrowing species were collected from the refuge. The karst crayfish is typical of springs and cave streams. The species was collected from the unnamed tributary of Storm Creek (site 19), while the White River crayfish was collected from Sandy Branch (site 13). Two tertiary burrowing crayfish species were collected including Sloan’s crayfish and the calico crayfish.

Alien species presence. The only non-indigenous species collected on the Muscatatuck National Wildlife Refuge was the western mosquitofish. It was collected from Linda (site 1) and Moss lakes (site 2), Mutton Creek, Sandy Branch, and the Vernon Fork Muscatatuck River downstream of the refuge (Table ). The western mosquitofish is intentionally stocked for mosquito control. The species is not effective for controlling mosquitoes in flowing waters and may be only marginally successful in lakes and ponds ().

Discussion
Maintaining or restoring biological integrity is not the same as maximizing biological diversity (). Maintaining biodiversity may entail managing for a single species or community at some refuges and combinations of species or communities at other refuges. This paradigm shift will provide a role for resistance and resilience management (, ). For example, a refuge may contain critical habitats for an endangered species. Maintaining that habitat (and, therefore, that species), even though it may reduce biological integrity at the refuge scale, helps maintain biodiversity at the ecosystem or national landscape scale.

In deciding which management activities needs to be conducted to accomplish refuge purpose(s) while maintaining biological integrity, we consider how the ecosystem functioned under historic conditions (). For example, to maintain certain habitats implementation of natural frequency and timing of processes, such as flooding, fires, and grazing would be required. Where it is not appropriate to restore ecosystem function, refuge management will attempt to duplicate these natural processes including natural frequencies and timing to the extent this can be accomplished ().

Landscape diversity is descriptive of the number and dominance of different patch types and is a fundamental component of refuge management (). It may be necessary to modify the frequency and timing of natural processes at the refuge scale to fulfill refuge purpose(s) or to contribute to biological integrity at larger landscape scales (). Many wetlands have been converted to agriculture or other land uses and the remaining wetlands must produce more habitat, more consistently, to support wetland-dependent species. Therefore, to conserve populations at larger landscape scales, we may flood areas more frequently and for longer periods of time than they were flooded historically.


Changes in Biological Integrity


 recommend that the focus for watershed management should be towards biological integrity as an overarching ecological organizational hierarchy. Aquatic systems are appropriate models for managing ecological consequences of anthropogenic impacts at the landscape level since rates of biodiversity decline for aquatic fauna exceeds those for terrestrial fauna (). Refuges are unlikely to sustain all biodiversity or even all species, thus partnerships between government agencies and the public are essential.

Patoka River NWR. In order to determine the biological integrity and ecological health of the Patoka River National Wildlife Refuge, we chose an unbiased approach to verify our understanding of overall biological integrity (, ). Biological integrity classification scores, based on targeted least-impacted sampling at 34 sites between 1992 and 2001 (), showed that stream biological integrity of the Patoka River National Wildlife Refuge and associated watersheds had declined slightly over this period (Fig. a) compared to previous sampling events.  reported that watershed integrity decline reached the lowest levels recorded since 1888.

The probability distributions of biological integrity, based on index of biotic integrity (IBI) score for the watershed showed that the two years had similar results (Fig. b). The results from 2006 were slightly higher than scores from 2007, but this is to be expected because of the drought conditions that occurred in 2007. The two years showed that site mean cumulative frequency distribution (CFD50) had higher biological integrity during 2006 with IBI scores of 35, which approximates the statewide average for Indiana, while the CFD50 for 2007 had mean biological integrity scores of 31. Both integrity categories would have scored between “Poor-Fair” based on index classification assessments (, ). Based on the assessment of all 83 sample events collected at Patoka River, the mean CFD50 scored 32 using the IBI ().

The trend for biological integrity in the Patoka River National Wildlife Refuge is not significantly different from previous surveys conducted between 1993—2001 (, ). IBI scores from 1993 surveys averaged 21 (range: 0-48) and represented “very poor” IBI biological integrity class. During 2001, the mean IBI score was 17 (range: 0-42). The trend in IBI score has had a positive slope and has slightly improved since the original watershed survey in 1993. Survey results based on 2006 and 2007 sampling showed that the watershed has improved enough to meet the statewide average. A variety of sites do not possess any fish species in the South Fork Patoka River, which is an area that is impacted from acid mine drainage, as well as Rough Creek, Pike County, which was also without aquatic life (). Based on study periods from 2001 to 2006-2007, conditions favored a slight increase in biological integrity of streams in the Patoka River watershed (). Over this time period, drought conditions possibly reduced nonpoint source runoff of nutrients and toxic materials into streams, while groundwater infiltration has potentially enabled some species to recolonize areas that had been in past decline. Unfortunately, the lack of water in 2007 caused some loss of biological integrity gain with declines in species richness and changes in trophic dynamics.

Big Oaks NWR. Biological integrity classification scores, based on targeted least-impacted sampling at 34 sites between 1992 and 2001, showed that stream biological integrity of the Big Oaks National Wildlife Refuge and associated watersheds had declined slightly over this period (Fig. ). Over this time period, prolonged drought conditions possibly reduced nonpoint source runoff of nutrients and toxic materials into streams, while groundwater infiltration has potentially enabled some species to recolonize areas that had been decimated in the past (U.S. Geological Survey Water Resources data, 2004-2006). Unfortunately, the lack of water also caused declines in species richness and changes in trophic dynamics.

At the Big Oaks National Wildlife Refuge we sampled 14 sites. We did not sample lake or pond locations in 2007 that had been prior sampled during 2006. The probability distributions of biological integrity, based on index of biotic integrity (IBI) score for the watershed showed that the two years had similar results (Fig. ). The results from 2007 had several sites that had higher integrity scores than the 2006 random sites, but this is to be expected because of the drought situation. The two years showed that site mean cumulative frequency distribution (CFD50) had higher biological integrity with IBI scores of 41, while the CFD50 for 2006 had biological integrity scores of 35. Both integrity categories would have scored between “Poor-Fair” based on index classification assessments (, ). Based on the assessment of all 104 sample events collected at Big Oaks, the mean CFD50 would have scored 37 using the IBI ().

The trend for biological integrity in the Big Oaks National Wildlife Refuge is not significantly different during the surveys conducted between 1993 to 2007 (, ). IBI scores from 1993 sampling averaged 46 (range: 32-58) and represented “good-fair” integrity classes of biological integrity. Although the trend has slightly declined since the historical surveys, this is most likely a result of including the lake sites in the IBI statistics and the emphasis on higher order streams in the 1993 surveys. Larger streams such as Otter Creek represented 23.5% of the 1993 collections compared to 5.9% of the 2006 and none of the 2007 collections. Since the 1993 stream sites were not randomly selected, there was a greater opportunity to target highest quality habitats. The dynamic change in biodiversity over time requires management actions promoting native species structure and function ().

Muscatatuck NWR. The seven small, wadable streams sampled on the refuge ranged from "poor" to "fair" (Suppl. material c) when compared to reference conditions for the Eastern Corn Belt Plain ecoregion. Index of Biotic Integrity scores ranged from 26 to 34 for these stream sites. The low IBI scores are largely a result of hydrologic modifications to the aquatic habitat on refuge to benefit migratory waterfowl and sport fishery. These streams are dominated by sunfish and bass species and lack sensitive sucker and darter species resulting from habitat modification and stocking of lakes for sport fishing.

The larger streams showed higher quality biological conditions. The four larger stream sites ranged from "very good" to "exceptional" (Suppl. material c). Scores ranged from 46 to 56 with two of the Vernon Fork sites scoring "exceptional." These sites supported populations of sensitive minnow species, such as bigeye chub, sucker species including golden redhorse, black redhorse, northern hogsucker; and several sensitive darter species including greenside (Etheostoma
blennioides), rainbow darter (E.
caeruleum), harlequin darter, logperch, dusky darter, and eastern sand darter. Hydrologic modifications on refuge have had little impact on the Vernon Fork and the river continues to support a high quality assemblage of native species.

The four lakes ranged from “fair” to “fair-good” (Suppl. material ). Both Lake Linda and Moss Lake were considered “fair”, while the MSU and Lake Stansfield were both considered “fair-good”. The lack of benthic species was the primary reason for the lower sustainability score in Lake Linda and Moss Lake.

The cumulative frequency distributions did not include the lake or pond sites that had been sampled during 2006. Based on probability distributions of biological integrity, index of biotic integrity (IBI) score for the watershed (Fig. ) showed that the two sampling periods had a wide range of results. The earlier sampling (N=49) showed lower integrity than sites sampled later in the summer (N=30). This was expected as the drought conditions concentrated fish into isolated pools. The two sampling periods showed that site mean reach cumulative frequency distribution (CFD50) in the early summer (June) had lower biological integrity with IBI scores of 31, while the CFD50 for late summer (August) had mean biological integrity reach scores of 40, which was above the statewide average for Indiana. The early summer integrity category was considered “Poor”, while the later summer integrity class would have been considered “fair-good” based on index classification assessments (, ). Based on the assessment of all 79 sample events collected at Big Oaks, the mean CFD50 would have scored 35 using the IBI ().

Although the trend has slightly improved between the two surveys periods in 2007, this is most likely a result of not including the lake sites in the IBI statistics and the greater number of higher order streams in the later summer sampling events. Larger streams such as Vernon Fork represented a higher percentage of the collections compared to 4.08% of the early summer collections. A different random draw was selected between the two periods so that only a few of the samples included the same sites. The survey results based on the 2007 survey is probably most representative of the variety of aquatic habitat conditions found at Muscatatuck National Wildlife Refuge.

Landscape level management for wholeness, resistence, and resilience requires the recognition of network patterns within the basin management planning (). Watershed patterns in biological integrity for the two drainage areas showed that the Muscatatuck River drainage had higher biological integrity than the Patoka River drainage (Fig. ). The Patoka River had the greatest variation in IBI scores with ranges between 0-56 (Table ). The highest biological integrity was associated with Hoosier National Forest and the tributaries draining into Patoka Lake (Fig. a); however, the highest reach scale IBI score was a score of 56 IBI points that was associated with tributaries of the Hoosier National Forest. The highest percentage of no fish and very poor IBI conditions were found in the lower Patoka River and were associated with Sugar Ridge State Recreation Area and the Patoka River NWR. The lower Patoka River also exhibited a high proportion of degraded conditions.

Biological integrity associated with the Muscatuck River drainage was highest in the area where the Vernon Fork joined the mainstem Muscatatuck River (Fig. b). Most of the remainder of the watershed was considered fair condition. Only a few areas within the Muscatatuck River drainage had no fish, both were associated with a treatment plant pump overflow that drained raw sewerage into the refuge along Storm and Mutton Creeks.


Species richness and watershed patterns


The aquatic fauna of Indiana’s National Wildlife Refuges includes a significant portion of the rarest of Indiana’s fish fauna; however, due to contaminant impacts associated with legacy land use the refuges are not necessarily considered least-impacted habitats (). An analysis of the highest species richness areas within the refuges show that most of the biodiversity is attributed to macroinvertebrate taxa richness (Table ). The Patoka River NWR had the highest species richness of both macroinvertebrates and fish, while Big Oaks NWR had the highest species richness of crayfish species.

A hot-spot analysis of watershed biodiversity showed that the central portion of the Patoka River drainage had the highest macroinvertebrate species richness (Fig. a), which was associated with the Flat Creek, Green Creek, and the Patoka River. The highest crayfish species richness was associated with the areas of the Patoka River that drained Hoosier National Forest and was downstream of Patoka Lake and lower Patoka River and Hurricane Creek (Fig. b). The highest species richness for fish assemblages was associated with areas draining Hoosier National Forest and surrounding Patoka Lake (Fig. c). A similar hot-spot analysis of watershed biodiversity patterns for the Muscatatuck River drainage showed that the highest species richness of macroinvertebrates (Fig. a) and crayfish (Fig. b) occurred within Graham Creek of Big Oak NWR. The highest fish species richness was associated with the mainstem channel of the Muscatatuck River and associated tributary mouths (Fig. c).

The management goal of sustaining ecological and evolutionary processes within a natural range of variability requires an understanding of the fundamental elements of the landscape (). Surveys of National Wildlife Refuges provide opportunities to determine species composition, species richness, and promote the management of biodiversity, while landscape level planning can evaluate the biological integrity of watershed levels. This incorporation of reach and larger landscape scales promotes effective conservation management of vital aquatic resources.

Supplementary Material
Supplemental Materials Appendix: Sites

Data type: Location georeferenced information

Brief description: Site distribution data with decimal minute degree lat-lon for study sites.

File: oo_34397.docx

Simon, T.P.Comparison of Relative IBI Cumulative Distribution Frequency for sites sampled within the Patoka River drainage

Data type: Analyzed IBI score calculations

Brief description: Patoka raw data on separate spreadsheets including macroinvertebrate, crayfish, and fish information and analyzed results of index of biotic integrity, Shannon-Weiner, and species richness.

File: oo_34508.xls

TP Simon &amp; CC MorrisComparison of Relative IBI Frequency for sites sampled by Fish &amp; Wildlife Service in 2006 (n=70), the Indiana Department of Environmental Management in 2007 (n=34), and a combination of all sites (n=104) within and around the Big Oaks National Wildlife Refuge

Data type: Raw and Analyzed data for Big Oaks National Wildlife Refuge

Brief description: Data files for fish, crayfish, macroinvertebrate, QHEI, index of biotic integrity, Shannon-Weiner, and Species richness information for the Big Oaks National Wildlife Refuge.

File: oo_34509.xls

TP Simon &amp; CC MorrisComparison of Relative IBI Cumulative Distribution Frequency for sites sampled by Fish &amp; Wildlife Service (n=49), the Indiana Department of Environmental Management (n=30), and a combination of all sites (n=79) within and around the Muscatatuck National Wildlife Refuge during 2007.

Data type: Raw and Analyzed data for Muscatatcuck National Wildlife Refuge

Brief description: Data files for fish, crayfish, macroinvertebrates, including analyzed information for QHEI, index of biotic integrity, Shannon-Weiner, and Species richness for the Muscatatuck National Wildlife Refuge

File: oo_34523.xls

TP Simon &amp; CC MorrisXML Treatment for Synurella
dentata
XML Treatment for Lirceus
fontinalis
XML Treatment for Orconectes (Faxonius) indianensis
XML Treatment for Orconectes (Rhoadesius) sloanii
XML Treatment for Notropis
ariommus
XML Treatment for Centrarchus
macropterus
XML Treatment for Lepomis (Lepomis) symmetricus
XML Treatment for Ammocrypta (Ammocrypta) pellucida
XML Treatment for Etheostoma (Etheostoma) histrio
Acknowledgements
Field assistance was provided by S. Sobat, A. Stephans, P. McMurray, and K. Crane, Indiana Department of Environmental Management; student interns J. Burskey, Indiana State University; R. Winemiller, Muscatatuck NWR, H. Hamilton, Patoka River NWR, and J. Ridge and C. Swetzer, Big Oaks NWR; and D. Karns, Hanover College. We appreciate the professional field courtesies supplied by M. Weber, T. Dailey and S. Knowles, Muscatatuck NWR. Special thanks to D. Clark and C.L. Bridges, Indiana Department of Environmental Management for field support. M.K. McShane created geographic information system pleth maps. Although this document may be wholly or partially funded by the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service or the Indiana Department of Environmental Management, no agency endorsement or support should be inferred. This study was funded through contaminant investigation #12613N3431440 to TPS. Any use of trade, product, or firm names is for descriptive purposes only and does not imply endorsement by the U.S. Government.

Distribution of sites sampled during an investigation of the Patoka River drainage. Numbers refer to site location in Supplemental materials Appendix a (Suppl. material ).

Distribution of sites sampled during an investigation of the Big Oaks National Wildlife Refuge. Numbers refer to site locations in Supplemental materials Appendix b (Suppl. material ).

Distribution of sites sampled in the Muscatatuck NWR within Jennings and Jackson Counties in southcentral Indiana. Black dots denote sample locations and numbers correspond to site numbers in Supplemental materials Appendix c (Suppl. material ).

Watershed scale patterns in habitat condition for the Patoka River (A) and Muscatatuck River (B) drainages using spline smoothed joined mean scores based on the Qualitative Habitat Evaluation Index (QHEI). Position and outline of the three National Wildlife Refuges are shown in relationship to the watershed (Suppl. materials , , ).

Comparison of Relative IBI Cumulative Distribution Frequency for sites sampled within the Patoka River drainage including: A) Fish &amp; Wildlife Service 2001 and B) Fish &amp; Wildlife Service 2007 (n=46) and the Indiana Department of Environmental Management in 2006 (n=37) and a combination of all sites (n=83) (Suppl. material ).

Comparison of Relative IBI Frequency for sites sampled by Fish &amp; Wildlife Service in 2006 (n=70), the Indiana Department of Environmental Management in 2007 (n=34), and a combination of all sites (n=104) within and around the Big Oaks National Wildlife Refuge (Suppl. material ).

Comparison of Relative IBI Cumulative Distribution Frequency for sites sampled by Fish &amp; Wildlife Service (n=49), the Indiana Department of Environmental Management (n=30), and a combination of all sites (n=79) within and around the Muscatatuck National Wildlife Refuge during 2007 (Suppl. material ).

Watershed scale biological integrity spline smoothed pleths for the Patoka River (A) and Muscatatuck River (B) watershed based on reach level Index of Biotic Integrity (IBI) scores (Suppl. materials , , ).

Watershed scale biodiversity pleths for the Patoka River drainage based on spline smoothed joined means of assemblage structure. A. macroinvertebrates based on taxa richness, B. crayfish based on Shannon-Weiner diversity index, and C. fish based on species richness (Suppl. material ).

Watershed scale biodiversity spline smoothed pleths for the Muscatatuck River drainage based on species richness joined means of assemblage structure. A. macroinvertebrates, B. crayfish, and C. fish (Suppl. materials , ).

List of fish species collected from three National Wildlife Refuges in southern Indiana. Numbers indicate the sites at which each species has been collected based on information in Supplemental materials Suppl. material  (Appendix a, b, and c) and Figs , , .

Species	Patoka River	Muscatatuck	Big Oaks	


Petromyzontidae

				
   Lethenteron
appendix (DeKay 1842)		6, 11		


Lepisosteidae

				
   Lepisosteus
oculatus Winchell 1864	6			
   Lepisosteus
osseus (Linnaeus 1758)	10	14		
   Lepisosteus
platostomus Rafinesque 1820	20, 34, 61, 74, 76, 78			


Amiidae

				
   Amia
calva Linnaeus 1766	6, 20, 33, 34, 36, 55, 68, 69	2, 3, 5		


Hiodontidae

				
   Hiodon
alosoides (Rafinesque 1819)	 61			


Clupeidae

				
   Alosa
chrysochloris (Rafinesque 1820)	63			
   Dorosoma
cepedianum (Lesueur 1818)	1, 2, 6, 7, 9, 11-13, 16, 20, 33, 34, 61, 63, 74, 78			
   Dorosoma
petenense (Günther 1867)	 61			


Cyprinidae

				
   Campostoma
anomalum (Rafinesque 1820)	1-5, 8, 9, 13-22, 24-27, 29-30, 35, 38, 45, 47, 48, 50-51, 64-65, 72-73	6, 8, 14	1-5, 7-13, 15-16, 20-27, 29-32	
   Chrosomus
erythrogaster (Rafinesque 1820)	4			
   Cyprinella
spiloptera (Cope 1867)	2, 6, 7, 9-13, 16, 19, 20, 25-27, 32, 34, 42, 74, 78	6, 14-15	5, 12, 20	
   Cyprinella
whipplei Girard 1856	9, 12, 16, 19, 20, 44, 63,	6, 14-15		
   Cyprinus
carpio Linnaeus 1758	2, 6, 7, 12, 33, 34, 36, 43, 63, 67, 74, 76-78			
   Ericymba
buccata Cope 1865	12-14, 16, 18-21, 25-27, 29, 30, 35, 44-45, 47-48, 50, 73	13, 15	1, 2, 5, 7-13, 26	
   Hybognathus
nuchalis Agassiz 1855	20, 63, 65, 66			
   Hybopsis
amblops (Rafinesque 1820)	12	15	1-3, 5, 8-12	
   Hypophthalmichthys
molitrix (Valenciennes 1844)	36, 61, 74			
   Hypophthalmichthys
nobilis (Richardson 1845)	74			
   Luxilus
chrysocephalus (Rafinesque 1820)	1-3, 7-9, 12-14, 18-19, 21, 22, 45, 61, 66		1, 5, 7-13, 15, 20-21, 24-27, 29-30, 32	
   Lythrurus
fumeus (Evermann 1892)	6, 7, 10, 42, 51			
   Lythrurus
umbratilis (Girard 1856)	1-3, 5, 6, 8, 9, 13, 19, 20, 25-27, 31, 34, 42, 61	6, 11, 14, 15	2, 8-12, 17, 19-22, 24, 30	
   Notemigonus
crysoleucas (Mitchill 1814)	28, 31, 40, 45	1, 2, 4, 10, 12	28	
   Notropis
ariommus (Cope 1867)			1, 11, 20	
   Notropis
atherinoides Rafinesque 1818	54, 63, 74, 77	15		
   Notropis
boops Gilbert 1884			1, 2, 8-10, 12, 20, 29-30	
   Notropis
photogenis (Cope 1865)			8, 10	
   Phenacobius
mirabilis (Girard 1856)	12-13, 16, 26-27, 34, 72-74			
   Pimephales
notatus (Rafinesque 1820)	1-9, 12-14, 16, 18-23, 25-32, 34, 38, 42, 45, 47, 61, 63, 66, 74, 75	6, 8, 11, 13-15	1-5, 7-13, 16, 20-24, 26, 28-33	
   Pimephales
promelas Rafinesque 1820	4, 8, 75			
   Pimephales
vigilax (Baird and Girard 1853)	 12, 61	6, 14-15		
   Semotilus
atromaculatus (Mitchill 1818)	1, 3-5, 8, 9, 13-15, 17-19, 21-22, 24-25, 27-31, 35, 39, 40, 42, 44-51, 54, 56-58, 60, 64-66, 70, 71, 73-74	8-11, 14-15	2-5, 7-13, 15-33	


Catostomidae

				
   Carpiodes
carpio (Rafinesque 1820)	10, 33, 74			
   Carpiodes
cyprinus (Lesueur 1817)	 45, 61			
   Catostomus
commersonii (Lacepède 1803)	1-4, 8, 13, 17, 19	5, 8, 11	3, 5, 8-13, 28, 32-33	
   Erimyzon
oblongus (Mitchill 1814)	3, 8, 13-14, 19, 20, 22-23, 26, 35, 40, 42		7, 18-21, 24-27, 29	
   Erimyzon
sucetta (Lacepède 1803)	18, 21, 25, 27-32, 45			
   Hypentelium
nigricans (Lesueur 1817)		5, 14-15	1, 2, 8-12, 23, 30	
   Ictiobus
bubalus (Rafinesque 1818)	6, 10, 11, 33, 61, 63, 74, 76			
   Ictiobus
cyprinellus (Valenciennes 1844)	6, 10, 33, 74			
   Ictiobus
niger (Rafinesque 1819)	6, 7, 10, 11, 33, 34, 36, 63, 78			
   Minytrema
melanops (Rafinesque 1820)	2, 6, 9, 13, 16, 19	2, 3, 5, 15		
   Moxostoma
anisurum (Rafinesque 1820)		5, 6, 15		
   Moxostoma
duquesnei (Lesueur 1817)	11	3, 5, 6, 14-15	1, 2, 8-12, 20	
   Moxostoma
erythrurum (Rafinesque 1818)	1, 2, 6, 7, 9, 12, 16, 19	5, 14-15	1, 2, 5, 8, 10, 11	
   Moxostoma
macrolepidotum (Lesueur 1817)	61			


Ictaluridae

				
   Ameiurus
catus (Linnaeus 1758)	74			
   Ameiurus
melas (Rafinesque 1820)	38, 62, 68, 69, 71	9		
   Ameiurus
natalis (Lesueur 1819)	4, 5, 8, 9, 13-14, 16, 18-22, 26-28, 30, 32, 38-40, 42, 44-48, 50-52, 54, 57, 62, 64-66, 72, 75	5, 7, 9-10, 12	1, 5, 9-13, 15, 28-29, 33	
   Ameiurus
nebulosus (Lesueur 1819)	6, 13, 19, 26, 39, 40, 42, 46	3, 15	1	
   Ictalurus
punctatus (Rafinesque 1818)	11, 12, 20, 23, 34, 54, 61, 74, 77			
   Noturus
flavus Rafinesque 1818	78			
   Noturus
gyrinus (Mitchill 1817)	25, 45			
   Noturus
miurus Jordan 1877	12	6, 14-15	9-10, 20	
   Noturus
nocturnus Jordan and Gilbert 1886	32			
   Pylodictis
olivaris (Rafinesque 1818)	6, 12, 33, 34, 54, 74, 78			


Esocidae

				
   Esox
americanus
vermiculatus Lesueur 1846	20, 35, 38-40, 51, 54, 55, 59, 64-66, 74	2, 6, 7, 10-13	13, 16, 27, 30	


Umbridae

				
   Umbra
limi (Kirtland 1841)	65, 66	7, 9, 11, 13		


Aphredoderidae

				
   Aphredoderus
sayanus
gibbosus Lesueur 1833	2, 7, 8, 11, 20, 23, 26, 31, 32, 34, 38-40, 42, 43, 48, 51, 59, 65	2, 10		


Fundulidae

				
   Fundulus
notatus (Rafinesque 1820)	1-3, 5, 9, 12-14, 16, 18-23, 25-31, 38-41, 45-48, 51-56, 58-59, 61, 64-68, 71-73, 75	13	20	


Poeciliidae

				
   Gambusia
affinis
affinis (Baird and Girard 1853)	12, 14, 16, 18, 20-21, 25-28, 30-35, 37, 44-47, 51, 53, 56, 58-59, 64, 66-67, 69-71, 73, 75, 77, 78	1, 2, 12-14	12-13, 15	


Atherinidae

				
   Labidesthes
sicculus (Cope 1865)	6, 12, 13, 16, 20, 61, 74	12	13	


Cottidae

				
   Cottus
carolinae (Gill 1861)	1, 3			


Centrarchidae

				
   Ambloplites
rupestris (Rafinesque 1817)	1, 2	15	1-2, 11-12	
   Centrarchus
macropterus (Lacepède 1801)	62, 68	2, 5, 12		
   Lepomis
cyanellus Rafinesque 1819	1-9, 12-14, 16-22, 25-28, 30-31, 35, 37-40, 42-56, 58-59, 62, 64-75	2, 5-15	1-5, 7, 9-13, 15-22, 24-30, 32-33	
   Lepomis
gulosus (Cuvier 1829)	1, 2, 5, 12, 59, 62, 70	1-5, 7, 9-12, 14		
   Lepomis
humilis (Girard 1858)	12			
   Lepomis
macrochirus Rafinesque 1819	1-5, 8-14, 16-17, 19-23, 25-26, 33-40, 42-44, 46-48, 50-52, 54-55, 60-66, 68, 70, 74, 76	1-5, 7, 9-12, 14-15	1, 2, 5, 6, 8-15, 17, 19-20, 28-29, 32, 34	
   Lepomis
megalotis (Rafinesque 1820)	1-14, 16, 18-23, 25-28, 32-35, 38-40, 43, 44, 47-48, 50-55, 59-64, 66, 74	5-6, 9, 11, 13-15	1-7, 8-17, 26-27, 29-30	
   Lepomis
microlophus (Günther 1859)	1, 9, 20, 59, 62, 65	1-4	5-6, 14, 34	
   Lepomis
miniatus (Jordan 1877)	62	2		
   Lepomis
symmetricus Forbes 1883	52			
   Micropterus
dolomieu Lacepède 1802	1, 2, 7		1	
   Micropterus
punctulatus (Rafinesque 1819)	5-8, 12, 17, 19, 20, 28, 32, 40, 47, 61, 64, 66, 74, 77	6, 15		
   Micropterus
salmoides (Lacepède 1802)	1, 2, 6, 7, 9, 13, 16, 22-23, 26, 38, 46, 54, 67, 69, 72, 75	1-5, 9-10, 12	2, 6, 11, 14-15, 34	
   Pomoxis
annularis Rafinesque 1818	1, 2, 11, 20, 36, 63			
   Pomoxis
nigromaculatus (Lesueur 1829)	33, 36	3-5	6, 14, 34	


Percidae

				
   Ammocrypta
pellucida (Putnam 1863)		15		
   Etheostoma
asprigene (Forbes 1878)		5-6		
   Etheostoma
asprigene nov. sp	32, 38, 74			
   Etheostoma
blennioides Rafinesque 1819			1-2, 5, 8-12, 20, 29-30	
   Etheostoma
caeruleum Storer 1845		14	1-3, 5, 8-13, 20, 25-26, 29, 30	
   Etheostoma
flabellare Rafinesque 1819			1-5, 7-13, 16, 20, 23-25, 29, 30	
   Etheostoma
gracile (Girard 1859)	31-32, 34, 37, 65			
   Etheostoma
histrio Jordan and Gilbert 1887	78	6, 14		
   Etheostoma
nigrum Rafinesque 1820	1-3, 14, 42, 45	6, 11, 13-15	1-5, 7-13, 15-16, 20-26, 28-30	
   Etheostoma
spectabile (Agassiz 1854)	1, 3-5, 8, 9, 14, 18-19, 21-22, 27		2-5, 7-13, 15-17, 21-25, 27, 29, 30, 32-33	
   Percina
caprodes (Rafinesque 1818)	7, 12-13	5, 15		
   Percina
maculata (Girard 1859)	7, 19, 39, 42, 48	15		
   Percina
phoxocephala (Nelson 1876)	11, 16	6, 14, 15		
   Percina
sciera (Swain 1883)	7, 10, 11-12, 39, 74	6, 14-15		


Sciaenidae

				
   Aplodinotus
grunniens Rafinesque 1819	7, 11-12, 20, 33, 34, 36, 63, 76, 78			
Comparison of fish assemblage structure and catch percentages from the Patoka River drainage, 2006 to 2007.

	2006	2007	Total	
Species	Count	%	Count	%	Count	%	


Lepisosteidae

							
   Lepisosteus
oculatus	1	&lt;1%			1	&lt;1%	
   Lepisosteus
osseus	1	&lt;1%			1	&lt;1%	
   Lepisosteus
platostomus	11	&lt;1%	5	&lt;1%	16	&lt;1%	


Amiidae

							
   Amia
calva	9	&lt;1%	3	&lt;1%	12	&lt;1%	


Hiodontidae

							
   Hiodon
alosoides			1	&lt;1%	1	&lt;1%	


Clupeidae

							
   Alosa
chrysochloris	1	&lt;1%			1	&lt;1%	
   Dorosoma
cepedianum	90	2%	72	2%	162	2%	
   Dorosoma
petenense			2	&lt;1%	2	&lt;1%	


Cyprinidae

							
   Campostoma
anomalum	827	16%	323	7%	1150	12%	
   Chrosomus
erythrogaster	3	&lt;1%			3	&lt;1%	
   Cyprinella
spiloptera	142	3%	89	2%	231	2%	
   Cyprinella
whipplei	70	1%	2	&lt;1%	72	1%	
   Cyprinus
carpio	47	1%	39	1%	86	1%	
   Ericymba
buccata	21	&lt;1%	203	4%	224	2%	
   Hybognathus
nuchalis	12	&lt;1%	70	2%	82	1%	
   Hybopsis
amblops			1	&lt;1%	1	&lt;1%	
   Hypophthalmichthys
molitrix	1	&lt;1%	6	&lt;1%	7	&lt;1%	
   Hypophthalmichthys
nobilis			3	&lt;1%	3	&lt;1%	
   Luxilus
chrysocephalus	378	7%	71	2%	449	5%	
   Lythrurus
fumeus	5	&lt;1%			5	&lt;1%	
   Lythrurus
umbratilis	75	1%	10	&lt;1%	85	1%	
   Notemigonus
crysoleucas	1	&lt;1%	50	1%	51	1%	
   Notropis
atherinoides	6	&lt;1%	8	&lt;1%	14	&lt;1%	
   Phenacobius
mirabilis	7	&lt;1%	81	2%	88	1%	
   Pimephales
notatus	283	6%	524	12%	807	8%	
   Pimephales
promelas	2	&lt;1%	2	&lt;1%	4	&lt;1%	
   Pimephales
vigilax			27	1%	27	&lt;1%	
   Semotilus
atromaculatus	210	4%	671	15%	881	9%	


Catostomidae

							
   Carpiodes
carpio	2	&lt;1%	1	&lt;1%	3	&lt;1%	
   Carpiodes
cyprinus			2	&lt;1%	2	&lt;1%	
   Catostomus
commersonii	89	2%			89	1%	
   Erimyzon
oblongus	114	2%	7	&lt;1%	121	1%	
   Erimyzon
sucetta			209	5%	209	2%	
   Ictiobus
bubalus	18	&lt;1%	8	&lt;1%	26	&lt;1%	
   Ictiobus
cyprinellus	4	&lt;1%	4	&lt;1%	8	&lt;1%	
   Ictiobus
niger	28	1%			28	&lt;1%	
   Minytrema
melanops	21	&lt;1%			21	&lt;1%	
   Moxostoma
duquesnei	1	&lt;1%			1	&lt;1%	
   Moxostoma
erythrurum	31	1%	1	&lt;1%	32	&lt;1%	
   Moxostoma
macrolepidotum			1	&lt;1%	1	&lt;1%	


Ictaluridae

							
   Ameiurus
catus			1	&lt;1%	1	&lt;1%	
   Ameiurus
melas	1	&lt;1%	22	&lt;1%	23	&lt;1%	
   Ameiurus
natalis	141	3%	69	2%	210	2%	
   Ameiurus
nebulosus	17	&lt;1%	1	&lt;1%	18	&lt;1%	
   Ictalurus
punctatus	8	&lt;1%	11	&lt;1%	19	&lt;1%	
   Noturus
flavus	4	&lt;1%			4	&lt;1%	
   Noturus
gyrinus			2	&lt;1%	2	&lt;1%	
   Noturus
miurus			1	&lt;1%	1	&lt;1%	
   Noturus
nocturnus			2	&lt;1%	2	&lt;1%	
   Pylodictis
olivaris	5	&lt;1%	5	&lt;1%	10	&lt;1%	


Esocidae

							
   Esox
americanus	17	&lt;1%	13	&lt;1%	30	&lt;1%	


Umbridae

							
   Umbra
limi			7	&lt;1%	7	&lt;1%	


Aphredoderidae

							
   Aphredoderus
sayanus	19	&lt;1%	24	1%	43	&lt;1%	


Fundulidae

							
   Fundulus
notatus	58	1%	423	9%	481	5%	


Poeciliidae

							
   Gambusia
affinis	33	1%	568	12%	601	6%	


Atherinidae

							
   Labidesthes
sicculus	15	&lt;1%	5	&lt;1%	20	&lt;1%	


Cottidae

							
   Cottus
carolinae	24	&lt;1%			24	&lt;1%	


Centrarchidae

							
   Ambloplites
rupestris	9	&lt;1%			9	&lt;1%	
   Centrarchus
macropterus			2	&lt;1%	2	&lt;1%	
   Lepomis
cyanellus	260	5%	288	6%	548	6%	
   Lepomis
gulosus	5	&lt;1%	5	&lt;1%	10	&lt;1%	
   Lepomis
humilis			1	&lt;1%	1	&lt;1%	
   Lepomis
macrochirus	461	9%	178	4%	639	7%	
   Lepomis
megalotis	1314	26%	264	6%	1578	16%	
   Lepomis
microlophus	8	&lt;1%	7	&lt;1%	15	&lt;1%	
   Lepomis
miniatus			11	&lt;1%	11	&lt;1%	
   Lepomis
symmetricus			1	&lt;1%	1	&lt;1%	
   Micropterus
dolomieu	7	&lt;1%			7	&lt;1%	
   Micropterus
punctulatus	26	1%	57	1%	83	1%	
   Micropterus
salmoides	25	&lt;1%	11	&lt;1%	36	&lt;1%	
   Pomoxis
annularis	22	&lt;1%			22	&lt;1%	
   Pomoxis
nigromaculatus	2	&lt;1%			2	&lt;1%	


Percidae

							
   Etheostoma
asprigene nov. sp.	1	&lt;1%	2	&lt;1%	3	&lt;1%	
   Etheostoma
gracile	2	&lt;1%	41	1%	43	&lt;1%	
   Etheostoma
histrio	1	&lt;1%			1	&lt;1%	
   Etheostoma
nigrum	8	&lt;1%	3	&lt;1%	11	&lt;1%	
   Etheostoma
spectabile	74	1%	17	&lt;1%	91	1%	
   Percina
caprodes	2	&lt;1%	1	&lt;1%	3	&lt;1%	
   Percina
maculata	5	&lt;1%	1	&lt;1%	6	&lt;1%	
   Percina
phoxocephala	2	&lt;1%			2	&lt;1%	
   Percina
sciera	5	&lt;1%	3	&lt;1%	8	&lt;1%	


Sciaenidae

							
   Aplodinotus
grunniens	18	&lt;1%	5	&lt;1%	23	&lt;1%	
Total Number of Individuals	5110		4548		9658		
List of macroinvertebrate taxa collected during 2006-2007 from the Patoka River, Muscatatuck, and Big Oaks National Wildlife Refuges. Numbers indicate the sites at which each species has been collected based on information in Supplemental materials Suppl. material  Appendix a, b, d and Figs , , .

Taxa List	Patoka River	Muscatatuck	Big Oaks	


Ephemeroptera

	67			


Ameletidae

				
   Ameletus spp. Eaton 1885	15, 18, 27			


Baetidae

	23, 26, 38, 43, 44, 72		 13, 15	
   Acerpenna
pygmaea (Hagen 1861)	14, 15, 18, 25, 27, 30	8, 11		
   Baetis
flavistriga McDunnough 1921	4, 14		5	
   Baetis
intercalaris McDunnough 1921	3, 19, 26, 34, 36		20	
   Callibaetis spp. Eaton 1881	23, 24, 26, 30, 35, 44, 72	16, 17		
   Centroptilum spp. Eaton 1869	5, 8, 15-16, 17, 20, 27, 42-43, 47-48, 50		15, 29	
   Plauditus
dubius (Walsh 1862)	14			
   Plauditus spp. Lugo-Ortiz and McCafferty 1998	15, 18, 22, 27, 29	11		
   Procloeon spp. Bengtsson 1915	19			
   Pseudocloeon spp. Klapàlek 1905	26, 35, 78			


Caenidae

				
   Caenis spp. Stephens 1835	2-4, 7, 9, 14-18, 20, 22-23, 25-27, 29-31, 33, 38, 40-44, 47-48, 50-52, 55, 63, 65-66, 72-73	 7, 8, 16	8-13, 15-16, 19-20, 25, 29, 30	


Ephemeridae

				
   Ephemera spp. Linnaeus 1758			7, 10-12, 20, 25, 27, 30	
   Ephemera
simulans Walker 1853			7-10, 12	
   Hexagenia
limbata (Serville 1829)	26		11, 30	


Ephemererellidae

				
   Attenella
attenuate (McDunnough 1925)			8	
   Eurylophella spp. Tiensuu 1935		11, 12		


Heptageniidae

	5, 34, 76, 77		8, 9, 12	
   Nixe spp. Flowers 1980	14, 15, 18, 22, 29, 37, 49, 82			
   Leucrocuta spp. Flowers 1980			11, 20, 25	
   Maccaffertium
pulchellum (Walsh 1862)			5, 11, 25	
   Stenacron spp. Jensen 1974		11	5, 11, 20, 27, 30	
   Stenacron
interpunctatum (Say 1839)	7, 36, 42, 63, 76		 9, 11	
   Stenonema
femoratum (Say 1823)	1-5, 9, 14, 15, 18, 22-23, 25-26, 30, 42, 43	11	7-13, 15, 16, 20, 15, 29, 30	


Isonychiidae

				
   Isonychia spp. Eaton 1871			12, 20, 25, 30	


Leptohyphidae

				
   Tricorythodes spp. Ulmer 1920	6, 33-35, 63, 76-78			


Leptophlebiidae

				
   Choroterpes spp. Eaton 1881	5		20, 29	
   Leptophlebia spp. Westwood 1840		12, 17, 20		
   Paraleptophlebia spp. Lestage 1917	1, 2, 10, 14, 15, 18, 22, 82, 83		7-12, 15	


Siphlonuridae

				
   Siphlonurus spp. Eaton 1868	83	20		


Odonata

	9, 20, 23, 38, 40, 43, 44, 67			


Calopterygidae

	54			
   Calopteryx
maculate Beauvois 1805	39, 40, 44, 51, 63, 77		12	
   Calopteryx spp. Leach 1815	15, 18, 22, 30, 46, 48-50, 56, 59, 64, 66	 8, 13, 19		
   Hetaerina
americana (Fabricius 1798)	13, 16, 26			
   Hetaerina spp. Hagen 1853	40			


Coenagrionidae

	1, 9, 14-15, 19, 20, 22-23, 25-27, 29-31, 33-35, 38, 40-41, 44, 47-48, 50, 52, 55-56, 59, 62, 66, 67, 72-73, 77, 82	13, 16, 17	7, 15	
   Argia spp Rambur 1842	6, 7, 11, 14, 16, 20, 25-26, 29, 30, 33, 40-44, 46-48, 50, 52-53, 56, 62, 66, 73, 76-78	13	9, 11, 12, 20	
   Argia
apicalis-tibialis (Say 1839)	6, 7, 9-11, 20, 33, 34, 40, 54, 63, 76-78			
   Argia
fumipennis (Burmeister 1839)	9, 19, 23, 39, 40, 44, 51, 72		9	
   Argia
moesta Selys 1865	76		9	
   Argia
sedula (Hagen 1861)	26, 40			
   Enallagma
basidens Calvert 1902	9, 13, 16, 19, 23, 26, 38, 40, 72		13	
   Enallagma
divagans Selys 1850	6, 13, 16, 20, 26, 33, 34, 38-40, 44, 72, 77		8, 10, 12, 13	
   Enallagma
exsulans (Hagen 1861)	9, 13, 16, 19, 20, 23, 38, 40, 72			
   Enallagma
signatum (Hagen 1861)	67			
   Enallagma spp. Charpentier 1840	2, 7, 13, 16, 19, 20, 23, 26, 38-40, 72			
   Ischnura
posita (Hagen 1861)	9, 33, 63			
   Ischnura
posita-verticalis (Hagen 1861)	1, 38			
   Ischnura spp. Charpentier 1840	9, 17, 23, 24-25, 27, 33, 35, 38, 40, 63, 67, 72		10	


Aeshnidae

				
   Aeshna
umbrosa Walker 1908	35			
Basiaeschna Janata (Say 1839)	1-3, 13, 16, 20, 38-40, 42-44, 54, 77	13	13, 15	
   Boyeria
vinosa (Say 1839)	1, 40, 44, 51			
   Boyeria spp. McLachlan 1895	41, 46	13	12	
   Nasiaeschna
pentacantha (Rambur 1842)	34, 77			


Cordulegastridae

				
   Cordulegaster spp. Leach 1815	49, 83		12, 32	


Corduliidae

			15	
   Epitheca
princeps Hagen 1861	11, 16, 26, 33, 38, 43			
   Epitheca spp Burmeister 1839	40, 43			
   Somatochlora
ensigera Martin 1906	43			
   Somatochlora spp Selys 1871	42, 67		7, 15, 18, 27, 32	
   Tetragoneuria spp. Hagen 1861		16		


Libellulidae

		17		
   Erythemis
simplicicollis (Say 1839)		17		
   Libellula spp. Linnaeus 1758	14, 29, 56, 59, 62, 73		13, 19	
   Libellula
luctuosa Burmeister 1839			15	
   Pachydiplax
longipennis (Burmeister 1839)		7, 12	13	
   Pantala
hymenaea (Say 1839)	23			
   Perithemis
tenera (Say 1839)	72		13	
Plathemis Lydia (Drury 1773)	26, 38, 42, 72		13, 15	
   Sympetrum spp. Newman 1833	40			


Macromiidae

				
   Didymops
transversa (Say 1839)			13	
   Macromia
taeniolata Rambur 1842	78			
   Macromia spp. Rambur 1842	7, 34, 39, 42, 43, 51, 55			


Gomphidae

	54, 62		13, 30	
   Dromogomphus
spinosus Selys 1854	38-40, 44		7, 9, 12, 15	
   Dromogomphus
spoliatus (Hagen 1858)	1, 6, 42			
   Dromogomphus spp. Selys 1854	11			
   Gomphus spp. Leach 1815	64, 66		5, 11, 30	
   Hagenius
brevistylus Selys 1854			11, 30	
   Progomphus
obscurus (Rambur 1842)	44, 51, 64		10	


Plecoptera

				


Leuctridae

				
   Leuctra spp. Stephens 1835	3, 14, 15, 37, 48, 82		5	


Nemouridae

				
   Amphinemura spp. Ris 1902	14, 18, 22, 29, 37, 41, 46-50, 82, 83, 86	11, 19		


Perlidae

				
   Acroneuria spp. Pictet 1841	3		5, 12, 30	
   Acroneuria
evoluta Klapàlek 1909			9	
   Neoperla spp. Needham 1905	3			


Perlodidae

	56			
   Isoperla spp. Banks 1906	14, 15, 18, 22, 27, 29, 49, 82	11		


Hemiptera

				


Belostomatidae

				
   Belostoma
flumineum Say 1832	23, 26, 35, 38		13	
   Belostoma
lutarium (Stàhl 1855)	30, 41, 62	17		
   Belostoma spp. Latreille 1807	1, 34, 72			


Corixidae

	1, 11, 23, 36, 38, 43, 67		15	
   Palmacorixa
nana Walley 1930	11			
   Sigara
modesta (Abbott 1916)	15		16	
   Sigara spp. Fabricius 1775	17		15	
   Trichocorixa
calva (Say 1832)	1, 20, 33, 36, 43, 55, 59, 67		15	
   Trichocorixa
kanza Sailer 1948	77, 78			
   Trichocorixa spp. Kirkaldy 1908	35, 76			


Gerridae

	1, 2, 9, 23, 38			
Gerridae larvae	41		15	
   Aquarius spp. Schellenberg 1800	3, 8, 17		 7	
   Aquarius
remigis (Say 1832)			23	
   Gerris spp. Fabricius 1794	8, 17, 35, 38-40, 42, 67, 72			
   Limnoporus spp. Stàhl 1868	72, 77			
   Rheumatobates
palosi Blatchley 1926	38			
   Rheumatobates
rileyi Bergroth 1892	3			
   Rheumatobates
tenuipes Meinert 1895	6			
   Rheumatobates spp. Bergroth 1892	3, 6, 11, 13, 16, 20, 26, 33, 34, 36, 38, 39, 42, 43, 77, 78			
   Trepobates
pictus (Herrich-Schaeffer 1847)	4, 5, 42			
   Trepobates
subnitidus Esaki 1926	6, 9, 13, 16, 19, 20, 38, 72		13	
   Trepobates spp. Uhler 1883	3, 5, 7, 9, 13, 16, 19, 20, 26, 42, 72		29	


Hebridae

				
   Hebrus spp. Curtis 1831	23			


Hydrometridae

				
   Hydrometra
martini Kirkaldy 1900	1, 44			


Mesoveliidae

				
   Mesovelia
mulsanti White 1879	1, 6, 11, 13, 16, 20, 38, 72		8	


Naucoridae

				
   Pelocoris
femoratus (Palisot 1820)	38, 67	17		


Nepidae

				
   Ranatra
buenoi Hungerford 1922	11, 39		12	
   Ranatra
nigra Herrich-Schaeffer 1849		16		


Notonectidae

				
   Notonecta
irrorata Uhler 1879	43, 77, 83		13	
   Notonecta spp. Linnaeus 1758	24, 36			


Pleidae

				
   Neoplea
striola (Fieber 1844)	9, 11, 13, 20, 33, 38, 67, 72		10	


Saldidae

				
   Micracanthia spp. Reuter 1912	19			


Veliidae

	23			
   Microvelia
americana (Uhler 1884)	1, 3-5, 8, 13, 17, 35, 39, 40, 42-44, 51, 77			
   Microvelia spp. Westwood 1834	19, 23, 35, 43, 46-47, 54, 67, 72, 83-86			
   Rhagovelia
obesa Uhler 1871	39, 40			
   Rhagovelia spp. Mayr 1865	76			


Megaloptera

				


Corydalidae

				
   Chauliodes
pectinicornis (Linnaeus 1763)	36		15	
   Chauliodes spp. Latreille 1796	70			
   Corydalus
cornutus (Linnaeus 1758)			5, 8, 11-13, 20, 25	
   Nigronia spp. Banks 1908				
   Nigronia
serricornis (Say 1824)	3		5, 7, 11-13, 15, 20, 25, 30	


Sialidae

				
   Sialis spp. Latreille 1802	1-4, 38, 39, 42-44, 51, 53-54, 62, 83		7, 8, 10, 11-13, 15, 16, 27, 30	


Trichoptera

				


Hydropsychidae

				
   Cheumatopsyche spp. Wallengren 1891	3-5, 13-15, 19, 20, 25-27, 29-30, 33, 34, 36, 39, 41, 44, 47-52, 54-55, 63-65, 77-78	 9, 11, 13	5, 8, 11, 12, 20	
   Hydropsyche
betteni Ross 1938	25, 29, 50		5	
   Hydropsyche
betteni-depravata Hagen 1861	19, 51			
   Hydropsyche
cuanis Ross 1938	36			
   Hydropsyche
hageni Banks 1905	63			
   Hydropsyche
simulans Ross 1938	4, 7, 33, 34, 54, 76, 77, 78			
   Hydropsyche spp. pupae Pictet 1834	22	 9		


Helicopsychidae

				
   Helicopsyche
borealis (Hagen 1861)			7, 15, 25	


Hydroptilidae

				
   Hydroptila spp. Dalman 1819	25, 27, 38, 40, 47, 48, 50, 53, 55, 59, 64			
   Oxyethira spp. Eaton 1873	44			


Leptoceridae

	20, 39			
   Ceraclea
flava (Banks 1904)			8, 9	
   Nectopsyche
candida (Hagen 1861)	77			
   Nectopsyche
exquisita (Walker 1852)	34, 78			
   Nectopsyche spp. Mueller 1879	26, 76, 78			
   Oecetis
cinerascens (Hagen 1861)	40			
   Oecetis spp. McLachlan 1877	14, 20, 38, 40-41, 56, 64			


Limnephilidae

				
   Ironoquia spp. Banks 1916	18, 22, 27, 29, 41, 46, 49, 82, 84	8-10, 19, 20		
   Pycnopsyche spp. Banks 1905		12		


Philopotamidae

				
   Chimarra
aterrima Hagen 1861	4, 19			
   Chimarra
obscura (Walker 1852)	19, 51			
   Chimarra spp. Stephens 1829	 41, 47, 48, 50		5, 11, 20, 30	


Phryganeidae

				
   Ptilostomis spp. Kolenati 1859	83, 85	17		


Polycentropodidae

				
   Cernotina
spicata Ross 1938	2, 4		8, 10	
   Neureclipsis
crepuscularis (Walker 1852)	5, 7, 34, 63, 76-78			
   Polycentropus spp. Curtis 1835	83			


Rhyacophilidae

				
   Rhyacophila spp. Pictet 1834	 27, 41	11, 19		


Uenoidae

				
   Neophylax spp. McLachlan 1871	15			


Lepidoptera

				


Crambidae

			8	
   Acentria spp. Stephens 1829	26			


Noctuidae

				
   Bellura spp. Walker 1865	8			


Pyralidae

		17	19	


Coleoptera

				


Curculionidae

	26, 34		7	


Dryopidae

				
   Helichus
basalis LeConte 1852	39		7, 8, 10, 12, 20, 25, 27, 30	
   Helichus
fastigiatus (Say 1824)	 41			
   Helichus
lithophilus (Germar 1824)	2, 9, 16, 18-20, 40, 44, 77		9, 12, 20, 25	


Dytiscidae

	44			
   Acilius spp. larvae Leach 1817		20		
   Acilius
fraternus (Harris 1828)	43		18	
   Agabus
gagates Aubè 1838			18	
   Agabus
semivittatus LeConte 1852	84			
   Agabus spp. Leach 1817	15, 18, 22, 29, 30, 47, 52			
   Brachyvatus
apicatus (Clark 1862)	72			
   Copelatus
chevrolati Aubè 1838	67			
   Copelatus
glyphicus (Say 1823)	35			
   Heterosternuta
laetus (Leech 1948)	82			
   Heterosternuta
pulcher (LeConte 1855)	22, 29			
   Hydroporus spp. Clairville 1806	17, 44			
   Laccophilus
fasciatus Aubè 1838	24, 35, 67		27	
   Laccophilus spp. Leach 1815	23, 24, 35			
   Laccophilus
maculosus Say 1823			13	
   Liodessus spp. Guignot 1939	23			
 (Hydroporinae)	18, 22, 29, 62, 66	16		
   Neoporus
dimidiatus (Gemminger and Harold 1868)	55, 65, 66			
   Neoporus spp. Guignot 1931	1-3, 11, 16, 23, 26, 34, 38, 40, 42, 43, 78		7, 9, 11-13, 15	
   Neoporus
undulatas (Say 1823)	25, 73, 83	12, 16		


Elmidae

				
   Ancyronyx
variegatus (Germar 1824)	1, 2, 7, 33, 34, 38, 76-78			
   Dubiraphia
minima Hilsenhoff 1973	1-3, 6, 7, 9, 16, 20, 23, 26, 33, 34, 38-40, 43, 44, 54, 63, 76-78		8-10, 13, 15	
   Dubiraphia
quadrinotata (Say 1825)	77			
   Dubiraphia spp. Sanderson 1954	23, 26, 38-40, 43, 44		8, 9, 13, 15	
   Dubiraphia spp. larvae and adults Sanderson 1954	14, 47, 48, 52, 46, 59, 64-66, 70, 73			
   Macronychus
glabratus Say 1825	7, 11, 33, 34, 38-40, 63, 76-78		10	
   Stenelmis
crenata (Say 1824)	2-4, 6, 11, 16, 20, 26, 33, 34, 36, 38-40, 51, 63, 76-78			
   Stenelmis
decorata Sanderson 1938	51			
   Stenelmis
quadrimaculata Horn 1870	44			
   Stenelmis
sexlineata Sanderson 1938			8-10	
   Stenelmis spp. Dufour 1835	3-5, 19, 26, 34, 40, 44, 76		5, 8-10, 13, 20, 25, 29	
   Stenelmis spp. larvae and adults Dufour 1835	14, 18, 22, 25, 27, 29, 30, 41, 46-50, 55, 56, 64			


Gyrinidae

	44			
   Dineutus
serrulatus LeConte 1868	10, 43			
   Dineutus spp. Macleay 1825	20			
   Dineutus spp. adults Macleay 1825	73	13		
   Gyretes
sinuatus Leconte 1851	6, 77			
   Gyrinus spp. Geoffroy 1762	35, 42-44			
   Gyrinus spp. adults Geoffroy 1762	47, 55			


Haliplidae

				
   Haliplus
deceptus Matheson 1912	62			
   Peltodytes
dunavani Young 1961	38, 40, 86	9		
   Peltodytes
duodecimpunctatus	1, 9, 11, 13, 15-18, 20, 23, 26, 29-31, 35, 37-38, 40, 43, 44, 47-48, 50, 55, 59, 66-67, 72-73	13, 16	8, 12-13, 15, 16, 23, 27, 29	
   Peltodytes
edentulus (LeConte 1863)	23			
   Peltodytes
lengi Roberts 1913	1, 2, 5, 16, 20, 23, 26, 33, 35, 39, 40, 44, 67		8, 13, 15	
   Peltodytes
litoralis Matheson 1912	31, 44			
   Peltodytes
muticus (LeConte 1853)	1, 48, 62, 67, 70	 12, 17, 20	15	
   Peltodytes
pedunculatus Blatchley 1910	1		13	
   Peltodytes
sexmaculatus Roberts 1913	16, 20, 35, 59, 65, 67		13	
   Peltodytes spp. Règimbart 1878	20, 35, 44, 67			
   Peltodytes spp. larvae Règimbart 1878	59, 62, 66	17		


Heteroceridae

	13, 23, 35, 39, 40, 72			
 Hydrochidae				
   Hydrochus spp. Leach 1817	1, 43, 67			


Hydrophilidae

	35, 72			
   Berosus
infuscatus LeConte 1855	2, 67			
   Berosus
peregrinus (Herbst 1797)	9, 13, 16, 20, 23, 26, 35, 38, 40, 44, 51, 72		15	
   Berosus spp. Leach 1817	9, 16, 20, 23, 26, 34, 38, 40, 44, 51, 72		13. 15	
   Berosus spp. larvae Leach 1817	14, 18, 25, 29, 46, 48, 50, 53, 55, 56, 59, 62, 64, 73			
   Enochrus
pygmaeus
nebulosus (Say 1824)	22			
   Enochrus spp. Thomson 1859	1, 13, 24, 26, 35, 40, 44			
   Hydrobius spp. Leach 1815	35			
   Hydrochara spp. larvae Berthold 1827		10		
   Hydrochara
soror Smetana 1980		20		
   Paracymus spp. Thomson 1867	8, 17, 35			
   Tropisternus
glaber (Herbst 1797)	23, 35, 40, 44, 67		8, 15	
   Tropisternus
lateralis
nimbatus (Say 1823)	67			
   Tropisternus
natator Orchymont 1938			27	
   Tropisternus spp. Solier 1834	16, 17, 23, 24, 26, 39, 44			
   Tropisternus spp. larvae Solier 1834	27			


Psephenidae

				
   Ectopria spp. larvae LeConte 1853			11, 23	
   Psephenus
herricki (DeKay 1844)	3-5, 13		5, 7-12, 18, 20, 23, 25, 29, 30	


Scirtidae

				
   Cyphon spp. Paykull	1, 3, 5, 6, 9, 10, 23, 26, 33		10, 12, 13	
   Scirtes spp. Illiger	46, 70	20		


Diptera

				


Chironomidae

	1, 3, 4, 11, 13, 23, 26, 33-35, 38, 40, 43, 44, 72		7, 15	
 (Diamesinae)				
   Diamesa spp.	14, 15, 18			
   Potthastia
longimana group (Keiffer 1922)	29			
 (Orthocladiinae)	7			
   Acricotopus spp.	62			
   Chaetocladius spp. Kieffer	15, 49, 55, 82, 84-86			
   Corynoneura spp.		9	7, 8, 15	
   Cricotopus spp. Wulp 1874		7-9, 11, 13, 16		
   Hydrobaenus spp. Fries		8, 9, 11, 13		
   Limnophyes spp. Eaton	15, 18, 22, 46, 47, 50			
   Nanocladius spp. Keiffer		7	20	
   Orthocladius spp. Wulp 1874	23, 26, 35, 40			
   Parametriocnemus spp. Goetghebuer 1932	18, 41			
   Paraphaenocladius spp.	44			
   Pseudorthocladius spp.	85			
   Smittia spp.	31			
 (Corynoneurini)				
   Corynoneura spp.	15, 18, 22, 49, 59			
   Thienemanniella spp. Kieffer	14, 22, 30, 48, 49, 52, 56, 73			
 (Orthocladiini/Metriocnemini)				
   Cricotopus spp. Wulp 1874	14, 15, 18, 22, 25, 27, 29, 30, 31, 37, 41, 46-50, 52, 53, 55, 56, 59, 62, 64-66, 70, 73, 82, 84			
   Cricotopus
sylvestris (Fabricius 1794)	38			
Cricotopus/Orthocladius spp. Wulp 1874	26, 35, 44			
   Eukiefferiella spp. Thienemann	49			
   Hydrobaenus spp. Fries	15, 18, 22, 47-50, 52, 55, 56, 59, 64, 66, 73			
   Nanocladius spp. Keiffer	52, 72			
   Parakiefferiella spp.	47, 62			
   Psectrocladius spp. Kieffer	62			
   Rheocricotopus spp. Thienemann and Harnisch	82			
 (Chironominae)	5, 6, 8, 13, 17, 20, 26, 33, 35, 43, 72, 77		15	
 (Chironomini)	5, 8, 14-5, 19, 23, 25, 27, 33, 35, 38-40, 43, 56, 62, 64, 70		7, 10-12	
   Chironomus spp.	1, 8, 15, 22, 24, 29, 34, 35, 39, 43, 44, 52, 53, 56, 58, 59, 62, 64, 66, 70, 73, 86	 9, 17, 20	10-11, 18	
   Cladopelma spp. Kieffer 1921	62			
   Cryptochironomus spp.	6, 23, 25-26, 35, 38, 40, 42, 43, 50, 56, 64, 66, 73			
   Cryptotendipes spp. Lenz	26, 38, 40, 43, 56, 66			
   Dicrotendipes spp. Kieffer 1913	5, 9, 13, 15-16, 19, 20, 23, 25-27, 29-30, 35, 38, 40, 42-44, 56, 62, 66, 72-73	 7, 11	29	
   Endochironomus spp. Kieffer	7, 16, 35, 52, 62, 73	16, 17		
   Glyptotendipes spp.	42, 43, 63, 70, 86	7, 11, 16, 17	9, 10, 12, 15, 30	
   Microtendipes spp.	4, 5, 8, 22, 44		5, 7, 9, 10, 12, 20	
   Parachironomus spp. Lenz	6, 7, 16, 52	16		
   Paralauterborniella spp. Lenz 1941	39, 40, 43, 70, 76			
   Paratendipes spp.	15, 18, 29, 30, 42, 47, 70	 11	11, 23	
   Phaenopsectra spp. Kieffer	5, 11, 13, 19, 35, 39, 42, 56			
   Polypedilum
fallax (Johannsen 1905)	13			
   Polypedilum spp. Kieffer 1913	1, 2, 4-7, 9, 13-16, 18-20, 22-23, 25-27, 29-31, 33-36, 38-44, 46-49, 51-52, 55-56, 63-64, 66-67, 72-73, 77-78, 83	7-9, 11, 13, 16, 17	5, 7, 10-11, 13, 20, 30	
   Saetheria
tylus (Townes 1945)		8		
   Stenochironomus spp.	50			
   Stictochironomus spp. Kieffer	3, 4, 26, 42, 43		7-8, 10-12, 15-16, 27, 29, 32	
   Tribelos spp.	77			
 (Pseudochironomini)				
   Pseudochironomus spp.	22-23, 25-26, 29-30			
 (Tanytarsini)	9, 33, 35, 43, 44, 63		15	
   Cladotanytarsus spp. Kieffer 1921	9, 18, 20, 22-23, 26, 43, 44, 48, 50, 64, 67	11	10, 11, 13	
   Micropsectra spp. Kieffer 1909	15, 18, 22, 29, 48, 49, 52, 53, 59, 62, 66	9		
Micropsectra/Tanytarsus spp. Kieffer 1909	3, 8, 13, 20, 23, 26, 34, 35, 38, 40, 43, 44,			
   Paratanytarsus spp. Bause	8, 14, 26-27, 29, 35, 38, 40, 44, 59, 62, 64, 66, 70	7		
   Rheotanytarsus spp. Bause and Thienemann 1913	14, 25-27, 30, 33-34, 40, 43, 46, 49, 50, 52, 70		5	
   Stempellinella spp. Brundin			9	
   Tanytarsus spp. Van Der Wulp	14-16, 18, 20, 22, 25-27, 30, 35, 38, 40-41, 43-44, 47, 48, 50-51, 55, 56, 59, 62, 64, 66, 70, 83	 7, 10	11, 13, 15, 29, 30	
 (Tanypodinae)	4, 18, 35		15	
 (Coelotanypodini)				
   Clinotanypus spp.	20, 23, 40-41, 72	12		
 (Natarsiini)				
   Natarsia
baltimoreus (Macquart 1855)	1, 4, 17, 42, 44		7	
   Natarsia spp.	22, 29, 79			
 (Procladiini)				
   Procladius spp. Skuse 1889	16, 20, 35, 38-40, 42, 43, 52, 55, 59, 62, 72	16	11	
 (Pentanuerini)				
   Ablabesmyia
janta (Roback 1959)	2, 6, 7, 11, 33, 34, 63, 76-78			
   Ablabesmyia
mallochi (Walley 1925)	3, 5, 7, 17, 26, 33, 35, 38-40, 42-44, 72			
   Ablabesmyia spp. Johannsen 1905	15, 48, 50, 53	 16, 17		
   Labrundinia
becki Roback 1971	1			
   Labrundinia
pilosella (Loew 1866)	33, 34, 43, 63			
   Labrundinia spp.	40	17		
   Larsia spp. Wiedemann 1824	5, 18, 22, 31, 40, 46, 52, 62, 64, 70, 73, 79, 82	16		
   Paramerina spp.	35			
   Pentaneura spp.	66			
   Thienemannimyia group	1, 5, 13-15, 17-19, 22, 25-27, 29-31, 33, 35, 40, 46-48, 50-51, 55-56, 64, 66	8, 9	8	
   Zavrelimyia spp. Kittkau	15, 37, 48, 79, 82			
 (Tanypodini)				
   Tanypus
neopunctipennis Sublette 1964	67, 72			
   Tanypus spp. Meigen 1803	59, 62	17		


Ceratopogonidae

	47, 50, 53-55, 56, 59, 62, 64, 66, 70, 85		19	
   Atrichopogon spp.	13, 24			
Bezzia-Palpomyia group	2, 3, 40, 46, 70			
   Ceratopogon spp. Meigen 1803	33, 35, 38, 40, 43, 54			
   Dasyhelea spp.	44, 53, 59, 62			
   Forcipomyia spp. Meigen 1818	23			
   Probezzia spp. Kieffer 1906	26			
   Serromyia spp.	40			


Chaoboridae

				
   Chaoborus spp. Lichtenstein 1800	18			


Culicidae

				
   Aedes Meigen 1818 / Ochlerotatus	86			
   Aedes spp. Meigen 1818	24			
   Anopheles
punctipennis (Say 1823)	4, 6, 8, 9, 17, 36			
   Anopheles
quadrimaculatus Say 1824	67			
   Anopheles spp. Meigen 1818	24, 42, 44			


Dixidae

			12	
   Dixella spp.	3, 4, 6, 7			


Dolichopodidae

	31			


Empididae

				
   Clinocera spp. Meigen 1803	14			
   Hemerodromia spp.	3, 4, 14, 44, 47, 48, 50, 56, 64, 66			


Ephydridae

	27, 59			


Ptychopteridae

				
   Bittacomorpha spp. Westwood 1835			18	


Sciomyzidae

			7, 9	


Simuliidae

				
   Simulium
jenningsi Malloch 1914	4			
   Simulium
tuberosum (Lundstrom 1911)	3			
   Simulium
vittatum (Zetterstedt 1838)	51			
   Simulium spp. Latreille 1802	25, 27, 29, 46, 52, 53, 64-66, 70, 73	7, 11		


Stratiomyidae

				
   Stratiomys spp. Geoffroy 1762	2, 67		7, 13	


Tabanidae

	29, 37, 41, 50, 53, 62, 83	9		
   Chlorotabanus
crepuscularis Bequaert 1926	1, 42			
   Chrysops spp.	1, 6, 23, 35, 40, 43, 44		13	
   Tabanus spp.	72		8	


Tipulidae

	26		7	
   Hexatoma spp. Latreille 1809			5, 7-8, 12, 20	
   Limnophila spp. Macquart 1834			9	
   Pilaria spp. Sintenis 1889	49		11, 12	
   Pseudolimnophila spp.	4			
   Tipula spp. Linnaeus 1758	14, 18-19, 29, 30, 38, 41, 56, 64, 82	11, 13	8	
Tipulidae pupae	47			


Orthoptera

				


Acrididae

				
   Metaleptea
brevicornis (Johannson 1763)			13	


Collembola

				


Isotomidae

	4, 10, 20, 24, 26, 35, 38, 67, 72		9	


Poduridae

	63			


Sminthuridae

	23			


Decapoda

				


Cambaridae

				
   Cambarus species “A”	24, 35, 44, 48, 54, 67	7, 19-20	18	
   Cambarus
polychromatus Thoma, Jezerinac, and Simon 2005	35, 39, 44			
   Orconectes
immunis (Hagen 1870)	11, 14-15, 24, 29, 30, 34, 35, 37, 56, 65, 70			
   Orconectes
indianensis (Hay 1896)	1-3, 6, 7, 17, 19, 22, 25-26, 29, 34, 38-40			
   Orconectes
juvenilis Taylor 2002			9-12	

Orconectes juvenilis x virilis
			12	
   Orconectes
propinquus (Girard 1852)	63			
   Orconectes
rusticus (Girard 1852)			9, 11	
   Orconectes
sloanii (Bundy 1876)			5, 7-13, 15, 16, 20, 23, 25, 27, 29, 30, 32	
   Orconectes
virilis (Hagen 1870)	5		13	
   Procambarus
acutus (Girard 1852)	59			
   Procambarus spp. Ortmann 1905	62			
 (Cambarinae)	14, 15, 22, 25, 27, 29-31, 37, 41, 47-50, 55, 56, 65, 66, 73, 79, 83, 84			


Amphipoda

				


Hyalellidae

				
   Hyalella
azteca Saussure 1858	1, 2, 18, 25-27, 38, 40, 46-48, 50, 52, 55, 59, 62-63	7, 12, 16, 17, 19	8, 9, 12, 13, 15	


Crangonyctidae

				
   Crangonyx spp. Bate 1859	11, 18, 22, 27, 31, 37, 40-41, 46-50, 55, 63, 70, 73, 79, 82-84	8-10, 12, 13, 16, 19, 20		
   Synurella
dentata Hubricht 1943	22, 27, 29, 41, 64-66, 82, 83	8-11, 13, 19, 20	29	


Isopoda

				


Asellidae

				
   Caecidotea spp. Packard 1871	5, 14-15, 17-18, 22, 25, 27, 29-30, 35-37, 39, 40-43, 46-50, 52, 53, 56, 58-59, 62-66, 70, 73, 76, 82-84, 86	9, 10, 12, 13, 20		
   Lirceus
fontinalis Rafinesque 1820	1, 3, 22, 25, 27, 29-31, 35, 36, 73, 79	7-13, 16, 19, 20	13, 15, 20	


Acariformes

	4, 11, 35, 67		13, 15	


Veneroida

				


Corbiculidae

				
   Corbicula
fluminea (Müller 1774)	26, 33, 34, 38-40, 44, 78		8, 11	
   Corbicula spp. Mühlfeld 1811	27, 56, 59, 64, 66, 73	13	12	


Pisidiidae

	65, 66			
   Pisidium spp. Pfeiffer 1821	15, 25, 27, 29-31, 37, 58, 64-65, 67, 70	12	10, 18, 19, 27, 29	
   Sphaerium spp. Scopoli 1777	1, 6, 11, 33, 34, 38, 40, 42, 43, 56, 58, 59, 65, 67, 72, 76-78	7, 12, 16, 17, 19	5, 7-13, 15, 20, 25, 30, 32	


Gastropoda

				


Ancylidae

			7	
   Ferrissia spp. Walker 1903	35		10	
   Laevapex spp. Walker 1903	43			


Lymnaeidae

	22, 30, 31, 35, 37, 47, 48, 56, 59, 62, 73	9, 11-13, 20		
   Fossaria spp. Westerlund 1885	35, 44, 67			


Planorbidae

	35, 38, 40			
   Gyraulus spp. Agassiz 1837	70	7, 12, 16		
   Helisoma spp. Swainson 1840	1, 25, 31, 59, 64, 70	11	13, 15, 27, 29, 30	
   Planorbella spp.Haldeman 1842	26		13	


Physidae

				
   Physa Draparnaud 1801/Physella spp. Haldeman 1842	1, 8, 9, 13, 15-17, 19- 20, 23-27, 30, 31, 33, 35, 37-44, 53, 56, 58-59, 62, 65, 67, 70, 72-73, 76-78	7, 9-13, 16, 20	7, 13, 15, 16, 18, 20, 23, 27, 32	


Pleuroceridae

				
   Elimia spp. Adams and Adams 1854	1		5, 7-13, 15, 20, 25, 30	


Viviparidae

	40			
   Campeloma spp. Rafinesque 1819	1			


Oligochaeta

			 8-13, 15	
Tubificidae without hair chaetae			11, 13, 19	


Branchiobdellida

	35		7, 10, 11, 13	


Enchytraeidae

	14, 31, 55, 62			


Lumbricidae

	15, 25, 30, 37, 47, 58, 73, 79, 83, 84, 86		18	


Lumbriculidae

	1, 10, 76, 79			


Naididae

	16, 23, 24, 26, 34, 35, 38-40, 42, 43, 54, 67, 72, 76		13	
   Chaetogaster
diaphanus (Gruithuisen 1828)		9, 16		
   Chaetogaster
limnaei Von Baer 1827			13	
   Dero spp. Okem 1815	58, 62, 66	7, 12, 16		
   Nais
communis Piquet 1906	14, 15, 30, 31, 58, 70, 83	9, 12, 13, 16, 19, 20		
   Nais
pardalis Piquet 1906	14, 22, 27, 29-31, 64, 66	13, 16		
   Nais
variabilis Piquet 1906	14, 30, 52, 53, 56, 58, 64, 73		25	
   Pristina spp. Ehrenberg 1828			16	
   Pristina
leidyi Smith 1896	62			
   Ophidonais
serpentine (Mueller 1773)		7		
   Slavina
appendiculata (D’udekem 1855)	22	9, 16	16	
   Stephensoniana
tandyi Harman 1975		7		


Tubificidae

	34, 42, 51, 78			
   Branchiura
sowerbyi Beddard 1892	7, 11, 22, 29, 30, 43, 76			
   Limnodrilus spp. Claparede 1862	30, 73			
   Potamothrix
bavaricus (Oschman 1913)	50			
   Tubifex
tubifex (Mueller 1774)	62			
   Quistradrilus
multisetosus Brinkhurst and Cook 1966		16		
Tubificidae with hair chaetae	22, 27, 29, 31, 37, 47, 56, 58, 59, 62, 64-66, 70	12		
Tubificidae without hair chaetae	14, 15, 18, 22, 25, 27, 29-31, 37, 41, 49, 50, 52, 55, 56, 58, 59, 62, 64-66, 70, 73, 83	12, 16, 19		


Hirudinea

				


Erpobdellidae

	35, 38, 43			
   Erpobdella
punctate (Leidy 1870)	14, 31	9		
   Mooreobdella
fervida (Verrill 1872)	58	20		
   Mooreobdella
microstoma (Moore 1901)				


Glossiphoniidae

	33, 38, 43, 67	12		


Nematomorpha

				
   Paragordius
varius (Leidy 1851)	11, 67			


Nemertea

				
   Prostoma spp. Duges 1828	52, 59			


Neuroptera

				
   Climacia
areolaris (Hagen 1861)	33, 77, 78			


Turbellaria

	6, 15, 19, 72, 83			


Planariidae

				
   Dugesia spp.	29, 52	7, 16		


Cnidaria

				
   Hydra spp. Linnaeus 1758		7, 16		
List of crayfish taxa collected from three National Wildlife Refuges. Numbers indicate the sites at which each species has been collected based on information in Supplemental materials Appendix a-d and Figures 1-3.


Species
	
Patoka
	
Muscatatuck
	
Big Oaks
	
Procambarus (Ortmannicus) acutus (Girard 1852)	59, 62	13		
Orconectes (Faxonius) indianensis (Hay 1896)	1-3, 6-7, 17, 19, 22, 25, 26, 29, 34, 38-40, 63			
O. (Gremicambarus) virilis (Hagen 1870)	5		1, 2	
O. (Procericambarus) juvenilis (Hagen 1870)			8-11, 15	
O. (Rhoadesius) sloanii (Bundy 1876)		5, 6, 10, 13-15, 20	3-5, 7- 13, 15-17, 20-27, 29-33	
O. (Trisellescens) immunis (Hagen 1870)	11, 14-15, 22, 24-25, 27, 29-31, 34-35, 37, 41, 47-50, 55-56, 65- 66, 70, 73, 79, 83, 84	6, 8-11, 13, 21	5	
Cambarus (Cambarus) ortmanni Williamson 1907			10, 15, 19, 32	
C. (Erebicambarus) laevis Faxon 1914		19		
C. (Lacunicambarus) species "A"	24, 35, 44, 48, 54, 67	1, 5, 7, 8-13, 15-16, 18-20	7, 10, 11, 18	
C. (Tubericambarus) polychromatus Thoma, Jezerinac, and Simon 2005	35, 39, 44	8, 13, 15	3, 7, 10-11, 25, 33	
Comparison of fish assemblage structure and catch percentages from the Big Oaks National Wildlife Refuge.

	
2006
	
2007
	
Total
	

Species
	
Count
	
%
	
Count
	
%
	
Count
	
%
	


Cyprinidae

							
   Campostoma
anomalum	426	8%	751	17%	1177	12%	
   Cyprinella
spiloptera	10	&lt;1%	18	&lt;1%	28	&lt;1%	
   Ericymba
buccata	40	1%	171	4%	211	2%	
   Hybopsis
amblops	72	1%	223	5%	295	3%	
   Luxilus
chrysocephalus	182	3%	461	10%	643	7%	
   Lythrurus
umbratilis	29	1%	16	&lt;1%	45	&lt;1%	
   Notemigonus
crysoleucas	18	&lt;1%			18	&lt;1%	
   Notropis
ariommus	10	&lt;1%			10	&lt;1%	
   Notropis
boops	38	1%	28	1%	66	1%	
   Notropis
photogenis			15	&lt;1%	15	&lt;1%	
   Pimephales
notatus	964	18%	857	19%	1821	0	
   Semotilus
atromaculatus	523	10%	485	11%	1008	10%	


Esocidae

							
   Esox
americanus	4	&lt;1%			4	&lt;1%	


Catostomidae

							
   Catostomus
commersonii	26	&lt;1%	235	5%	261	3%	
   Erimyzon
oblongus	30	1%	1	&lt;1%	31	&lt;1%	
   Hypentelium
nigricans	39	1%	93	2%	132	1%	
   Moxostoma
duquesnei	10	&lt;1%	75	2%	85	1%	
   Moxostoma
erythrurum	21	&lt;1%	7	&lt;1%	28	&lt;1%	


Ictaluridae

							
   Ameiurus
natalis	18	&lt;1%	8	&lt;1%	26	&lt;1%	
   Ameiurus
nebulosus	1	&lt;1%			1	&lt;1%	
   Noturus
miurus	6	&lt;1%	3	&lt;1%	9	&lt;1%	


Fundulidae

							
   Fundulus
notatus	1	&lt;1%			1	&lt;1%	


Poeciliidae

							
   Gambusia
affinis
affinis	123	2%	52	1%	175	2%	


Atherinopsidae

							
   Labidesthes
sicculus	2	&lt;1%			2	&lt;1%	


Centrarchidae

							
   Ambloplites
rupestris	12	&lt;1%	6	&lt;1%	18	&lt;1%	
   Lepomis
cyanellus	285	5%	78	2%	363	4%	
   Lepomis
macrochirus	1159	22%	3	&lt;1%	1162	12%	
   Lepomis
megalotis	147	3%	148	3%	295	3%	
   Lepomis
microlophus	161	3%			161	2%	
   Micropterus
dolomieu	1	&lt;1%			1	&lt;1%	
   Micropterus
salmoides	23	&lt;1%	2	&lt;1%	25	&lt;1%	
   Pomoxis
nigromaculatus	21	&lt;1%			21	&lt;1%	


Percidae

							
   Etheostoma
blennioides	72	1%	32	1%	104	1%	
   Etheostoma
caeruleum	286	5%	137	3%	423	4%	
   Etheostoma
flabellare	86	2%	66	1%	152	2%	
   Etheostoma
nigrum	177	3%	375	8%	552	6%	
   Etheostoma
spectabile	269	5%	109	2%	378	4%	
Total Number of Individuals	5292		4455		9747		
Biological diversity and integrity comparison of aquatic faunal assemblages at three National Wildlife Refuges in southern Indiana.

	
Species Richness
	
Mean IBI
		
Refuge	Macroinvertebrates	Crayfish	Fish	Total	2006	2007	Range	
Patoka River NWR	355	6	82	443	35	31	0-56	
Muscatatuck NWR	96	6	51	153	--	40	12-54	
Big Oaks NWR	163	7	37	207	35	41	26-54	
