Introduction
Ephemeroptera is a biogeographically significant archaic order of aquatic insects abounding in several enigmatic families in the pantropical region, especially in the Oriental Realm. Neoephemeridae is a small group of mayflies presently confined to Holartic and Oriental regions.  recognized only three genera viz., Potamanthellus
 (seven species), Neoephemera
 (five species) and Ochernova
 (one species), synonymising Leucorhoenanthus
 (one species) with Neoephemera. This is not accepted by  and . Larvae of Neoephemeridae have unique operculate gills on the second abdominal segment that are fused medially. The larvae of Potamanthellus are distinguished from those of Neoephemera and Ochernova by their densely setate mouthparts, by their lack of well developed lateral expansions of the pronotum and mesonotum, and by their possession of rows of long setae on the caudal filaments (). However, the larvae of Potamanthellus cannot be differentiated from Leucorhoenanthus by any plesiomorphic or appmorphic larval traits. Based on our larval collections of Ephemeroptera of the Western Ghats, we establish a new record of Potamanthellus
caenoides (), which is a significant range extension to south Asia from its known range viz., Sumatra Island located in Southeast Asia. Differential diagnosis of P.
caenoides is verified based on the larval descriptions given () and subsequent revisionary studies (). Brief ecological notes are appended.

Materials and methods
The material used for this study was collected from the up-streams of Silent Valley National Park in south western region of the Western Ghats of peninsular India. The specimens were preserved in 85% ethanol. Some specimens were mounted on slides to enable detailed microscopic observations. Photographs were taken on the stereozoom and brightfield microscopes (Magnus and Nikon Eclipse 80i).

Taxon treatments
Potamanthellus
caenoides
Ulmer 1939

Materials
Type status:
Other material. Occurrence: individualCount: 7; sex: male &amp; female; lifeStage: Larva; Taxon: kingdom: Animalia; phylum: Arthropoda; class: Insecta; order: Ephemeroptera; family: Neoephemeridae; genus: Potamanthellus; specificEpithet: caenoides; taxonRank: species; taxonomicStatus: accepted; Location: country: INDIA; stateProvince: Kerala; municipality: Silent Valley National Park; locality: Poochipara; verbatimElevation: 935 m; verbatimLatitude: 11°06’49.5” N; verbatimLongitude: 76°25’52.4” E; Identification: identifiedBy: C. Selvakumar &amp; K. G. Sivaramakrishnan; Event: samplingProtocol: Hand picking; year: 2013; month: April; day: 18; habitat: Cascade

Diagnosis
Potamanthellus
caenoides is distinguished from other species of Potamanthellus by the following combination of characters in larvae: (i) a distinct diagonal ridge on operculate gills (Fig. ); (ii) distinct tubercles on abdominal terga 6–8 (Fig. ); (iii) dorsal forefemora with transverse row of setae (Fig. ); (iv) relatively small body size (&lt;8 mm) (Fig. ) and (v) relatively short caudal filaments that possess strongly developed lateral setae (Fig. ). P.
caenoides is distinguished from closely related species P.
ganges by the following characters: (i) posteromedian tubercle on abdominal terga 1–2 and 6–8 distinct (Fig. ); (ii) rows of hairlike setae strongly developed and mature body ca. 6-8 mm (Fig. ) and (iii) dorsal forefemora with transverse row of setae (Fig. ).

Distribution
Indonesia (Sumatra (), Java, Bali, Lombok and Flores), Malaysia (Malay peninsula, Sabah and Sarawak), Philippines (Mindanao), Thailand (), Vietnam () and India (southern Western Ghats).

Biology
The larvae of P.
caenoides occur in moderately fast flowing mountain streams and rivers ranging 850-935 m in altitude. The streams and rivers are canopied by predominant riparian trees. The substrates consist of relatively coarse particles (boulder 30%, cobble 20%, pebble 20% and gravel and sand 30%), fallen leaves and detritus. The water temperature in April ranges 18-23°C. Larvae were collected by Kick samples and hand picking.

Taxon discussion
Presently this genus consists of seven species viz. P.
amabilis (), P.
caenoides (), P.
chinensis (), P.
edmundsi (), P.
ganges (), P.
shaowuensis () and P.
unicutibius (). However, only one species viz., P.
ganges is known from India from the tributary of Ganges (). P.
caenoides () is new record from the southern Western Ghats and second species from India.

Supplementary Material
XML Treatment for Potamanthellus
caenoides
Acknowledgements
The authors are grateful to Jobin C. Tharian for donation of larval material from his collections. They thank Dr. K. A. Subramanian, Zoological Survey of India, Kolkata for the photo of entire larva. C. Selvakumar thanks University Grants Commission (UGC), New Delhi, India for the award of Dr. D. S. Kothari Post Doctoral Fellowship [No.F.4-2/2006 (BSR) /13-670/2012 (BSR)].

Author contributions
All authors are equally contributed.

Dorsal view of Potamanthellus
caenoides Ulmer 1939.

Potamanthellus
caenoides Ulmer 1939.

Foreleg

Dorsal forefemora with transverse row of setae

