Introduction
Superfamily Ceraphronoidea (Hymenoptera) comprises two extant families of parasitoid wasps, Ceraphronidae and Megaspilidae (). Megaspilidae includes 305 valid species in 13 genera (http://hol.osu.edu/index.html?id=91). The species of Megaspilidae are generally ectoparasitoids attacking cocoons and puparia, primarily on Diptera, Neuroptera, Coleoptera, Mecoptera and also as hyperparasitoids of Hymenoptera ().

Among the 13 genera of Megaspilidae, the most speciose and widely distributed are Dendrocerus
 and Conostigmus
. The genus Conostigmus was erected by , as a subgenus of Megaspilus Westwood, with Megaspilus
alutaceus Thomson as type species. Later in 1951, Muesebeck and Walkley elevated the taxon to generic level. The genus is distributed widely in all geographical realms and has 168 species. Only 9 species have been reported from Oriental region so far (, ) (catalogued as 8 species by , missing out Conostigmus
occipitalis
).

In continuation with our pioneer taxonomic studies on the superfamily Ceraphronoidea of India, a new species of Conostigmus viz. Conostigmus
neotubifer sp. n. is hereby described and illustrated. A comparative discussion on the morphological affinities of the new species with Conostigmus
tubifer
, the most resembling species is also provided. Both the species are remarkable for their intermixing of characters seen in two genera, Conostigmus and Dendrocerus.

Materials and methods
The specimens under study were collected using malaise trap set among the grassy patches of Port Blair, Andaman and Nicobar Islands, India. The specimens were card mounted on point-card tips. Description and imaging works were carried out employing Leica M205A stereomicroscope, with 1 × objective and Leica DFC-500 digital camera. Morphological terminology follows ,  and . Based on , we have attempted to define the various states of ocellar triangle in Megaspilidae. If OOL &gt; POL, the ocellar triangle is ‘narrow-based’ and if OOL &lt; POL, the triangle is ‘broad-based’. If POL = LOL, then the ocellar triangle is ‘Equilateral’, and if POL is not equal to LOL, the triangle is ‘Isosceles’, the condition most common in occurrence. The triangle is said to be ‘short’ when LOL &lt; POL and ‘long’ when LOL &gt; POL.

Both the Holotype and the Paratypes are deposited in the National Zoological Collection at Zoological Survey of India, Calicut.

Abbreviations:
DFIm – Minimal Interocular Facial Distance

; OOL – Ocellocular Length

; POL – Postocellar Length

; LOL – Lateral Ocellar Length

; T3 – Metasomal tergite 3

.

NHM – Natural History Museum, London

.

Taxon treatments

Conostigmus
neotubifer

Bijoy &amp; Rajmohana, 2014
sp. n.

urn:lsid:zoobank.org:act:4BF76167-8B66-4FB5-B4C1-DEB4C9FBF302

Materials
Type status:
Holotype. Occurrence: recordedBy: Ramesh Kumar; individualID: ZSI/WGRC/IR/INV.2652; individualCount: 1; sex: male; lifeStage: adult; preparations: Card mount; Taxon: scientificNameID: Conostigmus
neotubifer; kingdom: Animalia; phylum: Arthropoda; class: Insecta; order: Hymenoptera; family: Megaspilidae; genus: Conostigmus; specificEpithet: neotubifer; scientificNameAuthorship: Bijoy and Rajmohana; Location: continent: Asia; island: Andaman and Nicobar island; country: India; stateProvince: Andaman and Nicobar island; locality: Port Blair; verbatimLocality: Bathu Barthi; decimalLatitude: 11.768 N; decimalLongitude: 92.737 E; Identification: identifiedBy: Bijoy and Rajmohana; dateIdentified: 06/27/2013; Event: habitat: grassy field; eventRemarks: collected in malasie trap; Record Level: institutionID: ZSIC

Type status:
Paratype. Occurrence: recordedBy: Ramesh Kumar; individualID: ZSI/WGRC/IR/INV.2653; individualCount: 1; sex: female; lifeStage: adult; preparations: Card mount; Taxon: scientificNameID: Conostigmus
neotubifer; kingdom: Animalia; phylum: Arthropoda; class: Insecta; order: Hymenoptera; genus: Conostigmus; specificEpithet: neotubifer; scientificNameAuthorship: Bijoy and Rajmohana; Location: continent: Asia; island: Andaman and Nicobar island; country: India; stateProvince: Andaman and Nicobar island; locality: Port Blair; verbatimLocality: Bathu Barthi; decimalLatitude: 11.768 N; decimalLongitude: 92.737 E; Identification: identifiedBy: Bijoy and Rajmohana; dateIdentified: 06/27/2013; Event: habitat: grassy field; eventRemarks: collected in malasie trap; Record Level: institutionID: ZSIC

Type status:
Paratype. Occurrence: recordedBy: Ramesh Kumar; individualID: ZSI/WGRC/IR/INV.2654; individualCount: 1; sex: female; lifeStage: adult; preparations: Card mount; Taxon: scientificNameID: Conostigmus
neotubifer; kingdom: Animalia; phylum: Arthropoda; class: Insecta; order: Hymenoptera; genus: Conostigmus; specificEpithet: neotubifer; scientificNameAuthorship: Bijoy and Rajmohana; Location: continent: Asia; island: Andaman and Nicobar island; country: India; stateProvince: Andaman and Nicobar island; locality: Port Blair; verbatimLocality: Bathu Barthi; decimalLatitude: 11.768 N; decimalLongitude: 92.737 E; Identification: identifiedBy: Bijoy and Rajmohana; dateIdentified: 06/27/2013; Event: habitat: grassy field; eventRemarks: collected in malasie trap; Record Level: institutionID: ZSIC

Description
Holotype: Male
(Fig. ).

Coloration: Body blackish brown with head more darker; eyes and ocelli silvery with a bronze tinge; fore wing clear at base, with large infuscate area below pterostigma and radial vein extending to its posterior margin; scape, pedicel and A3 brownish yellow turning darker towards segments from A4 onwards; legs brownish yellow with coxae and posterior half of hind tibia blackish brown (Fig. ); mandible light brown with darker distal extreme; pterostigma brown getting darker to wing margin; radial vein and costal vein pale brown (Fig. ); body pubescence white.

Body: length: 1.52 mm.

Head: (length/width/height: 230/580/460); eye (length/width: 260/210); preoccipital crescent well-separated from posterior ocelli merging laterally into eye margin (Fig. ); temple strongly carinated; preoccipital furrow present; ocellar triangle isosceles, narrow, short and raised; LOL &lt; POL; hind ocelli remote from eye margin: POL/LOL/OOL: (80/40/110) Fig. . DFIm 57% of head width. Head 1.28 × wider than mesosoma (Fig. ); facial sulcus present, extending to intertorular carina (Fig. ); supraclypeal depression absent. Intertorular carina clear with a slightly elevated median peak (Fig. ); ocular suture prominent and foveolate; eyes densely pubescent (Fig. ); frons with sparse hairs; clypeus narrow and rectangular with angulated corners (Fig. ); mandible long, bidendate, lower tooth distinctly longer than upper one.

Antenna: (Fig. ); very long (subequal to the body length) and slender; scape nearly 4 × longer than wide; pedicel small and almost globular; A3 highly slender, nearly 4.8 × longer than wide, subequal to scape; flagellar segments quasi cylindrical with very slight serrations basally; pubescence shorter than breadth of segments; length/width measurements of antennal segments: scape (252/66), pedicel (60/48), A3 (255/53), A4 (147/54), A5 (140/53), A6 (122/53), A7 (128/61), A8 (117/64), A9 (108/57), A10 (82/70), A11 (127/54).

Mesosoma: (length/width/height: 610/450/460); mesosoma robust with very angular shoulders; alutaceous in sculpture; mesoscutum: (length/width: 230/440); mesoscutum nearly 2 × wider than long; lateral margin of mesoscutum posterior to anterior margin of notaulus convex; coarsely foveolate notaulices curve smoothly and converging posteriorly, meeting median furrow at transscutal articulation (Fig. ); scutellum broadly rounded at apex with long hairs; axilliluar carinae present; metanotal-propodeal sulcus placed in regular intervals medially and with some longitudinal carina remote laterally (Fig. ); propodeum unarmed, smooth and bare with sculpture effaced and with irregular carinae (Fig. ) but stretched posteriorly into a inverted ‘U’ shaped narrow apex. Lateral propodeal carinae present. Propodeal spiracle large and conspicuous (Fig. ); sternaulus absent (Fig. ); anterior mesopleural sulcus and meso-metapleural sulcus distinct and foveolate; metapleuron bordered by incomplete carina; lower margin of mesopleuron and metapleuron with dense hairs.

Forewing: (Fig. ); total wing length 1.25 mm. Pterostigma (length/width: 200/80) semielliptical, 2.4 × longer than wide. Radius (0.27 mm), slightly curved and 1.36 × the length of pterostigma; maximal width of fused costal and subcostal vein wider than radius; basal part with less hairs.

Metasoma: (Fig. ); (length/width/height: 484/390/340); metasoma smooth; gastral collar well developed and widened more than that of propodeal strip, with syntergal translucent patch. Four strong transverse gastral carinae present on basal portion of metasoma. A pair of paler gastrocoeli seen quite below gastral collar; largest tergite, T3 occupying 72% of metasomal length. Metasoma held in an elevated manner, above propodeal plane (Fig. ) (best visible in lateral view). Genitalia with short basal ring, volsella widely separated basaly with long terminal setae on each parossiculi (Fig. ) (harpe damaged).

Female (Paratype)
Figs , , , .

Body length 1.68 mm. Body colouration and the morphological features of head, mesosoma and metasoma are the same as holotype, except the measurements of antennal segments, proportion of radius and pterostigma and length of metasoma.

Scape more than 4 × as long as wide and A3 more than 3 × as long as wide. Pedicel slender to succeeding antennal segments. Length/width measurements of antennal segments: scape (321/73), pedicel (103/51), A3 (170/51), A4 (97/65), A5 (86/79), A6 (83/90), A7 (90/87), A8 (79/84), A9 (80/85), A10 (87/78), A11 (124/68).

DFIm 52% of head width and fore wing infuscation much darker compared to paler infuscation in male fore wing. T3 occupying 57% of metasomal length.

Diagnosis
Conostigmus
neotubifer sp. n. can be diagnosed by the following features.

Head transverse, wider than mesosoma. Male antenna subequal to body length with A3 highly slender, 4.8 × as long as wide and subequal to scape. Flagellar segments in male quasi cylindrical with very slight serrations basally. Female antenna with scape more than 4 × as long as wide and A3 more than 3 × as long as wide. Ocellar triangle isosceles, narrow based, short and raised in both sexes. Facial sulcus extending to intertorular carina in both sexes. Preoccipital furrow distinct. Supraclypeal furrow absent. DFIm 0.57% of head width in male and 0.52% of head width in female. Eyes densely pubescent. Dorsal margin of propodeal foramen ‘U’ shaped in dorsal view; median propodeal projection absent. Sternaulus absent. Metasoma dorsally elevated from the propodeal axis. Forewing infuscus, darker in female and paler in male.

Biology
Unknown.

Etymology
The species is named 'neotubifer', since this species resembles Conostigmus
tubifer ('Neo' in Latin = 'new').

Distribution
INDIA, Andaman Nicobar island, Port Blair.

Discussion
The proposed new species is placed under Conostigmus, since its putative sister Conostigmus
tubifer belongs also to Conostigmus and can be justified mainly by the presence of independent parossiculi in male genitalia, one of the diagnostic characters for the subgenus Conostigmus s.str. in . Conostigmus
tubifer is unique among the Oriental species because of its affinity to Dendrocerus due to the quasi cylindrical appearance of male antennal segments, broad based nature of ocellar triangle (), along with characters as mentioned (Table ). Except in the ocellar ratio Conostigmus
neotubifer resembles Conostigmus
tubifer, in aspects regarding head, mesosoma and metasoma (Table ) and also in having an upwardly elevated posture of metasoma. This intermixing of character states of the two genera Conostigmus and Dendrocerus in Conostigmus
tubifer and Conostigmus
neotubifer sp. n. emphasizes the uncertain state of the current classification of Ceraphronoidea.

In Conostigmus
neotubifer sp. n., OOL &gt; POL (ocellar triangle is narrow based), while in Conostigmus
tubifer OOL &lt; POL (ocellar triangle is broad based). It needs special mention that the illustration No. 94, in page 87 and the description of Conostigmus
tubifer in , regarding ocelli, is a mismatch. In the description of the holotype male, Dessart clearly states, supported by numerical values, that the ocellar triangle is broad based, which is in contradiction to the medial placement of ocellar triangle in the illustration. As the holotype of Conostigmus
tubifer could not be traced, we had no means than to go by the descriptive part of the original literature, since it is supported by numerical values. Though NHM is mentioned as the type depository of Conostigmus
tubifer, in  and , on enquiry at NHM, we were informed that the types were never deposited there in reality.

In addition, the differences in the following characters also ensure that Conostigmustubifer and Conostigmusneotubifer are not conspecific.

Forewing infuscation extending further to the distal margins beyond pterostigma and radius in Conostigmus
neotubifer sp. n. (restricted under stigma and radius in Conostigmus
tubifer).

Facial groove distinct in both sexes in Conostigmus
neotubifer sp. n. (in Conostigmus
tubifer facial groove present in male and absent in female).

Pterostigma is 2.4 × longer than wide in Conostigmus
neotubifer sp. n. (only 2 × longer than wide in Conostigmus
tubifer).

DFIm value is 52% in female in Conostigmus
neotubifer sp. n. (46% in female in Conostigmus
tubifer).

Scape and A3 of male subequal in length in Conostigmus
neotubifer sp. n. (in Conostigmus
tubifer, A3 is shorter (only 0.85 ×) than scape).

In Conostigmus
neotubifer sp. n., A3 of female antenna is 3 × longer than wide and scape 2 × longer than A3 (in Conostigmus
tubifer, A3 is only two 2 × longer than wide and scape is 4 × longer than A3).

Supplementary Material
XML Treatment for
Conostigmus
neotubifer

Acknowledgements
The authors are grateful to the Director of the Zoological Survey of India, Kolkata and the Officer-in-Charge, ZSI, Western Ghat Regional Centre, Calicut, Kerala, for providing facilities and encouragement. Thanks are also due to Istvan Miko for his valuable help in interpreting the generic limits of Conostigmus and Dendrocerus and also for literature support. We are grateful to David Notton, for checking the availability of the types at the Natural History Museum, London. The authors profusely thank Dr. J Poorani, for sharing specimens for this study.

Author contributions
Bijoy C: Identification, species concept and imaging

Rajmohana K: Identification and species concept

Ramesh Kumar: Specimen collection and manuscript preparation

Male habitus, lateral view.

Male antenna, lateral view.

Male head, dorsal view.

Male head, anterior view.

Male head and mesosoma, dorsal view.

Male mesosoma, lateral view.

Male clypeus, anterior view.

Male forewing.

Male propodeum.

Male, metasoma dorsal view.

Female habitus.

Female antenna.

Female forewing.

Female, metasoma dorsal view.

Male genitalia ventral view.

Characters for distinguishing Conostigmus and Dendrocerus.

Characters	
Conostigmus
	
Dendrocerus
	Conostigmus
neotubifer sp. n.	Conostigmus
tubifer	
Ocellar triangle	Usually with narrow base	Usually with broad base	
Conostigmus
	
Dendrocerus
	
Shape of head	Usually globular	Usually transverse	
Dendrocerus
	
Dendrocerus
	
Intertorular carina	Complete and with a median projection	Complete or incomplete but without a median projection	
Conostigmus
	
Conostigmus
	
Notauli	Smoothly curved towards anterior angles of mesoscutum	Sharply angulate towards anterior angles of mesoscutum	
Conostigmus
	
Conostigmus
	
Mesoscutum	Anteriorly narrowed	Quadrate	
Dendrocerus
	
Dendrocerus
	
Basal antennal segments of male	Cylindrical	Serrate, triangular, ramose or quasi cylindrical	Quasi cylindrical as in Dendrocerus	Quasi cylindrical as in Dendrocerus	
Shape of scutellum	Flat	Convex or raised	
Conostigmus
	
Conostigmus
	
Parossiculi	Independent	Fused	
Conostigmus
	
Conostigmus
	
