Introduction
Two taxa interacting half a world away
Centipede grass (Eremochloa
ophiuroides) (Figs , ) is a turf grass that originated in Asia, that is now found world-wide (). The popularity of centipede grass is no doubt the result of its small leaves, prostrate growth habit, and ground-hugging mats of long stolons. When blooming, this low-growing grass will produce an inconspicuous inflorescence that is hard to see from a distance. This minimal amount of maintenance and visibility, has inspired another common name, lazy man’s grass, as it requires only an occasional mow to keep in check.

Apis
mellifera, or honey bees, were introduced to North America by European settlers in the 1700's and are not native to the North American continent. They are now best described as being ubiquitous worldwide. Agricultural necessity has fostered this expansion as bees help to pollinate crops. Their evolutionary and phylogenetic origins appear to be multiple radiations out of Africa, with later expansions to Asia and Europe ().

Material and methods
Observations were made by sitting/walking in a residential lawn in Baton Rouge, Louisiana, USA, during late September 2013 through early October 2013 (Fig. ). Occurrences of honey bees visiting centipede grass were documented with both video and still imagery. All observations were between 10:00 AM and 2:00 PM, consisting of video, and one session of macro-photography (Fig. ). The grass was sampled for identification and a specimen sheet was created at Louisiana State University Herbarium (Fig. ). Other plants at anthesis that could provide potential forage for bees were also noted. (Table ).

A total of three bees were sampled for taxonomic identification and examined by curators at the Louisiana State University Arthropod Museum (Fig. ). One honey bee pollen basket was then sampled for homogeneity at Louisiana State University Center for Excellence in Palynology (Fig. ). Three honey bee corbiculae pollen contents were then sent to and processed by at Washington State University via acetylosis. Pollen identification was later performed by the Palynology consultants at University of Arizona.

Equipment used:

Galaxy Note I cell phone for video

Nikon D300 DSLR camera with a 1:1 macro lens for still images

Olympus Microscope with slaved digital camera for microscopy images

Data resources
Rainfall prior and post-observations; a wet summer/early fall and not a time of drought stress/starvation (Table , Suppl. materials , , , , , )

Results
The honey bees were exclusively gathering unifloral Poaceae pollen (Table ). Macro-photography revealed that as the bees traveled from inflorescence to inflorescence, they generated biotic winds that moved the Poaceae pollen significant distances (Fig. ).

Discussion
The graminoids are treated in botanical literature as using the pollination syndrome of anemophily (), or abiotic wind pollination (c.e.g., ). A reason for this abiotic relationship are that the flowers are small and drab in appearance rather than showy (). In contrast, though diminutive and lacking petals and sepals, most graminoid inflorescences are quite colorful when blooming, plus present ultraviolet visual cues that are visible to the bees but cannot be seen by humans (). This dichotomy reveals an interesting question: is this just a scale problem for attractiveness? Insects are resourceful feeders, and will take advantage of pollen feeding opportunities that are acceptable and provide visual signatures of readiness for anther dehiscence (Fig. ).

Honey, a well documented economic commodity that is studied and sampled for purity and origins, tells a different story from botanical literature. Melissopalynology, or the study of pollen in honey, describes the collection of graminoid pollen by honey bees as commonplace. This literature is not isolated but found from across the globe, describing collection of pollen from all graminoids: Poaceae (), Cyperaceae​ (), and Juncaceae (). Interestingly, additional observations of other non-graminoid anemophilous plants of the Angiospermae, are also found to have associations with honey bees; including willows (Salicaceae) (, ), oaks (Fagaceae) (, ), and even glassworts (Sarcocornia) ().

Supplementary Material
Climatological Data for Louisiana, June 2013

Data type: PDF

Brief description: Flat file for June 2013 precipitation

File: oo_6602.pdf

National Oceanic and Atmospheric AdministrationClimatological Data for Louisiana, July 2013

Data type: PDF

Brief description: Flat file for July 2013 precipitation

File: oo_6603.pdf

National Oceanic and Atmospheric AdministrationClimatological Data for Louisiana, August 2013

Data type: PDF

Brief description: Flat file for August 2013 precipitation

File: oo_6600.pdf

National Oceanic and Atmospheric AdministrationClimatological Data for Louisiana, September 2013

Data type: PDF

Brief description: Flat file for September 2013 precipitation

File: oo_6599.pdf

National Oceanic and Atmospheric AdministrationClimatological Data for Louisiana, October 2013

Data type: PDF

Brief description: Flat file for October 2013 precipitation

File: oo_6601.pdf

National Oceanic and Atmospheric AdministrationDerived wet summer data from NOAA

Data type: xls

Brief description: "How-did" converting inches to centimeters across three weather points in Baton Rouge, La., from manual NOAA PDF amalgamation

File: oo_6604.xlsx

NOAA and Tim JonesAcknowledgements
Thanks to Chris Reid for editing and correction of my Rosaceae identification; and to Sophie Warny, Vaughn Bryant, and John Jones, concerning all things about pollen identification; and to Mary Barkworth for the advice to catch some of those bees.

Author contributions
Tim Jones observed the process and collected all samples. Dr. Victoria Bayless identified the honey bees as honey bees. The fly was identified by Tim Jones using the LSU Entomology collection. Dr. John G. Jones identified the pollen samples collected from the bees. Dr. Sophie Warny and Dr. Vaughn Bryant provided in-person and email palynological advice, respectively.

Video observations of multiple bees collecting pollen from centipede grass

Honey bee moving pollen up the culm, while also spreading pollen through biotic winds; here with pollen visible at left and below bee

Eremochloa
ophiuroides specimen collected at observation locality

Collected honey bee with body dusted in pollen and packed pollen baskets or corbiculae

Centipede grass at anthesis

Pollen sample at 20× from one bee corbicula demonstrating homogeneity. Image by: Sophie Warny

Inflorescences demonstrating color change in anthers after dehiscence from purple to brown

anthers before and after dehiscing

another culm showing same anther color changes

"Pollen biotic winds" caused by honey bees are denoted by arrows showing dispersal of grains between culms – original images available at http://www.herbarium.lsu.edu/keys/pensoft/bees3/

Pollen dispersal caused by bee

Spreading of pollen as result of bee

Pollen both above and below bee

Distribution and distance of pollen travel from bee

Other plants at anthesis in association with Eremochloa
ophiuroides.

Species	Family	
Duchesnea
indica (Andrews) Focke	

Rosaceae

	
Mikania
scandens B.L.Rob.	

Asteraceae

	
Ligustrum
sinense Lour.	

Oleaceae

	
Lablab
purpureus (l.) Sweet	

Fabaceae

	
Kyllinga
brevifolia Rottb.	

Cyperaceae

	
Oplismenus
hirtellus (L.) P. Beauv.	

Poaceae

	
Digitaria
ciliaris (Retz.) Koeler	

Poaceae

	
Ruellia
simplex C.Wright	

Acanthaceae

	
Brugmansia sp. Pers.	

Solanaceae

	
Pollen analysis after acetolysis from bee corbiculae

Bees – using one corbicula	Sampled pollen grains	Percentage Poaceae pollen	
1	252	100%	
2	266	100%	
3	270	100%	
Precipitation amounts for summer and early fall 2013, in Baton Rouge, Louisiana, USA. http://www.ncdc.noaa.gov/


Month (2013)
	
Precipitation (cm)
	
June	10.4	
July	11.9	
August	10.9	
September	19.3	
October	7.9	

Total
	
60.4
	
