Introduction
The Hesperinidae is a small relict family of nematocerous Diptera that includes only eight extant species in a single genus – Hesperinus Walker (, ). Pape () described the family as almost endemic to the Palaearctic region. In addition to six Palaearctic species, just one Nearctic and one Neotropical species have been discovered (). Three species have been described from Eocene Baltic amber () and two specimens in poor condition are known from Oligocene sediments in France (). According to a recent overview by Papp (), three species occur in the Western Palaearctic, viz. Hesperinus
imbecillus () in Austria, Italy, Slovenia, Croatia, Serbia, Albania, Romania, Bulgaria, Hesperinus
graecus
 in Greece, and Hesperinus
ninae
 in Russian North Caucasus. Members of the genus Hesperinus are medium-sized, dark coloured, with long antennae, legs and abdomen. The wings are well developed in the males but are shortened in the females of some species including Hesperinus
ninae, thus making it somewhat peculiar among nematocerous flies (). Very little is known of their biology except that the adults are scarce and collected mostly near streams in woodlands (). The larvae and pupae of an eastern Palaearctic species were found in decaying wood of deciduous trees ().

Materials and methods
The material reported here was collected during a recent expedition to Georgia in 2013. The locality lies on the northern slope of the Saguramo range (north of Tbilisi), covered by deciduous forests consisting of hornbeam, oak and maple. The sweep netting took place in vegetation along a narrow ravine with a steeply gullied bottom (Fig. ). The collected specimens were either micro pinned or preserved in ethyl alcohol. Preparations of the male terminalia, as well as the illustrations given here (Figs , ), were prepared using the methods and equipment described by . All the material is deposited in the insect collection of IZBE—Institute of Agricultural and Environmental Sciences, Estonian University of Life Sciences (former Institute of Zoology and Botany), Tartu, Estonia.

Taxon treatments

Hesperinus
ninae

Papp &amp; Krivosheina, 2010

Materials
Type status:
Other material. Occurrence: recordedBy: Olavi Kurina; individualCount: 12; sex: male; Location: country: Georgia; verbatimLocality: Saguramo north of Tbilisi; verbatimElevation: 915; verbatimLatitude: 41°53’04,3’’N; verbatimLongitude: 44°46’46,5’’E; Event: samplingProtocol: sweeping; eventDate: 15 May 2013; Record Level: institutionCode: EMY; collectionCode: IZBE

Taxon discussion
Hesperinus
ninae (Figs , ) was described from two male specimens collected in the 1960s from Krasnaya Polyana (Krasnodar Kray in Russian North Caucasus), but according to Papp &amp; Krivosheina () other material from the same collecting series had already been included in an overview by Mohrig et al. (: as Hesperinus
imbecillus).

Using the key by Papp (), the studied specimens run well to Hesperinus
ninae because of the elongated terminal flagellomere (Fig. ), wing length about 6 mm (Fig. ), considerably shorter and broader first flagellomere with specific setation (Fig. ), and gonostylus mediodorsally with a projecting lobe (Fig. ). Like the European Hesperinus
imbecillus, the females of Hesperinus
ninae are flightless. In spite, that there were no females included to the original description (), four of them from the same collecting series were studied by Mohrig et al. (, as Hesperinus
imbecillus). They figured a female with reduced wings (: fig. 1) and did not described any differences between Northern Caucasian and Central European material (see also discussion by ). The flightlessness has obviously been an adaptive response to unfavourable climatic conditions and has set further limits to dispersal. However, the current record is at quite a remote distance from the type locality, indicating that the species probably has a wide distribution in suitable habitats in the Caucasus.

Supplementary Material
XML Treatment for
Hesperinus
ninae

Acknowledgements
I am grateful to Prof. T. Tammaru (University of Tartu, Estonia) for organising the collecting trip to Georgia and to Dr. G. Japoshvili (Agricultural University of Georgia, Tbilisi, Georgia) for help during the fieldwork. The English text was kindly checked by Dr. A. Pont (Oxford, UK) and Mr. G. Ramel (Huaian, China). The study was supported by grant 9174 from the Estonian Science Foundation.

Collecting locality on the northern slope of the Saguramo range north of Tbilisi. Photo by O. Kurina.

Hesperinus
ninae Papp &amp; Krivosheina, 2010.

Male habitus, scale bar 1 mm.

Wing, scale bar 1 mm.

Penultimate and terminal flagellomeres, scale bar 0.1 mm.

Scape, pedicel, first and second flagellomeres, scale bar 0.1 mm.

Male terminalia of Hesperinus
ninae Papp &amp; Krivosheina, 2010.

Dorsal view, tergite 8 detached, scale bar 0.1 mm.

Dorsal view of tergite 8, scale bar 0.1 mm.

Closer view of gonostylus, scale bar 0.1 mm.

