WHAT DO HUMANS FIND ATTRACTIVE AND WHY?
Physical attractiveness influences numerous life outcomes and social experiences, and has been the subject of extensive research in the human behavioral sciences (e.g., ; ; ; Andreoni and Petrie 2005). For researchers adopting an evolutionary perspective on human behavior, interest in attractiveness is motivated by a theoretical expectation that attractiveness should be related to mate value and reproductive success (e.g., ; ; ; ). This expectation has received empirical support in a number of human populations (e.g., ; ; ; ; ; ; also see ).

Attractiveness research has concentrated on (1) documenting preferences for various physical traits and (2) attempting to explain the adaptive significance of the preferences. The first part of this endeavor is, in theory, a relatively straightforward research problem: studying preferences in humans, who are adept at both following instructions and interpreting pictorial stimuli, is in many ways easier than studying preferences in other species. The second issue–the nature of the benefits accrued through preferring one potential mate over another–is substantially more difficult to address. Experimental manipulations of human mate choice are difficult for both ethical and practical reasons (), and when assessing the potential biological benefits of choosing one potential mate over another, researchers must therefore rely on other methods. These include the observation of naturally occurring correlational data from human partnerships, and the “reverse engineering” of patterns in preferences to infer adaptive “special design” in behavior (e.g., ; ; ; ). These techniques can provide a useful insight into the likely nature of mate choice adaptations in our own species, yet neither strategy is ideal and evolutionary psychologists have been accused of an overeagerness, in practice, to accept specific adaptationist hypotheses on the basis of this data alone (; ).

THE IMMUNOCOMPETENCE HYPOTHESIS OF MALE FACIAL MASCULINITY
Of the various potential benefits proposed to have been associated with attractiveness, health (broadly defined) has received the most research attention, inspired by work in other species (; ; ; ; ; ; ). While a number of components of health may contribute to mate value (), heritable immunocompetence, or endogenous, genetically-mediated resistance to pathogens, has been the subject of particular interest (; ; ; ). A number of traits, including odor, voice pitch, body size, and various facial traits are hypothesized to signal immunocompetence in humans (; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ).

Here, we review the immunocompetence hypothesis with respect to masculine facial morphology in men, as face shape has received a large amount of research attention (). In this literature, high masculinity is generally defined as exaggerated sex-typical features (i.e., men with traits at the extreme of the distribution of a sexually dimorphic trait are considered more masculine than men with average trait size). Masculine face-shape traits include wide cheekbones, mandibles and chins, prominent brow ridges, long lower faces, and thin lips (; ). While a number of nonshape cues (color, hairiness, and movement; ; ; ) may also vary between the sexes, shape cues have been the focus of the majority of research regarding masculinity and immunocompetence, and these latter traits are widely proposed to be associated with each other (e.g., ; ; , 2001, 2003, 2004; ; , 2008a; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ). While a general link between phenotypic health and attractiveness seems likely (perhaps particularly in ancestral environments), the central role of heritable immunocompetence signaling properties of masculinity have increasingly been treated as established, rather than hypothetical. Research papers and textbooks on evolutionary psychology present the immunocompetence hypothesis of masculinity preferences as plausible, well established, or even as factual despite the absence of direct tests (; ; ; ; , 2010b).

The key assumptions of the immunocompetence hypothesis in this context are that testosterone is associated with (1) facial masculinity and (2) genetically heritable immunocompetence. These assumptions lead to clear predictions regarding female preferences for masculinity. What, however, is the evidence for these assumptions, and does empirical data support the predictions of the immunocompetence hypothesis?

DOES TESTOSTERONE INFLUENCE FACIAL MASCULINITY?
There is a direct relationship between testosterone and male traits in many species (see ; ; ), and similarly, a causal relationship between testosterone and masculinity in men has received reasonable support. Sex differences in the production of testosterone are almost certainly causal in the development of many sexually dimorphic traits in humans (; ; ; ). For men, both facial masculinity and circulating testosterone increase with maturity in adolescence () and the exogenous administration of testosterone during this time may influence the growth of certain dimorphic traits, such as mandible length and face height ().

In addition, a number of authors have reported evidence of a relationship between facial masculinity and direct measures of circulating testosterone in adulthood (; ; ). While results are not entirely consistent (; ; ), the one study to have employed an objective measure of masculinity (i.e., quantifying physical differences in face shape) as opposed to subjective masculinity “scores” (i.e., derived from participant ratings) did report a positive relationship with testosterone (). In light of these findings, the assumption that masculinity is a correlate of exposure to testosterone appears to be reasonable.

IS TESTOSTERONE RELATED TO HERITABLE IMMUNOCOMPETENCE?
The immunocompetence hypothesis proposes that masculinity is a reliable signal of disease resistance, and is derived from a handicap model of sexual signaling (; ). Research suggests that steroids such as testosterone may be immune stressors (; ; ; cf. ). Such findings have lead to the hypothesis that only immunocompetent males should be able to “afford” high levels of testosterone, and hence that exaggerated sex-typical traits (which are proposed to be mediated by testosterone) should be an honest signal of heritable immunity to local pathogens (see ; ), and hence a “good genes” indicator. 

The direct evidence for a link between facial masculinity and phenotypic health in humans is tentative.  found evidence of a weak association between apparent masculinity and adolescent health, but used subjective ratings of masculinity, which are not equivalent to anatomical measures (a point we will return to later).  found a negative correlation between masculinity and self-reported past respiratory disease, but no relationship between masculinity and intestinal illness. They did use objective measures of masculinity, but their findings were based on self-reported health, which may be confounded with personality and social status variables, and is of questionable validity (; ). For example, evidence suggests that men are less likely to admit to illness than women ()–an intrasexual analog would suggest that highly masculine men may be less likely to report illness than less masculine men.

Moreover, the proposal of a general, positive association between masculinity and good health is somewhat difficult to reconcile with the evidence regarding human immunity and testosterone. This evidence is mixed and often indicates a null or negative association between the two (see ; ). 

Researchers interested in good genes sexual selection in humans rely heavily on the animal literature for empirical support and theoretical inspiration. However, there is an increasingly complex and uncertain picture emerging from research into immunity in nonhuman species with a growing interest in viewing immunity as a compound trait, consisting of multiple, often unrelated (or even negatively correlated) subcomponents (; ; ; ; ). The nature of the relationship and the direction of causality between immune response and testosterone production is a subject of ongoing debate (; ) as is the issue of what types of evidence (i.e., negative, positive, or null relationships between health and trait expression) actually constitute support for good genes models of sexual ornamentation (). Consistent with this complexity, recent reviews from animal literature report that the evidence regarding testosterone and immunity is ambiguous and difficult to interpret (), varying considerably with the type of immune response measured () and with the species (or even the population) investigated (; ). At present, there is no clear evidence of a general, cross-species link between testosterone, genetically mediated immunity, phenotypic health and trait size, from which patterns among humans can straightforwardly be inferred.

DO WOMEN PREFER MASCULINITY?
In light of the equivocal support for a health-masculinity link, the plausibility of the immunocompetence hypothesis rests largely on the evidence regarding preferences. A straightforward prediction of the immunocompetence hypothesis is that masculinity should increase attractiveness. This prediction can be tested by assessing natural variation in masculinity among male faces and its association with rated attractiveness. A common alternative method is computer graphic morphing, in which facial photographs are manipulated to produce masculinized and feminized versions of a given face (). These images are presented to observers, often in forced-choice experiments, to examine preferences for masculinity.

To date, neither of these approaches has provided clear support for the prediction that masculinity is attractive to women (see  for meta-analytic review). While some correlational studies have documented small positive preferences for masculinity (; ; ; ), other similar studies have produced null or inconclusive results (; ; ; ; ; ). In addition, much of the correlational research (; ; , ) has been based on subjective ratings of masculinity, which may be attributed to faces on the basis of dimorphic nonshape cues such as color and hair growth, or possibly on the basis of attractiveness itself (; ; ; see  for discussion). Experimental data should provide more accurate insight into the direction of preferences (), but when tested using digital morphing techniques, preferences remain highly inconsistent between experiments, and if anything appear to favor facial femininity (; ; ). This failure to find preferences for masculinity is not attributable to the use of novel stimuli such as composite photographs—indeed, using more ecologically valid stimuli seems to reduce, rather than increase, reported preferences for masculinity (Scott and ). One serious concern is the reliance on two alternative forced-choice experiments with stimuli that vary in one dimension only. Such experiments produce nonrandom responses, but may force participants to discriminate between faces on the basis of traits that might otherwise be ignored, and cannot therefore be used to assess their importance (; ).

THE TRADE-OFF PROPOSAL: IMMUNOCOMPETENCE AT THE EXPENSE OF PATERNAL INVESTMENT?
To reconcile these findings with the immunocompetence hypothesis, it has been suggested that preferences reflect strategic pluralism, with females adjusting their mate preferences in accordance with their individual and environmental circumstances (, 2004; ; , 2008a, 2010; ; , 2010c). Strategic pluralism proposes that heritable quality may be traded off against exclusive investment; a proposal supported by evidence of an association between attractiveness and “riskiness” (i.e., probability of low investment in one’s partner) among humans (; ; ; ; ; ; ). Integrating this principle into immunocompetence perspectives has generated the proposal that masculinity preferences reflect a trade-off between heritable disease resistance (signaled by masculine face shape), and paternal investment (signaled by femininity). 

There are two ways by which this reciprocal association may manifest itself. In the first, men adjust their mating and paternal efforts facultatively, investing less when their masculine charm rewards mating effort handsomely (cf. ). This proposal runs into immediate difficulty as there is no clear preference for masculinity, as discussed above. To date, attempts to model a quality-investment trade-off in human mate choice (e.g., ) treat the sexual attractiveness of high-quality males as a premise. While such models can accommodate some “constraint” on preferences for high-quality men, this constraint is not anticipated in contexts of low investment, and is not predicted to actually reverse preferences (produce an overall preference for low-quality men). Indeed, the rationale for expecting that high-quality men offer less investment than low-quality men is precisely that they are sexually attractive: if they are not attractive, then it is no longer viable for them to follow a low paternal investment strategy. 

A second manifestation of the masculinity/investment association proposes a more obligatory link between the two, so that investing in masculine ornamentation has a pleiotropic effect on parental effort. Males advertise immunocompetence via masculinity, but advertise substandard paternal investment at the same time. Implicitly, it is this version of the trade-off proposal that is widely treated as capable of explaining facial preferences (, 2004; , 2008a, 2010; ; ; , 2010b). General preferences for femininity, for example, are proposed to be the result of the prioritizing paternal investment over genetic quality (; ; ; ).

Individual variation in preferences may also be explicable in these terms; a trade-off between indirect benefits and direct costs could explain, for example, why women have stronger preferences for masculinity when conception is likely (during the follicular phase of the menstrual cycle, and when they are of reproductive age), in the context of a short- rather than long-term relationship, and when they already have partners (see ; ; ; ; ; ; ; , or Jones 1998 for a review of positive findings; see ; ; ; ; ; ;  for failures to replicate). These shifts in preference are consistent with the prediction that masculine men should be more attractive in contexts in which the benefits of heritable immunocompetence are important and can be realized, and less attractive when paternal investment is a priority. Further support for this proposal is derived from evidence that women appear to have stronger preferences for masculinity in countries where national health is poorer (and hence, presumably, where immunocompetence is more important) (; ), after being primed with pathogen-relevant images () and when they report high levels of pathogen disgust ().

IS MASCULINITY ASSOCIATED WITH REDUCED DIRECT BENEFITS?
In order for the immunocompetence trade-off hypothesis to be tenable, masculinity must be associated with reduced parental investment, and consequently with reduced direct benefits in humans. In many species, endogenous and experimentally increased testosterone is linked to increased mating effort and a concomitant decrease in parental effort (). This pattern is also evident in humans, although most data is, understandably, correlational: testosterone is lower in fathers and men in committed relationships cross culturally (; ; ), while high testosterone is associated with more sexual partners (; ; ), troubled interpersonal relationships, infidelity, violence, and divorce (). Evidence that masculinity itself is associated with a mating/parenting trade-off is preliminary, but indicates that desire for, and history of, more short-term sexual partners, may be associated with rated facial masculinity (; , 2011).

The further assumption, however, that exclusive paternal investment straightforwardly implies net direct benefits for females, is substantially more difficult to justify. There is little reason to assume, a priori, that monogamous partnerships are universally equivalent to increased direct benefits. When male resource holding capability is unequal and linked to mating success, polygyny may pay off for females (see ; ; ). While women in some populations seem to suffer negative health and fertility consequences from polygamous marriages, this evidence is not straightforward or consistent, and even in relatively equal societies, wives in polygamous marriages may sometimes have equal or greater resource access than women in monogamous marriages (; ). Cross-cultural variability is also observed in the evidence regarding masculinity and resources: while participants from Western industrial populations tend to regard masculinity as a cue of poor parenting (; ; ), the Matsigenka of Peru appear to regard it as a cue of provisioning ability (). At present, therefore, there is little evidence for a universal pattern of association between direct benefits and exclusive investment, or between provisioning and facial morphology. 

DO WOMEN’S PREFERENCES SUPPORT THE TRADE-OFF PROPOSAL?
As noted, the evidence regarding variation in women’s preferences for masculinity is often described as providing support for the immunocompetence trade-off hypothesis of male facial morphology (e.g., ). Certainly, there is a good deal of evidence that is consistent with such a hypothesis; as described above, multiple authors have found that, in Western/postindustrial populations, women are more likely to select masculinized facial stimuli as attractive when they are fertile, and when considering short-term versus long-term relationships. What is less clear, however, is whether such findings warrant the stronger claim: that women preferentially mate with masculine men in short-term/high-fertility contexts, and that this is explicable in terms of heritable immunocompetence. 

There are reasons to be cautious about such a claim. First, the effects observed often fail to replicate: although early publications were largely supportive of the immunocompetence perspective (e.g., ; see ), the effects reported were small (see  for an illustration of the mean differences between stimuli preferred at high- and low-fertility phases of the menstrual cycle), and several more recent results have been negative (e.g., ; ; ; ; ; ; ; Vaughn 2010). 

Visual illustration of the size of menstrual cycle shifts in preferences documented in . Photos show mean masculinity preferred at high fertility (L) and low fertility (R).

Second, the evidence relating to context effects is drawn largely from populations in developed/industrial countries, who share similar (“Western”) culture and media, and may have greater cyclical variation in hormonal profile than other women, particularly those in natural fertility populations (; ). Few authors have tested preferences in less developed environments and/or societies with low exposure to Western culture, but among those who have, attempts to replicate menstrual cycle effects and relationship-context effects have been inconsistent (; ; also see ). 

Third, the context-dependent, preference-shift data themselves are often not consistent with the immunocompetence hypothesis: when only good genes benefits are offered (e.g., in short-term relationships, where paternal noninvestment is implied, particularly in the case of extra-pair copulations), the expectation is for unambiguous preferences for masculinity, as poor parenting (the major associated cost of indirect benefits) is irrelevant. In several studies often cited as supportive of the immunocompetence hypothesis, however, women do not appear to favor masculinity in any context, with a shift in preferences toward, but not beyond, average masculinity for short-term relationships (e.g., ; , ). There have been concerns that this pattern of preferences may reflect methodological issues in stimuli preparation, but these objections do not appear well founded (Scott and ). As such, it is hard to conclude that female choice is the selection pressure leading to the observed facial sexual dimorphism in humans.

Perhaps most significantly, when assessed using comprehensive, objective measures (rather than subjective ratings or a reliance on forced-choice experiments in which only one variable is manipulated), natural variation in masculinity appears to be unrelated to male attractiveness (; ; ), even among populations exposed to high pathogenic stress (). Tests for a curvilinear relationship have likewise found no association (), and there is no evidence to suggest that these null findings result from individual variation in preferences (). The proposal that masculinity is unrelated to attractiveness is consistent with results suggesting that testosterone and attractiveness are likewise not associated (; ; ). Together, these findings suggest that even if masculine facial morphology is a correlate of immunocompetence, females choose to use other cues to judge attractiveness (e.g., color, body build, posture, movement) when they are available.

This view is consistent with a model of mate choice in which females prioritize cues of current condition over cues of immunity. Due to the existence of pathogenic fluctuation and complexity, current condition may be a better predictor of future disease resistance than past immunity. If choosiness imposes a cost on females, they may therefore attend primarily to cues of current condition, potentially deriving little further benefit from simultaneously attending to cues of past immunity (). The emphasis on current condition (versus immunity) is expected to be greater when pathogen fluctuation is fast relative to host generation length, which, a priori, should occur more often in species with slow life histories (such as humans). Consistent with this theoretical expectation, attractive male traits (e.g., muscularity) are often cues of good condition, unattractive male traits (e.g., central adiposity, baldness) are cues of poor current health, and masculine facial morphology, which is unlikely to vary greatly with current condition post adolescence (due to being a stable trait), appears to be largely irrelevant to attractiveness. 

A counterargument to the claims of  is that reported variation in masculinity preferences in other, nonface traits such as voice pitch and body shape provide convergent evidence for the robustness of context effects. This interpretation is appealing as correlated masculine traits in humans are proposed to be, effectively, one signal of quality. While this is certainly a possibility, different dimorphic traits cannot straightforwardly be regarded as functionally or perceptually equivalent. Within a species, dimorphic traits can be intersexual cues of good genes, while others are primarily intrasexual signals and are not attractive (; ). Different masculine traits vary in their attractiveness; deep voices and tallness are usually attractive (; ), and beards and male-pattern hair loss are often considered unattractive ().

Finally, context effects are consistent with nonimmunocompetence-based explanations. With regard to menstrual cycle effects; for example, cyclical changes are observed in a number of different female reproductive hormones, and these changes influence a broad range of cognitive, emotional, and sensory processes (; ; ). Which of these processes, if any, are subject to direct selection, and which are epiphenomena of other processes, is currently far from clear. Many alternative hypotheses of fertility shifts have been proposed; one among them being the hypothesis that mid-cycle preferences for masculinity facilitate conception by orienting women toward fertile partners () or simply toward members of the opposite sex (). A further proposal is that menstrual shifts are an epiphenomenon of selection on the behavior of pregnant women (; ) as progesterone is elevated during both the luteal phase of the menstrual cycle and during pregnancy. Late-cycle preferences for femininity are proposed to reflect a greater orientation toward highly investing men among pregnant women (), although this is not the only possible explanation, as pregnant women are avoidant of threats in general (), and masculinity may be a cue of physical violence (see below for details). While there is currently limited empirical evidence regarding these hypotheses, their existence demonstrates that context effects alone do not constitute strong evidence for the immunocompetence hypothesis specifically.

IF MASCULINITY IS NOT PRIMARILY A SIGNAL OF IMMUNOCOMPETENCE, DOES IT MATTER AT ALL?
As patterns of facial masculinity preferences do not fit the immunocompetence hypothesis as well as is often assumed, and the importance of masculinity in attractiveness judgments may have been greatly overestimated (due to the methodologies employed in experimentation), attempts to explain the significance of masculinity variation primarily through female choice are weakened. An alternative (albeit extreme) possibility is that the variation has no significance; facial sexual dimorphism may act as a quick and useful signal of anatomical sex but beyond some discrimination threshold it may not carry any additional information at all. Essentially, the phenotype may simply drift at random, from one end of the male extreme to the other, under minimal selection and attended to by no one.

The problem with this interpretation is that masculinity variation may have some information value after all; in cultures around the world, facial masculinity is associated with perceptions of “prosocial orientation” (variously defined in different studies as social warmth, trustworthiness, and other related traits; e.g., ; ). One possibility is that facial masculinity, via an association with testosterone, is being used as a cue of competitive status-seeking behaviors, including direct physical aggression. Morphological masculinity appears to influence perceived dominance (; ; ), which, in turn, predicts future attainment of rank in certain environments (). Furthermore, humans can judge physical strength and fighting ability from faces alone (). The obvious interpretation is that masculinity is not primarily relevant to female choice, but is relevant to direct male–male competition. This alternative has been proposed in a number of articles (, 2009; ; ) and we believe that there is good reason to take it seriously.

MASCULINITY MAY BE A CUE OF CAPABILITY TO COMPETE INTRASEXUALLY
The evidence that masculinity is associated with aggressive/dominant behavior in men is at least as strong as the evidence for an analogous relationship between masculinity and health. Testosterone promotes male competitiveness and aggressive behavior, both in humans and other animals (see  for review), and high testosterone is associated with aggression (; ; ) and violent crime (; ; ). While situational variables appear to mediate the testosterone-aggression link, there nevertheless appears to be a reliable relationship between testosterone and probability of aggressive behavior in a given environment (, ). Testosterone administration increases self-reported aggression (Pope et al. 2000) and testosterone levels become elevated during exposure to contest situations, whether acute or chronic, direct, vicarious, or even anticipatory (; ; ; ). If facial masculinity is related to adult testosterone levels, therefore, it could potentially serve as a physical cue of aggressively competitive behavior. 

Masculine facial anatomy is more robust than feminine anatomy, which may reflect an ability to withstand direct competition rather than merely the propensity to engage in it (). This need not imply that masculinity is a reliable cue of “quality”, however, as testosterone levels may be responsive to quality-independent factors such as the frequency of aggression in the local population () and individual (developmental) exposure to conflict (; ). Masculinity may therefore reflect a strategic, rather than (entirely) quality-dependent reallocation of resources away from certain types of demand (e.g., maintaining health) and toward others (surviving violent conflict).

While it is difficult to demonstrate that masculinity is a “better” cue of aggression than of health, there are reasons to treat this as plausible. Convergent sources of evidence relating to spatial geography, phylogeny, and anatomy suggest that men’s morphology may have been subject to stronger intrasexual than intersexual selection () and may convey more information about competitiveness than about heritable viability as a result. This would not make humans an oddity, as honest signaling of dominance is observed in many species and may be more common than honest signals of health (). While participant’s attributions are not a decisive test of actual relationships (), we note that masculinized faces are judged to be dominant and aggressive in populations from a wide range of socio-ecologies (; ; ; ), and that the effects are stronger and more consistent than those regarding health or attractiveness (; ; ; see ). 

FEMALE RESPONSES TO MASCULINIZED STIMULI MAY REFLECT PREFERENCES FOR COMPETITIVE MATES
Women may not appear to attend greatly to masculinity when making attractiveness judgments of real faces in which other cues (such as color) are available, but responses to artificially masculinized stimuli are clearly patterned (within experiments, at least) and require explanation. One possibility is that the variation observed in the attractiveness of masculinity in these experimental contexts may reflect the costs and benefits associated with a mate’s potential success in intrasexual competition.

Observed responses to masculinized stimuli are broadly consistent with this hypothesis, and arguably more so than with an immunological one. An aggressiveness hypothesis can, for example, more readily accommodate the fact that women often prefer feminized to masculinized faces in experiments, even for short-term relationships. One reason for this is that aggressiveness—unlike health—could theoretically impose indirect costs upon mates. Aggressiveness has heritable components (; ; ) and may be positively or negatively predictive of intrasexual competitive success, depending on context (; ; ). When status is based on “prestige” or cooperation, rather than direct competition, aggressiveness is associated with poor outcomes so that mating with an aggressive male could produce less successful offspring. In addition to this, aggressive males may impose direct costs such as violence and disease risk that—unlike low parental investment—are pertinent to short-term matings (). These considerations make it theoretically plausible that women should sometimes be averse to cues of aggression, even for short-term relationships, and indeed preferences for less-dominant males have been observed in a number of low-investing species (; ).

Consideration of the costs and benefits associated with aggressiveness could also account for observed individual variation in preferences for masculinity such as relationship-context effects. As noted above, aggression may be directed toward one’s mate, but may also be predictive (either positively or negatively, depending on environment) of intrasexual competitive success, and hence of access to resources. Whether having an aggressive mate represents a net direct cost or benefit is therefore likely to be population specific, but in environments where it represents a net direct cost, aversion to masculinity should be stronger in long-term contexts. Evidence suggests that in many Western populations, aggressive men may indeed impose a net direct cost on their partners (; ; ), and this could explain why Western women are particularly averse to masculinized stimuli when thinking about long-term relationships. In populations where aggressiveness is a net direct benefit, however, this pattern may be reversed, which may explain why relationship-context effects are inconsistent across cultures (; ).

A similar reasoning may also be applied to preference shifts observed across menstrual-cycle stages. In populations where aggressive males confer net indirect benefits, these benefits are most likely to be realized during the fertile stage of a woman’s cycle; at other times, the cost-benefit ratio of mating with an aggressive male will be higher, making them less attractive. Consistent with this suggestion, we note that in Western populations, preferences for behavioral cues of aggressiveness and for the odor of self-rated dominant men have been observed to increase both during ovulation and in short-term mating contexts (, 2007; ), whereas preferences for apparent health in faces appear to increase during the luteal phase of the menstrual cycle (). Note that this argument does not necessarily imply that aggressive mates will actually be preferred when a woman is fertile; the indirect benefits offered may still not be substantial enough to overcome the costs, even if they do a better job of mitigating them.

Finally, an aggressiveness hypothesis may also account for intergroup variation in preferences. In a cross-cultural comparison of 30 countries,  found that average national masculinity preferences were predicted by an index of national health, in line with  prediction that masculinity, as a cue of heritable good health, will be more valued in regions where health is relatively poor. A reanalysis of this data (), however, showed that income inequality–proposed by some authors () to predict the strength of male–male competition–was an excellent predictor of masculinity preferences and significantly better than national health. Subsequent analyses focusing on data from USA suggested that health may also play a role in predicting intergroup variation in preferences (), and that, within a Western culture, priming pathogen-related cues increases preferences for masculinity (), but the equivocal nature of the findings mean that at present it remains difficult to exclude any particular interpretation.

CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE DIRECTIONS
There is nothing fundamentally wrong with the immunocompetence hypothesis as a logical argument, either in its original manifestation or in the form of the trade-off proposal. However, its popularity may not be proportionate to the strength of the supportive evidence. At present, there is little direct evidence of a link between facial masculinity and immunocompetence in humans, and the evidence from the animal literature regarding general relationships between dimorphism, testosterone, and disease is complex and difficult to interpret. In the absence of direct support for the operation of immunocompetence signaling in humans, preference studies are a potential source of insight into the functional significance of masculine morphology, but these provide limited evidence of the robust effects that would be expected if masculinity were an important cue of immunocompetence. Crucially, women do not appear to base facial attractiveness judgments on masculinity as much as previously thought, and may ignore it altogether. 

These considerations cast doubt on the claim that facial masculinity is an important intersexual signal. While it is difficult to definitively exclude the possibility that preferences for health are driving observed preferences for artificially masculinized stimuli, most patterns of results are compatible with multiple explanatory frameworks. However, reverse engineering the function of preferences is not straightforward, and it is not clear that the immunocompetence hypothesis is superior to other alternatives based on current evidence. A plausible alternative hypothesis is that women’s responses to masculinized stimuli may reflect preferences for intrasexual competitiveness, and this alternative explanation, although far from established, warrants greater research attention than it currently receives. Designing experiments that aim to discriminate between competing hypotheses should be a goal of future work, although not an easily attained one.

Despite the lack of evidence supporting an immunocompetence account of facial masculinity, it is quite possible that this could prove to be a useful explanation of observed preferences for other sexually dimorphic traits in humans, such as voice pitch, color cues, and body size. As in the facial attractiveness literature, however, care should be taken not to accept the immunocompetence hypothesis as supported without due evidence and consideration of viable alternatives.

More generally, the findings described above highlight the importance of ensuring adequate cross-cultural and ecological validity in attractiveness research (). Evolutionary approaches to attractiveness have, to date, devoted a great deal of attention to explaining variation in responses to theoretically driven experiments in which manipulated stimuli are judged. This approach is commendable, but there is a relative lack of data addressing the importance of given traits in real mate choice or even in attractiveness judgments of naturally varying stimuli. In counterpoint, a complementary approach is to identify traits that contribute to attractiveness by post hoc analysis of the traits that contribute to attractiveness ratings in large face sets (; ). Currently, these approaches do not always converge on similar conclusions about the traits that are actually important in attractiveness judgments, which must raise some concerns. The use of more ecologically valid stimuli, investigations of real mate choice (or, perhaps more practically, “mate choice” constrained by the researchers, such as in “speed dating” studies), and cross-cultural evidence from outside of Western/postindustrial populations would strengthen claims in this area considerably.

Funding
IMLS is supported by an ESRC postdoctoral fellowship.

Supplementary Material
Lay Summary
