INTRODUCTION
Direct fitness is defined as the number of adult offspring left by an individual in the next generation (). Premature loss of offspring thus limits parents’ reproductive success and creates costs in terms of investment already made in progeny (). There is an extensive body of literature on the factors impacting female reproduction, specifically offspring survival, in mammals (, ; ) both under captive (e.g., ; ) and natural conditions (e.g., rodents: ; carnivores: ; ; ; , ; ungulates: ; primates: ). However, we still know little of the influence of the interaction of social and ecological factors on offspring loss. Furthermore, most studies focused solely on a specific offspring stage, either pre- or postnatal, although the determinants of offspring death may vary between these stages. Events occurring in the prenatal stage, such as the causes of miscarriages, have either not been reported or little investigated under natural conditions, typically due to the difficulty of monitoring spontaneous abortions (but see ; ). More comprehensive studies are therefore needed to better understand the interactions between social and ecological factors causing offspring loss in wild female mammals.

From the data available, it is clear that a number of parameters can impact offspring survival. In addition to maternal, paternal, or offspring properties (e.g., female parity: ; female age: ; female dominance rank: ; offspring genetic abnormalities: ; reviewed in ) especially influencing fetal loss in the first trimester of pregnancies, both ecological and social variables have been shown to influence offspring (i.e., fetus and infant) survival. One of the most important is climate, as its components such as rainfall and temperature have great impact on plant productivity (e.g., ) and thus food availability (). Because female fecundity as well as offspring survival depend highly on food availability, climatic variables can modify female reproductive success (e.g., ungulates: ; carnivores: ; bats: ; primates: ; ; ). Additionally, in gregarious species, social factors act through the influence of other group members and rival groups. Female competition both within and between groups is an important selective force on females (e.g., rodents: ; carnivores: ; primates: ) although only few studies have addressed the reproductive consequences of between-group competition. However, females and their offspring also benefit from living with conspecifics, for example, through enhanced allomaternal care and joint resource defense against other groups, as well as protection against predators and infanticide; hence, female social bonds and support can be important determinants of female reproductive success (reviewed for mammals:  and primates: ).

Additionally, males can have a positive effect on offspring survival by providing paternal care (e.g., some carnivores:  and primates: ; ; ; ). Males are, however, also well known to cause offspring death, particularly in species in which infanticide is a sexually selected male strategy (). They may even harm offspring before birth by increasing stress in pregnant females, particularly when newly immigrating males takeover the alpha position (e.g., equids: ; rodents: ; primates: ; ).

Little is known to date about the relative importance of interaction between the aforementioned ecological and social factors in impairing offspring survival although it is clear that several of these potentially interact with each other, for example, the effects of food availability and group size (). Only 2 studies carried out on baboons have so far used multivariate analysis to investigate the determinants of offspring survival (; ). Both found that offspring loss is influenced by both ecological conditions and social factors. However, these studies as others on the determinants of survival usually focus on a single offspring stage (either pre- or postnatal, e.g., ; ; ; ; ).

The aim of our study was, therefore, to investigate simultaneously the combined effect of social and ecological factors, using modern statistical tools, on pre- and postnatal offspring survival in a wild population of crested macaques (Macaca nigra), living on the island of Sulawesi. In this species, miscarriages have been observed in the wild, and infant mortality reaches 20% (), although predation pressure is thought to be low due to the absence of large felids on Sulawesi ().

Crested macaques are categorized as one of the most socially tolerant species within the macaque genus, in which females form strong social bonds in extended social networks (). We thus expect all offspring to benefit from an increased number of adult female group members due to improved chances of successful resource access and monopolization through defense against adjacent groups. In addition, female social rank seems to be of little importance in females of this species with low-intensity conflicts and moderate dominance asymmetry (). Hence, we predict maternal rank to have relatively little effect on offspring survival probability. At the same time, intergroup encounters should be stressful for females, given that, in wild crested macaques, intergroup encounters in which females are involved are often aggressive () and injuries inflected to females are observed on a regular basis. In fact, between-group aggression is predicted to be high in this species (; ). We thus predict spontaneous abortion to be more likely with an increasing rate of stress through more frequent intergroup encounters. Finally, the high turnover rate by immigrants males may lead to frequent instability in the adult male dominance hierarchy (). Given that these instabilities may lead to increased tension within the group, we expect abortion to be more likely with an increasing rate of male immigration and changes in the male hierarchy. Dependent infants, on the other hand, should suffer specifically from takeovers of the alpha-male position by newly immigrating males given the potential risk of infanticide under these circumstances. We test our predictions with a Cox proportional hazards model in 3 groups over a study period of a total of 152 group months.

METHODS
Study site and subjects
Data were collected within the Macaca Nigra Project on 3 groups of wild crested macaques (R1, R2, and PB) living in the Tangkoko-Duasudara Reserve in Sulawesi, Indonesia (1°31′00.1″N, 125°10′59.9″E). This reserve, composed of primary and secondary lowland rainforest, covers an area of 8867 ha and ranges from sea level to 1350 m (; ; ). Temperatures are relatively constant throughout the year, with a monthly mean minimum and maximum of 23 and 28 °C, respectively. Annual rainfall ranged between 1410 and 2352mm during the study period (mean of 1940mm per year).

The study groups were fully habituated to human observers (), and adults and infants were individually recognized. Group sizes varied from 50 to 80 individuals and included 4–11 adult males and 13–25 adult females (Supplementary Table S1).

Female crested macaques in this population give birth year round, but more than 80% of births occur within 5 consecutive months, namely January to May and up to 59.3% within 3 consecutive months, namely March to May (). As is the case in other macaques (e.g., ), infant weaning started at 5 months of age (average of first nipple deterrence observation at 154.57 days of age, behavior described in ) and was usually completed when the infant was approximately 1-year old.

Data collection
Observations on groups R1 and R2 took place from March 2006 to December 2010 and for group PB from January 2008 to December 2010. Each of the 3 groups was followed at least once a week but usually several times per week from dawn to dusk (3894 total group observation days across the 3 groups, i.e., 75.5% days of the whole observation period). We recorded migrations, births, and disappearance/death of individuals, as well as the occurrence and size of female sex skin swellings (a sign of monthly ovarian activity; ) that lasts on average 19.4 days () and encounters between groups, using all-occurrence sampling (). In addition, outcome of dyadic aggressive interactions and displacements was recorded, during focal sampling of adult males and females (data extracted from ; , ; ) and ad libitum sampling (), to determine dominance rank through Elo rating, a method robust to frequent hierarchy changes (). Females were considered adult after conceiving their first living infant and males were considered adults after their scrota descended and their canines erupted.

We collected data on 99 fetuses and 78 infants (126 offspring altogether from 60 females). Onset of pregnancy was determined through the cessation of regular swelling cycles (i.e., a female not displaying her monthly sexual swellings for more than 2 consecutive months), as sexual swellings in this species are a reliable signal of ovulation () and there is no postconception swellings in this species (), confirmed by subsequent delivery or miscarriage. Miscarriages were detected through the observation of massive hemorrhaging from the vagina (sometimes with a protuberant umbilical cord) followed by the resumption of sexual activity and sex skin swelling (after a mean of 26.5 days ± 20.2, N = 17). Menses is difficult to detect in wild adult female crested macaques. To ensure that vaginal bleeding truly derived from fetal loss and not from menses, we only counted those cases in which the female had not displayed any swelling during the previous 2 months, thus suggesting that she was pregnant. This means that we may have missed some early miscarriages occurring during the first 2 months of the pregnancy. Pregnancy with life birth in this species last on average 170 days () and we observed in this population a range of pregnancies lasting from 171 to 185 days.

Infants were observed during their earliest life phase, that is, during the period in which infant mortality is highest in mammals (). In macaques and other cercopithecine primates, this period covers the first year of life (e.g., ). Accordingly, we recorded disappearances and deaths (from here on called “deaths” only) for individuals under the age of 1 year.

Data analysis
We used fetal and infant survival as a binary response variable in 2 separate models. The period of fetal survival was considered from conception (the last day of sexual swelling of the last estrous cycle) to birth and the period of infant survival was considered as the date of birth until 1 year of age. Fetuses were scored as alive or dead for each of up to two 90-day intervals from the defined day of conception to miscarriage or birth and for infants up to four 90-day intervals from birth to death or 1 year of age (496 intervals in total) in order to incorporate time-dependent variables into the model (). Infants for which the day of conception was known (N = 71) occurred twice in the analyses: once as fetus and once as infant. Each quantitative variable was calculated on a daily basis and we used the mean over each 90-day intervals per individual. We considered the following predictor variables as potentially influencing fetal and/or infant survival:


Mean rainfall (with an offset of 3 months) as an approximation of environment seasonality. It is well known that there is a link between phenology and water availability in seasonal tropical forests (). Accordingly, increased rainfall leads to increased availability of fruits in the study area () and fruits are the major food source of crested macaques in Tangkoko (). We shifted actual rainfall values back by 3 months, given that female crested macaques respond reproductively to environmental changes with a time lag of 3 months (Supplementary Figure S2).


Number of adult females in the group as a measure of female–female within-group competition for resources () on one hand and of competitive ability during between-group competition on the other.


Maternal dominance rank as a measure of individual competitive ability using Elo ratings based on aggressive dyadic interactions as well as displacements (; ). For each day, we standardized the Elo ratings of all adult females in each group (range of 0–1, 1 being the highest). Maternal rank is assumed to be transferred to the infant in macaques ().


Male hierarchy instability as a measure of increased within-group aggression and stress. Male hierarchical instability was calculated using the weighted hierarchy instability index (cf. ) based on all the adult males’ daily dominance rank assessed through Elo rating (as described above).


Number of male immigration events as another measure of increased within-group aggression was scored as a binary measure “0” or “1” to balance the data set containing mainly no occurrence.


Alpha-male takeovers by a newly immigrated male (N = 13 events) as yet another measure of increased within-group aggression and as a measure of the risk of infanticide. We measured the proportion of days a new alpha-male was present per interval until the fetus was born or the infant reached 6 months old, as some mother start cycling again by then.


Intergroup encounter daily rate (i.e., 2 groups in visual range, N = 1126 events) as a measure of conflict resulting of between-group competition.

We furthermore controlled for fetus and infant age and infant sex. Miscarried fetus sexes were unknown.

We incorporated interactions into both models. An interaction between 2 or more predictor variables indicates that the effect on the response of one of these predictor variables is conditional on the state or value of the other predictor variable and not simply additive (). We added a 3-way interaction between rainfall (our measure of environmental seasonality), number of adult females in the group, and maternal dominance rank, as well as all lower order interactions between these particular variables to our model, because these variables are known to have an interdependent effect on resource access and thus offspring survival (; ; ). The number of individuals within a group influences individual resource access through the degree of within-group competition as well as success of between-group resource defense (). Furthermore, fruits, being usually seasonal and patchily distributed, increase within-group contest competition, which again increases with the number of competitors. Finally, with increasing degree of within-group competition, high-ranking females get an advantage over low-ranking females in regard to resource access and reproduction. In addition, we incorporated 3 nested random factors into the model to control for the multiple source of random error: group identity, mother identity, and offspring identity.

Statistical analysis
We used a Cox proportional hazards model () to test the influence of the predictor variables on fetal and infant survival, respectively. The Cox model is a nonparametric survival analysis () that allows the influence of several parameters to be estimated simultaneously and over time on the risk of death (i.e., the hazard rate), whereas no assumption is made concerning the shape of the hazard function. In our Cox model, the regression coefficients represent the log change in the hazard function per unit increase of the predictor variable. In other words, a negative hazard rate (β) indicates increased survival chances with increasing value of the predictor variable (). The model was fitted in R (version 2.14.0, ) using a mixed effects model variant of the Cox model, namely the function “coxme” (package “coxme,” ) in order to include the 3 nested random factors. We checked each predictor for its distribution; to obtain approximately symmetrical distributions, we square-rooted age and intergroup encounter rate and double square-rooted male hierarchy stability. Subsequently, all quantitative predictor variables were z-transformed to a mean of 0 and a standard deviation of 1. We determine the statistical significance of the 2 full models by comparing their fit with the respective null model (containing only the random and control factors) with a log-likelihood ratio test. The variance inflation factors derived from a linear model containing all the predictors except the random effects (function “vif” of the R package “car,” ; ) revealed that collinearity was not an issue for both models (largest variance inflation factor is 2.1). The specific time interval of 90 days for a given offspring (i.e., fetus and infants) is the unit of analysis. When a fetus was aborted or an infant died, the time interval containing this event was included in the analysis. Variables may be fixed over time (e.g., infant sex) or time dependent (e.g., rainfall) (). All the terms included in the models are specified in  and , except for the 3 nested random factors.

Cox mixed model results for fetus survival (N = 184)

Predictor	β	
z
	
P value	
Rainfall	−0.504	
	
	
Number of adult females	−1.751	
	
	
Maternal dominance rank	0.336	
	
	
Male immigration	0.100	0.23	0.820	
Male hierarchy stability	−0.853	−1.43	0.150	
Male takeover	−0.498	−0.64	0.520	

Intergroup encounter rate
	−1.509
	−3.09	
0.002
	
Fetal age	−0.027	−0.07	0.940	
Rainfall × maternal dominance rank	1.009	
	
	
Number of adult females × maternal dominance rank	1.055	
	
	
Number of adult females × rainfall	−0.728	
	
	

Rainfall × number of adult females × maternal dominance rank
	1.036	2.36	
0.018
	
Significant effects are highlighted in boldface. β is the hazard rate coefficient; a positive value indicates an increased risk of dying with increasing value of the predictor. z and P values not shown are uninformative because the respective term is involved in a higher order interaction.

Cox final reduced mixed model results for infant survival (N = 260)

Predictor	β	
z
	
P value	
Rainfall	−0.319	
	
	
Number of adult females	0.460	
	
	
Maternal dominance rank	−0.457	−1.35	0.180	
Male immigration	−0.683	−1.58	0.110	
Male hierarchy stability	0.092	0.23	0.820	

Male takeover
	
2.928
	3.22	
0.001
	
Intergroup encounter rate	−0.031	−0.07	0.950	
Infant age	−0.417	−1.18	0.240	
Infant gender	−0.251	−0.39	0.700	
Mother parity	−0.276	−0.83	0.410	

Number of adult females × rainfall
	0.697	2.00	
0.045
	
Significant effects are highlighted in boldface. β is the hazard rate coefficient; a positive value indicates an increased risk of dying with increasing value of the predictor. z and P values not shown are uninformative because the respective term is involved in a higher order interaction.

RESULTS
General results
Overall, during the study, 18% of the 99 conceptions resulted in abortions and 17 of the 78 infants (22%) disappeared in their first year of life. We found the body of 8 of these 17 infants. All but one of these infant bodies showed large puncture wounds (Supplementary Table S3).

Models
Fetal survival
Overall, the model revealed that the set of predictor variables used had a clear influence on the probability of fetal survival (integrated log-likelihood ratio test comparing the fit of the full model with the fit of a null model containing only the random effects; χ2 = 24.32, degrees of freedom [df] = 11, P = 0.01). The model results indicate that the rate at which a group encountered a neighboring group had the strongest effect on fetal survival (): the more frequent intergroup encounters were, the more likely those fetuses survived. In addition, the 3-way interaction between rainfall, number of adult females in the group, and maternal dominance rank had a significant impact on fetal survival (). In general, fetuses were more likely to survive with an increase in rainfall and the greater the number of females present in the group (–). There were, however, differences between female rank classes in terms of when and to what extent these positive effects set in. Fetuses of high-ranking females benefitted most and constantly from an increase in rainfall compared with fetuses of middle- and low-ranking females. Fetuses of middle- and low-ranking females, in contrast, only benefitted from an increase in the number of group females when rainfall was low to moderate. When both female number and rainfall were high, fetuses of high-ranking females were most likely and those of low-ranking females least likely to survive. Alpha-male takeover rate, occurrence of male immigration, male hierarchy stability, and fetal age did not have any significant impact on fetal survival ().

Effect of rainfall and number of group adult females on the survival likelihood of fetuses of high-ranking (a), middle-ranking (b), and low-ranking (c) mothers. The continuous variable dominance rank was divided into 3 categories (high, middle, and low) to enable plotting. The plane depicts values predicted by the fetus Cox mixed model with each grid representing the mean value per square of the predicted mixed model. Dots represent mean empirical survival rates value per square.

Infant survival
The model revealed that, overall, the full set of predictor variables used did not explain the variation in infant survival (integrated log-likelihood ratio test comparing the fit of the full model with the fit of a null model containing only the random effects; χ2 = 20.49, df = 14, P = 0.11). However, because the 3-way interaction between rainfall, number of adult females in group, and maternal dominance rank did not reveal significance (β = 0.06, z = 0.19, P = 0.85) and two of the constituent 2-way interactions were also not significant (maternal dominance rank × rainfall: β = −0.11, z = −0.31, P = 0.75; maternal dominance rank × number of females in group: β = −0.21, z = −0.69, P = 0.49; determined from a model not comprising the 3-way interaction), we excluded these interactions from the full model. Although there is a risk of multiple testing (), exclusion was conducted successively (however, we did not use stepwise deletion) to ensure that none of the potentially significant interactions remained undetected.

The results of the final reduced model showed that all single parameters and the remaining significant 2-way interaction (number of females × rainfall) explained the variation in infant survival (integrated log-likelihood ratio test: χ2 = 21.83, df = 11, P = 0.02). According to this model, infant survival probability was most strongly affected by takeover of the alpha-male position (). Such a takeover almost tripled the probability of infants dying (β = 2.9). Interestingly, instability in the male hierarchy per se did not have such an effect nor did the immigration of males into a group. Rainfall and the number of adult females per group also significantly influenced the probability of infant survival (); infants were more likely to survive with increasing rainfall and the greater the number of females in the group (). From a certain degree of rainfall and number of females onward, however, the positive effect of each of these variables was weakened, as in the fetus model. Infant age and infant sex did not have any significant effect on survival probability.

Effect of rainfall and number of group adult females on the likelihood of infant survival. The plane depicts values predicted by the infant Cox mixed model with each grid representing the mean value per square of the predicted mixed model. Dots represent mean empirical survival rates per square.

DISCUSSION
Our results strongly indicate that an interplay of social and environmental factors significantly influenced fetal and infant loss in wild crested macaques. Our results also showed that the determinants of survival may differ between offspring stages. In both models, a social variable best explained variation in survival, but the precise variable differed between fetuses and infants. Similarly, in both models, the interaction between an ecological and a social factor exerted a significant effect on offspring survival, but again, our analyses revealed differences in the details of survival determinants between different offspring stages. Our results thus stress the importance of investigations covering more than a single offspring stage.

For both offspring stages, a social variable best explained variation in survival. Fetuses had a greater survival chance the more often their group was involved in intergroup encounters, whereas infants had a reduced survival chance after a new male had taken over the alpha-male position. Our finding that fetuses are more likely to survive the more often their group is involved in intergroup encounters is surprising to us. We had expected the opposite to be the case because aggressive intergroup encounters may increase female stress levels () and thus may cause pregnancy failures (reviewed in ). In addition, between-group aggressions have been predicted to be important in crested macaques for female social interactions (; ), as between-group competition may have an impact on resource access, hence on female dominance interaction and reproduction (). Nevertheless, our data indicate that intergroup encounters do not impair but foster female pregnancies, a finding that is difficult to explain through direct advantages. One possible explanation may be that the rate with which a group comes into conflict with neighboring groups correlates with the quality of this group’s home range. It has, for example, been shown for Japanese macaques that in areas with food of higher quality, intergroup encounters occur more often than in areas with food of lower quality (). Similarly, in our study population, multiple groups compete over fruit trees and the frequency of aggression during intergroup encounters increases when fruit becomes scarce and defensible (). Improved fetal survival may thus simply reflect preferential access to food by these groups during food shortages. Future studies might therefore incorporate the influence of winning or losing intergroup encounter and test the prediction that winning an intergroup encounter increases fetal survival.

The assumption that between-group competition and environmental seasonality play a role in fetal survival in our study population is also supported by our finding that an increase in both the number of group adult females and rainfall in principle improved fetal survival probability. Groups with more adult females are better able to defend resources against other groups (). Rainfall, at the same time, may lead to an increase in fruit availability in the study area () and as such to an increase in the most important food source of crested macaques (). As a consequence, pregnant females can better cope with the energetic costs of pregnancy (). Our findings thus suggest that in terms of successful pregnancy, improved access to food outweighs the costs of stress received during intergroup encounters in crested macaques. Interestingly, there seems to be a limit to which this is the case. Our model shows that from a certain group size and degree of rainfall (i.e., environmental seasonality) onward, the positive effect is diminished in the fetuses of middle-ranking and even more so in those of low-ranking females. Fruits, particularly when occurring clumped in large trees (as is the case in Tangkoko, ), are highly defendable food sources that increase within-group contest competition (). Within-group contests also increase with the number of females competing for clumped food (). Our results thus suggest that under certain conditions (patchily distributed food and many competitors), the costs of within-group competition override the positive effect of group resource defense for middle-ranking and lower ranking females. This may explain why dominance hierarchies remain in female crested macaques () although the species is relatively less despotic than other macaque species (; ; ; ). When food is less clumped, on the contrary, competition between females of the same groups seems to be less detrimental and/or balanced by the positive effect of joint resource monopolization. The reason for this is most likely that females feed more on dispersed and less defendable food sources during such periods () and thus engage in fewer direct contests.

Based on the reduced model, between-group competition and seasonality also seem to influence infant survival likelihood in our study population. As in fetuses, infants in general benefit from an increase in rainfall and in the number of adult females in the group, but their survival likelihood then decreases when both parameters simultaneously increase beyond a certain point. However, in contrast to fetuses, there is no rank-specific difference, suggesting that all infants suffer similarly from high levels of within-group competition. Why the infants of high-ranking females (in contrast to their pregnant mothers) should suffer equally from within-group contest remains unclear. Most likely, the infants of high-ranking females are not yet able to successfully deploy their status (compare ) during food competition. Macaque infants, as in several other Old World monkeys, do not hold a position within a dominance hierarchy during their first months of life and depend on support from others during agonistic encounters (; ).

Environmental seasonality and female group size were nevertheless not the most important determinants of infant survival in our study population. More important was whether or not the alpha-male position was taken over by a recent immigrant after the infant had been sired. In cases where a newly immigrating adult male reached alpha-rank position after an infant had been conceived, infants were 3 times more likely to die. We do not have direct evidence of these males having killed the respective infants—although males have been observed to attack infants—but the resemblance to cases of infanticide conducted as a male reproductive strategy is striking (e.g., ; ; ; ). In many of the cases in which we were able to retrieve the body, these exhibited deep punctures in the head and thorax consistent with having been inflicted by adult male canines, as it has been observed in other macaque species (cf. ; ; ). Because there are no large felids on the island of Sulawesi, we feel justified in assuming these wounds stem from male bites. Interestingly, general immigration by males and instability in the dominance hierarchy did not have a significant effect on infant survival probability. This suggests that infants are not more likely to die as a byproduct of increased aggression between males in general (as suggested, e.g., in ) but that infant death is specifically related to the arrival of a new alpha-male. It may well be that infanticide is a male reproductive strategy in crested macaques, given that dominant males appear to be able to monopolize access to females during the period of likely conception () and that new alpha-males in the vast majority of cases originate from other groups and are thus very unlikely to have fathered the infant killed (13 out of 14 takeovers during our study period).

Interestingly, several parameters previously found to impact fetal and infant survival in several species did not show any effect on offspring survival in our study. Fetal age usually has an effect on survival probability with younger fetuses (e.g., ) being more likely to die. Given that in humans the majority of miscarriages occur in the first trimester of pregnancy (e.g., ), we may have missed such an age effect because we were only able to detect miscarriages from the second trimester onward. The majority of early miscarriages, however, results from genetic aberrations (), which were not the focus of our study.

We also did not find any significant effect of infant age or sex or maternal parity on infant survival probability although all three have previously been reported in mammals (e.g., parity: infant mortality is higher for primiparous females, ; infant age: younger infants die more than older infants, ; infant sex: higher mortality among male than female infants, ). The reason for our result is possibly that in our study population, infants seem to die mainly from infanticide and that males perform infanticide opportunistically, that is, without regard to infant sex or age (as long as the infant is still dependent) or the mother’s parity. Furthermore, reports of sex differences in infant mortality are inconsistent for primates () and sex-dependent mortality seems not to apply to macaques during the first year of life (). Similarly, the impact of parity on infant survival seems to be insignificant for most primates (; ; but see ). Other more important variables (such as the number of adult females, rainfall, and alpha-male takeover) may thus have overridden any such effect in our statistical analysis. In addition, these variables may not play a role at such an early stage; thus, future studies should include older offspring stage too.

In summary, our study suggests that a combination of ecological constraints and social variables, in our case environmental seasonality, female within-group competition for food sources, between-group resource defense and male reproductive strategies, and their interactions, have an impact on offspring survival in crested macaques. It therefore reveals the direct link between fitness costs and benefits of sociality in regard to within- and between-group competition. We further show that the determinants of direct fitness have to be measured at both pre- and postnatal levels because they cannot necessarily be extrapolated from one to the other. Future studies adopting a similar approach would further elucidate the complex interplay of social and environmental determinants of direct fitness in gregarious mammals.

SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIAL
Supplementary material can be found at http://www.beheco.oxfordjournals.org/


FUNDING
This work was supported by the German Research Council (EN719/1,2 to A.E., WI1808/3-1 to A.W.), the Federal Ministry for Economic Cooperation and Development (EN719/1 to A.E.), the German Academic Exchange Service (DAAD), the Leakey Foundation, Primate Conservation Inc., and the International Primatological Society.

Supplementary Material
Supplementary Data
We are grateful to the Indonesian State Ministry of Research and Technology (RISTEK), the Directorate General of Forest Protection and Nature Conservation (PHKA), and the Department for the Conservation of Natural Resources (BKSDA), North Sulawesi, for permission to conduct research on the crested macaques in the Tangkoko-Batuangus Nature Reserve. Furthermore, we thank Dr J. Pamungkas from the Primate Research Centre for their support in Indonesia and the German Primate Centre and Max-Planck Institute for Evolutionary Anthropology for their support in Germany. In addition, we warmly thank R. Mundry for his help with the statistic analysis and A. Kazem for editing the manuscript. We want to thank the 2 anonymous reviewers and the editor for their constructive help to improve the manuscript. Finally, we also thank J.-B. Pfeifer for logistical support in Indonesia; C. Girard-Buttoz, J. Head, J. Duboscq, and A. Acerbi for providing useful comments on an earlier draft; and all members of the Macaca Nigra Project for their support in data collection.

