Introduction
Since its introduction in the mid-1930s, the Stroop task has become a canonical paradigm of
executive control and cognitive conflict (see MacLeod, , for a review). The traditional task consists of a color word printed in
colored ink that either matches the color word (e.g. “red” printed in red ink: a congruent
condition), or mismatches the color word (e.g. “red” printed in blue: an incongruent
condition). When participants are asked to ignore the written word and name the ink color,
reaction times (RTs) are reliably slower in incongruent conditions than in congruent or
neutral conditions. Because reading is such a highly practiced process, an incongruent
condition creates conflict between the word and the color, requiring increased cognitive
control to resolve the conflict, and resulting in longer naming latencies for incongruent
conditions.1

The Stroop task indexes cognitive control abilities and language skills, both of which are
affected by bilingualism. We first provide an overview of three hypotheses regarding
bilingual cognitive control and lexical access speed, and discuss how these factors might
influence Stroop performance in bilinguals. We then introduce a stimulus onset asynchrony
(SOA) manipulation as a method of separating these factors.

The bilingual cognitive advantage hypothesis
One phenomenon in the bilingualism literature is that bilinguals tend to outperform
monolinguals on the Stroop task, showing smaller interference effects than their
monolingual counterparts (e.g. Bialystok, ;
Bialystok, Craik &amp; Luk, ). This
bilingual cognitive advantage also extends more generally to non-linguistic
executive control such as the Simon task (Bialystok et al., ; Bialystok, Craik, Klein &amp; Viswanathan, ), anti-saccade tasks (e.g. Bialystok &amp;
Viswanathan, ), the dimensional card sort
task (Bialystok &amp; Martin, ), and the
attentional network and flanker tasks (Costa, Hernández, Costa-Faidella &amp;
Sebastián-Gallés, ; Costa, Hernández
&amp; Sebastián-Gallés. ). The bilingual
cognitive advantage hypothesis stems from the theory of non-selective access to an
integrated bilingual lexicon. This proposes that both languages of bilinguals are
activated in parallel, even in completely monolingual contexts, such that bilinguals
cannot completely “turn off” one language (e.g., Martin, Dering, Thomas &amp; Thierry,
; Midgley, Holcomb, van Heuven &amp;
Grainger, ; van Heuven, Dijkstra &amp;
Grainger, ; van Heuven, Schriefers, Dijkstra
&amp; Hagoort, ). Non-selective access
necessitates a highly effective mechanism of control over the non-relevant language to
avoid cross-language comprehension or production errors. This constant exertion of control
over languages leads to an overall enhancement of executive control processes (Bialystok,
), resulting in better performance (i.e.
less interference) for bilinguals than monolinguals on the Stroop and other conflict
tasks. Importantly, as the bilingual advantage extends to non-language control tasks, the
advantage is not purely language-based, but benefits executive processing more
generally.

The bilingual L1 lexical disadvantage hypothesis
In contrast to the advantage exhibited on control tasks, a bilingual
disadvantage is reported in lexical access tasks such as picture naming (Gollan,
Montoya, Fennema-Notestine &amp; Morris, ; Kaushanskaya &amp; Marian, ), lexical decision (Ransdell &amp; Fischler, ) and lexical retrieval or verbal fluency (Bialystok et al.,
), where bilinguals’ performance is poorer
than monolinguals’, even when bilinguals perform in their native language. This
disadvantage can also be attributed to non-selective access to an integrated bilingual
lexicon (Bialystok, ; Bialystok et al. ): the presence of two (or more) lexicons
activated in parallel results in competition and interactions between potential lexical
candidates, creating delays in lexical access and a performance disadvantage compared to
monolinguals (e.g. van Heuven et al., ).

One alternative theory of the bilingual disadvantage is the reduced frequency
hypothesis (Pyers, Gollan &amp; Emmorey, ), also referred to as the weaker links hypothesis (Gollan et al.,
), which attributes the disadvantage in
language production to the frequency of language use. This theory suggests that compared
to monolinguals, bilinguals use both languages less often, including their first language
(L1). This reduced frequency of use leads to weaker ties between words and concepts
(Gollan &amp; Acenas, ; Gollan, Montoya,
Cera &amp; Sandoval, ; Gollan et al.
; see also the Revised Hierarchical Model
(Kroll &amp; Stewart, ) and models of
concept mediation and word association (Potter, So, van Eckhardt &amp; Feldman, )). Weaker ties lead to slower lexical access and
thus longer RTs in lexical access tasks. Importantly, as bilinguals also use their L1 less
often than monolinguals, this hypothesis predicts slower lexical processing for bilinguals
even in a native language. This theory, referred to here as the bilingual L1 lexical
disadvantage hypothesis, thus explains the bilingual disadvantage in the L1 in
terms of frequency of language use.

The bilingual L2 lexical disadvantage hypothesis
By the same reasoning, the reduced frequency hypothesis further predicts delayed lexical
access in the less-dominant second language (L2) compared to the more-dominant L1 due to
the reduced frequency of L2 use (Gollan et al., ). Similarly, the temporal delay assumption of the BIA+ model of
bilingual word recognition (Dijkstra &amp; van Heuven, ; van Heuven &amp; Dijkstra, ) states that in unbalanced bilinguals, the activation speed of
orthographic, phonological and semantic codes is delayed in the L2 compared to the L1
since subjective word frequencies are lower in the L2. This L2 delay, referred to here as
the bilingual L2 lexical disadvantage hypothesis, is supported by extensive
empirical evidence, both in production and comprehension, and across a range of bilingual
proficiencies and ages of acquisition (e.g. Ardal, Donald, Meuter, Muldrew &amp; Luce,
; Coderre, Conklin &amp; van Heuven,
; Moreno &amp; Kutas, ; Newman, Tremblay, Nichols, Neville &amp;
Ullman, ; Proverbio, Adorni &amp; Zani,
; see Runnqvist, Strijkers, Sadat &amp;
Costa, , and van Heuven &amp; Dijkstra,
, for reviews).

Stroop performance in monolinguals and bilinguals
When considering Stroop performance in monolinguals and bilinguals, an interesting
question arises regarding the mechanisms governing interference effects. Do bilinguals
show an advantage because they have superior executive control processes (as suggested by
the bilingual cognitive advantage hypothesis), and are thus better able to resolve Stroop
conflict? Or is the slower lexical access (as proposed by the bilingual lexical
disadvantage hypotheses) generating less interference? Both possibilities would predict
improved performance for bilinguals on a Stroop task, but previous research has not yet
investigated the contributions of these two factors in determining Stroop performance.

The interaction of executive control and bilingual lexical access speed
Because each theory places the locus of Stroop interference on different factors, they
are not mutually exclusive and may interact. For example, using a proactive interference
(PI) task, a complex verbal task which requires executive control, Bialystok and Feng
(), found no bilingual advantage unless
controlling for vocabulary knowledge. Similarly, Carlson and Meltzoff () reported a bilingual advantage on a variety of
executive function tasks in young children, but only when verbal ability, age, and
socio-economical status (SES) were controlled for. These studies demonstrate that both
vocabulary knowledge and executive control abilities have implications for bilingual
performance on linguistic cognitive control tasks. Since bilinguals are disadvantaged in
lexical access speed but advantaged in cognitive control, a better understanding of how
these two factors interact on a language-based executive function task like the Stroop
task is needed to better interpret the bilingual advantage. The goal of the current
experiments was to separate the influences of executive control abilities and lexical
access speed in the Stroop task by manipulating the stimulus onset asynchrony of the word
and color information.

SOA manipulation in the Stroop task
One of the many variations of the Stroop task is stimulus onset asynchrony (SOA)
manipulation (e.g. Dyer, ; Glaser &amp;
Glaser, ; Roelofs, ), which presents the word and color stimuli at different times.
The amount of interference at each SOA provides insight into the speed of processing of
each dimension. Negative SOAs present the irrelevant stimulus (e.g. the word, in a
color-naming task) before the relevant stimulus (the color), whereas positive SOAs present
the irrelevant stimulus after the relevant stimulus. In a series of seminal experiments,
Glaser and Glaser () used nine SOAs (from
–400 ms to +400 ms in 100 ms steps) to investigate the timing of interference between
color and word stimuli. The most interference (incongruent RT minus control RT) occurred
at the 0 ms SOA, but significant interference occurred at negative SOAs even out to –400
ms (see  below for examples of the
interference and facilitation effects from their original data). In positive SOAs,
interference was diminished but still significant at +200 ms, but all effects were gone by
+400 ms, as the word appeared too late to influence color-naming. SOA manipulation has
been explored in monolingual Stroop tasks (Appelbaum, Boehler, Won, Davis &amp;
Woldorff, ; Appelbaum, Meyerhoff &amp;
Woldorff, ; Dyer, , ; Glaser &amp;
Glaser, , ; Roelofs, ) and applied to
other tasks such as picture-word interference (e.g. Glaser &amp; Düngelhoff, ; Schriefers, Meyer &amp; Levelt, ) and word translation tasks (e.g. Miller
&amp; Kroll, ). SOA manipulation has not
yet been used in bilinguals, yet it is a useful means of investigating Stroop effects in
bilingualism. (a) Interference and (b) facilitation effects taken from Glaser and Glaser's () original color-naming Stroop study
(Experiment 1), for the five SOAs used in the current study.



Specifically, the Stroop SOA paradigm provides a unique method for investigating the
impact of a cognitive advantage and/or lexical disadvantage on bilingual Stroop
performance. The Stroop task indexes both lexical and executive control abilities within
one task, enabling the investigation of these factors in bilingualism. Decades of research
have established the Stroop task as a reliable measure of reading ability, as the strength
of interference indicates how strongly reading interferes with color-naming. In
bilinguals, the magnitude of interference in each language is therefore indicative of the
strength of language connections. The use of high-frequency color words also allows for a
measure of lexical access speed in bilinguals without a frequency confound. SOA
manipulation also provides a wider temporal spectrum than typical Stroop tasks using a
static 0 ms SOA. Importantly, the identification of interference effects at negative SOAs
may be indicative of lexical processing delays (see predictions below). Crucially, each of
the theories previously discussed predicts a different pattern of RTs in SOA
manipulation.

The current studies
In three experiments, a Stroop SOA task using five SOAs (±400 ms, ±200 ms, and 0 ms) was
administered to monolinguals and to two groups of bilinguals: English–Chinese (L1 English,
L2 Mandarin), and Chinese–English (L1 Mandarin, L2 English) in their L1 and L2. Chinese
and English were chosen to avoid the issue of cognate effects in color words translations.
In most European languages the color words are highly similar, either in orthography,
phonology, or both. This overlap could cause language-related facilitation and/or
interference effects, which would be confounded with conflict-related effects. The factors
of cognitive control and lexical access speed are examined in the context of the
above-mentioned theories in order to more accurately explain the differences in Stroop
performance: (i) between monolinguals and bilinguals in their native languages
(monolinguals vs. bilinguals’ L1); and (ii) between bilinguals’ two languages (L1 vs. L2).

A manual Stroop task, in which participants indicate the color using a button-box, was
employed in all groups to avoid the issue of overt word production processes. A
vocal-response Stroop task, which requires participants to name the color aloud, involves
not just word recognition but also verbal response processes, which are both influenced by
L2 proficiency, age of L2 acquisition, word frequency, and semantic context (e.g. Gollan,
Slattery, Goldenberg, van Assche, Duyck &amp; Rayner, ; Thornburgh &amp; Ryalls, ). To avoid these complexities of L2 production and eliminate the influence
of overt word production processes, a manual task is used in the current studies, allowing
for the investigation of how word recognition processes, as modulated by language
proficiency, determine Stroop performance.

Below we outline the general predictions that the bilingual cognitive advantage
hypothesis and the bilingual lexical disadvantage hypotheses would make for monolingual
and bilingual performance on the Stroop SOA task. More specific predictions will be made
after the presentation of Experiment 1, which establishes a “baseline” effects in
monolinguals.

Monolinguals versus bilinguals’ L1
The bilingual L1 lexical disadvantage hypothesis predicts that relative to
monolinguals, the peak interference should be shifted to negative SOAs for a bilingual
L1. “Bilinguals are essentially less proficient or fluent than monolinguals” (Gollan et
al., , p. 1231) due to the reduced
frequency of language use, which leads to delayed lexical access. If this is the case, a
pre-exposure of the word in negative SOAs should allow this delayed lexical access a
head-start. This head-start would create a peak interference effect at an earlier time
window (e.g. –200 ms SOA vs. 0 ms SOA). Bilinguals’ L1 should therefore show a negative
shift in Stroop interference effects relative to monolinguals such that the peak
interference effects occur at earlier negative SOAs (see a for an example of monolingual interference patterns; a negative
shift in interference effects would shift this line to the left). By the same rationale,
a negative shift may also be apparent in the Stroop facilitation effects (b).

According to the bilingual cognitive advantage hypothesis, bilinguals have more
efficient cognitive control processes than monolinguals, and therefore should show
smaller Stroop interference effects than monolinguals. It may also be the case that
proficiency affects executive control abilities within bilingual groups, such that
high-proficiency bilinguals show better cognitive control, and therefore less
interference, than low-proficiency bilinguals. Importantly, enhanced executive control
would predict no differences in the overall pattern of SOA interference effects. That
is, bilinguals and monolinguals should show peak interference effects at the same SOAs,
but bilinguals should show a smaller magnitude of interference (i.e. the pattern of
a would be shifted down).

The bilingual advantage has been shown to be sensitive to the degree of conflict
present (Costa et al., ), so in some SOAs
(particularly positive SOAs in which little interference is elicited in monolinguals)
bilinguals will likely not show an advantage because of a floor effect in interference.
Only in SOAs which require the most cognitive control, such as the 0 ms SOA, is the
bilingual advantage expected to appear, as these high-conflict conditions should
emphasize bilinguals’ superior cognitive control abilities (e.g. Costa et al., ). The bilingual cognitive advantage
hypothesis therefore predicts a decrease in interference for bilinguals as compared to
monolinguals, especially – or perhaps only – at SOAs requiring the most cognitive
control. Importantly, however, interference should not be modulated by SOA between the
groups (i.e. all groups should show the peak interference effects at the same SOAs), as
this theory does not take into account speed of lexical processing.

As well as smaller interference effects, bilinguals may also experience smaller
facilitation effects. Previous work has found that populations with impaired cognitive
control, such as adults with Alzheimer's disease (e.g. Weaver Cargin, Maruff, Collie,
Shafiq-Antonacci &amp; Masters, ) and
children (e.g. Zelazo, Craik &amp; Booth, ), show not only increased Stroop interference but also increased
facilitation effects compared to normal adults (Spieler, Balota &amp; Faust, ; Wright &amp; Wanley, ). Ignoring the word in a color-naming Stroop
task requires cognitive control, so individuals with decreased cognitive control
abilities may have more “inadvertent word reading” errors (MacLeod &amp; MacDonald,
; Wright &amp; Wanley, ), leading to increased facilitation. Therefore
if bilinguals have increased cognitive control abilities, they may show a decrease in
facilitation compared to monolinguals (i.e. the pattern in b would be shifted down), in the same way that they show
decreased interference effects.

Bilinguals’ L1 versus L2
Previous research using bilingual Stroop tasks has reported that the L1 tends to elicit
more Stroop interference than the L2, although this depends on the proficiency of the
participants and the similarity of the languages (Brauer, ; Chen &amp; Ho, ; Fang, Tzeng &amp; Alva, ;
Tzelgov, Henik &amp; Leiser, ).
According to the bilingual L2 lexical disadvantage hypothesis, word information in the
L2 is less easily accessed (i.e. delayed) in unbalanced bilinguals. If the L2
experiences delayed lexical access, then a pre-exposure of the word in negative SOAs
should create a negative shift in the peak interference effects for the L2 compared to
the L1, by the same mechanism described earlier in the predictions for the L1 lexical
disadvantage hypothesis. If decreasing proficiency results in an increased amount of
time needed for lexical access, then this “negative shift” in interference effects
should be even more pronounced: i.e. the negative shift should increase with decreasing
proficiency. The bilingual L2 lexical disadvantage hypothesis thus predicts a
language-dependent negative shift in interference effects, and possibly also
facilitation effects, in the L2 compared to the L1 due to slower lexical access
resulting from reduced frequency of language use.

The bilingual cognitive advantage hypothesis claims that bilinguals have better
cognitive control than monolinguals, but generally does not mention differences within a
bilingual's two languages. As it is based solely on the efficiency of executive control
and not on speed of lexical processing, this hypothesis should predict no differences
between the L1 and L2 in SOA modulation, because executive control processes likely
occur at a fixed rate within individuals. It may be, however, that because the L1 is the
stronger language it is more difficult to ignore and therefore requires more control,
which would predict slightly larger Stroop effects in the L1 than the L2 within
individuals. Importantly, though, these effects will not be modulated by SOA, because
similar amounts of cognitive control will be required at each SOA.

As mentioned, these hypotheses point to different mechanisms being the critical factor
in Stroop performance (cognitive control in the bilingual cognitive advantage
hypothesis, and frequency of use in the bilingual lexical disadvantage hypotheses) and
are therefore not mutually exclusive. Thus an alternative prediction is that that these
factors will interact, such that bilinguals experience weaker language ties in their L1
as compared to monolinguals and even weaker ties in their L2, but still better cognitive
control. If bilinguals have weaker language ties in their L1 because they use each
language less often than monolinguals, this should generate the same type of negative
shift in interference effects based on SOA manipulation in the L1 compared to
monolinguals. The negative shift of the L2 will be even more pronounced due to weaker
ties in the L1 and for monolinguals. In both L1 and L2, however, there should be a
reduction in interference effects due to the enhanced cognitive control of bilinguals
over monolinguals (i.e. the pattern in a
would be shifted to the left and down, and more so in the L2 than the L1).

To establish a “baseline” comparison for the bilingual participants, a manual Stroop
SOA task was administered to English monolinguals in Experiment 1. Based on the results of this experiment, more specific predictions are then made
for Experiments 2 and 3, which administered a manual Stroop SOA task to English–Chinese
bilinguals and Chinese–English, respectively, in their L1 and L2.

Experiment 1: English monolinguals
Methods
Participants
Twenty-four English monolinguals from the University of Nottingham, England,
participated in Experiment 1 (see 
above). One subject was removed from the analysis because of having learned another
language besides English from birth. The remaining 23 participants were 14 females and 9
males, who all were right-handed, reported no color-blindness, had normal or
corrected-to-normal vision, and were not fluent in any other language besides English.

Subjective proficiency scores (scale: 1 = very poor, 10 = very fluent) and
participant demographics of Experiments 1–3. Numbers in parentheses indicate
standard deviation.


						Subjective L2 proficiency
scores	
Experiment	Participants	n	Age	L1	First contact L2	Speaking	Listening	Reading	Writing	Overall	
1	English			English	N/A	N/A	N/A	N/A	N/A	N/A	
	monolinguals	23	23.0 (4.1)		
2	English–Chinese			English	10.3 (7.3)	7.0 (1.3)	7.0 (1.6)	6.7 (1.6)	5.4 (2.5)	6.5 (1.3)	
	bilinguals	15	21.8 (2.4)		
3	Chinese–English			Mandarin		
	bilinguals	22	21.0 (1.6)	Chinese	11.0 (2.7)	6.4 (1.3)	6.6 (1.4)	7.1 (1.4)	6.3 (1.5)	6.6 (1.2)	


Materials and design
Word stimuli were the words red, green, and
blue in lowercase font. Control word stimuli consisted of
xxxx; this was included as a non-word, non-color control condition.
As SOA manipulation in the Stroop task necessitates a spatial separation of the color
and word stimuli, words were presented inside a colored rectangle, as in Glaser and
Glaser (). Color stimuli consisted of red,
green and blue filled rectangles of 284 × 142 pixels with a smaller black-filled
rectangle inside. Word stimuli were presented in white ink inside the black rectangle.
Congruent stimuli presented the same word and color (e.g. red
surrounded by a red rectangle). Incongruent stimuli presented non-matching words and
colors (e.g. green surrounded by a blue rectangle). Control stimuli
presented xxxx surrounded by red, green or blue rectangles.

Procedure
Stimuli were presented using E-Prime software (Psychology Software Tools, Pittsburgh,
PA). There were a total of 10 blocks in the experimental session, two for each SOA. The
order of SOA block presentation was counterbalanced, and congruency was randomized
within blocks. Each block consisted of 54 stimuli, with 18 each of congruent,
incongruent and control trials, resulting in a total of 540 trials. In each trial, a
fixation cross appeared for 500 ms, followed by a blank screen for 300 ms, and then the
word and/or color stimuli appeared.

Five SOAs were included: –400 ms, –200 ms, 0 ms, +200 ms, and +400 ms. In negative
SOAs, the word stimulus appeared on the screen alone first for either 400 ms or 200 ms,
followed by the colored rectangle. In positive SOAs, the colored rectangle appeared on
the screen alone for either 200 ms or 400 ms before the word stimulus appeared in the
center of the rectangle. In the 0 ms SOA, the word stimulus and the colored rectangle
appeared simultaneously. Both stimuli remained on the screen until participants made a
response; if no response was made in 2000 ms, the stimuli disappeared and the next trial
began. Participants were asked to respond manually to the color using an external
button-box (right index finger for red, right middle finger for green, right ring finger
for blue). To help with the initial finger-to-color mappings, the button-box was labeled
with color patches. Once the experiment began, subjects were instructed to keep their
gaze fixated in the center of the screen. Participants conducted a brief practice
session to familiarize them with the mappings between buttons and colors. Following the
completion of the experimental session, participants completed a language background
questionnaire and received an inconvenience allowance of £4 for their participation.

Results and discussion
Data were first trimmed to remove incorrect responses (3.8%) and outliers (RTs of less
than 250 ms or greater than 1500 ms: 0.4%). The mean number of errors per condition ranged
between 0.2% and 0.4%. Because error rates were very low no error analyses were conducted.

A 3 (congruency: congruent, control, incongruent) × 5 (SOA) repeated-measures ANOVA
showed a significant main effect of congruency (F(2,44) = 71.31,
p &lt; .0001) and of SOA (F(4,88) = 5.49,
p &lt; .01), and a significant interaction between SOA and
congruency (F(8,176) = 21.33, p &lt; .0001).
Paired-sample t-tests were run between the incongruent vs. control and
control vs. congruent conditions to compare interference and facilitation effects,
respectively, at each SOA. The p-values of these paired-sample
t-tests were Bonferroni-corrected, and only significant results
(p &lt; .05) after correction are reported. Bonferroni corrections
were applied due to the large number of tests performed (10 per group). The
t-tests revealed significant interference at –200 ms (74 ms;
t(22) = 10.78, p &lt; .0001), and 0 ms (57 ms;
t (22) = 5.68, p &lt; .0001). Significant
facilitation was found at –400 ms (51 ms; t(22) = 6.46, p
&lt; .0001) and at –200 ms SOA (27 ms; t(22) = 3.29,
p &lt; .05). As can be seen in a, the –200 ms SOA elicited the longest incongruent RT
(M = 639 ms, SE = 21 ms), and the greatest amount of
interference (M = 74 ms, SE = 7 ms). Mean RTs (ms) for the (a) monolinguals (Experiment 1); (b) bilingual L1 English
(Experiment 2); (c) bilingual L2 Chinese (Experiment 2); (d) bilingual L1 Chinese
(Experiment 3); and (e) bilingual L2 English (Experiment 3).



The results of Experiment 1, which administered a Stroop task with five SOAs in a manual
response modality, clearly showed a different pattern to those of Glaser and Glaser () and Roelofs (). The greatest interference effects were not found at 0 ms SOA but at the
–200 ms SOA, indicating a negative shift of interference effects due to the response
modality. Previous Stroop literature has reported performance differences depending on
response modality (Barch, Braver, Akbudak, Conturo, Ollinger &amp; Snyder, ; MacLeod, ; Weekes &amp; Zaidel, ),
such that vocal responses generally elicit overall slower RTs than manual responses.
Importantly, these results are in line with recent research that has also found a
negatively-shifted peak in interference effects with a manual response (Appelbaum et al.,
; Coderre &amp; van Heuven, ).

Pre-exposure of the word at –200 ms SOA in a manual task may interfere with the faster
motor response, while simultaneous presentation at 0 ms SOA interferes with the slower
vocal response. For example, in both manual and vocal modalities, processing of the word
stimulus presumably proceeds at the same rate. But in a vocal task, the color stimulus
must be translated into a vocal response, requiring additional time than a manual response
in which the color is mapped directly to a motor response. With simultaneous color and
word presentation in a vocal response, word semantics and vocalization of the color word
run at similar time courses and therefore cause stronger interference. However,
pre-exposure of the word in the vocal modality gives semantic processing a head-start such
that it is inhibited by the time the color word is vocalized, resulting in smaller
interference. In contrast, when the color and word are presented simultaneously in a
manual modality, the faster and more direct color mapping allows for a response to be
selected before the word is fully active, creating smaller interference. With a
pre-exposed word in a manual task, the time courses of word and color processing once
again line up, creating maximal interference at a more negative SOA. The results of
Experiment 1 thus demonstrate that response modality influences the RT patterns seen in a
Stroop SOA task, and that the peak interference is negatively shifted in a manual task
such that it occurs at the –200 ms SOA rather than the 0 ms SOA.

Experiment 2: English–Chinese bilinguals in L1 and L2
We next investigate the contributions of executive control abilities and speed of lexical
access on Stroop performance in bilinguals. In light of the results of Experiment 1,
specific predictions for each hypothesis can now be made about the patterns of interference
elicited by a manual SOA Stroop task.

Predictions for bilinguals
The bilingual cognitive advantage hypothesis predicts smaller interference effects for
bilinguals in both L1 and L2 compared to monolinguals due to enhanced executive control
processes, but only at the SOA which experiences the greatest cognitive demand (see a). As shown by Experiment 1, this is the –200
ms SOA. Facilitation effects may also be decreased in bilinguals, which is expected to
occur where facilitation is generally greatest in monolinguals: at the –400 ms SOA (b). Importantly, because the bilingual
cognitive advantage hypothesis makes no claims about the speed of lexical access,
interference and facilitation effects should not be shifted by SOA modulation. Panels (a) and (b): The bilingual cognitive advantage hypothesis predicts that
bilinguals will have better cognitive control than monolinguals, but this control
will be unaffected by SOA manipulation, resulting in an overall downward shift in
(a) interference and (b) facilitation effects. Panels (c) and (d): The bilingual
lexical disadvantage hypotheses predict that earlier negative SOAs will cause more
(c) interference and (d) facilitation in the weaker language due to word
pre-exposure, such that peak effects will be negatively shifted in the L1 vs.
monolinguals and in L2 vs. L1. Panels (e) and (f): A combination of all three
hypotheses would lead to a slightly negative shift in bilingual L1, even more of a
negative shift in bilingual L2, but still overall reduced (e) interference and (f)
facilitation as compared to monolinguals. Monolingual data are based on the
interference and facilitation effects from Experiment 1.



The bilingual lexical disadvantage hypotheses predict a negative shift of peak
interference due to the relatively decreased proficiency of both the L2 and L1 in
bilinguals compared to monolinguals. Therefore, the bilingual L1 should experience the
most interference at an earlier negative SOA than monolinguals, and the bilingual L2 at an
earlier negative SOA than the L1 (see c).
Importantly, the magnitude of interference effects will be the same for each group, and
only the latency of peak interference will be shifted according to the varying strengths
of language ties in each group. Due to the latencies of the SOAs used in the current
studies, it may be difficult to find the precise point where each group shows the peak
interference; for example, lexical access in the bilingual L1 may only be delayed by 50 ms
or 100 ms, making the peak interference effect fall between the –200 ms and –400 ms SOAs.
In this case a relative plateau of interference is predicted between the SOAs, as in the
bilingual L1 line in c. Because peak
facilitation occurs at the –400 ms SOA, negative shifts in facilitation effects may not be
observed as this would be outside the range of SOAs (d).

A combination of above hypotheses predicts that bilinguals will show less interference
overall than monolinguals, but that interference and facilitation will also be shifted to
negative SOAs in the L1 and L2 compared to monolinguals such that the peak interference
and facilitation effects occur earlier for bilinguals (see , panels (e) and (f)).

Experiment 2 tested a group of bilinguals with the same native language as the English
monolinguals of Experiment 1, to compare the impact of bilingualism on executive control
abilities and lexical access speed.

Methods

Participants
Participants were 15 English–Chinese bilinguals (English L1, Mandarin Chinese L2) from
the University of Nottingham in Nottingham, England (10 female, 5 male). All were
right-handed, reported no color-blindness, and had normal or corrected-to-normal vision.
Participants were native English speakers who rated themselves dominant in English but
also proficient in Mandarin. All participants completed a language background
questionnaire after the testing session (see  above). Most spoke other languages (N = 11), including Spanish, French, German,
and Malay, and some (N = 4) considered themselves more proficient in their other
languages than in Chinese (overall self-rated proficiency in other languages: 6.3, on a
10-point scale). Their overall self-reported Chinese proficiency was 6.5
(SD = 1.3; averaged across reading, writing, speaking and listening
self-reported proficiency scores), and their first contact with Chinese occurred at a
mean age of 10.3 years (SD = 7.3 years).

Materials and design
Word stimuli for the English (L1) version of the task were identical to Experiment 1,
with the exception that the English control stimulus was %%%%. Word stimuli for the Chinese (L2) version of the task consisted of the
simplified Chinese characters 红, 绿, and
蓝 (“red”, “green” and “blue”, respectively). The Chinese control
character was %, in order to match the approximate physical size of a
character. Characters were printed in white font against a black background.
Participants were instructed to ignore the English word or Chinese character and press a
button corresponding to the color of the rectangle. Each participant performed the
Chinese and English versions of the Stroop task on two consecutive days, and language
order was counterbalanced between participants. Bilinguals therefore had more practice
with the task than monolinguals; however, practice effects in the Stroop task are highly
specific and transient (MacLeod, ), so this
should not affect the results. As in Experiment 1, five SOAs were used; SOA was blocked,
and the order of SOAs was counterbalanced between participants.

Procedure
The procedure was similar to that of Experiment 1. Following the completion of the
experiment, participants completed a language background questionnaire and received an
inconvenience allowance of £8.

Results and discussion
English (L1) data
Overall, the mean RT pattern for the L1 English (b above) appeared very similar to that of the monolinguals. A 3 (congruency) ×
5 (SOA) repeated-measures ANOVA showed significant main effects of congruency
(F(2,26) = 60.23, p &lt; .0001) but not of SOA
(F(5,54) = 1.69, p = .17, and a significant
interaction of congruency by SOA (F(8,109) = 14.31, p
&lt; .0001). Paired-sample t-tests with Bonferroni corrections
showed significant interference effects at –400 ms (M = 47 ms;
t(14) = 5.11, p &lt; .001), –200 ms
(M = 70 ms; t(14) = 7.33, p &lt;
.01), and 0 ms (M = 50 ms; t(14) = 6.23,
p &lt; .01). Significant facilitation effects occurred at –400 ms
(M = 44 ms; t(14) = 4.10, p
&lt; .05) and –200 ms (32 ms; t(14) = 3.70, p
&lt; .05) SOAs. As can be seen in b,
the slowest incongruent RT occurred at –200 ms SOA (M = 618 ms,
SE = 23 ms), and the most interference occurred at –200 ms
(M = 70 ms, SE = 10 ms).

Chinese (L2) data
The pattern of mean RTs for the L2 Chinese (c) appeared different than those of the English conditions, especially with
regards to the control condition. A 3 (congruency) × 5 (SOA) repeated-measures ANOVA
showed a main effect of congruency (F(2,24) = 17.93, p
&lt; .001) and SOA (F(4,53) = 3.45, p &lt;
.05), and an interaction of congruency and SOA (F(8,106) = 4.57,
p &lt; .001). Paired-sample t-tests revealed
significant interference effects at –200 ms (38 ms; t(14) = 3.44,
p &lt; .05) with a trend at 0 ms (41 ms; t(14) =
3.03, p = .09 corrected; p = .009 uncorrected). There
were no significant facilitation effects after correction at any SOA (all
ps &gt; .17), although the largest effect occurred at –400 ms
(M = 29 ms, SE = 11 ms). As can be seen in c, the slowest incongruent RT occurred at
–200 ms SOA (M = 617 ms, SE = 24 ms), and the most
interference occurred at 0 ms SOA (M = 41 ms, SE = 13
ms).

The data therefore revealed similar patterns of RTs for the English Stroop task when
performed in a native language. However, the pattern of RTs for L2 Chinese was somewhat
different: most notably, slightly stronger interference effects were found at the 0 ms
SOA than the –200 ms SOA. It is unclear whether this discrepancy arose from differences
in native and non-native processing due to bilingualism, or from differences in
linguistic processing between Chinese and English. To investigate these effects,
Experiment 3 tested native Chinese speakers with English as their L2.

Experiment 3: Chinese–English bilinguals in L1 and L2
Methods
Participants
Twenty-four Chinese–English bilinguals (Mandarin Chinese L1, English L2) were tested in
Experiment 2. Two participants were removed from the final analyses because they rated
themselves as English-dominant. The remaining 22 included 19 females and 3 males, all of
whom were right-handed, reported no color-blindness, and had normal or
corrected-to-normal vision. Of the 22 participants, twelve were tested at the University
of Nottingham Ningbo campus in Ningbo, China, and ten were tested at the University of
Nottingham in England. The University of Nottingham Ningbo campus is an
English-immersion environment, in which all classes are taught in English, so all
participants tested in China were immersed in their non-native language, despite being
in their native country. The subjects who were tested in England had all just arrived in
the country from the Ningbo campus and had been living in England for no more than two
months. Analyses of the data with location as a between-subjects factor showed no
significant effects of testing environment on SOA or congruency effects (all
ps &gt; .25), so all Chinese–English bilinguals were considered
together in subsequent analyses. All participants were native Mandarin Chinese speakers
from mainland China who rated themselves dominant in Chinese but also proficient in
English (see ). Although some had
learned other languages (N = 9), none rated themselves as very proficient in any foreign
language (overall self-rated proficiency in other languages = 2.3). Most participants (N
= 20) also spoke a Chinese dialect from their hometown, but as these dialects use
simplified Chinese characters like Mandarin, this should not be a confounding factor.
Their overall self-reported English proficiency was 6.6 (SD = 1.2), and
they had their first contact with English at a mean age of 11 years (SD
= 2.7 years). Importantly, they did not differ statistically from the English–Chinese
bilinguals in either their overall self-rated proficiency scores (p =
.89) or their age of L2 acquisition (p = .76).

Materials and design
The materials and design were identical to that of Experiment 2.

Procedure
The procedure was identical to that of Experiment 2.

Results and discussion
Incorrect responses (2.6% for L1, 2.3% for L2) and outliers (RTs of less than 250 ms or
greater than 1500 ms: 0.3% for L1, 0.2% for L2) were removed before statistical analysis.
The mean number of errors per condition for L1 Chinese ranged between 0.1% and 0.2%. The
mean number of errors per condition for L2 English ranged between 0.1% and 0.4%. Overall,
error rates were again very low and therefore no error analyses are reported.

L1 Chinese data
The pattern of RTs in the L1 Chinese data (d) exhibited a similar pattern to that of the L2 Chinese data from Experiment 2.
A 3 (congruency) × 5 (SOA) repeated-measures ANOVA showed a significant main effect of
congruency (F(2,42) = 22.18, p &lt; .0001) but not
SOA (F(4,84) &lt; 1), and an interaction of SOA and congruency
(F(8,168) = 5.53, p &lt; .0001). Paired-sample
t-tests with Bonferroni corrections indicated significant
interference effects at –200 ms (26 ms; t(21) = 3.17,
p &lt; .05), and 0 ms (40 ms; t(21) = 3.62,
p &lt; .05). Significant facilitation effects occurred at –400 ms
(35 ms; t(21) = 4.37, p &lt; .01) and –200 ms (23
ms; t(21) = 4.49, p &lt; .01). As can be seen in
d, the slowest incongruent RT occurred
at –200 ms SOA (M = 585 ms, SE = 22 ms), and the most
interference occurred at 0 ms SOA (M = 40 ms, SE = 11
ms), as in the L2 Chinese data.

L2 English data
The L2 English data (e) showed a similar
pattern as that of the monolingual and L1 English data in Experiments 1 and 2. A 3
(congruency) × 5 (SOA) repeated-measures ANOVA revealed a significant main effect of
congruency (F(2,42) = 19.72, p &lt; .0001) but not
SOA (F(4,84) = 1.44, p = .23), and an interaction of
SOA and congruency (F(8,168) = 4.71, p &lt;
.0001). Paired-sample t-tests showed significant interference at –200
ms (30 ms; t(21) = 3.18, p &lt; .05). Significant
facilitation occurred at –200 ms (25 ms; t(21) = 3.89,
p &lt; .01) only. As can be seen in e, the longest incongruent RT occurred at 0 ms SOA (M
= 578 ms, SE = 20 ms), and the most interference at –200 ms
(M = 30 ms, SE = 9 ms).

Comparison of all three groups (Experiments 1–3)
To investigate the initial questions regarding the bilingual advantage and delay
hypotheses, all three groups were directly compared: English monolinguals from Experiment 1;
English–Chinese bilinguals from Experiment 2; and Chinese–English bilinguals from Experiment
3. An initial visual comparison of the raw RT patterns for each group () reveals an interesting effect of script, in that the English
and Chinese languages elicit different RT patterns, independent of language status (native
or non-native). This indicates that there may be an underlying effect of script driving the
resultant RT patterns. Specifically, the control condition seems to behave differently in
Chinese and English, especially at the 0 ms SOA. As the groups were compared on interference
effects (incongruent minus control), this script difference could be driving some of the
effects that are discussed in the next section. Comparisons of the Stroop effect
(incongruent minus congruent) may seem more appropriate; however, as SOA manipulation also
affects the amount of facilitation (e.g. increased facilitation in the –400 ms SOA),
interpretations of the Stroop effects are just as difficult. These script differences, and
the implications they hold for our interpretation of the data, will be examined in the
“General discussion” section below.

Evaluation of the bilingual cognitive advantage hypothesis
To investigate the bilingual advantage on conflict processing, monolingual performance
was compared to bilingual performance in both native languages: monolinguals vs. L1
English; and monolinguals vs. L1 Chinese. Monolingual English and L1 English interference
effects ( below, panels (a) and (b)) were
compared at the –200 ms SOA using an independent-samples t-test (with
Welch corrections to the degrees of freedom where the assumption of sphericity was
violated), which showed no significant difference in the magnitude of interference
(p = .76). Therefore when comparing the two groups of native English
speakers, no bilingual advantage was observed. For English monolinguals vs. L1 Chinese
(, panels (a) and (d)), the largest
interference effects (–200 ms SOA for monolinguals and 0 ms SOA in L1 Chinese bilinguals)
were compared using an independent-samples t-test. This comparison showed
a significant effect of bilingual status (t(35.1) = 2.56,
p &lt; .05), such that the L1 Chinese showed smaller interference
effects (M = 40 ms, SE = 5 ms) than monolinguals
(M = 74 ms, SE = 3 ms). Therefore a bilingual
advantage in the L1 compared to monolinguals occurred for the Chinese–English bilinguals
but not the English–Chinese bilinguals. Comparison of the magnitude of interference (panels (a)–(e)) and facilitation
(panels (f)–(j)) effects in monolinguals, L1 English, L2 Chinese, L1 Chinese, and L2
English.



If bilingualism leads to generalized enhanced cognitive control, this should be evident
in both the L1 and L2 in bilingual participants. To test whether the bilingual advantage
also occurred in the second language, the magnitude of interference was compared between
monolinguals and bilingual L2s. Comparing monolinguals versus L2 English (, panels (a) and (e)), there was a significant
reduction in interference effects for bilinguals’ L2 English (M = 30 ms,
SE = 9 ms) compared to monolinguals (M = 74 ms,
SE = 3 ms; t(38.8) = 3.79, p &lt;
.001) at the –200 ms SOA (the SOA of peak interference for both groups). Thus, the
Chinese–English bilinguals showed smaller interference effects in both their L1 and L2
compared to monolinguals, demonstrating a bilingual advantage across languages. To compare
monolinguals versus L2 Chinese (, panels
(a) and (c)), once again the SOA which showed the largest interference effects in each
group was selected (–200 ms SOA for monolinguals, 0 ms SOA for L2 Chinese). There was a
significant difference in interference magnitude (t(21.4) = 2.22,
p &lt; .05) such that the interference effects were smaller for L2
Chinese (M = 41 ms, SE = 13 ms) than for monolinguals
(M = 74 ms, SE = 3 ms). This might suggest enhanced
cognitive control in the L2 for the English–Chinese bilinguals. However, as a similar
advantage was not found in the L1 English, it is unclear whether the decreased
interference effects in the L2 result from enhanced cognitive control, or from less
interference from the second language due to the relatively reduced proficiency. In other
words, because an advantage in interference effects did not occur in both
languages for the English–Chinese bilinguals, this cannot be interpreted as a general
bilingual cognitive advantage.

Turning to the facilitation effects, 
(panels (f)–(j)) illustrates that at the –400 ms SOA monolinguals showed the greatest
facilitation (M = 51 ms, SE = 8 ms; f), followed by the bilingual L1 Chinese (M =
37 ms, SE = 10 ms; i), L1
English (M = 44 ms, SE = 11 ms; g), L2 Chinese (M = 29 ms,
SE = 11 ms; h) and L2
English (M = 27 ms, SE = 12 ms; j). If, as mentioned previously, larger Stroop facilitation
effects are indicative of poorer cognitive control, this pattern fits with the prediction
of monolinguals showing poorer performance, and supports other findings of greater
cognitive control abilities in the Chinese–English bilinguals. However, none of the groups
differed statistically in the magnitude of the facilitation effects (though there was a
trend between the monolinguals and the L2 English: p = .09 uncorrected).
Therefore the facilitation effects offered no significant evidence for the bilingual
cognitive advantage.

According to the bilingual cognitive advantage hypothesis, increased language proficiency
should lead to enhanced cognitive control abilities (Bialystok, Craik &amp; Ruocco,
; Linck, Hoshino &amp; Kroll, ). To investigate whether the bilingual advantage
is mediated by proficiency within bilinguals, the L2 performance in each bilingual group
was compared using a median split of self-rated L2 proficiency ( and ) below. Mean RTs (ms) after the L2-proficiency split in each bilingual group. (a)
low-proficiency English–Chinese bilinguals in L2 Chinese; (b) high-proficiency
English–Chinese bilinguals in L2 Chinese; (c) low-proficiency Chinese–English
bilinguals in L2 English; (d) high-proficiency Chinese–English bilinguals in L2
English.


Mean L2 interference effects for each bilingual group split by proficiency. (a)
low- vs. high-proficiency English–Chinese bilinguals on the L2 Chinese Stroop task;
(b) low- vs. high-proficiency Chinese–English bilinguals on the L2 English Stroop
task.



English–Chinese bilingual performance split by L2 (Chinese) proficiency
In L1 English, there were no significant differences between the low- and
high-proficiency groups in either interference (all ps &gt; .42) or
facilitation effects (all ps &gt; .25) at any SOAs. Thus, Chinese
proficiency did not influence the Stroop interference and facilitation patterns in L1
English.

In L2 Chinese, there was an interesting effect of Chinese proficiency on the overall
mean RTs. Specifically, the low-proficiency bilinguals (a) showed an RT pattern similar to English (, panels (a) and (b)), while the high-proficiency bilinguals
(b) showed an RT pattern similar to
native Chinese (d). This suggests that
with increasing proficiency comes more native-like processing of the foreign language.
However, there were no significant differences in interference between the low- and
high-proficiency groups at any SOA (all ps &gt; .68; a), indicating that the overall magnitude of
interference in the L2 was not affected by proficiency. No differences in facilitation
effects were found in the L2 Chinese between low-proficiency (M = 27
ms, SE = 20 ms) and high-proficiency (M = 31 ms,
SE = 9 ms) bilinguals (p = .87).

Chinese–English bilingual performance split by L2 (English) proficiency
In L1 Chinese, there were no significant differences between the low- and
high-proficiency groups at any SOAs either in interference (all ps
&gt; .32) or facilitation effects (all ps &gt; .21). Thus,
English proficiency did not influence the Stroop interference and facilitation patterns
in L1 Chinese.

For L2 English, the RT patterns for the low-proficiency bilinguals (c) appeared similar to those of English
(, panels (a) and (b)), but the
high-proficiency participants (d) showed
a different pattern, unlike English or Chinese. There was a difference in interference
magnitude at the –200 ms SOA between proficiency groups (t(15.9) =
2.38, p &lt; .05; b)
such that low-proficiency participants showed greater interference effects
(M = 50 ms, SE = 15 ms) than high-proficiency
bilinguals (M = 10 ms, SE = 8 ms). There was also a
trend towards a significant effect at the 0 ms SOA (t(15.2) = 1.97,
p = .07). Reduced facilitation effects also occurred in the
high-proficiency L2 English bilinguals (M = 9 ms, SE =
12 ms) compared to the low-proficiency group (M = 44 ms,
SE = 19 ms), though this was only a statistical trend
(t(106.4) = 1.72, p = .08). These data provide support
for the bilingual advantage hypothesis but not for the lexical disadvantage hypotheses.
According to the bilingual L2 lexical disadvantage hypothesis, the L2 experiences
delayed lexical access relative to the L1 due to the relatively reduced proficiency;
this predicts that in the L2, low-proficiency bilinguals would show smaller interference
effects than high-proficiency bilinguals because the word generates less interference.
However, in the present data, the low-proficiency bilinguals actually showed stronger
interference effects. This indicates that Stroop performance is largely driven by
executive control abilities, which are related to proficiency in a second language, with
increasing proficiency leading to stronger L2 activation and increased language
conflict, and therefore a greater need for cognitive control.

To summarize the analyses of the bilingual cognitive advantage hypothesis, the present
data revealed a bilingual advantage for the Chinese–English participants, (i) in L1
Chinese compared to English monolinguals; and (ii) in L2 English between high and
low-proficiency participants. There was a reduction in interference effects in the
English–Chinese L2 compared to monolinguals; however, a similar reduction did not occur
in the L1 for this group. Thus, there was no bilingual advantage in the English–Chinese
bilinguals, as enhanced cognitive control abilities did not occur for both languages of
these bilinguals.

Evaluation of the bilingual lexical disadvantage hypotheses
To investigate the potential impact of lexical access speed, a series of comparisons were
conducted using peak interference and facilitation effects ( above) as indicators of the window of lexical access. Latency
analyses were conducted by identifying the SOA that exhibited the maximum interference and
facilitation for each group and comparing groups using t-tests. First,
between-subjects analyses were conducted for each language to investigate the effects of
bilingualism and proficiency on the latency of interference within the same language.
Next, the monolinguals were compared to the bilingual L1 in each group to investigate the
bilingual L1 lexical disadvantage hypothesis; and finally, the L1 and L2 were contrasted
for the two groups of bilinguals to investigate the bilingual L2 lexical disadvantage
hypothesis.

In all groups performing in English (i.e. monolinguals, L1 English, L2 English), the peak
interference occurred at –200 ms SOA (,
panels (a), (b), and (e)). Comparisons revealed no significant differences between the
peak interference of English monolinguals and L1 English bilinguals
(t(27.2) = 1.01, p = .32) or between English
monolinguals and L2 English bilinguals (t(36.6) = 1.49,
p = .14). There was also no difference across bilinguals between L1
English and L2 English (p = .64). This indicates that RTs were affected
similarly in the English script, regardless of bilingual status.

The two Chinese conditions were also compared (L1 Chinese vs. L2 Chinese; , panels (c) and (d)) to evaluate the effects
of native-speaker status on the latency of peak interference effects in the logographic
script. There was a strong trend towards a significant difference in the peak interference
latency between L1 Chinese and L2 Chinese bilinguals (t(30.5) = 1.98,
p = .06) such that the majority of L1 Chinese bilinguals showed peak
interference effects at the 0 ms SOA, whereas the peak interference effects of the L2
Chinese bilinguals were more evenly spread over the –200 ms and 0 ms SOAs. The issue of
how script affects the latency of interference effects will be addressed further in the
“General discussion” section below.

In addressing the bilingual L1 lexical disadvantage hypothesis, as reported above there
were no differences between the peak interference of English monolinguals and L1 English
bilinguals (t(27.2) = 1.01, p = .32). There was a
significant difference between the peak interference effects for monolinguals relative to
L1 Chinese bilinguals, (t(37.3) = 2.27, p &lt; .05)
such that monolinguals experienced peak interference at the –200 ms SOA, whereas the L1
Chinese elicited maximal interference at the 0 ms SOA (, panels (a) and (d)). Contrary to the negative shift predicted by the
bilingual lexical disadvantage hypotheses, this is a positive shift in bilinguals relative
to monolinguals. However, as already mentioned, there were differences across the groups
in the patterns of interference for English and Chinese scripts: it may be that the
difference in peak interference latency between monolinguals and L1 Chinese is due to
these script differences rather than proficiency-driven differences in lexical access
speed (see “General discussion”).

To investigate the bilingual L2 disadvantage hypothesis within bilingual groups, the SOA
generating the maximum interference effect was identified for each subject in both L1 and
L2, and compared using paired-sample t-tests. Comparing L1 and L2 within
the Chinese–English subjects, a negative shift in interference effects occurred in L2
English compared to L1 Chinese (t(21) = 4.16, p &lt;
.001) such that the L1 elicited the peak interference at the 0 ms SOA while the L2 showed
maximal interference at the –200 ms SOA (,
panels (d) and (e)). In contrast, peak interference latencies in the English–Chinese
bilinguals did not differ between L1 and L2 (t(14) = 0.54,
p = .60; , panels (b) and
(c)). Therefore the Chinese–English bilinguals, but not the English–Chinese bilinguals,
demonstrated a significant negative shift in peak interference effects as predicted by the
bilingual L2 lexical disadvantage hypothesis.

An L2 proficiency split was again performed to investigate whether proficiency modulates
the latency of peak interference effects within bilinguals’ L2. Comparing the high- and
low-proficiency participants in each bilingual group, there were no differences in peak
interference effects either in English–Chinese (t(12.8) = 1.42,
p = .18) or Chinese–English (t(16.7) = 0.36,
p = .72) bilinguals. For the facilitation effects, all groups showed
maximum effects at the –400 ms SOA and there were no significant differences between any
of the groups (all ps &gt; .16).

To summarize the analyses of the bilingual lexical disadvantage hypotheses, the data do
not provide any evidence for a delay in lexical access between bilinguals’ L1 and
monolinguals, and is instead indicative of notable differences between the English and
Chinese scripts. However, when comparing similar languages, a difference in peak
interference occurred between L2 Chinese relative to L1 Chinese. There was also a
significant shift between the L1 and L2 within Chinese–English bilinguals such that L2
English experienced peak interference effects at –200 ms, while the L1 Chinese peaked at 0
ms.

General discussion
The current experiments administered a Stroop SOA task to monolinguals and bilinguals to
investigate how lexical access speed and executive control abilities modulate Stroop
performance. Experiment 1, with monolinguals, demonstrated that an SOA Stroop task using a
manual response modality shows peak interference effects at the –200 ms SOA, instead of the
0 ms as in a vocal task. This indicates that interference effects occur earlier in a manual
Stroop task due to the nature of the faster motor response. In the English–Chinese bilingual
data of Experiment 2, both the L1 English and L2 Chinese showed a roughly similar RT pattern
as the monolingual data, in that negative SOAs experienced significant interference effects
but no facilitation or interference effects remained at positive SOAs. However, the overall
RT pattern was noticeably different between English and Chinese, a finding that was
replicated in Experiment 3 with Chinese–English bilinguals. We first review the evidence
found for the bilingual cognitive advantage hypothesis, then focus on the bilingual lexical
disadvantage hypotheses, before discussing the effect of script and its potential influence
on the results seen here.

The bilingual cognitive advantage hypothesis
The current data revealed some evidence for the bilingual cognitive advantage hypothesis,
although the benefit in executive control was sensitive to proficiency and language
immersion. No evidence was found for a bilingual advantage in the English–Chinese
bilinguals: there were smaller interference effects in the L2 compared to the English
monolinguals, but not in the L1, rendering it unclear whether the effect in the L2 was due
to enhanced cognitive control abilities or less interference from the weaker language. In
contrast, the Chinese–English bilinguals showed significantly smaller interference effects
in both the L1 and L2 compared to monolinguals, which could be indicative of enhanced
cognitive control abilities in this group. Alternatively, the difference in script could
contribute to this effect in the L1 Chinese. Some previous studies have found that Chinese
elicits smaller Stroop interference effects than alphabetic languages (e.g. van Heuven,
Conklin, Coderre, Guo &amp; Dijkstra, ),
in which case it may not be enhanced cognitive control leading to the reduction in L1
Chinese interference effects, but rather the effect of processing the Chinese language.
However, other studies directly comparing monolingual speakers of Chinese and alphabetic
languages have shown that Chinese elicits larger interference effects (Biederman &amp;
Tsao, ; Saalbach &amp; Stern, ; Tsao, Wu &amp; Feustel, ). Thus though the present results indicate a
bilingual advantage in the L1 Chinese compared to English monolinguals, the possibility
remains that script differences may influence the magnitude of the interference effect
(see section on the Effects of Script below).

In the Chinese–English bilinguals, the L2 proficiency split revealed smaller interference
effects in L2 English for high-proficiency bilinguals than low-proficiency bilinguals.
According to the bilingual L2 lexical disadvantage hypothesis, lower proficiency in the L2
predicts less interference from the distracting word due to weaker language ties; however,
these data show larger interference effects for the low-proficiency group in L2
English performance. Thus this effect is not due to weaker L2 language ties in the
low-proficiency group, but to increased executive control abilities (and therefore smaller
interference) in the high-proficiency group. Although this is not a bilingual advantage in
the traditional sense, as it is within-group rather than compared to monolinguals, it
indicates that high-proficiency bilinguals may be more adept at controlling interference
from their L2, demonstrating superior cognitive control abilities with increasing language
proficiency.

Therefore a bilingual advantage was observed for the L1 Chinese bilinguals but not for
the L1 English bilinguals, despite similar levels of subjective proficiency (see , Experiment 3). One potential explanation for
this disparity is that the Chinese–English bilinguals were immersed in the foreign
language, while the English–Chinese bilinguals were not. Living in the foreign country
and/or hearing the non-native language every day may have created more long-term and
sustained language conflict, consequently boosting the bilingual advantage in the
Chinese–English bilinguals. There is a shortage of research on the role of immersion on
the bilingual advantage, but one study by Linck, Kroll &amp; Sunderman () demonstrated that L2 speakers immersed in the
foreign-language environment had reduced access to their L1, suggesting enhanced L1
inhibition (see Green, ). In other words,
bilinguals immersed in their weaker language (usually L2) engage cognitive control to a
greater extent on a daily basis due to the need to avoid interference from the dominant
language, which would predict larger cognitive advantages for immersed bilinguals. In
order to fully explore how immersion experience affects the bilingual advantage, future
research should seek to balance the immersion background of participants, by including for
example groups of L2-immersed and non-immersed bilinguals.

Overall, the above results highlight the sensitivity of bilingual executive control
abilities to factors such as proficiency and immersion in the non-native language. This is
in line with the current literature on the bilingual cognitive advantage. One recent
review (Hilchey &amp; Klein, ) has
revealed that the bilingual advantage in interference effects (i.e. differences between
incongruent and congruent conditions) is actually not often found, and is very sensitive
to the task used and the type of executive control being tested. The more robust finding
is a “global RT advantage”, such that bilinguals perform faster on all trial types,
incongruent and congruent, than monolinguals (e.g. Kousaie &amp; Phillips,
; see review in Tao, Marzecová, Taft,
Asanowicz &amp; Wodniecka, ). This global
RT advantage is hypothesized to reflect enhanced monitoring and maintenance abilities in
bilinguals, rather than enhanced cognitive control. To investigate the bilingual global RT
advantage in the current data, a post-hoc comparison of global RTs for
each group was performed. The results revealed that the English–Chinese bilinguals were
slowest overall, in Chinese first (M = 578 ms, SE = 25
ms) and then in English (M = 573 ms, SE = 26 ms); the
monolinguals (M = 560 ms, SE = 24 ms) and L1 Chinese
(M = 560 ms, SE = 22 ms) were the same; and L2 English
was the fastest (M = 555 ms, SE = 17 ms). As the
monolinguals fell in the middle of this distribution, this does not support the bilingual
global RT advantage hypothesis.

To summarize, the data of the current experiments provided some evidence for the
bilingual cognitive advantage hypothesis, primarily in the reduced magnitude of L1 Chinese
interference compared to monolinguals and in the L2 English proficiency split. Above all,
the results highlight that the bilingual advantage is elusive, and sensitive to a number
of variables including proficiency, language immersion, and script.

The bilingual lexical disadvantage hypotheses
The bilingual L1 lexical disadvantage hypothesis (i.e. reduced frequency
hypothesis, relating to processing differences between monolinguals and the bilingual L1)
predicted a negative shift in peak interference and facilitation effects for bilinguals in
their L1 compared to monolinguals due to reduced frequency of use. The current data did
not show a negative shift; in fact, L1 Chinese showed a positive shift (peak interference
at 0 ms rather than –200 ms) compared to monolinguals. As mentioned previously, the
English and Chinese scripts elicited different peak interference latencies, with maximal
interference occurring at 0 ms in Chinese and at –200 ms in English. The difference in
peak interference between monolinguals and the L1 Chinese is therefore more likely due to
script differences than to differences in lexical access speed. Importantly, in comparing
within the same language (English monolinguals vs. L1 English bilinguals), there were no
differences in the latency of peak interference, indicating no difference in lexical
access speed in a native language for bilinguals compared to monolinguals, as has been
reported previously (Coderre et al., ).

The bilingual L2 lexical disadvantage hypothesis (i.e. temporal delay
assumption, relating to the L2 and L1 in bilinguals) predicts a negative shift in
interference effects for the L2 compared to the L1 due to reduced proficiency. In the
within-groups comparison of L1 Chinese vs. L2 English, the peak interference effect in the
L1 Chinese occurred at 0 ms, while the L2 English peaked at negative SOAs. As discussed,
this could be due to differences in script. However, in the between-groups comparison of
the L1 Chinese vs. the L2 Chinese, the L2 Chinese showed overall peak interference at more
negative SOAs than the L1 Chinese. This supports the temporal delay assumption of the BIA+
model (Dijkstra &amp; van Heuven, ) and
is in line with previous literature supporting a temporal delay in activation of L2
representations in unbalanced bilinguals (e.g., Coderre et al., ; Newman et al., ;
see for a review Dijkstra &amp; van Heuven, ; van Heuven &amp; Dijkstra, ). Therefore these data provide support for delays in lexical access due to
reduced proficiency in the L2.

The effects of script
The present experiments were conducted with Chinese and English bilinguals to minimize
the effects of phonological and orthographic overlap between languages. However, as is
apparent from , English and Chinese
elicited different RT patterns in SOA manipulation. In particular, English experienced the
peak interference effects at the –200 ms SOA, whereas Chinese peak interference occurred
at the 0 ms SOA. This pattern was similar across English–Chinese and Chinese–English
bilinguals, suggesting this is not an effect of proficiency but rather an underlying
difference in the mechanisms of language processing in these two scripts.

The question of how linguistic processing differs between alphabetic and logographic
languages is a highly contentious issue in the literature. In visual word reading in
particular, a central question has been whether lexical access involves phonology. In
alphabetic scripts like English, in which letters map directly onto sounds, phonology is
activated as a part of word recognition, and plays a critical role in this process (e.g.
Frost, ; see review in Perfetti, Liu
&amp; Tan, ). In Chinese, however, the
role of phonology is more debatable. Being a logographic system, Chinese does not have
letters that map onto sounds; rather, each character has a specific pronunciation. The
same pronunciation is shared by many other characters, creating a large number of
homophones. In other words, phonology is much less reliable in Chinese. For this reason it
has been hypothesized that Chinese may use a “direct-access” route in word recognition,
proceeding directly from orthography to semantics and bypassing phonology altogether
(Saalbach &amp; Stern, ; Taft &amp;
van Graan, ).

Although this direct-access hypothesis seems logical, a large body of accumulating
evidence has demonstrated that this is not the case: phonology is in fact activated –
obligatorily and even in the absence of lexical activation – in Chinese word recognition
(Chua, ; Guo, Peng &amp; Liu, ; Liu, Perfetti &amp; Hart, ; Perfetti et al., ; Perfetti &amp; Zhang, ; Saalbach &amp; Stern, ;
Spinks, Liu, Perfetti &amp; Tan, ; Tan,
Laird, Li &amp; Fox, ; Xu, Pollatsek
&amp; Potter, ). The lexical constituency
model of word recognition (Perfetti et al., )
argues that phonological access is a key constituent of word recognition in all languages,
regardless of whether its activation is helpful or not. The degree to which it is useful
and contributes to lexical access, however, can be mediated by script. For example, Tan
and Perfetti (), using a
phonologically-mediated priming paradigm in Chinese, demonstrated that the mediation
effect was determined by homophone density: the more homophones a Chinese character had,
the smaller the mediation priming. They proposed that phonology is accessed in the
presence of a large number of homophones, but the phonological activation does not aid in
semantic access due to a very distributed spread of activation. In the presence of fewer
homophones, the activation of phonology can aid in semantic access, making phonology a
more central part of visual word recognition. Extending this proposal to Chinese and
English more generally, in the presence of a large number of homophones in Chinese,
phonology is activated but is not helpful, so lexical access is effectively a direct link
between orthography and semantics (supporting the direct access hypothesis). In English,
consisting of fewer homophones, the role of phonology is more pronounced and lexical
access is phonologically mediated.

In the current data, Chinese generated peak interference effects at the 0 ms SOA, while
English experienced peak interference at the –200 ms SOA. If the role of phonology is the
major difference between English and Chinese word recognition, this suggests that
phonological access and/or mediation occurs at different speeds in each language.
Specifically, as the peak interference occurred at a more negative SOA in English, English
phonological mediation may be slower than Chinese (in the same way that delayed lexical
access leads to negatively-shifted interference effects). This supports a previous finding
by Saalbach and Stern () reporting faster
activation of phonology in Chinese than in English. The stronger influence of phonology in
English could add an extra step in processing, making lexical access slower, whereas in
Chinese the more direct pathway from orthography to semantics speeds up word recognition,
creating different timings of lexical interference. More research that directly compares
how phonology is mediated in alphabetic and logographic languages is needed, with
particular regards to the timecourse of phonological activation in each writing system.

Another factor to consider is the use of a manual task in the current study rather than a
vocal task, which may have downplayed the influence of phonology. Naming aloud necessarily
requires access to phonology, but in a manual task this activation could theoretically be
bypassed altogether. If so, the use of a manual task may have diminished the role of
phonology in English, making it more like Chinese. Manual tasks in Chinese have still
reported phonological access (e.g. Liu et al., ; Xu et al., ), indicating that
the use of a manual modality does not eliminate phonological processing; however, this is
a potentially important point to consider in future research.

As seen in  (panels (c) and (d)), the
larger interference effects in the 0 ms SOA in Chinese were driven by the control
condition, which experienced a reduction in RT at the 0 ms SOA compared to the –200 ms or
+200 ms SOAs. It is unclear why this only occurred in one SOA. One possibility is that
because Chinese characters are more spatial in nature, participants exerted more
attentional resources in the control condition in order to determine whether or not it was
a Chinese character. The use of blocked SOAs in the current task design may also have
affected the strategies that participants adopted: for example, in the 0 ms SOA,
participants may not have invested as much effort into decoding the character because it
occurred simultaneously with the target color, whereas in negative SOAs, the pre-exposure
of the word allowed time to decipher the character. This explanation is not entirely
satisfactory, as if participants were not attending to the character in the 0 ms SOA the
incongruent condition would not have elicited a longer RT. The cross-linguistic similarity
of bilinguals’ languages may also have an impact on processing speed (e.g. Bates, D'Amico,
Jacobsen, Székely, Andonova, Devescovi, Herron, Lu, Pechmann, Pléh, Wicha, Federmeier,
Gerdjikova, Gutierrez, Hung, Hsu, Iyer, Kohnert, Mehotcheva, Orozco-Figueroa, Tzeng
&amp; Tzeng, ; Liu, Hao, Li &amp; Shu,
), so it remains to be seen whether this
pattern can be observed with other logographic languages, or whether other scripts are
also able to modulate the RT pattern of SOA manipulation.

A brief discussion of the differences between production and comprehension modalities in
relation to the bilingual lexical disadvantage is warranted here. Previous studies
investigating bilingual lexical processing delays have mainly focused on production delays
in the L1 (e.g. Gollan et al., ; Pyers et
al., ) and comprehension delays in the L2
(e.g. Ardal et al., ; Moreno &amp; Kutas,
; Newman et al., ). Recent evidence suggests that language processing delays
associated with bilingualism are more robust in production than comprehension (e.g. Gollan
et al., , ; Runnqvist et al., ). For
example, Gollan et al. () speculated that
bilingual processing delays have a larger impact on production than comprehension because
production requires more exposures, or more lifetime practice, in order to reach high
levels of proficiency. Therefore although the current data did not show evidence of an L1
delay in comprehension, an L1 delay may be elicited with a vocal color-naming task or an
alternative language production paradigm. However, the source of this delay might be
different from the delay found in comprehension, so more research is needed regarding how
bilingualism differentially affects lexical delays in production and comprehension.

A limitation of the current study is the use of only five SOAs at 200 ms intervals. Only
five SOAs were included due to length considerations for the experiment, but this may not
have provided enough fine-grained measurement to identify differences in lexical access
speeds between L1 and L2. Recent work by our group using a Stroop SOA task with
electroencephalography (EEG) in Chinese–English bilinguals (Coderre et al., ) revealed that lexical processing is delayed by
100 ms in bilinguals’ L2. Other studies using EEG have also provided compelling evidence
for a temporal delay of L2 relative to L1 (Newman et al., ; see van Heuven &amp; Dijkstra, , for an overview). Therefore future research using more
fine-grained SOA intervals is encouraged.

Conclusions
To summarize, the current study used an SOA manipulation of the Stroop task to investigate
differences in Stroop performance between monolinguals and bilinguals in relation to factors
of enhanced cognitive control (as proposed by the bilingual cognitive advantage hypothesis)
and delayed lexical access (as proposed by the bilingual lexical disadvantage hypotheses).
The bilingual cognitive advantage hypothesis predicted smaller Stroop interference for
bilinguals in both their L1 and L2 compared to monolinguals. The Chinese–English bilinguals
demonstrated reduced interference effects for both languages compared to monolinguals;
however, no bilingual advantage was observed in the English–Chinese bilinguals. L2
proficiency also affected the magnitude of interference in the Chinese–English bilinguals.
These results support the bilingual cognitive advantage hypothesis, highlighting its
sensitivity to language proficiency and effects of language immersion.

The bilingual L1 lexical disadvantage hypothesis predicted delayed lexical access in the L1
compared to monolinguals, reflected as a negative shift in the peak interference effects.
This hypothesis was not supported in either bilingual group. The bilingual L2 lexical
disadvantage hypothesis further predicted delayed lexical access between L1 and L2,
reflected as a negative shift in interference effects between L2 and L1. This pattern was
found in the L1 Chinese vs. L2 English and the L2 Chinese vs. L1 Chinese. Thus the data
support a delay in bilinguals’ L2 relative to L1, but not in bilinguals’ L1 relative to
monolinguals.

In conclusion, the data support the L2 lexical disadvantage hypothesis and the bilingual
cognitive advantage hypothesis, suggesting that both executive control abilities and lexical
access speed contribute to bilingual Stroop performance. Overall, the data promotes future
consideration of the multitude of factors, including script, choice of SOA, and language
experience, that interact in determining bilingual performance on linguistic executive
control tasks.

Stroop interference effects are referred to here as the difference between
incongruent and control conditions, and Stroop facilitation effects as the
difference between control and congruent conditions. Stroop effects (incongruent
vs. congruent conditions) are a combination of interference and facilitation effects and
therefore less appropriate for measuring Stroop interference.

An additional study was run with five SOAs (±400 ms, ±200 ms and 0 ms) in a vocal
modality with 12 monolingual English speakers as a pilot study. The results showed
significant interference at the –400 ms, –200 ms and 0 ms SOAs. Interference was greatest
at the 0 ms SOA, and decreased with increasing negative SOAs. Significant facilitation was
found at –400 ms and –200 ms but not at 0 ms. The vocal task thus replicated the results
of Glaser and Glaser ().

Although the control stimuli used different symbol strings between Experiment 1
(xxxx) and Experiment 2 (%%%%), the magnitude of the
interference should not be affected. To confirm, we compared the control conditions
between the monolinguals and the bilingual L1 English. A five-way (SOA) ANOVA on the
control RTs only with language as a between-subjects factor showed no main effects of SOA
or language group (all Fs&lt; 1), although there was a weak trend of
an interaction (F(4,143) = 2.02, p = .09). The lack of a
main effect of group indicates that the difference in control conditions between the
experiments does not affect the results.

To confirm again that the use of different control conditions did not affect the
magnitude of interference between in Experiment 1 and Experiment 3, the control conditions
were compared between the monolinguals and the bilingual L1 Chinese. A five-way (SOA)
ANOVA on the control RTs with language as a between-subjects factor showed a main effect
of SOA (F(4,172) = 2.47, p &lt; .05), but no effect
of language group (F(1,43) &lt; 1) and no interaction
(F(4,172) = 1.06, p = .38). The lack of a main effect of
group indicates that the difference in control conditions between the experiments does not
affect the results.

